THE APOLOGY OF THE ROMAN CHVRCH, DIVIDED INTO THREE Several Tractes whereof

1. The first, Concerns the Antiquity and continuance of the Catholic
Roman Religion ever since the Apostles time.

2. The second That the Protestants Religion was not so much as in being, at
or before Luthers first appearing.

3. The third That Catholics are no less Loyal and dutiful to their
Sovereign, then Protestants.

All which are undertaken and proved by testimonies of the learned Protestants
themselves.

Esaias. 19, 2. And I w^ll set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, so every
one shall fight against his brother.

Jesuit seal IHS



Printend with license Anno Domini 1604.

AN ADVERTISEMENT to the Reader.
FRIENDLY (Reader) thou art hereby to be advertised, that in regard of the many
and great difficulties which accompany Catholics in the impressio^ of their
books in England, it was houlden the safest course to commit this work to
straingers labor, by reason of whose ignorance in our language, and want of
due asistance to him in his printing hereof, it falls out that many words
are mistaken and other errors committed, of all which thou art to afford thy
favorable and patient consideration. And whereas the letters or other mark^s of
reference occurring in the text, are not (for the reason aforesaid) asserted
always in their due and proper place. Let thus much serve once for all to
admonish thee, that if at any time thou parceiue by the sense of the place,
that the said letters or marks of reference, cannot (as they should) relate to
the words next following in the text, then art thou in such places to refer
them to the other words of the text going there next before. And where also
the foresaid letters or marks of reference, have not sometimes their answerable
citation or authority alleged in the margent of that page or folio, thou art
then to enquier therefore in the margent of the folio which is next before or
next following. Thus much but remembered and well observed will be sufficient to
deliver thee from many mistakings. Thus wishing thy Good as mine own, I bidd
thee most heartily farewell, This first of April. 1604

I. B.

A TABLE OF CERTAIN PROTESTANT WRITERS AND THEIR PARTICVLER WRITINGS WHOSE
folio, or page are (for more ready and certain direction) specially alleged
in this discourse, and of their several editions or year of Printe, according
to which they be so alleged, unless it be otherwise noted in the margent.
A
ACCADEMIAE Nemausensis brevis and modesta responsio ad professoru^ Turnoniorum
societatis Jesus assertiones: Londini Anno 1584. Adamus Francisci (his)
Margarita theologica etc. VVotebergae, 1602. Anthony Sadel de rebus
gravissimis disputationes theologicae etc. Cantabrigia, 1584. Acta Colloquij
Aldeburge^sis Lipsiae 1570. Alison his co^futation of Brownisme Printed 1590.
Anthony de Adamo (his) Anatomy of the Mass, printed anno 1556. Amandus
Polanus professor in Basile (his) Sillogethesium theologicarum etc. Basiliae,
M.D.XCV.II. Amandus Polanus (his) Partitiones theologicae, Basiliae M.IC.CI.
Andraeas Crastouius (his) duo libelli de opificio missae etc. contra
Bellarminum Basiliae, M.D.XCIV. Antichristus sieve prognostica finis mundi
Basileae per Petrum Pernam. Apologia ad acta conuentus quindecem theologoru^
torgae nuper habit. Genevae. 1575. Aretius (his) Loci Comunes Geneuae 1589.
Andraeas Althamerus (his) Conciliationes locorum Scripturae qui specie tenus
pugnare videntur Norimbergae. Anno, 1535. Abraham Scultetus (his) Medulla
theologiae Patrum Ambergae 1603. Acta Theologorum Wirtembergensiu^ and
Patriarchae Constantinop. D. Hieremiae etc. Witerbergae 1584.
B
Baro (his) Treatize of Gods providence etc. Englished by I.L. printed by John
Woulfe. Baro (his) four sermons and two questions disputed ad clerum in S.
Mary's Church in Cambridge Englished by I.L. printed by John Woulfe. Bale (his)
pageant of Popes printed 1574. Bertra^ de loque his discourse of the church
translated into English by T.W. printed 1582. Bale Scriptorum illustriu^
maioris Britanniae etc. Catallogus etc. Basileae apud Ioh^^nem Oporinum.
Bancrofte (now Bishope of London) his Survey of the pretented holy discipline
printed 1593. Beacon the second part of his books set forth Anno 1560.
Benedict. Morgenstern. (Pastor Grandentinus in Prussia) tract. de Ecclesia etc.
Francofurtie M.D.XCVIII. Beza ad acta colloquij Montisbegardensis responsio
Anno 1589. Beza in his sermons upon the Canticles Englished 1587. Bilson (now
Bishope of Winchester) his true difference between Christian subjection, and
unchristian rebellion Anno 1586. Bilson his perpetual Government of Christ's
Church Anno 1593. Bilson of the full Redemption of mankind, by the death and
blood of Christ Anno 1599. Bridges his defense of the Government etc. Anno
1587. Bullinger his sermons divided into decades and translated into English
Anno 1587. Bullinger his hundredth sermons upon the Apocalippes Englished and
printed 1573. Brocard upon the Revelations Englished and printed Anno 1582.
Barlowe (his) defense of the Articles of the Protestants religion etce. printed
1601. Bartholomeus Keckermanus (his) Systema SS. Theologiae: Hanoutae 1602.
Bell (his) Motives printed 1593. Bucanus (his) Loci Comunes printed M.D.CII.
C
Carlisle his book that Christ descended not into hell printed 1582. Chemnitius
(his) Examen Concilij Tridentini Anno 1578. Chemnitius (his) Enchiridion etc.
An. 1590. Cowper (late Bishop of Winchester) (his) Chronicle printed Anno
1565. Chitraei Chronicon Anni 1593. 1594. etc. printed Lipsiae Anno 1595.
Camden (his) Britanniae etc. printed Francofurti 1590. Carrion (his) Chronicon
expositum and auctum a Mela^cthone and Peucero printed Bernae 1601. Couel (his)
examination of some things used in the Church of England etc. printed 1604.
Cassia^der de officio Pij viri in hoc religionis dissidio Anno 1562. Coelius
Secundus Curio de amplitudine regni Dei Anno 1554. Calvin Institutio impress.
Arge^torat. 1539. Colloquium Altenburgense Anno 1570. Centuria Epistolarum
theologicarum etc. a Melancthone, Bucero, Pe^^^ano, and alijs ab Anno 1519.
vsque 1540. printed 1597. Centurie writers their Centuries printed at Basile
per Iohannem Oporinum the 6. Centurie being printed there 1562. the 7. printed
there 1567 and the other ^u^^ormer Centuries being printed there certain
several years before. Castalio (his) defensio suarum translationu^ etc.
Basileae per Iohannem Oporinum. Conspiracy for pretended reformation printed
1592. Crispinus (his discourse) of the estate of the Church, Englished and
printed 1602. Couel (his) defense of M. Hooker printed 1603.
D
De Russoru^ Muscouitarum and tartarorum religione etc. spi^ae libera ciuitate
veterum nemetum. 1582. Deering (his) readings upon the Epistle to the
Haebrewes. Dent (his) Exposition upon the Revelations Anno 1603. Danaeus (his)
Isagoges Christianae part quarta Geneuae Anno 1586. Dangerous Positions
published in this Island under p^etence of reformation and for the presbiteriall
discipline 1595. Downham (his) treatize concerning Antichrist 1603. Danaeus
(his) responsio ad disput. Bellarmini part. 1. Geneuae 1596. Dresserus (his)
pars secunda millenarij sexti Lipsiae 1597. Dresserus (his) Millenar. 5.
printed Lipsiae 1595. David Pareus de Simbolis Sacramentalibus etc. Ambergae.
F
Fenton (Preacher at Grayes Inn) his book against Alablaster 1599. Fox (his)
Acts and Momuments printed 1563. Fulke against Heskins, Sanders Rastell etc.
1579. Fulke (his) answer of a true Christian to a counterfeite Catholic 1577.
Fulke (his) Confutation of Purgatory 1577. Fulke against the Rhemiss^
testament printed 1589. Fulke his defense of the English translations of the
Bible etc. 1583. Functius Chronologia etc. Witebergae. Fulke (his treatize)
against Stapleton and Martial printed 1580. Fox (his) meditations in
Apocalipsin printed 1596. Forth (his) Apocalipsis Jesus Christi etc. exposit.
1597. Fulke (his) retentiue against Bristowes motives and discourse against
Sanders, Rock, 1580. Franciscus Gomarus (his) speculum verae Ecclesiae
Hannouiae 1603. Fulke de successione Ecclesiastica etc. contra Stapleton
Londini 1584.
G
Gibbens (his) questions and disput. upon Genesis 1601. Gifford upon the
Revelations 1596. G^fford (his) demo^stration that our Brownistes be full
Donatistes etc. 1590. Georgius Millius (his) Augustana confessionis explicatio
Ienae. 1596. Gerhards G^esekenius de veritate corporis Christi in caena
adversus Pezelium printed Francofurti 1598. Godwine (his) Catalogue of the
Bishops of England 1601. Gesnerus (his) disputationes xvij. pro sanctissimo
libro concordiae Anno 1597. Gasper Oliuianus (his) expositio simboli Apostolici
Francofurti Anno 1584. Gomaru^ see Franciscus Gomarus Gabriell Powell (his)
Consideration of the Papists Reasons etc. printed at Oxford 1604.
H
Harmony of Confessions Englished and printed 1586. Hemingius upon the 84.
Psalm Englished 1581. Henoch Clapham his sovereign remedy against Schism
etc. 1600. Hiperius (his) method. theolog. 1574. Humfredus (his) Iesuitismi
pars secunda co^tra Edm. Camp. 1584. Hooker of Ecclesiastical Policy printed
at London by John Windet Hill (his) defense of the Article Christ descended
into Hell 1592. Hamelmannus de traditionibus apostolicis etc. 1568. Hospinianus
(his) Historia Sacramentaria etc. Tiguri 1598. Hemingius de gratia universally
1591. Hayward (his) answer to R. Dolman 1603. Haffenrefferus (his) Loci
Theologici 1600. Hierom Zanelius in Epistolas Pauli ad Philip. Colloss. and
Thessall. etc. printed Neostadij 1595. Huberus (his) Theses Christum Iesum esse
mortuum pro peccatis totius mundi. Tubingae 1602.
I
Iacobus Andraeas (his) Confutatio disput. Iohannis Iacobi Grinaei de caena
dom. 1584. Iacobus Andraeas (his) Epitom. Colloquij Montisbelgardensis 1568.
Iacobus Acontius Stratagematum Satanae libri octo Basiliae 1565. Iacobus
Heilbrunerus (his) Schwenfeldio Caluinismus, 1597. Jacob (his) defense of the
Church and ministry of England, Midleburgh 1599. John Napeire upon the
Revelations London. 1594. Iuel (late Bishop of Salisburie) his defense of the
Apoligie etc. 1567. Iuel (his) reply unto M. Hardings answer 1566. John Knoxe
(his) answer against the adversary of Gods Predestination printed at London
1591. Illiricus (his) Catalogus testium veritatis Basileae 1556. Johannes
Regius (his) liber Apolegeticus pro Ecclesia Augustinae co^fessionis vere etc.
co^tra Bellarm. etc. Mulhusij Thuringog. 1603.
L
Lascicius see de Russoru^ muscouitaru^ etc. Luc. Osiander (his) Epitom. hist.
Eccles. Ce^turia 1. 2. and 3. Tubingae 1592. Luc. Osiander (his) epitom. hist.
etc. centur. 4. Anno 1595. Luc. Osiander epitom. etc. Centur. 6. Anno, 1598.
Luc. Osiander epitom. etc. cent. 7. An. 1599. Luc. Osiander epitom. etc. cent.
8. An. 1602. Lutheri loc. Comunes Magdebur. An. 1594. Luther (his) Comentarie
upon the Epistle to the Galathians Englished Anno. 1575. Lubbertus de
principijs Christian. dogmamatum etc. M.D.XCI. Lobechius (D. and professor in
the University of Rostoch) (his) Disputationes Theologicae in Accademia
Rostochiensi M.D.IC. Laconici Antisturmij spongia adversus Lamberti Danae^
Annosiandru^ Tubing. 1580. Luc. Osiander epitom. etc. centur. 16. Tubinga 1602.
and 1603. Luc. Osiander epitom. etc. centur. 9, 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.
Tubingae 1604. Lithus see Simon Lithus.
M
Manlij Loci Comunes Basileae 1562. Melancthon (his) Loci Comunes 1536.
Melancthon epistolarum liber primus 1570. Melancthon (his) Apologia
Confessionis Augustan. 1541. Melancthon Consilia Theologica etc. 1600. Musculus
(his) Loci Comunes Basileae 1573. Marloret (his) Novi Testamenti catholica
expositio ecclesiastica editio quinta 1593. Mathias Hoe (his) Tractatus duo
etc. printed Francofurti ad Maenum 1603. Marbecke (his) common places printed
1581.
P
Parkins (his) Goulden Chain printed by John Legate. Parkins (his) Exposition
upon the Creed Anno 1596. Parkins (his) Reformed Catholic 1597. Piscator
(his) Analysis Epistolarum Pauli Londini 1591. Penrie (his) treatise entitled
M. Some laid open in his colors. Piscator (his) Volumen Thesium Theologic.
M.D.XCVI. Propositions and Principles disputed in the University of Genevae,
Edinburgh 1591. Pareus. see David Pareus. Peter Martyr (his) Common places etc.
englished and gathered by Anthony Marten printed 1583. Parkins (his) four
Treatises etc. 1588. Pantaleon (his) Chronographia printed Basileae 1568. Peter
Martyr de Coelibatu and votis printed Basileae 1559.
R
Raynolds (his) Conference with Heart etc. 1584. Rider (his) freindly Caveat to
Irelands Catholics, Dubline 1602. Rungius (his) Disputationes septemdecem ex
Epistola Pauli ad Corinth. etc. propositat in Accademia Wittebergensi etc.
1599.
S
Sarcerius (his) Loci Comunes tom. 1. Franc. apud Chroferum Egenolphum. Sarauia
of the diverse degrees of Ministers 1592. Spangenburg. (his) Margarita
Theologica etc. Witeberge 1541. Simon Pauli Method locorum doctrina etc. 1573.
Sleydan (his) History Englished 1560. Some (his) Defense against M. Penrie and
refutation of many absurdities etc. in M. Penries treatise printed 1588.
Spark (his) Answer to M. John de Albines 1591. Sutclyffe de Praesbiterio etc.
1591. Sutclyffe (his) Answer to a certain Libell Supplicatorie etc. 1592.
Sutclyffe de Vera Catholica Christi Ecclesia Anno M.D.XCII. Sauaria (his)
Defensio Tractationis de diversis ministrorum gradibus contra respons. Beze,
1594. Suinglij and Oecolampadij Epistolarum libri quatuor. Basileae M.D.XCII.
Smith of Prayer in general for all mankind against those that teach that all
men are not to be prayed for, 1595. Simon de Voyon (his) Discourse upon the
Catalogue of Doctors Englished 1598. Schlusselburg. (his) Theologia
Calvinistarum 1594. Schlusselburg. (his) Catalog. Haereticorum liber 23. and
vlt. 1599. Szegedenus (his) Tabula Analiticae: Londini, 1593. Sigwartus (his)
23. Disputationes Theologicae etc. Tubingae 1603. Simon Lithus (his) Responsio
altera ad alteram Iacobi Greitseri Apologiam etc. Heidelbergae M.D.C.III.
Suinglius (his) Works printed Tig. 1581.
T
The Disputation had in the Tower with Edm Camp. 1583. The Conspiracy for
pretended reformation 1592. Timotheus Kirchmerus (his) Thesaurus explicationum
omnium articulorum etc. ex reverendi etc. D. Martini Lutheri operibus collect.
1566. The Christian letter of certain English Protestants etc. to that
reverend man R. Hoe. 1599. The treatise against the defense of the Censure
printed by Thomas Thomas.
V
Vrsinus (his) Doctrinae Christianae Compe^d. sive Come^tarij Catechetici Land.
1586. Vrsinus (his) book entitled Comonefactio cuiusdam Theologi de S. caena
and eiusdem Comonefactionis consideratio M.D.LXXXIII. Vrbanus Rhegius (his)
Loci Comunes 1545.
W
Willet (his) Synopsis Papismi 1592. Whitaker contra Duraeum: Londini 1583.
Whitaker de Sacra Scriptura contra Bellarminum Herbonae M.D.XC. Whitaker de
Ecclesia contra Bellarminum 1599. Whitguift (now Lord Archbishop of etc.) his
defense of the answer to the admonition against the reply of T. C. 1574.
Willet (his) Tetrastilon Papismi etc. 1599. Whitaker (his) Responsio ad
Rations Edm. Campiani etc. printed Lichae 1604. Wicelius (his) Methodus
concordiae Ecclesiasticae printed 1537.
A TABLE OF CERTAIN FATHERS. and of the Anno Domini in which they lived.
Anno Dom. Fathers. 880. Adouiennensis. 670. Agatho. P. 120. Alexander Primus.
140. Algerus. 730. Alcuinus. 380. Ambrosius. 870. Anastasius Bibliothee. 1080.
Anselmus. 300. Arnobius. 430. Augustinus Hippone^ses. 600. August. Ang.
Episcopus 379. Athanasius. 1450. Antoninus. 130. Athenagoras. 370. Basilius
Ephesim. 700. Beda Venerabilis. 1120. Bernardus. 1460. Bessarion. 605.
Bonifatius tertius P. 840. Bertram Presbiter. 560. Cassiodorus. 390.
Chrisostomus. 430. Cirrill Alexandrinus. 510. Cirill Hierosol. 240. Ciprian.
80. Clemens P. 1. 180. Clemens Alexandrinus. 1220. Cesarius He^sterbach. 240.
Cornelius, P. 370. Damasus. P. 720. Damascen. 90. Dionisius Ariopagita. 380.
Epi^hanius. 520. Eusebius Emissen. 520. Euagrius. 520. Eus^bius Caesariensis.
500. Ennodius. 490. Gelasius P. 590. Gregorius Magnus. 340. Gregorius
Nazianzen. 340. Gregorius Nissenus. 570. Gregorius Turonensis. 1060.
Guitmundus. 540. Gildas. 1120. Glycas. 790. Haymo. 430. Hierom. 370. Hilarious
Pictauensis. 240. Hippolitus. 1216. Honorius P. tertius. 1320. Johannes
Zonaras. 100. Ignatius. 400. Inocentius P. 1. 170. Ireneus. 630. Isidorus 130.
Justinius Martyr. 800. Jonas Aurelianensis. 1100. Iuo Carnotensis. 320.
Lactantius. 1050. Lanfrancus. 440. Leo 1. P. 1300. Lyra. 540. Liberatus. 50.
Martialis. 1440. Marcus Ephesinus. 250. Methodus. 580. Michaell Singelus. 1060.
Marianus Scotus. 1250. Matheus Paris. 230. Minutius Foelix. 1300. Nicephorus
Calixtus. 1230. Nicholaus Methonens. 860. Nicholaus 1. P. 230. Origin. 350.
Optatus. 1170. Otho Frisnigensis. 1170. Odo Parisiensis. 390. Pac^anus. 140
Poli rates. 380. Prudentius. 880. Paschasius. 770. Paulus Diaconus. 350.
Philastrius. 450. Prosper. Rhegiensis. 460. Proclus Constantinop. 420. Paulinus
Nolanus. 860. Photius Constantinop. 390. Possidonius. 30. Philo. 1140. Petrus
Lombardus. 440. Primasius. 1150. Petrus Cluniacensis 1050. Petrus Damianus.
390. Rufinus. 850. Rabanus Maurus. 1120. Rupertus Tuitiens. 380. Siricius Papa.
1100. Sigebert. Gemblace^sis. 420. Sozimus P. 430. Socrates Hist. 450. Sozomen
Hist. 1482. Sabellicus. 460. Sedulius. 980. Suidas. 320. Silvester Papa. 220.
Tertullian. 370. Theodoret. 880. Theophilact. 1380. Thomas Waldensis. 1260.
Thomas Aquinas. 1490. Trithemias. 390. Theophilus Alexander. 170. Theophilus
Antioch. 180. Tatianus. 420. Vincentius Lyrinensis. 1220. Vispergensis Abbas.
1482 Volateran. 160. Victor Papa. 480. Victor Vticensis.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS* of every several Section.
TRACT 1.
SECT. (1) THAT Englishmen were above 1000. years since converted to the now
professed Catholic faith, page 2. SECT. (2) That the same faith was
universally professed for sundry ages then before: and was also agreeable to
that first faith whereto the Britains of Wales were converted in the Apostles
times, page 4. SECT. (3) A further Demonstration by confessed testimony from
the Fathers that it was taught in the Apostles times, page 9. SECT. (4) Another
like Demonstration thereof by testimonies from the ancient Jews, page 23.
SECT. (5) That true miracles make a strong argument, and that the foresaid
faith, whereto the English were converted was confirmed with such miracles,
page 34. SECT. (6) That his Majesty's Ancestors lived and died in that faith,
and that it is acknowledged by Protestants for sufficient to salvation, page
39. SECT. (7) That Protestants cannot prove that the Roman Church did change
her religion, sin^e her first conversion thereto in the Apostles times, page
45. SECT. (8) That Catholics are able to prove the contrary by testimony
even from the learned Protestants, page 60.
TRACT. 2.
divided into two chapters.
CAP. 1.
SECT. (1) THAT Christ's Church was by the predictions of the Prophets foretold
to become universal, and to convert with great increase, the Kings and nations
of the Gentiles, page 73. SECT. (2) That the same was not performed by
Protestants during either the first or second 300. years after Christ, page
76. SECT. (3) That Constantine our first Christian Emperor was not of the
Protestants but of the Catholic faith, page 77. SECT. (4) That after the
second 300. years after Christ the foresaid predictions were not performed by
the Protestants Church, and were yet accomplished by the Catholic Church, page
81. SECT. (5) That the known defect thereof in the Protestants Church
advantageth the Jews against them: made Sebastian Castalio, doubtful of his
faith, and David George an Apostata, page 84. SECT. (6) A confutation of the
Protestants objections and answers concerning their Churches not
accomplishment of the said predictions, page 87.
CAP. 2.
SECT. (1) THAT the true Church must have her Pastors, administration of the
Word and Sacraments evermore to continue, page 91. SECT. (2) That Protestants
to prove the answerable performance thereof (for former ages) in their Church,
do allege promiscuously both Catholics and known heretics as members of
their Church, page 95. SECT. (3) That Waldo who lived Anno Domini 1220. was no
Protestant and that therefore the examples of Waldo and his followers is not
sufficient to prove (but so much as for their times) a continuance of the
Protestant Chur^hes, administration of the Word and Sacraments, page 98. SECT.
(4) The like is showed of Wiclyffe (who lived Anno Domini 1370.) and his
followers, page 105. SECT. (5) The like is showed of Husse (who lived An. Dom.
1400.) and his followers, page 109. SECT. (6) That though Waldo, Wiclyffe, and
Husse, had bin Protestants, yet their examples are insufficie^t in this
behalf, page 111. SECT. (7) That the examples of Bertram, Berengarius, and
others (who lived before Waldo) are also insufficie^t to answer in this
behalf for their times page 115. SECT. (8) A confutation of those Protestants
who answer that their churches administration of the Word and Sacraments did
during all those times continue in being, and yet withal remain as then
invisible or unknown: with solution to the usual objection of Elias complaint
that he was left alone, page 120. SECT. (9) A confutation of those who answer
that their Churches administration of the Word and Sacraments continued during
all those several ages in being, and also known, and that as now through the
injury of latter times no testimony or notice thereof is to us at this day
remaining, page 124. SECT. (10) That even Luther himself was no member of the
English Protestants Church, nor professor of their religion, page 126. SECT.
(11) That also during the twenty years next before Luther (which are yet in
memory of this present age) no example can be alleged of the Protestants
(but only of the Catholic) Churches administ^ation of the Word and
Sacraments, page 141. SECT. (12) A short plain and unanswerable further
demonstration of the Protestant Churches defection, and the Catholics Churches
continuance, page 150. SECT. (13) That therefore Protestants for the
preservation of Christ's Church in being, do acknowledge the Catholic Church
to have been the true Church and the religion thereof for sufficient to
salvation, page 154. SECT. (14) A brief repetition of the premises of this
second chapter, page 156.
TRACT. 3.
SECT. (1) CONCERNING the confessed antiquity of Catholic Priesthood,
Confession, Absolutio^, Mass etc. and of the Penal laws made against them
page 158. SECT. (2) The Protestants objection of Catholics disloyalty
retorted upon them selves page 163. SECT. (3) A repetition of confessed
examples proving the loyalty of English Catholics page 168. SECT. (4) A like
repetition of confessed examples proving the loyalty of foreign Catholics
page 173. SECT. (5) A protestation of the now English Catholics page 175.
SECT. (6) That the argument drawn from the confession of the adversaries is
strong, with a breife repetition of the principal points throughout all these
several tractes, proved all of them by testimony and confession of learned
protestants: with an humble petition for private tolleratio^ page 177. SECT.
(7) Concerning the evident incertainety and disagrement of Protestants in
their faith, and the reason and particular examples thereof: with a like
humble petition thereupon, for disputacion: page 183.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORDS AND OTHER THE KNIGHTS AND BVRGESSES, ASSEMBLED
IN THE HIGH AND MOST HONORBLE Court of Parliament houlden this present year.
1604.
FOR so much (right Honorable) as the Catholics subjects of this Nation
being, though distressed members, yet truly members of that politic Body,
which this high and honorable court of Parliament does represent, have now for
a great part of this last declining age, been (contrary to all example of
former times) excluded from their accustomed places and voices therein: and
continuing yet under such estate, are thereby deprived of all ordinary means to
move or answer for them selves, when and where it does most concern them: It
cannot (I hope) seem justly grievous or offensive to any, that being in these
straights, and destitute of all other advocates they should mediate the
appeasing of their former pressures and calamities, by their own most humble
and earnest intercession. Amongst which their sundry endeavors thus undertaken
to be made known unto his Majesty, (as to a most Royal and ever flowing
fountain of all grace and mercy.) The treatise hereunto annexed was specially
one, being at first penned with intention to have the same delivered up to his
Highness: But whereas afterward (his Highness being in the mean time ouercharged
with multitude of petitions so formerly exhibited by Catholics and others)
his princely pleasure was thereupon at last signified not to be further
troubled or impo^tuned in that kind; the author of this treatise did thereupon
not only alter his first intention concerning the delivery thereof up to his
Highness, but also seriously labored by all careful means and direction for
the utter suppressing ther^f: In which ^ourse of his said labor, when I
perused over the or^ginal written copy hereof, which casuallye and without his
knowledge came unto my hands, and had fully considered the sobriety of style
therein so carefully observed and continued without all occasion of offense,
and the pecul^er and choice method thereof; together with the sund^ie important
reasons, enlarged and set down therein, not so much with ornamente o^ riches
of words, as with correspondence and sequel of matter, and that somewhat
(perhaps more The Author has signified his painful allegation of
testimonies, to have been undertaken, not ambitiously to paint his margent with
multitude of authorities, but only in regard of the adversaries tergiuersation
and bold denial concerning any point not ple^tifully and plainly proved:
and to the end that what is through his affected brevity wantinge in the text,
may in further satisfaction (where it s^all seem needful,) be found more
fully in the margent.
painefully endeavored in this, then in some other like treatise formerly
published; howsoever I could not but commend his foresaid care and good
discretion, in not presuming (by deliuerye of this treatise to his Highness) to
become offensive or further tedious to so great a Majesty. Yet could I not but
censure his other intendment of suppressing the same for no less then
extreme, and fit to be prevented: as houlding it unworthy, that so great
pains and of such public profit, should for his private satisfaction be
wholly suppressed and buried in silence. For which cause I have adventured
though (in regard of the reason before signified) not to offend or trouble his
Majesty therewith; yet to dispose thereof in an other course and so publishing
the same (without the Authors assent) to offer it (with all humble and due
respect) to your most honorable and grave considerations. For whom other may
we in the confidence and equity of our cause importune rather then your
selves, being the honorable Peers, and grave Sages of our noble Nation? upon
whom (next unto his MAJESTY the charge of redressing our miseries is most
properly incumbent. Vouchsafe therefore I humbly beseech you, to view even with
charitable and Christian commiseration, our present estate and condition
described to you in this treatise, and in like manner to weigh the reasons and
motives to the contrary therein set down, which are many and important. As
first that our affliction heretofore for so many years sustained, has been
for persisting constant in that Faith whereto we Englishmen were above a
thousand years since See hereafter tract. 1. sect. 1.
converted: that also the same faith is ibid. sect. 2. initio and sect 3.
confessed to have been the generally received faith of all Christian countries
for sundry hundredth years before those times: that likewise it was ^onfirmed
tract. 1. sect. 5.
with true and undoubted miracles, and those reported not from the Apocriphall
testimony of any pretended fabulous Legend, but from the constant assertion of
learned Protestants them selves: That also the same faith is deduced tract. 1.
sect. 2. circa and post med. and tract. 1. sect. 3 subdiuision. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
etc.
up to the Apostles times: In more full demonstration whereof it is likewise yet
further showed, as well that Protestants are not able tract. 1. sect. 7
to prove that the Roman Church has changed her Religion since her first
profession thereof in the Apostles times, as also that Catholics have proved
tract. 1. sect. 8
the contrary even by sundry arguments demonstratiuely unanswerable.
Furthermore that whereas (according to S. Austines Aug. in Psalm. 30. con. 1.
faith. obscurius dix^runt Prophetae de Christo qua^ de ecclesia. Puto propterea
quia videbant in spiritu, contra ecclesiam homines facturos esse particulas,
and de Christo non tantam litem habituros, de ecclesia magnas conte^tiones
excitaturos, ideo illud vnde maiores lites futurae erant, planius predictu^ est
apertius prophetatum est. etc.
assertion) the holy Ghost foreseeing the contentions that would arise about
the Church, did therefore by his Prophets speak more plainelye thereof then of
our Savior him self, there is in this treatise accordingly described tract.
2. cap. 1. sect. 1. and cap. 2 sect. 1.
the prophetical history of the true Church: with like proof of the
succeeding answerable event thereof to be most evidently wanting tract. 2. cap.
1. sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. and tract. 2. ca. 2. sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. and 10.
in the Protestants Church, and yet fulfilled tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 3. and 4
in ours. In so much has the more sober and learned Protestants in preservation
of Christ's true Church upon earth for many former ages in which theirs was
wanting, are enfo^ced to acknowledge tract. 1. sect. 6. post med. and tract. 2.
ca. 2 sect. 13 circa and post medium.
our now Catholic Roman Church to be the true Church, and the profession
thereof for sufficient to salvation, charging therefore their other inconsiderate
and headstrong brethren who affirm the contrary, even with ignorant tract. 2.
ca. 2. sect. 13. fine.
zeal. These (with sundry other important reasons) being contained in this
treatise, and all of them made plain and confessed, not by doubtful ambagie
of words, neither by only sentences of Scriptures or Fathers, though in them
selves never so manifest, (for that course is specially and of purpose
forborne, as being in regard of our adversaries endless tergiuersation no other
(then as it were) a vast Ocean wherein we can hardly restrain them to any cert
intie of fight)

But (for their more full conuincing) by those special testimonies (whether of
Scriptures or Fathe^s) whose evident sense on our behalf, is accordingly, and
for such acknowledged even by their own learned writers, and those not few or
vulgar, but many and of great estimation; I have in respect of such their
frequent and pla^ne testimonies, so fully alleged in iustificacion of our
Church and religion, entitled this treatise: The Protestants Apollogie of the
Roman Church. How effectual that kind of argument is which is thus taken from
the confession of the adversaries, I shall not need to show, seeing the force
thereof is not only acknowledged hereof see hereafter tract. 3. sect. 6. initio.
by Mr. D. Whittaker and other Protestant writers, but is also of it self
manifest even to common understanding; For how can it be denied but that they,
who in liking of their own opinion, doubt not to prefer and maintain the
same against the uniform and confessed judgment to the contrary, of the
ancient Fathers, of our now Catholic writers, and of their own learned
brethren, are to be given over as being desperately incureable, and much more
worthy of contempt then answer. These things being thus premised, the
conclusion of my most humble request is, that you will not forget to remember
these known principles of your own schools, as namely that you are but men,
and subject tract. 3. sect. 7. paulo post initium.
(no less then the Fathers were, or then we yet are) to error, ouer-sight, and
misvnderstandinge of the Scriptures, that therefore you would resolve to 1.
John. 4, 1.
try the spiritts if they be of God, and 1. Thessal. 5, 21
prove all things houlding that which is good. And that accordingly you would
read over this treatise, not being tra^sported with preiudicate David Pareus (a
Protestant writer) in libro de simbolis sacramentalibus. p. 17. post med.
confesses the preiudicate conceit of many Protestants saying. illud vero ego
intelligo, multos doctrinam Papae damnare qui eam non intelligunt: damnant vero
tantum nominis odio.
conceit of your former opinions, but as led the to with indifferent and equal
censure. Let not the sway of times, or our miseries prevail to make you so
regardles, or us dispiseab^e, that therefore you should be unmindful either of
your own souls or our present ^ondit^on. Thus much but obtained, I doubt not
but you will in the end, awake from all former spiritual drousines of opinion,
and thereupon confess and say of our Cathol ke Church, as Jacob at his bodily
awaking said of the place where he dreamed Genesis. 28, 12, 16
Surely the Lord was in this place and I was not aware. The eternal God
according to whose will all laws should be made direct you accordingly in your
making of laws, and incite or stir up, act. 5, 34, 35, 38, 39.
if any (as God forbid) not yet satisfied with our former troubles, should
urge or move for our further continued calamity) some one or other well
enspired heart, to persuade and prevail as did the honorable Gamaliel when he
upon the like occasion said, Act. 5, 34.35, 38, 39.
Men of Israel take heed what you intend to do touching these men: etc.
refrain your selves and let them alone, for of this work^ of theirs be of men
it will fall away, but if it be of god, you are not able to dissolve it.

TRACT 1. TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
IHS

AMONG so many and so important reasons (most Gracious Soue^aigne as are
prevailing more th^n ordinary in question of the truth there does none occur of
greater satisfaction, then such as is graced with answerable Mr. Whitaker. de
ecclesia co^trou. 2. quaest. 5. cap. 14. initio. page 366. says firmum sit
necesse est argumentum illud quod sumitu^ ex aduersariorum confessione: etc.
efficax eni^ erit aduersariorum ipsoru^ contra ipsos testimonium etc. et quidem
fateor veritatem etiam e suis inimicis testimonium extorque re. etc.
acknowledgement of the learned adversary: And seeing it is the honorable
privilege Hereby we understand the Puritan preachers and their accomplices.
of our CATHOLIC faith, to be so Justified by her enemies, of whom
nevertheless many (to make us more odious and dejected) have (of their
inueterate hatred) busied them selves in their daily Sermons and other-wise
never more then now of late, publicly to deprave our professed religion with
all unworthy and scandalous calumniation, perplexing so against us, even the
more sober and quiet judgments, with a dispersed contagion of their
sophisticated (and to us most dangerous) incantations; we cannot therefore in so
great necessity of times, (in our own defense) use either a more proper
Antidote to expel the poison of such their intemperate and impurest language,
or less offensive means to your MAJESTY, for the appeasing of our former
continued calamities, so far as to your PRINCELY and Christian wisdom may
seem requisite, then if in this our needful Apology undertaken wholly to
that end, we do profess purposely to abstain from all such matter as
remains questionable, contenting our selves only with that, which is in it
self evident or otherwise acknowledged for true by learned Protestants them
selves. The which also we will acco^dingly endeavor hereby to accomplish, not
with insulting against them in matter of unnecessary and unkind exprobration
nor yet with affected entertainment of prolonged discourse, 1. Cor. 2, 4.
Neither in the persuasible words of humane wisdom: but humbly, briefly, and
plainly, as being very confide^t, that naked truth, presented thus to your
HIGHNESS though but in her native and simple habitt, shall yet nevertheless,
appear in vewe of so understanding a mind, both gracious and regardable:

THAT ENGLISH MEN WERE above 1000 years since converted to the now professed
Catholic faith.. 1.
PLEASES it therefore your most excellent Majesty to call to mind, that it is
now somewhat above one Mr. Couper late Bishop of Lincoln, in his chronicle
fol. 156. a. affirms our conversion to have been Anno Do. 599. and Mr. Fox
in his acts and monuments, printed 1576. page 117. a. prope finem affirms the
like.
thousand years since Gregory then Bishop of Rome, for his virtue and
learning surnamed the Great, a man highly commended both by Fathers S. Gregory
is commended by Damascen in orat. de defunctis: by Isodore. de scriptoribus
ecclesiasticis cap. 27. and by the Fathers of the eight Toletane Council. can.
2. and by S. Bid hist. l. 2. c. 1.
and Mr. D. Humfrey in Iesuitissimi. part. 2. rat. 5. page 624. says:
Gregorius nomine quidem magnus and reuera magnus, vir magnis and multis diuinae
gratiae dotibus exornatus: etc. And Mr. Godwyne in his catalogue of the
Bishopps of England. p. 3. ante med. says: That Blessed and holy Father S.
Gregory was the occasion of replanting the Christian faith in our country: and
Mr. W^itaker co^tra Duraeum. l. 5. page 394. fine. says. quod nos magno
beneficio affecit Gregorius, id semper gratissima memoria recolemus:
Protestants, converted us English men (by the preaching of Austine) from
heathenish infidellitie to the faith of Christ.

Concerning the religion professed by Gregory, and whereunto we were as then so
by him converted, it was so undoubtedly our now professed Catholic faith,
that the protestant writers (not of vulgar note but those that are for learning
reputed most accomplished, do for such throughout every particular specially
and at large In prooffe that our then conversion was to every particular point
of our now profess^d Catholic faith, Mr. D. Humfrey in Iesuitissimi part. 2.
rat. 5. page 626. and 627. says. In ecclesiam vero quid inuexerunt, Gregorius
and Augustinus. onus caeremoniarum: etc. intulerunt pallium archiepiscopale ad
sola Missarum solemnia: Purgatorium etc. oblatione^ salutaris hostiae, and
preces pro demortuis etc. reliquias, etc. transubsta^tiatione^, etc. nouas
temploru^ consecrationes etc. ex quibus omnibus quid aliud quaesitum est, quam
vt indulgentiae, monachatus, Papatus reliquu^que Pontificiae superstitionis
chaos extruatur? Haec autem Augustinus magnus monachus, a Gregorio monacho
edoctus, importauit Anglis: etc. Also Luke Osiander in his epitom. historiae
ecclesiasticae centuria sexta page 289. fine. and 290. initio. describes it
yet more perticulerly, saying. Augustinus romanos ritus, and consuetudines
Anglicanis ecclesijs obtrusit, nimirum Altaria, Vestes, Imagines, Missas,
Calices, Cruces, Candelabra Thuribula, Vexilla, sacra Vasa, Lustrales aquas,
Romanarum ceremoniarum codices: etc. And ibid. page 288 prope finem. he says
of Gregory, in pluribus articulis turpiter and pontificie hallucinatus est,
nam and libero arbitio and bonis operibus nimium tribuit, de poenitentia non
recte docet, caelibatum ministrorum ecclesiae acriter vrsit, inuocationem
Sanctorum eorumque cultum, sed and imaginum idolatricam venerationem
approbauit, palliauit, and defendit: Also the Centurie writers of Magdeburg in
their sixth Centurie ca. 10. col. 748. circa med. make like report of Austines
doctrine to us English men. And collecting (else where in the sam^ book) out of
Gregory's own writings by them recited certain his opinions which th^^ hold
for erroneous, as being popish they do in their index or Alphabeticall table of
tha^ sixth centurie at the word Gregorij specially set down (with figures of
p^rticuler reference w^^ every such said opinion is to be found, as follows.)
eiusdem error de bonis operibus, de (...) ^sessione, de coniugio, de ecclesia,
de Sanctoru^ inuocatione, de inferno, de Iustificatione, (...) ^^rbitri^ de
Paenitentia, de Purgatorio, de Satisfactione,: Also they charge him ye^ (...)
^^itings with Consecration of Aultars, Chalices, and Corporalls: col. 369.
fine. with Oblati^ ^rifice for the dead col. 473. post med. with Exorcisme col.
376. circa med. with translati^ ^^^ues. col. 381. fine. and 382. with
Monachisme. 383. initio. and 384. with Pilgrimage. co^ (...) with Consecration
of Churches, with Mass, Relics and sprinckling of holy water. (...) with
Con^ (...), of ^ap^^^e, of ^o^^ia, and O^le: ^l. 367. prope in^^um. ^^^h
C^^^r^ti^n of Mass: (...). 36^. ^^n^ and 370. ^i^o, and 693. post med. and
(...) in (...): and with Claim and exercise of Jurisdiction and P^^macie over
all Churches: ^ol. 425, 426, 427, 428 429, 430. 431. 432. etc. with which last
point concerning Primacie he is in like manner charged and reproved by Mr. D.
Fulke in his confutation of Purgatory page 310. ante med. and by Peter Martyr
in cap. 8. iudicum.
describe it: Mr. Doctor Fulke tearming it therefore in general our peruersion
Mr. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatory. page 333. initio.
: Danaeus also calling it, inebriatio Danaeus in resp. ad disputat. Bellarm.
part. 1. page 780. fine.
meretricis de qua est apoc. 17. verse. 4: and Mr. Harison confessing likewise
that Mr. William Harrison in his description of Brittanie set before Holl^nshed
great Chronicle volum. 1. (after the last edition) page 29. b. line 11. And see
his other more plain words. ibidem. page 27. a. line 27.
Austine came and brought in Popery: with whom agrees Mr. Bale, affirming
that Aust. Mr. Bale in catalog. scriptorum illustrium maioris Britaniae cent.
14. page 117. says of Austine, plebem per interpretes fidem papisticam docuit.
by his interpreters taught our people the Papisticall faith with the
profession whereof they doubt not likewise sin plain terms,) perticularly to
charge certain famous and godly learned English men, who lived in the ages
next after our said conversion, as namely Mr. Bale in Catallog scriptorum
illustrium maioris Britaniae centur. 14. page 145. speaking of their martyrdom
says: Passisunt pro papismo papistici Martires Anno 693. And see further the
Centurie writers cent. 7. cap. 6. col. 154. and Luc. Osiander in epitom. cent.
7. l. 4. c. 20. page 331. circa and post med.
the two (memorable) brethren named Eualdi whom they therefore call
Papisticall: and S. Bid whom they likewise expressly charge with Luc. Osiander
in epitom. cent. 8. l. 2. c. 3. page 58. initio says of Beda: Omnibus
pontificijs erroribus (in articulis in quibus nos hodie a Papa dissentimus)
inuolutus est etc. and says yet further of him, bonus fuit vir:
error in all those popish articles wherein they at this day dissent from the
Pope: and yet (that his profession notwithstanding) they do think him worthy
of the surname of Mr. Fox in his acts and monuments printed 1576. page 128. b.
initio, and M. Couper in his chronicle at the year 724. fol. 168. b. and
Hollinshead in his great Chronicle of the last edition volum. 1. page 130 b.
initio.
reverend not doubting to number him amongst Mr. D. Humfrey in Iesuitismi.
part. 2. rat. 3 page 326. ante medium.
the godly men raised up by the holy Ghost.

THAT THE SAME FAITH WAS Universally professed for sundry ages before, and was
also agreeable to that first faith, where to the Brittons of Wales were
converted in the Apostles times. 2.
(...) (most dreed Sovereign) being our confessed Catholic religion,
whereunto most vn^oubtedly we were (so many ages since) thus converted, and for
which we have of late years endured such affliction, was not as then private
only unto Rome, or us Englishmen, but (as our adversaries do complain) was
universally the^ Mr. Parkins in his exposition of the Creed page 307. says:
During the spa^^ of nine hundred years the popish heresy has spread: self
over the wholle earth
professed through the Christi^n world, neither first as then became so
universal, but (as they yet further complain and acknowledge) continued such
for sundry ages then before. Mr. John Nappeir in his treatise upon the
revelations dedicated to your Majesty page 68 prope sinem says. Between the
year of Christ 300 and 316. the Antichristian and papisticall reign begun
reigning universally and without any debatable contradiction. 1260 years.
Re^gning universally (says Mr. Nape^e) and without any debateable
contradiction, (even) twelve hundredth sixty years: next ensewing the first
300. years after Christ, Mr. Nappeire vbi supra page 145. fine faith. Even
1260 years the Pope and his Clergy has poss^ssed the outward visible Church
of Christians: And with this account of Mr. Napeir agrees Mr. Broca^d in his
treatise upon the revelations fol. 110. a. circa med. where he affirms, that
the Church was trodden down and oppressed by the papacy, even from Siluesters
time, unto these times: which he there and fol. 123. (b) collecteth to be
during the said 1260 years
the Pope and his Clergy during all that time poss^ssing the outward visible
Church of Christians. In so much that whereas our learned adversaries do truly
affirm (as being undoubted) that our neighbors the Brittons of Wales, M.
Camden in his Britannia etc. page 40. circa med. says: Certum est Britannos in
ipsa ecclesiae infancia christianam religionem imbibisse: In proof, thereof he
there alleges sondrie ancient authorities. page 40. circa med. And page
157. paulo post med. he says. In hac floruit monasterium Glastenburie quod
antiquam repetit originem a Iosepho Arimathensi. etc. hoc enim and antiquissima
huius monasterij monumenta testantur etc. Nec est cur de hac re ambigamus. And
Mr. Harrison in his description of Brittannie annexed to Hollinshead his great
chronicle of the last edition: volum. 1. page 23 a. l. 18. says: that Joseph
preached here in England in the Apostels times, his sepulcher yet in
Glastenburie and Epitaph affixed thereto is proof sufficient: Also Mr. HENOCH
CLAPHAM in his sovereign remedy against Schism page 24. speaking of the
conversion of the Brittons in the Apostles times says thereof. Our
Schismatickes may as well ask me what assurance I have there was a King Henry,
as demand what assurance I have of the other. This point is also yet further
affirmed by Mr. D. FVLKE in his book against Heskins, Sanders etc. page 561.
sect. 71. and in his confutation of Purgatory page 332. also by Mr. GODWINE in
his catolog. of Bishops. etc. page 1. initio.
received the Mr. BALE in his pageant of Popes says: The Brittons being
converted by Joseph of Aramathia held that faith at Austines coming: And D.
FVLKE against the Rhemish Testament in 2. Cor 12. sect. 5. fol. 316. a circa
med. says The Catholic Brittons with whom Christian Religion had continued
in succession from the Apostles times would not receive Austine: And in his
answer to a counterfeit Catholic page 49. fine he says: The Britons before
Austins coming, continued in the faith of Christ even from the Apostles times
And Mr. FOX in his acts and monuments printed 1576. page 463. a circa med.
says:
faith of Christ by the preaching of the Apostles and held that faith at
Austines coming not being (as they yet further affirm) in the mean time In
proof that the Brittons of wales at and before Austines coming into England
were not altered by the ROMAN Church: Mr. D. HVMFREY In Iesuitissimi. part. 2.
rat. 3. page 304. circa med. says: Habuerunt Brittanni templa sibi non
Romany, qui tum Romano iugo non erant subditi, nec Romana^ religione^
suscipiebant, nec Augustinum Apostolum suum agnoscebant: Et vide ibidem. page
624. fine. Also Mr. Doct. FVLKE in his confutation of Purgatory page 372.
initio says. It appears that this Land did never receive the doctrine and
ceremonies of the lattin Church, before the time of the Saxons.
altered or corrupted by the Roman Church: The Brittons after the receiving of
the faith, never forsook it for any manner of false preaching of other nor for
torments. etc.
In the special proof whereof (as being most certainly true) Mr. D. BARLOWE
in his defense of the articles of the Protestants religion page 21. affirms
the Church of, he Brittons to be as ancient every day, and as Christian every
way as the R^mane, affirming further, the integrity thereof (or not being
altered by the Church of Rome) first by their observation of Easter different
from Austine: Secondly by the opposition which they made against Austine:
Mr. D. Barlowe seriously labors: it is nevertheless evident by S. Bid who
lived Bid did write his history thereof Anno. 724. as witnesses Mr. Cowper
in his Cronicle fol. 168. b.
so nere to those times and write the History thereof. And is also acknowledged
since by Protestant writers, that upon conference then had at a place thereof
called in Bedes time Bed^ hist. lib. 2. c. 2. initio says Augustinus adiutorio
vsus Edilberthi Regis, conuocauit ad suam colloquium, Episcopos sieve doctores
maximae and proximae Britonum prouinciae, in loco vbi vsque hodie linqua
anglorum Augustineizat appellatur: And Holenshead in his great Coronicle of
the last edition. volum. 1. l. 5. c. 21. page 102. b. line. 33. 40. etc. makes
like mention hereof.
Austineizat between Austine and the Britton Bishops, who at the first
frowardly resisted Austine all they could, (for which Mr. Fox not unjustly
reproves the^) Mr. Fox in his acts and Monuments printed 1576. page 120. b.
the greatest differences the^ stood upon between Austen and them, were
expresselie and only mentioned to be Beda hist. l. 2. c. 2. paulo post med.
reports how Austine said to the Brittons: si in tribus his obtemperare mihi
vultis vt Pascha. suo tempore celebretis, vt ministerium Baptizandi quod co
renascimur iusta morem romanae and apostolicae ecclesiae compleatis, vt genti
Anglorum vna nobiscum praedicetis verbum Domini, cetera quae agitis quamuis
moribus nostris contraria, equanimiter cuncta tollerabimu^. And the like is
testified by Hollenshead volum. 1. page 103. a. line 17. and by Mr. Godwine in
his catallog. of the Bishopes. etc. page 6. ante med.
their dissent from the use of the Roman Church in their (Ceremonies) or
ministering of Baptism and keeping of Easter: which let er (as Luc. Luc.
Osiander in epitom. cent. 2. l. 3. c. 2. page 51. circa med. says: Ioannes and
Philippus apostoli Pascha celebrauerant decima quarta luna post aequinoxium
vernum, quo tempore Iudaei etiam pascha suum celebrare solebant, idque apostoli
haud dubie fecerunt in gratiam little Iudae orum, qui nuper ad Christum conuersi
fuerunt, and vt plures etiam Iudaeos Christo lucrifacerent:
Osiander witnesses from antiquity) was tolerated by the Apostles in re^arde
of the known weakness of some, even as for like respect act. 16.3.
Circumcision was by them in like sort tolerated, and act. 15.29.
abstinence from blood and that which was stra^g^ed specially prescribed: By
which their so earnest dissenting about these only matters of smaller
importance, is most plainly signified For the Brittons who Contradicted
Austine and that so earnestly about these so few and smaller points, would
never have been silent, but much the rather have with-stoode him in the other so
many and in comparablie much greter points of faith, had they in like sort
disagreed from him therein:
their full agreement in all other substantial and head points of faith: Which
thing is also as yet more certainly evident, as well in that the Britton
Bishopes as then Beda hist. l. 2. c. 2. ante med. says, tum Britones quidem
confitentur intellexisse seueram esse viam Iusticiae, quam praedicaret
Augustinus: Hereof also see Hollenshead vbi supra page 102. b. line 54.
Confessed that it was the right way of justice and righteousness which Austine
taught: As also for that Mr. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatory, page 335.
prope finem.
Austine did (as Mr. Fulke affirms at the last obtain the aid of the
British Bishopes to the conversion of the S^xons: So evidently does that faith
which Austine taught us, and which the Protestants acknowledge for Popish,
demonstrate it self in general to be consonant and agreeable with that
primative faith whereunto the Brittons of wales were (as is confessed)
converted in the Apostles times: which point is as yet made much more evident
by like further observation of so many other remote Nations converted in the
Apostles times as namely of Gracia Armenia. India, etc. which although they be
in some things departed from the faith whereto they were first converted, yet
by their remnante of religion to this day preserved, sufficiently appears
what faith it was whether Catholic or Protestant, whereto they were at first
converted, and from which they be so in some points at this day departed
witness hereof are the several public See in those Liturgies mention made of
Real Presence, Sacrifice Prayer for the dead, Prayer to Saints etc.
Liturgies of the Cratians, Armenia^s etc. further witness also hereof is their
late professed agreement or Osiander in Epitom. histor. eccles. centur 15. page
477. post med. says. Anno 1430. conuocaret (Papa) Eugenius quartus, concilium
Florentiae etc. huic concilio etiam Graeci Atmenij Iacoboini consenserunt and,
Mr. Marbecke in his common places. page 258. post med. acknowledges that at
the Council of Florence the Christians of Armenia and India consented to the
Roman Church, and that the Greeks agreed etc. also Abdisu Primate of the
Armenians subscribed to the late Council of Trent.
s^bmission to our Catholic Church; and most full and plain witness hereof is
the aunswerable It appears by the treatise published by the Protestants
diverse of Wittenberg Anno. 1584. entitled acts theologorum witebergensium and
Hieremiae Patriarchae Constantinop. etc. that the Greek Church at this day
though divided from the Lattin, professes to believe Invocation of Saints,
Relickes, worshipping of Images, Transubstantiation, Sacrifice, the signifying
Ceremonies of the Mass. Auriculer Confession: Enjoined Satisfaction:
Confirmation with Chrisme: Extreme unction: all the seven Sacraments: Prayer
for the dead: Free will: Monachisme: Vowed Chastity: the fast of Lent: that
Preistes may not marry after orders taken etc. see this alleged in particular
hereafter Tract. 1. ss. 7. in the margent at Figur. 11. And Chrispinus in his
discourse of the estate of the Church page 253. initio: affirms that Anno
870. the greek and Lattin Churches became divided only for the Primacie and
diversity of Ceremonies: so fully did they at that time consent in all other
points: And concerning the other oriental Churches further remote, Osiander
(in epitom. histor. eccles. centur. 16. page 970. post med.) says, Hoc Anno.
1585. Christiani qui etc. the year 1585. the Christians who inhabit near to
Mount Libanus, became at last Conquered, and subject to the Turkish Empire,
neither is that to be maruailed at, for the Christians in the East have not
sincere religion, but are in most part of Articles Popishly.
Testimony of our learned adversaries: By which foresaid examples of so many
remote nations, so far distant each from other, as namely Wales Graetia,
Armenia India etc. Converted As concerning the conversion in the Apostles times
of Armenia: See Chemnitius examen. part. 2. page 7. b. Paulo ante med. when he
says, Armenit Bartholomeus Euangelium praedicauit. of the like conversion of
Indiae: See Osiander centur. 1. page 37 circa med. and Paulus venetus l. 3.
cap. 27. and 43. and Hayton Armen. l. de tartaris cap. 6. the like conversion
of Graecia appears by Paul's epistles to sundry of that Nation as to the
Corinthians Ephesians Thesalonians. And see reuelat. 1, 11. and concerning the
like confessed conversion of Wales See heretofore page 4. in the margent there
at the letter. (...).
undoubtedly all of them in the Apostles times, and agreeing so far with us and
against our adversaries in so many principal points of faith, is not obscurely
signified that our now Catholic Religion is that Primative faith, which the
Apostles them selves first planted in all nations.

A FARTHER DEMONSTRATION BY Confessed Testimony from the Fathers that it was
taught in the Apostles time.. 3.
WHICH antiquity or prescription of our professed Catholic Doctrine up to
those Apostolic times is also made as yet much more probable or rather
evident, by that which our learned adversaries them selves do yet further
acknowledge and collect from the writings of the more ancient Fathers: To go
through every concerning every particular see more fully hereafter Tract. 2. c.
1. sect. 3.
particular would be over tedious to your MAJESTY and improper to this place:

Vouchsafes therefore your HIGHNESS that we may give instance in such as be
chief.

1 First concerning vows it is acknowledged that Peter Martyr de votis page
490. fine. says: erant ergo Clementis aetate professiones castitatis and vota
fateor. Iam tum inceperant homines deflectere a verbo dei. etc.
the profession and vows of Chastity were extant among Christians in the
time of Clement Bishope of Alexandria that Peter Martyr ibidem. page 524. fine
says Scio epiphaniu^ cum multis alijs ex patribus in eo errare, quod peccatu^
esse dicant votum huiusmodi violare cum opus fuerit, and male illum id refer
in traditiones Apostolicas:
Epiphanius and many other Fathers erred therein: that centur. 3. c. 6. col.
140. line. 27 and centur. 3. c. 7. col. 176. line. 39.
Tertulian and Ciprian taught vows of Chastity: That the same have been used
Calvin institut. l. 4. c. 13. sect. 17.
ab vltima memoria, and antiquitus receptum: that Peter Martyr de celebatu and
votis versus finem.
imediately after the Apostles times to much was attributed to vows: that
Ignatius him self (though their scholar) signifies in his epistles: his
centur. 2. c. 4. col. 64. line. 40. It is said ex epistolis Ignasij apparet
homines iam tum paulo impensius caepisse amare and venerari virginitatis
studium, nam in epist. ad Antioch. ait: virgins videant, cui se consecrarins.
to much liking of that profession: and Centur. 2. c. 10. col. 167. line 24. de
virginitate minus comode loquitur.
speaks incommodiously of virginity. Abraham Scultetus in his medulla
theologiae Patrum. page 450. circa med. alleges Ignatius saying ad Philadelp.

Saluto collegium: virginu^ whereupon he imediately infers: Ergone in illo
ecclesiae flor^ fuerunt, quae castitatem and continentiam perpetuam
profiterentur Virgins? fuerunt omninq. etc.


saluting (and affirming Colleges of Virgins: and so plainly, that our
learned) adversaries do there-vpon affirm, how that even Scultetus vt supra.
in that flower of the Church there were Virgins, that professed Perpetual
Chastity that lastly S. Ambros and Epiphanius derive Peter Martyr de coelibatu
and votis. page 543. paulo post med. and page 525. initio.
Professed Chastity from the institution of S. Paul:

2 Secondly concerning the Real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, the
reservation thereof, and the mixture of water with wine in the Challice:
concerning the first, it is affirmed that Gregory, the great Humfred.
Iesuitissimi part. 2. tat. 5. page 626. post med.
taught transubstantiation that The Centurie writers. cent. 5. col. 517. l. 23
say: Chrisostomus transubstantionem videtur confirmare, nam ita scribit. etc.
Chrysostom is thought to confirm transubstantiation: that Centur. 4. c 10.
col. 985. line. 30
Eusebius Emissen did speak vnprofitablely of transubstantiation: that
Aothonie de Adamo in his Anotomie of the Mass. fol. 221. a. fine. and see the
centurie writers, cent. 4. cap. 4. col. 295. l. 3 And oecolampadius in libro
epistolarum oecola^padij and Zuinglij. lib. 3. p. 765.
the books of Sacraments ascribed to Ambros, affirm the opinion of Christ's
Bodily Presence in the Sacrament: wherein Peter Martyr likewise professes to
Peter Martyr in defens. object. Gardner. part. 4. page 724. And see also Peter
Martirs further dislike of Cyrils s^yings in his epistles annexed to his common
places in English, his epistle there to Beza page 106. b ante medium. where he
says. I will not so easily subscribe to Cyrill, who affirmed such a communion,
as thereby even the substance of the flesh and blood of Christ first is joined
to the blessing. (for so he calls the holy Bread) etc. And in his epistle to
Calvin ibidem page 98. a. ante med. he proves further for this opinion Cyrill
and some other Fathers.
dislike the Judgment of Cirill: that In the treatise attributed to Vrsinus
entitled Commonefactio cuiusdam theologi. de S. caena and eiusdem
commonefactionis consideratio page 211. and 218.
In Ciprian are many sayings which seem to affirm transubstantiation: in so
much as they do The sermon of Cyprian de caena Domini, which this foresaid
testimony concerns, is dedicated to Cornelius who was Bishop of Rome when
Cyprian lived, and to whom Cyprian him self l. 1. ep. 1. and ep. 3. did write,
in so much that Mr. Fulke against the Rhemish testament in 1. cor. cap. 11.
fol. 282. a. circa medium alleges testimony from thence, affirming that the
Author de caena Domini was not in time much inferior to Cyprian.
unworthily affirm that Sermon of his in which those sayings are extant to be
counterfaite: that lastly Ignatius Mr. Whitgift in his defense against
Carthwrightes reply page 408. ante med.
who was S. John's scholar, and lived in Christ's time did (as Theoderet 1200
years since, and them selves now do Theodoret. dial. 3. and Hamelmanus de
traditionibus apostolicis etc. col. 746. line 18. 19. 22, 23 etc. alleges not
only Theodoret but also one Wydefortus alleging Anno 1396. this saying of
Ignatius, out of an ancient copy of that time.
affirm, and as the Lutheranes do object Vide recitationes de concilio scripti
libri concordiae etc. (printed Lipsiae 1581.) nona recitat. p. 177. ante medium.
in proof of their Real presence, say of the heretics in his time, they do
not admit Euchariste and oblations, because they do not confess the Eucariste
to be the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which flesh suffered for our
sins: and one of our adversaries confesses accordingly, that Adamus
Francisci in Margarita theologica. p. 256. says. Commentum Papistarum de
transubstantiatione mature in ecclesiam irrepsit.
Transubstantiation entered early into the Church: and an other says Anthony
de Adamo in his Anotomie of the Mass page 236. a. ante med.
I have not yet hitherto been able to know, when this opinion of the Real
and bodily being of Christ in the Sacrament did begin:

As concerning reservation of the Sacrament: whereas according to our
adversaries Doctrine, Mr. Willet in his synopsis page 460. ante med.
It is no Sacrament unless it be received. The contrary was so plainly taught
and practiced, even in the more ancient times of S. Chrysostom, Chrisostom. in
ep. 1. ad Innocentium.
Ciprian Cyp. in sermon. de lapsis post med.
Ireneus, Ireneus apud Eusebium hist. l. 5. c. 24.
Iustine, Iustine in Apolog. 2. prope finem.
etc. that Mr. Fulke confesses hereof saying Fulke against Heskins Sanders
etc. page 77. prope finem.
That the Sacrament (of some) was reserved in the elder days of the Church, is
not so great a controversy, as whether it ought to be reserved. and Calvin
acknowledges Calvin. instit. l. 4. cap. 17. sect. 39.
the reservation of the Sacrament (to be) veteris ecclesiae exemplum, See Peter
Martyr. lib. contra Gardineru^ object. 88.
the example of the ancient Church: and (to omit others) Chemnitius does
likewise acknowledge that Chemnitius exame^ part. 2. p. 102. a. paulo post
me^iu^.
witnesses of this custom of private reservation of the Eucharist, are
Tertulian, Ciprian, Ambrose, Hierom, Basile, etc. and that Chemnitius ibid.
certain of the aunicent Fathers greatly commended the same, as Nazianzen,
Ambrose etc. and that it was, Chemnitius ibid.
antiqua consuetudo late patens and diu propagata. In so much as Peter See this
hereafter tract. 1. sect. 8. page 57. in the margent at at the letter.k.
Martyr cannot but acknowledge that (by the testimony of S. Cirill) the
anthropomorphites were specially condemned for their impugning of the
Sacraments reservation:

As concerning the minglinge of water with wine in the Chalice before
consecration of the Sacrament It is so abundantly testified by the Fathers
Iustine apol. 2. fine and Ireneus l. 5. c. 1. Cypr. l. 2. ep. 3. Ambros l. 5.
de sacramentis cap. 1. and l. 4. c. 5. Hierom. in morc. c. 14. Austine tract.
120 in Io^n. and de eccles. dog. cap. 75. and de doctrina Christiana lib. 4. c.
21 Eusebius. emissen. ser. 5. de Paschate. council. 3. Carthag. can. 24. and
council. Auraicen. can. 17. and council. 3. brach. c^n. 1. and council. tribur.
can. 21. and council Aphrican. can. 4. and ex capitulis graec. synd. c. 55 and
council. 6. consta^tinop. can. 32
of all ages and Countries, that Mr. Whitguifte says. Mr. Whitgift in his
defense etc. pa. 473. prope initium.
Ciprian was greatly ouer-seene in making it a matter so necessary, in
caelebration of the Lords Supper, to have water mingled with wine, which was
at that time no doubt, common to more then to him: Mr. Carthwright likewise
acknowledges that Mr. Carthwrite alleged in Mr. Whitgifts foresaid defense.
p. 525 fine.
in the minglinge of water with wine, a necessity and great mystery was
placed, as may appear (says he) both by Iustine Martyr and Ciprian: and Mr.
Jewel speaks of this mixture, confesses in like manner saying, Mr. Jewel
in his reply page 34. paulo antemed.
in deed S. Ci^rian and certain old Fathers, spoke of it, and f^r^^ it much,
add but now hereto, that the Armenians being the first we read of, that
denied the mixture, ^ffirming (with our adversaries) that only wine wa^ to be
used, were therefore speciall^ condemned of error, as witness Theophilac^. in
Io^n. cap. 19. ^^nom^ the water and blood which issued from Christ's side:
says. Confund^ntur Armenij qui non admiscent in misterijs aqua^ vino, non enim
credunt vt videtur, ^uod aqua ex latere egressa sit.
Theop^ilact and the Fathers of the si^t Council Council. 6. constantinop.
can. 32, says. Nouimus quod in Armenianorum Regione vinum ta^ tum in sacra
mensa offerunt aquam illi non miscentes, qui sacrificium incruentum peragunt:
which their usage that council there condemns, saving there further against
it, nam and Iacobus Domini nostri Jesus Christi frater. etc. and Basilius
Cesareae Archiepis^opus. etc. mistico nobis in scripto tradito sacrificio, ita
per agendum in sacro misterio ex aqua and vino sacrum poculum ediderunt.
of Constantinople, who (above a thousand years since) alleged against them
ibidem vt supra.
S. James his Liturgy in proof of the foresaid mixture:

3 Thirdly as concerning Antichrist, Altars, and sacrifice, Mr. Whitaker
confesses touching Antichrist saying, Whitaker. l. de Antichristo. page 21.
the Fathers for the most part thought that Antichrist should be but one man.
But in that as in many other things they erred: concerning the short time of
his persecution or reign gathred from the scriptures. Mr. Fox confesses that
Fox in Apoc. c. 12 page 345. post medium.
almost all the holy and learned interpreters do by a time, times, and half a
time understand only three y^ares and a half: affirming further to be Fox in
Apoc. ca. 13 page 392. fine.
the consent and opinion of almost all the ancient Fathers. As concerning
Aultars and Sacrifice, (which as D. Rainoldes grants D. Rainlodes in his
conferrence with Mr. Heart page 552. fine.
are linked by nature in relation and mutual dependence one of other. And
first concerning Aultars: Peter Martyr reproves the ancient Fathers, saying,
Peter Martyr in his common places in english. part. 4. p. 225. b. post med.
Petrus Alexandrinus etc. attributes more to the outward Altar then to the
lively Temples of Christ. And yet further against Optatus: Peter Martyr ibidem.
p. 226. a. initio.
Optatus l. 6. against Parmenianus says, what is the Altar? Even the seat of
the Body and Blood of Christ: ibidem.
such sayings as th^se (says Peter Martyr) edified not the people etc. and in
no less plain manner is Optatus foresaid saying mentioned and reproved by the
centurie cent. 4. c. 6. col. 409. l. 25.
writers: Peter Martyr in his common places part. 4 page 225. b. ante med.
As also Peter Martyr, reproves the Fathers in general, saying the Fathers
should not with so much liberty have seen ed he^re and there to have abused
the name Altar: Now as concerning sacrifice, it is affirmed, by our learned
adversaries that the more ancient Fathers, namly See this affirmed by Calvin
hereafter pa. 145. in the margent under the letter. t. at Anno. 320
Athanasius, Ambrose, Austine, Arnobius, etc. erred herein, and so fully, that
their supper (is therefore said to have) carried the face of a renewed
oblation, imitating over n^r^ly the Jewish manner of sacrificing etc. that they
Calvin. in omnes Pauli epist. in haebr. c. 7 verse. 9. page 924. b.
forged a sacrifice in the Lords supper with out his Commandment, and so
adulterated the supper with adding of sacrifice: that also the writings of
Ireneus and Ignatius, (who are most ancient are herein) Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 63
line 9. and cent. 2. cap. 10 col. 167. line 17. and see hereafter page 145 in
the margent under the letter.t. and at Anno 90. and 170
incommodious and dangerous: and that Sebastianus Francus in his epist. de
abrogandis in vniuersum omnibus statutis ecclesiasticis.
presently after the Apostles times, the Supper of our Lord was turned into a
sacrifice. In so much as some of our adversaries doubt not to charge the
ancient Fathers even with propitiatory Andreas Christianus lib. de opificio
Missae page 167. initio reciting the Fathers opinion hereof says: Dicta autem
Patrum non solum impetrationem sed etiam intrinsecant quandam vim placandi
Inuunt Origines hom. 13 in Leuiucum a^t: ista est commemoratio sola quae
propitium facit Deum hominibus. Athanasius in sermon de defunctis apud
Damascenum ait: incruentae hostiae oblatio propitiatio est. To which end he
alleges likewise further the particular sayings of Ambrose, Chrysostom,
Augustine, Gregory, Bid, and of the 3. Council of Brach: and concerning the
Fathers further testimonies for Mass see more hereafter Tract 3. Sect 1. in
the margent at the letter.t.
sacrifice, and sacrifice for the dead: So chargeable were the ancient Fathers
no less then we now are, in that great question of sacrifice.

4 Fourthly concerning Prayer for the dead it is granted that Mr. George
Gifford in his demonstration that our Brownists be full Donatistes page 38 and
see hereafter pa. 44 post med. and page 45.
it was general in the Church long before the days of Augustine, as it
appears in Ciprian and Tertulian: that also Mr. Fulk in his confutation of
Purgatory page 362 ante med and vide ibid. p. 303 circa med. and 393 post med.
Tertulian, Ciprian, Austine, Hierome, and a great many more, do witness that
sacrifice for the dead i^ the tradition of the Apostles. That likewise prayer
for the dead is taught in the writings Mr. D. Fulke in his confutation of
Purgatory page 353 and 354 ante med and vide Dio^is. de eccles. Hierarch. c.
7. part 3.
now extant under the name of Dionisius Ariopagitta, who is mentioned in the
Acts, Act. 17, 34.
and those w^itings as well Mr. Fulke against the Rhemish Test^ment in 2 Thessalonians.
2. sect 19 fol. 361. b. paulo ante med. thinks that Dionisius lived in the
time of Origin.
acknowledged by Mr. Fulke to have been written above 1300. years since,
(which was long before the objected Where as it is usually objected against
this book that if it had been the writing of Dionisius then Eusebius or
Hierome would have mentioned it, this confessed antiquity thereof before their
times, auoideth that objection, which is also no less plainly avoided by
Eusebius hist. l. 5. c. 26. and Hierome (in catul. prope initium) who signify
that the books of sundry writers were unknown to them.
times to the contrary of Eusebius and Hierome) as also alleged specially by
Mr. Sutcliffe as being Sutcliffe de Presbiterio c. 13 page 91 prope finem
says. Dionisius antiquitatis optimus sane testis, videtur enim esse
antiquissimus etc. And the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury in his answer to the
admonition page 105 sect vlt. alleges Dionisius saying, Dionisius Ariopagitta
in his book de caelesti hierarchia and seventh chapter speaks thus. etc.
And see hereafter in this Section numb. 13 in the margent at this mark ()
most ancient, and the best witness of antiquity.

In like manner concerning Limbus Patrum where as Bellarmine alleges in proof
thereof the plain testimonies of the Greek Fathers, as namely of Bellarm.
tom. 1. l. 4 de Christi Anima cap. 14
Iustine, Ireneus, Clemens, Origin, Eusebius, Basil, Nazianzen, Nicen,
Epiphanius, Chrysostom, etc. and of the Lattine Fathers Bellarm. ibid.
Tertulian, Hipolitus Ciprian, Hillarie, Gaudentius, Prudentius, Ambros,
Hierome, Rufinus, Austine, Leo, Fulgentius, etc. our aduesarie Dan^^us
answers to their testimonies saying. Danaeus ad Roberti Bellarmini d^^put.
part. 1 page ^76. paulo post med.
as concerning them, they were not inctructed out of Gods word, neither do th
y confirm their opinion from it, but only from their own conjectures etc. In
like plain manner does my Lord of Winchester make his acknowledgement, saying.
Master Bilson in his book of the full redemption of mankind page 188 fine.
All the Fathers with one consent affirm, that Christ delivered the souls of
the Patriarchs and Prophets out of Hell, at his coming thither, and so spoiled
Satan of those that were in his present possession: whereunto might be added
the like liberal and plain Mr. Whittaker contra Dur^um l. 8. p. 567. fine.
answers to Dureus his testimonies from the Fathers concerning Lymbus Patrum
saying: quod scripturis euincere minus potuisti, id Patrum Testimonijs procul
dubio conficles: de qu^bus vt tibi quod fentio libere, breuiterque respondeam,
apud me vna scripturae vocula plus habet ponderis, quam mill Patrum sine
scripturis pronunciata, itaque non expectabis dum singulati^ hos Patrum errores
diluo. And see further Mr. Whitaker ibid. page 773. initio And D. Barlowe in
his defense of the articles of the Protestants religion page 173 Post med.
says hereof. This passes most rife among the Fathers, who taking Inferi for
Abraham^ bosom, expound it that Christ went thither, ad liberandum liberandos,
to convey the Fathers deceased before his Resurrection into the place where now
they are.
confession of Mr. Whitaker and Mr. D. Barlowe. In so much as Ioannes Lascicius
a learned Protestant of Polonia, doubts not to affirm Ioannes Lascicius in
the book entitled de Russorum, Muscouitorum, and Tartarum Religione. page 122
initio and 123
and derive the Doctrine thereof, from manifest See the testimony of Ignatius
in his epistle ad Trallianos paulo post med. and the like testimony of
Thaddeus apud Eusebius. hist. l. 1. cap. vlt.
testimonies of Ig^atius, Mr. Whitguift in his defense etc. page 408 ante med.
who was scholar to S. John. as also of Thaddaeus who was one of Mat. 10, 3.
the twelve. the authority and creditte of which last Testimony Frigenilleus
Frigeuilleus Gauuius in his Palma Christiana page 74 post med.
Gauuius (an other Protestant writer) undertakes specially to defend.

5 Fifthly as concerning f^eewill, it is affirmed that Protestants So says the
Puritanes in their brief discovery of untruths etc. contained in D.
Bancrofts sermon page 203 fine.
know that ever since the Apostles time in a manner it flourished every where,
until Martin Luther took the sword in hand against it. And that accordingly
the most ancient Fathers, namely Hereof see Abraham Scultetus in medulla
theologiae patrum page 369 post med. and 304 post med. and 466. fine and 151
paulo ante med. and 105 circa medium and 98 circa med. and 48 prope initium and
fine. and 66 fine and 73 initio and 40 ante med. and see the centurie writers
cent. 2 c. 4 col. 58 line 30 and col. 59 line 11. and cent. 3 c. 4. col. 77 and
78 and col. 48 line 15.
. Ciprian, Theophilus, Tertulian, Origin, Clemens Alexandrinus, Iustine
Ireneus, Athenagoras Tatianus: etc. erred therein:

6 Sixthly as concerning freewill and merit of works Mr. D. Humfrie says,
Humfreid. Iesuitismi part. 2 page 530 ante med And concerning the confessed
doctrine of Me ite, of W^rkes in Clemens Alexandrinus, Theophilus, Cypr.
Iustine, Martyr etc. See Abraham Scult^tus vbi supra page 48. ante med. and 122
post med. and 151 post med. And the centurie writers cent. 2. c. 4 and cent. 3
c. 4.
it may not be denied but that Iereneus, Cl^menes, and oth^r^ (quos vocant
Apostolicos) called Apostolical (in respect of the time in which they lived,
have in their writing^ the opinions of freewill^ and of meritt of wookes:

7 Seventhly concerning freewill, meritts of works, invocation of Saints, and
such other like: The Lord Archbishope of Canturbury discourcing of Mr.
Whitguift in his defense etc. against the reply of Carthwrite page 472 fine and
473 initio.
Doctrine taught in any age ^ine the Apostles time: affirms without any other
exception, either of age or Father, that (to use his own words) Mr.
Whitguifte vbi supra page 473 paulo post initium and ^e Mr. Louel in his
examination etc. page 120.
almost all the Bishopes and learned writers of the Greek^ Church, and Lattin
also f^r the most part were spotted w^^h Doctrine of freewill, of merit, of
invocation of Saints, and such l^ke:

8 Eighthly concerning Baptism, that the most ancient Fathers (who suc^eeded
next to the Apostles scholars) namely Iustine, Cl^ment etc. Centur. 2. c. 4.
col. 47. line. 43. and in Centur. 3. c. 4. col. 82. line. 55. it is said:
Affirmare audet Ciprianus quod persona Baptizans Spiritum sanctum conferat and
Baptizatum intus sanctificet.
thought regeneration (not to be signified but) wrought by Baptism, and the
word; unto which (two) joined t gether they attribut efficacy, that is to say
remission of sins: that also Cent. 3 cap. 6. col. 125 line 16.
Origin, Tertulian, and Cipriane, mention how that the Baptized persons were
accustomed to be signed with the sign of the Cross. That there were likewise
then used in Baptism sundry other Ceremonies as cent. col. 124. line 53 and
col. 126 line 20.
Abrenunciati^: cent. 3. col. 125. line 1 and 124 line 57
Three sold immertio, centur 3. col. 125 line 9.
vncton etc. that So says Carthwrite in Mr. Whitguifts defense etc. p. 522
fine And Bullenger in his decades in English decad 5. sermon. 8. page 1049. a.
circa med.
Austine was of mind that Children could not be saved without Baptism: that
Musculus ho. comun. de Baptismo page 308. post med.
Austine and many Fathers were of the same opinion. In so much that (as Calvin
confesses) the Fathers hereupon doubted not Calvin. institut. lib. 4 c. 1 sect
20.
almost from the very beginning of the Church, to use the Baptism of lay
persons in danger of death.

9 Ninthly concering Confe^sion, Absolution, Penance and satisfaction: that
even cent. 3. cap. 6. col. 127. line 28. and see the words alleged hereafter
tract. 2. sect 7. in the margent at the letter c. nearest the end
in (those firster) times of Ciprian and Tertulian was used private Confession
(even) of thoughts and lesser sins, and that the same was vide ibidem
then commanded and thought necessary that also as then Penance cent. 3. col.
127 line 40
or satisfaction was enjoined according to the offense. that the same Fathers
Whittaker contra Camp. rat. 5 page 78 and see him also alleged in Mr. Fulkes
defense of the English transl^tions c. 13 page 368 ante medium.
though by (such) their external discipline of life, to pay the pains due
for sins, and to satisfy Gods Justice. That Whitaker in resp. ad. Camp. rat.
5 page 78 paulo ante medium.
not Ciprian only; but almost all the most holy Fathers of that time were in
that error and that the Priest, when Confession was (as before) made, and
Penance enjoined, Cent. 3. col. 129. l. 77.
did afterward absolve the Penitent (even) Vide ibid. And see this ceremony
of imposing the Priests hand in absolution mentioned by Cyprian in sermon. de
lapsis paulo ante med. and l. 3. ep 17. and 18 Council. 4. Carthag. Can. 76. and
78 and Chrisost in Ioh. 20. hom. 85 fine.
with the now like used Ceremony of imposing his hand.

10 Tenthly concerning the Primacie of Peter, and the Roman sea, our
adversaries reprehend sundry of the Fathers for their af^^rming the Church to
be builded upon Peter: namely cent. 4 col. 1250 line 2.
S. Hierome: cent. 4. col. 555 line 30
Hillary: Cent. 4 col. 558 line 54
Nazianzen: Cent. 3 col 84 line 37
Tertulia^ Cent. 4 col. 84 line 59.
Ciprian: Cent. 3. col. 85 line 3.
Origin: and in general Calvin. institut. l. 4 c. 6. sect 6 says. In Petro
fundatam esse ecclesiam quia dictum sit, super hanc petram etc. At nonnulli ex
Patribus sic exposuerunt, sed recl^mat tota scriptura etc. And Daneus in
respons. ad Bellarmini disput. part. 1 page 277 post med. says. Patres pessime
de Petri persona sunt interpretati etc.
many Fathers reproving also others for their entitling Peter Cent. 4 col. 556
line 17.
the head of the Apostles: and ibidem col. 1074 l. 16
the Bishope of B^sh^p^s in so much that whereas the Fathers doubted not to
celebrate publicly a yearly festival Council. 2 Turonense 2 can. 16 says:
sunt etiam qui in festiuitate Cathedr^ domini Petri Apostoli etc. And Austine
sermon. 15 de Sanctis says. Institutio solemnitatis hodiernae, a Senioribus
nostris cathedrae nomen accepit, etc. recte ergo ecclesiae, natalem sed^^
illius colunt, quam Apostolus pro ecclesiarum salut suscepit, dicente Domino,
tues Petrus etc. ideo digne fundamentum hoc ecclesia colit: and see farther
mention hereof in Beda in martirologio.
day, in honor of Peter's sea (which respect so had the^eto, is more then we
find had to any other sea of any other Apostle:) Daneus answering hereunto
^ffirmeth the Fathers assertion, hereof to be Danaeus in resp. ad Bellarmini
disput. part. 1 page 375 fine et 276 initio:
the judgments and testimonies of the Church then corrupt d and betwitch^d, or
made blind with this error.

As concerning the Primacie of the Roman sea, the Centurists s^y Cent. 5 cap:
10 col: 1262 line 30.
Leo very painefully goes about to prove that singul^r pr^heminence was given
to Peter above the other Apostles, and that thence rose the Primacie of the
Roman Church: and Beza further says Confess. Geneue c: 7 sect 12 and Whitaker
de concilijs contra Bellarminum page 37 paulo ante medium faith, de Leone primo
non laboro, magnus ille suit Antichristiani regni architectus, and yet ibidem
page 34. circa medium he says: of Leo, fuit ille quidem doctus and pius
Episcopus, sed fuit tamen magis ambitiosus: etc.
it is manifest that Leo in his Epistles does clearly breathe forth the
arrogancy of the Anticristian Roman sea and my Lord of Canterbury says Mr.
Whitguifte in his defense page 342 post med.
it is certain that then viz. in the time of the ancient carthage and
Aphrican Council the Bishope of Rome began at least to claim the
superiority over all Churches. In like manner is that ancient council of
Sardis whereat sundry fathers of the Council were present, charged for
acknowledging Hereof see Osiander cent. 4. p. 294 ante med. and Calvin instit.
l. 4 c. 7 sect 9 and see hereafter Tract. 1 sect. 7 in the margent at the
letter d of the second alphabet.
appell^s to the Bishope of Rome and Mr Ful^ke and other Protestants affirm
that the ancient Roman Bishopes See Mr. Fulke alleged hereafter Tract. 1
sect 7 letter a of the second alphabet: And see Spark against Mr. John de
Albines in his answer to the preface ante med. and Osiander cent. 5 page 28 and
218.
Anastasius, Innocentius, zozimus, Boniface and Celestinus, (who lived 1200
years since) challinged prerogative over the Bishopes of Aphrica by sorging a
false canon of the Nicen Council which pretense of forgerie is hereafter See
herafter Tract 1 sect 7 in the margent at the letter c. d. of the second
alph^bet
avoided: Mr. Whitaker says also of Julius Bish^pe of Rome (who lived in
Constantines time) that See Whitaker de concilijs etc. quoest 2 page 42 fine 43
initio and 44 paulo ante med.
he challenged to him self authority that no Council should be celebrated
without the sentence of the Bish^pe of Rome: S. Cipriane though a Bishope of
Aphrick (who lived Anno. 240.) is charged by the centurie writers for his
affirming Cent. 3 c. 4 col. 84 line 44.
our chair sounded by our Lords voice upon the rock: and that ibid. l. 49
there ought to be one Bishope in the CATHOLIC Church: and for his challenge
ibid. l. 56
Peter's chair the principlll Church from whence Priestly virtue arises and
lastly for his (say they) ibid. line 51.
teaching without any foundation of scripture, that the Roman Church ought to
be acknowledged of all others, for the Mother and Root of the Catholi k Church
victor Mr. Whitgifte in his defense etc. page 510 prope finem.
(as my Lord of Canterbury affirms) lived Anno 198. and was a Godly Bishope
and Martyr, and the Church at that time in great purity: (as) not being long
after the Apostles time: yet is he charged by Amandus Polanus to Amandus
Polanus in silogethesin theologiae. p. 165.
have showed a Papal mind and a^r gancie: and by M. Spark Mr. Spark. against
mr. John d' Abbines in his answer to the preface ante med. and see Osiander
cent. 2. page ^7 and 96.
somewhat Popel k^ to have received h^s bonndes when he took^ upon him to
excommunicate the Bishopes of the East Mr. Whitaker also charging him with
Whitaker contra Dureum. l. 7. page 480. initio
exercising jurisdiction upon former Churches: Lastly S. Ierneus (who lived
next after the Apostles scholars and in the same time victor) is disliked for
his affirming, that The centurie writers. cent. 2. c 4 col. 64 line 10
all the Church ought to accord to the Roman Church in regard of a more
powerable principallitie: wherein the Centurists charge him with See the 2.
centurie in the Alphabeticall table at the word Irenaeus.
a corrupt saying concerning the Primacie of the Roman Church:

11 Eleuenthly as concerning the appointed Fast of Lent: St. Ambrose says
Ambrose sermon. 25 34. and 36
it is sin not to fast in Lent: for which M. Carthwright Mr. Cartwrite
alleged in master Whitgiftes defense p. 100 initio.
reproves him: and yet no less is affirmed by Aug de tempore sermon. 62 and 77
S. Austine Chrisost. ad pop. ho. 6. prope finem.
Chrysostom and other council. 8. Tol. can. 9
Fathers: in so much as Chemnitius confesses that Chemnitius exame^ Council.
Trident. part 1 page 89. b. ante med. says Quadragessi nam enim Ambrosius,
maximus taurinensis, Theophilus, Hieronimus, and alij affirmant ess^
traditionem apostolicam.
Ambrose, Maximus, Taurinensis, Theophilus, Hierom, and other do affirm the
fast of Lent to be an Apostolical tradition. In more undoubted proof whereof
other Protestante writers do not only affirm See this in Abraham Scultetus in
medul. theologiae Patrum p. 440. initio.
The superstition of Lent and fasting, to have been allowed and commanded by
Ignatius Master Whitgifte in his defense etc. page 408 circa medium
who was schol^er to S. John: but do also defend See Abraham Scultetus vbi
supra. And the same epistle of Ignasius (being ad Philippenses) is in like
manner cited and acknowledged by Mr. Whitgifte in his deffence p. 102 ante med.
And by mr. Carthwrite alleged ibidem. page 99 prope finem. And mr. Hooker in
his ecclesiastical policy l. 5. sect. 72 page 209 circa med. answers our
adversaries usual objection made against it. and so likewise does mr.
Whitgifte in his defense. etc.
that very Epistle of Ignatius, in which this Doctrine is extant, to be his
true Epistle and not counterfaite:

12 Tweluethly concerning unwritten Traditions and Ceremonies, and first
concerning unwritten TRADITIONS it is Confessed as follows, whereas Sanit.
CHRYSOSTOM says Chrisost. in 2. Thessal. hom. 4
the Apostles did not deliver all things by writing, but many things without,
and these be as worthy of credit as the other: Mr. Whitaker in answer thereof
says Whittaker de sacra scriptura. p. 678 paulo post med.
I answer that thi^ is an inconsiderate speech and unworthy so great a
father and whereas Epiphanius says Epiphanius haer. 61 circa med.
we must use Tradition for the scriptu^e has not all things, and therefore
the Apostles delivered certain things by writing and certain by Tradition:
with whom agrees S. Basil saying Basil. de Spir. Sanct. cap. 27.
some thing we have from scripture other things from the Apostles Tradition
etc. both which has like force unto Christian Religion: Mr. D. Rainoldes
answering to these foresaid sayings of Basil and Chrysostom, says D.
Rainoldes in his Conclusions annexed to his conference the 1. conclusion. page
689.
I take not upon me to control them, but let the Church Judge if they
considered with advice enough: etc. Whereunto might be added the like confessed
Where Eusebius l. 1 demonstr. Euang. c. 8 is objected to say, that the Apostles
published their doctrine: Partly by writing, partly without writing, as it were
by a certain unwritten law. Mr. Whittaker de sacra scriptura page 668 fine.
says thereto. I answer that this testimony is plain enough, but in no sort
to be received, because it is against the Scriptures.
testimony, from Eusebius.

And thus much briefly concerning the Fathers of the Greek Church. Now as
concerning the like confessed Doctrine in the Fathers of the LATTIN Church (to
avoid tediousnes) S. Austine only (as being most Gomarus in speculo verae
ecclesiae etc. page 96 ante mediu says: Augustinus Patrum omnium communi
sententia purissimus habetur.
approved by our adversaries) shall serve for all: who laboring to prove that
those who are Baptized by heretics should not be Rebaptized, says Aug. de
Bap. contra Don. l. 5. c. 23
the Apostles commanded nothing hereof, but that custom which was opposed
herein against Ciprian is to be believed to proceed from their Tradition, as
many things be, which the wholle Church houldeth, and are therefore well
believed to be commanded of the Apostles, although they be not written.
Wherein and See the like saying in Austine epist. 118 ad Ianuarium.
other his like sayings his meaning is so evident and confessed, that Mr.
Carthwright speaking thereof, says See Mr. Carthwrite in mr. Whitgifts defense
etc. p. 103 ante med.
to allow St. Austines saying is to bring^ in Popery again: and that See Mr.
Carthwrites words alleged vbi supra.
if S. Austines Judgment be a good Judgment, then there be some things
commanded of God, which are not in the scriptures, and there-upon no
sufficient Doctrine contained in the scriptures: Add but now hereunto, that See
Chemnitius examen part. 1. page 87. 89 90.
Chemnitius, reports for their like testimony of unwritten Traditions;
Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Hierome, Maximus,
Theophilus, Basil, Damascene etc. That M. Fulke See mr. Fulke against
Purgatory pa. 362 ante med. and 303 and 397 and against Martial page 170. 178.
and against Bristowes motives p. 35 and 36.
also confesses as much of Chrisostom^, Tertulian, Ciprian, Augustine,
Hierome, etc. that lastly, Mr. Whitaker See master Whitaker de sacra scriptura
page 678. 681. 683. 685. 690. 695. 696. 670 668.
acknowledges the like of Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Tertulian, Ciprian,
Augustine, Innocentius, Leo, Basil, Eusebius, Damascene, etc. Now as
concerning Ceremonies Mr. Calfehill (to omit others) affirms that Hereof
see Mr. Fulkes reioinder to Martialls Reply printed 1580. pa. 131 fine and 132
initio.
the Fathers declined all from the simplicity of the Gospel in ceremonies.

13 Thirtenthly it is confessed yet further in general concerning Dionisius
Artopagitta and Hermes, who are houlden most ancient and Apostolic, Of
Dionisius mention is made act. 17, 34. and of Hermes romans 16, 14.
namely that Dionisius in his fore-saide writings which were above a thousand
years since (as D. Humfrie Humfreid. in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 5 page 513
fine and 514 initio. says: Hunc Arcopagitam, Suidas, Michaell Singelus,
Gregorius Turonensis, and alij Pauli auditorem credunt fuisse illum scriptorem
caelestis et ecclesiasticae Hierarchiae: And see before Sect 3. n. 4. lit..o.
confesses) publickely extant and alleged under his name, does (casually and
obiter among other things) make mention over and besides the foresaid
Doctrine of prayer for the dead, Hamelmanus de traditionibus apostolicis col.
707 line 27 and col. 736 line 56 and master Whitaker de sacra scriptura page
655 ante med.
of Apostolic unwritten Traditions: of Hamelmanus vbi supra col. 707. l. 4
and col. 732 l. 51
Chrisme Hamelmanus vbi supra col. 707. l. 49 and col. 743 l. 4
Consecration of Moncks. and Humfreid. in Iesuitismi par 2 page 519 circamed
and Luther tom. 2 Witeberg. Anno 1562 de captiu. Babil. fol. 84. b. ante med.
Six of our Sacraments that the book of Hermes entitled Pastor affords in
like manner testimony or ground work of Abraham Scultetus in medulla
theolog. etc. page 467 post med.
freewill and monastical solitude of Hamelmanus de trad. apost. col. 252 fine
and col. 253 initio. and col. 254 line 38 and Abraham Scultetus vbi supra page
467 post med.
Pu^gatorie, and prayer for the dead: of Hamelmanus vbi supra col. 253 l. 54
and col. 254 l. 49
Merit and Justification of works: of Professed Chastity Hamelmanus vbi
supra col. 251 line 48 and col. 254 l. 30
in ministers of Hamelmanus vbi supra col. 254 l. 36
Fasting from certain meats: of ibidem col. 253 line 46
the Innocent parties remainnig unmarried in case of adultrie: of Chemnitius
examen council. Trident. part. page 127 a prope finem
works of superogation: and of Hamelmanus vbi supra col. 254 l. 53 says.
Furtigitur bonum papismi initium impurus ille liber pastoris, vel Heremitis.
Popery: And though in the primative Church some question Vide Eusebium hist.
l. 3 ^. 3 prope finem
was made of this book, as whether it were Canonical scripture or not, (many
Fathers It was thought to be sacred, and for such alleged by Origin lib. 10 in
epist. ad Romans Tertulian l. de oratione. Clemens Alex. l. 6 stromat. Athanasius
in libro de decretis Nicen Synod. Cassianus collat. 13. c. 12 and by Ireneus l.
4 c. 37.
thinking that it was) yet is it confessed to have been received at the least
for Hamelmanus vbi supra col. 254 line 24 says. illum pro ecclesiastico
habuerunt quidem Patr^s: and col. 730 line 25 he says Hermetis libellus qui
dicitur Pastor, est olim aliquando in numerum ecclesiasticorum librorum
relatus: In so much as Eusebius hist. l. 3 c. 3. Ruffinus in Simbolum and
Hierom. in catul. do comme^d this book for profitable, and so Mr. Whitaker de
sacra scriptura p. 93 fine confesses of Hierome.
Ecclesiastical, and the authority thereof to have been so many ages since
specially alleged Hamelmanus vbi supra col. 253 line 10 says: Liber pastoris
videtur receptus esse ab Ireneo and Clemente. And col. 255 line 42 he says:
Ostendit Eusebius a quibusdam librum pastoris receptum esse, and imprimis ab
Ireneo sic and Origines l. 1 de Principijs c. 3 citat quaedam ex libro pastoris
eiusque libri lectionem commendat: ho: 13 in Ezech:
by Origin, Clement, and Ireneus, who lived next to those Apostles times.

14 Fourthtenthly whereas the Lord Archbishope of Canterbury does against
Carthwright learnedly and truly urge this general rule or proof of
Apostolic Doctrine, saying Mr. Whitgiste in his deffence: etc. page: 351
for so much as the original and beginning of these names, Metropolitaine,
Archbishop etc. such is their antiquity, cannot be found so far as I have
read it is to be supposed they have their Original from the Apostl^s
themselves. For as I remember S. Austine has this rule in his 118 Epistle. In
so much as he yet further says in proof of this rule Mr. Whitgifte vbi supra
page: 352
it is of credit with the writers of our time, namely with Mr. Suinglius Mr.
Calvin, and Mr. Gualter, and surely I think no learned man does dissent from
them:

It is now by the premises made more then evident that the several Doctrines
of our faith, are according to this rule, no less fr^e from all noted and
known beginning since the Apostles times, then are the other foresaid
Doctrines of Metropolitaines and Bishopes: a thing so manifest that Master.
Carthwright though our great adversary) doubts not yet further to
acknowledge the same, saying therefore of this very rule in plain words, See
Mr: Carthwrite his words in Mr. Whitgiftes foresaid deffence etc. page: 352
initio:
that thereby a window is open to bring in all Popery: And Master Carthwright
alleged ibidem page: 103 paulo ante medium.
I appeall (says he) to the Judgment of all men, if this be not to bring in
Popery again, to allow of S. Austines saying: and. So evidently do our own
learned adversaries, confirm and prove our foresaid Catholic Religion,
whereto we were so many ages since converted, to be undoubtedly Apostolic.

ANOTHER LIKE DEMONSTRATION thereof by Testimony from the Ancient Jews.. 4.
ADD but now in further demonstration hereof that concerning such Articles of
faith now in question as are common to us with the Fathers of the old
Testament whenever upon any occasion, direct mention is made of any of them
either by those that were before Christ's time, or by the Jewish Rabines since,
it is still with us and against our adversaries. So in the example of prayer
for the dead, admitting the book of Machabees but for a true History, it may
not be denied but that long before Christ's time, Judas Machabeus (the undoubted
servant of god 2. Machab. 2, 43
procured sacrifice for the dead: that the Priests at Jerusalem accordingly
offered 2 Machab. 2, 45 So he made a reconciliation for the dead that they might
be delivered from sin.
it, and that the Author of the History so many years after commended 2.
Machab. 2, 45. It was a holy and good thought, and vide ibidem: verse: 43
the same. Whereunto might be added further like Testimony thereof, from
Josephus Joseph cap: 9 diswadeth those distressed soldiers that were ready to
kill the^ selves saying: ignoro milites quae sit propitiatio animae hominis qui
seipsum interfecit: quis intercedet pro nobis ad Deum si sic peccauerimus? most
plainly thereby insinuating that for such as dye in better estate, Prayer may
be made.
Bengorion, also from Rabby Simeon Rabby Symeon in libro Zoar. in c. 18
Genesis, says of such as are temporally punished after this life. After they
are purged from the filth of their sins, then does God cause them to ascend
out of that place.
(who lived before Christ) and from sundry other old Jewish Menachim siam in
Comment. ad Leuit. c 16 and R. Hismi. Alphesi^ scholiastes ad caput Roch:
Haschana. And R. Isaac. Ababab. in Lucerna lucis conclusione. 1. part. 2. c. 2.
and R. David. Kimhi in Psalm: 32.
Rabbines. In so much as the Jewish Rabbines of latter age do thereupon yet to
this day professefull to retain and observe Rabby Moses in his simbolum fidei
Iudeorum printed at Paris Anno 1569. fol. 26. b and 27 a and 22 b expr^ss^th a
prescript form of prayer for the dead. like testimony thereof is given by
Ioannes Isaac in institutionibus linguae haebricae impressis Coloniae. 1553 And
by Antonius Margarita: (a late converted Jew) in his book entitled vniuersi
Iudaeorum fides:
Prayer for the dead: a thing not denied but plainly confessed by Mr.
Whitaker contra Dureum lib. 1 page 85 antemed. says: Scio enim Iudae is esse
libros memoriales quos in Sinagogis suis legunt, eosque nunc precibus quibusdam
pro mortuis vti solere non ignoro.
Whitaker.

2 Secondlye concerning Limbus Patrum the book entitled Ecclesiasticus,
though we should for the time suppose it not to be Canonical Scripture, yet
was it Collected or penned before Christ's time, and by such an Author as then
before In the prologue of the book of ecclesiasticus ante med.
had given him self to the reading of the Law and the Prophets and other
b^okes of their Fathers and had gotten therein sufficient knowledge. In this
book is our Saviors discending in to that place specially foretoulde us where
it is said in his person: Ecclesiasticus 24, 37.
I will pearce through the lower parts of the earth, I will look upon all
such as be a sleep, and will lighten all them that trust in the Lord: a
saying so direct This pearcing thing the lower parts of the earth to lighten
those that were there a sleep and tr^sted in the Lord argues plainly that
those faithful so a sleep (or dead) were not the^ in Heaven: for by the lower
parts of the e^^th cannot be meant heaven.
and pertinent that Master WHITAKER seeks to euade by these two only ways,
as first in answering that Whitaker contra Dureum l. 8 page 567 postmed.
these words are wanting in the Greek Coppie: Se^ondly (this being
notoriously false ^alse for the English Bible (to omit others) of Anno 1576
purporting by the title on the first page thereof to be translated according
to the H^brue and Greek has these words translated accordingly.
he finally and only reposeth him self in answeringe that Whitaker contra
Dureum l. 8 page 567 post med. says, Nec libri huius authoritate^ canonicam
agnosco, his fundamentis limbum immixum reuera est necesse.
the book is not Canonical and so acknowledging the plain meaning of the
words, rejects their authority: So evidently does this author make with the
Doctrine of Limbus Patrum. In like manner Rabbenu^ Haccados who lived before
Christ, says in the person of the Messiah Rabbenus Haccados libro qui
inscribitur: Reuelator Arcanorum.
I have decreed to descend into Hell to redeem the souls of the just which my
Father did thrust there in the rodd of ^ s indignation, for Adams sin: and
the same doctrine is more plainly as yet affirmed by Rabby Rabby Symeon filius
Iohai apud Rabbenum Heccados foretells of the Messiah saying: Tunc anima eius
discendet ad inferos, apud quos triduo morabitur, vt inde omnes animas Patrum
iustorumque educat. etc. iuxta illud Hoseae 6. visitabit nos post duos dies, in
die tertia suscitabit nos, and viuemus ante faciem eius.
Symeon (who lived before Christ's coming) and by other See these more at large
alleged by Petrus Galatinus de arcanis Catholicae veritatis l. 6 c. 9 and 10.
See them also alleged by Peter Martyr in his common places part. 3. cap. 16
sect 13 page 377 a. fine and b.
Jewish Rabbines, and it is further more so agreeable with the writings of the
It is said that the law brought nothing to perfection but was only an
introduction of a better hope: hebr. 7, 19) that therefore the way of holies
was not open whiles the sister Tabernacle was standing. hebr. 9, 8 the same way
being therefore called the new way which Christ dedicated (hebr. 10, 20.) that
the Fathers of the old testament are said to dye according to faith not
receiving the promise. hebr. 11, 13. God providing a better thing for us, that
they with out us should not be made perfect. ibidem verse vlt. that accordingly
the souls of sundry persons dead before our Saviors Ascension, as of Lazarus:
Joan. 11, 43, 44. the made Luc 8, 55. and of those many bodies of the Saints
that rose and appeared to many. Matthew 27, 52, 53. did not return from the
eternal and unchangeable ioies of heaven, but from that other place which is
called Abraham's bosom (Luc. 16, 22 the which was not heaven, as is testified
by Peter Martyr in his common places part. 2 page 621. a and part. 3. page 378.
b and 379 a. initio: that (lastly) our Savior in regard of his delivery of the
old Patriarchs and just men from this place at the time of his ascension, is
accordingly said to Ascend on high leading captivity captive: (Ephesians. 4, 8.)
new Testament, that the ancient See heretofore sect 3. subdiuision 4.
Fathers and sundry learned See hereafter tract. 3. sect. 7 in the margent
under the letter.m. example 17 page 174 fine: and see Peter Martyr vbi supra.
Protestants do therefore allow of it.

3 Thirdly as concerning Freewill it is said in the foresaid book of
Ecclesiasticus not only of Adam who was then dead, and his sin past, but by
way of admonition to the men of that time, and against their sins then to
come: Ecclesiasticus 15, 12, 15, 16, 17.
say not thou he has caused me to err, if thou will, thou shall observe the
Commandments, h^ has set water and fire before thee, strech out thy hand to
which thou will. Before man is life and death, good and evil, what likes him,
shall be given him, a saying so plain, that Mr. Whitaker therefore says
thereof de loco Ecclesiastici Patrum, laboro etc. Whitaker in respons. ad
rations Campiani rat. 1. page 15 ante med.
I make small account of the place of Ecclesiasticus, neither will I be leeue
the freedom of man's will although he should affirm a hundredth times, that
before man were life and death: and aun^ient Philo who lived in Christ's time,
affirms in like manner that Philo. in libro quod Deus sit immutabilis.
man has freewill etc. to which purpose (says he) is extant the Oracle in
Deutronomie, I have placed before the l^fe and death, good and evil, choose
life: whereunto might be added no less plain sayings of the other old
Iewishe Rabby Moses filius Maimon in epistola aduersus astrologos, says: Ac
illud quidem intelligere debetis, praecipuum ac principale ex fundamentis legis
nostrae omnesque item Philosophos aperte confiteri, quecunque ab ipsis
hominibus fiunt, ea in ipsorum manu esse ac potestate etc. Si velit homo seruit
Domino etc. sin placet adire concilia impiorum, and illud quoque facit: And see
the other no less plain sayings of Rabby Moses Hadarsan in cap. 4. Genesis and
also of Rabby Abba and Rabby Selomo, alleged by Petrrus Galatinus de arcanis
Catholicae veritatis: Printed Francofuf. 1602. l. 6 c. 6. colum. 339. f. and
340. b. c.
Rabbines, and the answereable Mr. Fulke in his defense of the English
translatio^s etc. p. 320 initio, says: The Jewish Rabbines Patrons of
freewill, do err etc. And whereas Rabby Akiba in capitulis Patrum, says: Et
potestas data est and in bono mundus iudicatur Paulus Fagius in hunc locum
says: Haebrei hanc sente^tiam sic explicant etc. vt cuiuis homini potestas
tradita sit vel been vel male agendi. And again. Apotheca aperta est etc. Hoc
referunt ad liberum arbitrium videlicet in nobis situm, vt vel male vel been
agamus, Deum nobis mortem aut vitam pro ponere.
confession in that be half of Mr. D. Fulke and Paulus Fagius.

4 Fourthly as concerning Gods induration or hardening of Pharos heart: the
Iewishe Rabbines are so plain in affirming with us the same to be by Gods
Permission, and not by his working (which exposition Calum institut. l. 2. c. 4
sect. 3. in^^o
Calvin disliketh in the ancient Fathers) that Peter Martyr Peter Martyr in
epist. ad Romans c. 9.
and Munster M^nster: Annot. in Exodus c. 7
do accordingly acknowledge this their aforesaid exposition.

5 Fifthly as concerning Angels and Saints, the book of Toby written so many
ages before Christ, is so Toby. 5, 5.12, 12.13, 15.18.
plain with us concerning the patronage and intercession of Angels, that Mr.
Whitaker does therefore accordingly confess and say thereof, Whittaker in
respons. ad rations. Campiani rat. 1. page 15. ante medi.
illum vero Tobiae Raphaelem etc. Little do we regard the example of Raphaell
the Angel mentioned in Toby. Neither do we acknowledge those Of the like
number of seven Angels which Mr. Whitaker so misliketh: see reuelat. 1, 4. and
5, 6.
seven Ang^l^ whereof he speaks, all this is different from the Canonical
Scriptures, and sauoreth I know not of what superstition: In like manner does
the book of Machabees make mention how that Judas Mach^beus 2. Machab. 15, 12,
13, 14.
saw in vision Onias the high Preiste (who was then before sl^ine) See 2.
Machab. 3, 33 and 4, 34
houlding up his hand^s toward heaven and praying for the People, after which
there appeared to him an other man who was ag^d etc. And Onias spoke and said,
this is a lover of the Brethren who Prays much for the People, and for the
whole City, (to wit) Ieremias the Prophet of God: A place so direct for the
intercession of Saints, that Mr. Whitaker does therefore contemn it Whitaker in
respons. ad rations Campiani page 16. circa medium, says: Illud Iudae de Oum
somnium quod. 2. Machabe. 15. legimus, vt somnium pretermitto, sed parum refert
mortuorum sieve intercessionem sieve sacrificium intelligas, vtrumque tuum est,
vtrumque est falsum.
And it is to be observed f^rther as very probable, that the Jews present at
our Saviors Death, could not have been so easesly persuaded to think and say
that our Savior saying Mat. 27, 46, 47, 49. and Marc. 15, 34, 35, 36.
Eli Eli Lammasabacthani, called He ias: If the invocation of Saints had not
been as then familiar and usual to them: which their opinion appears yet
more evidently, as well by further testimony of the ancient See Flauius
Josephus de Bello Iudaico l. 3. c. 14 where it is said: Purae animae quae
exaudiunt inuocantes, retinent locum in coelo adeptae sanctissi nu^: And
Josephus Bengorion in Bello Iudaico. cap. 21 where it is said: Exurge nunc
Moises fili Amram and vide populu^ tuum. exurge nunc Aaron etc. and R. Abr ham
in Genesis 22: says of the Jews. Isaac interponere solent interse and Deum in
suis precibus quasi intercessorem.
Jews, as also of those other Rabbines of latter Concerning the like practice
of the latter Jews, see simbolum fidei Iudaeorum impress. Prarisijs 1569. fol.
22. b and 28. b And in their office of the dead, (where it is said) Angeli
pacis egredimini in occur^um defuncti, portas Paradisi voluptatis reserate
illi: and in libro precationum Iudaicarum it is said: Angeli misericordes
ministri Dei altissimi placate quaeso faciem Dei optima deprecatione etc.
times.

6 Sixthly concerning the unwritten Traditions of the Jews. Origin hom. 5 in
numer. and in ep ad Romans c. 3.
Origin and Hillary Hillarie in Psalm. 2. says: Erat iam a Mose antea
institutum in omni Synagoga septuaginta esse Doctores: nam idem Moses quamuis
veteris Testamenti verba in literis condidisset, tamen separatum quaedam ex
occultis legis secretiora misteria septuaginta senioribus, qui Doctores
deinceps manerent, intimauerat. etc. doctrina ergo horum in posterum, quae ab
ipso scriptore legis accepta, in hoc seniorum and numero, and officio
conseruata est.
do affirm that Moses left many things unwritten, the knowledge whereof was
continued by Tradition, which his unwritten Traditions: the book of Esdras
does not obscurely signify, as where it is said in the person of God, touching
Moses 4. Esdras. 14, 4, 6, 26.
I brought him to the mount Sinay, I did detain him with me many days etc. I
commanded him saying th s^ words thou shall make known, and these keep
secret. And Egesippus mencioneth in like manner (as Mr. Hanmer Translateth
Eusebius Egesippus apud Eusebium hist. l. 4 c. 21 fine.
the unwritten Traditions of the Jews. To which their vnwritte^ Traditions
that most ancient Author Anatolius Anatolius apud Eusebium hist. l. 7. c. 26
gives also further Testimony, and the ancient Jews do affirm of their
unwritten Law, that In capitulis Patrum.
Moses receau^d it vp^n Mount Sinay and delivered it to Joshua, and Joshua to
the Elders etc. which saying as Rabby Judas affirms R. Judas in hunc locum.
concerns the order of Tradition delivered by word of mouth: a thing not
denied but confessed by Paulus Fagius in hunc locum says: Tenet enim Iudeoru
opinio, Mosen duplice^ legem a Domino in monte Synai accepisse, al teram quam
legem inscripto sieve scripto traditam vocant, alteram quam legem quae in ore
est sieve ore traditam nominant atque hanc postremam succedanto quodam ordine
per Mosen ad posteros derinatam affirmant.
Paulus Fagius.

7 Seventhly concerning the force or meritte of Alms, and other good works,
proceeding from true faith in the Mesias the Doctrine of the ancient Jews is
delivered in the book of Toby, where it is said: Toby 12, 9 after the
translation of the English Bible of 1576. and according to the greek copy
published by the divines of Basil 1550: the which I do more precisely note,
for that Mr. Fulke against the Rhemish Testament fol. 109 a. circa med. denies
the latter part of this text to be in the greek.
Alms does del^uer from death, and does purge all sin: and again Toby. 4,
10.
Alms does deliver from death. and suffers not (the soul) to go into
da^knes: and in the foresaid book of Ecclesiasticus Ecclesiasticus. 3, 33.
water quenches burning fire and Alms expiateth (or purges) sin: and this
is but agreeable with the other Scriptures acknowledged for Canonical, as
where it is said Daniel 4, 24. Whereas our adversaries do here instead of
Redeem translate break of. Hemnigeus in his exposition of the 84 psalm.
Englis^ed page 527. thinks that the haebru word signifies to Redeem: so
also most cleerelye in the gre^ke translation does the greek word and so
likewise does the vulgar interpreter, and the ancient F^thers read
accordin^ly, in so much as the same reading is observed likewise by Luther in
loc. comun. class. 1. page 72. ante medium: and by Peter Martyr in his common
places in English: part. 3. cap. 4. page 114. b. circa med. by Melancthon in
loc. con^un. edit. 1536. cap. de bonis op^ribus page 157 in fine: by the
Apology of the Confession of Augus^a fol. 104. a circa med. And by the T^gurine
translation of 1544 whereunto might be added the like reading and judgment of
Calvin, Aretius, Bullenger and many other Protestants.
redeem thy sin with alms, and thy iniquities with mercy to the poor:
Proverb. 16, 6.
By mercy and truth sin shall be forg^uen Proverb. 15, 27. although this be
omitted in the English Bible of 1576 yet is it so evidently parcel of the text
that (to omit the Fathers) the Divines of B^sill in their edition hereof in
Greek and Lattin printed. 1550. do read it accordingly.
By alms and says sins are purged: Luc. 11, 41.
Give alms and behoulde all thing are clean to you.

8 Eighthly concerning Monastical ^ife that it was not altogether wanting, but
in some sort professed among the ancient Jews, Josephus testi^^eth saying
Josephus antiquit^tum: Iudaicarum. l. 18. cap. 2.
the righteousness of the essenes is maruailous: etc. they enjoy their riches in
Common: etc. And in this course above. 4. thousand men do live, having neither
wives nor servants: etc. And else where it is affirmed of them that Josephus
de Bello Iudaico l. 2. c. 7.
they are Jews by nation, and do obs rue continency, avoid Marriage, are
contemners of riches (and) enjoy things in common, none being ritcher then
other: And that before any be admitted amongst them Ibidem.
Trial is had of his Continency, and his other manners are for two years
pr^ued, and then he is taken into the Company. And Philo also who lived in the
Apostles times, makes mention of those who then Philo de vita contemplatiu^.
forsaking their goods did dwell without the walls loving solitarine^: he
also makes like mention of Philo, ibidem.
their Monasteries, where being solitary, they studied the Mysteries of holy
life, and of See Philo his words apud Eusebium hist. l. 2. c. 16. post med
where it is said of them, quidam po^ro etc. vix semel toto triduo cibi
recordantur: (and again) nonnulli illec ebris sapientiae etc. sic oblectantur
etc. vt duplo plus temporis inedi^m facile sustineant and vix tantum sex diebus
expletis alimentum necessarium degustent:
their (wonderful great) fasting from meat: Which foresaid professors of
monastical life thus mentioned by Philo, are by the Centurie Centur. 1. l. 2.
c. 3. col. 18. line 33.
writers, and D. Rainolds D. Rainoldes in his Conference page 488. prope fine^.
(for their lesser To their lesser disadua^tage, least other wise being taken
for Christian professors (as they are by Eusebius hist. l. 2. c. 16. and by
Hierom de scriptor. Eccle. verbo Philo) it should argue monastical profession
to be apostolic.
disadvantage) acknowledged to be Iewishe.

9 Ninthly concerning Vows: it is said in the writings of the old Testament.
Psalm. 76, 11.
Vow ye, and render your vows unto God: Numeri. 30, 3.
whos^euer voweth a vow unto the Lord, etc. He shall not break his promise,
but shall do according to all which proceeds from his mouh. Deutro. 23, 21.
when thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not be slack to
pay it, for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee: Ecclesiastes 5, 3,
When thou have vowed a vow unto God defer not to pay it: etc: It is better
that thou should not vow then that thou should vow and not pay it:
Whereunto might be added sundry other Psalm. 22, 25. and psalm. 50, 14. and Esaias.
19, 21.
like Testimonies from the writings of the old Testament. We are not ignorant
how that Peter Martyr, Mr. D. Fulke, and others seek to euade in answering
thereto, that Peter Martyr de caelibatu and votis page 302. fine and 303. and
ibidem page 304. post med. He further says. Votu^ ego caeremoniale antiquae
legis praeceptum fuisse affirmo. And Mr. Fulke. answering to psalm. 76, 11.
says That text pertains to the old Testament in his retentiue against
Bristowes Moiues. etc. page 153. fine. And Bullinger in his decades in English,
page 380. ante med. says vows belong to the Iewsh Ceremonies.
v^wes were Ceremonies of the old Testament: etc. Abol^shed by Christ's commi^g
But is not the contrary many ways evident? as.1. First in that vows were
made before Moses time, as is to be seen in the example of Genesis 28, 20^ Then
Jacob vowed a vow saying, etc.
Iac^^s v^we. 12. Se^ond^y by the heretofore Se heretofore. tract. 1. sect. 3.
initio.
confessed Doctrine of the most ancient Fathers, teaching vows. 3. Thirdly,
(to omit the sundry other proofs that might be alleged from the new
Testament) by the evident confession of sundry learned Mr. Perkens in his
re^ormed Catholic, page 155. post, med. says. And now in the new testament
we have warrant in like manner to vow etc. of this kind are the vows to keep
set times of fasting etc. And see the the like lawfulnes of Christian vows.
further affirmed by Musculus in loc. comun. de votis. p. 524. circa med. And by
Mr. Willet in his Sinopsis. pa. 241. post med. And by Amandus Pol^nus in
partitionihus theolog. l. 2. page 394. and Danaeus in primae partis altera
part contra Bellarminum page 987. affirms it, fas esse Christianis Hominibus
vouere quae cum dei volu^tate consentiunt:
Protestants who a knowledge the lawfullnes of Christian vows: in so much as
Mr. Hooker acknowledges Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical policy. l. 2. page
103. paulo post med.
Ananias his solemn vow unto God, which strictly bound him to the giving of
his possessions to the Churches vs^, (though vet Mr. Fulke and Mr. Willet will
not Mr. Willet in his Sinopsis page 245. ante med. says We do not read that
ANANIAS made any Vow etc. And Mr. Fulke against the Remish Testament: in act.
5. fol. 191. a. propt finem. affirms the like.
in any case acknowledge Ananias to have vo^ed) and Augustine Marloret
acknowledges in like manner how that And so does Peter Martyr de caelibatu and
votis page 323. initio. Marloret in. 1. Tim. cap. 5. verse. 11. page 375. a fine:
the widows) men^ioned by S. Paul,) did give their faith to Christ the
spouse, and to the Church, willingl^ barring them s^lues from Mariag^: with
whom herein do agree, sundry other The Protestant author of the book
entitled Antichristus sieve Prognostica finis mundi. pa. 148. fine. and 149.
says quod Lutherus hanc primam fidem de fide iustificante intelligit and non
de fide pudicitiae, id plane coactum est etc. loquitur apostolus de fide seu
voto officij etc. quia autem Paulus vitio vertit quod nubere postea voluerint,
clarissi number est hanc conditionem in voto intercessisse etc. And Mr. R. Alison
in his confutation of Brownisme. page 71. affirms likewise of these widows,
that before God and his Church they had vowed not to marry: And thus (says
he) is this place expounded, by Bullenger, Claudius, Guiniam and others.
Protestant writers affirming the vowed Chastity of the said widows.

10 Tenthly as concerning our con^ession of sins Petrus Galatinus de arcanis
Catholicae veritatis l. 10. cap. 3.
Galatinus gives examples of several testimonies In libro Sanhedrin
Hierosolomitano in capite quod nigmar haddin id est definitum est iudicium it
is said. Omnis co^fitens habet partem in seculo futuro sic enim in Achan
reperimus quod dixit ei Ieho^uas, fil^m^da obsecro honorem Domino Deo Israel,
and da confessionem, and indica mihi quaeso quid feceris nec celes a me etc.
And in libro Ioma id est dierum in capite tom ^a^^ppurim id est dies
propitiationum. It is said, dixit R. Hurma omnis qui transgressione
transgressus est, necesse est vt singulatim exprimat peccatum. etc.
in the ancient Jews, and like further testimony or prefiguration thereof is
not wanting in Leuiticus for whereas several sacrifices are there appointed for
several sins, as for Leuit. 4, 2, 3. etc.
sin through ignorance, and other Leuit. 5, 1, 4, 17. and 6, 1, 5. and numeri
5, 7.
particular offenses, for which Leuit. 4, 3.
the Priest was appointed to offer and make Leuit. 4, 20. and 5, 6, 13. and 6,
7.
a^^onement, how could the Priest here offer those sundry sacrifices
appointed severally according to the diversity of SINS, unless the party
so offending confessed the same sins to him; which to have been so, is yet
furthermore probable, in that it was there also appointed and said Leuit. 5,
6. and numer 5, 7.
when he has sinned in any of th^s^ things, then h^e shall confess that he
has sinned therein and^: And the Priest shall make atonement for him
c^ncerning his sin.

11 Eleuenthly as concerning Melchisadechs offering of B^ead and Wine in
sacrifice (which our adversaries Master Fulke against the Remish Testament in
haebr. 7. sect. 8. fol. 406. a. initio says Melchisadechs Bread and Wine
pertended not to his Priestly office neither did he offer it to God. And Mr.
Willet in his Sinopsis. pa. 478. ante med. and versus finem affirms the like;
And Mr. Whitakes in his answer to Mr. Rainolds etc. pa. 67. says,
Melchisade^he did not by any thing wherein he so sacrificed, pr^figure the
sacrifice and Priesthood of Christ:
deny) and the prefiguration thereby, of our now sacrifice of the new
Testament. Rabby Samuel says Rabby Samuel in Bereschit Rabba ad cap. 14.
Genes.
Melchisadech set forth the acts of Preisthood, for he sacrificed Bread and
Wine, to the holy and Blessed God. Rabby Phinces says, Rabby Phinces ibidem in
cap. 28. numer.
In the time of the Messiah all s^^rifices shall cease, but the sa^rifice of
Bread and Wine shall not cease etc. as it is said Psalm. 110. thou art a
Priest fore^^r acco^ding to the order of M^lchisdech. Rabby Moses Hadarsan
says of Melchisadech, Rabby Moses Hadarsan in Bereschit Rabba ad cap. 14.
Genes.
bringing forth bread and wine, shows that he taught the act of Priesthood,
which was to sacrifice Bread and Wine, and this is that which is read in the
Psalms etc. thou art a Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisadich:
This point is so evident in the old Jewish Rabbines: that Theodorus The^dorus
Bibliander de SS. Trinitate l. 2. page 89. says, erat apud veteres haebraeos
dogma receptissimum in aduentu Messiae Benedicti, cessatura esse omnia legalia
sacrificia, tantumque celebrandum sacrificium thoda gratiarum actionis etc. and
illud peragendum pane et vino sicut Melchisadech Rex Salem and sacerdos etc.
panem et vinum protulit
Bibliander (a Protestant writer) doubts not accordingly to confess the same.

12 Tweluethly as concerning their further opinion of the Churches sacrifice
upon the coming of the Messiah: our now sacrifice is therein so plainly
signified and affirmed by the ancient Jews who lived before Christ's time,
that (as Galatinus says of one of them) Galatinus de Arcanus Catholicae
veritatis l. 1. cap. 3. circa med.
they may be thought not so much to have foretoulde things to come, as to have
reported Euangelist-like things already done: To this end says Rabby Cahana
Rabby Cahana ad c. 49. genes. verse. 11.
the sacrifice which shall be offered of Wine, shall not only be changed into
the substance of the Blood of the Messiah, but also into the substance of his
Body: the sacrifice which shall be of Bread notwithstanding that it be whit as
milk, it shall be converted into the substance of the Body of the M^ssias. In
like manner Rabby Iudaes says R. Judas in 25. exodus
the bread shall be changed when it shall be sacrificed from the substance of
bread into the substance of the Body of the Messiah, which shall descend from
Heaven, and he him self shall be the sacrifice etc. R^bby Symeon says R.
Symeon filius John libro qui inscribitur reu^latio secretorum.
The sacrifice which after the Messiah his coming Priests shall make etc: they
shall make it of Bread and Wine etc. and that sacrifice which shall b^ s^
celebrated upon every Altar, shall be turned into the Body of the M ssias:
Rabby Barachias teaches that at the coming of the R. Barachias in
ecclesiasten.
M^ssias, food shall come from Heaven like a little Cak^. Thus did these
religious and ancient Jews who lived before CHRIST'S coming, foretell and
write (by special inst nct) concerning our Chur^hes Blessed Sacrifice: whereto
might be added sundry of their other no less plain testimonies Rabby Ionathas
in libro collectionum in psalm. 72. says ille est M^ssi^s de quo loquitur totus
psalmus, cum ergo ait, et erit placenta frumenti in terra in capite montiu^,
vult dicere quod placenta panis fiet sacrificium in capitibus sacerdotu^ qui
sunt in ecclesia. And Rabby Moses Hadarsan in psalm. 136. says, Gustate and
videte quoma^ bonus est deus, quia panis quem dat omnibus, ipse est caro eius,
et dum gustatur panis, conuertitur in carnem etc.
^he which together with these are collected specially by Petrus See these
foresaid testimonies and sundry other like alleged from the Rabbines by
Petrus Galatinus de Arcanis Catholicae veritatis. l. 10. ca. 5. 6. and 7.
Galatinus, and by Mr. Whitaker For whereas Duraeus urges this collection made
by Galatinus of the Hebrews foresaid so plain sayings concerning Real
Presence and Sacrifice. Mr. Whitaker answering thereunto (l. 9. co^tra Duraeum
page 818 circa med.) Neither confesses nor yet denies but shufleth them of,
saying only thereto. Tuum in hac causa petru^ Galatinu^ minime profecto
desideramus, nec H^braeoru^ Testimonijs illis indigamus. And is this a direct
and sufficient answer, to so many pl^ine sayings of the old Hebrews that
lived before Christ, so evidently foreshewing and affirming the Real Presence
and sacrifice of Christ's Blessed Body in the holy Sacrament?
rather sh^ffled of then answered,) wherein they do no less plainly fore
show the truth of Christ's Body Really present and offered in the Blessed
Sacrament, then d d the Heathen Sibills in like manner foretell the truth of his
incarnation. And for so much as Esaye 41, 23.
God only knows things to come. The Devil not being able to foretell things
s^mplie future, but only such other future effects as depend upon their
seconda^y causes then already past or present, in which causes, he (of his
great skill and experience) foreseeth the coming of the said effects, to
which kind, the foresaid Doctrines of Re ll Presence and Sacrifice, cannot in
any so^te be reduced, by reason they cannot be said to have been then
depending upon any natural or other cause, then past or in being, save only
the imediate and sacred will of God. This therefore so pl^ine foresaid
p^ediction m^de by the ancient Rabbines before Christ's t^me, in behalf of
Real Presence and Sacrifice, demonstrating it self so evidently to have
proceeded not from any secondarie cause but only from a divine instinct,
yields thereby a most strong argument in behalf of the said Doctrines.

13 Thirtenthly and lastly (to omit other points) as concerning the final
ending of controversies, not only scripture, but a certain visible and lively
Judge upon earth was appointed and acknowledged. To omit all other proof
thereof, the Law of Deutronomie was that when there did Deutron. 17, 8, 9, 11.
arise any matter to hard for the (people) in Judgment: they were appointed to
go up to the place which God had ch^sen, and to come to the leuiticall Pri^st,
and to the Judge in those days: and to ask of them the sentence of Iu^gement,
and to do according to ^he Judgment which they did tell, not declining neith^r
to the r^g^t hand nor to the left, it being yet further said of him that did
Deutron. 17, 12.
presumptiously refuse to obey the commandment of the Priest, tha^ by the
decree of ^he Judge that man should di^: Now that the sentence grounded upon
this Law, was not subi^ct to new question under color of appeal ng to the
scriptures but was definitive and final, and concerned as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil Causes is in it se^fe plain, and for such Doct. Rainolds in his
conference pa. 251. circa med. says, The law of Deutronomie was made to
establish a highest Court of Judgment, in which all harder causes
Ecclesiastical and Civil should be determined without appeall further: and
Mr. Whitaker de sacra scriptura p. 466. prope finem. says: Respondeo verba
ista intelligenda esse etc. de authoritate tantum definiendi difficiles lites
ac co^trouersias, sieve ecclesiasticas, illas quidem per ministrum, sieve
politicas et foreses per magistratum, vt esset semper in vtrisque aliquis, a
quo prouocare non liceat alioqum enim nullus esset litigandi finis: and vide
ibidem page 470. paulo post med. And Mr. Bil^on in his perpetual government of
Christ's Church. page 20. post med. says, hereof that the same did conscerne
such matters as were of greatest moment both Civil and sacred, and their
sentence by Gods law no man might refuse without punishment of death: And see
the like assertion in Mr. Hooker in his preface before his books of
e^clesi^sticall policy pa. 26. fine. and 27. and 28. fine.
confessed by Mr. D. Rainolds, Mr. D. Whitaker, Mr. D. Bilson, and Mr. Hooker
Whereupon it is evident that not only scripture (which they of the old
Testament had as well as we now have) but besides that a certain visible
Judge, was then appointed to determine controversies. And for so much as the
occasion to have controversies ended, is as great now as during the old
Testament, the doubts of religion being as now many more and the danger of
error no less grievous: whether theref^re may it be thought that our Haeor. 8,
6.
Testament which is established in better promises is want^ng of this
privilege? and so thereby the Ecclesiastical policy of Moses time, to be
preferred herein before that other which succeeded by Christ? With which only
last reason the Puritanes doubt not to Penrie in his supplication to the high
Court of Parliament. p. 21. fine. says That form of government which makes
our Savior Christ Inferior unto Moses is an impious, ungodly and unlawful
government contrary to the word etc. See him further p. 22. and 23. and peruse
the occasion and circumstance of this his reason, and it will appear to houlde
much more strong in this point then in that other for which he urges it.
press their other Protestant Brethren in matters of much smaller importance.

By which so many foresaid examples of our Catho^icke Faith, thus affirmed by
the ancient Jews that lived before Christ's coming, it is made further
probable that our religion is not new or lately devised, but most ancient and
undoubtedly apostolic: which point is made as yet much more clear by that
which is hereafter See hereafter tract. (...). sect. 7. and 8.
alleged concerning the Roman Church being converted in the Apostles time
and her not being sithence changed in religion.

THAT TRUE MIRACLES MAKE a strong argument: And that the aforesaid faith
whereto the English were converted, was confirmed with such Miracles. 5.
AND like as in those firster times of the Churches infancy, our Savior did
make manifest the truth of his Apostles Doctrine with undoubted Miracles, to
serve as (...). cor 12, 12.
signs of their Apostleshipe, to that end. Marc. 16, 20.
Confirming the word wi^h s^gnes followinge: So likewise this virtue or power
of Miracles not ceasing, but (as our adversaries confess) Whereas our Savior,
Ihon. 14, 12. says. He that believes in me the works that I do he shall do
and greater: In the Marginall Notes of the English Bibles (Printed 1576.) it
is there-upon said, this is referred to the wholle Body of the Church, in
whom this virtue does shine for ever.
shininge in the Church for ever, the necessity thereof being one and the same
in all succeeding ages to the conversion of the heathen, who contemning the
scriptures, are nothing moved with the Miracles thereof mentioned, our Savior
did in like manner confirm our now faith so then taught by Aust^ne, with like
manifestation of Miracles, not such only as Antichrist or the Devil can by the
power of nature or secondarie causes bring to pass, which may be These. 2, 9.
lying signs, against which we are forewarned, but with Miracles exceeding
the power of nature, and done imediately by God: which by the Doctrine of
learned Protestants Vrsinus in Co^mentar. catech. page 21. fine says: Etsi
Ethnicorum nonnulla miracula commemorantur, ac de Antichristo, and
pseudoprophetis dictum est edituros esse signa etc. tamen caneque numero neque
magnitudine paria sunt miraculis Ecclesiae etc. primum enim ea miracula quae
iactantur ab hostibus ecclesiae, sunt eiusmodi, quae (ordine naturae non
mutato) hominum vel diaboloru^ fraudibus possunt effici etc. miracula vero
quibus Deus ecclesia^ ornauit, opera sunt preter aut contra naturae and
causarum secundarum ordinem, ac proinde non nisi diuina potentia facta. And the
like is affirmed by Zanchius in D. Pauli epistolas ad Philipenses, Colloss. and
Thessai. page 241. and 242. By Danaeus in Isagoges Christianae. part. 4. page
43. initio 46. fine and 47 initio By Piscator in Annal. epistolarum Pauli page
470 paulo ante med. and by many others.
are evermore true and infallible, of which kind though some be sometimes done
(as the scriptures forewarne Mat. 17, 22.
and Daneus Danaeus in Isagoges Christianae part. 4. page 48. initio says: Ad
eos qui donum duntaxit miraculorum adeo acceperunt absque dono regenerationis,
pertinet, quod ait Christus, multi dicent mihi in die illo; Domine nonne per
nomen tuum prophetauinius, and daemonia eiecimus etc. And see the same further
affirmed by Sigroartus in 23. disputat. theolog. and p. 164 sect. 12 etc. 13.
confesses) by professors of wicked life (accordingly as our Savior in like
manner Mat. 10, 1.
gave power over unclean spirits, and to cure all manner of diseases to his
Twelve Disciples: Whereof even the wicked Judas Mat. 10, 4.
was then one) yet are the Miracles so wrought though by such nevertheless
certain and undoubted testimonies of Gods truth, and for such in general are
MIRACLES throughout the wholle course of scriptures most fully both
acknowledged Exodus 8, 19. and 3. Reg. 17, 24 and 3. Reg. 18, 39. and 4. Reg. 5,
15. and Mat 27, 54. and Mat. 14, 25, 33. and Joan. 2, 23 and 3, 2. and 4, 53.
and 9, 30 and 11, 45. and act. 4, 14 16. and 9, 35.
and urged, Exodus 7, 17. and 16, 12. and numer. 16, 12 28. and Iosue 3, 10,
16. and 3. Reg. 13, 3, 5. and 18, 24, 38. and 20, 23, 28. and 4. Reg. 20, 8, 9,
10. and Mat. 9, 6. and Marc. 2, 10 and Joan. 14, 11. and 15, 24. and 20, 30, 31.
as being even to our Savior him self Joan. 5, 36.
a greater Testimony then John.

And hence it is that the credible histories as well of all former times, as
also of this In the book entitled a report of the kingdom of Congo a region
of Aphricke printed 1597 published by Mr. Abraham Hartwell servant to the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, and by him dedicated to his Lo. mention is made l.
1. c. 1. initio. Of the discovery of that Kingdom Anno 1587 by Odoardo Lopes:
and of the Conversion thereof to the Christian faith l. 2 c. 2. and of the
great and undoubted miracles showed by God in the presence of a wholle army
l. 2. c. 3. in so much that Mr. Abraham Hartwell in his epistle there to the
Reader post medium, confesses that this Conversion of Congo was accomplished
(by Massing Priests) and after the Romish manner. And this action (sath he)
which tend^th to the glory of God shall it be concealed and not committed to
memory, because it was performed by popish Priests, and popish means? God
forbid. In like manner Mr. John Porie lately of Goneuill and Caius College in
Camebrige in the Geographicall history of Aphrica by him published Anno 160
page 410 versus finem, acknowledges and mencioneth the said Miracles and page
413 initio he commends Mr. Hartwell for Publishing his fores^ide treatise.
Also whereas it appears in the book entitled: Rerum in orient gestarum
Commentarius. fol. 2 that Francis Xauerus set forward in his journey from
Lisbone to the East India Anno 1541 to the Conversion of those Nations, and
page 36. That the King of Portugal hearing of the great Miracles as then there
wrought, sent forth his Commission to his Viceroy there dated in April 1556
to take examination thereof upon oath, upon execution whereof and certificate
thereupon being accordingly made, it did appear (fol. 8. b.) that Xauerus in
testimony and proof of the Christian faith by him then preached and taught,
Cured miraculously the Dumb, the Lame, the Deaf, and with his Word healed
the Sick. (and fol. 9. a.) raised sundry dead persons to life, and after his
death which happened (fol. 14. a) Anno 1552 the grave being opened, wherein his
dead body for a time had been buri^d, to the end his naked bones might be
carried from thence to Goa (fol. 14. b.) they found his body not only
unconsumed, but also yielding forth fragrant smells from whence they carried it
to Goa, and placed it there in the Church of S. Paull, where yet to this day
(says the Commentary) it remains free from corruption: Witness whereof says
that treatise are all the inhabitants of that City, and travelers that
repair thither, and the truth hereof for matter of fact is so probable, that
Mr. Whit^ker lib. de ecclesia contra Bellarminum page 353. dare not in his
answer thereto alto^ither rest in denial of the matter of fact, but says: ne
putet (Bellarminus) me omnino haec mir^^ula contemnere: respondeo fieri posse
vt in regno pontificio fuerint huiusmodi miracula and nunc sint. and page 354.
post medium (he says:) Potuit Diabolus Xauerij corpus ad tempus seruare
incorruptum and suauiter olens: and so he not so much denies those miracles as
over bouldly refers the^ to the Devils work: whereas yet to the contrary
Mr. Richard Hackluit preacher in his book of principal nauigations etc.
printed 1599 in the 2. part of the 2. volume page 88. initio. doubts not to
afford commendable mention of that holy man (Xauerus) his particular virtues
and wonderful works in that Region
present age, are plentiful in like examples of true and undoubted Miracles
showed by God, at the Conversion of heathen Nations. Among which our Countries
foresaid conversion by Austine houldeth not the least place, as being in like
manner greatly then confirmed with undoubted Miracles, not lately fained, but
so credibly testified by the faithful writers of those times, that now
sithence they are acknowledged for certain and true by learned Protestants
themselves. To this end does S. Bid and our own Chronicles witness, how that
Austine Beda hist. l. 2. c. 2. ante medium says. Allatus est quidam de genere
Anglorum, oculorum luce priu^tus etc. tandem Augustinus iusta necessitate
compulius, flectit genua sua etc. deprecans vt visum caeco quem amiserat
restitueret, and per illuminationem vnius hominis corporalem, in plurimorum
cordibus fidelium spiritalis gratiae lucem accenderet, nec mora illuminatur
caecus, ac verus summae lucis praeco ab omnibus predicatur Augustinus, tum
Britonis confitentur intellexisse se veram esse viam iusticiae quam preditet
Augustinus. And see Hollinsheads Cronicle after the last edition volum. 1. l.
5. c. 21. page 102 b lin. 51.
to prove his opinion good, wrought a Miracle in restoring sight to one that
was blind. Which kind of Miracle, as Hemnigius Hemnigius in his exposition of
the 84. Psalm. englished part. 1. c. 6.
acknowledges for a true Miracle, so likewise the Christian Brittons present
thereat, were specially Beda vbi supra and Hollinshead vbi supra
moved therewith. In like manner it is testified by S. Bid and Protestant
writers, that Austine persuaded the King to his religion Beda hist. l. 1. c. 26
circa medium says of the King, Miraculorum multorum ostensione credens
Baptizatus est, and Hollinshed vbi supra page 100 b, line 60. and Mr. Fox in
his acts and monuments printed 1576. page 117 a prope finem.
by diverse MIRACLES showed. Which were at those times so certainly known,
that (as S. Bid reports) it was Beda hist. l. 2. c. 3 fine.
written in the Epitaphe upon his tomb: that he was: Suffultus a Deo
Miraculorum operatione. Beda hist. l. 2. c. 1 versus finem says. Quibus verbis
beatus Gregorius declarat quod Sanctus Augustinus and socij eius coelestium
ostensione signorum gentem Anglorum ad cognitionem veritatis perducebant. and
S. Gregory himself l. 7. epist. 30 indict. 1 reports hereof to Eulogius
Archbishope of Alexandria saying. Know then that whereas the English nation
etc. remained hitherto in infidelity, I did by the help. of your prayers etc.
send unto that nation (Austine) a Moncke of my monastery to preach to them
etc. and now letters are come to us, both of his health and of his work that
he has in hand: And surely either he or they which were sent over with him,
work so many Miracles in that Nation as they may seem therein to imitate the
power and miracles of the Apostles them selves.
And Gregory him self, not only affirms those Miracles, but also by his
Hollinshead vbi supra page 192 a line 25.
Letters dated Anno. 602. did specially This letter of Gregory is extant in
Bid hist. lib. 1. c. 31 and mentioned by Hollinshead vbi supra page 102 a. l.
10, 11. etc.
write to Austine touching the Miracles showed by him, aduising him not to
glory therein, but rather to consider that God gave him the gift for the
weal of those to whom he was sent etc. In so much that Mr. Fox and Mr.
Godwine (both of them learned Protestants) do accordingly mention and
acknowledge Mr. Fox in his acts and monumentes printed 1576. page 117. a.
prope finem and Mr. Godwine in his Catalogue of the Bishops of England page 4
fine.
the Miracles (then) wrought by Austine through Gods hand. As also S. Bid, Mr.
Fox, and Hollenshead do in like manner speacially mention Beda hist. lib. 2. c.
12. post medium and Mr. Fox his acts and monumentes printed 1576 page 121 b.
post medium 122 a. and Hollinshead in his great Chronicle the last edition
volume 1. page 108 b initio and 109 a line 29. 30 etc.
the Miraculous conversion of Edwine King of Northumbers, which happened some 26.
years after Augustines foresaid coming into England, Mr. Fox not doubting
to place the same in his Catallogue of Mr. Fox in the Alphabeticall table of
his acts and monuments printed 1576 at the word Miracle.
true Miracles. Hereunto we could likewise add, the undoubted many and great
Miracles As concerning the miracles of Malachias: To omit particular mention
of them, no meaner a witness then S. Bernard, who lived in the same time with
him, and was to him so familiarlye known, says of them in general (in vita
Malachiae: In what kind of old miracles did not Malachias excel? He wanted
not proph^sie, nor revelation, not the gift of healing, and to conclude not
raising of the dead. And no less undoubted miracles are written of S. Bern^rd
by his own scholar Godfridus, and others of that time, who write his life:
Godfridus (de vita Sancti Bernardi lib. 3. c. 5.) mencioning an undoubted
known miracle wrought by him in Toulouse in confirming of his doctrine against
the Heretics called Apostolic: who (as appears heareafter tract. 2. c. 2.
sect. 3 in the margent under the letter ^n. denied the Real Presence, Mass,
Purgatory etc. of which said miracle S. Bernard him self in his 241 epistle
(which was written to the same persons) gives a modest signification in like
words, as does S. Paull 1. Thessal. 1, 5. the many miracles of S. Bernard are
so credibly and certainly reported, that Osiander in Centur. 12. page 310.
post med. dare not rest in denial of them, but says of them, Partim
permissione Dei, praestigijs Satanicis effecta existimo, non quod S. Bernardum
magum suisse putem, sed quod verisimile sit Satanam talia miracula effecisse
etc. ad confirmationem idolatriae and falsorum cultuum: so good a Protestant he
makes S. Bernard.
wrought of later times, (to omit sundry others) by holy Malachias, and S.
Bernard, both of them confessed, and known As concerning Malachias his
Religion: Osiander Centur. 12. page 315. post med. says: Malachias
Archiepiscopus in Hibernia abineunte aetate literis and religioni addictus
tandem inuitus and diu admodum coactus Archiepiscopatum Hiberniae assumpsit S.
Bernardo admodum familiaris fuit, eius monachatum admiratus and imitatus est,
superstitiones Pontificias amplexus, Romanum Pontificem pro Deo coluit,
tribuuntur illi admodum plurima miracula etc. (and vide ibidem page 256. post
medium.) and S. Bernard in vita Malachiae affirms that Malachias was Legate
to the Pope. As concerning S. Bernardes religion of whom Mr. Whitaker (in
prelect. de ecclesia contra Bellarminum page 369 paulo post medium) says:
Bernardum vere sanctum fuisse existimo: He was Abbot of Claireuaux (as
testifies Simon de Voyon upon the Catallog. etc. page 126.) and he acknowleged
so plainly the Popes primacie. (whereof see S. Bernard l. 2. de consider. ad
Eugenium and l. 3. c 8 and epist. 125. and 131. and 190 ad Innocentium.) That
he is therefore reproved by D. Fulke (against the Rhemish Testament in Luc. 22.
sect. 11. fol. 133 b. post initium) and by Mr. Whitaker. lib. 2. contra Duraeum
page 154 ante medium. and was so evidently a professed Catholic, that Gomarus
in speculo Ecclesiae page. 23. versus finem alleges him to us saying.
Bernardus sanctus vester: and mr. Whitaker in respons. ad ratio. Camp. rat. 7.
P. 105 ante med.) says, Bernardus quem ecclesia vestra multis annis vnum tulit
Pium Viru^: etc. Lastly this point is yet made further evident in Malachias,
and Bernard: in that it is manifest that they both lived Anno. Domini. 1140.
When the profession of our now Catholic faith was most flourishing; which
thing Mr. Jewel In his defense of the Apology printed 1571. page 557. Paulo
ante med. confesses saying, S. Bernard lived in the midest of the Popes rout
and tirany: Whereupon it follows that for so much as neither of them is found
to have been troubled for any one point of Doctrine disagreeing from those
times, but were to the contrary both of the^ in high favor as then with the
Roman Sea, the one of the^ being the Popes Legate the other an Abbot, that
therefore they were agreeable in religion to the professed Doctrine of those
times: So improbably do our adversaries pretend S. Bernard to have been a
member of their Church, for his only then zealouse reproving the corruption of
life and manners in the Clergy of that age.
members of our now professed Catholic faith.

THAT HIS MAJESTY'S AVNcestours lived and died in that faith: and that it is
acknowledged by Protestants for sufficient to Salvation. 6.
IN this faith thus dedicated and continued, have your MAJESTY'S most Noble
Ancestors (KINGS and QVEENS of this Realm) for so many ages together lived
and died, with peace toward God, and honor to the world. In this faith died
your HIGHNESS dearest MOTHER (of Blessed Memory (admired at her death for her
most Christian resolution, the which (at the time of her Funeral) was
accordingly and for such Celebrated, even by the then Preacher Protestant whom
the Puritanes publickely, and reprochfully traduced, for that (to use their
own words therefore had of him) Martin Marprelate in his Epistle Printed over
Sea etc. page 50.
Preaching at Peterburrow Agust. 2. Anno. 1587. at the funeral of one who died
a professed Papist (viz. the Scottish Queen) he prayed that his soul and the
souls of all there present might be with the soul of the dead Papist. For
this faith thus taught us, have our learned adversaries honored. Mr. Cowper
late Bishope of Lincoln in his foresaid Chronicle fol. 156. a. Mr. Bilson now
Bishope of winchester in his true difeference between Cristiane subjection and
unchristian rebellion, Part 1. page 57. and Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments
Printed 1576. page 117. a. Mr. D. Fulke in his book against Heskins Sanders,
etc. p. 561. fine and 562. initio.
Gregory and Austine with due and answerable commendation, calling therefore
the one of them Mr. Godwine in his Catallog. of Bishopes page 7. ante med.
S. Austine Mr. Godwine vbi supra page 7. initio.
our Apostle and the other Mr. Godwine vbi supra pa. 3 ante med.
that Blessed and holy Father S. Gregory etc. To this faith like-wise have all
the learned Protestants of sober Judgment afforded the promises of hopeful
salvation, as appears most plainly. 1. By their own most evident
testimonies. 2. By their like confessed examples thereof given. 3. And by their
undoubted answerable practice. To give proof of every of these parts.

And 1. First concerning their testimonies in this kind: Mr. D. Baro says,
Mr. D. Baro in his four sermons and two questions disputed ad cleru^ etc.
sermon. 3. page 448. fine.
I dare not deny the name of Christians to the Romanistes sith the learneder
writers do acknowledge the Church of Rome to be the Church of God And Mr.
Hooker also says. Mr. Hooker in his third book of Ecclesiastical Policy
page 188. initio. And Johannes Regius in his liber. Apologeticus etc. p. 95.
fine. says In Papatu autem cum fuerit ecclesia vera. etc.
The Church of Rome is to be reputed a part of the House of God, a limme of the
visible Church of Christ: and Mr. Hooker vbi supra page 130 ante med.
we gladly acknowledge them to be of the family of Jesus Christ: Mr. Bunnie
likewise says of Catholics and protestants: Mr. Bunnie in his tretise
tending to Pacificatio^ sect. 18. p. 109 circa med.
Neither of us may justly account the other to be none of the Church of God,
Mr. Bunny vbi supra page 113. post med.
we are no several Church from them, nor they from us: In like sort does Mr.
D. Some in defense thereof (against Penrie the puritan) say: Mr. D. Some in
his defense against Mr. Penrie and refutation of many absurdities etc. in Mr.
Penries treatise page 164. ante med.
that the Papists are not altogether aliens from Gods covenant, I have showed
before: for Mr. Doct. Some vbi supra page 182. initio.
in the Judgment of all learned men and all reformed Churches, there is in
Popery a Church, a Ministry, a true Christ etc. Mr. D. Some vbi supra page
176. prope finem.
If you think that all the Popish sort which died in the Popish Church are
damned you think absurdly, and dissent from the Judgment of the learned
Protestants. Lastly to omit many others Peter martyr (as appears by his
Epistles annexed to his common places in English page 153. a. fine. Desired at
the conference had at Poysie between the Catholics and Protestants, that
they should not for diversity of opinion break brotherly Charity, nor call
one another Heritickes: and see the same opinion yet further affirmed by the
Protestant writter against Nicholas Machiuell. printed at London 1062. page 80
post medium and 83 paulo post medium and 85. prope fine^.
(for we are unwilling to become tediouse to your MAJESTY) Mr. D. Couell in
his late treatise Published by Authority and didecated to the Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury, defends this opinion at large, and concludes Mr. D. Couel in
his defense of mr. Hookers five books of Ecclesiastical policy. P^blished
by authority. page 77. ante med.
saying we affirm them) of the Church of Rome (to be parts of the Church, of
Christ, and that those that live and die in that Church may notwith-standing be
saved: In so much as he doubts not to charge the Puritanes with mr. D. Couel.
vbi supra page 68. paulo post med.
Ign^rance for their contrary opinion. 4 Hithe^to concerning their Testimonies
before undertaken.

2 Secondly, As concerning now their like confessed examples we will out of
very many allege only some few: It will not (we think) be denied but that
our late SOVEREIGN KING Henry the Eight, did after his breach with Rome,
believe and maintain the wholl frame and substance of our now professed
Catholic faith, the Article of the Popes Premacie only excepted. To which end
their own author Sleidane says of him Sleydan in English.l. 13. fol. 174. a.
initio
: He exiled the name of the Bishope of Rome, but kept still his Doctrine: and
Mr. Fox says a^cordingly: Fox act. monu. page 1472. b. sine
He set forth and by full consent of Parliament established the book of six
Articles containing the sum of Popish Religion. And it is evident that he
himself in person, not only as then disputed, Act. monu. page 530 a. and b.
initio.
but also commanded act. monu. page 533. a circa med.
sentence to be pronounced against Lamberte: as also the L. Cromwell read and
act. monu. page 533. a.
pronounced that sentence, and at his own death protested him self Act. mon.
page 598 b circa med. and see Hollinsheads Chronicle page 591.
to die in the Catholic faith, not doubting in any Article of faith or
Sacrament of the Church, though (says he) many have slaundred me to the
contrary. And yet is he commended by Mr. Fox to dye as Act. mon. page 598 b.
post med.
a valiant Soldier and Captain of Christ: as also the Church under the reign
of King Henry the.8. is by Mr. Fulke affirmed to be a true Mr. Fulke against
Heskines, Sanders etc. page 564. sect 80. and 82.
Church: and the King him self acknowleged in like manner for Fulke vbi supra
sect. 82 and see D. Humfrey in Iesuitismi. part. 2. rat. 3 page 304 circa med.
a member of the Catholi^ke Church of Christ. In like sort Osiander cent. 12.
page 309 post med.
S. Bernard lived (some 400 years since, as Mr. Jewel confesses) even Jewel
in his defense of the Apology printed 1571. page 557. paulo ante med. and see
Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 2 page 154 ante med.
in the midst of the Pope rou^e and tyrany: And as we do not find that he
was then troublede or gainesaid so much as in an one article diffe e^t f om the
doctrine of the Roman Church of that tim^, so we find confessed to the
contrary, that he acknowleged even Bernard l. 2 de considerat. ad Eugeniu^ and
vide epist. 125. and 131 and ep. 190 ad Innocentiu^ and see this confessed by
mr. Fulke against the Rhemishe Testament in Luc. 22. sect. 11. fol. 133. b.
post initium. and by Mr. Whitaker l. 2. contra Duraeum, page 154. ante med
the Popes Supremacy, and was so conformable to the doctrine of the Roman
Church, that he was made Osiander in epito^. etc. cent. 12. page 309. and Simon
de voyon. in his catalog. etc. page 926
Abbot of Claireuaux, being also Osiander vbi supra page 309. fine says:
Centum and quadraginta Monasteriorum author fuisse creditur: and Danaeus in
primae partis altera part contra Bellarminum page 940. says. Hieronimus and
Bernardus fuerunt monachi and istius erroris authotes and fautores.
author of many monasteries: In so much as our adversaries alleging him to us
do call him, Sanctus vester Gomarus in speculo ecclesiae page 23. fine.
our S. and Whitaker in respons. ad rat. Campiani. rat. 7. pa. 105. ante med.
says: Bernardus ecclesia vestra, multis annis vnum tulit pium virum.
a man brought forth by our Church: who in regard of Christian communion was
dearly Osiander Centuria. 12. page 305 post med.
familiar to Malachias whom our adversaries reiecte for a confessed Osiander
ibid. See his words heretofore sect. 5. in the margent at the figure. 3.
initio.
Catholic, or papist. And yet this his known religion notwithstanding our
adversaries do acknowledge him for Whitaker de ecclesia page 369 paulo post
med. says. Ego quidem Bernardum vere fuisse Sanctum existimo. And see thee
like in Whitaker against mr. William Rainoldes page 125 and 126
a true Saint Osiander Cent. 12. page 309 post med.
a very good man, See this in Pasquils return into England. page 8. and 13.
a good Father, and one of the lamps of the Church of God. In like manner S.
Bid (who lived about 900 years since) was so evidently of our religion, that
our adversary Osiander therefore says of him: Osiander in epitom. etc. cent. 8.
l. 2. c. 3. page 58. initio.
Beda was wrapped in all the popish errors, wherein we at this day dissent from
the Pope, for he admired and embraced the worship of Images, the popish
Mass, invocation of Saints. etc. which thing appears also yet more
undoubtedly: (to omit his evident writings) by his See mr. Fox act. monu.
printed. 1576. p. 128. and 129
confessed credit and estimation had with the Popes of that age, and yet is he
(all this notwithstanding) acknowleged by our adversaries to have been Osiander
cent. 8. p. 58. ante med.
a good man mr. Couper in his Chronicle at the year of our Lord 734. fol. 171 b.
renowned in all the world, for his learning and godly life: for which he was
also priuileged with the surname of Of this title see Hollensheds Chronicle at
the year 735. and mr. Couper in his Chronicle at the year 724. fol. 168. b.
and mr. Fox act. mon. printed 1576. page 128. b. and vide 129. a. and
Oecolampadius in libro epistolarum Zuinglij and Oecolampadij p. 654 post med.
Reverend, and by D. Humfrey specially registered, among Humfredus in Iesuitismi
part. 2. rat. 3. p. 326. initio.
the godly men raised up by the holy Ghost. Hitherto also appertains the like
examples of Gregory and Austine both of them heretofore acknowleged for hereof
see heretofore tract. 1. sect. 1 d. 2. 3. e
confessed popish Catholics, and yet the one of them called by our
adversaries, hereof see before in this section at d.
That Blessed and holy Father S. Grego. and the other before in this section at
b.c.
S. Austine our Apostle: whereunto (to omit others) might be added the
foremencioned example of your HIGHNESS Dearest Mother, whose undoubted Salvation
(her known religion notwithstanding) was (even in that oposition of time) by
the learned aduesarie as before before in this section at z.
publicly acknowledged. What now can our adversaries answer unto these
confessed examples? Is there James. 1, 17.
with God variablenes? or Ephesians. 6, 9. and deutro. 10, 17. and Romans 2, 11 and
1. Peter. 1.17.
any acception of persons? or is he Numer. 23, 19.
as the son of man that he should change so as one and the same religion,
which was before in them holy, should now be in us damnable? And thus much
briefly concerning certain undoubted examples of this kind.

3 Thirdly to make this point, more evident as yet by the like answerable
practice of almost all Protestant reformed Churches. Whereas they hold that In
the propositions and principles disputed in the university of Geneua page 166.
sect. 25.
the Sacraments are only to be administered, to those that are taken for known
members of the Church: Which no man can be without faith, because that Hebr.
11, 6.
without faith it is impossible to please God. For which cause they teach
concerning Infants, who in their opinion have not That children have not faith
is affirmed by master Carth write in mr. Whitgifts defense pa. 611. And in the
propositio^s and principls disputed in the university of Geneua. p. 178. sect
4. and by Jacob. Kimedoncius in his redemption of mankind l. 2. c 15. page 164
fine. and by mr. Whitaker contra Dureum lib. 8 page 682.
faith, (which as the scriptures witness Romans 10, 17.
comes by hearing which Infants cannot accomplish) that So say the Deuines
of Geneua in the foresaid propositions and principles disputed page 178. sect.
4. also Oecolampadius in libro epistolarum Oecolampadij and Suinglij l. 2. page
301. circa med. says hereof. Parentum and compatrum fides pueros sanctificat.
And Praetorius l. de Sacramentis page 108. says: Respectu fidelium parentum,
infantes fideles habentur. etc. Credunt igitur infantes, sed in parentibus
they are comprehended within the covenant of eternal life, by means of the
faith of their Parents, and In the propositions and page 178
are for that cause to be Baptixed, and that there-fore the Children of Jews,
Turks and such like professed Infidels, are In the propositions and principles
etc. vbi supra. sect 8. page 179. and mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 8. page
679. fine says. Infidelium liberos (vt Turcarum, Iudeorum, Ethnicorum Caluinus
merito and vere negat esse baptizandos and the like is taught by Kimnedoncius
in his redemption of mankind: l. 2. c. 15 page 167 fine: and see mr. D. Some in
his defense against Penrye, and refutation etc. page 150.
not to be Baptized, as not being comprehended within the covenant, by reason
that their Parents do not believe. All this yet notwith-standing they profess
Taught by mr. Whit gift in his defense. etc. page 623 ante med. By mr. Hooker
in his ecclesiastical policy l. 3. sect. 1. page 131 by D. Some vbi supra
page 149 and 150 and in the foresaid propositions and principles: etc. page
179. sect 9. It is said by the Divines of Geneua: We are of mind that the
children of Papists may be received unto Baptism:
to teach and practice their Baptizing of Infants Borne of Catholic (or as
they term) Popish Parents: Not (says Mr. Hooker) in regard of mr. Hooker vbi
supra:
Gods promise which reaches unto a thousand generations: for by this reason
the Children of Turks and (as Mr. Hooker says) Master Hooker ibidem:
all the world may be Baptized, in so much as no man is a thousand discents
removed from Adam. But their said Baptising of them is (according to the other
premises of their Doctrine) by them selves practiced and holden good, though
(as Mr. D. Some affirms mr. Some in his foresaid defense etc. cap. 22. page
165 and 167
to Penry) they were the Children of Popish west-Indians whose other former
ancestors never knew the Christian faith, and though (says he) those
West-indians Master Some ibidem: page 167.
were Baptized by Popish Shauelings, yet they received true Baptism and were
ingraffed into Christ, and for this reason, because there is a Church in
Popery, for (says he) mr. Some ibidem p. 149 post med. says: And Amandus
Polanus in partic. theologic. page 305: post med. says. Hodierna Ecclesia
Romana est adhuc Ecclesia Christi, sed omnium impurissima etc. alioquin ij qui
in papatusunt baptizati, extra ecclesiam Christi. ac proinde nec baptismo
Christi fuissent baptisati. etc.
If there were no Church at all in Popery, (then) the Infants of Papists were
not to be Baptized in any reformed Church: By which premises of their
confessed practice it appears 1 that the Children of Catholic (or Popish)
Parents are to be Baptized 2 as being comprehended within the covenant of
eternal life: 3 and that by reason of their parents Faith: So evidently in
their Doctrine and practice, is the faith of the Catholic (or Popish)
Parents, houlden for available to his Child. And shall it then be thought
damnable to him self? or houlden worthy to be yet further persecuted by our so
implacable and unrelenting adversaries?

THAT PROTESTANTS CANNOT prove, that the Roman Church did change her Religion,
since the first Conversion thereto in the Apostles time. 7.
AND for so much as it is your HIGHNESS In the sum of the Conference before
the Kings Majesty page 75. circa med.
Constant and resolute opinion, that no Church ought further to separate it
self from the Church of Rome, then she has departed from her self, when
she was in her flourishing and best estate. In further probability therefore of
the Premises we do presume hereby most humbly to submit to your MAJESTY'S
most learned Judgment this brief discourse had thereof in the two sections
next ensuing: it is generally confessed that the Roman Church was once the
true Church and professed the right faith, whereto the I thank my God for you
etc. because your faith is renowned throughout the wholle world. Romans 1, 8. To
all that be at Rome, the beloved of God called to be Saints, grace to you.
Romans 1, 7. That which is common to us both, your faith and mine. Romans 1, 12.
Your obedience is published in every place. Romans 16, 19.
Apostle him self gives full and assured testimony: whereupon it evidently
follows that if the Roman Church have not sithence changed her religion,
then she still retains and persisteth in the right faith.

Now as touching her supposed change. we will breifely examine what our learned
adversaries (who have purposely and seriously labored in discovery or proof
of this pretended change) do most materially object in that behalf 1 First
then Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum. l. 7 page 480 initio: and mr. Fulke in his
answer to a counterfeite Catholic p. 36. post med.
the first (says Mr. Whitaker and Mr. Fulke) That exercised Jurisdiction upon
foreign Churches was Victor: whereto we answer (as does the Lord Archbishope
of Canterbury concerning woman's Baptism) saying to Mr. Carthwright mr.
Whitgifte in his defense page 510 prope finem.
you say in the margent that Victor Anno. 198. did first appointe that women
might Baptize, by this you do add more credit to the cause then you are aware
of, for Victor was a Godly Bishope and Martyr and the Church at that time was
in great Purity as not being long after the Apostles whereto we further add,
that whereas Victor in the example now urged, did upon occasion The occasion
hereof was that the Churches of Asia minor had received of S. John the
Evangelist to observe our Lords Pasch or Easter day not always upon Sunday
but with the Jews (in regard of their known weakness) upon the 14. of the
moon, as in like sort upon the same ground was for the time tolerated,
Circumcision: Act. 16, 3. and abstinence from blood and that which is
strangled. Act. 15, 20. The Bishops of Rome who had received of S. Peter and
Paul the other manner did accordinglye tolerate the Churches of Asia, til
such time as that certain of them in Asia made this their observation
necessary, in so much that the other manner was condemned by the Iudaizing
heretic B^asius. Tertulian de praescript. circa finem: and centur. 2. c. 5
col. 107. l. 12. hereupon Victor thought good to tolerate them no longer, and
therefore prescribed the Bishops of Asia to be excomunicated, unless they
conformed them selves to the latin Church in the observation of Easter day.
then seeming very slender The Churches of Asia not denying the feast of
Easter, but differing only from the Roman Church in the day on which it
should be kept, wherein also they had (as they presumed) the fore mentioned
example and tradition of S. John for their warrant, thought this no just cause
of excomunication.
excomunicate the Bishopes of Asia: wherein (says Mr. Fulke) mr. Fulke in his
answer to a counterfaite Catholic page 36 post med.
( he passed the bounds of his Authority, howso-euer the Bishopes of Asia (in
respect of the said occasion seeming to them so slender) censured Victor as
over severe, Eusebius. hist. l. 5 c. 23 and 24
yet (which is most to be observed) no one of them (though thus in their own
opinion provoked,) charge him (as in all reason if they might they would)
with any undue claim or exercise of usurped authority: Eusebius. hist. l. 5 c.
24. initio. reports how Ireneus who thought Victor over sharp herein,
admonishes Victor by letters that he would not for the observation of a
Tradition so long used, quite cut of so many Churches from the body of the
universal Church: in which words he does not so much impugn as plainly
acknowledge his authority. for how could Victor so cut them of unless he had
authority therein.
even Ireneus him self (who stood most herein) acknowledges so plainly else
where, the Primacie of the Roman see, that he is therefore specially
reprehended Cent. 2. c. 4 col. 64 l. 10. It is said: Nouitate^ deinde quanda^
and illud recipere quibusdam videri posset, quod in exemplaribus Irenei, qualia
nunc h^bemus, extat libro tertio cap. tertio. Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter
potentiorem principalitatem necesse ^st omnem conuenire Ecclesiam etc. And in
the Alphabeticall table of that centurie at the word Ireneus special reference
being there made to this saying of Ireneus, it is withal said thereof: Irene^
corrupta sen^entia de ^r ma^u Ecclesiae Romanae: 64, 12.
by the Centurie writers of Magdeburge: 2 Secondly Mr. Whitaker Whitaker contra
Duraeum. l. 7. p. 480
gives example In Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus. Bishopes of Rome, mr.
Fulke in his answer to a counterfaite Catholic pa. 37 circa medium.
Challenging (says Mr. Fulke) Prerogative over the Bishops in Aphrica by
forging a false Canon of the Nicen Council: Whereto we answer: that the
former example of Victor who lived about some 200. years before these, fully
auoideth this objection: for if Victor so long before them challenged primacie,
then did they but continue it, and not first bring it in; As for the suspicion
The suspicion which Protestants enforce was this: Zozimus Boniface and
Celestinus to prove unto the Bishops of Aphrica appeals unto Rome alleged
in behalf thereof the Nicene Council: whereupon (says mr. Jewel in the 4.
article of his replye The said Aphricane Bishopes wrote to the Bishops of the
East to see their copies of the Nicene Council: upon return of which Copies
from Cirrill Bishope of Alexandria and Atticus of Constantinople, there
appeared therein no such Canon: As also (say they) neither in the 22 Canons set
down by Rufinus (hist. l. 10 c. 6) does any such Canon appear, whereupon
Protestants urge this to have been a forgery and innovation in Zozimus Boniface
and Celestinus.
of pretended forgery of the Canons of the Nicen Council by Zozimus, Boniface,
and Celestinus it is both untrue Untrue for between the time of the Nicene
Council and of the foresaid Bishopes Cirrill of Alex andrra and Atticus of
Constantinople; The Arrianes had occupied those sees, whereof see Socrates l.
2. Zozom. l. 4. Theodoret. l. 2. and Niceph. l. 9 and 10) and corrupted the
true originals of the Nicene Council, so as the Canons which Rufinus sets
down and which Cirrill and Atticus sent (howsoever those Fathers thought of
them) were false and corrupted, which to be true, appears many ways. 1 First
in that sundry ancient Fathers have alleged sundry Canons of the Nicene
Council which are not to be found in these: As for example Ambrose ep. 82
says: It was decreed in the Nicene Council, Ne bigamus in clerum asciscatur:
S. Austine ep. 110 says, It was there decreed (Ne Episcopus sibi successorem
sufficiat: Hierom. in praefat. Judith says, concerning the book of Judith:
Hunc librum Synodus Nicena in numero Sanctarum scripturarum legitur computasle:
And the Fathers of the second general Council of Constantinople (which was 30
years before Zozimus) in their Sinodicall letters written to the Bishopes of
Italye Damasus and others, extant in Theodoret hist. l. 5 c. 9. post medium,
affirm that there was sanctorum Patrum in Concilio Niceno decisio: vt
videlicet singularum Prouinciarum antistites vna cum finitimis (modo ipsis ita
visum fuerit Episcopis) ministros ad ecclesiarum commodum in suis ipsorum
prouincijs ordinent. Julius who was Bishope of Rome presently after the Nicene
Council (in rescript. contra orientales pro Athanasio etc. which is in Isidors
collection, and a great part thereof specially recited and alleged verbatim
by Zozomin hist. l. 3. c. 7. and whereof see Socrates hist. l. 2 c. 11) says,
Canonibus in Nicena sinodo Iubentibus non debere preter sententiam Romani
Pontificijs concilia caelebrari. And Socrates affirms accordingly that such a
Canon was hist. l. 2 c. 5 and that it was alleged by Julius hist. l. 2 c. 13
and so likewise does Zozomine hist. l. 3. c 9. also it is notoriouse and most
certain (as appears by Athanasius in epistola de sinodis Armini and Selenci,
and by Eusebius de vita Constantini l. 3. c. 5. 17 and 18 and by Epiphan. haer.
69. that one principal occasion of the Nicen Council was to determine the
controversy about the observation of Easter day, and that accordingly those
Fathers made a Canon thereof. To omit sundry other like examples in that kind:
(whereof read Council. Aphricanum Can. 14. and Leo ep. 25. ad Theodosium
Augustum. And the Lord Archbishope of Canterbury in his defense etc. page 334.
post medium. And to omit likewise that the Canons alleged by Rufinus do vary
from the Canons sent by Cirrillus both in number, order, and matter, diverse
learned Protestants, as Oecolampadius, in libro epistolarum Occolampadij and
Suin glij page 664. and 667. Calvin lib. 4. institut. c. 17. sect. 36. mr.
Jewel in his Apology of the Church of England. and mr. Bilson now Bishop of
Winchester in his true difference between etc. part. 4. page 555 ante med. do
acknowledge and mention a Canon of the Nicene Council concerning the
Sacrament. All which said Canons are wanting as well in the 22. Canons set down
by Ruffinus as also in the 20 Canons sent by Cirrill, in so much as
Occolampadius vbi supra p. 664 ante med. expressly charge our latin copies as
defective in this behalf. 2. Secondly in that the Arrians had burned the
originals of the Nicene Council, which to be true appears by Athanasius in
epist. ad omnes orthodoxos. And Julius in rescript. ad Orientales alleges in
particular very many of the other Canons of the Nicene Council, which
Protestants now reiecte for forged, and among them one Canon concerning
appeals to Rome. 3 Lastly the Aphricans (whom this matter most concerned) were
so far from charging the said Popes with Innovation or forgerie that S. Austine
one of them calls Zozimus the most blessed Pope Zozimus: Aug. de gra. Christi
l. 2 c. 2 and 6. 7. and 8. and 17 and epist. 157 and Council. Aphric. in epist.
ad Bonifacium. And like titles of reverence and honor are given by the
Aphricane Bishopes to Boniface, and Celestinus. Vide epistolam Aphricani
concilij ad Bonifacium. and vide epist. Aphric. council. ad Celestinum.
and Impertinent because that the Council of Sardica (not that heretical
conuenticle against Athanasius mentioned by Zozomen hist. l. 3. c. 10. And
which mr. Whitaker mistaketh contra Dureu^ l. 7 p. 499) but that other
Catholic council mentioned by Dresserus in millenar. 5. page 104 and 246. and
by Carrion in chronic. p. 283 initio. and by Zozomen l. 3 c. 11. (whereat as
witnesses Theodoret hist. l. 2. c. 7 and Carrion in chronic. page 282 post
med.) Athanasius and many other of the Fathers of the Nicene Council were
present) affirms can. 7. before the times of Zozimus, Boniface, and
Celestinus, this very matter of appealing to Rome, in so much as Calvin l. 4
institut. c 7 sect 9. mencioneth this decree, and thought that the Pope did not
forge, but by mistaking allege this decree of Sardica as the decree of the
Council of Nice, so clear hereby it is that Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestinus
were no Innouators.
impertinent.

3 Thirdly Mr. Whitaker gives example in Pope Siritius saying, Whitaker cont.
Duraeum l. 7. page 480 ante medium.
Siritius was the first that annexed perpetual Chastity to the Ministers of
the word. Whereto we answer First that Mr. Whitaker alleges no proof that
Siritius was the first, neither does he or can he name any Catholic writer of
that time so reporting: Secondly we allege most plainly to the contrary how
that S. Hierome who lived in the time of Damasus predecessor to Siritius says
thereof. Hierom. in Apolog. ad Pamach. c. 3 and the same doctrine does he
affirm in c. 1 ad Titum:
If Married men like not this, let them not be angry with me but with the holy
scriptures, with all Bishopes Priests and Deacons, who know they cannot offer
sacrifice, if they use the act of Marriage: And this opinion was then not first
begune, but (to the contrary) so universal, that Saint Hierome affirms it
to be the general Doctrine and practice of Hierom: contra Vigilant. c. 1
says. Quid faciunt Orientis Ecclesiae quid Egipti and sedis Apostolicae? quae
aut Virgins clericos accipiunt aut continentes, aut si vxores habuerint mariti
esse desinunt.
the Church of the East, of Egipte and the Sea Apostolic. And in like manner
was the Marriage of Priests long before these times so plainly impugned even
in the Greek Church by Epiphanius haer. 59. after other plain words had
hereof says: At dices mihi in quibusda^ locis adhuc liberos gignere,
Presbiteros, Diaconos and Hipodiaconos: at hoc non est iuxta Canone^ etc. So
plainelye does he acknowledge hereby a former Canon.
Epiphanius, Origin in numer. hom. 23 says: Certum est quia impeditur
sacrificium indesinens ijs qui coniugalibus necessitatibus seruiunt, un de
videtur mihi quod illius est solius offerre sacrificium indesinens, qui
indesinenti and perpetuae se deuouerit castitati. and vi de Origin in Leuit.
hom: 4. and l. 8. contra Celsum.
Origin, and also even by that misaplied Misaplied for that many learned
Protestants do urge it in proof of Priests marriage: whereas it proves the
contrary.
example of Paphnutius, It does appear by Socrates hist. l. 1. c. 8. ante med.
and Zozomen hist. l. 1. c. 22 and by the Centurie writers Cent. 4. c. 9 col.
656. line 44. and by mr. Fulke against the Rhemish Testament in Mat. 8 sect. 3.
fol. 14 a. post med. that Paphnutius, though he thought that Priesthood did not
dissolve marriage contracted before orders given, yet he affirmed to the Nicene
Council that those who were made Priests before they were married, should not
afterward marry: alleging for this (veterem Ecclesiae traditionem,) the
ancient Tradition of the Church: so plainly does Paphnutius hereby
acknowledge that this doctrine was then holden for the Churches ancient
Doctrine.
that our learned adversaries doubt not therefore to So Ch^mnitius in his
examen council. Trident. part. 3. reprehendeth Hierom, Ambrose, and Origin page
50. a. ante med. and Epiphanius p. 62. a. initio. And Frigeuilleus Gauuius in
his palma Christiana page 103 reprehendeth Socrates and Zozomen for their
report of Paphnutius.
reprehend the said Fathers, and as Epiphanius and Paphnutius in their cited
testimonies hereof, do in plain terms rest upon the Churches Doctrine before
their times: so likewise the Fathers of the Council. 2. Carth. can. 2. says:
Omnibus placet vt Episcopi, Presbiteri, and Diaconi etc. ab vxoribus se
abstineant (and for this reason there set down) vt quod Apostoli docuerunt
and ipsa seruauit antiquitas, nos custodiamus.
Carthage Council doubt not in like manner to ground this point upon
Antiquity and the Apostles Doctrine. So evident hereby it is, that Siritius in
his foresaid Doctrine hereof brought in no Innovation or change:

4 Fourthly Mr. Whitaker gives example in Innocent the third saying Whitaker
l. 7 contr. Duraeum page 480. circa med.
He that first invented Transubstantiation was Innocent the third in the
Laterane Council: Whereto we answer First that Mr. Whitaker barely affirms
but proves not this his assertion, neither does he allege so much as any one
author of those times, charging this Pope Innocent or that Council with any
Innovation or change of Doctrine in this matter. And we further say that Mr.
Whitaker urges this example how soever against his knowledge and learning, yet
most clearly against all evidence of truth: for this Council of Laterane was
houlden Anno. 1215. Whitaker l. 7 contr. Duraeum page 480. circa med.
And as appears by the said Council and further testimony of Crispinus in
his book of the estate of the Church page 345. fine
Protestants. there were present thereat the Patriarchs of Jerusalem, and
Constantinople; 70. Metropolitaines; 400. Bishopes: and 800. Conuentuall
Priors. Now that so many learned men of so many several remote Nations of the
CHRISTAN world, as were here assembled, should all of them agree to decree
Transubstantiation, and yet the same to be an Innovation (as Mr. Whitaker
says, then First invented, is more the^ improbable: The truth here of
therefore was most plainly to the contrary, that in the age before that
Council, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was public and general: only
Berengarius as then impugned the same, and was therein publicly contradicted
and specially written against by diverse Fathers There did in that age write
purposelye in proof of the Real presence Anselmus Lanfrancus, Guitmundus
Adelmanus, Algerus, Hugo Lingonensis, and others: in so much that Papir.
Maslon. Annal. francoru^ l. 3. in Henrico Rege, testifies saying. Berengario,
omnes illius temporis Theologi Bellum indixere: And Oecolampadius in libro
epist. Oecolampadij and Suinglij l. 3. page 712. fine says, Viuo Berengario,
multi contra ipsum scripserunt.
of several Nations in that age: In so much as the fore-saide Council of
Laterane was at length then afterward assembled against that his then new
seeming opinion. A thing so evident that Mr. Fox confesses and says thereof,
Fox act. monume^ printed 1576. page 1121 b. circa medium.
about the year of our Lord 1060. the denying of Transubstantiation, began
to be accoumpted Heresy, and in that num^er was first one Berengarius who
lived about Anno. 1060. So far was Transubstantiation from being (as Mr.
Whitaker pretends) first affirmed or invented after-wardes in the Council of
Laterane Anno. 1215. Secondly we say that also the many sayings (over tediouse
here to recite) of the other much more ancient Fathers who lived long before
the Laterane Council, are so plain and pregnant for Transubstantiaton, that
the learned Protestants the^ ^elues do in plain terms accordingly
acknowledge the same, and therefore reprehend the said Fathers: To omit the
plain testimony Osiander in epitom. hist. eccles. Cent. 9. 10. 11. and page
95. fine: says Anno. 950. exorta est in Clero Cantuariensi acris contentio de
Pane Eucharistico, alij enim asseuerabant priorem panis substantiam remanere
and nihillominus simul ibi veru^ Christi Corpus porrigi^ alij vero pugnabant
recitatis verbis Domini priorem substantiam elementorum prorsus euanescere
atque transire in corpus Domini. etc. And Crispinus in his book of the estate
of the Church page 286. circa med. and page 289 initio. and 323. post medium.
confesses that Paschasius (who lived Anno Domini 880.) taught
Transubstantiation.
herein of Osiander and some others: in this sort it is confessed and affirmed
that Affirmed by mr. Carelile in his book that Christ descended not into Hell:
fol. 58. and by Oecolampadius in libro epistolarum Oecolampadij and Suinglij.
l. 3. page 661. and see Mr. Fulke against Heskens page 217 post med. and 204.
ante med. and 296 fine. And by Carrion in chronic. page 451. initio.
Damascene taught Transubstantiation that both See the treatise entitled
Commonefact. cuiusdam theologi de sacra Domini Caena. and eiusdem Commonefact.
consideratio page 211. post med. where it is said, Theophilactus and Damascenus
plane inclinant ad Transubstantiatione; and vide Chemnitiu^ examen. part. 2. p.
83. a. paulo post med. and pa. 90. b. circa medium.
Damas^ene and Theophilacte do evidently incline to Transubstantiation: that
Humfredus in Iesuitismi part. 2 rat. 5. page 626 says: In Ecclesiam vero quid
inuexerunt Gregorius and Augustinus, intulerunt etc. Transubstantiatione^ etc.
Gregory the great and Austine brought into England Transubstantiation: that
The Centurie writers cent. 4. c. 10. col. 985. line 30. say of Eusebius
Emissenus that, parum commode de Transubstantiatione dixit. etc.
Eusebius, Emissenus did speak unprofitably of Transubstantiation that The
Centurie writers undertaking in their fifth centurie. c. 4. col. 496. line 4.
to set down, errores Doctorum huius seculi do therein col. 517. line 23. say:
Chrisostomus Transubstantiationem videtur confirmare nam ita scribit in sermon
de Eucharistiae, number vides Panem? number Vinum? number sicut reliqui cibi in secessum
vadunt? absit ne sic cogites, quemadmodum enim si cera igni adhibita illi
assimilatur, nihil substantiae remanet, nihil superfluit, sic and hic puta
misteria consumi corporis substantia.
Chrysostom does seem to confirm Transubstantiation: whereto sundry other
like examples might be added: A thing so evident that Adamus Francisci (a
learned Protestant writer) does therefore acknowledge, how that Adamus
Francisci in Margarita theologica page 256. post med. says: Commentum
Papistarum de Transubstantiatione mature in ecclesiam irrepsit.
Transubstantiation entered early into the Church: so improperly (if not
wilfully untruly) is the foresaid example of the Laterane Council, and
Innocent the third urged by Mr. Whitaker, and so many other of his brethren.

5 Fiftely Mr. Whitaker gives example in Boniface the third, saying Wkitaker
contra Duraeum. lib. 7. page 480. post medium.
he that first entitled the Roman Church to be Caput omnium ecclesiarum, the
head of all Churches was Boniface the third: Whereto we answer that although
this point be for the matter thereof, already answered by that which has been
heretofore said to the former examples of Victor, Zozimus Boniface, (the
first) and Celestinus: yet to refell Mr. Whitaker even in Terminis: whereas
Boniface the third was Pope Anno. 607. that very title of being Head is
acknowledged, and given to the Roman Church by many Fathers Theodor^e (though
agretian) in epist. ad Renatum presbiterum says of the Roman Church, tenet
enim Sancta ista seeds gubernacula regenda rum cuncti orbis ecclesiarum. And in
the Counsel of Calcedon act. 1. it is said, and not contradicted, Papae vrbis
Romae, quae est caput omnium Ecclesiaru^, praecepta habemus.
Greek and Prosper de in gratis c. 2. says, seeds Roma petri quae Pastoralis
honoris facta caput mundo etc. And Victor Vticensis de persecusione vandalica,
l. 2. says, praecipue ecclesia romana quae caput est omnium ecclesiaru^: And
Ennodius diaconus in libro de sinodis sub spiniacho habitis says, sanctorum
voce patet pontificu^, dignitatem sedis apostolicae factam toto orb
venerabilem, dum illi quicquid fidelium est submittitur, dum totius corporis
caput esse designatur: Vigilius Bishope of Rome in epist ad Euterum. c. 7.
says, Sancta Romana Ecclesia etc. Primatum tenet omnium Ecclesiarum, ad quam
tam summa episcoporum negotia, and iudicia, atque quaerelae, quam and maiores
Ecclesiarum quaestiones, quasi ad caput semper referenda sunt.
Latin, who lived before those times: And Gregory the great predecessor to
this Boniface, affirms in sundry places, that Greg. l. 11. ep. 54. and in
quartu^ Psalmum Paenitentialem.
Romana Ecclesia est omnium Ecclesiarum caput: For and with which very title,
the Centur. 6. c. 7. col. 425. line 38. and l. 41. and centur. 5. c. 7. col
774. line 53.
Centurists do reprehend and expressly charge both him and sundry others that
lived before Bonifacius tertius.

6 Sixthly Mr. Whitaker gives example in Gregory the great saying: Whitaker
contra Duraeum l. 7. p 480.
He that first delivered Purgatory for a certain Doctrine was Gregory the
great: whereto in Gregory's full discharge from all Innovation in this point
we answer, that S. Austine long before Gregory delivers the Doctrine
thereof for most certain saying: Aug. de verbis apost. sermon. 34. says,
Orationibus vero sanctae Ecclesiae and sacrificio salutari and elemosinis quae
pro eorum spiritibus erogantur, non est dubitandum mortuos adiuuari, vt cum eis
miserecordius agatur a domino, quam eorum peccata meruerunt, hoc enim a
patribus traditum vniuersa obseruat ecclesia. And in his book de cura pro
mortuis c. 1. he says of prayer for the dead, non parua est vniuersae
ecclesiae quae in hac consuetudine claret authoritas.
It is not to be doubted but that the dead are helped by the Prayers of the
holy Church, and the healthful sacrifice, and alms which are employed for
their souls, that God will deal with them more mercifully then their sins
deserved, for this does the universal Church observe as delivered from our
forefathers: and else where he says no less certainly Aug. in enchirid. c.
110. says, neque negandu^ est defunctoru^ animas pietate suoru^ viuentiu^
releuari, cumpro illis sacrificiu^ mediatoris offertur
it may not be denied but that the souls of the deceassed are reliued by the
piety of their living friends, when for them is offered the sacrifice of the
mediator etc. In so much as he for the Latin Church doubted not to Aug. haer.
35. says, of Aerius, fertur quoque propria dogmata addidisse nonnulla, dicens
orare vel offerre pro mortius oblationem, non oportere.
censure Aerius for an heretic, for his denial of this Doctrine: as also
Epiphanius for the Greek Church, condemns Aerius in like sort, saying
against him in defense of prayer and oblatio^ for the dead, Epiphan. haer. 75.
and ibidem versus finem. He further says, Ecclesia necessario hoc perficit
traditione a patribus accepta.
The Church has received (this) through the wide world, it was agreed upon
before Aerius was: Hence it is that Mr. Fulke confesses and says Mr. Fulke in
his answer to a Counterfeite Catholic pa. 44. finem.
Aerius taught that Prayer for the dead was unprofitable, as witness both
Epiphanius and Austine, which they coumpt for an error: Also he acknowledges
that Mr. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatory pa. 320. ante med. and p. 194.
ante med. and page 326. initio. and 349. circa and post med.
Ambrose, Chrysostom, and Austine allowed Prayer for the dead, that Mr. Fulke
vbi supra pa. 320. ante med. and pa. 326. initio. and 349. post med. and pa.
78. fine.
it was the common error of their times: that Mr. Fulke vbi supra pa. 161. ante
med.
the error) of Purgatory was some what rifely budded in Austines time, that
Mr. Fulke vbi supra page 392. ante med. and vide ibidem p. 303. circa med. and
393. post med.
Tertulian, Austine, Ciprian, Hierome, and a great, many more do witness that
sacrifice for the dead is the tradition of the Apostles. In like manner Mr.
Gifford affirms, that even Mr. George Gifford in his Plain demonstration
that our Brownistes be full donatists etc. page 38. initio
in the (Churches) public worshipe to pray for the souls of the dead, and
to offer Oblation for the dead was general in the Church long before the days
of Austine, as appears in Ciprian and Tertulian, which was before him and
nearer to the time of the Apostles. Whereunto might be added like testimony
from Calvin Calvin institut l. 3. c. 5. sect. 10 acknowledges that, ante
mill and tree cent. Annos vsu receptum fuit vt precationes fierent pro
defunctis (and a little after) sed fateor in errore^ abrepti fuerunt etc.
So clear is Gregory (who lived so many ages after these Fathers) discharged
from all innovation in this point:

7 Seauenthly Mr. Whitaker gives example in Innocentius the third, affirming
that Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 7. page 480. post med.
He was the first that instituted auriculer Confession for necessary: whereto
we answer that an Innovation so strange and compulsorie as for men (against
all natural shamefastnes) to be constrained to confess their secret sins,
could never have been brought in by man's only authority, without some open and
great contradiction: If therefore Innocentius first brought in this usage
before that time strange and untaught, what Father or other writer of that age
then resisted it? or who is witness to this change? Herein Mr. Whitaker is
silent. But to clear Innocentius who was Pope about Anno. 1200. It is evident
that the Iacobites were condemned Anno. 600. For affirming that Witness hereof
Guido de Iacobit^^ c. 2. and Michaell Buchingerus in ecclesiastica, historia:
And Matheus Parisius in Henrico tertio; and Iacobus Vitriacus historiae
orientalis. c. 76. and Nicephorus l. 18. c. 45.
we are to confess our sins to God only and that Confession of sins to a
Priest is not needful. And Haymo Haimo in psalm. 31. says licet deus dimittat
peccata etc. tamen confitendu^ est Ministris ecclesiae quia nisi confiterentur,
ex sua inobedie^tia damnarentur; and no less plain is he (ad Euangeliu^
dominicae. 15. post pentecosten ite osten dite vos sacerdotibus.
who lived about Anno. 790. expresses the like agreeable Doctrine of the
Church in his time: as also S. Bernard Bernard. in meditationibus c. 9. says
sed dicis sufficit mihi soli deo co^fiteri quia Sacerdos sine eo a peccatis me
absoluere non potest; ad quod non ego sed beatus Iacobus respondet dicens,
co^fitemini alte rutru^ peccata vestra etc. And vide eum de interiori domo c.
37.
Petrus Damianus and others Council. 2. Cabilonense (which was Anno. 813) can
32. says, Sed and hoc emendatione egere perspeximus, quod quidam dum
confitentur peccata sua Sacerdotibus non plene id faciunt etc. And Alcuinus who
lived Anno. 730. l. de diuinis officijs c. 13. in c. Ieiunij, says.
confiteatur omnia peccata sua quae recordare potest etc. quo facto fixis
genibus in terram and super ipsa innixus stans suppliciter tensis manibus
blando ac flexibili vultu respiciens sacerdotem, dicat etc. And see Aug. de
visitatione infirmorum l. 2. c. 4. and l. 50. homiliarum hom. 49. c. 3. and
Hospinianus in historia sacramentaria l. 4. pa. 366. circa med. reproves the
same Doctrine of Auriculer Confession, in Peter Lombard who (says he) lived
Anno. 1150. and also in Hugo de S. Victore who lived (says he) about the year
1130. both of them before Innocent the third.
who all lived before Innocent the third, do the like for their times. To
omit that S. Basil affirms plainly that Confession is See Basills words.
hereafter tract 3. sect. 1 in the margent under the letter a.
Necessary: and that S. Leo affirms it to be Christ's See the words of Leo
hereafter tract 3. sect. 1. in the margent under the letter.a
institution, teaching with all even Vide ibidem.
secret Confession: Our adversaries the centurie writers The centurie writers
cent. 3. c. 6. col. 127. l. 28. say, absolutione^ deinde a peccatis ita
conferebant, si qui paeenetentiam agebant, peccatum prius confessi essent: sic
enim confessione^ magnopere Tertulianus urgent in libro de paenitentia; and
vsitatam fuisse priuatam confessionem qua delicta and cogitata quoque praua
confessi sunt, ex aliquot C^priani locis apparit, vt ex sermon quinto de
lapsis, and l. 3 epistolaru^, epistola 14. and 16. vbi diserte ait in minoribu^
etiam pecca it is quae quide^ non in deum committuntur, necesse est ad
exomologesm venire, idque frequenter fierr inbet l. 1. epist. 3. etc.
speaking of the ancient Churches usage even in those former times of Ciprian
and Tertulian, do out of their writings most plainly collecte and set down
private Confession even of thoughts and lesser sins: and that it was as then
commanded and thought necessary. So greatly is Mr. Whitaker mistaken in this
example. Petrus Damianus: epist. 1. alleges a notable example in proof
hereof: (and vide eum in sermon. 2: de S. Andrea Apostolo) and concludes
aduising men not to defer their confession.
8 Eighthly Mr. Whitaker gives example in Pope Nicholas the second, saying of
him Whitaker contra Dureum l. 7. pa. 480.
Qui primus docuit corpus Christi sensual^^er tractari. fra^gi and dentibus
atteri is Nicholaus secundus suit: Whereto we answer 1. First that the matter
hereof is already sufficiently answered by that which has been heretofore
said concerning The fourth former example of Transubstantiation, and the
confessed antiquity thereof in many Fathers who lived long before this Pope
Nicholas the second: 2. Secondly concerning the phrase (which is but a verbal
objection) S. Chrysostom (many ages before Pope Nicholas) said in like
manner, Chrisostom in Math. hom. 83. post med.
Ipsum vides, Ipsum tangis, Ipsum comedis: And else where Chrisosto^ in John
hom. 4 5. post med.
Non se tantum videri permittet desiderantibus, sed and tangi and manducari and
dentes carni sua infigi: And in what true and sober sense, these words may (in
regard As S. Paul in like regard says, This is my Body which is broken for
you 1. cor 11, 24. and Calvin de caena dom. inter opuscula says in like
manner, John Baptist says, he saw the holy Ghost descending, of we look
narrowly, we shall find he saw nothing but a Dove etc. Yet because he knew
that vision to be etc. a most certain sign of the presence of the Holy Ghost,
he bouldely affirms that he saw him etc. As the holy Ghost is in regard of
this foresaid presence said to be seen and to descend: so may Christ's Body in
regard of it like presence in the Sacrament be likewise said to be handled,
broken, etc.
of Christ's Body Really present in the Sacrament) be used, is at large affirmed
by our adversaries the Lutheranes, who doubt not specially to Iacobus Andraeas
in confut. disput. Johan. Iacobi Grinaei pa. 214. ante med. says, quomodo
autem corpus Christi in hoc sacramento dentibus teri, videri, tangi, dicatur,
quae non a Luthero recens inuentae and in ecclesiam introductae, sed eruditae,
piae, and orthodoxae vetustatis phrazes sunt, etc. Luculenter explicatum est.
And page 215. post medium. He says: Haec Berengario a Papa Nicholao and
sinodo praescripta pallinodia nihil continet, quod inscriptis orthodoxoru^
Patrum, Chrisostomi in primis non continetur: and vide page 306. And of Luthers
like allowance and defense of Pope Nicholas herein, vide ibidem page 307.
initio. and fine. And so the book entitled apologia modesta ad acta conuentus
quindecem theol. torgae nuper habit page 36. post medium.
defend against their other brethren our adversaries, this very objection
concerning Pope Nicholas.

9 Ninthly and lastly (for we will not in this our discourse which touches
only Rome, be tediouse in rehearsing Mr. Whitakers other untrue and impertinent
examples concerning other Churches or Bishopes,) Mr. Whitaker (for want of
greater matter) charge Pope Calixtus that Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 7. page
480.
he was the first that ordained Ieiunium quatuor temporum whereunto for so
much as this ancient Pope was the imediate successor (next but one) to Victor,
we answer as heretofore did the Lord Archbishope of Canterbury concerning
Victor saying: Se hertofore tract 1. sect 7 letter r.
By this you add more credit to the cause then you are aware of: etc. And
seeming that Mr. Whitaker can allege no ancient writer charging Calixtus
with Innovation herein, the example therefore and authority of so ancient a
Father, does not so much impugn as give credit to this appointed fast, so as
further answer hereunto is needless.

Mr. Whitaker having thus failed in every one of those examples whereof he made
boulde to give instance, and the Roman Church being found therein free from
all supposed change or Innouatio^: how much the rather now are we to esteem it
no less cleared from change in those other so many and great Doctrines,
whereof he is not able to aforde so much as color of instance to the
contrary? his apparent want in that behalf being such as enforced him for
show of variety, to give (as before) several examples concerning one and the
same question, as namely concerning the Blessed Sacrament, and the Popes
foresaid Primacie. In all which nevertheless he had so little trust and did
so well fore know the discouerable weakness thereof, that he else where
protests plainly that he and his breethren Mr. Whitaker l. 3. contra Duraeum
page 277. ante med. And Bucanus in loc. comun. page 466. says: non est nostrum
designare quo temporis momento experit ecclesia deficere etc.
are not bound to answer in what age Superstition crepte into the Church, and
that Mr. Whitaker l. 7. contra Duraeum page 477. post med.
it is not needful for them to search out in histories the beginning of this
change: And for that in deed he right well knew that he could not show the
same, therefore quite against his own former examples, and in proof that it
cannot be showed, he alleges similitudes of Whitaker contra Camp. ^at. 7.
page 101. and 102.
the hairs of a man's head which wax not whit suddenly, but by degree not to
be discerned: and of Whitaker contra Camp. ibidem.
slifters entering into a building, at first not to be perceived. etc. and so
with deceiptfull and Deceiptfull and misaplied in many respects: As 1 In that
the hairs, nor so much as any one hair of a man's head are instantly at the
first become white at changed. Neither does every first beginning of decay in
buildings at the first become an outward and markeable ruin, whereas in
Doctrine every opinion is at the first either true or false: 2 Secondly the
first whitnes of some few hairs, and the first decay in buildinges cannot be
at the first discerned, though they were precisely regarded, which is otherwise
in change of Doctrine: 3 Thirdly none is specially charged so preciselie to
mark these, whereas on the contrary, it is the special charge not of a few,
but of all the Churches Pastors not only to mark but also publicly to
withstand the other.
misaplied resemblances, labors to perplex and sophisticate his readers
Judgment, wherein to bear with his bouldenes, and to admit (for the time)
his said similituds for pertine^t, yet is all this unable to relieve our
adversaries: for though we should be sparing hereupon to charge the^ with
showing the first begi^ning of so great a chang as is by the^ imagined (which
is all that by these foresaide-misaplied resemblances, our adversaries do
wrongefully urge) nevertheless at the least yet, we are in all reason to
expect, that (according to the nature of these their own examples) For though
the first whit hair or slifter be not discerned, yet the further degrees and
increase thereof are markeable and discerned.
they should discover and describe to us some proceedings and increase of this
supposed change: If therefore they say that this change was not made all at
once, but by little and little, some times in one point of faith, some times
in an other, then are they accordingly to show forth those several little
changes or some degrees of the increase and proceedinges thereof. As what be
those several points of faith so by degrees at several times changed, which
be the Popes that were agentes therein, and who be the fathers that impugned
the same etc. In this sort (to omit the like in Sarauia in defensione
tractationis de diuersis ministrorum gradibus. cap. 23. p. 362. initio. says
upon like occasion, respondeo id dici non fat esse, sed ex historijs
demonstra^dum esse quae illa fuerint schismata, and vbi and quando nata, and
quomodo inde tam vniuersalis consuetudo fuerit profecta: And see him further,
ibidem page 429. initio.
D. Sarauia) does the L. Archbishope of Canterbury defending Mr. VVhitgifte in
his defense etc. page 747. initio.
Cathedral Churches against Mr. Carthwright, Mr. VVhitgifte ibidem.
demand accordingly of him: from what Pope they came or in what time they
were first invented: Affirming withal (else where) against the Puritanes that
See heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. l. m. number. 13.
for so much as the original and beginning of these names Metropolitaines
Archbishope etc. cannot be found, it is (therefore) to be supposed, that they
had their original from the Apostles, for (says he) S. Austine has this rule
etc. In defense whereof he further alleges See heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3.
l. n. number. 14.
sundry Protestant writers: And hence like-wise it is, that S. Hierome doubts
not to teach, that Hierom ad clitesi phontem.
to reduce an heresy to it beginning is a confuting thereof, the truth of
which his assertion Mr. Whitaker Whitaker contra duraeum l. 7. page 479. paulo
post med. says, multum autem ad haereses refutandas confer, earum origine^
nosse nemo negat.
acknowledges.

This point therefore is not our only assertion or urging, but is also yet
further grounded upon the confessed sense of scriptures, which teach that See
hereafter Tract. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 1. z. a. b. d.
Pastors and Doctors must be always in the Church: and that Hereafter Tract.
2. ca. 2. sect. 1. l. 1. and ibide^ l. p. q. r.
they shall not be silent: but shall See hereafter tract. 2. ca. 2. Sect. 1. l.
p.
always resist all false opinions with open reprehension: The office also and
nature of the Church argues no less, for how can she be the true Church, and
yet suffer so many and important errors as are pretended to invade her children
without resistance upon her part? the experience likewise of all former times
is answerable hereunto, for in this sort have the old Heresies of the
Graetians and Lattines been discovered, and See this at large in the several
treatises of Ireneus, Epiphanius, Theodoret Augustine, Damascene, etc. written
purposely by the^ against haeresies:
contradicted: In this sort were of later times, Berengarius, Waldo, Wicliffe,
Luther, etc. Ever at their first arising contradicted and charged with
Innovation. In this sort lastly is the defectio^ or change in Doctrine
heretofore made by the 1 First, concerning the defection of the Greek Church,
the more ancient examples thereof in Paulus samosetanus, macedonius, Nestorius
etc. are so memorable as further testimony thereof needs not. 2 Secondly as
concerning the several defections for later times of the Greek Church from
the Roman, they are testified by Nicephorus, Zonoras, Clycas, Hunbertus
against Nicetas, and others. And in part by some Protestants, as namely by
Crispinus in his discourse of the estate of the Church page 364. fine. and 253.
initio. And by Osiander in his Epitom. Centur 9. 10. 11 etc. p. 144. circa med.
and 156. post med. and 261. fine. and 262. fine. and by Mr. Spark against M.
John de Albines p. 158 And by Keckermanus in Sistem theolog. l. 1. page 68. and
69. Twelve times or there aboutes has the Greek Church reconciled it self to
Rome, and afterward fallen from thence being thereupon now at last wholly
opressed with barbarouse turcisme. 3 Thirdly as concerning the several errors
(few in comparison) wherein the Greek Church at this day dissenteth from the
Roman: their beginning and contradiction is notoriouse: As for example their
denial of subjection to the Roman sea was begune by John of Constantinople
and he thereupon specially contradicted by Gregory the Great l. 4. ep. 34.
and 36. and l. 7. ep. 36. and 64. and by Pellagius in his epistle, vniuersis
Episcopis qui illicita vocatione Ioannis Constantinop. ad sinodum conuenerunt.
Also their denial of prayer for the dead. was begun by Aerius and
contradicted in him by Austine haer. 53. and by Epiphanius haer 75. And yet
afterward in both these doctrines they conformed them selves to Rome, as is
reported by Mr. Spark vbi supra. and by Osiander cent. 15. page 477. and by
Crispinus vbi supra page 451. In like manner their defense of marriage of
Priests was contradicted against Theodorus by Chrisostom. in epist. 6. ad
Theodorum Monachum: and against certain other by Epiphanius haer. 59. ante
med. Also their denial of the holy ghost proceeding from the Father and the
Son was begun and gain said about Anno 764 as witnesses our adversary
Keckermanus in sistem. theolog. page 68. the denial of unleavened bread in
celebration of the Sacrament was begun about Anno Domni 1053 as appears by
Leo the.9. in epst. ad Michaelem Episcopum Constantinop. c. 5. and by Osiander
cent. 11. page 156. post med. And by the centurie writers cent. 11. c. 8.

Like example might be given of their other, but few and lesser errors. the
which Anno Domini 870. consist (as appears by testimony of Chrispinus in his
discourse of the estate of the Church page 253. initio) but only in the
Primacie and the diversity of Ceremonies All which notwithstanding they do
vehemently profess to detest the Protestants religion, as appears by the two
several treatises translated lately into lattine, the one made by Hieremias
Patriarch of Constantinople, the other entitled responsio Ioan^^s Basilij
magni ducis Muscouiae etc. Anno 1570. And published and replied unto by Ioannes
Lasicius a Protestant writer of Poland, and extant in the book entitled de
Russorum Muscouitarum and Tartarorum religione etc. printed 1582. And it
appears in the treatise set forth even by the Protestant divines of
witteberg, entitled acta theologorum witebergensium and Hieremia Patriarchae
constantinop. de Augustana confessione etc. Printed witeberga Anno 1584 that
the Greek Church yet to this day professes and teaches Invocation of Saints
and Angels (page 55. fine. 102. ante med. and 128. initio) Relics (page 243.
fine. and 368. post med.) worshipping of Images, (page 243. initio 244. circa
and post med. 247. ante med. and 251. fine) Transubstantiation (page 86. initio
96. initio. 100. circa med. 240. post med. and 318.) Sacrifice (page 102. and
104. post med.) The signifying Caeremonies of the Mass: page 97. Circa med.
And see the marginall note thereupon. And page 99. and 100. Auricular
Confession in prefat. ante med and in libro page 87. initio. and 130. post med.
Enjoined satisfaction: page 79. and 89. post med. Confirmation with Chrisme:
(page 78. initio. and 238. fine.) Extreme unction: (page 242. initio and 326.
ante med.) And all the seven Sacraments (page 77. Circa med. and 242. Also
Prayer for the dead page 93. post med. 102. ante med. and 109. post med.
Sacrifice for the dead: page 95. circa med. and 104. post med. Alms for the
dead. page 93. post med. and 109. circa med. Freewill page 224. circa med. 296.
ante med. and 367 circa med. Monachisme: page 132 ante med. and 257. ante med.
Vows of chastity: page 111. circa med. and 129. post med. and 135 post med.
The fast of Lent and other set fasting days page 126 fine. That Priests may
not Marry after orders taken: page 129. circa med. and lastly (to omit many
other) that the tradition and doctrine of the Fathers is to be kept page 131
fine 138. initio and 142. so plainly in all these chief points does the
greek Church yet to this day remain unchanged.


GREEK CHVRCH to us (though in comparison strangers thereto) at this day yet
discouerable. And could then our home neighbor Rome, only Rome, cast of her
primative faith, and in liew thereof set abroach pretended errors, not few but
many, not small but of importance not of belief only but also of practice ( as
prayer for the dead: Prayer to Saints: Pilgrimage. Vowed Chastity:
Monachisme: Offering of external sacrifice to God. and above all (to omit
many other) the external adoring (as protestants think of Bread and Wine for
God,) neither keep these private to her self, but therewithal infect so many
Christian Nations Nappeire upon the revelations. page 68.
Reignening universally: and all this as Mr. Napeire confesfeth Nappeire ibidem.
without any debateable contradiction Ibidem page 239. ante med.
never suffering for the space of a 1000. years after Siluester the first,
(nor before for any thing that is alleged, so much as) any to be seen
vouchable or visible of the true Church to match or encounter her: (whereas yet
our adversaries them selves, do acknowledge and report Reported at large by
the centurie writers in the fifthe Chapter of their several Centuries of
every age.
the confessed and known heretics who in every of the foresaid ages, have in
other points openly and bouldely contradicted This is testified by the centurie
writers vbi supra and by the other ecclesiastical writers of every age: and
see hereafter tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 9. l. 2.
the ROMAN Church) And though we should suppose all this so strangely to have
happened, could yet so great and strange a wonder but so much as in that one
foresaid example of Whereas our adversaries pretend that Honorius the third who
was Pope Anno. 1220. did first bring in the adoration of the Sacrament: it is a
mere fiction, for no writer of that age did gainesay or so much as charge him
with Innovation therein, only he did ordain that Priests should admonish the
people against their ne^ligence in that behalf. Before this Honorius Odo
Parisiensis, who lived. 1175. (in synodicis constitutionibus cap. 5. de sacram.
Altaris) says in like manner: Frequenter moneantur Laici, us vbicunque viderint
deferri Corpus Domini, statim genua ^^ectant tanquam Domino and creatori suo,
and iunctis manibus quoadusque transierint orent: also Algerus Anno Domini.
1060. l. de sacram. Eucharist l. 2. c. 3. fine. says, Hac fide ipsu^
sacramentum quasi diuinum quiddam and rationabile alloquimur, and rogamus:
Agnus dei qui tollis peccata mundi miserere nobis, quia non quod videtur, sed
quod vere est, Christum ibi esse credimus. Also Antonius Praetorius a learned
Caluinist in libro de sacramentis pa. 288. prope initium: Telling how Damascene
taught Transubstantiation, with all further says Anno. 735. Subse^^^ est Panis
adoratio, ac si ipse Christus esset. And so accordingly Carrion in his Chronic.
(page 451. prope initium, does not only charge Damascene most expressly with
transubstantiation, but does also (ibidem page 476. circa med. and 477. paulo
ante med.) place Artolatria. That is to say (says he) the odoration of the
reserved and eluated Bread (sequentibus Annis quingentis etc.) within the
second five hundredth years after Christ. By which only premises as it is
clear and confessed that adoration of the sacrament was used long before the
time of Honorius the third. So also it is as evident and confessed by
Protestants, and namely by Mr. Fox (act mon. page 896. b. fine. and after the
aedition of Anno 1596. page 1276. a. line 14.) that if this Honorius did not
begin the same, the first beginning thereof, is then so sarr from being
found, that we cannot (says Mr. Fox) find it to come in by any other: Add
but now hereunto the aunswerable testimonies of Austine in Psalm. 98. of
Ambrose de spiritu Sancto l. 3. c. 12. of Theodoret dial. 2. of Chrysostom in
1. cor. hom. 24. of Basil de spiritu Sancto cap. 27. of Nazianzen, in Epitaph
Gorgoniae, and of Dionisius Areopagita, de Eccles. Hierach. c. 3. which are so
plain and agreeable with our external adoration of Christ in the Sacrament,
that our aduersari^ Chemnitius does for such allege sundry of them against
our adversaries the sacramentaries (in his examen Council. Trident part. 2. p.
92.)
adoring the sacrament for God, (much more in so many other points of faith)
have been so brought and devulged into so many Christian Nations nere and
remote, and not once testified or remembered, so much as by any one of the
Churches enemies neither heretical nor profane: were the Churches own
pastors, her home enemies and strangers to her Religion all of them silent
herein,

THAT CATHOLICS ARE ABLE TO prove the contrary even by Testimony of the
learned Protestants. 8
AND although the proof of the ROMAN Churches supposed change of her religion
lying on our adversaries part, and hitherto wanting, might be matter in this
behalf sufficient to offer unto your HIGHNESS learned Judgment; yet will we our
selves in surplusage exhibit futher demonstration of her not change in any
needful article of faith, by manifest testimony from our learned
adversaries: First then it is heretofore fully proved by evident confession of
the learned Protestants (as well in general, This is fully confessed
heretofore Tract 1. Sect 1 paulo post initium, and Mr. Fulke in his answer to
a counterfaite Catholic page 36. initio. affirms also that, the religion of
the Papists, came in and prevailed in the year of our Lord 607.
as also concerning every point of faith in particular) This is hertofore
proved Tract. 1. Sect. 1. in the margent at the letter d.
that in the time of Gregory the great Bishope of Rome, the Roman Church
professed our now Catholic, or (as they term it) Popish faith; and that
she has perseuered in profession thereof ever since that time, is confessed
likewise by our adversaries, and made so evident by all histories as that to
undertake further proof thereof were tediousnes both Confessed hertofore tract
1. sect. 2. in the margent at the letter l. and also at this mark *. And Mr.
Fulke in his answer to a counterfaite Catholic page 27. circa med. speaking
of Boniface the third who was Bishope of Rome the 2 year after the death of
Gregory the great (test Anastasio l. de vitio Pontificum) says the Popes
from Boniface the 3. were all blasphemous haeretickes and Antichrists: And he
affirms the same in his confutation of Purgatory page 344. post med. And he
likewise affirms Boniface the third to be Antichrist, and that under him The
Papists religion prevailed (in his foresaid answer to a Counterfaite
Catholic page 36. and in his confutation of Purgatory pa. 194. paulo post
med. and vide Whitakerum l. de Ecclesia pa. 260. fine. and 261.
improper and needelesse. This This is manifestly affirmed and collected from
the Ecclesiastical writers of every age, and by our adversaries the Centurie
writers, in every of their several Centuries.
Gregory lived somewhat within the first 600. years after Christ, so that
having now hereby already proved the continued profession of the Roman Church
in our now taught Catholic faith for all these last thousand years: The only
difficulty and doubt least to be examined, is whether that she did make
change of her faith, during these other foresaid first 600 years next after
Christ.

This being the maine point or issue of this present controversy, we will now
first examine for how many hundredth years next after Christ, the Church of
Rome is confessed to have perseuered without revolt or chang in the faith
first to her delivered: In discovery whereof, whereas our writers do object,
how that Tertullian provoked the heretics of his time with the succession of
the Roman Bishopes, Mr. D. Fulke aunswering thereto affirms the reason
thereof to be, for that (says he) Mr. Fulke in his confutation of Purgatory p.
374. post med.
The Church of Rome retained by succession until Tertullians days that faith
which it did first receive of the Apostles: With whom agrees herein Mr. D.
Whitaker Whitaker de Ecclesia pa. 278. post med. speaking of certain
Apostolic Churches, and emongst them of Rome by name: says, vnde
intelligimus cur ad illas Ecclesias prouocaret Tertullianus, nimirum quia tum
Doctrina^ Apostolicam perpetua successione tenebant.
and Hierome Zanchius de vera relig. p. 148. circa med.
Zanchius and where one of our writers urges In Mr. Fulkes confutation of
purga. p. 372. ante med.
the succession of the Roman Bishopes by example of Ireneus, Ciprian,
Tertullian, Optatus, Hierome, Austine, and Vincentius Lirinensis, Mr. Fulke
answers thereto saying, Ibidem p. 373. paulo ante med.
that these men specially named the Church of Rome. It was because the Church
of Rome at that time, as it was founded by the Apostles, so it continued in the
Doctrine of the Apostles. And Mr. D. Rainoldes being provoked in the same kind
acknowledges in like manner that Mr. D. Rainoldes in his conference with M.
Heart pa. 442. post med.
the succes^ion of the Roman Bishopes was a proof of the true faith in the
time of Austine, Epiphanius, Optatus, Tertullian, and Ireneus etc. And the like
acknowledgment or answer thereto, is made by many other Ridley in Mr. Fox
acts and Monuments p. 1359. b. circa med. says, The Patriarche of Rome in the
Apostles time, and long after was a great maintainer and setter forth of
Christ's glory in the which above all other Countries and Regions was Preached
the true gospel, the sacraments were most duly administered etc. After the
Emperors became Christians the gospel there flourished most: And Mr. Iuell in
his reply to M. Harding pa. 246. ante med. says, As Well S. Austine as also
other godly fathers right lie yielded reverence to the sea of Rome etc. For the
purity of religion which was there preserved a long time without spo^. And
page 628. paulo post med. he further says, the godly Fathers (of those fore
said times) sought to the Church of Rome, which then for purity in religion,
and constancy in the same was most famous above all others.
learned Protestants: only we will conclude with Calvin, who sets down our
foresaid allegation saying of us Calvin institut l. 4. c. 2. sect. 2. says
Magnifice illi quidem suam nobis Ecclesiam comendant: allegant enim ^am apud se
initio sana Doctrina and sanguine Martirum been fundatam, perpetua Episcoporum
successione conseruatam fuisse ne intercideret; commemorant quanti hanc
successionem fecerunt, Ireneus, Tertullianus, Origenes, Augustinus, and alij.
They in deed set forth their Church to us very gloriously etc. They report
out of Ireneus, Tertullian, Origin, Augustine and others, how highly they
esteemed this succession: Whereto he then answers and gives his like reason
thereof, saying, Cum extra controuersiam esset nihil a principio vsque ad illam
aetatem mutatum fuisse in Doctrina, sumebant quod omnibus nouis erroribus
conficiendis sufficeret, illos opugnare Doctrinam ab ipsis vsque Apostolis
constanter and vnanimi assensu retentam. (Calvin vbi supra l. 4 cap. 2. sect.
3.)
Considering it was a matter out of all doubt that from the beginning even
until that time, nothing was changed in Doctrine, the (fore-saide) holy
Doctors took in argument that which was sufficient for the overthrowing of all
new errors, (to wit) that they (viz. the heretics) oppugned the Doctrine
which even from the very Apostles them selves had been inuiolablie and with one
consent retained: And in his book of Institutions set forth in French he says
expressly that Calvin in his institutions in French Printed at Gaeneua by
Corradus Badius, Anno. 1562. says, C'estoyt vne chose notoire and sans doubt,
que depuis L'ange des Apostres, iusques a lour temps, il ne S'estoit fait null.
Changement de Doctrine, ny a Rome ^y aux autres villes.
It was a thing notoriouse and without doubt, that after the Apostles age
until those (foresaid) times, no change was made in Doctrine neither at Rome
nor at other Cities: So plainly do our learned adversaries acknowledge that
no change of faith was made by the Roman Church from the Apostles age until
the times of Saint Austine, Epiphanius, Optatus etc. Which was for four
hundredth and forty years after Christ.

The Church of Rome being then thus cleared from all change of Doctrine (at the
least concerning any needful article of faith which is the only point now
pertinent and questionable) during as well the first 440. years after Christ,
as also the other thousand years now last past. There remains only to be
examined, the interim of those 160. years which passed between the said
first 440. and the said other last 1000. years; in which mean time, if no
such supposed change was, then does it hereof unavoidably follow that as the
Church of Rome at first received and professed the right faith, so likewise she
does yet still to this day continue and preserve the same.

The matter being as then (even from the testimonies of our learned
adversaries) made thus issuable, and plainly deduced to this certainety or
narrow compass of time: we have here often provoked the^ to give example or
instance of this their supposed change in the Roman Church during the said
mean time of 160. years. In full discovery of which point, we will briefly
urge three special reasons next ensuing: As First seeing the scriptures do
witness to us as well that Christ has placed in his Church Ephesians. 4, 11, 12, 13.
Pastors and Doctors, (to continue) to the consummation of Saints, until we
all meet in the unity of faith, even as our adversaries do here-vpon
expound) Mr. Fulke against the Remish testament in Ephesians 4. fol. 335. a.
initio. And Calvin institut. (Printed Geneuae 1550.) c. 8. de fide. sect. 37,
38. p. 233. 234. and melancthon in loc. Comun. (Printed 1561.) c. de Ecclesia.
for ever: as also that these Esaias. 62, 6.
watchmen or See the margi. notes of the English Bible of Anno 1576. in Esaias
62, 6.
Pastors Esaias 62, 6.
shall not be silent, but shall (as Mr. Fulke confesses) Mr. Fulk in his
answer to a counterfaite Catholic pa. 11. initio.
always resist all false opinion (even) Mr. Fulke ibidem pa. 92. ante medium.
with open reprehension which thing is also other-wise most evident, in that by
the Judgment of all men See this confessed hereafter tract 2. c. 1. sect. 6. in
the margent at the letter m. and tract 1. c. 2. sect 13. in the margent at the
letter r.
Christ's true Church must ever continue, but the true Church she neither is
nor can be, if she fail so much in duty, as to suffer so many supposed errors
to assault and invade her Children, without some open defense and resistance
to the contrary: Therefore so many and so important Doctrines, as Merit of
works, Prayer for the dead, Prayer to Saints, Free Will, Real presence,
Adoration of Christ in the sacrament, Sacrifice of the Mass, The unmarried life
of Priests, and so many other more such like, could never (supposing they were
errors) have in so small a compass as of those said 160. years, been brought
to have been as then begun and publicly professed by the Roman Church,
without great difficulty of resistance and open reprehension of some one or
other Godly man in some part of the true Church. The examples These examples
are yet extant, and to be found in Ireneus in libro aduersus haereses. And in
Epiphanius and Augustine in their several books against haeresies.
as well of the times then precedent wherein were so contradicted but for some
one or other several opinion. The Vale^tinians, Tatianists, Manichees,
Arianes, etc. As also of the ages then subsequent, in which were in like sort
contradicted the several These examples are collected out of the Fathers of
every of those ages by the Protestant writers, as namely by the Centurie
writers in their fifte Chapter of every several Centurie: See also Pantaleon
in his Chronology, and Osiander in his several centuries.
other heresies of every age, and all yet to this day manifouldly recorded,
give plentiful demonstration herein. The like examples also of the very
foresaid 160. years now in question afforde no less evidence hereof, for
even as then were contradicted for their several opinions to us, yet at this
day discerned and known not only the Aug. l. de haeresibus ad quod uultdeum
haer. 88.
Pelagianes, Aug. ibidem haer. 91.
Nestorians, Aug. ibidem haer. 69.
Donatists Sexta sinod. Constantinop. and see Centur. 6. col. 311. line 37.
Monothelites etc. But also (which argues this matter most inuinciblie and
clearly for us and against our adversaries) sundry heretics for their then
private and singular denying (as protestants now do) sundry points of our now
professed Catholic faith. The undoubted examples whereof, are many and by our
very adversaries acknowledged: So even in or (which is more strong) next
before the beginning of the said 160. years was (as is confessed) the denial
of prayer and offering sacrifice for the dead and of our appointed fasts
condemned as singular in Hereof see Aug. haer. 53. and Epiphanius haer. 75.
ante med. And Mr. Fulke in his answer to a Counterfaite Catholic page 44.
fine. and 45. initio. Confesses this saying, I will not dissemble that which
you think the greatest matter, Aerius taught that Prayer for the dead was
unprofitable as witness both Epiphanius and Austine, which they coumpt for an
error: Also he taught that fasting days are not to be observed: And see this
confessed in like manner by Pantaleon in Chronographia page 28. initio.
Aerius. So also was the denial of prayer to Saints and worshipping of Saints
Relickes condemned likewise as then in Hierom contra Vigilantium c. 2. and. 3.
And Mr. Fulke confesses this likewise, vbi supra page 46. paulo ante med.
saying, Last of all Vigilantius shall be brought in who wrote against
Invocation of Saints, superstition of Relickes, and other Caeremonies, him
Hierome reproves. and vide centur. 4. col. 1250. line 45. And Osiander in
epitom. cent. 4. l. 4. page 506. ante med. And see this further confessed by
Crispinus in his discourse of the estate of the Church page 131. post med.
Vigilantius: In the same times were condemned in like manner the denial of
Images in Functius (a Protestant writer) in libro 7. Comentariorum in
precedent. Chronologiam. At Anno. Christi 494. confesses saying, Porro is
xenayas primus in Ecclesia bellum contra imagines excitauit: And Nicephorus in
hist. Eccles. l. 16. c. 27. says, Xenayas iste primus (o audacem animam and os
impudens) vocem illani euomuit, Christi and little qui illi placuere imagines
venerandas non esse. And see also hereof Cedrenus in compendio histor.
Xenayas and the denial of voluntary poverty and monastical profession in
Hierome contra Vigilantium prope finem says, quod autem asseris cos melius
facere qui vtuntur rebus suis and paulatim fructus possessionum suarum
pauperibus diuidunt, quam illos qui possessionibus venundatis semel omnia
largiuntur; non a me cis sed a Domino respondebitur si vis esse perfectus, vade
and vende omnia quae habes and da Pauperibus and veni, sequere me. Ad eum
loquitur qui vult esse perfectus etc. iste quem tu laudas, secundus and tertius
gradus est, quem and nos recipimus dummodo seramus prima secundit and tertijs
preferenda; nec a suo studuo monachi deterrendi sunt a te lingua ^^perea and
morsu saeuissimo, de quibus argumentaris and dicis, si omnes se clauserint and
fuerint in solitudine, quis caelebrabit Ecclesias, etc. And see this plainly
confessed by Crispinus in his book of the estate of the Church page 131. and
132.
Vigilantius and others. In like manner is Ianuarius for this like Doctrine
reproved by S. Austine sermon. 49. ex diuersis cap. 1. and Instus is for the same
reproved by Gregory l. 4. dial. c. 55. And see further hereof Leo ep. 92. ad
rusticum. And council. Chalcedon cap. 7. and Austine ep. 89. ad Hillarium and
Chrisostom l. aduersus vit^peratores vitae monasticae.
The denial of the power of Priests to remitt sins in the Sea this
hereafter Tract. 3. Sect. 1. in the margent at the letter x.
Nouatians: The denial of freewill and of remission of sins and grace
conferred in Baptism in the Hierom in proaem. librorum aduersus Pelagianos
fine. says, Manichaeorum est hominum damnare naturam, and liberum auferre
arbitrium. and dei adiutorium: And see Hierom in explan. symb. ad damasum. And
S. Austine de fide contra manich. c. 9. says, Aduersus haec solita caecitate
manichaei latr^nt, and cum conuincuntur naturam non esse malum, sed in
potestate esse hominis facere been aut male, dicunt non esse animae liberam
voluntatem, and non vident cae^tatem suam etc. and vide ibidem cap. 10. and in
actis cum faelice manichaeo l. 2. cap. 4. And Chrisostom in John hom. 45. prope
initium says, Christ said to them, no man can come to me, except the Father
who sent me draw him: Here at the Manichees do rise up contending by testimony
of this scripture that we can do nothing of our selves etc. But this takes not
away our freewill, but shows that we need Gods help. And concerning the
other point touching Baptism, Mr. Whitaker l. 10. contra Duraeum pa. 883.
confesses the same saying: Nos in Baptismo peccata remitti and gratiam
conferri credimus ac docemus, quod negare soliti sunt Manichaei, ergo nos a
Manichaeis alienisumus, and vide sarcerium loc. comun. tom. 1. de Baptismo fol.
232. b. post medium.
Manichees The denial of the necessity of Childrens Baptism in the
Innocentius in rescripto ad mileuitanum conciliu^ post med. says of the
Pelagians, illud vero quod vestra fraternitas cos asserit predicare, paruulos
aeternae vitae praemijs absque Baptismatis gratia posse donari, perfatuum est:
In like plain manner is this poine condemned in the Pelagians by S. Austine
haer. 88. and contra Iul. Pelag. l. 6. c. 7. and de pecc. mer. and rem. l. 2.
c. 9. and 27. and by S. Leo. ep. 86. ad Episcopum Aquiliensem.
Pelagianes The denial of the Blessed Sacraments reservation in the Cirrill ad
Calosyrium says. I hear they say that the mystical blessing, If any remnants
thereof do remain till the next day following is unprofitable to
sanctification, but they are mad in so saying, for Christ is not made an other,
neither shall his body be changed but the virtue of blessing and lively grace
do always remain in it. This point is so plain and confessed that Peter
Martyr) aduersus Stephans Gardeneri librum de Eucharistia printed Basilea Anno
1581 object. 213. col. 838. post med. says of this saying of Cirrill: Quod
autem subijcitur Eucharistia reliquias asseruatas in chrastinum diem a
sanctificatione non cessare, spectat opinor ad receptam quanaam consuetudinem.
(etc.) ea consuetudo etsi saperet nonnihil superstitionis, tamen illi Cirrillus
alique subscribebant: statim enim a temporibus Apostolorum paulatim caeptum est
degenerar^ ab illa veteri simplicitate diuini cultus.
Anthropomorphites The denial of the single and unmarried life of Priests in
Hierom contra Vigilantium c. 1. condemns this doctrine in Vigilantius saying
hereof against him. Quid faciunt Orientis Ecclesiae, quid aegipti and sedis
Apostolica, quae aut virgins clericos accipiunt, aut continentes, aut si
vxores habuerint mariti esse desinunt.
Vigilantius, See Hierom. l. 1. contra Iouin. c. 19. and 14. and ad Pamahium
apol. c. 8.
Iouinian and Epiphanius haer. 59 ante med. says. At dices mihi omnino in
quibusdam locis, adhuc liberos gignere and Presbiteros and Diaconos and
Hypodiaconos whereto he answers) at hoc non est iuxta Canonem, sed iuxta
hominum mentem etc. And see Siritius in epist. ad Himerium Tarraconensim. c. 6.
and 7.
others. The denial of enjoined times of penance in the heretics called
Theodoret l. 4. haer. and fab. de Audianis. reproves them saying deinde
confessis etc. They give remission to such as are Confessed without prescribing
time for Penance as the laws of the Church Command.
Audiani: The denial of the diversity of Merittes in Aug. de tempore sermon.
191. says, Iouiniani damnamus errorem, qui dicit nullam in futuromeritorum
distantia^ And Hierom l. 1. aduersus Iouin. c. 2. reproves Iouinian for that
he taught that Marriage and Virginity were (Eiusdem Meriti) of aequall meritt,
confessed by Pantaleon in Chronographia page 32. And S. Ambrose and others say
against Iouinian: Agrestis vlulatus est etc. Promiscue velle omnia confundere
etc. diuersorumque gradus abrogare meritorum. hereof see further Council.
Tolense. and rescriptum Ambrosij ibidem and aliorum ad Siritium prope initium.
I^uinian: The denial of the Commandments being possible in certain other
Hierom in explanat. symb. ad Damasum says, Execramur Blasphemiam eorum qui
dicunt impossible aliquid hominia Deo praeceptum esse etc. And the same words
has Austine, de tempore sermon. 191. and vide Hieronimum ad Cleantium and
Council. 2. Arausican Can. 25.
heretics of those times. The denial of Exorcisme and Exufflation used in
Baptism was condemned like-wise in Aug. de nuptijs and concupiscentia l. 2. c.
29. says, Iulianus Antiquissimam Ecclesiae traditionem n^sario crimine
aspergit, qua Exorcizantur, and vt dixi exufflantur Paruuli: and vide Aug.
ibidem l. 2. c. 17. and contra Julian. Pelag. l. 6. c. 2.
Iulianus the pelagiane: And lastly (to omit sundry other) The denial of the
Churches continuing visible, was condemned in the Aug. epist. 170. ad Seuerinum
says, facile tibi est attendere and videre ciuitatem supra montem constituta^
de qua Dominus ait in Euangelio, quod abscondi non possit ipsa est enim
Ecclesia Catholica, vnde Catholice Graece appellatur quod per totum orbem
terrarum diffunditur, hanc ignorare nulli licet, ideo secundum verbum Domini
abs^ondi non potest: and vide Aug. de unit. Eccles. c. 12. and 13. and ep. 48.
ad Vincentium Rogatianum.
Donatists, and Hieromini d^al. a^u. Luciserianos paulo post medium and cap. 6.
Prosecuteth this point at large: saying, (among much other matter) vbi sunt
isti nimium prophani qui pluris sinagogas asserunt quam Ecclesias etc. si
Ecclesiam non habet Christus, aut si in sardinia tantum habet nimium pauper
factas est etc. (And then he answers their objection saying) Quod si de illa
quae in Euangelio scripta est sententia sibi blandiuntur, Putas ne cum venerit
filius hominis inueniet fidem super terram, sciant il^^m fidem nominari. de qua
Dominus alebat fides tua te saluum fecit.
Luciferin^s and all this done by the sundry writers that lived in or next
before the foresaid 160. years now in question. And which is most, not so
much as any one Catholic Father of the said times being known, to have but
defended or excused any one of the said persons so condemned in their denial
of any one of our foresaid recited several Doctrines.

Secondly we do hereunto add in further demonstration that whereas on the one
part our learned adversaries are not able to show, that any of the Catholic
writers of those foresaid 160. years did note or charge the then Bishopes of
Rome with Innovation or change of faith, so again we on the contrary are able
to give particular proof, how that the Catholic Fathers of those same times,
In those times was Leo the first Bishope of Rome beginning Anno. 440. and
continuing POPE 21. years. (Test Anastasio. de vitis Romans pontific.) of the
Communion which other Bishopes of that age professed to have with him: Read Leo
Epist. 39. and 41. c. 1. And the Epistle of Theodoret (a Grecian) to Leo and
see the Centurie writers Centur. 5. c. 7. Col. 774. circa and posi med. and
col. 775. initio and vide council. Chalced. act 1. 2. and 3. Hilarious was
Bishope of Rome Anno 461. of the like Communion of faith had with him: Vide
Epistolas Tarraconensium Episcoporu^ ad Hillarium in 1. tom. council. Felix the
third was Bishope of Rome Anno 483. of the like Communion professed toward
him: Vide Epistolam Anastasij Patriarchae Hierosol. ad faelicem Papam: Horm^sda
was Pope Anno 514. and continued so about 9. years: Of the like Communion had
with him: Vide Iohannem Patriacham Constantinop. in Epist. ad Hormisdam, in 1.
tom. concill. inter Epistolas Hormisdae. and vide ibidem rescriptum Hormisdae
ad Episcopos Betica prouinciae: and Epistolam Iustini Imperatoris ad Hormisdam.
and Epistolam possessoris episcopi ad Horm sdam. and vide conc^lium habit: in
epiro ad Hormisdam. extat apud Baromium Boniface the second was Pope Anno 530.
of the like Communion had with him: Vide Epistolam Eulalij Carthaginensis ad
Bonifacium secundum: and vide Centur. 6. c. 10. col. 670. Siluerius was Pope
Anno 535. of like Communion had with him: Vide Epistolam Amatoris episcopi ad
Siluerium: And see Liberatus in breuiario cap. 22. Vigilius was Pope Anno 537.
of like Communion had with him: Vide Epistolam Eutychij Patriachae
Constantinop. ad Vigilium, and Epistolam synod. mopsuestan. ad Vigilium: Also
the 2. Council called Turonense Anno. 570 can. 21. and the 1. Council of
Brach c. 22. and 23. Anno 572. professed like Communion with the Roman sea.
Gregorius primus was Pope Anno 590. of like Communion had with him: Vide
Epistolam Iohannis Episcopi rauennatensis ad Gregorium inter Epistolas Gregorij
l. 2. indict. 11. ep. 55. and Isidorum in Praefact. in Opus conciliorum and
vide Centur. 6. col. 677. 678. 679. and 687. line 4. 5. 6. etc. This Gregory
was Pope within two years or less of the last year now in question:
and of the times next The Bishopes of Rome in the times next praecedent were,
Innocentius Zozimus, B^niface, and Celesi^nus, of the Communion had with
Innocentius Vide Epistolam Chrisostomi ad Innocentium, and Paladium in vita
Chrisostomi, and vide Epistolam Concilij mil^uitant ad Innocentium, and
Epistolam Concilij Carthag. ad Innocentium: And concerning the other three
Bishopes of Rome, see heretofore page 40. in the margent at the letter c. fine.
and vide Epistolam Civilli Alexandrini ad Caelestinum. A little before them was
Pope Damasus of the Communion had with him read Hierom. Epist. 57. ad Damasum:
And see the further Communion had between Damasus and the Greek and Lattin
Fathers specially reported and confessed by Crispinus in his book of the state
of the Church page 137.
before, and after Concerning the reverend aestimation had of the Roman sea in
the times next after the foresaid 160. years, it is generally confessed: yet
for more certainetie read the Centurie writers Cent. 7. c. 10. and how
reverently this our Nation of England thought as then thereof: Vide Bedam in
hist. l. 2. c. 8. etc. 10. etc. 17. and 18. and 19.
the same, professed to reverence and Join in Communion of faith with the then
Roman Bishopes: whereby also it is (in our opinion) most evidently yet further
proved, that during all that mean time of the foresaid 160. years, the
Bishopes of the Roman Church did not come to the profession of our now
religion, by means of any their then devised Innovation or change in faith.

Thirdly this point is as yet made furthermore demonstratiue in that it is
evident and by our learned adversaries confessed, that sundry even of the
chiefest Articles of our faith, as namely See heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3.
subdiuision 2.
Real presence: See heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 2. subdiuision 3. and hereafter
in the margent at the letter 1. Tract. 3. Sect. 1.
Sacrifice: See heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdeuision 5.
Free Will: Ibidem Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 6. and 7.
Merit of works: Confessed by Mr. Bilson in his dooke of the full redemption
of mankind pa. 188. fine. By Danaeus contra Bellarmine page 176. Paulo post
medium. By Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 9. page 773. initio. And by Johannes
Lascitius in the book entitled, de Russorum, Mascouitarum, and Tartarorum
religione page 122. initio. And see heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 4.
Limbus Patrum: Heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision. 4. And see also
heretofore Tract. 2. Sect. 7. subdiuision. 6.
Prayer for the dead: Heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 7. And see the
Centu^ie writers Centur. 3. col. 84. line 23. and Centur. 3. col. 83. line 47
and Centur. 4. col 1183. and Centur. 5. col. 1009. initio. And Mr. Fulke
against the Remishe testament fol. 443. a. paulo ante med. And against
Purgatory page 310. ante med.
Prayer to Saints: Hereafter Tract. 2. c. 1. Sect. 3. l. q. r. s.
Monachisme: Heretofore Tract. 2. Sect. 3. initio. And hereafter Tract. 2. c.
1. Sect. 3. l. p.
Vowed Chastity: Heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 7. example 1. and 2. and 5. And
heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 10.
Popish Primacie: See heretofore Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subdiuision 8.
The grace and necessity of Baptism: Vide ibidem.
The Ceremonies of Baptism: Vide ibidem subdiuision 9. And see also heretofore
Tract. 1. Sect. 7. in the margent at the letter c.
Conf^s^ion of sins and absolution: Heretofore Sect. 7. example 3.
The unmarried life of Priests: Confessed by I^bbertus de Principijs Christian.
dogm. l. 2. c. 10 p. 675. ante med. and 678. fine. and 674. prope finem. And by
Mr. Whitaker de sacra scriptura page 678. paulo posi med. and 668. fine. and
690. post med. and 670. post med. And by Carthwright in Mr. Whitgittes defense
etc. page 103. ante med. and hertofore tract. 1. sect. 3. subdiuision 11. and
12.
Unwritten Traditions, And (to omit many other) Hereafter tract. 2. c. 1.
Sect. 3.
most of our See heretofore tract. 1. sect. 3. l. y. Dionysius mencioning six
of our Sacraments.
Sacraments are plainly found to have been professed and publickely taught in
the writings yet extant of sundry See hereafter Tract. 2. c. 1. Sect. 3. of the
confessed Doctrines believed and taught in the fourth hundredth years after
Christ.
aunc ent Fathers who lived before the foresaid 160 years now in question; In
so much that Mr. John Napeire (though our great adversary) affirms and
confesses the like aunswerable continuance of our religion before that
foresaid mean time of 160. years: Affirming to that end most plainly, that
from Mr. Nappier upon the revelations proposition 37. page 68. post. med.
the year of Christ 319. (which was before the said time now in question) the
Antichristiane and Papisticall Re^gne has begun reining universally, and
without any debatable Contradiction 1260 years last past: And that from Mr.
Nappeir ibidem in c. 12. page 161. col. 3. circa medium.
the year of Christ 316. God has with-drawne his visible Church from open
assemblies to the hearts of particular godly men etc. During the space of 1260.
years: Mr. Nappeir ibidem in c. 11. page 145. col. 3. fin^.
The Pope and his Clergy having p^ssessed the outward visible Church of
Christians even 1260. years: Vide ibidem p. 191. initio.
The true Church abiding (so long) Latente Vide ibidem p. 161. col. 3. circa
medium and page 156. ante med. and 237. paulo post med. and 23. fine.
and invisible with (which his opinion or computation Mr. Brocard upon the
revelations fol. 110. a. and 123. b.
Mr. Brocard also professes to agree, whereby it is more then evident that our
religion being thus publicly professed in the Roman Church both before and
ever since the foresaid 160. years, could not therefore be any matter of
Innovation of change, newly brought in or divised by the Roman Church either
then or afterward: Which point is also made as yet otherwise more manifest, by
that which has been heretofore confessed by our adversaries, concerning the
conversion See heretofore Tract. 2. Sect. 1 in the marg. at the letter d. and
in the text at the letter c. and ibidem l. f. g.
of us Englishmen unto our now professed Catholic faith by S. Austine then
sent from Gregory Bishope of Rome. Concerning also the undoubted conversion of
the Sea heretofore Tract. 2. Sect. 2. l. m. and in the marg. there at the
letter m.
Brittons of Wales in the Apostles times, and their perseuera^ce See heretofore
Tract 1. Sect 2. in the margent there at this mark.
in that faith till Austins comm^ng. And the foresaid evident hereof see
hertofore Tract 1. Sect. 2. l. 1. y. z.
agreement of Austine and of the Brittones of Wales in all substantial points
of faith: So plainly is that faith which the Roman Church now professes, the
very same, whereto the Romans were converted in the Apostles times. A thing so
evidently true, that our adversary M. Bunny (though using all warines to
acknowledge or utter more then of necessity he must) confesses yet (as
enforced) and says of the whole time since the Apostles to this present, that
See Mr. Bunny in his treatise tending to pacificatio^ Sect 14. circa med. pa.
89.
the Church of Rome has ever continued after a sort in the profession of the
faith, since the time that by the Apostles it was delivered to them etc. and
has also in some manner preserved and hitherto maintained both the word and
the sacraments that Christ himself did leave unto us, which surely (says he)
is a very special blessing of God, an evident work of the holy Ghost. etc.

And thus much briefly whether that the Roman Church professing the right
faith in the Apostles times, has at any time since ever altered or changed the
same, against our foresaid discourse whereof grounded upon several truths
confessed even by our adversaries if any boulder forehead shall wilfully oppose
it self and shall without other answer or respect had to that which his
learned brethren have heretofore confessed, and we otherwise proved, leap over
all the foresaid proofs and ages iumping per saltum up to the Apostles, and
then tell us, So Mr. Whitaker. l 7: Contra Duraeum pa. 478: ante medium says,
Nobis sufficit ex Pontificioru^ dogmatu^ and scripturarum collatione discrimen
and dissimilitadine^ ^gnoscere: historicis liberum relinquimus scribere quid v^
lint:
that howsoever we prove from histories and Fathers or other testimony of
their own writers, concerning every of the ages since the Apostles times, yet
the scriptures themselves are (in his Hereof see hereafter Tract 2. c. 1. Sect.
1. initio in the margent at the letter p. and (...) q.
opinion) contrary in many points to that faith which the Roman Church now
professes and that therein therefore she has changed the faith which was
first to her delivered: Besides, that this is a most needy and miserable
begging of the thing in question, against which we do vehemently contest, (as
being more then persuaded that our adversaries cannot truly allege from the
first of Genesis to the last of the Revelations, so much as any one text of
scripture, which makes with them and against us.) Let that man and all other
of his mind yet also further consider, that for so much as the sacred
SCRIPTVRES them selves, do as (before See heretofore Tract: 1. Sect. 8. l. n.
o. and hereafter Tract. 2. c. 2. Sect 1. prope initium.
affirm that the Churches true Pastors must evermore continue and withstand
all innovation of false doctrine even with open reprehension. The answerable
performance whereof in particular being matter of fact, can be to us at this
day, no otherwise made known, then upon the only credit of humane testimony
commended to us by history, Mr. Whitaker Contra Duraeum l. 7. page 472. says,
Quicquid de Ecclesiae Propagatione, Amplitudine, gloria veteres Prophetae
predixerunt id perfectum esse historia Luculentissime testatur, ita vatic inijs
Prophetarum, Ecclesiasticam historia^ suffragari nulla controuersia est:
the force of which testimony our very adversaries acknowledge Mr. Hooker in
his Ecclesiastical Policy l. 2. p. 115. initio says, The strength of man's
authority is affirmatively such, that the weightest affairs in the world
depend there-vpon: And ibidem page 116. ante medium: VVhatso-euer we believe
concerning salvation by Christ, although the scripture be therein, the ground
of our belief, yet is man's authority the keye that opens the door etc. The
scripture could not teach us these things, unless we believed men: etc: And
ibidem l. 1. page 86. ante medium: Of things necessary the very cheifest is
to know what books we are bound to esteem holy, which point is confessed
impossible for the scripture it self to teach: And l. 2. Sect. 4. page 102.
fine. for if any one book of scripture did give testimony to all, yet still
that scripture which gives credit to the rest would require an other scripture
to give credit unto it, neither could we ever come to any pause whereon to
rest our assurance unless besides scripture there were some thing which might
assure us. etc. upon which ground l. 3. Sect. 8. page 146. fine. he says, We
all know that the first out-ward motive leading men so to esteem of the
scripture, is the authority of Gods Church: And Mr. Whitaker aduersus
Stapletonum l. 2. c. 4. page 298. post med, says: non nego traditionem
Ecclesiasticam esse argumentum quo argui and conuinci possit qui libri sunt
canonici, qui non: (And ibidem page 300. ante medium) Hoc semper dixi sensique
and vide ibidem l. 1. page 25. ante medium. And in his book against Mr.
William Rainoldes page 44. circa med. In so much as the Protestant author of
the treatise of the scripture and the Church (so greatly commended by
Bullinger in his preface before that book) does (after the English
translation thereof cap. 15: page 72:) say we could not believe the gospel,
were it not that the Church taught us and witnessed, that this Doctrine was
delivered by the Apostles: And see further there cap. 19. page 74. and 75.
that there-fore the same SCRIPTVRES do therein most evidently perforce reduce
them to this foresaid trial by history and Fathers: whereto if they stand,
their overthrow (they see) is certain, and in refusing the same, their flight
is shameful. As for the further extremest bouldnes of such, who are in these
straites (resolved not to acknowledge the Johannes Regius in libro apologetico
etc. page 192. post medium: and 193. being urged to show wherein the Roman
Church changed her faith, and not able to give any one particular example
thereof, betaketh himself to this extreemest bouldnes. answering page 193.
post medium: Sed denique licet verum esset, Romanam Ecclesiam, in sua religione
nihil mutasse, an propterea mox sequetur eam esse veram Ecclesiam? Non opinor:
In defense whereof he is not ashamed to allege sundry impertinent reasons
unworthy of rehersall.
Roman Church to be a true Church, though it were true, that she had not
changed any thing in religion. We pass the same over as being most absurd,
and much more worthy of contempt then answer.

THE SECOND TRACT
FIRST CHAPTER.
SECT. 1. THAT CHRIST'S CHVRCH WAS BY the Predictions of the Prophets foretold
to become universal and to convert with great increase the Kings and Nations
of the Gentiles.
AND for so much (most GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN) as it has bin the course of
certain our adversaries (under the pretense of only scripture (to under take
liberty of rejecting all our former confessed proofs drawn from the
authority of Mir^cles, (though never so true and of Fathers though never so
ancient) and so thereby in the end, making them selves and every of their
vulgar followers, Judges Luberius in libro de principijs christian. dogm. l. 6.
c. 13. page 563. ant^ med. says. Omnes publicos Iudices) vt interpretando
errare posse ostendimus, ita in iudicando errare posse asserimus; priuati
Iudices sun^ singuli fideles, hi etiam habent potestatem iudicand^ de doctrinis
and interpretationibus. And page 573. paulo ante med. he further says. Deus
dedit cui. libet fideli non tantu^ spiritum intellige^di, sed ^^tiam spiritum
discer^end^ falsam doctrinam a vera. And Mr. Bilson in his true difference
between Christian subjection and unchristian rebellion. part. 2 page 353.
says: The people must discern who teaches right before they believe. and
again afterward, the people must be discerners and judges of that which is
taught. And the same power Iudicandi and decidendi etc. Of Iudgeing and
deciding doctrine of religion, is no less fully given ad vnumquemque priuatum
hominem to every private man, by Brentius in Prologomenis contra Petrum. a Soto
and in confessione Witebergica cap. de sacra scriptura.
both of scripture, and of all interpreters: Finally to restrain all things
to that only framed sense of scripture, which they them selves Zanchius de
sacra scriptura page 412. initio. says: concerning interpreters: Eatenus
illorum interpretationes amplectamur, quatenus videmus allatas iuxta analogiam
fidei, and ex. alijs erutas esse scripturis. And Mr. Whitaker de sacra
scriptura: page 529 post med. says of the unlearned, debent illi alios se
peritiores adire, Doctorum interpretum Commentarios consulere etc. sed videndum
interim est ne nimium illis tribu^mus etc. Sed caute semper atque ita vt
nostram interim libertatem retineamus. And Mr. Carthwrite in mr. Whitegiftes
defense etc. page 111. paulo post med. allows Caluines judgment, yet with
this cautell. So far (says he) as we can esteem, that, that which M. Calvin
says does agree with the canonical scriptures.
upon their conferring of places can collect for true. Pleases it your HIGHNESS
so much to afford us your PRINCELY patience, as that we may (in further
manifestation of the equity of this our most humble Petition) yield to them
though thus far for the time and thereupon (following the^ in their own
course) briefly allege from that confessed sense of scripture which even them
selves and their folowers do generally a^knowledge, but two special points
(amongst many other) which are most clearly available to us in this behalf.

The first is concerning the Churches continuing Catholic or vniuer^all after
her f^rst increase and the predictions of the Prophets affirming the same; to
which purpose Esaias foretelling See the marginall notes of the English Bible
1576 in Esaias 60. verse vlt.
that the Church should be miraculously mul^^plied: says. Esaias 60, 22.
a little one shal-become as a thousand, and a small one as a strong nation.
whereto our Saviors like saying agrees: Marc. 4, 31. and see the marginall
notes of the English Bible in Daniel 2. verse 45.
and speaking of See the marginal notes of the English Bible of 1576 in Esaias c.
2. verse 2. at the letter a. and ibidem at the letter c.
the restoration of the Church of Christ and the enlargement thereof. Esaias
foretells likewise, that all Nations Esaias. 2, 2.
shall flow to it: and yet further concerning See in the English Bibles the
contents of the 60. chapter of Esaias.
the Gentiles coming to the Church in abundance Esaias. 60, 5.
thou shall see and shine, thy heart shall be astonished and enlarged, because the
multitude of the sea shall be converted to thee: Esaias. 60, 9.
the Isles shall wait for the Esaias 60 10, 11. and vide Psalm. 102, 15. and
Esaias. 62, 2.
their Kings shall minister to thee: and thy gates shall be continually open,
neither day nor night shall they be shutt, that men may bri g to thee the
riches of the Gentiles. And that their KINGS may be brought: Esaias. 60, 16.
Thou shall suck the milk of the Gentiles and the breasts of Kings: Esaias.
49, 23. and see the marginall notes of the English Bible of 1576 in Esa. 49, 23
Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers and Queens thy mothers: Psalm. 2, 8.
I will give thee the heathen for thy inheritance, and the end of the earth for
thy possession: In like manner it is said in the person of the Church Esaias 49,
20.
The place is strait for me give rowme that I may inhabit: And again to the
Church: Esaias 54, 2, 3: And see the Contents of the English Bible upon that
Chapter.
Enlarge the place of thy tents, spread out thy Curtains of thy habitation for
thou shall increase on the right hand, and on the left, thy seed shall
possess the Gentiles and inhabit the desolate City: And lastly it is
foretoulde concerning the Churches Esaias. 62, 6.
watchmen: or See the marginall notes of the english Bible in Esaias 62, 6.
Pastors that Esaias 62, 6.
they shall not be silent or wanting, but daily Hieremie 33, 18, 21, 22. and
that this is meant of Christ's Church see in the English Bible of 1576 the
contents of this chapter, and the marginall notes ibidem in ver 16.
multiplied to minister to him not with interrupted seasons, but continually,
Esaias 66, 21, 23. and that this is meant of the Pastors of Christ's Church see the
marginall notes of the said english Bible ibidem.
even from mouth to mouth, and from sab^th to saboth: And that albeit all other
monarchies had end, (as the Assirians, Persians, Macedonians, and Romans: yet
Daniel. 2, 44.
this Kingdom should not be given over to an other people (or altered as they
were:) But should stand for ever as Esaias 60, 15, 16.
an external glory and joy, from generation to generation; and that the
covenant (made of the premises unto Christ's Church) should Psalm. 89, 30, 31,
32, 33, 34.
not be broken for any transgression committed by her children but should most
assuredly be fulfilled: Hierom. 33, 20, 21, 25. referred to Christ's Church by
the contents upon that Chaper in the. English Bible of Anno 1576.
according to which confessed sense of the Catholic dispersion, and
continuance of Christ's Church, her Kings and Pastors. Occolampadius says upon
Jeremy Oecolampadius in Hieremiam cap. 33.
God speak^th here of the Eternity of Christ's kingdom etc. He shall have
Kings and Priests and that for ever, and not a few, but as the stars of
heaven, etc. for their multitude: In so much as that grave and learned man the
L. Archbishope of Canterbury teaches like-wise that Mr. Whitgifte in his
defense etc. pa. 465.
the Church of Christ is dispersed through the whole world. and cannot now
(at any time) be shut up in one kingdom for that he terms Mr. Whitgift vbi
supra.
an impossibility: as also Mr. D. Whitaker says of the fore alleged
scriptures Mr. Whitaker in his answer to Mr. William Rainoldes in the
preface page 37. ante medium, And in his book contra Duraeum l. 7. page 472.
he further says, Quicquid de Ecclesia Propogatione amplitudine gloria, veteres
prophetae praedixerunt, id perfactum esse Historia Luculentissime testatur, ^ta
vaticinijs Prophetarum, Ecclesiasticam historiam suffragari nulla Controuersia
est.
the promises of God concerning the largenes and beauty of his Church have
been accomplished etc. with whom agrees Mr. Henoche Clapham, saying, Mr.
Henoch Clapham in his sovereign remedy against schism page 23 circa med
The Church was to enlarge her tents and stretch her coardes universally
through the earth, for which cause it is called Catholic.

THAT THE SAME WAS NOT PERFORmed by Protestants during either the first or
second 300. years after Christ 2
TO examine now the accomplishment of these predictions, we will for the more
plain understanding thereof divide the time of the Churches continuance into
three several stations or Of this division see the breife discourse of the
Churches estate initio annexed to Crispinus his treatise of the state of the
Church etc.
Periods observed and mentioned by our very adversaries: The First which was
from Christ till the Conversion of Constantine our first Christian Emperor,
(which amounts unto some 320. years:) The Second from thence until the time
of Bonifacius tertius Bishope of Rome Anno 607. (which wanted some thing of
300. years. And the Third from that time till Luthers first appearing, which
was nine hund^eth years and above.

1 Concerning the First it is without question, that during all the time after
Christ until Constantines conversion, the true Church remained so under
persecution, as that the foresaid amplitude and glory, fore-toulde of her
(concerning her great increase of believers and of Kings and Queens to serve
her) was not as then fulfilled, to which purpose (if any question thereof were)
the sayings Mr. Barlowe in his defense of the articles of the Protestants
religion pa. 34. post med. says, In the primative nonage of the Church this
promise of Kings allegiance thereunto, was not so fully accomplished, because
in those days that prophecy of our Savior was rather verified, you shallbe
brought before Kings for my names sake, by them to be persecuted even to
death: the best of the Kings for a long time, reaching but King Agrippa his
in modico a slender inclination to religion. And see S. Austine ep. 48. And see
Mr. D. Fulke in his treatise against Stapleton and Martial. page 51.
of our learned adversaries are very pregnante.

2 And for the Second it is like-wise evident that during the 200. and odd
years from Constantines reign till the time of Boniface the third, there were
few or rather almost no Kings that then professed the Christian faith, the
Emperors of the East and West only excepted, and of those few, some revolted
(as Julian See Mr. Cowpers Chronic. fol. 128. b. and 129. a.
the Apostata, and sundry other) were (as Mr. Fulke Mr. Fulke in his answer to
a Counterfaite Catholic p. 15. fine. And in his reioinder to D. Bristowe page
375.
observes) Arians as Constantius, Mr. Cowpers Chronic. vbi supra fol. 126. a.
at Anno 340.
Valens Mr. Cowper vbi supra fol. 129. b. at Anno 368. and fol 131. a. at Anno
380.
etc. And did for a great part of that small time, so grievously persecute
Luc. Osiander in Epitom. cent. 4. pa. 255. 256. etc. and p. 449. 451. and cent.
5. page 425 432. fine. And centur. 6. p. 91. fine. And see further hereof
Carrion in Cronic. page 281. and 282. 283. 284. etc.
the Catholic professors, that the Protestant writers doubt not to Objected
by Mr. Fento^ Preacher of Graies Inn in his book against Alablaster the 4.
motive p. 21. fine. and 22. initio.
object the persecution and pancetie of Christians in those very times as a
strong argument against the Churches universality: And therefore for such
other Princes of those times, as were neither Apostataes nor Arians, although
they had been for number so many, and had also for current of ages so long
continued as were aunswerable to fulfill the said predictions of the
Protestants, (as it is most clear by the premises that they neither were, nor
in so short a season possibly could be) it is yet at the least questionable
that they were in religion not Protestants but Catholics, whereof even for
the first and best of them namely Constantine our first Christian Emperor and
the Church in that age (the example whereof. your MAJESTY In the sum of the
conference before his MAJESTY had with the Bishopes and other of his Clergy
etc. page 69. post med.
not unworthily seems to affect) sundry (and those not obscure) probabilities
are remaining and confessed.

THAT CONSTANTINE OUR FIRST Christian Emperor was not of the Protestants but
of the Catholic Faith. 3.
FOR it is evident that Constantine Eusebius. de vita Constantini l. 3. c. 47.
erected Temples in memory of Martirs Eusebius. ibidem l. 4. c. 58. 59.
dedicated a most sumptuouse Church in memory of the Apostles. Eusebius. ibidem
l. 4. c. 60.
Provided his Sepulcher there to the end that after his death he might he made
partaker of the prayers there offered. Centur. Magdeburg centur. 4. col. 452.
line 30.
He celebrated the dedication of the Temple with a yearly festival day. He
Ibidem cent. 4. col. 497. line 50.
caused Churches new builded to be consecrated, for service therein to be
celebrated, in so much as Zozomen hist. l. 1. c. 8. versus finem.
He carried about with him a portable Tabernacle or Church, and Priests and
Deacons attendi^g it for celebration of the divine Mysteries. Centur. 4. col.
497 line. 48. and col. 410. li. 7.
He had lights in the Church in the day time. Hierom contra Vigilantium ante
med. says, Constantinus Imperator sanctas Reliquias Andreae Lu^ae and Timothei
transtulit Constantinopol in apud quas daemones rugiunt.
He translated to Constantinople the holy Relics of St. Andrew, Luke, and
Timothy. Cent. 4. col. 457. line 58. and col. 458.
under him in that age were Pilgrimages. Cent. 4. col. 704. line 11, 21.
In his time it was decreed by Council that Priests might not marry. Cent.
4. col. 467. line 10. and Eusebius. de vita Constantini l. 4. c. 28. and Zozomen
hist. l. 1. c. 9.
He honored sacred Virgins professing perpetual chastity. Cent. 4. col.
1294. line 50. 51.
Under him were Monckes throughout Siria, Palestine, Bithinia, and the other
places of Asia. Cent. 4. col. 1306. line 19. 20.
Also throughout Africa. and Sozomen hist. l. 1. c. 13. initio.
He greatly reverenced Anthony the Moncke whose religiouse and austere life
Protestants term Osiander in Epitom. cent. 4. c. 2. p. 100.
superstitiouse. Eusebius. de vita Constantini l. 3. c. 2.
He signed him self with the sign ^f the Cross. Zozomen hist. l. 1. c. 4.
and 8. prope finem. And Eusebius. in orat. de Laudi^u^ Constantini ante med.
says, Imperator triumphale signum honorat: And Prudentius in apotheosi does
accordingly affirm this usage in the ancient Emperors, saying thereof
Vexillumque Cruci^ summus dominator adorat. And Szegedinus in his speculum
pontificu^ page 229. says, Crux honorari capit Constantini tempore.
Honored the same sign. Had affiance Eusebius. de vita constantini l. 2 c. 7.
and success of victory in the virtue thereof. and Eusebius. ibid. l. 1. c. 25.
and l. 2. c. 3. and l. 3. c. 48.
erected it publicly He Zozomen hist. l. 1. c. 9. post med.
ordained that the decrees of Councels should be kept firm and inui^lable.
Eusebius. vbi supra l. 3. c. 10. fine. And Theodoret hist. l 1. c. 7. circa med.
And the Centurie writers cent. 4. col. 460. line 31.
He would not sit down at the Council of Nyce till the Bishopes had thereto
given him their assent. He Ambrose epist. 32. And Rufinus hist. l. 10 c. 2. And
see this fully confessed and reported by Crispinus in his discourse of the
state of the Church pa. 99. prope finem: where he thus writes thereof.
Constantine said, God has ordained you B shopes and has given you power to
judge of your s^lues. By means whereof we yield our selves to your Judgment,
men may not Judge you but God alone: And ^n Zozomen hist. l. 1. c. 16.
Constantine says, Mihi vero non est fas cum homo sim, Eiusmod^ tausaris
cognitionem arrogare.
would not undertake the judgment of Church causes but committed the same
over to Bishops: Cent. 4. col. 653. line 26. 27.
He reproved A^esius the N^ua^ian for denying the power given Priests to
remitt sin. Centur. 4. col. 454. line 26. and Eusebius. de vita. Consian. l. 4.
c. 71.
After his death prayer was made for his soul: and Eusebius. vbi supra.
the mistical^ sacrifice offered. And as concerning the Churches doctrine of
that age, it was so evidently our now professed Catholic faith, that to omit
all other particular proof, and what is by our other adversaries confessed In
the brief discourse of the Churches estate: etc. Annexed to Crispinus his
book of the estate of the Church. it is affirmed how that about the e^l^ of
this period (which continued until Constantine) the love of solitude and
Monckerie, the abstinence from marriage and from certain meats on particular
days, many feasts and other seeds of superstition after succeeding took a
marueilouse root, so the Commencement of prayers for the dead and sacrifice of
the Mass, did discover them selves: etc.
in this behalf, the centurie writers of Magdeburge, (whose writings are by
our English Protestants affirmed to be Mr. D. Hill in his defense of the
article, Christ descended in to hell: fol. 23. b. post med.
worthy of immortal memory do in their fourth Centurie (by the^ dedicated to
our late Souraigne Lady Queen Elizabeth) profess to Col. 278. line 16.
set down the peculier supposed errors of the doctor of those times, and do
charge them in particular (by collection from their own writings) with Cent.
4. col. 291.
freewill: Cent. 4. col. 292.
Justification by works: Cent. 4. col 293.
Meritt of works: Cent. 4. col. 425. l. 54. and col. 426. line 10. and col.
294.
Confession of Sins: and Penance: with Cent. 4. col. 425. line 60.
absolution of such as had confessed. with affirming Cent. 4. col. 1243 line
33. And see Calvin in institut l. 4. c. 19. sect. 17.
Penance to be the second table after shipwreck. and error in Cent. 4. col.
231. line 12 and col. 294. line 1.
the doctrine of penance: with Cent. 4. col. 295. line 58. and col. 296. 297.
Invocation af Saints, Cent. 4. col. 304. line 42. 43. etc.
Purgatory, Cent. 4. col. 409. line 15. 25.
Aultars, Cent. 4. col. 295. line 3. and 40. and col. 985. line 30.
Transubstantiation, Cent. 4. col. 456. 457. and 482. line 44. and col. 1250.
line 45.
translation of Saints R^lickes: and their worship. Cent. 4. col. 457. line
58. and col. 458. line 1. 2. 3.
Pilgrimage to holy places. Cent. 4. col. 470. line 20.
Heremites, Cent. 4. col 300. line 39. and col. 301. line 46. and col. 464 465.
Monckes, their Cent. 4. col. 464. line 59. and col. 301. line 28. 29. etc.
voluntary poverty: their Cent. 4. col. 471. l. 23. and col. 474. l. 10. 11.
22. 23.
abstine ce from certain meat, and other austeritie of life: their Cent. 4.
col 472. l 20.
Cowle, girdle, and other religiouse habites: their undoubted and great Cent.
4. col. 493. l. 18.
Miracles Cent. 4. col. 301. l. 1. 2. 3. 54. and col. 706. l. 57. and col. 847.
line 50.
the Vowed chastity of Virgins Cent. 4. col. 467. l. 8. 9. etc.
Monasteries of vowed Vi^gins. Cent. 4. col. 495. l. 18.
Rising in the night to prayer. also also with Cent. 4. col. 302. line 9. 10.
14. etc. And col. 495. line 30.31. And Mr. Fulke against Heskens Sanders etc.
page 657. circa med. Affirms that Rufinus and Cirill had a superstitiouse
estimation of the sign of the Cross: and that also by the report of Paulinus
the Cross was by the Bishope of Jerusalem brought forth at Easter (yearly)
to be worshipped of the people: And Danaeus in prime partis altera part, ad
Bellarminum 5. controu. respons. page 1415. initio. Affirms that Paulinus
Cirrill and sundry other Fathers were plainly superstitiouse and blinded with
this enchauntment of the Crosses adoration.
attributing to much the sign of the Cross: with Cent. 4. col. 417. 418. 419.
Abrenunciation, ANNOILING, threefould Immersion. And sundry other like
Ceremonies used in Baptism: with Cent. 4. col. 415. line 25.
Baptism of lay persons in case of necessity: with Cent. 4. col. 1160. line
53. and col. 1^43. line 39.
Remission of sins (not signified but) given in Baptism: with Cent. 4. col.
415. line 44.
Consecration of the water of Baptism, with teaching that Cent. 4. col 303.
line 18. and col. 704. line 11, 21. and col. 1293. line 5. and 17.
Priests might not marry: that Cent. 4. col. 303. line 10. and col. 847. line
47. and col. 1293. line 25.
Bigamus (or he that has been twice married) may not be Priest: also with
Consecration of religiouse Cent. 4. col. 874. line. 11.
women: and their religiouse habit: with Cent. 4. col. 873. fine and col. 874.
initio.
Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolites, Exorcistes, Readers, Dorekeepers: and the
special rites used in making of them. with Cent. 4. col. 497. line 50.
Sumptuouse Church^s consecrated, and superstitious insolency in celebration.
Of the Mass^ appointed to be said in no places but such as were hall^wed by a
Bish ppe: with affirminge Cent. 4. col. 555. line 30. and col. 557. l. 45. and
col. 558. line 54. and 1250. line 2.
the Church to be built upon Peter. and f^rther teaching Centur. 4. col 551. l.
31. and col. 556. line 15. and 1074. line 13.
Peter's ^^macie. And lastly even with sundry noted examples of Centur. 4. col.
549. line 39. and col. 550. line 26. and col. 551. line 36. and col. 529. li^e
20.
Primacie in the Bishope of Rome. In so much as certain Protestants doubt not
to deal plainly with us herein, affirming that Helene mother to Constantine
was Centur. 4. col. 458 line 5.
a superstitiouse woman: and the visible Church in his time Mr. John Nappeir
upon the reuel^tions page 68. post medium.
Antichristian, and papisticall. Whereu^on we doubt not in behalf of our
religion to say now to our adversaries. as did your MAJESTY (most religiously)
to the Puritanes in defense of the Cross in Baptism used in Constantines
time, In the sum of the Conference before his MAJESTY had with the Bishopes
and other of his Clergy page 69. post med.
Is it now comen to that pass, that we shall appeach Constantine of
superstition, if then it were used, I see no reason, but that still we may
continue it. So clear it is by the premises, that the foresaid predictions
of the Prophets were not accomplished by the Church which continued the 300
years next after Constantine, and that though we should admit they were, it
was that Church not protestant but Catholic.

THAT AFTER THE SECOND 300. years after Christ the foresaid predictions were
not performed by the Protestants Church and were accomplished by the Catholic
Church. Sect. 4.
Now for the third, namely the wholle residue of time from Bonifacius the
third till Luther which contain the last 100. years in which (for that time)
the predictions of the Prophets concerning the Churches increase, and
continuance of Kings and Pastors, were most evidently fulfilled: that the same
were not yet during that time fulfilled, (otherwise then in and by our The
centurie writers mention the Conversion of sondrie Nations wrought since the
time of Gregory the first, and Boniface the third by our Catholic Roman
Church: as of Germany (cent. 8. c. 2 col. 20.) Of the Vandalls (cent 9. c. 2.
col. 15.) Of the Bulgarians, Sclauonians, Polonians, the Danes, and Morauianes.
(cent. 9. c. 2. col. 18.) and of sundry Kings and Kingdoms (cent. 10. c. 2.
col. 18, and 19.) and of a great part of Hungary (centur. 11. c. 2. col.
27.) and of the Norueigians (centur. 12.) As also the Protestant writer
Osiander in his Epitomes hist. Ecclesiasticae Centuriae. 9.10.11.12.13.14. and
15. mencioneth the like Conversion of sundry Nations performed by our
Catholic Church since the times of Gregory and Boniface. As namely of the
Danes page 16. initio and 94. fine. the Morauians. (p. 16. fine.) the
Polonians: (p. 36. circa med.) the Sclauonia^s. (p. 36. circa med: and 16. post
med.) the Bulgares: (p. 36. post med.) the Hunnes. (p. 37. initio.) the
Normanes: (page 72. post med.) the Bohemianes: (page 77: fine) the Suecians:
(pa. 21. circa med. and 90. post medium.) The Noruegianes: Liuonians, and
Saxones: (page 86. circa medium.) Tee Vagarians page 104. circa med. The Rugij
Thuscanes page 99. post med. of Scandia (p. 111. circa med.) Maior^a (p. 341.
circa med.) of Tunes in Africa: (p. 377. fine.) and of sundry other Nations:
(p. 342. ante med. Whereunto might be added sundry other like testimonies
mentioned by Osiander in his Epitome cent. 7. pa. 73. and 168. and cent. 8. pa.
48. 112. 121. and 127. and the like known conversion of sundry Nations wrought
in this age in the East Indies, the West Indies and Africa confessed by our
adversary Simon Lithus in respons. Altera ad Altera^ gretsert apol^giam p.
331. where he says, Iesuitarum seges etc. paucorum annorum spacio etc. non
contenta europae finibus, Asiam, Aphricam, Americam suis idolis compleuit. A
thing so evidently performed only by our Catholic Church, that Mr. VVintaker
answering thereunto (l. de Ecclesia contra Bellarminum p. 336. ante med. says,
Respondes illas Conuersiones tam multarum gentium post tempora Gregorij, de
quibus hic Bellarminus loquitur non puras and integras fuisse, sed corrupta^:
And Danaeus in respons. ad disput. Bellarmini part. 1. pa. 780. fine, answers
thereto in like manner saying, Propogatio autem illa quam Gregorius primus,
Conon, Zacha ^^s and al^ Gr^gori^ secerunt s^it i^^riatio meretricis m^n facta,
de qua est apoc. 17. versi^. 4. and 18. vers^^. 3. As concerning examples to be
given of Protestants co^uerting he^the^ Nations, we find one only endeavor of
the Caluinists l^boring to preach to the Indians, but their labor took no
effect, as is confessed by their Francis^^^ G^narum in s^^culo verae Ecclesiae
page 161. fine. and 168. post med. And see further thereof Villagag. con.
Calvin. and Epistolae Iudicae.
Catholic Church) is in it self so certain, and withal so evidently
confessed by our learned adversaries, as that we will not seek for other
proof thereof.

To this end one of them affirms that Anno See Simon de Voyon his discourse
upon the Catallog. of Doctors etc. in the epistle there to the reader post
medium.
605. when Pope Boniface was Stalled in his Papal throne, then falsehood got
the victory etc. then was the wholle world overwhelmed in the dregs of
Antichristian filthiness, abominable superstitions, and traditions of the Pope.
Then was that universal apostasy from the says foretold by Paul. To this
end likewise says Mr, Parkins: Mr. Parkins in his exposition upon the Creed
page 400.
We say that before the days of Luther for many hundredth years an universal
apostasy ouerspred the wholle face of the earth, and that our Church was not
then visible to the world: and that Mr. Parkins vbi supra page 370.
during the space of nine hundredth years the popish heresy has spread it
self over the wholle earth: In so much that whereas it is Heretofore tract. 2
c. 2. sect. 2. and 3.
heretofore confessed as evident, that the foresaid predictions of the
Prophets concerning the conversion of so many foretold Kings and kingdoms of
the Gentiles, neither were nor could be fulfilled during the 600. years next
after Christ and before Boniface the third. And where also we have given
particular See this heretofore in the beginning of this section, in the margent
at this mark. *)
instance of the more evident and clear accomplishment thereof begun
afterward and continued at and after the foresaid times of Gregory and
Boniface, with most plentiful and answerable success in so many Kingdoms
before mentioned. Our adversaries are not now abashed,) an opinion most
dreadful to be heard, or thought of) that where the foresaid predictions of
the Prophets take their chiefest beginning increase and continuance in regard
of the Churches answerable accomplished enlargement, they doubt not even then
and there to place the very contrary defection of Antichrist. Mr. Whittaker to
that end (is before) affirminge See Mr. Whitaker alleged ibidem.
the Conversion of so many Nations after the times of Gregory to have been not
pure but corrupt: Daneus also terming it in^briatio meretricis mundo facta de
qua est Apoc. 17, verse. 4. and 18. See Danaeus his words alleged ibidem.
Turninge so most evidently the Churches most gloriouse foretold enlargement
by the answerable conversion of so many heathen Kings and kingdoms fulfilled
but since the times of Gregory and Boniface into their pretended See before in
this Section at. n. o. p.
universal Apostasy wrought by Antichrist. Hieremie 2, 12.
O ye Heavens be astonished at this: Be afraid and utterly confounded. Are they
Christians who dare thus affirm the Churches foretoulde enlargement to be
Antichristian? Is this the end or issue of our adversaries Doctrine Math. 13, 9.
He that has ears to hear, let him hear. But to omit the like further
testimony herein of Mr. D. Fulke: Mr. D. Fulke in his treatise against
Stapelton and Martial p. 25. paulo post med. acknowledges that Some
(Protestants) have written that the Pope has blinded the world these many
hundredth years, some say a 1000. years, some 1200 some 900. etc.
Mr. John Napeire affirms yet more fully both concerning this time and the
other former 300. years next after Constantine, that Mr. Napeire in his
treatise upon the revelations pa. 43. versus finem.
the Popes kingdom has had power over all Christians from the time of Pope
Siluester and the Emperor Constantine for these 1260. years: and that Mr.
Napeire vbi supra p. 145. colum. 3. fine.
From the time of Constantine till these our days even 1260. years, the Pope
and his Clergy has possessed the out-ward visible Church of Christians Mr.
Napeire vbi supra pa. 68. versus finem.
Reigning universally and without any d^bateable contradiction 1260. years:
Ibidem p. 191. initio.
Gods true Church most certainly abiding so long Latent and Ibidem page 161.
col. 3 circa med. and pa. 156. ante med. and 237. paulo post med. and 23. fine.
invisible: with whom agrees M. Brocard: Brocarde upon the revelations fol.
110. a. and fol. 123. b.
And Mr. Napeire doubts not to proceed yet much further, affirming that also
Napeire vbi supra p. 191. initio.
during even the second and 3. ages (after Christ) the true Temple of God and
l^ght of the gospel was obscured by the Roman Antichrist himself: But
Sebastianus Francus reaches the very point, and doubts not to comprehend all
the foresaid ages since the Apostles times, affirming that, Statim post
Apostolos etc. Sebastianus Francus in Epistola de Abrogandis in vniuersum
omnibus statutis Ecclesiasticis. And Mr. Fulke in his answer to a
Counterfaite Catholic page 35. post medium says, The true Church decayed
imediately after the Apostles times.
Presently after the Apostles time, all things were turned vpside down etc.
And that f^r ^ertaine through the work of Antichrist: the external Church
together with the faith and sacraments vanished away presently after the
Apostles departure, and that for th^s^ thousand four hundredth years the
Church has been no where external and visible: So far has the Protestants
Church hitherto been (even by their own testimonies) from fulfilling the
foresaid foretoulde Conversion, of so many KINGS and kingdoms of the
Gentiles.

THAT THE KNOWN DEFECT THEREOF in the Protestants Church aduantageth the Jews
against them, made Sebastian Castalio doubtful of his faith and David Georgean
Apostata.. 5.
THESE things (most Gracious SOVEREIGN) being thus explained and confessed,
we do here as now insist, and most humbly appeal unto your MAJESTY'S Learned
and equal judgment between our adversaries and us concerning the
accomplishment of the foresaid predictions, whether that the same may be said
to have been hitherto performed by our Catholic or their Protestant Church
Here have we often knocked at the doors of their hearts, demanding but with
what probability they can (before Luthers time) make good that which the
scriptures foretell (as Oecolampadius and them selves understand) concerning
the Oecolampadius alleges before Tract. 2. Sect. 1. letter q.
eternity of Christ's Kingdom, and the multitude of Kings to serve it: and
which be those many Kings and Kingdoms of the Gentiles which their Church
has in all that mean time accordingly converted from heathenishe Paganism to
the faith of Christ, or how can their Church but be said (accordingly as the
scriptures The glory of this last house shall be greater then the first Aggeus
2, 10. the desolate has more Children then the married wife ( Esaias 54, 1. and
Galat. 4, 27. He is mediator of a better testament which is established upon
better promises (haebr. 8, 6.)
and Oecolampadius Oecolampadius in Esaias c. 2. verse. 2. says, Great is the
dignity of the Christian Church above the sinagoge of the Jews, in that it
shall be most populouse, and of all Nations sundry shall Join themselves unto
it abundantly.
from them teach, that the true Church ought to excel the Sinagogue of the
Jews: but so much as since the coming of the Messiah (which was the appointed
time of the Sinagoges decay and the Christians Churches increase) considering
that it is heretofore fully See heretofore tract 2. c. 1. sect. 4.
confessed, and hereafter See hereafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. 7. 10.
further proved, that for the thousand years last before Luther, their Church
has continued unknown Latente and invisible etc. whereas on the other part
it appears (by sufficient authority of histories in all times) that the
Jews during all those ages, and ever since Christ's time, have had their
Sinagogues (though under some kind of restraint) yet dispersed known Peter
Martyr in his common places in English part. 2. page 599. b. initio says
hereof. The Jews as yet continue, and are kept in so great adversities, in so
diueres and greeuouse captivity and dispersion, they houlde still their
religion, doubtless no ancient Trojans, Lombards, Hunnes or Vandalles, have so
held still their own etc. and could show their original and history set
forth in most true writting, and being every where dispersed as they were
could nevertheless keep their own ordinances which for so much as it
contineweth among the Jews, is undoubtedly a singular work of God etc. If now
then Gods work be such in the dispersed and reprobate Jews afrer the time of
their Sinagoges decay, shall it not much the rather be more Gloriouse in his
Church of the new testament, which according to Paul haebr. 8, 6. Is
established in better promises? Then ever was the other of the Jews ever
before the dissolution and end thereof? And see Peter Martyr vbi supra pa. 328.
b. fine and 329. a initio.
and visible in the most notable provinces of the world, as Greece, Italy,
Spain, France, Germany, England, etc. And therefore here also again we do
submit to your MAJESTY'S learned judgment, whether we or they be the men, that
can against the objections in this kind of the doubtful and misbeleeuing
Jews, maintain that before Luthers time, the foresaid predictions of their
Prophets have been fulfilled, and so consequently that our Savior is the true
Messiah, which falls necessarily into great danger of further doubt with
them, if so many of their Prophecies as went of the Messiah and his Church,
have for so many ages before Luther been left unaccomplished.

Neither may the scandal or scruple hence arising be a stumbling block only
to the Jews, but such as has also distracted certain of our learned
adversaries: To allege some few examples thereof (and withal to omit the
straites and laborinthes into which certain principal Protestant Calvin in
Daniell c. 2. verse. 44. and Luther tom. 7. printed at Witteberg Anno 1557 lib.
de Iudaeis etc.
writers have been driven in their disputation had of this matter against the
Jews) Sebastian Castalio professor at Basil Osiander in Epitom. histor.
Eccles. cent. 16. pa, 753. initio calls him, Sebastianus castalio vir apprime
doctus, Caluinista tamen: Linguarum peritissimus etc. And Pantalion in his
Chronographia p. 125. places him there in his catalog of the Fathers and
lights of the Church, saying further that for such, Guilielmus Farellus,
Petrus Viretus and Sebastian Castalio agnoscuntur
a very learned Caluinist, and highly Castalio commended by D. Humfrey de rat.
interpret. l. 1. pa. 62. 63. and 189. And by Gesnerus in bibliotheca Sebastia^
Castall: And by Fridericus Furius alleged in Sebast. Castal. defens. suarum
translat. page 236.
commended by D. Humfrey and others,) having recited sundry of the foresaid
Prophecies concerning the conversion of Kings, and the Churches foresaid
happy estate and continuance, and looking to the accomplishme^t thereof,
writes thus perplexedly thereof to our late Sovereign Lord King Edward the
sixte. Sebastia^ Castalio in his preface of the great Lattin Bible dedicated
to King Edward the sixte says, Equidem aut haec futura fatendum est, aut tam
fuisse, aut Deus accusandus mendacij: quod si quis fuisse dicit, quaeram ex eo
quando fuerint, si dicet tempore Apostolorum, quaeram cur nec vndiquaque
perfecta fuerit, and tam cito Exoleuerit dei cognitio ac pietas, que and
aeterna and marinis vndi^ abundantior fuerat promise.
Verily we must confess either that these things shall be performed
hereafter, or have been already, or that God is to be accused of lying: If any
man answer that they have been performed, I will demand of him when? If he
say in the Apostles time, I will demand how it chances, that neither then
the knowledge of God was alt^gither perfect, and after in so short space
vanished away which was promised to be aeternall and more abundant then the
floodes of the sea? So plainly does he more then insinuate this perilous
scruple, (and which is most dangerous) withal leaves the same not explained
or answered but perplexed and doubtful, saying yet further thereof, Castalio
vbi supra says Quo magis libr^s sacr^^ co^sidero, eo minus hactenus praestitum
video vtcunque ^ra ^^la ^lla intelligas.
the more I do peruse the scriptur^s, the less do I find the same performed
howsoever you understand the said Prophecies. But much more grievous is the
example hereof in David George the hollander, who for many years continued at
Basil professing there the Protestants religion, and by them well esteemed of
till in the end he became a most blasphemous Apostata: and affirming our
Savior to be a Seducer, drew secretly many to his opinion, the principal
motive of his revolt, being, that: Historia Georgij Dauidis printed at Antwerpe
1568. in Octauo the Divines of Basil published his history.
Si Christi and Apostolorum doctrina vera and perfecta fuisset etc. If the
doctrine of Christ and his Apostles had been true and perf^^t, the Church which
they planted etc. should have continued etc. But now it is manifest that
Antichrist has subverted the doctrine of the Apos^l^s. and the Church by them
begun, as is evident in the papacy, th^rfore the doctrine of the Apostles
was false and imperfect. Thus far that wretched Apostata.

By which two foresaid examples of Castalio and David Ge^rge, and other the
premises is fully discovered not only the not fulfilling of the foresaid
Predictions in the Protestants Church, but also the dangerous sequel which
thence ensues against their wholle Church and religion in general.

A CONFVTATION OF THE PROTEstants objections and answers concerning their
Churches not accomplishment of the said predictions. Sect. 6.
AND we may not here dissemble but refer like wise unto your MAJESTY'S grave
judgment, the colors, rather then answers wherewith certain our adversaries do
(in these straites) seek to uphold them selves and their Church,

1 First some would enforce that the universality which is foretold of the
Church, was to be accomplished but after The Author of the book entitled
Antichristus sieve Prognostica finis mundi page 12. fine says, spiritus qui
annunciat futura non operatur nisi eunte Euangelio, quod sub finem ex confesso
Lutherus primus inuexit: And page 13. post medium. he further says, Non
manifestatur aute^ perseudoprophetarum surrectio: nisi Euangelio: quod inde a
primatiuo Apostolorum Euangelio ante Lutherum, vt diximus nunquam iuit, ne quis
autem Hussiticum Euangelium pertinere huc putet, id prohibet quod Christus
illud Euangelium edicit quod sub finem per vniuersum orbem esset iturum: porro
Hussiticum Euangelium Bohemis tantum venit, signo ergo esse non potest, nam
common orbis Euangeliu^ signo esse voluit, non illud vnius gentis: Lutheri
Euangelium per orbem volat tam voce, tam praelo.
Luthers gospel preached which long intermission til Luthers time, as it
implies a manifest breach of Gods foresaid Hereof see heretofore Tract. 2. c.
1. Sect. 1. l. 0.
Couenante: which foresheweth and assures the Churches increase and
prosperouse continuance thereof, and is directly against the opinion of the
most learned Mr. Whitaker in his book Contra Duraeum l. 7. page 472. says,
Quicquid de Ecclesiae propagatione, amplitudine, gloria veteres Prophetae
praedixerunt, id perfectu^ esse historia Luculentissime testatur etc.
Protestants who affirm that the foresaid predictions have been heretofore
performed. And is also other-wise not answerable to the event since Luthers
time, for not so much as any one King or Kingdom of the Gentills is yet
hitherto converted from paganism by Luther or any of his followers: So
likewise Christian hearts may hardly endure to think that we have for so many
ages before Luther, wanted weapons in this behalf against the Jews, or that
God has during the youth and middle time of his Church suspended his foresaid
promises of her happy conversion of Kings and Nations to serve her, and is
but now to fulfill the same in her In hac mundi senecta post tenebras lucem
Euangelij exorir: and pr^lucere voluit Deus. So say the Protestant Divines apud
Osiandrum Centur. 16. page 872. post medium.
declining and decrepit age.

2 Secondly others in steed of answer do object that the Apostle foretells
2 Thessalonians. 2, 3.
a falling away: In discharg whereof it is manifest, first that there is nothing
in this place to prove that the said falling away should continue for so many
hundred years as are before pretended: Secondly we say that this falling away
is (as the Fathers understand) not of the Church, whereof Gloriosa dicta sunt
de te Ciuitas Dei. psalm. 86, 3.
glorious things are foretold, but of Ambros. in hunc locum. and Tertul. de
resurrect. carnis. and Aug. de ciuit. dei l. 20. c. 19. and Hierom. qu. 11. ad
algasiam.
the Roman Empire, which did then 2 Thessalonians. 2, 7.
hold or flourish, and yet in the end must See Dresserus in mil lenar 5. pa.
92. fine and 93. initio.
fall away, and that not in part. but as the text there says, must 2 Thessalonians.
2, 7.
be taken away: which to refer to the Church, were as Mr. Witaker him self
confesses Mr. Whitaker against Mr. William Raynoldes in his answer to the
preface page 33. says: We believe that Christ's Church shall never fail, and
we account it a profane heresy to teach that Christ's Catholic Church has
p^rished from the earth at any time, for this assertion s^aketh the foundation
of all faith:
a profane heresy.

3 Thirdly they do furthermore yet (in lieu of answer) object with Mr. D.
Fulke, that S. John foretells that (by reason of Antichrists persecution
Reuelat. 12, 6. objected thus by Mr. Fulke in his answer to a Counterfaite
Catholic pa. 16. ante medium.
the woman must flee into wilderness there to remain a long season. Whereunto
we likewise say, first that the same scripture witnesses that Renelat. 20, 2,
3.
the old Serpent Satan was bound for a thousand years that he should no more
deceive the Nations till the thousand years were ended: and not loosed
Reuelat. 20, 7. Mr. Willet in his Sinopsis pa. 160. post med. thinks these
1000. years to have ended Anno Do^ni 1294. Mr. Fox in apoc. c. 11. page 245.
circa medium, thinks then to have ended Anno Domini 1300. And vide ibidem pa.
346. fine and 347 fine And see Hospianus in historia sacramentaria l. 4. c. 2.
p. 295. ante med. and in Epist dedicatoria antemed. And Bullenger upon the
Apo^^lipps s^rm. 87. fol. 267. b. fine. Affirms hereupon that the g^spell was
preached not ^n ^^^^r-m^^ker, but most manifest, not short and pin^^ed, ^^at
p^^bshed by (...) space of a thousand yeare^, and re^eaued not of a few, but
of all Nations: etc.
till then. Which number though it be perhaps incertaine as signifying mo
years, yet fewer it cannot signify. and therefore our adversaries in placing
Antichrists appearing and forecing of the Church to fly into wilderness, so
many ages within the first thou sand years after Christ, do therein affirm
against manifest scripture, and the judgment For it is affirmed and collected
from the scriptures, that Antichrist is yet to come by VVicelius in libro de
singularitate Antichristi: by Hierome Zanchius in epist. Pauli ad Phillip.
Collos. and These. page 245. a. and by Franciscus Lambertus who^ Bullenger upon
the Apocalips sermon. 62. fol. 202. b. post med. commends for a most godly and
excellent learned man: of whose judgment that Antichrist is not yet come, see
the book entitled Antichristus siu^ prognostica finis mundi, printed at
Basil. page 74. and 75. and 79. ante medium And concerning the like opinion of
other Protestants see Mr. Dove in his sermon of the second coming of Christ
etc. versus finem where he says: Some Protestants being overmuch modest make a
doubt whether Antichrist be yet revealed or not. And see Mr. Fox act. mon.
(printed 1576.) page 739. b. prope finem and printed Anno 1596. page 366. a.
lin. 17
of their own brethren. Secondly we say that these foresaid words objected,
there to remain a long season, being most material and inserted by Mr. D.
Fulke, not as his own words, but as in the several print or letter of the
scripture, are his own negligent (or else more faulty) addition, and therefore
that there is nothing in the text to prove that this flight (though it were to
have happened within the said thousand years) should against so many foresaid
Prophecies continue for so lorge a season: as either of these last 1300. or
900. years, but only as the text says, modico tempore for Reuelat. 12, 12.
and 17, 10. and 20.3. Mr. Fox in Apoc. c. 11. page 239. versus finem says
hereof: Neque enim fieri potest vt longum tempus codem modico tempore
figuretur, modico enim tempore, modicu^ tempus designatur: to which end he
alleges there Franciscus Lambertus and David Chitraeus. and vide page 347.
fine and 348. and see Fr. du. Ion. upon the revelations c. 20. page 257. and
258.
a short time namely Reuelat. 12, 6.
for a thousand two hundredth and sixty days: or as it is explained in other
terms, for Daniel. 12, 7. and reuelat. 12, 14.
a time, two times, and half a time: or as it is yet further explained for
reuelat. 11, 2. and 13, 5.
two and forty months: all which as well by ordinary computation Mr. Dent in
his ruin of Rome, or exposition upon the revelation page 134.
as also by exposicion of the Fathers, Aug. de Ciuitat. Dei lib. 20. c. 23. and
Hi^rom. in Daniel. c. 7. and Cirrill Catech. 25 and Ireneus lib. 5. fine. and
others. in so much as Mr. Fox in Apocalipsin. page 345. post medium says
hereof. Docti sanctique hic interpretes, plerique fere omnes quos hactenus
videre contigit, nihil hic certi statuunt, nisi quod tempus, tempora, and
dimidium temporis ad tres duntaxit annos and semialterum restringu^t. and vide
ibidem page 362. prope finem.
and of that learned Protestant Hierom Zanchius Zanchius in epistolas Pauli ad
Phillip. Collos. and Thessal. page 245. a.
do amount but unto three years and a half: during which time the hight of
Antichrists persecution is in their opinion hereby foretoulde to rage: Thirdly
we further say that other Protestant writers (who dislike this exposition of
three years and a half: and would enforce a longer term as namely Mr. Forde,
Mr. Ford in Apoc. c. 13. verse. 5. page 97. ante med. says. Menses isti 42.
designant paululum id temporis quod Diabulo concessumerat supra c. 12, 12.
videl. tempus grauissimae illius persecutionis quae durauit ad Constantinum
magnum, supputandi sunt enim prorsus sicut sanctissimus pater Ioannes Foxus
accepit, nempe per sabatha annorum, quomodo menses 42 efficient annos 294.
quibus ex vicesimo anno imperij Constantini (qui ide^ fuit Annus Christi 329.)
subductis, Constabit Prophetia^ istam statim post mortem Christi incepisse.
and Mr. Fox, do understand by every month a Saboth of years affirming so by
the 42. months to be meant. 294. years and that by their opinion those 294.
years begun in the first persecutions of the primative Church, and so ended
about the end of the first 300. years after Christ: which their exposition as
it altogether makes with us, strengthening our former assertion of the not
fulfilling (during that time of the foresaid predictio^s concerning the
Churches happy enlargement, so likewise it leaves our adversaries wholly as
before chargeable, to answer for the fulfilling thereof in the ages succeeding.

And thus much breistly to show to your MAJESTY 1 First That according to that
confessed sense of scripture which Protestants them selves acknowledge, Mr.
Fox in Apoc. page 346. fine and 365 ante med. expresses his like judgment
affirming page 365 that this exposition was delivered to him as it were by
revelation, arcano quodam admonitionis sibilo, sieve voce tamen etc. and with
this exposition agrees Mr. Downham in his treatise concerning Antich^ist c. 8.
page 77 fine:
the Church of Christ was fore toulde to continue after her first increase
wonderfully enlarged with conversion of many KINGS and Kingdoms of the
Gentilles.

2 Secondly, that it is like-wise confessed that many Kings and Nations of the
Gentilles have continually since the conversion of CONSTANTINE our first
Christian Emperor till Luther been accordingly converted Hereof see
heretofore tract. 2. c. 1 sect. 4. in the margent there in the beginning at this
mark (*)
by our Catholic Church, and that our Church has in that estate continued
and flourished, as Mr. Napire confesses for these 1260. years Reining
universally etc.

3 Thirdly that by like confession of Protestants, their Church has been so
far from performing the like, that as them selves acknowledge, she has most
certainly for so l^nge remained Latent and invisible: A scruple so evident
that Castalio there-vpon fell to doubtful speeches of our Christian faith, and
David George to plain Apostasy

THE SECOND CHAPTER
THAT THE TRVE CHVRCH MVST have her Pastors, administration of the word and
Sacraments euer-more to continue. SECT. 1.
THE second point which we intend to offer to your MAJESTY from that
confessed sense of scripture which Protestants acknowledge, is touching the
Churches continued and visible administration of the Word and Sacraments, which
our Savior has ordained to serve as the necessary appointed ordinary means
of our salvation: for albeit that God was able to call, justify, and confirm
the elect without any mediate means, yet has he not as (Calvin confesses)
See Calvin. institut. l. 4. c. 1. sect 5. initio.
determined to accomplish the same, otherwise then in and by the ministry of
his Church.

To begin therefore with the administration of the Word, the Apostle
teaches..1. First that Christ has placed in his CHVRCH, Ephesians. 4, 11 12, 13.
Pastors and Doctors to continue to the consumation of Saints, till we all
meet in the unity of faith, even as our adversaries do hereupon expound) for
ever: Doctor Fulk against the Rhemishe Testament in Ephesians. 4. sect 4. fol. 335
a. inition. And Calvin. in institut. Printed Geneua. 1550. c. 8. de fide sect
37 38. page 233. 234. Melancthon. loc. commun. aedit. 1561. c. de Ecclesia
And hence it is that they affirm, that Calvin. vbi supra
the Church can never want Pastors and Doctors. and which is more, that Mr.
Fulke against Heskins, Sanders etc. pa. 539 prope finem.
Christ will suffer no particular Church to continue without a servant to
ouersee it: and that Mr. Fulke ibid. page 536 paulo post med. And mr. Spark in
his answer to mr. John d' Albines p. 11. prope initium says accordingly. The
Church of Christ has always had and shall have to the end successively in all
ages in one place or other, such as have showed the truth faithfully unto
others, as have shined as lights in their days set upon a Candlestick.
Pastors and Doctors must be in the Church till the end of the world: (even)
from Mr. Fulke ibid. page 569 initio.
Christ's time till Luthers age. In the like assertion whereof the other
Protestant writers The Confession of Heluetia cited in the harmony of
Confessions page 337. and Bertram de loque. in his discourse of the Church p. 79.
are plentiful. 2. Secondly that these Pastors must not be silent, the holy
ghost testifies, foretelling of the Churches Esa. 62, 6.
Watchmen or Pastors. The marginall notes of the English Bible 1576. in Esa.
62, 6.
that they shall not Esa. 62, 6.
be silent. But even as the Apostle says. Romans 10, 14.
How shall they believe whom they have not heard, and h^w shall they hear
without a Preacher. So our aduersa^ies do accordingly hold concern^ng
preachers, that (as Mr. Fulke says) Mr. ^ulke in his answer to a counterfaite
Catholic p. 100. initio.
truth cannot be continued in the world but by their ministry. That therefore
Propositions and principles disputed in the university of Geneua page 245.
circa med.
the ministry is an essential mark of the true Church: that also as Mr.
Deering faith Mr. Deering in his reading upon the epistles to the Hebrews ca.
3. lectur. 15. post initium.
Salvation springs in preaching of the gospel, and is shutt up again with
the ceasing of it. and that Ibid. c. 3. lectur. 16 fine.
take away preaching, you take away faith: for which he cites many scriptures.
3. Thirdly our adversaries do yet further confess, and the nature of the thing
proves it, (for otherwise they were no true Pastors) that these Churches
Pastors (at the least some of them) shall Mr. Fulke in his answer to a
^ounterfaite Catholic page 11 initio and 92 ante med.
always resist all false opinion) even with open reprehension: and that Mr.
Deering vbi supra in c. 2. verse. 12. lect 10 circa med. etc. 3 lect. 12. fine.
the religion being of God, no fear of man shall keep them back, because as
Mr. Deering says hereof) mr. Deering ibid.
that were to keep the honor of God for corners and sol tarry places: for as
the Apostle prescribes Romans 10, 10.
with the heart a man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confesses to salvation.

Concerning now the continued administration of Sacraments. 1. First the
scriptures affirm, that we are thereby to 1. Cor. 11, 26.
show the Lords death till he come. 2. Secondly our puritan adversaries do
acknowledge, and accordingly teach, that there must be Beza in his sermons upon
the Canticles englished page 79. and 80.
Pastors and Doctors to the end of the world for the administration of the Word
and Sacraments: that therefore Mr. Bancroft in the survey of the holy pretended
discipline page 440 post medium.
the ministry of the Word and Sacraments are in absolute degree of necessity
to salvation. with whom our other Protestant adversaries do agree: Mr. Whitaker
saying to this end of the administration of the Word and Sacraments, that Mr.
Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 3. page 249 ante med. says. S^ adsunt Ecclesiam
constituunt and tollunt, si auferantur.
being present they do constitute a Church, and being absent do subvert it.
and Mr. D. Wil^et likewise says of them: Mr. Willet in his synopsis page 71
fine.
these marks cannot be abs^nt from the Church, and it is no longer a true
Church then it has these marks: for as he further says Mr. Willet vbi supra
page 69 finc.
the only absence of them does make a nulletie of the Church: with whom herein
the Lutheranes also Lobechius a Lutherane Doctor and public Professor in the
university of Rostoche in disput. theologic. page 213. sect. 44. affirms of
these and of the Church, that tam areto and indistolubili nexu inter se
copulata sunt, vt in coetu vocatorum, alterum sine altero esse non possit, and
negato vno, alterum quoque negare necesse sit.
do agree. 3. Thirdly our adversaries do yet further hereupon affirm of these,
that Mr Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 3. page 260. says. Sunt Ecclesiae
proprietates essentiales. And see mr. Whitgifte in his defense etc. page 81.
ante med. and see mr. D. Couell in his examination etc. page 21. ante med. and
page 5. fine.
they are essential notes of the Church: and that Hiperius in method. theolog.
page 548 ante med. and page 532. prope finem. And Amandus Pol^nus in partition.
theolog. page 304. ante med.
these notes are needful to distinguish the true Church from the false, that
men careful of their salvation may know where the true Church is and to which
company chiefly they ought to adioyne them selves. And that therefore the
Church militant is in some sort evermore to remain, not poor or slender in
paucetie of professors, but rich and plentiful: Caelius secundus Curio writ a
wholle book hereof, entitled de amplitudine regni Dei. wherein read him lib.
1. page 1. 5. 14. 24. and l. 2. page 135. 148 167 183 232 233 243 246. etc. And
he answers the common objections urged to the contrary l. 1 page 96. 97 100
106 108 115 117 120 128 131.
neither obscure or latent but like to Math. 5, 15. and Esa. 2, 2. Concerning
the answerable exposition of which textes see D. Humfrey hereafter page 84. in
the margent under the letter. e. And S. Austin tom. 6. contra faustu^. Manich.
l. 13. c. 13. says Propter hos enim motus paruulo^um qui possint seduci ab
hominibus, a manifestatione claritatis Ecclesiae, Dominus quoque prouidens ait,
non potest Ciuitas abscondi supra monte^ constituta. And tom. 7. contra liter.
Petil. l. 2. c. 32. he further says. Hinc fit vt Ecclesia vera neminem lateat,
vnde est illud, quod in Euangelio ipse dicit, non potest Ciuitas abscondi supra
montem constituta: ideoque in eodem psalmo connectitur, In sole posuit
tabernaculum suum, id est in manifestatione.
a City placed upon a hill that cannot be hid, known and Bartholomeus
Keckermanus in sistem. theolog. page 408. initio says. Noui testam. Ecclesiae,
ratione notarum and formae externae semper debet esse sensibilis, seu
conspicua, vt nimirum reliquae gentes quae adhuc extra Ecclesiam sunt, scire
possint cuinam Ecclesiae sese debeant agregare, id quod de ecclesia noui
testam. Esa c. 61. ab initio magnificis verbis predixit. And Hiperius in
method. theolog. page 552. prope finem, says: Profecto nisi signa haec
extarent, ac vera ecclesia sensibus deprehenderetur, qui scire possit homo
cumam caetui salutis consequendae ergo adherendum sioi foret. And Peter Marter
in his epist^es annexed to his common places in English page 153. a. circa
medium: reporting certain points wherein he professes to agree with us
Catholics says: We also do not appoint an invisible Church, but do define
Congregations, unto which the faithful may know that they may safely adioyne
them selves. affirming further a little there before, that this opinion is
(says he) Common with us to Catholics.
conspicuouse: a truth so evident that they doubt not thereupon to affirm and
teach out of the scriptures Mr. Henoch Clapham in his sovereign remedy
against schism. p. 18. after many proofs alleged by him from the scriptures,
and otherwise concludes, saying. Not only all auncientes ever hold the
Churches ever visibilitie, but also all learned men of our age: In like full
manner is the Churches visibilitie affirmed from the scriptures as well by
Melancthon in loc. comun. edit. 1561. c. de Ecclesia, and in prefat. lib. corp.
doctrinae Christianae in Ecclesijs Saxon. and mismicis electoris Saxon.
impress. Lipsiae Anno 1561. And in Council. theolog. part. 1. page 512. and
part. 2. page 201. and 394. As also by D. Humfrey in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat.
3. page 240. where he says: Declaratum est nos Ecclesiam non in aere ollocare
sed in terra, nos Ecclesiam confiteri esse opidum supra montem positum, quod
abscondi non p^test. Math. 5. montem excelsum domus Dei cunctis collibus
editiorem, ad quem omnes gentes confluent. Esa. 2. etc. Cur ergo anxie and
curiose probant quod est a nobis nunquam negatum? etc. (And ibidem page 241.
initio. he says) Visibilis est propter exercitia pietatis, quae videntur ab
omnibus in Ecclesia, nam dum ministri docent, alij discunt, illi sacramenta
administrant, hij communicant. etc. qui ista non videt talpa est caecior,
visibilis est quia notae sunt insignes and conspicuae etc. and page 242.
initio. he says, non enim clancularij se^essus etc. conuocationes sunt
Christianae. and page 281 fine he affirms concerning the Church militant
(which is the only point in question) ^portere Ecclesiam esse conspicuam,
conclusionem esse clarissimam.
the Churches ever visibilitie: condemning the contrary opinion of the
Churches pretended Latencie or inuisibilitie, for a monstrouse Melancthon in
Council. theolog. part. 2. says: necesse est fateri esse visibilem Ecclesiam
etc. quo spectat haec portentosa oration qua negat esse vllam visibilem
Ecclesiam. page 393. fine. and 394 initio.
assertion and Mr. Henoch Clapham in his sovereign remedy against schism
page 17 ante medium says. Contrary to all scriptures they do affirm that
there has been no visibilitie of the Church for former hundredth of years,
which position is against Psalm. 72, 3, 17. Esa. 59, 21.
contrary to all scriptures: against which our Savior did (as they think)
specially forewarne us, saying: Math. 24, 23. whereupon mr. H^noch Clapham in
his sovereign remedy against schism page 23. post med. says. Our Savior
forbides going out unto such desert and corner ghospels. Math. 24, 23, 24, 26.
and S. Austine tom. 4. quaest. euang. l. 1. quaest. 38. says, accordingly:
Constituta ergo authoritate Ecclesiae per orbem terrarum clara atque manifesta,
consequenter discipulos admonet and qui in eum credere voluerint, ne
schismaticis atque hereticis credant: vnumquodque enim schisma and vnaquaeque
heresis aut locum suum habet in orb terrarum partem aliquam retinens, aut
obscuris atque occultis conuenticulis curiositatem hominum decipit: Ad quod
pertinet quod ait, si quis vobis dixerit, Ecce hic est Christus aut illic, quod
significat terrarum parts and Prouinciarum. Aut in penetralibus aut in
deserto, quod significat obscura and occulta conuenticula haereticorum. etc.
And see him further contra Faustum Manich. l. 13. c. 13.
If therefore they shall say unto you, Behold he is in the deserte, go you not
forth: Behold he is in secret places believe it not. In so much as they also
affirm the visible dispersion thereof even for that Reuelat. 12, 12, and 17,
10. and 20, 3.
short time during which she is foretold Reuelat. 12, 6.
to flee into wilderness by reason of Antichrists persecution: to which end Mr.
Fulke (though most precise in this behalf) is yet enforced to confess, that
Mr. Doct. Fulke against the Rhemishe Testament in 2. Thessa. 2. sect. 5. fol.
354. b. fine.
the true Church th^^gh obscure and driven into wild^rnes by Antichrist, yet
still continued dispersed over the world, and that Mr. Fulke ibid. fol. 355. a.
initio. to this like effect see Mr. Whitaker in his answer to master
Rainoldes preface page 34 and 37. mr. Fox in Apoc. page 349. post medium
in the time of Antichrist it was not driven into any corner of the world, but
was, is, and shall be always dispersed in many nations: and that not obscure,
but (as Bullenger says) Bullenger upon the Apocalips fol. 200. a. fine. and b.
initio. see the words of Bullenger hereafter in the margent at the figure 3.
tract. 2. c. 2 sect 11.
right famous: which point the text it self does also most inuincibly argue:
for as it affirms that the woman's flight into wilderness must continue
Reuelat. 12, 6
1260 days: so likewise it affirms that the preaching of the Word, must as
then continue in like manner during even the same term of 1260. days: Reuelat.
11, 3.
and must so be as general as the persecution: a matter so undoubted, that
Szegedine says hereupon, Szegedinus in tabul. Analatic. page 368 circa medium.
the ministers of Gods word shall preach all the time in which Antichrist shall
tread under foot the holy City. And Mr. Gifford says likewise, Mr. Gifford
upon the revelations sermon. 21. page 191. fine.
these two witnesses are not to be taken for two and no more, but for all those
which were raised up to impugn Antichrist: and that they should prophecy
during all the time of Antichrists reign. In like testimony whereof, the other
See Mr. Fulke against the Rhemishe Testament fol. 475. b. sect. 4. and
Bullenger upon the Apocalipes in c. 11. fol. 142. b. post medium.
Protestant writers are very plentiful.

THAT PROTESTANTS TO PROVE THE answerable performance thereof (for former ages)
in their Church do allege promiscuously both Catholics and known Heretics
as members of their Church. SECT. 2.
THIS continued and visible administration of the Word and Sacraments, being
the confessed sense of the scriptures, and without which the true Church cannot
be, we will now examine somewhat concerning the answerable performance thereof:
In which point when we provoke our adversaries, there is nothing more usual
with them, then (for their own defense in this behalf) to search out in the
examples of former times, for all such whatsoever, as may be said (though often
falsely) in any sort to have impugned the Pope, but so much as in any one
point either of manners or doctrine: And although they were otherwise never so
different from Protest^nts, yet are they (in these straites) promiscuously
registered by our adversaries in the Catallog. of the Doctors of their Church.
In this sort are named See hereafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 7. in the margent
there at the figure 2. concerning Ioannes de Rupe Scissa, and Willm. de S.
Amore: and see concerning Peter Bloix (claimed by Mr. Gabriell Powell in his
consideration etc. pa. 52. initio.) Osiander incentur. 12. page 281. post med.
where he says: Petrus Blesensis etc. Pricipum Prelatorum religiosorum and
priuatorum peccata grauiter arguit. etc. non tamen Pontificios errores
refutauit was this man then a Protestant?
Ioannes de rupe Scissa Willielmus de S. Amore, and Peter Bloix. for their
only reproving the life and manners of the Clergy, for this only cause also
are named Concerning Willm. Occam read act. mon. printed 1596. page 358. a sin.
88. and b. line 40. and of Scotus see Fox ibid. page 130. b. line 8. and
Osiander cent. 9. page 44. and of Ioannes Gaudauensis read Fox vbi supra page
358. 2. line 88.
William Occam, John Scotus, and John Gaudauensis. In like unjust manner is
named By Mr. Spark in his answer to Mr. John d' Albines page 64 prope finem
And by Simon de voyon in his discource upon the Catallog. of the Doctors of
Gods Church, in the table. numer. 11.
Alcuinus Archbishop of Canterbury, and scoller to S. Bid for his only
opinion untruly pretended against the Real presence, the contrary whereof is
by his own writings more then Alcuinus in lib. de diuinis officijs c. de
Missa. says: Consulens Deus infirmitati nost^ae, qui non solemus carnes crudas
manducare, and sanguinem bibere, facit vt in pristina remaneant forma, duo illa
munera, and est in veritate corpus Christi and sanguis.
evident. So likewise do they name Doctor Humfrey in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat.
3. page 326. initio. And Simon devoyon vbi supra in the table numer. 107.
and claim S. Bid him self whom others of them do more truly and plainly
reject, for a confessed Papist: even Luke Osiander in epitom. cent. 8. page 58.
initio. see this heretofore tract. 1. sect. 1. in the margent at the letter g.
in all those articles wherein Protestants do at this day distent from the Pope.
In like manner Peter Lumberd master of the sentences is by them sorted Simon
Pauli. in method. aliquot locorum doctrine. etc. tradit. Rostochij. fol. 12. b.
in the Catallog of the Doctors and restorers of the heavenly doctrine, and
Simon Pauli ibid. fol. 15 b. and Hiperius in method. theolog. in praefat. page
1. fine and 2. cit^a and post medium.
placed even with Husse and Luther, who was so evidently a known Catholic,
that Mr. Fox therefore terms him Acts and monuments page 41. b. circa medium.
an Archpiller of papistrie. We could give like example Mr. Gifforde in his
sermons upon the revelations page 195. post medium gives instance in Ioannes
Picus Earl of Mirandula. And Simon de Voyon in his discource upon the
Catallogue etc. page 126. post medium: names S. Bernard. And Mr. Fox in his
Callender placed in the beginning of his acts and monuments places Erasmus and
Picus Mirandula and yet Erasmus (in who^ they do more pretend) does in lib. 16.
ep. 11. excuse him self briefly and fully to the contrary: saying. Christum
agnosco, Lutherum non agnosco, Ecclesiam Romanam agnosco.
of S. Bernard, Erasmus, Picus Mirandula, and sundry other known Catholic
writers, whom our adversaries do in like manner most iniustly claim to be of
their Church. And as with Catholics so likewise in this exigeme of need, are
they constrained to make like claim to Mr. Fox acts monu. page 70. a. ante
medi.
Almericus, the Like claim is made to the Albigenses by mr. Spark against mr.
John d' Albines. page 58. ante medium. by mr. Fulke contra Stapletonum, de
successione Ecclesiae page 112. and 271 initio. And by Chrispinus in his book
of the estate of the Church page 350 ante medium. But see plain testimony of
the execrable errors of the Albigenses in Osiander Centur. 13. page 329. And in
Cesarius, Cistert. 5. did. dial. and Luxemb. haer Albig. See also hereafter
tract. 2. c. 2 sect. 3. in the margent at the figure 2.
Albigenses, and sundry other Of like claim made to Peter Bruis, and the
Henricianes or Apostolici: see Catallog. testium veritatis printed Anno 1597.
tom. 2. page 561 and 562.
confessed and known heretics. In diverse of whom Mr. Jewel (to omit
others) See these other Protestants so disclaiming hereafter tract. 2. c. 2.
sect. 3. in the margent at the letter.o.
is enforced to disclaim, saying expressly of them: Mr. Jewel in his defense
of the Apology page 48. And see certain of Almaricus his confessed errors
mentioned hereafter tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 3. in the margent at the letter o.
And by Chrispinus in his book of the estate of the Church page 349 post medium
And see also thereof Cesarius lib. dial. d. 5. and Gaguinus lib. 6. franc. and
Gerson tr^ct. 3. in Matt. and Paulus Amilus l. 6. hist. Galliae. and
Genebrardus in Chron. Anno 1208.
they are none of ours. In examination therefore of these and such other like
known impertine^t examples, we will not be so Idly tedious as to trouble your
Majesty, but will make trial of those in whom our adversaries have greatest
confidence, as namely, Waldo, Wicliff^, and Husse, and in their several
followers, and see if that these can uphold the Protestant Churches
administration of the word and Sacraments, but so much as for those several
ages in which they lived: in whom if our adversaries do fail, then remain
they for any hope to be had of the other no less then desperate.

THAT VVALDO (WHO LIVED ANNO Domini 1220.) was no Protestant and that therefore
the examples of Waldo and his followers is not sufficient to prove (but so much
as for their times) a continuance of the Protestants Churches administration of
the Word and Sacraments. SECT. 3.
TO begin then with Waldo the Protestants adm^n^stration of the word and
sacraments is so little proved by his example to have been but so much as in
being imediatlye befo e and at the time of his first appearing, that (in cl^re
prooffe to the contrary he (as Mr. Fox testifies) was then a Catholi^ke
layman Act. mon. page 628. b. circa med.
a rich merchant of Ly^n^ and so act. mon. page 628 b. paulo post medium.
unlearned that he gave rewards to certain learned men to translate the holy
Scriptures for him and certain other works of the Doctors: and being thus
helped, did as Mr. Fox reports act. mon. vbi supra.
conferr the form of religion in his time to the infallible word of God:
where upon says Mr. Fox act. mon. page 41. b. paulo ante medium
sprung up the Doctrine and name of t^ose which are called Waldenses: act. mon.
p. 628. b. ante medium. or (as he says page 41. b. circa med. About Anno. 1160.
Anno 1218.

2 Seacondlie he had no ordinary vocation or calling by man for our Catholic
Church condemned him, and his proceedings, and therefore would not, call him,
and as for any other Church then being of his profession to call him, there was
none See herafter tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3. at this mark ().
at that time, so much as but in being or known to him. For which cause he and
his followers contemned all calling, teaching that Illiricus in Catal. testium
page 730. 731. 732. 740. 745. And Osiander in epitom. histor. eccles. cent.
9.10.11 etc page 287 fine and 440
Lay men and women might Consecrate (the sacraments) and Preach. And as for
any pretense of extraordina ie calling by God, (which every sectmaster may
a^rogate) even as by the Protestants grauer assertion, it had evermore when it
was in use, Amandus Polanus in partition. theolog. l. 1. p. 308 says:
Ministrorum extraordinary vocatoru^ etiam dona extraordinaria fuere, nempe
Prophetiae, donum edendi miracula: etc. And Musculus loc. comun. page 394.
says: Vocatio quae imediate est a Christo, iam in vsu non est, vt erat olim,
habebat sua signa vnde cognosci potuit, de quibus memenit Marcus Euangelista.
cap. vlt. dicens, predicauerunt etc. sequentibus signis etc. And mr. Henoch
Clapham in his sovereign remedy against schism page 25. initio does upon
this ground reprehend Brown for that he did take upon him extraordinary
calling, and wanted Miracles: and Luther in loc. comu. Clas. 4. c. 20. initio
p. 38. post med. admonishes to this end saying: Hoc explores an vocationem
suam possint probare: neque enim Deus vnquam aliquem misit nisi vel per Hominem
vocatum, vel per signa declaratum, ne ipsum quidem filium. And Luther tom. 5.
Ien. Germ. fol. 491. a. b. says: Vnde vetus? quis te misit etc. vbi sigilla
quod ab hominibus missus sis? Vbi sunt miracula quae te a Deo missum esse
testantur? Also Luther admonished the Senate of Milhouse against Muncer the
Anabaptist saying: Si dicat se a Deo atque ipsius spiritu missum esse
quemadmodum Apostoli: probet hoc signis and miraculis editis, vel nolite far
vt concionetur, nam vbicunque Deus ordinariam viam mutare vult, ibi semper
miracula facit: Luther tom. 2. Ien. Germ. fol. 455. b. and 456. a. and hereof
(...) Sleydon lib. 3. An. 25. Also Sigwartus in his 23 disputationes theologic.
etc page 207 sect. 8. says: Haec vocatio semper extraordinaria quaedam and
diuina dona comitantia habet quae sunt tanquam sigilla doctrinae etc. cuiusmodi
fuerunt miracula etc.
Miracles adjoined thereto in testimony that it was from God, (which were
wanting in Waldo) So likewise as the learned Protestants them selves grant, it
is now since the Apostles times Musculus vbi supra and Lobechius in disput.
theolog. page 358 fine and 359 initio. says: Imediatam porro vocationem cum
mediata ab Apostolis permutatam esse scriptura testatur etc. credimus imediatae
vocationis vsum Deo in hoc mundo nullum (amplius futura, nullam quippe de ea
dedit promissionem, nullum mandatum. And D. Sarauia in his book of the diverse
degrees of Ministers page 9. initioterm^th extraordinary calling an unknown
coast out of which (the now defendors thereof) can no ways wind them selves.
And see mr. D. Couell in his defense of mr. Hooker page 86. fine and 87.
initio. and see Sarauia in defen. tract. etc. contra resp. Bezae p. 306 and
307. And ibid. page 37. circa med. he says Sed speciem illam extraordinariae
vocationis ad Ecclesiae ministerium etc. cum nullo testimonio scripturarum, nec
exemplo certo doceatur, non admitto, est enim periculi plena, and noui malique
exempli etc. ea sola fretus nemo se ministerio Ecclesiastico ingerere debet.
And see there page 35. 36. 38. etc.
ceased and not t^ be expected as being without all proof or testimony in
the writings of the new testament. If now therefore Waldo did (as appears by
Protestants them selves undertake to Simon de Voyon in his discource upon the
Catalog. of the Doctors etc. page 132. post medium, and Crispinus in his book
of the estate of the Church page 339. ante med.
Preach being (but) a Lay^ s^culer man, and so wanted call^ng, much less then
could he confer calling to others: therefore both he and all his followers
which descended from him were through their want of calling No man takes the
honor unto him, but he that is called of God, as Aaron: hebr. 5, 4. How shall
they preach except they be sent. Romans 10, 15. Who so enters not in by the
door into the Sheepefould but clymeth up an other way, is a thief. John. 10, 1.
intrudors, having no more authority to celebrate and administer Sacraments
(excepted only Baptism in time of necessity which Baptism by lay persons in
time of necessity is affirmed by the Fathers as witnesses. Calvin. institut.
l. 4. c. 15. sect. 20. confessing and saying hereof. Multis abhinc seculis,
adeoque ab ipso fere Ecclesiae exordio vsu receptum fuit, vt in periculo mortis
Laici Baptizarent si minister in tempore non adesset. It is in like manner
affirmed by the Lord Archbishope of Canterbury in his defense against
Carthwrite pa. 518 and 519. ante med. and many other Protestants.
a lay person may do) then they had power to create a new world, so little is
the continuance of Protestants administration of the Word and Sacraments
enabled by Waldo.

3 Thirdly concern^ng the Protestants doctrine of Justification by only
faith, which is in their judgment Mr. Clarke in the disputation had in the
Tower with Edm. Camp. the 4. days conference Arg. 1 D. iiii
the soul of the Church: The Cofession of Bohemia in the harmony of
Confessions in English page 253.
of all other points of doctrine the weightiest. and which says: Mr. Fox act.
mon. page 402. a. circa med.
Luther opened as being long hid before. It was so unknown to Waldo, and he so
wholly affected to our Catholic doctrine of merittes and Works (which
Protestants term Penrie in his book entitled Mr. Some laid open in his
colors page 29. 30.
the very heart, life, and soul of Papistrie,) that he did D. Humfrey in
Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 3. page 270 circa medium: and Mr. Fox act. mon. page
628. b. fine
forsake all things that being poor he might follow Christ and the
Euang^licall perfection: which our adversaries reject Mr. Fulke against the
Rhemish testament in Math. 19. sect. 9. fol. 38. b. And mr. Perkins in his
reformed Catholic page 241. and Calvin. institut. lib. 4. cap. 13. sect. 13.
for Popish: In so much as he and his followers were a very profession of
begging Friars, and therefore called acts and monuments page 41. b. circa
medium and page 629 a. ante medium.
the poor men of Lions Doctor Humfrey in Iesuitismi part. 2. page 270 circa
medium.
professing (as D. Humfrey urges) a kind of monastical life: wherein they were
so forward, that they afterward Vrspergenses in Chronic. Anno 1212.
made means to Innocentius the third then Pope to have their order by him
confirmed, but could not prevail

4 Fourthly the Waldenses held sundry gross errors. as namely their denial
See Guido and Antoninus de Waldensibus: and Aeneas Siluius in his Bohemica
historia de Waldensium dogmatibus: And Luxemb. in haer. Paup. de Lugduno.
of all judgment to blood. and See Illiricus in Catal. testium veritatis page
748. prope initium.
of the Saboth. In regard of which latter they were also called Act. mon. page
41. b. circa med. and see Simon de Voyon in his discource upon the Catallog. of
the Doctors of the Church. p. 134
insabalistes. They also further taught Illiricus in Catal. testium veritatis
p. 731. fine. and 745. ante med. and 730. circa med. and 732. initio 740. ante
medium.
that Layemen and women might Consecrate (the Sacrament) and preach. That
Illiricus ibid. page 729. circa med. and 747. post medium. and 760 circa med.
Clergy men should have no Possessions or property. that Illiricus ibid page
729. post medium
there should be no division of Parishes, nor Churches: for Ibid. page 749.
initio: and 733 circa med. and page 760 fine.
a walled Church they reputed as a barn and^. alleging textes against Ibid.
page 749 initio
Churches made with hands: that Illiricus ibid. page 735. ante med. and 756.
ante med. and 752. initio.
men ought not to swear in any case. Ibid. page 731 circa med. and 743 post med.
they condemned the Sacrament of marriage: affirming that those Ibid.
married persons mortally sinned, who accompanied together without hope of
issue. they held Ibid. page 746. ante medi. and 731. post med.
all things done above the girdle, by kissing, touching, words, compression
of the pappes etc. to be done in charity, and not against continency. That
also Ibid. page 760. circa med. and 740. ante med and test Osiandro in epitom.
histor. Eccles. ce^t. 9. 10. 11. etc. page 440 post med.
neither Priest nor civil Magistrate being guilty of mortal sin did enjoy
their dignity, or were to be obeyed. Illiricus in Catall. test. Ver. page 735.
post med. and 755. post med.
They condemned Prince and Judges. Ibide^. page 730. fine.
They affirmed singing in the Church to be an infernal clamor. And (to omit
sundry other), they taught that they might dissemble their religion, and so
accordingly Ibid. page 734 paulo post med.
they went to the Catholic Church dissembling, and offered, confessed, and
Communicated diss^mblingly. By reason of which their dissimulation they
secretly increased in sundry places to a great number before they could be
discovered: for which our adversary Illiricus Illiricus ibidem page 722. ante
med. faith of them: Non est quidem id omnino probandum, quod in multis locis
diu sine vlla publica Confessione fuerint.
not unworthily reproves them.

And if Protestants will not believe the writers of those times reporting these
and sundry other gross errors of them, why then may they not excuse in like
manner Peter Bruis, Almericus, the Albigenses, and the Apostolici, or
Henricianes: all which lived in that age and are confessed to have held Peter
Bruis denied Transubstantiation, Mass, Prayer for the dead, the single life of
Priests and Monckes, Veneration of the Cross, Church music etc. Osiander
centur. 12. page 282. 283. and see Catallog. testium veritatis printed 1597
tom. 2. page 561. and 562. Almericus denied the Real Presence C^nsing of
Churches with frankencence: he also taught that, every faithful person ought
to believe his own salvation, as surely any article of his faith. Hereof see
Vincentius in speculo historial. and Bernardus Lutzemb. de haeresibus) and
Osiander centur. 13. page 327. Also he denied Images. Fox act. mon. fol. 70.
upon the A. side col. 1. ante med. and denied likewise Tra^substantiation,
Aultars, and praying to Saints. hereof see mr. Mores Table page ^74. fine. And
Pantaleon in Chronograph. page 98. the Albigenses denied Prayer for the dead,
Purgatory, Confession, Extreme Unction, the Popes authority, Images, Pardons,
Ceremonies, and Traditions: Hereof see Fox act. mon. fol 71. upon the B. side
col. 2. post med. And Cesareus Hesterbachius l. 5. c. 21. and Antoninus 4.
part. tit. 11. c. 7. the Apostolici or Henricianes, Burned Crosses: denied the
Real presence and Sacrifice of the Mass: Also Festival days, consecration
of Chrisme and Oil, Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead, Prayer to Saints.
etc. Hereof see Petrus ^^^na^^^sis lib. contra haereses etc. S. Bernard. sermon.
66. in Cantic. And Bernardus Bo^aualensis vitae S. Bernardi l. 2 c. 5. and
Osiander in Epi^om. etc. Centur. 12. page 291 ante med. and Pantaleon in
Cronograph. page 92.
sundry of the Protestants opinions as well as did the Waldenses: and are yet
nevertheless by learned Protestants rejected and reputed for The Apostolici
are censured for Heretics by mr. Fulke in his retentiue against Bristow etc.
page 124. and by Osiander centur. 12. page 291. ante med. And Mr. Jewel in his
defense of the Apology page 48. disclaimeth in Almaricus, the Albigenses, and
Apostolici, saying expressly of them: they be none of ours. And Peter Bruis is
censured for an Heretic by Osiander centur. 12. page 282. 283. And see the
several absurd errors of Almaricus reported by Osiander in epitom. hist.
Eccles. centur. 9. 10. 11. etc. page 326. and of the Apostolici reported by
Osiander ibidem page 291 ante med. and of the Albigenses reported by Osiander
ibid. page 329. and o^ Peter Bruis reported by Osiander in cent. 12 page 282
and 283. and see further heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 2 in the marge^t at
the letters q. and r. And Hospinianus in historia Sacramentaria lib. 4. page
361 post medium says: Henricus quidam cum Petro Bruis circa Annum Domini 1140
docere caepit semel tantum in ipsa vltima Domini caena Apostoli Christi corpus
vere datum sub specie panis, deinceps autem ^^eram deceptionem esse quod
Sacerdotum ministerio dicitur aut creditur: testis est and refutator huius
erroris Petrus Cluniacensis qui eodem tempore floruit, in tractatu de
Sacrificijs.
Heretics, in regard only of those sundry other most absurd heretical
opinions, wherewith the writers of those times do in like sort charge them. Or
why also may not the now succeeding ages say as much hereafter in like excuse
as well of Barrowe, Brown, Hacket: Ardington etc. as also of Mr. Fulke in his
answer to a counterfaite Catholic. page 62.
the horrible heresies of the Anabaptists, Libertines, Swenfeldianes, and such
otherlike of this age as have sprung from Protest^nts, holding as yet most of
their opinions? Or with what credit can Protestants them selves al eage the
same writers to prove that the Waldenses held certain points of their faith?
for if they depend upon their testimony in that, how can they upon mere
supposall make it doubtful in the other? considering it is evident that in
those former times the said reporters indifferently and alike condemned all
those opinions wherein the Waldenses did as then dissent from the Roman Church,
as not fo^eknowing which of those opinions we of this age would a low or
reject. This point is yet made much more evident by example of the foresaid
Albigenses whose execrable errors are specially acknowledged and Osiander in
centur. 13. l. 1. c. 4. page 329. initio. says: Exorta est haeresis
Albigentium etc. Dogmata haec illis attribuuntur, duo esse principia Deum viz.
bonum and Deum malum, hoc est Diabulum, qui omnia corpora creet, bonum autem
Deum creare anim^s: etc. Baptismum abijciunt, ire in Ecclesias vel in eis orare
nihil prodesse etc. Matrimonia damnabant, promiscuos concubitus eosque
nefarios, sanctos ducebat Corporum resurrectione^ negant: etc. Quod Christus
non fuerit verus homo, nec vere comederit: etc. And a little after there, he
further says. Hae propositiones cum sint absurdae, impiae and hereticae etc.
Cum Albigenses admonitiones non admitterent, sed in erroribus and sceleribus
persisterent. Adhortante Pontifice Romano, magistratus polliticus, collecto
exercitu, duabus vicibus aliquot millia Albigensium tru^^darunt: multi etiam
Capitibus truncati and cremati leguntur qui hinc inde sunt deprehensi: fuit
enim Albigensis furor Anabaptisticus, qualis Anno 1534. nostro seculo
Anabaptistarum monasterientium erat; See also further hereof the centurie
writers of Magdeburg. centur. 13. c. 5. and mr. Marbecks common places page 22.
may now mr. Fox and Chrispinus allege these thousands thus slain in their
Catallogue of Protestant Martirs?
reported by sundry Protestant writers, and they the^eupon rejected for
confessed Mr. Jewel in his defense of the Apology page 48. disclaimeth in the
Albigenses, and others there named, saying expressly of them, they be none of
ours. and Osiander cent. 13. page 329. says, as is before alleged that their
opinions were absurd, wicked, and heretical that they admitted no admonition,
but persisted in their errors and wickedness: and calls them yet further an
anabaptisticall fury. And Pantaleon in chronographia page 98. numbreth them
amongst Heretics. And so likewise does Mr. Marbecke in his common places page
22.
Heretics. Now these Albigenses lived in the same time with the Wal^e^s^, and
were (as Mr. Fulke and other Protestant writers do acknowledge) Mr. Fulke de
successione ecclesiastica contra Stapletonum page 332. ante medium. says of
the Waldenses: Iam dixi a Papistarum vulgo nomen hoc i^lis inditum, vt alias
dicti sunt pauperes de Lugduno, Leonistae, Albigenses, and quicquid placuit
Antichristi Scurris: And ibid. page 333. circa med. he says: Quae Antoninus
etiam and Matheus paris. de Albingensibus quos eosdem esse cum Waldensibus illa
Archiepiscoparum epistola probat etc. and vide ibid. page 359. post medi. And
Mr. Spark in his answer to mr. John d'Albines page 58. says to Albines
concerning the Waldenses, your friends call them Waldenses, Albigenses pauperes
de Lugduno etc. changing their titles and names according to the diversity of
places and times they lived in, howsoever their religion was all one.
of the same sect with them b^ing therefore by him and others challenged Hereof
see heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 2. in the margent at the letter. q.
as members of the Protestants Church, and called Albigenses only of the
country Mr. Spark vt supra and Simon de Voyon in his defense upon the Catall.
of the Doctors of Gods Church page 138. initio says they inhabited the
Country about Toulouse and Albi.
in which that company remained, as in like resembla^ce the Hugonottes of
France, and Puritanes of Scotland, and England profess to be of one religion
notwithstanding the diversity of name, whereby they be diversely called or
known in those se^erall countries.

Hereunto we could (in further explanacion of this point) also add the sundry
confessed and known doctrines and rebellions of the Waldenses of latter times
condemned by Protestants and testified by Melancthon Melancthon. in council.
theologic. part. 2. page 152. ante med. in an epistle to a friend of his who
ministered the Communion to Infants: says. Gaudeo te de summa doctrinae
nobiscum sentire, Waldenses scio dissimiles esse and quidem nimis morose
defendant quaeda^, de quibus aliqua^do cu^ eisrixatus sum quida^ nolunt absolve
re Lapsos, qui ad poenite^tiam redeunt, negant coniugium suis Sacerdotibus.
and other Protestant Benedict. Morgenstern. in tract. de ecclesia page 79.
paulo post med. says: Di^i autem possunt noui Waldenses (ex seipsis nati) vel
participantes quia partem capiunt a Papistis, partem a Sacramentarijs, partem
meliorem a Lutheranis vel fratres (quo nomine valde gaudent) sed falsi, vel
certe ignorantiae, quia lucem doctrinae diuinitus accensam hoc saeculo
supercilio se neglexeru^t, and errores crassissimos etia^ ab ipso Luthero An.
1523 monstratos etc. clam scriptis apud suos mordicus defenderunt, id quod
demu^ post obitum Lutheri innotuisse. D. D. Ioannes Hedericus scribit etc. And
ibid. pa. 124. he says to them. Antichristi institutum de numero sacramentorum
confirmatis. licet id quidem saepius in alijs articulis fecistis, vt in
doctrina, de celibatu, votis, sacra scriptura, bonis operibus, Iustificatione,
Baptismo paruulorum, nec non de Purgatorio. Et vide ibid. page 154. and 226.
fine. See Seluecerus his testimony of the Waldenses false doctrines, and
gross errors not to be suffered. And in the book de Russorum, Muscouitarum,
and Tartarorum religionis. page 96 Lascitius a Protestant writer, affirms the
calling of their Clergy to be by casting of lottes. Persuasi Deum moderatorem
sortis futurum.
writers, even after that they were altered Laconici Antisturmij Spongia
aduersus Lamberti Danaei Antiosiandrum. page 35. initio. mencioneth their being
altered by Luther.
in many things by Luthers instruction.

Upon which premises concerning Waldo and his folowers for so much as it is
made evident thereby. 1 First that imediately before his first appea^ing he was
a Catholic, and not member of any other Church to him then known or in being
a matter furthermore so manifest that the Protestant writers do therefore
affirm his first proceeding to have been in time of Crispinus in his discource
of the estate of the Chucch. page 338. paulo post medium.
thick darkness, and as a first and little begini^g of the instauration of the
Christian religion 2 Secondly that he was then also, but a lay man, and so
wanted calling. 3 Thirdly that his opinion concerning Justification, and sundry
other points of faith were Catholic. 4 Fourthly and lastly that he and his
followers held sundry gross and damnable errors. We do humbly as now submitt
to your MAJESTY'S learned judgment, whether that Protestants may allege this
example of the Waldenses as sufficient to continue and vphould the
administration of their Churches Word, and Sacraments. But so much as at and
since that foresaid time See before tract. 2 cap. 2. sect. 3. b. x. y.
of Anno 1218. in which Waldo first appeared.

THE LIKE IS SHEVVED OF VVICLIFFE (Who lived Anno Domini 1370.) and his
followers. SECT. 4.
AS concerning John Wycliffe and his followers, he as Mr. Fox reports Act.
mon. 85. a. post medium.
flourished Anno Domini 1371. was our countrie-man and so far before his first
appearing from being of any Church in which the Protestants administration of
the Word and Sacraments was then cont^nued: (whereof as appears by Mr. Fox
Mr. Fox act. mon. p. 85. b. initio. affirms that, out of all doubt all the
world was in a m^st desperate and vile estate, and that lamentable ignorance and
darkness of Gods truth had ouershadowed the wholle earth, when John Wycliffe
stepped forth. etc. as the morning star in the midst of a cloud. And mr.
Fox act. mon. printed. 1596. page 391. b. line 60. says, that in times of
horrible darkness when there seemed in a manner to be no one so little spark of
pure doctrine left or remaininge, Wycliffe by Gods providence rose up, through
whom the Lord would first waken and raise up again the world. etc. And
Osiander in his epitom. hist. Eccles. centur. 9. 10. 11. page 439 post med.
says. Libri Wycleu^ non per omnia sunt pur^, non enim habuit tum coaetaneos
qui potuissent eum (sicubi longius extra metas progressus fuisset.) fraterne
admonere.
and others not so much as any entry or being could be to him then known.)
that he himself was then before a Catholic Priest, even the Mr. Stowes
Annals of England faithfully collected etc. Printed 1592. pa. 464 initio.
Parson of Lutterworthe in Leicestershire: And as Mr, Stowe in his Annualls or
chronicle dedicated to the new Lord Archbishop of Canterbury abridgeth his
story Stowe ibid. page 425. post med.
He (first) Inueyed against the Church f^r that he had been deprived by the
Archbishope of Canterbury from a certain benefi^e etc. And having so upon
this occasion separated him self from the Church in which he formerly was Stow
vbi supra.
He with his disciples went barefooted and baselie clothed in course russet
garments down to the heel: and Stow ibidem. page 426 ante medium.
seemed to contemn all temporal goods for the love of aeternall riches,
adioined him self to the b^gging Friar^ approving their poverty and
extolling their perfection: reteining also his fo mer Catholic opinion
concerning Wycleuus de blasphemia ap. 17. mencioning aqua benedicta says
withal in proof thereof, Habuerunt Christi Discipuli potestatem corpora tam
rationabilia quam irrationabilia consecrandi.
Holy Water: Wycleuus de Eucharistia cap. 9. says, adoramus imagines vnde vt
signa etc. conceditur ergo quod reliquiae, imagines, and sacramenta sunt cum
prudentia adoranda. And in decalogo super primo mandato cap. 15. he says
Introductae sunt imagines in Ecclesiam vt sint libri Laicorum and signa
recordatiua singulis Christianis vt adore^t debite Sanctos Dei.
the worshipping of Relics, and Images: Wycleuus in sermon. de Assumptione
Mariae, says: Hic videtur mihi, quod impossible est nos praemiari sine Mariae
suffragio etc.
the intercession of our Blessed Lady, St. Marie: The Wycleuus de tractatu
degradationibus scholasticis c. 3. says of them: Sunt docta implicit in sua
specie vel suo principio, (and that) supposita quacunque tali caeremonia
virtuosa vel licita, fuit docta per appositiones in su^ principio.
apparel and tonsure of priests: The Wycleuus de Apostasia c. 18. mencioneth
and allows them: And Ioannes Przibrauus (an heretic who lived near the
same time) in professione fidei c. 28 says Ioannes Wycleuus libro de Apostasia
cap. 18. approbat totum ritum Missae a principio fere vsque ad finem etc.
Rite: and Cerem^nies of the Mass Wycleuus ad caput primum prioris ad Corinth.
says: Vnctio extrema est medicina ad sanandum peccatum, vt patet Iacobi. 5.
(affirming there further that it is made) cum oleo oliuae ab Episcopo
consecrato.
Extreme Unction. and all Wycleuus in Postilla super 15. c. Marci numbreth and
mentions them all. and in postilla super 1. Cor. 1. he further says quaedam
sacramenta etc. per se promulgauit (Christus) vt Baptismum, Eucharistiam,
Ordine^, and Poenitentiam: quaedam autem per Apostolos vt Confirmationem and
Extremam Vnctionem etc.
the s^auen Sacraments, and all those sundry other points of our Catholic
faith now in question, with denial whereof he is not found so much as charged.

2 Secondly he held sondrie strange and damnable heresies, as (amongst other)
that Act. mon. page 96. a. art. 4. and b. art. 15. Osiander in epitom. hist.
Eccles. centur. 9. 10. 11. and page 452. art. 4.
if a Bishope or Priest be in deadly sin he does not order Consecrate nor
Baptize act. mon. page 96. a. fine and 93. b. art. 12. and Osiander vbi supra
page 453. art. 10. and page 458. art. 36.
that ecclesiastical ministers should not have any temporal p^ss^ssions or
Melancthon in epist. ad Frideric. miconium (extante) in libro epistolarum
Suinglij and Oecolampadij page 622 initio. says of Wycliffe. Contendit
Presbiteris non licere vt possideant quicquam propriu^.
property in any thing. but should Melancthon. loc. comun. de potest. eccles.
ante med. says. illa Wycleuica superstitio pernitiosa and seditiosa est, quae
adigit ministros ecclesiarum ad mendicitatem, and negat eis licere proprium
tenere.
beg. Osiander vbi supra p 459. art. 43.
He condemned lawful oaths. Savoring therein (says Osiander) of Anabaptisme.
he also taught that Osiander cent. page 457. prope initium.
all things come to pass by absolute necessity. which is Stoicall. and as
for the Protestants doctrine of Justification, it was so unknown to him that
as Waldensis (who lived in the same time with him) affirms he exceeded in the
contrary, defending Waldensis tom. 3. cap. 7. 8. 9.
Human merrittes as the damnable heretic Pelagius held them. In so much
that Melancthon says accordingly of Wicliffe Melancthon in epist ad Frideric.
mico^. in lib. epist. Suinglij and Oecolampadij page 622. prope initium says.
prorsus nec intellexit nec tenuit fidei iustitiam.
verily he did not understand nor hold the Justice of faith. and doubeth not
with all to say of him, Melancthon ibid.
I have found in him many other errors whereby one may judge of his spirit.

Lastly (to omit diverse other) he held as Melancthon terms it Melancthon
ibidem says of Wycliffe. De domino civilly sophistice plane and seditiose
rixatur.
a se litiouse doctrine, and mother of all rebellion, teaching Osiander in
epitom. histor. Ecclesiast. centur. 9. 10. 11. 12. etc. page 454. fine art. 15.
and Council. Constantien. Sess. 8. art. 15. And Melancthon in disput. de Iure
magistratuum says hereof. Insanij^ Wycleuus qui sensit impios nullum dominium
habere. And in Commentarijs ad politica Aristotelis, he further says, miras
tragedias excitauit Wicleuus, qui contendit eos, qui non habent spiritum
sanctum amittere dominium, and colligit multas so phisticas rations ad
confirmandum hoc dogma. etc. recitabimus quaedam argumenta Wycleu^ etc.
that there is no civil Magistrate whilst he is in mortal sin: and that
Osiander in epitom. centur 9. 10. 11 etc. page 405 art. 17.
the people may at their pleasure correct Princes when they do offend. and
according to this principle Mr. Stowes Annals etc. page 550. post med.
the favorers of wycliff^s doctrine did (as Mr. Stow reports) n^^ ^e up
schedules upon the Churches doors of London containing that there was a
hundredth thousand men ready to rise against all such as could not away with
their sect. In so much as Sr. John Ouldcastle Wycliffes chief disciple or act.
mon. page 268. b. fine And Mr. Stowes Annals etc. page 550. post medium.
follower Mr. Stowes Annals ibidem.
to whose force and wit these other trusted Burst forth into Mr. Stowe vbi
supra page 566. initio. also his enditement of high treason is extant of
record, and set down by Mr. Fox act. mon. printed 1596. page 529. b. where he
more bouldly then advisedly labors upon surmises to discredit the said
record.
treason against the King and Mr. Stowe ibidem page 551. prope initium.
did confederate him self with others to fight against the King in St. Giles
feelde. At that time Mr. Stow ibid. page 551. circa medium.
were taken fourscore men in armor of that faction. And Ibid. page 551 prope
finem.
37. of the^ (publicly) condemned and executed. And Sr. John Ouldcastle him
self being at the last taken, was likewise executed in the said feilde of St.
Giles, at what time he was so fantastical, that at the time of his execution
Mr. Stow ibid. 572 fine.
when many honorable persons were present, the last words he spoke was to Sr.
Thomas Erpingham, adiuring him, that if he saw him rise from death to life
again the third day, he would procure that his sect might be in quiet. By all
which premises concerning Sir John Ouldcastle, taken from Mr. Stowes Chronicle
(dedicated to the now Lord Archbishope of Canterbury) it seems that Mr Fox
was in extreme need of examples to maintain the continuance of his visible
Church, when in his acts and monuments he so publickely and seriously
registered this Sr. John for Act. mon. page 261 b. and see there the title of
Ouldcastles history. and see Mr. Downeham in his treatise concerning
Antichrist. page 41. prope initium.
a valiant and most worthy M^rtir for the true profession of Christ's Gospel.

And thus much briefly (to omit much more Ioachimus Vadianus a Swinglian of
Zuriche de Eucharistia lib. 5. page 161. says of Wycliffe. In nonnullis faede
lapsus est. etc. He was fowly ouerseene in sundry points of religion and more
given to scoffinge and pratinge then became a sober Divine. And Pantaleon in
Chronolog. page 119. ante med. accou^teh Wycl^ffe for an Heretic. And placing
him there in his Catallogue of Heretics. says. Ioannes Wyclefius cum
Lolhardis in Anglia suam haeresim predicat. etc. And Mathias Hoe in his
tractat. duo etc. tract. 1. de disput. page 27. expressly places and numbreth
the W^clenistes and Hussistes in the rank of Heretics, calling them and
others by him there named most monstrous monsters. Also it appears by mr.
Fox that Wicliffe was an usual dissembler of his faith: and that to prevent
danger of trouble he did ordinarily practice the same, to which purpose mr.
Fox. act. mon. page 95. a fine, says. W^cliffe being beset with troubles was
forced once again to make confession of his doctrine, in which confession, as
occasion served for to avoid the rigor of things he answered with intricate
words etc. Anno. 1381. And page 91. a. versus finem. he signifies Wicleues
often recantation: alleging Wicliffe saying. And now again as before, also I
do revoke and make retractation etc. by means whereof as Mr. Fox confesses a
little there before Wicliffe wonde him self out of the Bishopes snares Anno
1377. And p. 846. a. paulo post med. it is testified how that Wycliffe in an
epistle written by him ad Ioannem Episcopum Lincoliensem, retracted his former
doctrine against the Real presence of Christ's Body in the sacrament and in
the Mass, reconciling him self in that article to the Church of Rome: and
page 98. b. post med. and 99. a. it appears that Wicliffe Anno. 1384. (which
was not three years before his death) in his epistle to Pope Vrbane does purge
him self to the Pope, acknowledging that, the Bishope of Rome is the Vicar of
Christ here upon earth. with much more other like dissimulation: By ^eason of
which kind of practice, Wicliffe so escaped the aggrauated danger of those
times, that as Mr. Fox witnesses page 98. a. paulo ante med. He return^d
agai^^ to his parish of Lutte^ worth whereof he was parson, and quietly there
(says mr. Fox) Slept in the Lord upon St. Siluesters day ann^ 1387.
that might be said (concerning Wycliffe and his followers) wherein is showed. 1
First that imediately before his first appearing he was a Catholic Priest, and
no Church of Protestants then known to be so much as but in being. 2 Secondly
that after his reuolte he retained still sundry Catholic points of faith. 3
Thirdly that he held sundry gross and damnable errors. 4 Fourthly and lasty
that his doctrine was treasonable and his followers were notable co^uicted
traitors: whereupon we refer (as before) to your Majesty's learned judgment,
whether that the example of Wicliffe and his followers does enable the
continuance of the Protestants Churches administration, of the Word and
Sacraments, but so much as for and since that time in which he first appeared.

THE LIKE IS SHEVVED OF HVSSE (who lived Anno Domim 1400.) and his followers.
SECT. 5.
AS concerning John Husse, who was brought in question Simon de Voyon in his
discource upon the catallog. of the doctors of Gods Church page 159
about the year 1405. little is needful to be said, for his chief trouble
was for urging communion to the lay people under both kinds, (which point
Protestants acknowledge to be but a matter of indifferency, Melancthon in
centur. epist. theologic. page 252. initio. and see the protestant writers
alleged, and by mr. Jewel not denied, in his reply page 110. and 109.
and for his affirming act. mon. page 230. b. art. 1. and 2. and confessed of
Husse by Osiander in epitom. cent. 15. page 469. paulo post medium. where he
repeateth Wycliffe and Husse his doctrine saying: Nullus est Dominus ciuilis,
nullus est Prelatus, nullus est Episcopus, dum est in mortali peccato: haec
propositio approbari non potest, sed passus est Ioannes Husse hac in part
aliquid humani vt supra demonstrauimus.
of Wicliffes seditious doctrine against Princes, Priests, and Bishopes, if
they committed mortal sin: other wise he believed Act. mon. page 216. a.
fine and b. initio.
seven Sacraments. act. mon. page 209. a. fine and b. initio. and post med.
and page 197. b. fine.
Transubstantiation. Mr. Jacob in his defense o^ the Churches and ministry of
England page 13. ante med. and act. mon. page 227. b. art. 7. and 8. and page
216 are. 12. and Luther in assertionibus Art. 30 says. Ioannes Husse non
repugnare videtur quo minus sit Monarchia Papae. (and a little there before) he
further says of Wicliffe. non parum detulit romano idolo.
the Popes Primacie. and Luther in colloquijs germanicis cap. de Missa says:
Missa priuata multos sanctos decipit a tempore Gregorij per Annos. 800. Ioannes
Husse codem reti captus fuit.
the Mass it self: and being a Catholic Priest said Mr. Jacob. vbi supra.
And Hulderich Reichentale who was a Citizen of Constance and lived in that time
testifies the same in hist. teutonic. de con^il. Constantiens.
Mass even to his dying day: and was so Catholickly resolved in other points
of faith, that Luther says. Luther in colloquijs germanicis cap. de
Antichristo.
the Papists burned John Husse when as yet he departed not a finger breadth
from the Papacy, for he taught the same which the Papists do, only he found
fault with their vices and wicked life, against the Pope he committed nothing.
And the same is yet further testified of Husse by Mr. Fox in Apoc. c. 11. page
287. post med says: Hieronimus Laudans Ioannem Hussium ait, nihil illum
aduersus Ecclesiae statum commeruisse, tantu^ abusus, Clericorum superbiam,
fastu^ ac Pompam Prelatorum far minus potuisse.
Hierome of Prag, who lived in the same time with him: a thing so evidently
true that no meaner a witness then Mr. Fox, testifies the same as yet much
more fully, rebuking for that very reason the Popes causing Husse to be burned:
to which end Mr. Fox says: Mr. Fox in Apoc. c. 11. page 290. post med.
says. Hussium and Hieronimum vt haereticos traducunt, quid ita obsecro? etc.
Addo aliquid amplius si hereticus est, qui a placitis Romanae Ecclesiae de
flexit, quid vnquam docuit, aut in concilio defendit Hussius in quo non cum
Papistis superstitiose co^sentire videbatur? quid de Tra^substantiatione
statuit fides Pontificia quod ipse pariter cum ijsde^ Pontificijs non
confirmauit? Quis Missas illo religiosius celebrauit, aut vota sacerdotalis
celibatus castius obseruauit? Add huc quod in dogmate Catholicorum de libero
arbitrio, de Predestinatione de fide formata, de iustificationis causa, de
meritis bonorum operum, quid aliter sentit ille quam quod docetur Romae, quam
ille vnquam statuam aut diui imaginem eiecit e templo suo Bethlehem? etc.
Agedum, quid igitur commeruisse illum dicemus, in quo aut non ipse pariter cum
Romana Sede condemnandus sit, aut cum eadem absoluendus?
What did Husse at any time teach or defend in the Council, wherein he did not
rather seem superstitiously to consent with the Papists? what did the popish
faith decree concerning Transubstantiation which he likewise with the Papists
did not confirm? who celebrated Mass more religiously then he, or more
chasilie observed the vows of Priestlie chastity? Add further that in the
doctrine of Cath^lickes concerning freewill, Predestination, informed faith,
the cause of Justification, and merit of good works? what other thing did he
hold then is taught at Rome? What image of any Saint did he ever cast out of
his Church at Bethleme? etc. What therefore shall we say him to have committed
for which he is not together with the Roman see to be condemned, or with it to
be absolved? And Mr. Fox repor eth accordingly of Husse his followers the
Bohemianes that Act. mon. page 260. b. ante med.
being demanded in what points they did diff^r from the Church of Rome Ibidem
circa medium.
the only propositions which they (thereupon) propounded were these Act. mon.
page 260. ante medium. And see the very same testimony hereof in Dresserus his
millenar. 6. page 255. post medium.
four articl^s: First the necessity of Communion under both kinds: the
Second that all civil dominion was forbidden to the Clergy. the Third that
the preaching of the Word is free f^r all men and in all places. the Fourth
that open crimes are in no wise to be suffered for auoidi^g of greater evil.
So evidently also did the B^hemianes in all other points of faith embrace the
Catholic doctrine.

And thus much brie^lie concerning Husse and his followers that they were not
of the Protestants Church, and therefore cannot justly be alleged as examples
sufficient to vphould their Churches adm^nistration of the Word and Sacraments:
A truth made so evident by the premises as we hold it altogether unworthy of
your MAJESTY'S further consideration, only we cannot but (as before) so here
also admire Mr. Fox his extreme bo^ldnes or rather need of protestant Pastors
and professors, when he so seriously registered John Husse for Act. mon. page
190. b. ante med. and page 241. b. post med. And Mast^r Dowaeham in his
treatise ^o^cerning Antichrist page 40. fine.
a most holy martyr, of their Church: not doubting likewise so unadvisedly to
honor, the succesfull for the time (though barbarouse) Of their barbarous
cruelty, see act. mon. page 253. b.
insurrection of his Act. mon. page 250 b. post medium.
disciples and adherentes in Bohemia (who proceeded Act. mon. page 251 a. post
medium.
to revenge his death with Act. mon. ibid.
an army of. 40000 men and confessed Act. mon. page 252 a. ante medium. Mr.
Fox says of them, they rebelled out of hand. and Osiander in epitom. histor.
eccles. centur. 9. 10. 11. etc. pa. 472. circa med. says of them. Cum Bohemi
de exustis duobus Martiribus Ioanne Husso and Hieronimo Prage^si certiores
facti essent vehementer exasperati sunt, a Magistratu politico aliquot Templa
extorserunt in quibus Conciones ab Hussiacis ministrs audiuerunt and Sacramenta
perceperunt. postea progressu temporis monasteria quaedam and Templa pontificia
destruxerunt, Sacerdotes quosdam pontificios trucidarunt, denique multa
designarunt, quae Hussus si in viuis adhuc fu^sset minime approbasset. etc.
rebellion against their Sovereign) with the unfitting title of act. mon. page
258. a. initio.
the ghospells increase.

THAT THOUGH VVALDO WICLIFFE and Husse had been Protestants yet their
examples are insufficient in this case. SECT. 6.
HITHERTO we have proceeded that neither Waldo, Wicliffe, nor Husse were of the
Protestants Church, and that therefore their examples are impertinently
alleged: only now we will suppose for the time that they had been all of them
full Protestants in opinion, and withal yet appeall to your MAJESTY'S learned
judgment, whether their fo^esaide examples be not altogether insufficient to
prove a continuance of their Churches administration of the Word and
Sacraments, but so much as for those only times in which they lived, and that
for two special important reasons.

As 1 First in that neither they all (nor so much as any one of them) were
before their first appearing members and professors of the said supposed
Protestants Church and faith, but were (as appears by the premises,) all of
them originally professed and known Catholics: as in like manner were Arius,
Macedonius, Nestorius, Pelagius, Eutiches, and the other old Sectmasters
before their times, who all being first Catholics (through Innovation
afterward and novelty of opinion) 1. John. 2, 19. and act. 15, 24.
went out from us: the very brand or character wherewith the holy scriptures,
and Protestants Mr. Alison in his confutatio^ of Brownism. page 1. initio.
them selves do note false teachers. And therefore the foresaid example of
Waldo, Wicliffe, and H^sse, who before their first appearing were Catholics
supposing they were afterward Protestants) proves in steed of continuance
rather a manifest defection, and not being of their Churches administration of
the Word and Sacraments, at and imediately before the first beginning of every
of them.

2 Secondly, as Luther says: Luther upon the epistle to the Galathianes
englished in c. 1. fol. 10. b ante medium.
It is not enough for a man to have the word and purity of doctrine, but al o
he must be assured of his calling, and he that enters without this, certainly
enters to no other end but to kill. etc. to which purpose the scripture says:
Romans 10, 15.
How shall they preach except they be sent. Hebr. 5, 4
No man takes to him the honor of Pries^hood but he that is called of God as
Aaron was: John. 10, 1
Who so enters not by the door into the sheepfolde, but climeth an other way,
is a thief. And for so much as the refuge of pretended extraordinary calling
has been heretofore See heretofore tract 2. c. 2. sect. 3 in the margent there
at the letter z. and in the margent at the letter a.
sufficiently discovered, and rejected, by learned Protestants, Lutheranes, and
Puritanes: the Churches ordinary calling by man, being, (as the ancient
Fathers Ciprian. l. de simplicitate Prelatorum condemns such as want the
Chur^hes calling saying. I^ sunt qui se vltio apud temerarios conuenas sine
diuina dispositione praesiciunt, qui se praepositos sine vlla ordinationis lege
constituunt: qui nemine episcopatum dante Episcopi nomen sibi assumunt. And
Ciprian. l. 1. ep. 6. ad Magnum. says of Nouatianus: Nouatianus in Ecclesia
non est, nec Episcopus computari potest qui Euangelica and Apostolica
traditione contempta, nemini succedens a seipso ordinatus est, habere namque
aut tenere Ecclesiam nullo modo potest qui ordinatus in ecclesia non est (and a
little afterward) nemini succedens and a seipso incipiens, alienus fit and
prophanus. Upon this ground Tertulian. in libro de prescrip. urges the
Heretics of his time saying: Edant origines ecclesiarum suarum, euoluant
ordinem Episcoporum suoru^ ita per successionem etc. And Optatus l. 2. contra
Parmen. urges in like manner the Donatisies saying. Vestrae Cathedrae vos
originem ostendite qui vobis vultis sanctam ecclesiam vindicare: mistus est
Victor ex Africa Romam, erat ibi filius sine patre, sequens sine Antecedente
And St. Austine ex quaest. in nouo and vet. Test. quest. 100. says of
Heretics. Ordinem ab Apostolo Petro caeptum and vsque hoc tempus per traducem
succedentium Episcoporum seruatum perturbant, ordinem sibi sine origin
vendicantes etc.
and them selves Luther upon the epistle to the Galathianes fol. 10. a. circa
med. says: God calls us at this day to the ministry of his word not
imediately him self but by man. And Piscator. volum. 1 thesium. theolog. page
405. circa med. says. Post tempora autem Apostolorum vocauit, and adhuc vocat,
and ad finem vsque mundi vocaturus est Pastores, Doctores and Presbiteros per
Ecclesiam etc. And see D. Couel. in his defense of Mr. Hooker page 86. fine and
87. initio. and in his examination etc. page 131. fine and 106 initio.
do yet further confess) the established course of the new Testament, without
which no man may undertake the public charge and administration of the word
and sacraments: To which end the now Lord Bishop of Winchester affirms that,
Mr. Bilson in his perpetual government of Christ's Church. c. 9. page 111. ante
medium.
the moderation of the keys and imposition of hands were at first settled in
the Apostles: and that they can have no part of Apostolic Commission that have
no show of Apostolic succession etc. and therefore that Ibid. page 111 post
med. and see the like in Mr. D. Couel. in his examination page 97. circa med.
and 106 initio.
Pastors do receive by succession the power and charge of the Word and
Sacraments from and in the first Apostles: against all which, the vulgar
objections which some precisians urge (contrary to scriptures, and so many of
their own writers) of Objected by master Fulke against the Rhemish Testament
in Romans c. 10 fol. 255. a. paulo post me.
Aedesius and Frumentius (two lay persons) Converting a great nation of the
Indianes: and of a captive woman converting the nation of the Iberianes, and
grossly mistaken Mistaken and impertinent, for though it be reported that
Aedesius and Frumentius did by private exhortation persuade the people of that
Nation to the Christian faith, a thing which Lay persons may do: yet is there
no mention that either of them did undertake the administration of the Word and
Sacraments, until such time as Frumentius went to Alexandria to Athanasius who
gave to him the holy function of a Bishop. Theodoret (after Christofersons
translation. hist. l. 1. c. 23.) wherewith he returned to the said nation and
so proceeded to their conversion. In like manner it is not said that the captive
woman did undertake the administration of the word and sacraments, but that
Priests only were wanting, which she perfited by persuading the King to send
to the Emperor of R^me for some Doctor etc. Whereupon a certain worthy man was
made Bishope and sent to preach to the nation of the Iberianes. Thendoret hist.
l. 1. c. 24. versus finem. See also the former example of Frumentius answered
in this sort, by D. Sarauia in defens. tract. etc. contra respons. Bezae. c.
1. page 46. ante medium.
and impertinent.

If now our Catholic Church be a true Church able to confer this calling so
by her Whittaker contra Duraeum. l. 9. page 820. says hereof to Duraeus: Fuit
Lutherus vestro etiam ritu Presbiter atque Doctor etc and talem fuisse
Suinglium, Bucerum, Oecolampadiu^ aliosque innumerabiles constat. etc. And see
Ioannes Regius in libro Apologetico. etc. page 122. ante med. and page 121.
given to Husse, Wicliffe etc. and that it was sufficient to them, why then do
our adversaries so grievously accuse and malign our said Church for false and
Antichristian? And if according to their doctrine the Pope be Antichrist and
our Church Antichristian, then follows necessarily that which them selves
thereupon say, namely that, Propositions and Principles disputed in the
University of Geneua. page 245. circa med. And Mr. Gabriell Powell in his
consideration of the Papists reasons etc. page 71. says the Popish ordination
is nothing else but mere profanation: etc. there is no true Ecclesiastical
vocation in the Papacy. etc. And see further hereof mr. Sutliffe in his
answer to the Mass Priests supplication to the 19. section And Mr. Fulke in
his answer to a counterfeite Catholic page 50. circa med. says, to us, you
are highly deceived if you think we esteem your offices of Bishops Priests
and Deacons any better then Lay men, and you presume to much to think that we
receive your ordering to be lawful. And page 51. ante med. he answers and
gives reason, why he allows our Baptism though not our orders. And see Mr.
Whitaker contra Duraeum. l. 9. page 821. initio.
there is in Babylon (thereby meaning our Church) no holy Order or ministry in
deed, no lawful calling but a meer^ usurpation: F^r it must needs to all men
seem absurd that Ch^ists Ministers should receive then spiritual power and
Commission from Antichrist: and then also not only Waldo the ^ay man, and all
those who descended from him (which is heretofore heretofore tract. 2. c. 2
sect 3. prope initium.
in them made most evident) but likewise even Husse, Wicliffe, and Lu^her him
self (who had no other calling but from our Church) and so many other as have
afterward claimed under them, are destitute hitherto of all lawful calling,
The Protestant Lascius in proof hereof alleges (in the book entitled de
Russorum, Muscou^tarum, and Tartararum religione. page 23. Calvin saying, quia
Papae Tirannide abrupta fuit vera ordinationis series, nouo subsidio nunc opus
est etc. atque omnimo extrao^dinarium fuit hoc munus quod Dominus nobis
iniunxit etc. so say they fleeing to extraordinary calling. And Beza in the
Conference at Poyssie being demanded of the calling of him self (and his
other then associates) affirmed the same to be extraordinary. Hereof read
Sarau^a in defens. tract. contra respon. Bezae page 59. fine. and 60. post
medium. and 74. fine.
the true succession of ordination being (as our adversaries thereupon affirm)
then broken of: which needful continuance of personal succession or calling,
seems furthermore so manifestly defective or wanting in the Protestants
Church, that even sundry of themselves, (who as Sadell complains thereat)
Anthony Sadell in his book entitled de rebus grauissimis controuersis
disputationes theologicae page 719. ante med. says hereof, hoc ipsa rei
veritas ab illis obtinuit, veram, atque expresso Dei verbo fundatam esse eam
doctrinam, quam ecclesiae nostrae amplexae sunt: sed affirma^t ministros esse
apud nos legitima vocatione destitutos, cum non habea^t perpetuam ac visibilem
ab Apostolis ad haec vsque tempora successionem. etc.
acknowledge the doctrine which their Church does embrace to be true and
grounded upon the express word of God, do yet affirm the ministers with them
to be destitute of lawful calling: etc. In which opinion they are so resolute
that Sadell did therefore write a special The title of that treatise is, de
legitima vocatione Pastorum Ecclesiae reformatae aduersus eos, qui in hoc
tantum capite se ab Ecclesia reformata dissentire profitentur: and begins
page 719. of the book above alleged.
treatise thereof against them.

And thus much briefly whether Waldo, Wicliffe, Husse, and Luther, had
suficient calling or not to administer the Protestant Churches word and
sacraments: which if they had not, the^ admitting that we should for the time
suppose them to have been full Protestants in opinion, and also never to have
been revolted Catholics, but orig^nally professors of the Protestants
Doctrine, yet all th^s notwithstanding there appears by reason of their
foresaid alleged only want of true ordination, a con^essed and unanswerable
defecte or downfall (for so many hundredth years last past) of their Churches
administration of the word and sacraments, without which (as them selves have
See heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. at x. y. z.
heretofore confessed from the scriptures) it were no Church.

THAT THE EXAMPLES OF BERTRAM Berengarius and others (who lived before Waldo)
are also insufficient to answer in this behalf for their times. SECT. 7.
HAVING spoken thus fully of Waldo, Wycliffe and Husse in whom remained our
aduersairies greatest confidence, it shall be less needful to make this point
more manifest as yet in the other several ages precedent to their times, as
well for that thus much only may suffice as have been already said of the
Protestants foresaid defection (though but during the several times or ages
of Waldo, Wycliffe, Husse or any of them) concerning their Churches then
evident want of administration of the word and Sacraments which (acording to
their former See heretofore tract 2. c. 2. sect. 1. at. t. v. and ibid. x. y.
z. b. c.
confession) must evermore continue and be in the true Church, as also for that
their like manifest defect, even also in those other precedent ages is by our
learned adversaries no less the^ very plainly acknowledged. To ad yet somewhat
to that which has been See heretofore tract 2. c. 1. sect. 4.
heretofore most fully confessed, in that behalf, the other learned
Protestants (such as are more wary and sparing what to say or write thereof)
do acknowledge that Mr. Fulke in his answer to a counterfeit Catholic page
36. prope initium. and Mr. Gabriel Powell in his Consideration of the Papists
reasons etc. page 105. fine. says. I grant that from the year of Christ
605. the professani company of Popery has been very visible and perspicuous.
Anno 607. (at the furthest) from Christ the papists religion prevailed, Mr.
Fulke ibid. page 27. circa medium.
all Popes from Boniface the third being Antichrists. And that since that time
their Church Mr. Fulke ibid. page 16. paulo ante med.
fled into the Wilderness there to remain a long season invisible now Waldo
(who was many years before Wicliffe and Husse) begun but Act. mon. page 628
b. ante medium.
Anno 1218 so that betwixt him and the foresaid years of 607 were six
hundredth and odd years, for and during all which time no less then for the
time since Waldo, our adversaries rest chargeable again to answer for their
churches continued administration of the Word and Sacraments, whereat they stand
wholly silent, and confess as before their defect therein, being unable to
afford but any one example so much as of any one Kingdom, City, or Village
upon the wholle face of the earth, nor so much as of any one person living in
the world, professing their religion and celebrating their sacraments, but
during any one moment day or time within any one of all those said six
hundredth years.

In further trial whereof to deal as now liberally with them, and to admit
for true, as well that Apocriphall and forged epistle, printed lately at
Basil, and written in behalf of Priests marriages in the name of Vtricke
Bishope of Augusta unto Pope Nicholas, For Pope Nicholas the first, to whom
this Vtricke should write was made Pope Anno. 858. and enjoying the same nine
years two months xx. days dyed Anno. 867. as testify Onuphrius in libro de
Romany Pontificibus: and vide Anastasiu^ Bibliothecarium de vitis Roman.
Pontific. etc. Printed Magnutiae Anno. 1602. page 305 fine. and 328. initio.
And Pantaleon in cronog. p. 70 whereas Vtricke was not made Bishope of Augusta
till after the death of Pope Nicholas viz. Anno. 924 (Vide Vrspergensem in
chronic. and Chitreum in Chronic. and Pantaleon in chronic. page 75.) and
continuing Bishope 50. years: dyed Anno. 973. Beuther l. Fastorum page 209.
And see Pantaleon in Chronograph. page 75. and Osiander in epitom. histor.
eccles. cent. 9. 10. 11. 12. etc. page 99. fine. and 100. ante medium.
sundry years, either before that Vtricke was borne, or else after that Pope
Nicholas was dead: as also that other though perhaps more ancient, yet no
less forged It appears by the book of Pope Adrian unto Charles, (which
book is extant tom. 3. Council. and in many things long since specially cited
by Iuo, and purposely written in confutation of that other book under Charles
his name) that the same was then forged by some heretical enemy against
Images.
and lying book written against images Calvin. in institut. l. 1. c. 11. sect.
14. Insinuates it to be forged about Charelemaines time, saying: extat
refutatorius liber sub Caroli magni nomine, que^ ex dictione colligere licet
eodem fuisse tempore compositum.
Under the name of Carolus Magnus, who in deed was not only an extreme enemy
Ioanas Aurelianensis (who lived in those times) affirms (l. 1. pro
imaginibus) that Claudius Taurinensis who impugned images durst never publish
his doctrine thereof during the life of Carolus magnus. And Paulus Aemilius l.
2. hist. Franciae such, that Carolus magnus sent 12. Bishops unto a Council
holden at Rome by Pope Stephan^^ in confutation of the error of the Greeks
against images. Hereof also see the Centurie writers cent. 8. c. 9. col. 570.
And Mr. Cowper late Bishope of Lincoln in his Chronic. fol. 174. b. circa med.
repo^teth of certain Bishops sent by Adrian to Charles, who held a Council in
France against the condemnation of images. etc.
to all those that impugned Images, but was also (as the learned Protestants
Hereof see Luc. Osiander in epitom. hist. eccles. cent. 8. page 101. circa med.
and Mr. Cowpers Chronic: fol. 173. a. post med. and 175. b. paulo ante med.
Fox in Apoc. page 436. paulo post med. And Crispinus in his book of the
estate of the Church: page 221. paulo post. med. and 226. initio. and circa
med. And Hospinianus in epistola dedicatoria. hist. sacramentar. circa med.
says. Imperator (Carolus magnus) non solum publicis edictis mandauit, vt
ceremoniae and ritus, itemque Missa latina Romans eccles. aliaque decreta placita
and instituta Romani Pontificis per totum imperium obseruarentur, sed ipsemet
etiam carceribus ac varijs suppliciorum generibus ad hoc ipsum cogebat
ecclesias: was this man then like to impugn the Church of Rome in her doctrine
of Images.
confess) wholly denoted to the Roman Church. And to admit likewise the book
written of the Sacrament, and set forth lately (not without great In so much
that Pantaleon in his chronogra. page 65. mencioning Bertram and his other
writings, forbeareth yet to mention this book or to charge him with this
pretended opinion.
suspicion) by Oecolampadius under Bertrams name to be in deed that ancient
book which Bertra^ is mentioned to have written de Corpore and Sanguine
D^mini, to King Charles the balde: and that also this present book were not
doubtful This book is so perplexedly and doubfullye penned, and uses the
words figure spiritual and mystery, with such qualifications, and so fully
also withal affirms the presence of Christ's Body under the veil or
couerture of bred that it affords no plain sense against the Real presence.
but plain and direct against the Real presence, which thing the Centurie
writers utterly deny: Centur. 9. c. 4. col. 212. It is said:
Transubsta^tiationis semina habet Bertramus.
In so much also, as our ancient Catholic writers nearer to those times,
doubts not to honor Bertram, Hospinianus in hist. sacramentaria. l. 4. page
317. paulo ante med. mencioneth this at large.
for a holy Martyr of their Church, and Illiricus accordingly for bears to
name him in his Illiricus in Catall. test. ver. printed Basiliae Anno 1556.
Catalog. of Protestant witnesses. And to admit lastly the example of
Berengarius Archdeacon of Angiers, denying Transubstantiation, and that he had
not, (as he after did) Act. mon. page 13. a
recanted that his opinion, and had also been free from all those other
confessed errors wherewith Oecolampadius and other Protestant writers charge
him, Oecolampadius in libro epistolarum Oecolampadij and Suinglij l. 3. page
710. fine. says: Berengarius nonnulla affirmabat aduersus Coniugiu^ and
Baptismum paruulorum ( and page 711.) deinde etiam Berengarius parum candide
incessisse deprehenditur. ( and page 712. initio.) Damnata est Berengarij
opinio, nimirum sacerdotio parum, Christiano minus tribuens: And see Papir.
Masson in Annalibus Francorum. l. 3. in Hugone, and Roberto: where it is said
that Berengarius and his followers denied the grace of Baptism, denying that
men committing mortal sin could ever obtain pardon therefore. and that
Beside^ this he was an en^mie to marriage. etc. And Crispinus in his book of
the estate of the Church. page 289. ante medium says: Although Berengarius
had the truth on his side, yet had he a certai^e hatred against La^francus and
R^gerius mingled with glory. etc. He mingled with all certain speeche^ of
m^^riage and the Baptism of little children etc. So ^t comes to pass when
without the Lords fear w^ will m^^ntaine the cause of the Gh^spell.
yet what do all these, or any one of them, or any other like that may be
alleged, convince in this behalf? every of them, (though thus admitted)
extends only but to some one part or small time of the said 600 years: and
is also for the most part but the example of some one or other private man,
being at first Catholic and beginning afterward to hold some one only
singular point of the Protestants faith, remaining in al^ other matters of
controversy still Catholic: which thing Mr. Fulke did well foresee, and
therefore being provoked in this kind, he iumpeth quite over these foresaid
examples, and all the said si^e hundredth years, and gives his first instance
in Wi^l^ff saying: Mr. Fulke in his answer to a counterfeite Catholic. page
34. paulo ante med.
Wicliffe I ween you will not deny but he was of our Church: and as to Bertra^
and those other who severally impugned Images and the unmarried life of
Priests, he says expressly of them: Mr. Fulke ibidem.
Although these and such like defended some part of the truth which we hold
against you, yet least you should object it was but in some one or two points,
I pass them over with silence. So manifestly are these foresaid examples of
Bertram and the rest found impertinent (though we should admit them for true)
and so plainly withal are the said 6. hundredth years between Boniface the
3. and Waldo, found destitute of all examples whereby to up hold the Protestant
CHVRCHES administration of the Word, and Sacraments: which point Master John
Nappeir Mr. Nappeir upon the revelations in c. 20. page 239. ante med.
affirms that for the space of a thousand years from the days of Pope
Siluester the first (who lived Anno Dom. 320.) to the days of Pope Boniface
the.8. the seat of Rome had no match nor encounter (neither) ever suffered any
to be seen vouchable or visible of the true Church but thence forth such hot
wars fell betwixt the empire of Rome and the mahumeticke empire, that at
unawares diverse true professors openly and vowably did arise, as John de R^pe
scissa Anno 1240.. Guilielmus de sancto Amore. Anno. 1260. etc. Wicliffe Anno.
1390. John Husse, and Hierome of Prag. Anno. 1415. So plainly does Mr. Napeir
disclaim in Bertram Vtrike and all those other foresaid examples which were
before Boniface the 8. As for Ioannes de Rupe Scissa (whom Mr. Napeire names)
he lived not Anno. 1260. but (as Mr. Fox) act. mon. printed. 1596. page 359.
a. line 70. testifies Anno. 1340. of whom Mr. Fox there says, that he for
rebuking the spirituality for their great enormities, and neglecting their
office was cast in prison: otherwise he was in Religion Catholic, and wholly
ignorant of the Protestants doctrine. In like manner concerning Willm. de S.
Amore. his trouble is by Mr. Fox (vbi supra page 287. b. line 60.) and by
Crispinus in his discourse of the estate of the Church page 359.) mentioned to
be only for writing against the Friars and their hypochrisie in so much as
Pantaleon (in chronographia page 102. initio) says. Guilielmus de S. Amore,
Monachos ex elemosina in ocio viuentes non saluari scribens a Papa hereticus
censetur; and to the like effect testifies Osiander centur. 13. page 367. ante
med. as for any further prooffe of him being a Protestant there is no
testimony; to such impertinent examples as our adversaries enforced for
upholding of their Churches continuance.
(though our adversary) does as yet much more fully acknowledge. Add but now
he^evnto in full conclusion or demonstration that neither H^sse, Will ff^,
Waldo, nor any other within the foresaid 600. ye^res between Boniface the 3.
and Waldo were professed members of the Protestants visible Church, a brief
repet^tion of that which the lea^ned Protestants the^ selves have heretofore
most plainly acknowledged: to this end says Mr. Perkins Mr. Perkins in his
exposition upon the Creed page 400.
We say that before the days of Luther for many hundredth years an universal
Apostasy ouerspread the wholle face of the earth and that our Church was not
the^ visible to the world: whereof he gives the reason saying, Mr. Perkins
ibidem. page 307.
during the space of nine hundredth years the popish heresy has spread it
self over the wholle earth. To omit the like acknowledgment of Mr. D. Fulke
concerning the Churches remaining Mr. Fulke in his answer to a counterfeit
Catholic. page 16. ante medium.
invisible a long season, after Anno. Dom. 607. Master John Napeire confesses
as before that Mr. Nappeire upon the Revelations. page 145 colum. 3. fine.
the Pope and his Clergy has possessed the outward visible Church of
Christians 1260. years, Mr. Nappeire ibid. page 191. initio.
Gods true Church most certainly abiding so long Latent, and invisible: Ibid.
p. 161. col. 3. circa med. and page 156. ante. med. and 237. paulo post med.
and 23 fine.
and Sebastianus Francus affirms Sebastianus Fra^cus in epistola de
Abrogandis in vniuersum omnibus statutis ecclesiasticis.
that for certain, through the work of Antichrist, the external Church
together with the faith and sacraments, vanished away presently after the
Apostles departure, and that for these thousand four hundredth years, the
Church has been no where external and visible.

A CONFVTATION OF THOSE PROTEstants who answer that their Churches
administration of the Word and Sacraments did during all those times continue
in being and yet withal remain as then invisible or unknown; with solution
to the usual objection of Elias complaint that he was left alone. SECT. 8.
AND for so much as in this extremest need, Anthony Sadell offers his last
help Sadell de rebus grauissimis controu. disputa. etc. pa. 783. prope initiu^.
affirming that although their Pastors, Doctors, administration of the Word,
and Sacraments, had for so many s^uerall hundredth years together, been to the
world so invisible and unknown as the premises argue, that yet
notwithstanding they were at all times in every of those several ages most
certainly (though so unknown yet) daily extant and in being, even as those
7000. 1 Of Kings. 19, 18
faithful, though unknown in like manner to Helias, when he thought 1 Of
Kings. 19, 10
him self alone were yet nevertheless at the same time reserved and remaining.

we humbly pray your highness of patience to vouchsaue our examination of
this their last and dispairing refuge: in full discovery whereof, we say: 1
First that though those.7000. of that one special time were unknown as the^
to Elias, yet this proves not (which is the only matter pertinent hereby to
be proved that therefore they should be as then unknown also to all others of
the same time, and much less therefore can this particular example prove, that
all the faithful not of one special time only, but also of so many several
hundredth years as are before examined should all of them during all those ages
continue so generally Latent and unknown (not to one Elias only but) to the
whole world, as that there should remain no memory or notice of the needful
preaching, and administration of Sacraments to have been performed, so much as
by any one of the^ in any one Nation of the earth, for any one moment of all
those times,

2 Secondly we say that this example of Elias makes wholly for us and against
our adversaries, and is therefore by them either ignorantly mistaken, or
wilfully misapplied: for it is evident that Elias 1 Of Kings. 19, 3. And see
the contents of the English Bible upon that Chapter.
fleeing the face of Iezabell wife to Achab, who sought Ibid. verse. 2.
his life, lay thereupon secret in Ibid. verse. 8. and 9.
a Cave upon Mount Horreb. in the wilderness at the time of his foresaid
complaining that he was left alone, the which he then vttred not generally but
in regard only of that country of Israel which was the kingdom of Achab
(wherein he then a stranger lay secret) as appears most plainly as well in
that God himself accordingly answered his said complaint, with like respect to
that only country, saying as is objected, Ibid. verse. 18.
I have left to me in Israel 7000. etc. as also for that in those very times
the Church did greatly florishe in the other next adioining kingdom of Judah,
and was as then to him there, both known and visible, under two good kings
Asa and Iosaphat, who reigned even in the time 1 Of Kings. 22, 41.
of Achab: at what time the number of the faithful was there so exceeding
great, that the soldiers only were numbered to many 2. Chron. 14, 8, 9. and
17, 14, 15.16, 17, 18, 19.
hundredth thowsands: so visible and known was the Church at that time, and so
evident withal is the truth of this our answer, that this very objection, is
in this sort answered and refelled, not only by Mr. Clapham in his soueraign
remedy against schism pa. 17. paulo post med. says. Our ignorant reformists
say, the Church was invisible in the time of Helias* whereto he answers
saying, the holy Ghost records Helias to have spoken this against Israel,
not against Judah, for as he knew that good Iosophat at that time reigned in
Judah: So he well knew that there, was not only the Church visible, but also
mightily reformed. and vide ibid. page 18. initio. and circa med.
Mr. Henoch Clapham an English Protestant, but also (as certain of our other
adversaries do thereat Benedict morgenstern. in tract. de Ecclesia page 4.
says: Mirum quod Philippus ea quae dicuntur de inuisibili Ecclesia ita prorsus
reijcit, vt illud etiam Domini verbum ad Eliam, reliqui mihi 7000 etc. ad
visibilem Ecclesia^ detorqueat.
complain) even by Philip Melancthon. Melancthon in corpore doctrinae. page
530.
and that the Churches Pastors and Doctors should for so many ages together be
in being and withal unknown, is yet otherwise at the least in it self
inexplicable if not co^tradictorie, for what do our adversaries affirm to be
the reason of this their pretended latencie, a^l they can al^edge is
persecution. But against this we say 1. First that the Churches persecution
makes her the more known, for who are persecuted but known men, this Mr.
Ca^thwright confesses calling therefore the Church under persecution. Mr.
Carthwrite in Mr. Whitgiftes defense etc. page 174. paulo post med. And he
says there further: What a conclusion is this, the Church were few in number
because they were under the Cross etc. To let pass both scriptures and
stories Ecclesiastical, have you forgotten what is said in the first of
Exodus, that the more the children of Israel were persecuted the more they
increased.
visible and sensible, for else (says he) how could it be persecuted and Mr.
Jewel says accordingly, Mr. Jewel in his reply page 506. circa med. And see
Mr. Jewel in his defense of the Apology printed 1571. page 33. and 34.
the Church is placed upon a Mount her Persecutions cannot be hid. In clear
demonstration whereof, it is evident, that although the primative Church during
the first 300 ye^res, after Christ, endured Hereof see Mr. Fox in his acts
and monuments Printed 1576. from page 34. till page 86. describing the first
ten Persecutions. And see the Centurie writers of Magdeburg. Cent. 1. l. 2.
c. 2. col. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. and Cent. 2. c. 2. col. 10. 11. 12. 15. 16. 17.
18. 20. 21. 22. etc. and Cent. 3. c. 3. col. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17.
18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. etc.
incomparably the most universal and violent persecutions that ever were,
(yet the same notwithstanding) our adversaries Centur. 1. and Cent. 2. and 3.
throughout. And Pantaleon in Chronogra. and Functius in Chronolog and Osiander
Cent. 1. 2. and 3. and Fox act. mon. in his discourse of the ten first
Persecutions of the primative Church. And Dresserus in millenar. 5. page 11. and
12. And of the sundry Counsels or Synodes then assembled and had. See Mr.
Fulks book de successione Ecclesiastica, contra Stapletonum. pa. 246 ante med.
the Centurie writers, and sundry otherrs, do at this day take certain and
particular notice, of the Catholic Bishops and Pastors by name in every of
those ages, of their administration of the Word and Sacraments, and their open
impugning of Heresies.

2 Secondly we say that for so much as (according to many before See heretofore
tract 2. c. 2. sect. 1.
recited plain testimonies from scriptures and Protestants) it is evident and
confessed that the Church is to continue so known, that all men See heretofore
tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. l. c. and in the margent there.
careful of their saluatio may know where the true Church is, and to which
company they ought to adhere: that therefore no force or persecution of man can
or shall be able to dissolve Act. 5, 39. If this work be of God you are not
able to dissolve it.
or make frustrate the ordinance of God made in this behalf.

3 Thirdly we say that even common understanding argues this invincible, from
the very nature of the Church, for we must needs affirm of the Church under
Persecution, that either she does in some sort or other make profession of her
faith, and also openly refrain the external communion of all Idolatry, false
doctrine, and sacraments, or else that she does not profess and refrain as
beforesaid, if the latter, then (as appears most evidently by the premises)
See heretofore tract 2. c. 2. sect. 1.
she is not the true Church: if the first then is she thereby made known and
visible, for besides her foresaid profession consisting in administration of
the Word and Sacraments, and impugning of errors; which being done (though
never so privately) is impossible Humfred. in Iesuitismi. part. 2. rat. 3. page
241. initio. says hereof. Dum Ministri docent, alij discunt, illi Sacramenta
administrant, hij Communicant, omne Deum inuocant, and fidem suam profitentur,
qui ista non videt talpa est caecior. etc.
to be in so many countries kept secret, for any smaller time, much less for
so many ages together, her only foresaid open refraining or recusancie (whereto
she is by the judgment of Protestants That Protestants think them selves
bound to avoid the open profession of our Catholic faith and communion of
our Sacraments, is made more the^ evident by their recusancie, to be so much as
present only at our service whereof more is s^ide hereafter. tract. 3. sect. 1.
in the margent at the letter c.
no less in duty bound) lies evermore open to be discerned, and by how much
the persecution is more grecuous, so much the less can this recusancie be kept
secret or unespied, as appears most plainly by that small resemblance had
thereof in the example For if during but the last 20. years, we of this one
nation in comparison but few, could not so escape the mileder search of
Protestant Magistrates, but that by our only recusancie we were daily
discerned, could the^ all Christians supposed to be dispersed through out so
many nations of the world, escape for so many hundredth years together, that
inquisition of our Church, which Protestants affirm to have been universal
and far more greeuouse.
only of our own times and nation.

A CONFVTATION OF THOSE WHO AN swear that their Churches administration of the
word and Sacraments, continued during all those several ag^s in being and also
known and that as now through the injury of later times no testimony or
notice thereof is to us at this day remaining. SECT. 9.
IF now any of our adversaries do disclaim in urging as before the foresaid
example of Helias, and in the foresaid opinion of affirminge their Church to
have been for so many ages in being, but yet unknown, and will now in steed
thereof lastly say, (which is all that can be imagined to be left for them
unsaid) that their Churches Pastors and Doctors, their impugning of errors,
their administration of the word and sacraments were in every of those
foresaid ages known, and visible to the world, though now sithence, all
testimony and record thereof is through the late violence of the Pope and his
clergy utterly suppressed and made away, the idle vanity of this conceit is
many ways discouerable. As, 1 First in that it is but a meare imagination
whereof is neither testimony nor proof. 2 Secondly in that all proof and
experience is most clearly and directly to the contrary, as appears by
example of Husse, and Wicliffe, whose Of the writings of Husse and Wicliffe
yet extant, and printed at Noriberg. See Iunius his Animaduersiones ad
controuersiam quintam etc. de membris Ecclesiae milita^tis, quam Bellarminus
exarauit etc. l. 1. page 14. circa med. And Illiricus in Catallog. testium
veritatis page 847. and 850. prope finem. makes like mention of their writings
yet extant. And mr. Fox act. mon. printed 1596 mencioneth W^cliffes writings
page 428. a. lin. 35 and so likewise does Crispinus in his treatise of the
estate of the Church page 419. initio. And Mr. Fulk says. Nondum interierunt
B^rtrami, Valdi, Ioannis a Ga^dauo, Wicleui, Hussi plena pietatis ac
Christianae doctrinae monume^ta Fulke contra Stapletonu^ de successione ecles.
page 308. initio. and ibid. pa. 349 initio. he says. scripta W^cleu^,
Bertrami, Hussi etc. extant. and vide page 320.
writings are yet extant: also to our adversaries, by like example of their
other foresaid aledged epistle of Vlrike in defense of Priests marriage, of
Charlemaines book against images: and of Bertrames book concerning the
Sacrament: in like manner by the decrees of our Catholic Counsels daily
condemning and reciting all such arising opinions as were contrary to the same,
likewise by the many and ample now extant volumes of our Catholic writers in
every age reciting in like manner, and at large confuting all appearing
Doctrines contrary to the Roman Church. Lastly (as Mr. Whitaker confesses) by
our eclesiasticall Mr. Whittaker contra Duraeum. l. 7. page 469. prope initium.
observing for true that all opinions contrary to the Roman Church are
me^cioned by our historiographers, and being enforced for the upholding of the
Protestants Church, to make claim almost to all such as in any sort resisted
the Pope (whereof see heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 2.) says deinde post
Apostasia^ inuectam, and tirannidem Antichristi constitutam, nullus vnquam
historiam scripsit, qui non ecclesiae nostrae doctrinam, mores instituta,
semitia aduersarios commemoret ita vestris historijs nostrae Ecclesiae memoria
viget: and qui Pontificij regnires narrare conati sunt, ij nostrae ecclesiae
testes sunt. etc.
historiographers of every age, who make this the very argument of their
writing: in so much that nothing is as now better known to us, then that which
the Church of Rome has heretofore impugned, and many an heretic is hereby
likewise m^de noted and infamouse to all suceeding age^, whose better
obscurity would otherwise have been buried in forgetfulness. And that all this
is most true is yet furthermore so evident, that our very adversaries them
sel^es, do from hence take notice, and in there own writings This is at large
performed and set down by the Divines of Magdeburg. in their several
Centuries. by Pantaleon in his Chronographia. by Luc. Osiander in his epitom.
eccles. hist. and by Illiricus in his hook entitled Catallogus testium
veritatis qui ante nostram aetatem reclamarunt Papae. And see further hereof
Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum. page 276. initio. and 469. ante medium.
make mention of the daily opinions cond^mned in every age by the Church of
Rome, of which opinones certain also (which makes this point most evident)
were often times even some one or other special Doctrine Besides the foresaid
examples of several doctrines of the Protestants reported and condemned in
Waldo, Berrengarius, Wicliffe and Husse. See also heretofore tract. 2. c. 2.
sect. 3. in the mar^ent under the letters n. o. The other like examples of
sundry articles of the Protestants faith, mentioned and condemned in other
confessed Heretics, as namely in PETER BRVIS, Almericus, the Albigenses and
the Apostolici. so plainly were the Protestants several doctrines, not
purposely suppressed or passed over in silence, but in all times (ever as they
appeared) specially recorded and condemned.
now sithence taught by Protestants, and heretofore severally profe^^ed by so^e
one or other particular condemned person of those times: 3. Thirdly (supposing
with Protestants that their Church is a true Church) it is against manifest
scripture, which testifies of the true Church that Esaias. 60, 20.
her son should not be set nor her moon hid: that she Daniel. 2, 44.
should not be given to an other people, but should stand for ever, as Esaias.
60, 15, 16.
an eternal glory and joy from generation to generation.

4 Lastly it is against the evident confession of our learned adversaries who
acknowledge their own Church to have been (in regard of external profession)
for many hundredth years past See before tract. 2. c. 1. sect. 4 post medium.
invisible and See Mr. John Nappeire upon the reualatio^s in c. 12. page 161.
col. 3 circa medium.
withdrawn from open assemblies to the hearts of particular godly men.

THAT EVEN LVTHER HIM SELF WAS no member of the English Protestants Church:
nor professor of their Religion. SECT. 10.
LIKE as it appears by the premises, that our adversaries are not able to
find out any testimony or proof of their Churches administration of the word,
and sacraments for so many several ages before Luther, their principal
examples of Waldo, Wicliffe, Husse etc. being heretofore discovered for
altogether insufficient, so likewise in further evidence we will now show, the
like insufficiency also even in the very example of Luther him self:
concerning whom we will endeavor two special points, the First that Luther
never was of the English Protestants now faith and religion. Secondly that
though he were, yet is his example therein of no force in this behalf: not for
so much as for his own time.

Now concerning the First namely that our adversaries may not challenge Luther
to have bin of their now Church and religion, appears by his sundry gross
and confessed errors, wherein they are enforced to disclaim.

As for example 1 First concerning the success and preservation of our
Christian profession in general: he affirmed and taught (to the great danger
thereof) that Luther in assertionibus damnat. per Leonem decimum Artic. 34.
which was praeliari aduersus Turcas est repugnare Deo visitanti iniquitates
nostras per illos. And in explicat. articuli. 34. he says among his other
defense thereof. Ite praeliamini contra Turcas vt resistatis virgae Dei, and
cadatis sicut and Achab cecidit. And in epistola contra duo mandata imperialia
(he further says) Oro cunctos pios Christianos, ne vllo modo sequamur vel in
militiam^re vel dare aliquid contra Turcas, quandoquidem Turca decies
prudentior probiorque est quam Principes nostri.
to war against the Turks, was to resist God visiting our sins by them:
the which opinion he did also afterward more at large defend, concluding and
saying Luther in explicat. Art. 34. prope finem. and hereof see the treatise
against the defense of the censure page. 230. ante med. and 231. initio. Luther
in his book de bello contra Turcas, affirms that the Devil by Gods
permission did govern and hinder the Counsels and assemblies of the Princes
of Germany for no other cause, but that his article of not warring against the
Turk might remain in force and vnconde^ned.
He that has ears to hear let him hear, and abstain from the Turkish
wars whiles the Popes name prevails under heaven: I have said: And whereas
Doctor Fulke does excuse all this, as Mr. Fulke in his Apology of the
professors of the Gospel etc. against Peter Frarine page 31. initio.
meant of those Christians which were under the Turks Dominion: It is so
directly against the scope and His former mention of God visiting our sins by
the Turk and likewise of the Pope, and also of the Princes of Germany, and
the wholle passage of his treatise made thereof at large, auoideth this answer,
in so much as the author against the defense of the censure page 231. labors
to excuse Luther otherwise.
circumstance of Luthers words, that Roff nsis Roffensis in confut. Assert.
Luther. printed 1523. Art. 34.
did therefore write speci^lly against this his foresa^d doctrine, at large
^eciting and confuting his reasons: which foresaid doctrine of Luther was also
so known and Hereof see Belforest in Cosmogra l. 2. c. 7. col. 579.
grateful to the Turk, that as (Luthers own ^choller reports) Manlius in
loc. comun. page 636. fine.
the Turkish Emperor (to the great shame of Luther hearing thereof) demanded
our Christian Ambassador how oul^ Luther was, and wished him younger, promisi^g
to be his good Lord. And the Duke of Saxony (a professor of Luthers doctrine)
was accordingly charged, Hereof see Sleida^. l. 18. fol. 277. ante med
as being confederate with the Turk. In so much has Erasmus (whom our
adversaries think to have been indifferently Act. mon. pa. 404. a. fine.
affected toward Luther) says hereof Erasmus in epistola ad fratres
inferioris Germaniae. page 39.
many of the Saxones following that first doctrine of Luther, denied to Caesar
and King Ferdinando aid against the Turk etc. and said they had rather fight
for a Turk not baptized, then for a Turk baptized, thereby meaning the
Emperor.

2 Secondly concerning the Canonical scriptures it is evident that Luther
denied sundry confessed parts thereof: concerning the Apocalips Bullenger gives
testimony saying. Bullenger upon the Apocalips englished c. 1. sermon. 1. fol.
2. a. post med
Doctor Martine Luther has as it were sticked this book^ by a sharp preface
set before his first aedition of the new Testament in dutch, for which his
judgment good and learned men were off^nded with him: and concerning the
epistle of S. James, Luther says thereof. Luther prefat. in epist. Iacobi in
aeditione Ienensi.
The Epistle of James is contentious. swelling, dry, strawne, and unworthy an
Apostolical spirit. In so much as liliricus Luthers scholar expresses and
defends Luthers foresaid judgment saying. Illiricus prefat. in Iacobum.
Luther in his preface upon S. James epistle gives great reasons why this
epistle ought in no case to be accounted for a writing of Apostolic
authority unto which reasons I think every godly man ought to yield, which
foresaid judgment of Luther concerning these, and other parts of the new
Testament is yet to this day so continued and defended by Luthers own
scholars, that (to omit sundry See Pomeran. in epist. ad Romans c. 4. And Vitus
Theodorus in Annot. in nou. test. page vlt. And the Centurie writers of
Magdeburg. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. and cent. 2. l. 3. c. 4. And Hastenrefferus in
loc. theologic. l. 3. stat. 3. loc 7. page 292. And Adamus Francisci in
Margarita theologic. page 448. says: Apocriphi libri noui testamenti sunt
epistola ad haebreos, epistola Iacobi, secunda and tertia Ioannis, posterior
Petri, epistol^ Iudae and Apocalip.
other of them) Chemnitius (Luthers greatest scholar) affirms that
Chemnitius in Enchirid. etc. page 63. And see Chemnitius in his examen. Council.
Tride^t. part. 1. page 55.
the second epistle of Peter, the second and third of John, the epistle to the
hebrews, the epistle of James, the epistle of Jude and the apocalips of John
are apocriphall as Chemnitius examen part. 1. page 56. b. initio.
not having sufficient testimony of their authority, and therefore that
Chemnitius ibidem page 57. a.
nothing in controversy may be proved out of these books Concerning now the
other books of scripture, although Luther acknowledged them for canonical,
how far yet he was changeable otherwise in miss translating them, we will
(omitting perticulers) refer to the credit of Zuinglius his testimony, who
says hereof to Luther. Zuinglius. tom. 4. ad Luther. l. de sacram. page 411.
and 412.
Thou do corrupt (Luther) the word of God, thou art seen to be a manifest
and common corrupter and peruerter of the holy scripture, how much are we
ashamed of thee, who have hitherto esteemed thee beyond all measure, and now
prove thee to be so false a man.

3 Thirdly as concerning faith, he reprooueth as well such Protest^nts as say
Luther upon the Galathians englished in c. 2. fol. 67. b. post med.
nei^h^r can faith be true faith without charity, as also those other who
teach Luther ibid. fol. 67. circa medium.
though my faith be never so perfect, yet if this sait^ be without charity I
am not iust^fied calling it Luther ibid. fol. 68. b. prope finem. and fol. 126
b. and see Luther in his sermons Englished. etc. page 204. circa med.
impiety to affirm that says except it be adorned with charity iustefieth
not, nay ^e proceeded so far, as he douted not to say, Luther. tom. 1. prop 3.
Fides nisi sit sine etc. Faith unless it be without even the l^ast good
works does not iustefie, nay it is no faith. which saying of his master D.
Couell specially acknowledges and recites, tearming it Mr. Couel. in defense
of Mr. Hookers five books of Ecclesiastical policy. page 42. ante med.
harsh and Mr. Couel. ibid.
justly called in question, by the Church of Rome. He also further taught that
Luther de captiu. Babylon. and see further hereof the treatise against the
defense of the Censure. page 198.
a Christian or Baptized person is so rich, that although he would he cannrt
lose his salvation by any sins how great soever, unless he will not believe:
whereof he gives his reason else where saying. Luther in loc. commun. etc.
Class. 5. c. 27. page 68. initio.
As nothing iustefieth but faith, so nothing sins but unbelief.

4 Fourthly as concerning works: he teachteh Luther in his sermons Englished
etc. page 147. ante medium.
that work^s take their goodness of the worker: and that Luther ibidem page 276.
ante medium.
no work^ is disalowed of God, unless the author thereof be disalowed before:
saying therefore further. Luther ibidem page 278. ante medium.
Such a one works nothing but good works, neither can it be but good, which
he being good before shall do. And as concerning the necessity of good works
(affirmed against him by English Protestants) The necessity of good works is
affirmed by Mr. Willet in his tetrastilon. Papismi. page 90. fine. by Mr. Fulke
against the Rhemish Testament in 2. Petr. 2. sect. 3. fol. 444. a. post med.
and by Mr. Whitaker against mr. Rainoldes page 350. post medium. Of the
dissension had herein between the Divines of England and the Lutheranes in
Germany, special report and mention is made, in colloquio Altenburgens. fol.
168 a. fine. And also in actis colloquij Adelburgensis page 102. circa med. and
483. circa medium.
it is so far disclaimed in by him and his followers. that they deny
Illiricus in prefat. ad Romans and vide Conradum Schlusselburg. in catal.
hereticorum l. 13. and vlt. page 819. circa med.
good works to be so much as causa s^ne qua non of salvation, affirming
Illiricus in prefat. ad Romans And see colloquium Altenburgense. fol. 210. a. b.
and 231. 324. 382. and 352.
the controversy with the Papists to be (not only) whether good works do
iustefie, (but also) whether they be in any respect necessary to sa^uation:
which last position they call Illiricus vbi supra.
a papisticall error: tearming it Illiricus. ibidem.
the doctrine of the new Papists as perniciouse as the old, to say (as English
Protestants do) that the Apostle meant to exclude good works from
justification, not simply and as due, but only as meritoriouse and cause
efficient: they will not in the point of our justification grant Conradus
Schlusselburg. in catal. Hereticorum. l. 13. in epist. dedicatoria pa. 22.
paulo post med.
good works to be necessary (necessitate presenti^) so much as with a
necessity of presence: condemning their brethrens contrary doctrine for
Illiricus de originali iusticia ac iniusticia in appendice page 163.
worse then is the Papists doctrine concerning good works: they fortefie them
selves herein with the testimonies See Luthers sayings alleged in actis
colloquij Aldeburgensis pa. 8. circa med. and in Illiricus in prefat. ad Romans
of Luther, and have proceeded so far against all necessity of good works,
that some of them (as namely Amsdorphius) doubt not to affirm, that Hereof see
acta colloquij Aldeburgensis page 120. sect. 11. initio. And page 443. paulo
post initium. and page 293. paulo ante medium.
good works are not only, not necessary to salvation, but also hurtful to
it. Vide ibid. page 205. post med. and fine.
alleging Luther in proof of this opinion. Vide ibid. page 120 sect. 11.
initio. and 293. paulo ant^ medium.
the which Illiricus does allow and defend by public writing. And all this
so grossly and intollerably, that sundry other Protestant writers, who
acknowledge Amsdorphius D. Amsdorphius piae memoriae. so called ibidem page
206. circa med.
for a man (otherwise) of godly memory do yet nevertheless in this, profess
to Ibid. page 205. fine. and 206. initio. It is said hereof nos quidem ipsos
(Lutherum and Amsdorphium) interse committimus, hanc propositionem non
vsurpaturi.
leave both him and Luther to themselves.

5 As concerning marriage and divorce: Luther says: Luther in sermon. de
matrimonio.
Si non vult vxor, aut non possit, veniat ancilla: If the wife will no^, or can
not come, let the maid come: and whereas Mr. Whitaker (who would make the best
gloze hereof) answers Mr. Wh^taker in respons. ad rat. Campiani rat. 8. page
150. circa med says thereof. Lutheri aute^ istam de ho^ diuortij genere
sententiam, ego minime defendo.
hereunto, that Luther hereby meant first to divorce and then after to marry
the maid, yet is this divorce (though upon such foresaid occasion either of
infirmity or wilfulnes) utterly rejected Whitaker ibide^ vt supra and contra
Duraeum l. 8. page 687. fine.
even by Mr. Whitaker him self: and nevertheless Luther was so vehement
against the wives froward refusal of her husbands bed, that he further says
thereof, Luther tom. 5. Witteberg sermon. de matrimonio fol. 123. a. verius sinem.
See also Luthers words cited in the treatise against the defense of the
censure page 219. post med.
the Magistrates duty is to bridle this wife, yea and to put her to death,
this if the Magistrate omit, the husband must imagine that his wife is stolen
away by thieves, and dead, and consider how to marry, an other: (for says he
yet further, See the foresaid treatise against the defense of the Censure page
213. prope finem. And see Luther tom. 5. Witteberg. in 1. Cor. 7. fol. 113. a.
initio
we cannot stopp St. Paul's mouth etc. his words are plain that a brother or
sister are free from the law of wedlock if the one depart or do not consent
to dwell with the other, neither does he say that this may be done once only,
but leave it free, that so often as the case shall require he may either
proceed or stay: in which case (as he signifies) a man See the treatise
against the defense of the Censure page 213. paulo post med. And see Luther
tom. 5. Witteberg. fol. 112. b. fine.
may have ten or more wives stedd from him and yet living: nay he doubts not
in case of adultery committed by a married man or married woman to give
liberty even to the offending adulterer In aliam profugere treram. maechus
potest, ibique si continere nequeat vxorem ducere rursum. Luther tom. 5.
Witteberg sermon. de matrimonio. fol. 123. a. initio
to flee into an other country and marry again: so dangerously does he
incline to poligamie, the which (to be sparing herein to his other Musculus in
epist. Pauli ad Phillip. Colloss. etc. in 1. Tim. 3. page 396. circa med.
thinks that Poligamie was tolerated by the Church in the Apostles times. and
see the Alphabeticall table there at the word (Poligamie) And see Poligamie
defended by Bernardinus Ochinus l. 2 dial. 21. page 200. and 204 commended in
the treatise of the life and death of Peter Martyr (ante med.) for an excellent
and learned man.
scholars) himself else where seems to defend, affirming that Luther in
propositionibus de Bigamia Episcoporu^ aedit. Anno. 1528 propositione 62. 65
66. and vide Lutherum in explicatione Geneseos edit. Anno. 1525. in
Commentario. c. 16
poligamie is no more abrogated, then is the rest of Moises law, and that it as
free, as being neither commanded nor forbidden: in respect whereof he
signifies that Luther. in Genes. c. 16. edit. Anno. 1525.
he will neither bring in poligamie nor condemn it: which foresaid errors
concerning marriage, divorce, and poligamie were so plain and gross in
Luther, that Wicelius in his method. concordiae Ecclesiasticae c. 9. initio
says. Reducat ad calculum Lutheri factio and retractet quae portenta and quam
non pudice admodu^ scripta ediderit, de coniugio, de diuortijs, de it^ra^do
post diuortia, de gradibus, de poligynecia populi etc.
Wicelius (a learned Protestant) does therefore specially charge and reprove
him.

6 As concerning Magistracy, how fully, plainly and directly he impugned the
same (especially before the Princes of Germany had undertaken the defense of
his doctrine) is by his own writings more then manifest, See hereafter tract.
3. sect. 5. in the margent at the figure 3.
and hereafter in part from thence declared: only now I will add as not
altogether improper hereunto the base and inuectiue calumniacions wherewith he
charged (to omit sondrie other Princes and Magistrates) our late sovereign K.
HENRY the 8. of famous memory calling him Luther in libro contra Rege Angl. in
prefat.
an enuiouse mad fool, babbling with much spittle in his mouth In the same
book extant in tom. 2. Witte^berg fol. 333. and 334.
more furious then madness it self, more doltishe then folly it self, endued
with an impudent and whorish face without any one vain of Princely blood in
his body, a lying s^phiste, a damnable rotten worm, a Basili^ke and progeny
of an adder, a lying s^urrill covered with the title of a King, a clownishe
wit, a doltishe head, most wicked foolish and impudent Henry. and saying
further Ibid. fol. 338.
he does not only lie like a most vain scurre, but passes a most wi^ked
knave: Ibid. fol. 339. and vide 442.
thou lie in thy thro^e foolish and sacriligious^ King. Whereunto might be
added his exceeding many othe^moe like dispitefull and s^ur^ill words used
against his Majesty, some of them being so immodestly base, Ibidem fol. 333.
and 337. where he says. Ius mihi erit Maiestate^ tuam Angelicam stercore
conspergere (and.) Sit ergo mea haec generalis responsio ad omnes sentinas
insulsissimae huius laruae (and) haec sunt Robora nostra aduerius quae
obtumeseere cogu^tur, Henrici, Thomistae, Papistae, and quicquid est faecis,
sentinae, latrinae, impiorum and sacrilegorum eiusmodi: Sordes istae and labes
hominu^ Thomistae and Henrici sacrilegus Henricoru^ and asinorum cultus: furor
insulsissimorum asinorum and Thomisticorum porcoru^os vestrae dominationis
impurum est sacrilegum. W th infinite more such like.
as we are ashamed to english them.

7 Concerning the administration of the word and sacraments he makes it common
to lay men with the clergy, s^ing to this end Luther tom. 2. l. de ministris
Ecclesiae instituendis fol. 362. and vide ibid. l. de abroga^da Missa priuata.
and in libro de captiu. Babylon. c de ordin^. And see Hospinianu^ in hist.
sacrame^tar. page 22. paulo post med.
the first office of a Priest is to Preach the word and^. But this is common to
all, next is to Baptize, and this al^o may all do even women etc. The third is
to Consecrate bread and wine, But this also is common to all no less then
Priests, and this, ^aun^^h by the authority of Christ him self, saying, do
this in remembrance of me, this Christ spoke to all there present and to come
afterward whosoever should eat of that Br^ad and drink of that Wine etc.
this also is witness^d by St. Pau^e, who.1. cor. 11. repeating this, applies
it to all the Corinthians: making them all a^ him self was, that is to say
Cons^crators: and. if then that which is greater then all be given
indifferently to all men and women, (I mean the word and Baptism) then, that
which is l sse. (I mean to Consecrate the supper) is also given to them. And
the like doctrine does he affirm no less plainly Luther in assertionibus
damnatis per Leone^ decimum art. 13. says. In sacramento poenitentiae ac
remissione culpae, non plus facit Papa, ^piscopus, quam infimus Sacerdos. Immo
vbi non est Sacerdos aeque tantu^ quilibet Christianus etiamsi mulier aut puer
estet etc. quod autem absente Sacerdote etiam puer aut mulier and quilibet
Christianus absoluere potest Mat. 18. clare patet vbi Christus omnibus
Christianis dicit quodcun que solueritis super terram solutum erit in coelis,
hanc inuictam authoritate^ non mihi subuertent. And see further in loc. comun.
class. 2. page 136. and 138.
in other of his writings, being (as Mr. D. Couel. affirms) Mr. Couel. in
his defense of Mr. Hookers 5. books of ecclesiastical policy Art. 15. page
101 post med. And see Luther de Missa priuata. editio. Anno. 1534. And see
Hospinianus in histor. sacramentar. page 22. paulo post medium.
not afraid to affirm that sacraments are affectuall t^ough administered by
Satan him self: this did Luther write against the POPE, though else where to
serve his own turn against the Anabaptists (who used the very same weapon
against him) he presses and charge them for their want of ordinary calling:
so variable, Zuinglius in responsione ad confessione^ Lutheri says. Lutherus
nunc hoc nunc illud de eadem repronunciat, nec vsqua^ sibi constat, haud dub^e
ea inconstantia and leuitate in Dei verbo vtendu^ esse existimat, qua effrictae
frontis scurrae, inter aleam vti consueuerunt.
inconstant, and t^mporizing (as oc^asion requiered) was he in his doctrine.

8 Concerning the sufficiency of our redemption by our Saviors Passion in his
humane nature upon the Cross, Luther taught thus far to the contrary, as
that not Luther in confessione maiore de caena Domini. says: Cum credo quod
sola humuna natura pro me passa est, Christus ille vilis nec magni praetij
Saluator est: Immo ipse quoque saluatore opus habet.
only the humane nature of Christ suffered for us, for (says he) in affirming
but so much, Luther vt ^upra.
Christ is a Savior of vile and small account, and needs him self also a
Savior. But also that Luther libro de concilijs part. 2. says of the
Zuinglia^s Pertinacissi^^e co^tra me pugnaba^t, quod diuinitas Christi pati non
posset. etc. And see Luther further. tom. 3. germ. Ien. fol. 455. b.
the Divinity of Christ did suffer which his opinion of the Godhead suffering
is admired and yet further taugh by Andreas Siluester Czecanorius in dial. de
corruptis moribus vtriusque partis fol. 5. says. Andreas Musculus non veritus
fuit palam docere diuina^ Christi naturi, q^^e Deu^ est, vn^ cum human anatura
mortua^ fuisse in Cruce etc. nec destirit. etc. id dogma de mortua diuinitate
publi^e profiteri ac spargere, adiutore Ioanne Islebio.
M^s^ulus and sundry Nichol^us Seluecerus in confut. accusat. sol. 192. says.
Nemo dicere posset vel debet D^um non este p^ssum vel mortuum: And the same
doctrine is in like manner affirmed by Stephanus Gerlachius contra Busaeum page
24. and 126. And by Iacobus Andreas. Whereof see in Respons. ad acta colloq^.
Montisbelgar. page 82. versus finem. and 92. versus finem.
other of Luthers scholars, and so in^ollerablie and grossly, that they are
therefore the^in specially Beza in epistolis theologicis. ep. 60 initio. And
after the Geneua Print of Anno. 1573. page 285. says. Non potest a nobis satis
been disputari de sententia Islebij and Musculi Andreae, contendentium Christum
in vtraque natura passum esse etc. istorum sententia Prophetarum and
Apostolorum and ominum orthodoxorum sanae doctrinae aduersari videtur.
Whereupon he does at large confate that opinion there. page 286. 287. 291. And
see Beza hereof further in respons. ad acta colloquij Mentisbelgar part. 1.
page 82. versus finem. and 92. versus finem. And Siluester Czecanorius vt supra
at 5. and Luther vt supra at 4.
contradicted by diverse other lea^ned Protestants.

9 Concerning his contempt of the ancient Fathers and his own great undertaken
knowledge: he says. Luther in libro ad Ducem Georgium. And Luther ad cap. 1.
ad Galatas. says: Esto, Ecclesia, Augustinus, and alij Doctores, item Petrus,
Apollo, imo Angelus e coelo diuersum doceant, tamen mea doctrina est eiusmomodi
quae solius Dei gloriam illustrat etc. Petrus Apostolorum summus, viuebat and
docebat extra verbum Dei. And after the English translation fol. 33. b. paulo
post med. and 34. a. initio.
since the Apostles times no Doctor or writer has so excellently, and
clearly, confirmed instructed and comforted, the consciences of the seculer
States as I have done: By the singular grace of God this certainly I know,
that neither Austine, nor Ambros, who are yet in this matter the best, are
aequall to me herein. And again Luther in sermon. de euersione Jerusalem.
the Gospel is so copiously preached by us, that truly in the Apostles time
it was not so clear In what strange manner he contemns, Origin, Athanasius,
Chrysostom, Basil, Ciprian, Hierome, and Gregory: I pass over as being else
where See this in Gasper Vkenbergius in his book entitled, graves and iustae
causae, cur Catholicis in Co^munione veteris eiusque very Christianismi
constanter vsque ad vitae finem, permanendum sit etc. Printed Anno. 1589.
causa. 7. page 175. and 176. And see Coccius his thesaurus tom. 1. page 1118. b.
collected specially from his own particular sayings over tediouse and
unworthy here to rehearse. How highly he esteems of such doctrine as him
self collecteh from the scriptures and how much he prefers him self
therein before the Fathers, him self signifies saying Luther tom. 2. l.
contra Regem Angliae. fol. 342.
Gods word is above all, the Divine Majesty makes for me, so as I pass not
if a thousand Austines, a thousand Ciprians, a thousand King Harrie Churches
stood against me. Nay he doubts not in plain terms to exempte Luther
aduersus falso nominatum ecclesiasticum statum says: Scire uos volo quod in
posterum non amplius vos hoc honor dignabor, vt sina^ vel vos, vel ipsos
Angelos de coelo, de mea doctrina iudicare etc. nec volo meam doctrinam a
quoquam iudicari, atque adeo ne ab Angelis quidem, cum enim certus de ea sim,
per eam quoque and vester and Angelorum iudex esse volo.
his doctrine from all judgment of men and Angels, making him self thereby
judge of both: and will our English Divines allow this in the doctrines of
Real pres^nce, Images etc. wherewith they charge Hereof see Mr. Bridges in his
defense of the government etc. page 559. Mr. Perkins in his four treatises how
to apply Gods word etc. sect. 10. initio. And see Mr. Whitgiftes defense. etc.
page penult.
and reprove Luther.

10 As concerning the implacable contentions between him and the Zuinglians or
Caluinists (to who^ our English Divines adhere) and how they disclaimed each in
other Luther expresses saying. Luther contra Articulos Louanienses. these. 27.
tom. 2. Wittenberg. fol. 503. And in epistola ad Iacobum Presbiterum he further
says. Beatus vir qui non-abijt in concilio Sacramentariorum, nec stetit in via
Zuinglianoru^, nec sedet in cathedra Tigurinoru^, habes quid sententiam.
We censure in earnest the Zuinglians and all the Sacramentaries for Hereti^k^s
and alienated from the Church of God: and See Luther. tom. 7. Wittenberg. fol.
380. 381 and 382.
I do protest before God and the world that I do not agree with them nor ever
will while the world stands, but will have my hand, clear from the blood of
those sheep, which these Heretics do drive from Christ, deceive, and k^ll
And again in the same place: Cursed be the charity and con^ord of
Sacramentnries, for ever and ever to all eternity. And a little before his
death, he protests saying. Luther de caena Domini tom. 2. Germ. fol. 174. And
see this a so reported by the Tigurine Divines in confess orthodox Ecclesiae.
Tigur. tract. 3. fol. 108. And Luther tom. 3. Germ. fol. 264. calls them
Persons condemned in their own knowledge with whom he will have no intercourse
neither by letters writings or words.
I having now one of my feet in the grave, will carry thi^ testimony and
glory to the tribunal of God, that I will with all my heart condemn and
eschew Carobastadius, Zuinglius, O^colampadius and their scholars, nor have
wi^h any of them familiarity, neither by letter or writi^ges, neither by
words nor deeds accordingly as the Lord ha^h commanded. with infinite much
more to the same effect: To make this more evident as yet by the like
answerable testimonies of the Zuinglians and Caluinistes: The Tygurine, Divines
say hereof Tigurini tract. 3. co^tra suprema^ Lutheri confessionem page 61. And
the Author of the treatise against the defense of the censure does hereupon
charge Luther with breach of all Christian modesty and immoderate zeal. page
155 circa med. even far beyond the bonds of charity and modesty. page 101.
ante med.
Nos condemnatam and execrabilem vocat sectam etc. Luther calls us a damnable
and execrable sect, But let him l^oke that he do not declare himself an
Archereticke, seeing he will not nor cannot have any s^cietie with those that
confess Christ: But how marueilously does Luther here bewray him self with
his devils? What filthy words does he use, and such as are replenished with
all the devils in hell? For he says that the Devil dwells both now and
ever in the Zuinglianes, and that they have a blasphemous breast insathanized,
supersathanized, and persathanized, and that they have besides a most vain
mouth, over which Satan bears rule, being infused, perfused, and transfused
to the same: did ever man hear such speeches pass from a furious Devil him
self? In so much as Zuinglius says of him, Zuinglius in respons. ad
confessionem Lutheri says. En vt totum istum hominem Satan occupare conctur.
Behoulde how Satan does endeavor wholly to possess this man. And
Oecolampadius acco^dingly forewarneth Luther, Oecolampadius in responsione ad
cofessione^ Lutheri.
Least that being puffed up by Arr^gancie and pride, he be seduced by Satan:
whereunto might be added sundry other like testimonies: Conradus Regius in
libro Germanico co^tra Ioannem Hussium de caena Dom. says. Deus propter
peccatu^ superbiae qua sese Lutherus extulit, que^admodum pleraque ipsius
scripta testificantur, veru^ illi spiritum abstulit, vti Prophetis illis. 3.
Reg. 22 atque in eius loco iracundu^, fostuosum, atque mendace^ spiritu^ dedit.
And the Tigurine Deuines in confessione Germanica impresta. Tiguri. Anno. 1544.
in octauo. fol. 3. say. Superioribus diebus edidit Ma^tinus Lutherus librum
que^ inscripsit (breuis confessio de Sacrame^to) in quo non obscure pro
hereticis sacramentarijs and sceleratissimis hominibus, habet and condemnat
Oecolampadium, Zuinglium and omnes Tigurinos, liber plenus est demonijs, plenus
impudicis dicterijs, scater iracundia and furore. etc.
This contention between Luther and his followers on the one party, and the
Zuinglians or Caluinists on the other is yet further testified not only by the
almost infinite many writings Hereof see hereafter tract. 3. sect. 7. in the
margent at this mark. *.
of one against an other yet daiely increasing, but also by the known mutual
proscriptio^ or banishment Concerning the many examples hereof: see Apolog.
modest. ad acta conuentus quindecem theologorum torgae nuper habit. page 3, 4.
and 5. and Osiander in epitom. histor. eccles. centur. 16. part. altera page
803 ante med. and 860. initio. and 609. initio. and 735. initio. and Crispinus
in his book of the estate of the Church. page 697. post medium. And Conradus
Schlustelburg. in catal. hereticorum. l. 13. and vlt. page 828. prope finem.
and 847. circa med.
each of other from their several territories or dominions: So far were they
from reputing one an other for members of one and the same Church:

11 As concerning Luthers life and manners, for so much as ^e is so strongly
priuileged in the opinion of the present time, we will in respect thereof but
brief^y touch the same, and that also not without great and re^pectiue
observation as forbearing purposely the credible testimonies in that behalf of
Cocleus, Lindanus, Staphilus and other our Catholic writers, to whom his life
and manners were well known, and choosing specially to speak thereof from no
other testimony then of hi^ self and his own dearest scholars. As touching
his life before his revolt from our Catholic Church, it is confessed that he
as then lived See Simon Voyon upon the catalog. of the Doctors etc. englished
page 180. and Luther ad Galat. c. 1. ver. 14. fol 35. a. after the English
translation.
in his monastery punishing his body with wat^hing, fasting and Prayer. See
Luthers own words hereof in his Come^tarie upon the epistle to the Galathians
in english in c. 1. fol. 35. a.
Honored the Pope of mere co^s ience: Luther. ibidem. fol. 35. b.
kept Chastetie, Pou rtie, and Obedience: and Luther. ibid. fol. 35 a.
whatsoever (says he) I did, I did it with a single heart, of good zeal, and
for the glory of God, fearing grievously the last day, and desirous to be
saved from the bottom of my heart. Whereas afterward upon his defection from
our Church, he was so far from his former cource of chastity, that he says
to the contrary Luther tom. 7 in epist. ad Wolfangu^ etc. fol. 505.
He that resolves to be without a woman, let him lay aside from him the name
of a man, making himself a plain Angel or spirit. And again. Luther tom. 5.
Wite berg. sermon. de matrimo. fol. 119. a. versus finem.
quam non est in meis viribus vt vir non s^m etc. As it is not in my power that
I should be no man, so it is not in my power that I should be without a woman
etc. It is not in our power that it shoul be either stayed or omitted, but is
as necessary as that I should be a man, and more necessary then to eat,
drink, purge, make clean the nose etc. (And to omit Luther in colloquijs
German. cis c. de matrimonio, says. vt nemo potestest cibo vel potu carefe,
sic fieri nequit, vt aliquis a muliere abstineat. etc. causa haec est, quia in
vtero mulierum concepti, eo aliti, inde nati lactati and edudati sumus ita vt
caro nostra maiori ex part mu lieribus caro sit, and sic plane fieri nequit,
vt ab ijs separemur.
his other like sayings) yet he further says. Luther tom. 1. epistolarum
latinarum. fol. 334 ad Phillippum.
I am burned with the great flame of my untamed flesh, I who ought to be
fervent in spirrite, am fervent in the flesh, in Lust, slothe etc. eight days
are now past, wherein I neither write, pray, nor study, being vexed partly
with the temptations of the flesh, partly with other trouble. (But says he)
It Luther vbi supra. pa. 345.
suffices that we have known the riches of the glory of God, the Lamb which
takes away the sins of the world, from him sin cannot draw us, although we
should commit fornicacion or kill a thousand times in one day, And being in
this case he labors not to preserve his former kept chastity by his
foresaid pun^shing his body with Watching, Fasting, and Prayer, before time
continued by him in his monastery when he was a Catholic, which cource of
resistance by prayer, the blessed Apostle 1 Cor. 12, 7
(being so assaulted) instantly used, and thereby prevailed, but unmindful of
his former vow, and forbearing as before prayer sometimes even for eight days
together, at the last (in speedy accomplishnent of his desire) Melancthon in
epist. ad Ioac. Camer. de D. Lutheri coniugio. It is extant in Melancthons
Consilia Euangelica part. 1. page 37.
He married upon the sudden Katherine Bore the Nun, without any
communication before had thereof with any of his friends, but having in the
evening invited to supper Pomerane, Luke the painter, and Appelles the lawier,
he finished the espousalls. A thing then holden so scandalous by Sleidan in his
Comenraries in english l. 5. An. 25. fol. 65. b. paulo post med. says In
those days Luther married a Nun, whereby he gave occasion to his adversaries
to speak evil of him. An. M. Fulke in his answer^ to p. Frarines declamation
page 32. ante med. con^esseth that many men misliked Luthers marriage with a
Nu^ne in so much as Luther him self. in colloquijs latinis tom. 2. de coniugio
says hereof. Nisi ego clam celebrassem nuptias, omnes impedissent, quia omnes
amicissimi clamabant, non illam, sed aliam.
report of Sleidan and others that his dearest Melancthon did therefore
specially Melancthon his fore said epistle ad Ioc. Camer. extant vbi supra.
write to a friend of his in excuse thereof, wherein nevertheless he holds it
Melancthon vbi supra says. Ac possit fortassis aliquis mirari illu^ hoc
infaelici tempore, bonis and honestis viris vbique grauiter laborantibus, non
modo non affici simul dolor, sed videri propemodum nihil penitus curare ea
mala quae ante oculos versantur.
marvelous, that Luther should be so regardlesse and little touched with grief
at the calamity then present, as to undertake that marriage: only he excuses
it with Melancthon vbi supra says. Atque ego rem hanc sic gestam esse
arbitror, est vir iste nequaquam ex ijs qui homines oderunt and congressus
fugiunt, quotidianae autem vitae illius vsum non ignoras, vnde cogitare te
cetera quam mescribere melius vt opinor fuerit.
Luthers sociable condition of life, and Melancthon vbi supra. What other good
matters were these which Melanctho^ did thus forbear to write, leaving them
rather to his friends thought?
other matters (thereupon depending and not to be uttered,) which (says he) are
fitter for you to imagine then me to write. For (says he) Melancthon ibid.
page 38. initio. says. Ego naturam Lutherum arbitror coegisse vt fieret maritus
I am persuaded that Luther was a man enforced to marriage by nature. Hereunto
we may ad, that Luther lying thus open, acknowledged his In Sleidans
Comentaries in English l. 3. An. 21. fol. 29. b. initio.
profession not to be of life or manners, but of doctrine: Sleidan ibid fol. 22
a circa med.
wishing that he were removed from the office of preaching, because his manners
and life did not answer to his profession: wherein he was so censured of even
by Protestants themselves, that (as appears by their own report Reported by
the Protestant writer Benedict Morgenstern. in tract. de Ecclesia pa. 221.
circa med who says of the Caluinistes. Si quando volunt indulgere genio non
verentur inter se dicere, hodie Lutheranice viuemus.
If at any time they would give assent to the provocation of nature, they blush
not to say among them s lues, to day we will live Lutheranely. Hereunto we
could further add like confessed testimony Conradus Schlusselburg. (a
Lutherane Protestant of great note.) and is great an enemy to the Pope as
either Calvin or Beza, in his theologia Caluinistarum. l. 2. fol. 72. a. circa
med. and post med. says of Calvin. Deus manu sua potenti adeo hunc hereticum
percussit, vt desperata salute, Demonibus inuocatis iurans, execrans, and
blasphemans miserime animam malignam exhalarit: obijt autem Caluinus morbo
pediculari, vermibus circa pudenda, in apostemate seu vlcere faetentissimo,
^^^^centibus, ita vt nullus assistentium faetorem amplius far posset. Haec
publicis scriptis Caluino obijciuntur (in quibus etiam de ipsius ASELGIA,
varijs flagitijs, and sodomiticis libidinibus ob quas, stigma ferro cadenti
dorso Caluini impressum fuerit a magistratu sub quoru^ vixit ho^renda
narr^ntur.) ad quae non video solida^ and luculentam aliqua^ refutationem. etc.
Scio and lego Bezam aliter de vita moribus and obitu Caluini scribere, cum vero
Beza eadem haeresi, and codem ferme peccato nobilitatus sit, vt historia de
candida eius meretricula testatur, nemo ipsi in hac part fidem habere potest.
And see further there concerning Beza. l. 1 in proemio page 4. b. and ibid.
page 92. a. post med. and b. and 93. a. initio. And Tilmannus Heshutius an
other Protestant writer in his book entitled verae and sanae confessionis
etc. says of Beza. Spurcissimis suis moribus dedecori fuit ipsis disciplinis
honestis, quique nefandos amores, illicitos concubitus, scortationes, faeda
adulteria, sacrilego carmine decantauit orbi, non contentus eo, quod ipse more
porci in caeno flagitiosarum libidinum sese volutaret, nisi etiam aures
studiosae iuuentutis, sua illuuie contaminaret.
in this kind even against Calvin and Beza.

12 As concerning Luthers confessed instruction from the Devil by sensible
conference had with him, we refer the same to his own testimony thereof See
in the next section in the margent there at the letters c. d.
hereafter more fitly alleged.

13 Lastly (to omit much more that might be said) we will now only allege
(which point in general, Zuinglius Zuinglius in responsione ad confessionem
Lutheri says. Lutherus obstinato and deuoto animo conceptum semel opinionem
persequi and obtinere conatur, nec multum curare solet, quodcunque tandem de re
quauis pronunciet, etiamsi vel sibi ipsi vel diuini verbi oraculis contradicere
deprehendatur: these words of Zuinglius are also in Schlusselburg. in
theologia Caluinistaru^ l. 2. fol. 122. a. fine.
reproves in Luther) certain examples of his wilful frowardnes or obstinacy
against that which him self acknowledged for true. As where he says of
Communion under both kinds Luther de formula Missae. and vide Lutherum tom. 3.
Germanic. fol. 274 And whereas Mr. Jewel answers hereunto in his reply
against Mr. Harding page 107. post med. that Luther only meant that Gods truth
should not hang of the authority of man: does this enable Luther to teach that
in despite of the Council we should use either but one kind or neither;
which-last were directly against Christ's institution.
If the Council should in any case decree this, least of all then would we use
both kinds, yea rather in despite of the Council and that decree, we would
use either but one kind only or neither, and in no case both. Of like nature
is it where he teaches Luther tom. 2. Germ. fol. 214.
that if the Council should grant the Churchmen liberty to marry, he would
think that man more in Gods grace, who during his life kept three whores then
he who married according to the Counsels decree, and that he would command
under pain of damnation, that no man should marry by the permission of such a
Council, but should either live chaste, or if that were impossible, then not
to despair though he kept a whore. In like manner he says touching Elevation
of the Sacrament Luther in parua confessione says. Eleuationem Sacramenti
scieban^ esse idolatricam sed tamen eam retinebam in Templo Wittebergensi, vt
aegre facerem diabolo Carolastadio And see Luther tom. 3. Germ. fol. 55. and in
colloqu. mensal. germ. fol. 210.
I did know the Elevation of the Sacrament to be idolatricall, (as making for
sacrifice) yet nevertheless I did retain it in the Church at Wittenberg, to
the end I might despite the Devil Carolastadius, a saying and practice so
gross, that Amadus Polanus professor at Basil speacially mentions, and
Amandus Polanus in Sillogethesium. theolog. p. 464. ante med.
reproves the same: saying further. Amandus Polanus ibid. says. Sed nolo
plura absurd dicta Lutheri recensere quae multa sunt, quae tegenda potius quam
exagitanda etc.
I will not recite more of Luthers absurd sayings, which are many: may this man
then be said to be Mr. Jewel in his Apology of the Church of England part. 4.
c. 4. S. 2. and in his defense of the Apollo^ie printed 1571. page 426. prope
finem.
a man sent of God to lighten the world See the acts and momuments page 416.
a. ^uitio
the Hleias, Conductor and chariote of Israel: to be reverenced Christus habet
primas, habeas tibi Paul secundas, at loca postillos proxima Luther habet. And
Ciriacus, Spangenbergius in his dutch book against certain Catholic writers
of his time, in the part thereof against Stephanus Agricola, commends these
verses for true and godly, and such as the Papists must suffer, will they nill
they.
next after Christ and Paul: Andreas Musculus in prefat. in libellum Germ. de
diabol. tyrannide: And see Nicholaus Anisdorphius Conc. 8. de Luthero page 88.
and vide Amsdor. in prefat in primum tomum Lutheri. and Alberus contra
Carolastadianos l. 7. b.
greater then who^ lived not since the Apostles times: Conrad. Schlusselburg.
catal. haeret. l. 13. and vlt. page 314. 316. and 489.
the Angel and last trumpet of God: whose calling was and
immediate and Hereof see Aretius loc. comun. de ministerio. loc. 63. page 198.
circa med. And Lambertus Daneus in Isagog. Xpian. part. 4. l. 2. page 36.
initio. And Lascius in the book entitled de Russorum, Muscouitarum, and
Tartarorum religione. page 93. ante med.
extraordinary, and his coming specially See the book entitled Antichristus
sieve pronostici sinis mundi page 12. fine. 13. fine. and 86. fine. And Mathias
Hoe. in his tract. duo. part. 1. page 136. initio. And Conrad. Schluffelburg in
catal. heret. l. 13. page 314. and 316. post med. And Michael Neander in libro
orbis terrae partium explicatio l. 8. calls him ^pi. os, Deus aliquis
theologorum, quem Deus multo ante per D. Pauli and Hussi os Ecclesiae promisit.
foreshewed in the scriptures, and sithence also foretold Hereof see the acts
and monuments page 339. b. ininitio. and Mr. Fox in Apocall. page 324. and
Neander vt supra.
by sundry prophecies (of latter times) which went upon the time of Martine
Luther. O sin and most hateful sin of former Catholic times which (in
Gods just judgment) made the world (for the time) subject to such gross
illusion. And thus much briefly to show that our English Protestants may in no
sort challenge Luther to have been so much as but a member of their Church.

THAT ALSO DVRING THE 20 YEARS next before Luther (which are yet in memory of
this present age) no example, can be alleged of the Protestants (but only of
the Catholic) Churches administration of the word, and Sacraments. SECT. 11.
BUT admitting now for the time that Luther had been a member of the
Protestants Church, we will as now yet further show, that his example is for
all that, of no force to prove a continuance of their Churches administration
of the word and sacraments but so much as for that only age in which he lived.
Wherein (to make the equity of this our Apology as yet more perspicuous) we
will descend from all those foresaid several ages before spoken of, and will
as now make examination but of one only peculier time, and that most evident,
as being yet within the memory of this present age, namely the twenty years
that were next before Luthers first writing against the Pope, which happenned
Anno Domini 1520. Act. mon. page 402. (...)
the late and fresh occurrants whereof concerning the matter now in question
can not be either mistaken or forgotten, at the least, not in all countries
where Christian religion was professed. And for so much as our adversaries do
collect and grant from the scriptures, that Mr. Fulke against Heskins, Sanders
etc. page 536. paulo post med.
Pastors and Doctors must be in the Church till the end of the world, even Mr.
Fulke vbi supra page 569. initio
from Christ's time to Luthers age. that they shall Mr. Fulke in his answer to
a countefeit Catholic page 11. initio.
always resist all false opinions Mr. Fulke ibid. page 92. ante med.
with open reprehension. that Mr. Deering upon the Hebrews in c. 2. verse. 12.
lectur. 10. circa med. etc. 3. lectur 12. fine.
the religion being of God no fear of man shall keep them back, that
therefore The Puritans words alleged in the Bishops of London Survey of the
holy pretended discipline pa. 44^ circa med.
the ministry of the word and sacraments are in absolute degree of necessity
to salvation. that, Mr. Willet in his sinopsis page 71. fine.
it is no longer a true Church then it has these marks: and that Mr. Willet
vbi supra page 69. fine.
the only absence of them does make a nulletie of the Church that also
Hiperius in method. theolog. sieve loc comun. l. 3. page 548. ante med. and 552.
prope finem
these signs (must be) external and visible that men may know where the true
Church is and to which company they ought to adhere that lastly Mr. Whitgiftes
defense etc. page 465. post med.
the Church of Christ is dispersed through the whole world, and cannot now be
shut up in one Kingdom. All which has been See before tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1.
heretofore more specially and at large declared out of our adversaries own
writings we do here as now insist, and as our adversaries The Deuines of Heidel
berg. in prefat. in Protocollum Frankentale^se, say to the Anabaptists. Sivos
Ecclesia Dei sitis, sequetur Deum sine sine populo and Ecclesia fuisse etc. nam
si vel omnes historias perlegatis, nullum ab exordio mundi populum inuenietis,
qui confessionem fidei vestrae similem habuerit: quia vero neque deus a
principio fine populo and Ecclesia, neque sempiternus ille Rex Jesus Christus
sine regno fuit, vestra autem Congregatio primu^ Anno. 1522. caepit, sequitur
vos veram Dei Ecclesiam atque populum esse non posse. So plainly do our
adversaries urge the Anabaptists to prove the continuance of their Church. And
Beza in epist. theologic. ep. 16. and (after the Geneua Print of Anno. 1573.)
page 127. paulo ante med. urges upon the same ground saying. Si verum est
eorum dogma etc. vbi tandem fuerit vnquam Ecclesia ipsos ostendere iub camus,
quum a pro pagato Euangelio facile fit demonstrare, nullum vnquam eiusmodi
quicquam sensisse, quin perpetuo Ecclesiae consensu fuerit damnatus.
did upon this ground charge and provoke the Anabaptists, so we in like manner
charge them, demanding what pastors and Doctors of their Church did accordingly
impugn false doctrine, preach the word, and administer their sacraments, and
in what several nations were the same visible and external, but during even
those foresaid xx. years next before Luther; where might any man as then have
performed Christ's commandment of Math. 18, 17.
tell the Church: which Mr. Carthwright confesses to be Mr. Carthwrite in Mr.
Whitgifts defense. page 635. fine.
necessary and perpetual. or whereas then might a man have found so much as
any one of those Fox in Apocall. c. 12. page 349. post med. says. Scio ac
fateor non adeo omnes terrae angulos sua seductione imposterem Demonem
corripuisse, quin Ecclesia semper habeat aliquot milia. (etc. quae nunquam
incuruauerunt genua ad Baal:) and vide Whitaker de Ecclesia contra Bellarminum.
page 161. fine and contra Dureum l. 3. page 259. fine.
thousands: or of that Bullenger in Apocall. sermon. 62. initio. and fol. 200.
a. fine. and b. initio says. By the description of the Romish tyrrannie and
reign of Antichrist it should seem that the Church and preaching of the
gospel had been utterly l^st etc. He declares therefore by a most excellent
vision, how Christ shall notwithstanding etc. have his Church cottinually and
that right famous.
Church (not obscure, but) right famous: which (as Mr. Fox, Mr. Whittaker,
and Bullenger do collect from the scriptures) were evermore to continue even
during the greatest persecution and seducing by Antichrist: Luther him self
imediatly before his first preaching against the Pope, was not a professed
member of any Church of Protestants the^ known to be in being, but was a known
Catholic, even Simon de Voyon in his discource upon the Catallog. etc. page
180.
an Augustine Friar: and as him self protests Luther says hereof, Casu non
volu^tate in illas turbas incidi, Deu^ ipsum testor. Witness hereof his own
scholars Timotheus Kirchmeru^ in his thesaurus etc. in epist. nuncupatoria
versus finem. and Iacebus Andreas in confut. disput. Joan. Jacob. Grinaei. etc.
page 312.
He fell into the troubles or (as he terms it) Luther in loc. commun. Clasi.
4. page 58. paulo ante med. says. Initio Euangelij, cum Deus in hanc (vt sic
votem,) factionem, preter meam voluntatem per mirabiles occasiones me
inuolueret.
faction of controversies concerning religion but casually and against his will
not knowing of any other then Luther in loc. commun. Class. 4. c. 30. page 51.
fine says. Tanta^ causam in me vnum recipiobam, and mihi vnisustinendam
auxilio diuino iudicabam. And see further hereof hereafter tract. 2. c. 2.
sect. 11. e. f. g. h.
to join with him therein, and not so much as Act. mon. page 404. 2. initio.
and Simon de Voyon in his discourse upon the Catalog. etc. pa. 182
dreaming or suspecting any change that might happen: for as Sleidan (Luthers
own scholar) reports the story Sleidan in English l. 13. fol. 177. a.
prope line^^.
the cause and original of this business was by occasion of John Tecel a
dominicke Friar, who carried about pardons to sell Sleidan. l. 16. fol. 232. b.
fine.
Against which Luther began to preach. (not upon judgment, but) as him self
confesses when he knew not what the matter meant: Luthers words in Sleidan. l.
13. fol. 177. b. paulo post med.
for (says he) I scarcely understood then what the name of indulgences meant:
In so much as afterward Luther did much dislike of his own undertaken cource
in that behalf, often times (says he) Luther in colloqu. mental. fol. 158. b.
wishing that I had never begune that business. And Mr. Fox does accordingly
testify how that after the said business so begun act. mon. page 404. b.
initio.
Luther was determined not to stire up any new debates, but rather coueted a
common quiet: whereunto he seemed so enclining as he douted not to insinnate
with the Pope making even his Sleidan. l. 1. fol. 10. a. prope initium.
appeal to him, and Sleidan. l. 1. fol. 10. a. fur.
professing (says Sleidan) his affection to the Church of Rome and that he
will attempt nothing against it: acknowledging also Luther in Sleidan. vbi
supra.
the power thereof to be so great, that Christ only excepted there is nothing
in this world more excellent: In which cource he was so forward, that (says Mr
Fox) Act. mon. page 404. a. fine. And Osiander in epitom. etc. centur. 16.
page 61. fine. and 62. initio says accordingly: quod Lutherus in Pontificem
quaedam durius scripserit aut dixerit, id condonari sibi petit, promittens
posthac maiorem modestiam, indulgentiarumque posthac nullam se facturum
mentionem, modo aduersarijs etiam suis silentium imponatur. And see further
there page 68. paulo post itutium. where he offered like condition to the Pope.
it is apparente that Luther promised Cardinal Caietane to keep silence (with
this annexed condition of pride) prouidid also that his adversaries would do
the like: And Mr. Cowper late Bishope of Winchester, reports further, that
Mr. Cowper in his Chronicle. fol. 278. a. paulo post initium.
Luther by his letter submitted him self to the Pope (with this other like
condition so that he might not be compelled to recant: so plainly was pride,
even his Concerning Luthers confessed Pride many Protestant writers give
testimony. So Conradus Regius. libro Germanico contra Ioannem Hossum de caena
Domini. says. Deus propter peocatu^ superbiae qua sese Lutherus extulit
(quemadmodum pleraque ipsius scripta testificantur) verum illi spiritum
abstulit. And Zuinglius in responsione ad confessinem Lutheri, charge Luther
with magna Arrogantia, and cum Arroganti verborum fastu, minis quoque plus quam
turgidis. And Oecolampadius in responsione ad confessione^ Lutheri: says that
Luther was, Arrogantiae and superbiae affectu inflatus. Also the Tigurine
Deuines in their answer to Luthers book against Zuinglius: say. Prophetae and
Apostoli, Dei gloriae, non priuato honori, non suae pertinaciae and superbiae
studebant, Lutherus autem sua quaerit, pertinax est, insolentia nimia effertur
etc. And Simon Lithus in resposione Altera ad Alteram Iacobi Gretzeri apologiam
page 333. paulo ante med. says. Lutherus plus quam debebat, tribuit gloriolae
partae, cuius particulam communicari cum alijs indignissime ferebat. And Thomas
Naogeorgus (a learned Caluinist) alleged by Schlusselburg. in theolog.
Calumistaru^. l. 2. fol. 131. a. post med. says of Luther. Plurima scripsit
per iram, carnalem, and per emulationem, ne succumbere cerneretur vlli:
doctorum veterum orbitam reliquit, indulgens stomacho suo ac honori. And John
Calvin alleged ibidem fol. 126. a. post med. says. Lutherus vt pollet
eximijs virturibus, ita magnis vitijs laborat: Hanc in^emperiem qua vbique
ebullit, vtinam magis frenare studuisset etc. vtinam recognescendis vitijs plus
operae dedisset. etc. And Conradus Gesnerus in universally Bibliotheca says.
Illud non est dissimulandum Lutherum virum esse vehementis ingenij,
impatientem, and qui nisi per omnia sibi consentientes far nesc^^t. etc.
Dominus faxit, ne quid contentione and impudentia oris obsit Ecclesiae, cuius
olim crepundia ta^ faeliciter promouit: In so much as Luther him self (in
Lutheri loc. comun. class. 4. fol. 35. b.) acknowledges the worlds opinion
herein had of him. saying there. Video ab omnibus in me peti modestiam. and
again there he further says. Omnes fere, in me damnant mordacitatem etc.
confessed intolerable pride, the only true cause of his further revolt and
apostasy. And it is accordingly yet further testified by Sleidan how that
Sleidan. l. 1. fol. 10 paulo post initium.
for so much as Luther offered (as before) most reasonable co^dicions, he
thought to have found some favor in the humanity of the Bishope of Rome: and
Sleidan l. 13. fol. 177. b. fine.
that the Bishope would assoile him Luther apud Sleidan. ibidem.
But lo: (says Luther.) whilst I look for a ioiefull sentence from Rome, I
am stricken with the thunder boult (of excomuincatio^, ( and condemned for the
most wicked man alive: Sleidan l. 13. fol. 178. a. initio.
then (says he.) I began to defend my doings setting forth many books etc.
and seeing it is so, let them impute the fault to them selves, that have so
excessiuely hanled the matter: In this sort (as Sleidan testifies) Martine
Luther, his foresaid Sleidan l. 1. fol. 10 a. paulo post initium.
appellation to the Pope being condemned, his offers despised, looking for no
more help nor health at the Popes hands, was through extreme necessity
brought to appeal from the Bishope of Rome: and so upon occasion of these his
foresaid procedings (which whether they were from heaven or not, we will with
out all further infere^ce refer to your MAJESTY'S grauest judgment) he fell
into the open and over violent current of his further ensuing Apostas^e:
notwithstanding which, he did yet still for a space afterward, continue his
accustomed saying of Mass, until that among Manlius Luthers scholar
testifies this in loc commun. page 42. fine. And see also the Alphabeticall
table of that book where it is set down Luthero sapius spectra apparuerunt.
several apparitions happened to him: (nor of Luther in (Lutheri loc. comun.
class. 4. page 39. prope fine says. nullas apparitiones Angelorum habeo. And
ibid. page 40 ante med. he further says: Pactum feci cum Domino Deo meo, ne
vel visiones vel somnia, vel etiam Angelos mihi mittat. and vide ibid. post med.
Ang ll for therein he disclaimeth but of wicked sp^rits wherewith he was
infested or hau^ted) whereof one was so terrible that Manlius in loc: commun.
page 42. fine. and 43 initio.
He was almost cast into a sound: in prevention whereof, oil was distilled
into his ear, and his feet rubbed with hot clothes. It chanced that Luther
tom. 7 Witteberg. Anno. 1588. in libro de Missa priuata, and Unction
Sacerdotum fol 443. and tom. 6. Germ. Genensi. fol. 28. in libro de Missa
angulari. Also Luthers words hereof are acknowledged and set down in the
Treatise against the defense of the censure. page 234. 235. 236.
upon a certain time (as him self reports the matter) he was suddenly
awaked about midnigh^: then (says he) Satan began this disputation with me
saying harken right learned D. Luther thou have said private Mass by the space
of 15. years etc. and so the Devil with arguments which Luther him self
there sets down, (whereat Protestants are greatly ashamed and strive though
in vain Mr. Charke and others to avoid that their doctrine against the Mass
should thus proceed or begin from the Devil, answer, that by this
disputation which Luther as thus reports to have been between the Devil and
him, was only meant a spiritual temptation of mind, and not any sensible
conference had with the Devil. But the contrary is to manifest. 1 First by
Satan's foresaid preface to him calling him according to the humor of his
Pride, right learned Doctor Luther. 2 Secondly in that he says thereof in the
same place, plane persuasus sum Empserum and Oecolampadium etc. his ictibus
horribilibus subito extinctos fuisse: which argues more then a spiritual
temptation 3 Thirdly by Luthers there describing the sound of Satan's voice:
whereof he there says. Hic certe sudor mihi erupit, habet Diabolus grauem, and
fortem vocem, atque ego tum been expertus sum, quomodo mane homines in lecto
mortui inueniuntur. Which last words are purposely omitted by the Lutherans in
their latter edition of Witeberg. but are yet still extant in the more ancient
edition of Luthers works. tom. 6. Genesis Germ. fol. 28. b. 4 Fourthly by report
of like other terrible apparitions happened to Luther testified as here by
Manlius a Lutherane. 5 Fiuethly by Luthers own report else where of the Devil
of ten walking with him in his bed Chamber affirmed by Luther in colloquijs
mensalibus Germanice editis. fol. 275. 6 Sixth^y by our adversaries the
Tigurine Deuines, who therefore object against Luther his disputation had with
the Devil. Tigurini in confessione Germanica impress. Tigurini. 1544. vide
fol. 25. 26. and 127. 7 Lastly this eu^sion of a spiritual temptation to be
hereby only meant is so weak, that Mr. Sutliffe l. de vera Catholic^ Christi
Ecclesia. page 298. 299. says, that Luther hereby sets down but only his
dream, but that also is most clearly against Luthers words, which are that he
was first, suddenly awaked, and then after Sat^n begun disputation with him.
to avoid the same.

And it is this kind of persuasion or appa^ition reported by Protestants them
selves as happening likewise to Suinglius, It appears by Zuinglius his words
set down by him in libro de subsid. Euchar. and also in the treatise against
the defense of the censure. page 249. and 230. that Zuinglius having labored
the abolishing of the Mass at Zurich against a certain Scribe that had
opposed him self (in argument) against Zuinglius: Zuinglius was in that
disputation provoked to bring forth examples which were joined With no parable:
therefore we began (says he) to think of all that we could, but yet n^
other example came to mind. etc. But when the 13. day of April drew near (I
tell the truth) and etc. my Conscience compels me to utter what the Lord
bestowed upon me: (my th ught as I was a sleep) that I was again disputing
with the Scribe, and my mouth so stopped that I was not able to speak etc. and
suddenly there seemed an admonisher to be present with me. ater fuerit an albus
nihil memini whether he were black or white I remember not etc. which said,
why do thou not answer him, that which is written Exodus. 12. (for it is the
Paschall which is the Passover of the Lord etc. whereupon (says he) I
(afterward) considered the place, and thereof before the whole Congregation
preached, which sermon when it was heard, drove away all mist. Thus were
Zuinglius his foresaid proceedings against the Mass furthered with nightlie
instruction in his dream, by an admonisher whether black or white he
remembers not: whereof though he made seriouse and great account affirming it
to be no light matter which (says he) I learned by this dream, thanks be to
God etc. Yet is the same derided as a meare illusion by his other brethren, as
namely by Iacobus Andreas in confut. disput. Joan. Iacobi Grinaei page 120.
254. fine. and 304. and by Schlusteli urg. (in theolog Caluinistarum l. 1. in
Proem. fol. 3. a. b.) and by Gerhardus Gresekenius de veritate Corporis Christi
in S. Caena. page 64.) By Benedict Morgenstern. in tract. de Ecclesia page 68.
and by Iacobus Heilbrunerus in Schwenck^^ldio Caluinismo etc. in prefat. ante
med.
Carolastad^us, In the book entitled Conspiracy for pretended reformation
page 83. initio. It is said, among others, Carolasta^ius a Preacher professing
the Gospel. etc. attributed much to Cabinet teacher^ in private conuenticles,
and unto v^sions, and pretended conferences with God.
Oecola^padius Luther alleged vbi supra. says, concerning these apparitions:
Plane persuasus sum, Empser^m and Oecolampadium etc. his ^ctibus horribilibus
subito extinctos fuisse: so plainly was he persuaded that Oecolampadius was in
one of these apparitions slain by the Devil.
and Mr. Fox In like manner does Mr. Fox in Apocalipsin. page 364. fine and
365. initio. and in his acts and monumentes Printed 1596. page 90. b. circa
med. See also heretofore page 80. in the marge^t at the letter y. report the
very like pretended wonderful revelation happened to him (as did to Zuinglius)
whereby he was instructed that by the 24. months mentioned in the Apocalips
was understood the 294. years of the primative Churches first persecution,
and yet is this understanding of them sithence rejected, and in steed thereof
is thereby understood the last 1260. years before Luther by Mr. Napeir upon
the revelations. Proposition 15 pa. 22. 23. 24. By Mr. Brocard upon the
reuiatio^ fol. 110. a. and by Master Gifford upon the reuelat. page 890. post
med.
was the first that diswaded Luther from further saying of Mass.

If now then that Luther him self was at first a Catholic, and our
adversaries in steed of plain instance or example to be given of their
Churches impugning of errors, of her Pastors Doctors, administration of the
word and sacraments during but the foresaid 20. years next before Luther: do
answer us that they were as then persecuted? we reply to them from them
selves, as well that no persecution of man can frustrate the foresaid ordinance
of god made to his Church in this behalf, as also that persecution See
heretofore tract 2. c. 2 sect. 8. at o. p.
makes her most known and therefore we ask as before, who these were that
were as then so persecuted? if they say that for fear of persecution they
durst not profess their faith, and so escaped unknown, we again tell them
from themselves, that See heretofore tract 2. c. 2. sect. 11. 1. l. p. q. r
therefore they were not as then the true Church. And we urge yet further that
the fear of persecution could be no such let to them, after that sundry common
wealths and Magistrates had undertaken the public profession, and defense of
Luthers doctrine, but that as then at the least if any such had been in being,
they might safely have showed them selves and joined in comunion with Luther:
If lastly they say that their Pastors, and Doctors, administration of the word
and sacraments were as then visible and known, and that now since, all
testimony thereof is suppressed to omit what has been See heretofore tract.
2. c. 2. sect. 9.
already sufficiently said against this, and to admit also that all our
Catholic writers should so strangely have passed them only over in silence,
remembering all others as the Annabaptistes Swenefeldians etc. why yet should
Luther, Zuinglius, and the other Protestant writers forbear to mention them?
the cause we take to be evident, and only, for that during the foresaid 20.
years before Luther, they were not known to be so much as but in being, in
any one nation of the world, which thing is in our opinion not obscurelye
granted, rather then signified by our learned adversaries them selves. To this
end our learned adversaries, Ioannes Regius acknowledges that the Church was
even the^ Ioannes Regius being urged in this kind. does (in his liber
apologeticus etc. page 176. circa and post med.) answer thereto saying. Negas
Lutherum suae fidei caetum inuenisse etc. dico fuisse ante Lutherum verae
religionis and qui cum Luthero per omni^ consentiret caetum ecclesi^sticum. But
coming to answer where this Congregation was to be then found, he has no
other refuge but says there, that it was, a ^ontificijs non agnitus, nec
propter tyrannide^ pontificiam visibiliter fortassis ostendi non potuerit:
iucoque qua^do urgent Iesuitae, vt Lutherus verae religionis ass clam
Ecclesiam ostendat. etc. volunt vt Lutherus oppositum in adiecto demonstret,
and inuisibile, visibile probet etc. interim tamen absurdum est ita
argumentari, haec res ab alijs non agnoscitur, nec potest etiam videri aut
demonstrari, ideoque non est in rerum n^tura etc. So plainly does he (being
urged to particulers) acknowledge his pretended Congregation at Luthers coming
to have been then invisible, and not able to be showed
inuisibl^ and could not be showed: and Mr. Jewel affirms accordingly, that
Mr. Jewel in his Aplogie of the Church of England part. 4. c. 4. division 2.
and in his defense of the Apology printed Anno 1571. page 426 prope finem.
the truth was unknown at that time and unheard of, when Martine Luther and
Hulderi^h Zuinglius first came unto the knowledge and preaching of the Gospel:
Mr. Parkines s^ith in like manner, Mr. Parkins in his exposition upon the
Creed. page 400. And Calvin in his book of Epistles. printed Hannouiae 1597.
ep. 141. page 273. paulo post med. says accordingly. Ad^urdum est, postquam
discessionem a toto mundo facere coacti sumus, inter ipsa principia alios ab
alijs dissilire. And Daniel Chamierus in his epist. Iesuitic. part. altera.
printed Geneuae. 1601. page 49. says hereof. Arianoru^ venenu^ non
portiuncula^ qua^da^ fed pene totum orbem contaminauerat etc. In ea nos tempora
deuinimus quae etiam excedent Ariani furoris co^fusionem: non portiunculam vnam
aut alteram error occupauit, sed totum ^orpus Apostasia auertit a Christo.
we say that before the days of Luther, for the space of many hundredth years
an universal apostasy ouerspread the wholle face of the earth and that our
Church was not then visible to the world: in so much as Bucer does therefore
call Luther, Primum Aposiolum purioris Euangelij. Bucer in epist. Anno. 36. ad
Episcopum Hereford. and vide Conradum Schlusselburg. in theolog. Caluinistarum
l. 2 fol. 17. a. initio.
the first Apostle of the reformed doctrine. whose vocation (said our
adversaries) was by reason of the then general defection of a^l protestant
Pastors) See before tract. 2. c. 2. sect 10. fine at q. r.
immediate and extraordinary the cource of Bez^ ep. 5. Al^m^nno. paulo post
initium.
Ordinary vocation being then no where extant. And the Lutheranes do affirm
it Conrad. Schlustelburg. ibid. l. 2. fol. 130. b. versus finem.
impudency to say, that many learned m^n in Germany before Luther did h^uld
the Doctrine of the Gospel. And an other of them further says: Si
antecessores Lutherus in officio habuisset orthodoxos etc. Georgius Milius in
Augustan. confess. explicat. art. 7. de Ecclesia page 137.
If there had been right beleuers that went before Lu^her in his office etc.
there had then been no need of a Lutheraine reformation, Georgius Miluis ibid
page 138.
therefore (says he) we say that Luther was raised up (diuinitus and extra
ordinem) by Gods special appointment, and extraordinarily. And an other
Lutherane writer affirms, it Benedict. Morgenstern. tract. de Ecclesia page
145.
ridiculouse (to think) that in the time before Lu^h^r any had the purity of
Doctrine, and that Luther should receive it from them, and not they from
Luther, consideri^g (says he) it is manifest to the whole Christian world,
that before Luthers time, all Churches were overwhelmed with more then
Cymeriane darkness. And that Luther was divinely raised up to discover the
same, and to restore the light of true Doctrine. So plainly do our adversaries
them selves, in steed of instance or example to be given, acknowledge (to the
contrary) the utter defection and want of their Churches Pastors and Doctors,
of administration of the Word and Sacraments for and during the age next before
Luther: whereunto we further add, that the Protestants Doctrine of
Justification by only faith, (which them selves affirm to be Mr. Charke in
the Tower disputation the fourth days conference Arg. 1. d^nii
the So^l^ of the Church, Mr. Fox act. mon. page 402. a. circa medium
the only principal ^^gine of salvation. and The Confession of Bohemia in the
Harmony of Confessions page 253. ante medium.
of all ^h^r p^ints of Doctrine the chiefest and weightiest,) was so unknown
in the age before Luther, that the contrary Doctrine of Justification by M^rrit
and Works (which Protestants term Mr. Penrie in the book entitled Mr. Some
laid open in his colors page 29, 30.
the very heart life and soul of Popery) was defended not only by the Sea
this heretofore for the Waldenses, at page 90. i. l. and for Wicliffe at page
97. f. and for Husse at page 101. g.
Waldenses, Wycl^ffe, and Husse, but also by all other nearer Luthers time in
so much that Mr. Fox having spoken of the t^mes next before Lut^er, and of the
learned writers then living, concludes only of Luther, that Act. mon. page
402 a. circa med. and the Deuines of the Confession of Augusta alleged by Luc.
Osiander in epitom. hist. ecclesiast. centur. 16. page 157. paulo ante med.
confess the same likewise saying. Cum igitur doctrina de fide quam oportet in
Ecclesia praecipuam esse, tam di^ tacuerit ignota, quemadmodu^ fateri omnes
necesse est etc.
he gave the str^ak^ and pluckte down the f^undation (of our Catholic faith,
and all by opening one vain l^ng hid before which is our free Justification by
our faith only in Christ. so plainly also by Mr. Fox his confession, was
this chief article of the Protestants faith, unknown and unheard of during
the age next before Luther.

And thus much briefly to show that whereas it is evident and confessed from
the Scriptures, that the true Churches pastors, her administration of the Word
and Sacraments must evermore continue yet our adversaries Church, religion,
administration of of the Word and Sac^aments, are not known so much as but to
have been in being, during the xx. years next before Luther. Whereupon we are
to resist and say to them as did the ancient Tertulian in libro de praescript:
says. Qui est is vos? vnde est quando venistis? vbi ta^ diu latuistis? and
Augustine l. 3. de Baptismo contr. Don. c. 2. says Vnde ergo donatus apparuit?
de qua terra germinauit? ex quo mari emersit, de quo coelo cecidit? And Aug. de
Vtilit. Cred. c. 14. says to the Manichees vos autem and tam pauci, and tam
turbule^ti, and tam novi, nemini dubiu^ est, quoniam nihil dignum auctoritate
proferetis: and Optatus, l. 2. contra Parmenianum says Vestrae Cathedrae
originem ostendite, qui vobis vultis sanctam Ecclesiam vendicare: and Hillarie,
l. 6. de Trinitate ante med says, tarde mihi hos Pijssimos doctores aetas nunc
huius seculi protulit, etc. and Hierom, contra Luciferianos in fine says: ex
hoc ipso quod posterius instituti sunt, eos se esse indica^t quos futuros
apostolus praenu^ciauit.
Fathers in like manner to the Heretics of their times: and as did Luther.
(in Lutheri Loc. Comun. class. 5 c. 15. page 50. ante med. says of the
Sacrame^taries, Sine nobis and ante nos nihil erant, ne hiscere quidem
audebant, nunc nostra victoria inflati, in nos vertunt impetum.
Luther him self upon this like ground to our adversaries the Sacramentaries.

A FVRTHER DEMONSTRATION Otherwise of the Protestant Churches defection. SECT.
12.
BUT forbearing as now, further to prosecute the foresaid evident defection of
the Protestants Church her administration of the Word and Sacraments, by
reason of the heretofore alleged disparetie (or rather contrariety) in
doctrine between our now Protestants, and the foresaid examples of Waldo,
Wicliffe, Husse, Luther etc. and all those other, whom our adversaries have (as
has been See heretofore for Waldo. tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3 for Wicliffe sect.
4. for Husse sect. 5. for. Luther sect. 10. and for others, see sect. 7.
heretofore perticulerly proved) iniustlie pretended to be of their Church: we
will as yet in further proof otherwise of their Churches no less unanswerable
defection, but briefly put your MAJESTY in mind, of one only other point,
(worthy of a much more labored discource) the which being hereby but
signified, rather then at large entreated of, we do nevertheless (^n full
confidence of the manifest and unanswerable clearenes thereof) presume humbly
to offer unto your HIGHNESS more retired and seriouse consideration.

We have heretofore showed how that supposing Waldo had bin a Protestant yet
was he before his first preaching against the Pope, originally a known and
professed member of our Catholic Church: and the like we have discovered in
Berengarius, Peter Bruis, Wycliffe, Husse, Luther etc. all whose followers, as
namely the Berengarians, Waldenses, Wy^leuistes, Hussi^s, Lutheranes. and^. are
in their forenamed seue all Sectmasters from whom they are known to have
descended, most plainly reduc^d to a known Catholic begin ng. As were in
like manner the A^r^ans, Dona^ist s, N^st^rians. and. known to have had their
like first beginning in Catholics, as in A^ius, D^natus, N^^torius. and. who
all together with Berengarius, Waldo, Wy liffe, Husse, Luther. etc. were
professed members of our Catholic Church, before such time as they 1. Ioh. 2,
19.
went forth from us the peculier mark or stig^a. wherewith the 1. Ioh. ^, 19.
It is said of heretics: they went out from us. And Act. 15, 24. it is
likewise said of them. Certain that went forth from us: And Act. 20, 30. Out
of your own selves shall arise men speaking perverse things in so much as our
Savior forwarneth us against this departure or going out saying: If therefore
they shall say unto you, behold he is in the desert, go you not forth: Mat.
24, 26. See S. Austen upon these words heretofore, tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. in
the marge^t at the figure 2.
Scriptures, Optatus, lib. 1. says hereupon against the Donatistes vide^dum
est quis in radice cum toto orb manserit, quis for as exterit, quis cathedram
sederit alteram quae ante non fuerat etc. And S. Augustine, tom. 8. in Psalm.
106. says quid est ergo seduxit eos? dimisit eos in inu^o and non in via,
quomodo enim in via, homines qui partem tenent totum relinqunt? quomodo in via?
quae est ergo via? Aut vbi agnoscitur via? Deus (inquit) m^sereatur nostri
(and^) vt agn^scamus in terra vtam tuam: in qua terra? in omnibus gentibus
salutare tuum: vtique t^les vt min^antur, vt pauci fi^nt, hinc exeunt: A
multitudine vnitatis omnes exieru^t, si^ut P^ulo ante co^memoraui dictu^ de
illis, ex nobis exierunt (etc.) And Aug. tr^. 3. in ep. Io^ says omnes
Haeretici, omnes Schismat. ex nobis exieru^t, id est ex ecl. exeu^t.
Fathers, and See M. Al^s^n in h^s confutacio^ of Brow^^s^^e: page 1. initio.
Protestants do (not without evident reason) note the sectemasters of their
times.

For seeing that truth is ancient to heresy, (the which is but a denial of
some part of the truth then in being and professed) and that the sum of our
Christian religion was accordingly at first established and continued in and by
the Apostles See M. B^^sons words alleged heretofore, tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 6.
at z. a.
and their Successors; There never This is evidently seen in the examples of
Arius, Novatus, Donatus, etc. And all other Arch heretics or sect-masters of
every age, neither can our adversaries give any one example to the contrary.
was therefore, nor possibly could be, any Arch Heretic or sectmaister, who
d^d not by his the seco^dary Innovatio^ in denial of some truth divide himself
from the Catholic Churches the visible society: whereupon as it follows (by
necessary sequel) that it suffices not our adversaries to affirm with such
needy begging of the thing in question, and no less peremptory and assuming
judgment (under pretense of that forbidden 2. Peter. 1.
private interpretation which Hereof see heretofore, tract. 2. cap. 1. initio.
in the margent at the letter p. q.
themselves do frame upon the Scriptures that we have departed from God,
unless withal they can show from what other known company of Christian to
us then elder and in being we did devide our selves, betaking v^ so thereby
into an other singular society, as did in their several times W^l^^, Wi^li^e,
Husse, Luther, Calvin etc. in their departing from our Catholic church, the
like whereof to have happened by any such departure made by our Church f om any
other known ^ompay of Christ ans to it then ancient and in being in any age or
nation since the Apostles times, our learned adversaries are Whereas the proof
hereof lies on our adversaries part, their most material objections in this
behalf are examined and answered heretofore. tract. 1. sect. 7. and the
contrary by us proved. tract. 1. sect. 8.
not able to show, a thing (in regard of the reason before alleged) worthy of
all special and due observation. So likewise, (which is no less worthy also
to be observed) although it be manifest and grounded that the true Church must
undoubtedly evermore Hereof see hereafter tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 13. initio in
the marge^t at the letter r.
continue with Hereof see heretofore. tract. 2. ca. 2. sect. 1. lit. t^^. x. y.
Z. b. c.
administration of the Word and Sacrament. Yet to avoid the example of the
Primitive Church, being as made by our adversaries unworthily questionable, and
by us heretofore even from themselves sufficiently Concerning testimonies of
our n^w Catholic doctrine to have been taught in the Primitive Church. see
heretofore. tract. 1. sect. 2. and 3. and tra. 2. c. 1. sect. 3.
cleared, and withal to restra^ne the^ to an other no less large, certain,
and known time) they are not able to name from Anno Dom. 700. for other 700.
years then next after following, (a time long and larg enough) so much as but
any one The Waldenses, Wicle^^stes, H^ssites, and Lutherans. admitting they
were all Protestants (the contrary whereof is heretofore prooved) are yet in
their forenamed several sect-masters, (as are also the Calvinistes in Calvine)
reduced to a Catholic beginning: And as for other examples our adversaries
ca^no^ give instance, so much as of any one other man, whom they can pretend to
have been originally a Protestant and not a Catholic: And if they flee to the
examples of such other, as themselves cannot but acknowledge for confessed
heretics, it is ridiculously impertinent, and shows their full conviction
herein.
other person living during any part of althat time, in any one nation of the
earth, whom they can but with any coulor pretend, to have been at first no
Catholic but originally a Protestant: As we have before said, Waldo, Wicliue,
Husse. Luther, Calvin etc. (from whom have sprung, the Waldenses, Wiclevistes,
Hussites, Lutherans, Caluinistes, etc.) were each of them originally
Catholics, as likewise were for former times Arius, Nouatus, Pelagius,
Nestorius etc. Let now our adversaries peruse (though most carefully) the
several writings of their own most painful writers in this behalf, as n^mely
M. Fox his Acts and monuments, Il iricus his Catalogus testium veritatis, Simon
de voyon, his Discourse upon the Catal^gue of the Doctors of Gods Church, and
also the century writers of Magdeburge, and they shall not in all or any of
them, or in any other find instance or example of any one other man named to
the contrary of that which we now urge, if then our learned adversaries be
not able to give us neither instance of any departure made by our Church from
any other known company of Christians to it then ancient and in being, yet
neither also example (as it is before required during the time before limited
so much as but of any one man living in any part of the world, who was at first
no Catholic but originally a Protestant: If these things be plain evident and
not to be excepted against by our learned adversaries, what then can be more
clear to prove a manifest interruption and discontinuance of their Churches
Pastors, adminstration of the Word and Sacraments, and that as our Religion is
vndoudtedly that Math. 13, 24.
Good seed which Christ the good husband- man first Sowed in his field. So
also their adverse doctrines are those forewarned Math. 13, 25.
tares which the enemy (afterward came and s^wed among the Wheat and went
his way: And thus much concerning the Protestants apparent defection of their
Churches Pastors, administration of the Word and Sacraments.

THAT THEREFORE PROTESTANTS for preservation of Christ's Church in being do
acknowledge the Catholick^ Church to have bin the tru^ Church and the Religion
thereof for sufficient to Salvation. SECT. 13.
WHICH sai^le defection or want of their Churches Pastors administration of
the Word and Sacraments, carries with it such an evident scandal or rather
scroople, by reason of the confessed doctrine to the contrary of all men
con^erning the true Church (which according to M. Whitaker against M.
Raynoldes: in his answer to the preface page 33. says We believe to the
comfort of our souls, that Christ's Church has continued and never shall
fail, so long as the world endures: and we account it a profane heresy to
teach otherwise. And the same is yet further affirmed by D. Fulke in the tower
disput. with Edm. Camp the 2. days co^f^rence. And ^lso by the confessions of
Belgia, in the Harmony of confessions p^g. 321. and by the conf^ssion of
H^luetia, ibidem page 306. And by the conf^ssion of Saxony, ibidem page 324.
and 325. and 473. in so much as the Divines of Witenberge in Colloquio Badensi
apud Osiandrum in epitom (etc.) ce^tur. 16. page 1064. ante med. say Ecclesiam
inde ab asce^sione, vsque ad hac tempora nunqua^ interruptam sed perpetua
su^cessione in terris per mansisse firmiter credimus: And ibidem page 1065.
p^st med. It is said^ Contra omnes furores Satanae. Ecclesia vera in terris
vsque ad adventum Christi ad extremum iudicium est mansura.
all opinions must evermore continue, without fa^ling or ceassing to be, not so
much as for any one moment of time) that the more sobe^ and learned
Protestants, whom headstrong and inconsiderate zeal has not altogether
b^inded do therefore in preventio^ thereof, and for preservation of themselves,
make in these straits, our Catholic Church as it were their Numeri 35, 11.
City of refuge: acknowledging to that end, that the true Church imediately
before Luthers time, had it being in our Catholic Church; and that
accordingly, like as Luther himself before his preaching against the Pope, was
an S^e^dan. lib. 1. initio.
Augustine Fre^r: and (as himself says) Luther in his Commentary upon the
Epistle to the Galathians Englished, fol. 35. b. circa m^di^m.
kept chastity poverty and obedi^nce: was only given to fasting, watching,
praying, saying of Mass, and such like, and Luther ibidem fol. 35. a. circa
medium.
ho^o^ed the Pope of mere conscience, etc. and was so thereby most undoubtedly,
a professed member of our Catholic (or as they te me it popish Church.) So
likewise upon his pretended reformati^n or preaching afterward against the
Pope, he did not (say they) thereby M. D. Couel in his defense of M. Hooker,
Art. 11. page 73. post med. says As it is strange for any man to deny them of
Rome to be of the Church. S. I cannot but wonder, that they (of Rome) will ask
where our Church was before Luther, as if any were of opinion, that Luther did
erect a n^we Church, etc. And see the like saying in M Hooker, in his
Ecclesiastical ^olicie, lib. 3. page 129. post. med.
erect a new Church the^ before not in being, (for that were most directly
against themselves) and therefore d^ not depa^t from the Church he wa^ of
before, but continued still a membe^ thereof, whi h th ng both in H^^k^ and M.
D Cou^ (speaking the^eof do very plainly M. Hooker lib. 3. page 130. and M.
D. Couel in his defense of M. Hooker page 68. say We gladly acknowledge them
of Rome to be of the family of Jesus Christ, therefore we hope that to
reform our selves is not to sever our selves f^o^ ^he Church we were before; n
the Chur h we were and are so still, as also we say that they of Rome
(notw^thsta^ding their manifo d def ct) are to be held a part of the house
of God, a lymme of the visible Church of Christ.
acknowledge to the great dislike of the In the Christian lett^r of certain
English P^ot^st^nts unto that rev^^e^d man M R Hooker page 1^. and 19. they do
reprove at large M. Hook for this opinion of not severing themselves f^o^ the
Church they were of before.
Purit^ins: As also M. Bunm^ prosecuteth the same more at large affirming
therefore M B^nny in his treati^e tending to Pacification page ^0^. Paulo post
Medium.
That of departing f^^ in the Church there ought to be ^o qu^stion at all
amon^est us Ibidem page 113. post m^dium.
we are says he no several Church from them nor they f^o^ us and therf re
there is no departing at all out of the Church f r a^y to depar^ from them to
us, nor from us ^o them, all the difference between us is concerning the truer
members, whether we or they may b^ f^und more w^r^hie of that account, as f r
the other we all^w no su h question, in so much as he doubts not to say
Ibidem p^g. 109. circa medium.
It wa^ evil done of them who f^rst v^ged ^uch a ^eparati^^ co^fess^ng further
our g eat Ibidem page 92 circa medium, he says of his separation, our
adversaries see themselves to h^^ advantage if they can win us to acknowledge
(it)
advantag given thereby, which our advantage he afterw rds very pla^nel^ to
this purpose expresses to be Ibidem page 96. c^rca m^dium.
for that says he) it is great pr^babilitie wi^h the^, that (...) we make ou s
l^es a swerable ^or to find out a distinct and s uerall Church from them, which
continued from ^he Apo l s ^g^ t^ this p^e^n^, ^lso that ^ele we must
acknowledge that our Church is str^g upon late, or since theirs: And hence it
comes, that M. H^ler and M. D. Couel do M. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical
Policy. l. 3. sect. 1. p^g. 130. ante medium and l. 5. page 188. initi^. and
M. D. Couel in his defense of M. Hooker, page 68.
acknowl^^g^, the Church of Rome t^ be^ of the sami^ie o^ Jesus Ch^^st, a pa^te
f the h^use of God, a Lymme of ^h^ vi^^bl^ Church of Christ: that M. D. Bar^
s^ith In his ormer sermons and two questions, etc. sermon. 3. page 448. fine.
the learnedder writ^rs acknowle^ge the Church of Rome to be the Church of
God: that M. D Some says M. D. Some in his defense against M. Penrie (etc)
cap. 23. fine page 182. initio.
in the judgment o^ all learned men, and all reformed Church s there is in
Popery a Church: that another late English Protestant writer says See the
discourse upon the means of w^l governing (etc.) against Nicholas Matchiuell
Printed at London 1602. page 80. post med
the Catholic and r formed make not two but one same r ligion, Ibide^ page 83
Paulo post med and 85. prope finem.
agreeing in all principal points ^f religion ^ecessarie for our salvation
that also George Cass^l^r (though disliking Cass^der in libro de offic^o Pij
viri etc. page 14. ante medium and 15. initio.
the Pope) and a knowledged for David Pareus in his book de Symbolis
Sacramentatibus etc. in praefat ante medium, says C ssader ^rditius scriptor.
etc.
a learned writer says Cassander ibidem page 14. post medium. and in defense
of his opinion h^e alleges Luther ibid. page 14. fine and page 21 and. 22.
the Ch^r^h of Rome is to be reverenced as being the true Church and Templ^ of
God; and that a late d sguised French Protestant writer, affirms Examen
Pacifique de la doctrine de H^guenotes, etc. imprimee a Caen. 1590. en argum du
liver page 2.
Ca^h^l^ ke^ and H g^^^^^s to be of one says and r^l g ^n: with whom agrees
another l ke ^rite^ term^ng the^ in like manner Apology Catholic etc. part.
2. page 26. and 203 and 204.
Dom^sti^kes ^f o^^ fa^^h, and braunch^s of one and the same Vine. And hen e
lastly it comes, that the lea ned Protestants (as we before Heretofo^e
tract. 1. s^ct. 6.
have she^ed do afford to our C^tho ike professors, the ho efull promises of
Salvation, af^irming this to be M. D. Some vbi supra page 176. prope finem.
the judgment of a^l ^^a n^^ Pr^^e^tan^. and ^^d M. B^nny in his treati^e
tending to Pacifi^ation page 93. circa medium.
^are by the wh^l^ course of all their writ^ gs: in so ^uch a^ ^hey doubt not
to change such of their other headstrong brethren as affirm the contrary
even with Mr. D. Couell in his defense of M. Hooker, page 68. Paulo post medium.
Ignorant zeal.

A brief repetition of ^he premises of this second Chapter. SECT 14.
SINCE therefore (most Gratiouse Souer^igne) it appears by the second chapter
of this second tra^t grounded upon the Scriptures, and that confessed sense
thereof which our adversaries themselves ackno^ledge 1 First that the Chu^ches
Pastors and Do^to^s, t^eir impugning of errors, administration of the Word and
Sacrament^ must evermore See hereto^ore tra. 2. c. 2. sect 1. b. c. d. and
ibid. n o. u. and ibidem, x. y. z.
continue in being 2 Secondly that where these are wanting there the true
Church is See heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. sect. 1 y. z.
not. 3 Thirdly that the examples of See heretofore tra. 2. c^p. ^. sect. 7.
Bertram, the Sea heretofore tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3.
Wal^e s s, See heretofore tract. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 4.
Wi^liffe, See heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. sect. 5.
Huss, and See heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. and 11.
Luther, upon which our adversa^ies do most insist and all other See
heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. Sect 7.
examples of former times are altogether impe^tinent to enable (but so much a
respecti ely for those times:) a continuan e of their Churches administrat^on
of the Word and Sacraments: in so much as themselves are urged to confess that
the same have continued latent and See h^retofore tra. 2 c. 1. sect. 4. p. q.
r. s. t. u. x. y. z.
invisible to the world (at the least) for these 1000. years l st past. 4
Fourthly whi h po^nt only wo^^d suffice to convince our adversaries) that not
so much as an one e^ample thereof can be found, b^t during eve^ the last xx
See heretofore tra. 2. cap. 2. sect. 11.
years before Luthers first preaching against the Pope, which are yet within
the memo^ie of t^is present age. 5 Fifthly that in regard thereof, our
adversarie^ a e (for preservation of themselves) urged to flee Heretofore
tract. 2. c^p. 2. sect. 13 y. and ibidem z. b c. d. e. f. g. h. i.
to our Catho^ike Church whose Pastors administration of the Word and
Sacraments, have according to their former confession) continued See heretofore
tra. 1. sect. 2. and tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 4. q. r. s. t y.
kn^wne and visible ^or 1300. years last ^ast, and so to acknowledge it for a
true See heretofore tra. 1. sect. 6. e. f. and ibidem g. h. l. and tract. 2.
ca. 2. sect. 13 b. c.
Church, whereof Lu^her at and after his s^^d first pre c^^ing was and
Heretofore tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 13. y.
continued (according to their en^orced con^ession) a known and prof^ssed
member.

We do most humb ^e now hereupon appeal to your MAJESTY concerning the
eq^itie of this our pre^ent Apology, and whether ^h t we have not her by
great cause, to stand (a^ we do) against our adversaries in defense of our
Catholic Church, and when her also that they, are not in all sen^e and r^ason
fo^nde of all others most unreasonable, n their seeking further to af^^ict and
persecute the same.

THE THIRD TRACT
FIRST CHAPTER,
SECT. 1. CONCERNING THE CONFESSED Antiquity of Catholic Priesthood Confe
sion Absolution Mass etc. and of the penal laws made against them.
ALBEIT most gracious Soueraign that in regard of these so pl^ine and ^onfessed
premises already alleged in be^alfe of our Catholic faith, the same can
appear (even to our enemies) no less then worthy of all reverend and due
estim tion, such yet neverthel^s has bin the calamity of our former ti^es, th
t even for this faith, though th^s bewt^full with all this outward o na^et of
co^f^ssed probability, (which being indeed but as it were th mother pear^e
contains under it such further special proof from Scriptures Fathers, and
Protestant write^s s is much more orient and richly demonstrat^^e, the
particule^s whereof we h^mblie pray but by this discourse m^de only in
general da^e not presume) to offer to your Majesty: we have for many years
past sustained the ^mpositio^ of sundry p^nall laws, the Catholic S.
Chrysostom writ a ^peciall book of this Priesthood.
Priest hood of our spiritua l Pastors, who (as St. Austine says) are now not
^^properlie but Aug. de civ. Dei l. 20. c. 10. post medium says non vtique de
solis Episcopis and Presb^teris d^ctum est, qui ^a^ prop^e voca^tur in Ecclesia
Sacerdotes.
prope^lie called priests in the Church: and to w^om therefor the words
Presbiter, and Sa^^rd s are and fferently A^gust^^ vt supra and the Greek word
Hiereus which signifies Sacerdos is used and referred to Christian Priests by
Dionisius Areopagita de eccles. Hierarch. c. 5. and Epist. 8. ad demophilum
monachu^: And Ignatius in his undoubted Epistle ad Smyrnenses now extante
(whereof diverse sentences are verbatim alleged under the name of Ignatius, and
title of this Epistle by Hierom. lib. de viris illustribus and by Eusebius lib.
3. cap. 32. as is more at large urged and proved by the L. Archbishop of
Canturburie in his defense etc. page 408. circa medium: and he not so much as
therein gaine-said by Carthwright affirms the Bishop to be as the high Priest,
and Chr^sts Image in respect that he sacrifices: affirming further, that in
the Church nothing is greater then the Bishop, who sacrifices to God for the
safety of the w^ole world and Nazianz^^ in Epist. 8. ad Simplicium Heret.
affirms the Priest to be the mediator between God and man and sacrificing
together with Christ: this point is so evident and common in the Greek and
Latin Fathers, that M. Whitaker lib. 9. contra D^^^am, page 813 initio,
acknowledges the same and answers only that the said Fathers used the words
H^^reus and Sacerdos: (non proprie sed catacresticos, not properly) (directly
against S. Austines foresaid testimony) But by abuse of speech: and yet as the
L. Archbishop of Canturburie in his said defense etc. page 411. versus finem,
confesses and says this name Priest is usually applied to the Minister of ^he
Gospel in all Histories, Fathers and writer of Antiquity.
referred in respect of the blessed Sacrament, which is by them off^ed to God
Aug. de civ. Dei lib. 17. cap. 17. circa medium.
under Christ the (High) Priest, and Ambros. in 1. Tim. c. 4 verse. 14.
in his steed or Ciprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3. post medium.
place, as the churches e^tern^ll and acceptable oblation, and acknowledged For
these last 1000. years M. Beacon in his works set forth 1560. the 3. part in
his treatise entitled the relics of Rome fol. 344. a post. med. says, the
Mass was fully finished by Pope Gregory the first, about Anno Domini 600.
etc. And from Charles the Great unto Charles the first, the Mass reigned as a
most mighty Queen in all the Churches of the West part of the world. and
Melancthon lib. 4. Chronic. in Henric. 4. fol. 186. 187. says of Gregory. he
allowed by public auctority the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood not only
for the living, but also for the dead: And the like is affirmed of Gregory by
Carrion. in Chronic. page 567. Paulo ante med. Also Musculus Loc. Comun. de
caena dom. page 339 fi^e says of Pelagius Predecessor to Gregory, Pelagius
commemoratione^ mortuorum in secreta canonis mistatic^ retulit (etc.) vt
mortuis virtus and efficacia Missae communica^etur: Also Simachus was Bishop of
Rome ( Anno 501) of whom the centurie writers centur. 6. cap. 10. col. 664.
line 30, say, notas Antichristi and hic habuit, missam enim in formam redegit:
Before him was S Leo (Anno 440.) of whom M. Bale in his Pageant of Popes fol.
27. says, Leo the first allowed the sacrifice of the Mass not without great
blasphemy to God: Before Leo was Ambrose (Anno 370) whom the centurie writers
cent. 4. cap. 4. col. 295. line 3. reprove and ch^rge with not writing well de
transubstantiatione and applicatione pro mortuis: and ibidem line 23. they
further s^y, Ambrosius locutionibus vtitur quibus ante eum ex patribus nemo
vsus est: vt miss^m facere, offerre sacrificium etc. Before him again was
Gregory N^ssene of the Greek Church: ( Anno 340.) of whom Andreas Chrastouius
in his book (against Bellarmine) de opificio missae lib. 1. sect. 164. initio
and page 81. says An ignorant opinionem Nissem per se absurdam esse (etc.) ait
ille (Nissenus) cum itaque dedit (Christus) discipulis suis corpus suum ad
comedendum (etc.) ^am latenter (etc.) in effabiliter and inuisibiliter corpus
immolatum erat (etc.) And see further hereof M. Whitaker co^tra Duraeum l. 4.
page 320. fine: Also Cyrrill of Jerusalem another Father of the Greek Church
flourished ( Anno 320.) whom Hospinianus in historia Sacramentaria page 167.
initio charge and reproves saying, quod ad Cirrillum Hierosolomitanum
attinet, dicit ille quide^ pro ^u^iam temporis recepta consu^tudine,
sacraficium altaris, maximum iuvamen este animarum: and Ca^vin in libro de vera
Ecclesia reformatione says of the Fathers of this age solemn est nebulonibus
istis (meaning us Catholics) quicquid vitiosum in Patribus legitur coriadere
(etc.) cum ergo obijciunt locum Malachiae de missae sacrificio ab Ireneo
exponi, oblationem Melchisedech sic tractari, ab Athanasio, Ambrosio,
Augustino, Arnobio, brevite. ^^^ponsu^ sit, eosdem illos scriptores alibi
quoque panem interpretari Corpus Christi, sedita ridicu^e, vt distentire nos
cogat^atio and veritas (etc.) And in his book of the institutions printed
Argentorat. 1539. page 350. ante medium. And after the ^ther edition lib. 4.
institut. cap. 18. sect. 11. he further says veteres quoque illos video hanc
memoriam alio detorsisse quam institutioni domini co^veniebat, quod nescio quam
repetitiae aut saltem renovatae in^ol^tionis faciem, ^orum caena prae se
f^rebat (etc.) Imitati sunt enim propius Iudaicum sacrificandi morem quam aut
ordinauerat Christus, aut Evangelij ratio ferebat and see heretofore page 13.
Before these times lived S. Ciprian (Anno 240.) whom the Centurie writers cent.
3. cap. 4. col. 83. line 34. reprove saying, Sacerdorem inquit (Ciprianus) vic^
Christi fugi, and Deo Patrisacrificium offerri. And M. Fulke against Heskines,
Sanders etc page 100. circa med. says It is granted that Ciprian thought the
bread and wine brought forth by Melchisad^ch to be a figure of the Sacrament,
and that herein also Melchisadech resembled the Priesthood of Christ. Also
Tertullian lived ( Anno 220) him does Luc Osiander centur. 3. lib. 1. cap. 5.
page 10. circa med. reprove saying, Tertullianus approbauit oblationes pro
defuciis, orationes Annuas pro natalitijs: In like sort is he reproved by the
Centurie writers cent. 3. cap. 5. col. 338. line 56. and no less plainly by M
Fulke in his confutation of Purgatory page 265. circa and post med. Before
Tertullian lived Ireneus (Anno 170.) him Calvin reports as before, and the
Centurie writers cent. 2. cap. 4. col. 63. line 20. charge, saying de oblatione
porro Ireneus l. 4. c. 32. (etc.) satis videtur loqu^ in co^^n ode, cum ait
noui Testamenti novam docuit (Christus) oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis
accipiens in vniverso mundo offert Deo. Before him lived Ignatius the Apostles
undoubted scholar, ( Anno 90) of whom the Centurie writers in cent. 2. cap. 4.
col. 62. line 9. say, quaedam ambigua and incomode dicta in quibusdam
occurrunt, vt in Epistola Ign^tij ad Smyrnenses, non licet inquit Ignatius sine
Episcopo neque offerre, neque sacrificium immolare, and cent. 2. c. 10. col.
167. line 17. the Centurie writers affirm these words of Ignatius to be
periculosa and qu^si errorum semina: Lastly M. Beacon in his foresaid treatise
fol. 344. a. post med. says, the Mass was begotten, conceaved and borne anon
after the Apostles times, if all be true that historiographers write. And
Hospinianus in historia sacrame^taria l. 1. c. 6 page 20 fine. says, Iam tum
primo illo seculo viuentibus adhuc Apostolis, magis huic sacr^mento quem
Baptism insidiari ausus sit (demon) and homines a prima illa forma sensim
abduxerit (etc.) And Sebastianus Francus in Epistola de abrogandis in vniuersum
omnibus statutis ecclesiasticis (says most plainly) statim post Apostolos
omnia inuersa sunt (etc.) caena dom. in sacrificium transformata est.
by learned protestants to have been for such acco^d ngly offered not only for
these thousand years last past, but also for so many other precedent ages, as
being (in our opinion) not any new redemption but rather a continual
commemoration and application of the force and benefit of that one sacrifice,
which Haebr. 9, 28.
was offered once for all: is against all example of former times made treason
in our Priests: our releeving of them is death to us, the remission or
forgiveness of our sins, (which Protestants term reconciliation) defended by
ancient Ambros. l. 1. de poenitentia c. 2. says of the Novatians, sed a^unt
se domino defer reverentiam cui soli remittendoru^ criminum potestatem
reservent. Immo nulli maiore^ iniuriam faciunt, quam qui eius volunt mandata
rescindere. nam cum ipse in Evangelio suo dixerit dominus, accipite spiritum
sanctum quoru^ remisseritis peccata remittuntur eis (etc.) quis est ergo qui
magis honorat, vtrum qui mandatis obtemperat an qui resistit. And cap. 7. he
further says to them, cur Baptizatis si peccata per hominem dimitri no^ licet:
In Baptismo vtique remissio peccatorum omnium est, quid interest vtium per
paenitentiam, an per lauacrum hoc ius sibi datum Sacerdotes vindicentur vnum in
vtroque ministerium est. Also Pacianus in epist. 1. ad S^mp^onianum nouatianum
says, numquam Deus non poenitenti comminar^tur nisi ignosc^^e^ poenitenti:
solus hoc (inquies) Deus poterit, verum est: sed and quod per Sacerdotes suos
facit ipsius potestas est, nam quid est illud quod Apostolis dicit: quae
ligaueritis in tertis (etc.) In like manner Socrates in hist. tripart. lib. 2
cap. 13. fine. reproves Acesius the Nouatian: for that he taught concerning
such as fell in persecution (inuitandus quidem ad poenitentian, spem vero
remissionis non a sacerdotibus, sed a Deo solummodo sustinere, qui potestatem
h^bet peccata remittere: Haec cum dixisset Acesius, imperator ait, o Acesi pone
scalam and si potes ascend solus in coelum; so strange and singular in those
times was this opinion deemed: and vide hist. tripart. l. 8. c. 9. prope
initium.
Fathers against the Novatians, and by other Protestant Lobechius Doctor and
professor in the University of Rosticke in his disput. theolog. page 301
answers our adversaries common objection saying; est quide^ solius De^a
peccatis absoluere, sed ita vt (hoc fac^at alias immediate, (etc.) alias
mediate per suos ministros condonando nobis culpam (etc.) errant ergo Calum^^m,
qui (etc.) absolutioni ministri verbi, illam efficaciam detrahant, (etc.)
contendentes mini^^um absoluere tantum vt internuntium etc. In like plain
manner is our adversaries objection of God only forgiving sin: and their
denial^ thereupon of that power to Ecclesiastical Minis^ers, no less plainly
further answered and refelled by sundry Protestants, as namely by Andrea^
A^thamerus in conciliat. locorum Scripturae pugnantium etc. loc. 194. fol. 218.
a. b. And by Iacobus He^lbranerus in Schwenckfeldio Caluinism. pa. 55. In so
much as Absolution (is affirmed to be) properly a Sacrament, by Melancthon in
Apolog. Confessed. August. Art. 13. de numero and vsu Sacramentorum fol. 161. b.
initio. by Spangeberg in (hu) Margarita Theologica. page 116. and 117. by
Andraeas Acthamerus in conciliat. lo^orum Scripturae Pugnan. (etc.) loc. 191.
fol. 211. b initio. and loc. 195. fol. 219. b. And by Sarcerius in loc. comun.
tom. 1. de potest. Ecclesiae fol. 305 b. post med.
writers against their brethren our adversa^ies, which our said Priests
(according to their commission most plainly set down in the Ioh. 20, 21, 22,
23.
Scriptures) undertake to impart to us, upon particular confession had of our
sins, (which said confession both To omit the plentiful testimonies of
the Fathers S. Leod^s^ribeth the usage of the Latin Church in epist 91. ad
Theodoru^ foro iulij Episcopum saying, Christus hanc Ecclesiae praepositis
tradidit potestatem, vt and confitentinus actionem poenitentiae darent, and
cosdem salubri satisfactione purgatos, ad communionem Sacramentorum per Ianuam
reconcil^^tionis admitterent: And epist. 80. ad Episcopos Campaniae. He further
says, cum reatus conscientiarum sufficiat solis Sacerdotibus iudicari
confessione secreta. And it is said in the ancient tripartite history. lib.
9. cap. 35. Ad hanc causam presbiterum bonae conuersationis, seruantemque
secretu^ ac sapientem virum statuerunt, ad quem accedentes hi qui delinquebant
delicta propria fat^bantur: At ille secundum vniuscuiusque culpam indicebat and
mulctam: quod etiam hactenus diligenter in occide^talibus servatur ecclesijs,
and maxim apud Romam, vbi etiam locus est certus poenitentium. And S. Basile
(signifies the like doctrine of the Greek Church) in quaestionibus
brevioribus interrogat. 288. saying, necessario peccata ijs apariri debent,
quibus credita est dispensatio mysteriorum Dei: siquidem rationem hanc in
poenite^tia etiam veteres illos cernimus sequutos fuisse: etc. And the Centurie
writers Centur. 3. cap. 6. col. 127. line 29. 30. 31. etc. Describe the life
doctrine and usage of the Church of Aphricke out of the writings of Ciprian,
and Tertullian. And see further hereof heretofore page 53. number. 7. And in the
margent there at the letter t etc.
Fathers and Protestants Sacerius in loc. comun. de confessione fol. 289. b.
says it is an error adserere confessione^ quae coram Deo fit sufficere, ita vt
contemnas claves and absolutionem per fratre^: Hic error prorsus tollit vsum
clavium and absolutionis (etc.) falsum ergo est confessionem, quae cora^ Deo
fit tollere confessionem privatam: etc. In like plain manner is private
confession defended most earnestly against our adversaries. by sundry of their
own other brethren, as namely by Lobechius in disput. theol page 295. sect.
4. By Conradus Schluselburg. in theol. Caluinistarum, fol. 147. a. By
Melancthon l. 1. epistolarum page 234. ante medium. By the confessions of
Saxony, and Boheme in the Harmony of Co^fessions. page 231. circa medium. and
page 357. and 358. initio. and by many others.
do likewise acknowledge) is (to our greatest grief) condemned for Lasa
maiestas, as being a disloiall abnegation of our allegiance. To the clearing
whereof, we do (as in the presence of God and your Majesty) protest upon our
souls, that no such matter, is therein or thereby expressed implied or meant:
our recusancie or refraining to be present at Protestants service:
(notwithstanding that the like denial or recusancie of Protestants to be
present at our Catholic service, is prescribed and taught by sundry of their
own most learned M. Willet in his Synopsis printed Anno 1600. page 612. 613.
614. teaches this recusancie, and alleges in proof of his opinion sundry
testimonies from the most famous Protestants, as Ridley, Latimer, Philpot,
Bradford etc. In like manner is it further taught by Ridley in the Acts and
Monuments page 1285. b. paulo ante medium. By Hawks Act. Mon. page 1150. b.
initio. and 1151. a. circa medium. By Melancthon in concilijs theologicis page
628. By Peter Martyr in his discourse hereof recited in Melancthons foresaid
treatise of Consil. theolog. page 634. 635. By Martine Bucer alleged ibidem
page 632. and 633. and 634. By John Calvin alleged ibidem page 635. fine and
636. and by the Divines of Germany alleged by Sleydane in his Comentaries
Englished. lib. 7. fol. 87. a. circa medium.
writers) is nevertheless judged in us a kind of froward and superfluous
remorse, and accordingly taxed with a confiscation or waist of our goods and
yearly revenue: whereunto might be added our sundry other losses, contumelies,
imprisonments and public disgraces heretofore sustained whereat though we do
all mourning plain, yet complain we will not,

THE PROTESTANTS OBJECTION OF Catholics disloyalty retorted upon themselves.
SECT. 2.
AND for so much as sundry of our uncharitable adversaries who are nothing moved
with our foresaid calamities, do out of their inueterate and implacable hatred,
daily seek to auert from us your HIGHNESS most gracious and Princely
disposition, inclined otherwise to commiserat all such as are afflicted, and do
therefore to make us more odious often inculcate the doctrine wherewith
certain our writers are charged concerning the Popes undertaking in some cases
to despose Princes, pretending with all what great danger may at last hence
ensue when by reason of your Majesty's mercy in the mean time to us exte^ded,
our estats shall be bettered and number increased: Vouchsafes your HIGHNESS
(before we enter into petition for our selves) graciously to weigh with equal
consideration that which hereunto we shall allege, as well concerning our
adversaries, who thus charge us, as in answer for our selves that are so
charged.

First then concerning our adversaries, we say that they in their thus urging
or but remembering of this point against us, do of all others show themselves
most indiscreetely malicious, for: quis tulerit grachum de seditione loquentem
etc. or how can it be decorum in any, to charge others with imputation of that,
wherein themselves are further chargeable? And although we for our parts do
altogether dislike all acerbitie and gall of in vectiue writing; being yet thus
provoked to such just and necessary recrimination as our own defense and
safety requires; we say from themselves as follows 1 First concerning the
Lutheranes does not Sleydane Luthers own Scholar make full report of the
seditious doctrine of the Divines of Magdenburge maintaining and publicly In
Sleydane in English hist. l. 22. fol. 345. a circa medium the Divines of
Magdenburg thus teach thereof: If it so fortune that the Magistrate pass the
bounds of his authority and command any thing that is wicked etc. If he
attempt any force he should be res^sted etc. and seeing the case stands
t^us, there can no rebellion of right be objected unto us. And ibide^ fol. 345.
b. initio It is further said, The Min^sters of the Church set forth a writing
wherein they recite the confession of their Doctrine, and declare how it is
lawful for the inferior Magistrate to defend himself against the the superior
compelling him to forsake the truth.
teaching in defense of their rebellion, that in case of religion it was lawful
for subjects even with force to resist the Prin^e: does not Chitraeus a learned
Lutheraine Chitraeus in Chronic. Anno 1593. and 1594. page 74. fine and 75.
says hereof tandem rex flecti se sibique persuadere passus est, vt
assentiretur se religionem and cultum Dei, in verbo Dei and Augustana
confessione comprehensum etc. solam in regno conseruare ac tueri, nec templa in
vrbibus vlla alteri, quam Augustinae confessionis reli^ioni destinare velle,
nec aditum in senatum regni, vel ad vlla r^gni officia publica, alijs quam
Augustinae confessionis doctrinam retinentibus concedi debere: regem ve^o ip^um
ad suae religionis Pontificiae exercitium, sacellis arrium in quibus habitabit
contentum fore. etc.
repo t how the King of Suethland being a Catholic was by hi^ subjects the
Lutheraines urged to asse^t to the de^ree that no Catholic should bear any
of^ice in that kingdom and that the King should content himself with his
Catholic service to be Celebrated only in his own private Chapel? was not
the force attempted by the Germans Of the Germans insurrection against
their Emperor, see further hereafter in this tract in the margent at the
figure 4.
against their Emperor in defense of their Lutherane religion so publiquel^
m^de known to the world with lamentable effus^on of much Christian blood
throughout Germany, as that the same is much more wort^ie o^ pity t^en
reme^bran e?

Se^o^dl^ concerning the Cal^iniste^, does not Calvin him self teach hereof,
that Calvine in Dan. c. b. verse. 22.25. says, abdica^t se potestate terreni
Principes dum insurgunt contra Deum, immo indigni sunt quicenscantur in hominu^
numero, potius ergo conspuere oportet in illoru^ capita, qua^ illis parere etc.
ear^hly Prin^es do be^eaue him selue o^ auth^ritie when they erect thems lues
against God, yea that they are unworthy to b^ accounted in the number of men,
and therefore we must rather spitt upon their faces, then obeie them etc. does
not S^inglius likewise say, Suinglius lib. 4. epistolarum Suinglij and
oecolampad. epist. Cunhardo Somio and Symperto etc. page 868. post medium and
page 869. says, Promittendum est Caesari officium debitum si modo fidem nobis
permittat illibatam etc. Romanum Imperium, imo quodque Imperium vbi religionem
sinceram opprimere ceperit, and nos illud negligentes patimur, iam negatae aut
contemptae religionis non minus rei erimus quam illi ipsi oppressores: exemplum
est apud Hieremiam 15. vbi exterminium cominatur Deus Israeli quod Manastem
permisissent impune esse pessimum.
due l^ial^ie is to be promised to Ces^r, i^ so that he p r^nt to us our rel
gio in violabl^ and. if the roman Empire or what ^^her, souerai n^ s^euer,
should opresse the sincere religion, and we n^gligently further the same, we
shall be charged with contempt, no less^ then the oppressors thereof them
s^lues. whereo^ (^aith he, abusing therein ^he Scriptures most g^o^ely) we have
an example in the 15. of Jeremy, where the destruction of the Pe^pl^ is
proph^sied for that they suffered their Kings Ma^^ss s ^e^^g ungodly to be
unpunished. And does he not advise to have this Doctrine privately and with
respect (Ibidem page 869. post medium.) Prudenter igitur ac paulatim age^da
sunt huiusmodi, atque cum paucis quibus credere possis quae ardua sunt.
Communicated unto certain chief persons of credit, did not also the
Caluinists of Embden (as a brother of t^e^r o^ne Gerhardus Giesekenius lib. de
veritate Corporis Christi in Sacra caena. page 256. paulo post medium says,
Embdens^s illustrem dominu^ suum, mota seditione and advocato peregrino milite,
fere non solum civit^te, sed tota ditione pepulissent: pacti eti^m sunt ne
pot^state^ habeat dictus illustris comes vllius religionis nisi C^lvinistae
exercitium subditis in Civitate Embd^na co^cedere, and tamen liceat (quod
magnae est gratiae) facere in aula co^cionatorem, qui sit Augustinae
co^fessionis. H^ sunt fructus fidei vestrae etc.
reports) by force expel the Civil Magistrate, being a Lu^herane and
enforce that the e^ercise of the Calvinistes religion should be public and
^he other but private; to the Magistrate in his o^ne house. Is there not also
like further ^epo^t or mention made by the Protestant writer ^ri^tuus of the
Crispinus in his book of the Churches State page 509. initio.
S^dition at Basile betwixt the Bu ge^^^s and certain of the Senators for the
cause of religio? and that the Burg^sses hau^ng taken arms, cast down the
Imag^^ in the Templ^s, and cau^ed the Sena^e to agree to what they demanded:
and that hereupon twelve Senators fav^uri^g Pap^strie were dejected out of the
Senate. and that in this sort, the Mass was then abolished through all that
Signorie: Whereunto might be added the known confessed example of like
Osiander in epitom-hist. Eccl. centur. 16. page 801. post med. and. 803. ante
medium.
impatient fury at Antwerpe, and certain other plac^s of Holland, Zelland
etc. as also of Testified by Crispin^^ vbi supra page 627. fin^, and by
Osiander centur. 16. page 959. And Sarauia in defens. tract. de diversis
gradibus ministrorum etc. cap 2. page 74 ante and circa medium. says, quid his
verbis D. Beza si^nificare velit quando pios expectare non a^quum censet donec
lupi publica auctorit^te expellantur, quidam dubitant: and videre privata
auctoritate lupos illos posse expelli sicut in Belgio and alijs lo^s factum
est, vbi templa and monasteria cum Monachis and Episcopis, vniu^rsoque clero
pa^istico spoli^ta and diruta sunt populari tum vltu and militari licentia,
invitis summis magistratibu^, and contra fidem datam.
Petrus Dat^enus, and others chief of the Congregation in Gaunt, who Anno
1578. stirred up the Citizens there to thrust out all the M^sse Priests and
Monckes out o^ the City, and put their goods into their treasury etc. does
not Mr. Doctor Su^clyffe accordingly confess that M. Sutclyffe in his
answer to a certain Lybell Sapplicatorie etc. page 75. paulo post medium.
Bezain his book de iure magistratum in s^bditos does arm the subjects
against the Prince in these causes, and that this M. Sutclyffe vbi supra page
192. post medium
book overthrows in effect all the auctority of Christian Kings and
Magistrates. Does he not likewise further affirm M. Sutclyffe vbi supra page
75. post medium.
that the author of the book which is entitled, vindiciae contra tyrannos,
whom (says he) many affirm to be Beza or Hottoman does give power to the
subjects not only to resist but also to de^ose and kill the Pri ce if he
impugn Gods religion, did not John Knoxe allege in proof of his own
seditious opinion Hereof see the history of the Church of Scotland printed by
Vautrouilier page 213. and M. Sutclyffe vbi supra page 192. ante med.
Calvin, and certain other ministers then residing at Geneua, teaching that
it is lawful for subjects to reform religion when Princes will not, yea
rather then fail even by force of arms, do not our adversaries themselves
acknowledge accordingly that the Protestants Hereof see Bodinus de republica
page 353. and Calvine to Sadolet. pa. 172. and M. Sutclyffe vbi supra page 194.
initio, and the L. Bishop of London in his Survey of the pretended holy
discipline. pa. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.
of Geneua did depose their Liege Lord and Prince from his temporal right
there, from which yet to this day they keep him by force excluded. In so much
as the Lord Bishope of London, and Mr. D. Sutcliffe pro^esse without any
couerture of words, plainly to dislike See the foresaid S^rvey etc. page 14.
circa med. and M. Sutclyffe in his said answer page 194. initio.
the divinity which was pretended in defense thereof by the Ministers of
Geneua. Con^erning the Low Countries, see Osiander in epitom. hist. eccles.
centur. 16. page 941. fine, where he says Belgici publico scripto Domino and
regi suo Philippo omnem obedie^tiam and subiectionem renunciant. And see there
further page 801. post medium, and 803. ante medium, and 805. prope finem.
Thirdly to forbear as well the confessed example of Ioannes See Osiander in
his Epitom. centur. 16. page 802. fine.
Functius a prime Protestant, publicly executed for his offense of this
kind, as also (for some respect) what is or may be further said conce^ning
the Protestant Subjects of For France see Peter M^rtir in his epistles
annexed to his common places in English page 157. b. and Osiander in epitom.
hist. Eccles. centur. 16. page 697. initio and 708. circa medium. and 804.
post. medium. and 809. initio. And see Crispinus in his book of the estate of
the Church page 614. post medium, and 615. and 616. fine, and 619. post medium,
and 611. fine, and 613. fine, and 625. post medium. And see the History of the
civil Wars of France (gathered from Anno 1585. till 1591. Printed at London
Anno 1591.) of the Kings royal authority joined with the Leaguers, page 91.
initio, and 168. fine, and of resistance after made thereto by them of the
reformed religion page 48. and 49. fine, and 51. circa medium, and 104. and
135. post medium, and 143. circa med. and 144. ante med. and 165. paulo post
medium, and 169. post medium, and 172. etc.
France, and the Low Concerning the Low Countries, see Osiander in epitom.
hist. eccles. centur. 16. page 941. fine, where he says Belgici publico
scripto Domino and regi suo Philippo omnem obedie^tiam and subiectionem
renunciant. And see there further page 801. post medium, and 803. ante medium,
and 805. prope finem.
Countries, and many other See these other examples in Osiander centur. 16.
page 115. circa med. and 735. initio and circa med. and 599. paulo ante med.
and 692. fine, and 802. fine, and 942. and 125. ante med. and 523. initio, and
350. ante med. and 1120. fine, and in Crispinus in his book of the estate of
the Church page 636. circa medium, and 682. ante medium. And see the Protestant
writer Dresserus in part secunda millinarij sexti, where he acknowledges and
reports conc^rning G^rmanie, page 656. ante medium, saying, scripto publico
Saxonem and Lautgrauium proscribit Caesar tanquam perfidos rebels etc.
Protestants cognita tanta severitate Bellum and ipsi denunciant Caesari ( and
page 658. fine) Mauritius Sax. elector and Augustus frater, non quiescendum
sibi arbitrabantur, priusquam in tuto religionis Lutheranae professionem
collocassent, inde expeditionem Mauritius in ipsum Caesarem suscepit* ( and
page 661. ante medium, he acknowledges that) dissidium and bellum omne ex
mutatione religionis Pontificiae in Lutheranam in Germaniae quibusdam
ducatibus, comitatibus, and civitatibus ortum est: and page 464. ante med. he
says, Mauritius itaque cum rege Galliae foedus fecit and in obtinendum id,
ta^dem ratus quod aequitate non poterat, milites presidiarios in Pacificatione
Magdeburgica dimissos tacit rursum conduxit, and contra Caesarem ipsum
adduxit: etc.
like foreign examples confessed and reported even by Protestant writers, and
to come nearer home, was not our Cou^trieman Mr. Goodman so far carried away
with this rage of sedition that he doubted not to publish, that in case of
religion See Goodmans book, page 4. 43. 59. 63. 87. 72. 99. 180. 184. 185. 196.
it was lawful to resist the Superior Powers, and for subjects to withstand
their Prince. Does he not hereupon affirm that Cap. 14. page 204. ad 212.
Wiat did but his duty, and that it was the duty of all others that professed
the Gospel to have risen with him: is it not evident and confessed that this
M. Sutclyffe in his answer etc. page 192. fine.
book^ was printed at Geneua in Queen Mary's time, See Whittinghams Epistle
before Goodmans book.
commanded by M. Wihittingham, and Whittingham vbi supra, and M. Sutclyffe in
his said answer, etc. page 193. initio.
approved to be good and godly by the cheifest men of learning that were then
in that City: did not the auctor of the book of obedience written in Queen
Mary's time, affirm therein that Obed. page 99. and 113. and se M. Sutclyffe
in his foresaid answer pa. 193. ante med. and see the book entitled
dangerous Positio^s etc. page 36. circa medium.
Queen Marie ought to be put to death, as being a tyrant, a moster, and a
cruel beast: did not one William Thomas and others accord^nglie conspire to
Hollinsheades great Chronicle the last editio^ volume 3. page 1104. a. initio.
murder the said Queen, and was not yet the said William Master Cowper in his
Chronicle fol. 365. b. ante medium.
Thomas being for that ^ff^nce hanged, drawn, and quartered nothing abasht to
justify and say M. Stowe in his Annalls or Chronicle Printed Anno 1592. page
1058. paulo ante medium.
at his death that he died for his Country: etc.

As con^erning our English Puritanes of latter times who yet at this present
(to exasperate the state against us) do so tediously and tragically riot in
their pulpitts with so much want of matter and wastfull prodigality of time,
we will requite their malice with all sobriety and patience forbearing
purposelie at this present to mention in particular, what may be, and by their
own brethren already is In M. Sutclyffes answer to a lybell Supplicatory and
in the treatise entitled dangerous Positions and Proceedings published and
practiced within this Island of Britainy under pretense of reformation, whereof
M. Bancrofte is said to b^e the Auctor. And in the book entitled conspiracy
for pretended reformation, etc. printed 1592. page 28. 29. 30. 32. 33 35.
collected in this kind against them out of their own writings as also we
willinglye pass over the like further exam^les to well known to your Majesty
of, Knoxe, Buchanan, Andrew Melum, and those other unquiet spirrits of
scotland, whose Seditiouse doctrine and designe^ents complotted against your
Majesty, are to the world more odiouse and doubtful, in that besides other
respects, they did perpetrate the same against your Highness, a Prince zealouse
in their own religion only we will premonishe in general, that the
jurisdiction (more then papal) which they under the veil of paretie, wou^d
induce into every of their several parishes, is, (as her late Majesty
observed out of her own Princely experience) In her Majesty's Oration in
Stowes abridgment. page 1196. prope initium.
dangerous to a King^y rul^: and to the state so much the more doubtful and to
be suspected, by how much it is evident, that many M. Hooker in his preface to
his book of Ecclesiastical policy, page 34. post. medium, says to the
Puritanes you admit so many Supremacies, as there are several parishes etc.
domesticke Popes among whom is no subordination, are to be reputed for more
turbulent, and enabled with opportunity to attempt the hurt by them intended,
then any one foreign Pope can be: a thing so evident that certain of the
rowne brethren d^ubte not to affirm and say of them, that M. D. Sutclyffe in
his foresaid answer etc. page 192. prope initium and page 198. ante medium.
they do deliver doctrine as dangerous to Princes, as R^ss^, Sanders, Allen,
and other Papists.

A REPETITION OF CONFESSED examples proui^g the Loialty of English Catholics.
SECT. 3.
BUT certain of our adversaries will perhaps hereto answer (which is all they
can well answer) that sundry of them do dislike of the foresaid seditious
doctrine and practices wherewith their foresaid brethren are (as before
charged) and that therefore we should greatly wrong them, if for the example of
those, we should hold all of them in like sort chargable. Truly we
acknowledge no less, and do persuade our selves that many grave and learned
amongst them, would profess and teach Loyalty to their Sovereign, any
diversity of religion notwithstanding.

If now the^ they could but afford us the like charitable and indifferent
censure, concerning that other foresaid doctrine wherewith they charge certain
of our writers, they should so discern matter no less evident and sufficient
for our excuse. To allege therefore even from themselves, that which blinded
malice w ll not as now suffer certain of the^ to confess: (and by themselves
published) and first concerning our own country: To omit the known
doctrine of In the epistle of John Heart to the Reader, set before the
beginning of the Conference between Doctor Raynoldes and him published by
authority.
Mr. Heart and In M. Bishops book entitled A cortuyse Conferen e etc. written
by John Bishop a recusant Papist Printed at London for Robert Dexter in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Brazen Serpent.
Mr. Bishop do not the English Chronicles testify concerning Salisburie, and
those other (who were sinisterly seduced, to design with Babington to the
effusion of innocent and sacred blood) that sundry of them, as namely
H^llinsheades Chronicle of England the last edition vol. 3. page 1574. b. line
8.
Salisburie, and Ibidem page 1574. b. linea. 14. 15.
Dunne, did at the time of their death, (when their conscience, and religion
was not to be dissembled) publicly and most grievously repent them of their
error, diswading all Cathol ckes from attempting to restore r^l g^^n b^
vi^lence. Did not Ioanes very earnestly as the^ and to the ^omiseratio^ of the
behoulders Ibidem linea. 60.
pr^test, that alth^^gh he was a Catholic yet he so deeply weighe^h liberty
f his country as that he would be and ever was rea^y to s^e^d his life in
withstanding any force Italishe, Spa^^sh, or what^o^uer? Does not the said
Chronicle report ^n like sort concerning ^he conspiracy wherew^th a^r^ was
char^ed, that when he came to confer^e with the S^minarie Priests beyond the
Seas, See Hollinsheads foresaid Chronicle volume 3. page 1385. b. linea 41. 42.
Mr. Wat^^s a l arned Pries^ plainly pronounced that it was utterly ^nlawfull,
with wh^m ma^y English Pries^e did agree: And that ^ar^i in his letter to our
late Sovereign did conf^sse that Ibidem page 1387. A. linea. 36.
most of the ^^gl s^ Divines did utterly mislike and ^odemne it: And also that
William Chreichton the Scottish Jesuit in his private resolution thereof to
Parrie Ibidem page 1387. b. linea vult.
Beyond the seas, did at sundry times answer him Ibidem page 1388. a. linea 24.
quod omnino non liceret, that it was altogether unlawful, and withal
alleged unto him sundry grave Ibide^ linea 32. etc.
reasons to withdraw him from that reported enterprise. In like manner the book
entitled the execution of Justice in England etc. penned (as some think by a
late deceased worthy The late Lord Treasurer.
Magistrate of very honorable memory published by authority, and now since It
is inserted into Hollinsheades foresaid Ch^onicle volum. 3. Anno Eliz. 26. pa.
1358. and 1359. etc.
inserted into the foresaid Chronicle is it not ple^tifull in testimonies of
this kind? does it not affirm and say, that Ibide^ page 1360. b. linea 26.
there be many subjects known in the Realm, that do not forbear to
prof^sse their religion and yet do also profess Loyalty and obedience to her
Majesty, and offer read^ly to her Mai^stie defense to impugn and resist any
foreign force though it should come from the Pope: In respect whereof they
rece^ued favor, and that Ibidem linea 35.
of these sorts there have been and are a ^umber of persons not of base and
vulgar note. A for example Ibidem linea 40.
the first and chief by office (says the book) was Doctor H^ath Archbishop
of York, a faithful and quiet s^biect* Also Ibid. lin. 53. 54. etc.
Doctor Poole Bish^p of Peterborrow a very quiet subject: Doctor Tunstall
Bishop of Durham a person of great reputation; Doctor White, and Doctor
Oglethorp^ the one of Winchester, the other of Carlisle Bishops and he of
Carlisle so in^^^ed to dutifulness to the Queen, Majesty as he did the
office (...) the Conse^ration and Coronation of her Majesty. To these also are
there added Ibidem linea 65.
Doctor Thurl^bey, and D^ct^r Watson the one of Eli^, the other of Lincoln
Bishops. Besides some Ibidem linea 69. and page 1361. a. linea 2.
Abbottes and Dean^s there mentioned, and Ibide^ page 1361. A. linea 61.
a great number of Laymen of good possessions and credit in their country. In
like manner our M. D. Bilson Bishop of Winchester in his true difference
between Christian subjection and unchristian rebellion part. 3. page 243. 244.
adversaries themselves do take notice and affirm that the Com^ns of this Land
in the reign of King Richard the second did in open Parliament acknowledge in
regard of spiritual Jurisdiction the These words of the Commons are in the
Statutes of King Richard the 2. Anno 16. C. 5.
Bishop of Rome (to be) their most holy father and yet withal did at the
very same time expressly deny that the In the said Statutes vbi supra and in D.
Bilson vbi supra page 244. ante medium.
Crown of England wh ch was immediately subject to God and to no other in all
things touching the regalitie of the said Crown, should be submitted to the
Bish^p of Rome: wherf^re (say they) we will be with our said sovereign Lord
the King and his said Crown and his regalitie in the cases aforesaid and in
all other cases attempted against him his Crown and r^galitie in all points
to live and die. Is it not also testified concerning controversy moved in this
kind in the time of King Edward the first, that to use Hollinsheades words
hereof Hollinshead in his second volume of the last edition page 309. b. line
66.
All the Lords temporal of the Land assembl d in Parliament at Lincoln in
name of all the Estates there gath^red did a^swere (concerning) the Popes r^ght
to bein^ge etc. that they would not consent that their King should do any
thing that might tend to the disinheriting of the r^ght of the Crown of
England: (And that) Hollinshead ibid. page 310. a. line 2.
it was never known that the Ki^gs of this land had answered or ought to
answer for their rights in the same R^alme ^f^re any Judge Ecclesiastical or
Seculer. Did not they in their letter hereof specially written to Pope Bonifac^
and by Hollinshead at large recited, acknowledge and call Pope Boniface to whom
they did so write Ibidem page 310. a. line 11
Boniface by Gods providence high Bishop of the holy Roman and universal
Church and themselves, his Ibidem page 310. a. line 14.
devoute Sons: and did they not also (all that notwithstanding) yet further
affirm, that Ibidem. page 311. a. line 2.
the Kings of England ought not to answer for their rightes in the said
Re^lme or for any their temporalties before any Judge Ecclesiastical or
Seculer by reason of the free pre-eminence of the estate of his Royal d^gnitie
and custom kept without breach at all times And that Ibidem page 311. a. line
9.
after full treaty and deliberation it was their common agreement and consent
with one mind and should be without fail in time to come that their foresaid
Lord the King ought by no means to answer in judgment nor ought to send any
Procto^s to the Popes presence especially seeing that the premises tended
manifestly to the disenheriting of the Crown of England, and al^o to the hurt
of the liberties and laws of their Fathers, and the duty of their oath made,
which (say they) we will maintain with all our power and defend with all our
strength and will not suffer our foresaid Lord the King to do or attempt the
premisse being so unaccustomed and before not heard of? Hitherto concerning
only those testimonies which our very adversaries afford us from the
Catholics of our own nation, whereunto we add this one further observatio^
concerning our own country, that whereas at the first coming to the Crown of
our late Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, so many Bishopes as are before mentioned,
and so many other of the Clergy and Commons of this Realm, were all of them
Catholic, and at that time had also the public state and government settled
in that course, and so thereby were of force (no doubt) sufficient to have
impugned and withstood the alteration then evide^tly foreseen to ensue, they
did yet her Majesty's known professed diversity of religion notwithstanding)
generally and without resistance receive her withal For the Lord Archbishop
and Chancellor of England being a Catholic made a public Oration to
persuade the people to acknowledge her Majesty for their Queen.

H^llinshead vbi supra pa. 1170. a. lin. 35 36. etc. and the Lords and
Bishops with all speed repaired into London to proclayme her: Hollinsheade vbi
supra page 1170 b. linea 15.


Loyal and dutiful respect, whereas yet again in clear example to the
contrary, it is evident that Queen Marie came to the Crown not without open
resistance, and endured afterward mo^e known Concerning open rebellions in
the field in Queen Mary's time, M. Stowe in his Annalls printed 1592.
mentions the rebellion the^ made by the Duke of Northumberla^d, and his
co^plices page 1039. and page 1045. circa med. he mentions how that Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury was condemned for high treason. Also pa. 1046. post
med. and 1047 etc. He mentions the rebeho^ made by What and his confederates,
and page 1070 he me^tioneth the rebellion made by Tho. Stafforde and others,
and their taking of Scarborowe Castle.
rebellions in open field within the Realm during but those five years of her
short government, then were after in the five and forty succeeding of her late
Majesty's reign: whereto might be likewise added the several notable and
violent mi^behaviours of those times, done (to omit other) even to the
public preacher M. Stowe vbi supra, mentions pa. 1039. initio, how at one
time a dagger was thrown at the preacher at Paul's Cross and page 1058. paulo
post med that at another time a Gunne was shot at the Preacher there, the
pellet whereof went very near him.
at Paul's Cross, the like whereof to have been committed by Catholics
would have appeared very strange during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

A LIKE REPETITION OF CONfessed examples proving the Loialtie of forreyne
Catholics. SECT. 4.
Now concerning foreign examples do not our adversaries affirm and confess
that the French King, M.D. Bilson vbi supra part. 3. page 223. paulo ante
medium.
Phillippe the fai^e resolutely withstood the Pope with all his interdictions
and depositions: that likewise concerning the Emperor M.D. Bilson vbi supra
part. 3. page 215. fine and 216. initio and Naucler Gener. 43. Anno 1344.
Lodowick the fourth, the Princes and Bishops of Germany signified their
general determination to him in these words. Most gracious Lord, the Princes
electors, and other faithful of your Empire pervsing the articles of your
submisison, which the Pope requires, and rests on, with one consent have
decreede them to be conceived to the s^buersion and overthrow of the Empire,
so that neither you nor they by reason of the oath you have taken to the Empire
can yield to the, and they inte^d to send Orators to the Pope, and to the
College of Cardinals to request him to cease from this course, if they re^use,
your Princes are resolved to meet at Rhens upon Rhene there to deliberate with
you for the further resisting of these practices does not D. Bilson further
confess and affirm that ibidem part. 3. page 212. circa medium in the margent
there.
all the Prelates and Princes of Germany took with Lodowicke against the Pope,
and that upon Ibide^ page 212. post med. and Naucler gener. 45. anno 1338.
grounds (of the Popes) own Canon, as namely these the Prince has his
dominion not from the Pope but only from God? And do not our adversaries in
like sort affirm and acknowledge as much touching the Emperors Frederick
Concerning Frederick the second, see M.D. Bilson vbi supra part. 3. pa. 187.
fine and Vsperg. in anno 1227. And hereof see further M. Bilson part. 3. page
206. initio, and page 207. ante and circa medium, 173. ante medium and fine.
the second and Henry Concerning Henry the fourth, Osiander in epitom hist
Eccles. cent. 11. page 193. fine and page 223. circa med. testifies his
public defense made by Wezilo Bishop of Mentz and Sigebert the Moncke,
notwithstanding the Popes former excommunication.
the forth? do the^ not in like manner take further notice and say, that D.
B^lson vbi supra part. 1. page 130. circa medium, and part. 3. page 233. ante
medium, and Chronicon Masse^ in Anno 1510. And see further hereof Crispinus in
his book of the state of the Church page 495 circa med. and Crispinus vbi
supra, adds further, how that it was by the same Council agreede that the
Pragmaticke Sanction should be kept throughout France, notwithstanding the
Popes excommunication.
Jews the twelueth in a council at Towers had the resolution of all the
French Bishops, that he might contemn the Popes iniust censures: that also
See the History of the civil wars of France from Anno 1585. till 1591.
printed 1591. page 58. circa medium.
the Senate of Paris having considered upon the Popes excomunication, did Anno
1585, reprove the Pope for usurping upon the liberties of the Crown of Fran^e,
and condemned the excomunication: that likewise (as Mr. Bilson affirms
Affirmed by Doctor Bilson vbi supra, page 4. fine.
Thomas Aquinas had this moderation, that Princes should no^ lose their
dominion for heresy, wherewith even Cardinal Bellarmine himself (who is most
cha ged he ein by our adversaries) seems yet so far to asse^t, as that he
makes the King subject to censure, but condition^lly Bellarmine tom. 1. lib. 5
de Romano Pont^f. cap. 7.
if he go about to draw by f^rce his subjects to heresy and infideliti^:
affirming also that Bellarmine ibidem.
if Princes do not endeavor this, but permit liberty of conscience to their
subjects, the^ (says he) Non existimo posse eos priuari Dominio suo. I think
they may not be deprived of their dominion for he acknowledges the Pope
Bellarmine ibide^ cap. 4. the title of that chapter being, Papam no^ habere
vllam temporalem Iurisdictionem direct.
to have (in this case) no temporal jurisdiction directly but only Bellarmine
ibide^ cap. 7. ante medium.
quando al^ter non potest bonu^ spirituale tueri: when he cannot otherwise
preserve the spiritual good: in so much as he doubts not to affirm that
Bellarm. lib. 2. de Romano Pontifice. cap. 29. vesus finem.
it is lawfu^l to resist the Pope invading the body, or troubling the common
wealth: it is lawful I say (says he) to resist him by no doing that which he
commaun^eth, and by letting or hindering him that he execute not his will:
whereunto might be added as well the late See this at large in the civil
wars of France in English, collected by Anthony Coll^net. from An. 1585. till
1591. printed at London 1591. lib. 7. and 8.
examples yet fresh in memory of the Catholics of France who not only
acknowledged but also assisted, and aided this their present King
notwithstanding his then known diversit^ of religion or any former
excommunication h^d from the Popes As also the King of Spaines no less kno^ne
detayning (even to this day) of Naples against the Pope notwithstanding the
Popes yearly clayming of it ^n the right of his See. And thus much briefly
concerning such foreign examples as are alleged and acknowledged by our own
adversaries Only we th^nke this one point further worthy of observation.
That whereas it is manifest and confessed that sundry Catholic Princes have
been by their Protestant subjects actuallie deposed as your Highness late
Mother from her kingd^me of Scotland; (which we refer to your Maiest^es own
more feeling How they used that poor Lady my mother is not unknown, and
with grief I may remember it: who desired only a private Chapel wherein to
serve God after her manner with some few selected persons, but could not
obtain it at their hands: in the sum of the Conference before his Majesty
between the Bishops and other of his Clergy printed 1584. page 81. fine, and
82 initio.
testimony) the temporal Lord of Geneua from his territories there, and to
forbear the examples of the Low Countries) the King Hereof see heretofore,
tract. 3. sect. 2. in the margent at the letter c.
of Suethland restrained as before to his private Catholic service ^n his own
Chapel, we find not yet on the other part, that so much as any one
Protestant Prince, was ^t any t^me deposed by his Catholic subjects so
different ^re the spirits of Catholics and Protes^ants: and yet is it ev^de^t
that Protest^nts have received their c^^efest beginning, increase and strength,
by the only favou^ and tolle^ation of their Cat^olike Princes.

A PROTESTATION OF THE now English Catholics. SECT. 5.
AS concerning our selves we hold that the authority given by God to Kings,
is imediate, abso^ute, and ndependant and we do acknowledge from the
Scrip^ures, that as Romans 13, 1.
there is no power but from God, so likewise that unto Wisdom. 6, 3.
King rule is given by the Lord, and power by h^ most High, that Prove. 8, 15.
by him Kings do reign, as being Romans 13, 4, 6.
his minister: and that Romans 13, 2.
whoso^v^r r^siste^h them, d^ h withal resist he ordinance of God: Hen e it is
that we are commanded to Math. 22, 21. and Romans 13, 7.
render unto Caesar the tribute of o^r obedience: to be 1. Pet. 2, 13.
subject to the king as having preeminence to Prove. 24, 21.
^eare, and 1. Pet. 21, 17.
honor him Exodus 22, 28. Act. 13, 5.
not to speak ev^l^ of him, no not so much as in our Eccles. 10, 20.
thought, to imagine his hurt; but to be Romans 13, 5.
subject of ne essiti^ and even for consc^ence sake. Least that by our
disobedience we Romans 13, 2.
purchase to our selves domnation. In so much as we doubt not further to
affirm with our brethren the Rhemistes, that See the Rhemish Testament and the
Annot. therein. Romans cap. 13. verse. 2. after M. Fulkes edition, fol. 259. a
paulo post med.
Christians are bound in conscience to obey (even) their heathen Emperors:
Hereupon it is that we differ ^n doctrine from our adversaries. See Bellarmin.
lib. 3. de Lai^is cap 10. and 11.
maintaining against them and their contra^ie Luther de Seculari potestate, in
tom. 6. Germanico says, among Christians no man can or ought to be Magistrate
but each one is to other equally subject etc. among C^ristian men none is
superior save one and only Christ: And in sermon. de o^e perdita, and also in
his sermons Englished by W^lliam Gage. page 97. fine. Luther further says,
therefore is Christ our Lord that he may make us such as himself is, and as
he cannot suffer himself to be t^de and bound ^y Laws etc so also ought not
the cons^ie c^ of a Christian to suffer them. And in hi^ said sermons page 261.
circa med. he does ad^on s^ that we obey the C^v^ll Magistrate, f^r (says he)
there comes no loss of Christ^an liberty or faith thereby: for for so much as
they do^ not contend that those things are necessary to salvat^on which they
ordain etc. howbeit, if any should contend that those comma^ndem nts of the
Civil Mag^s^rate be necessary to salvation (as doubtless they be in regard
that they bind us in ^ons^i^nce, and to break them were sin) then as it is
said of the trad^t^ons of the Pap^sts, the ^otrari^ rather were to be done.
And M. Whitaker doubts not to maintain this doct^in^o. Luther, teaching us
obedience of policy rather then conscience. For whereas Luther is ^h^^ ^d to
say absurdly. Christiani liberi sunt a statutis hominum M. W^^taker expl^neth
and de^end^th the samesaying liberi Christiani s^nt non vt n^llis legi^u
obtemperent, (...) ^que semp^r v^^^n^, s ^ vd conscientia: mentesque sua^,
legum human^rum relig^one liberat^ ^s^e ^n^^ll^gant. W ita ^r ^^^^ss. ad
^ati^nes Campiant rat. 8. page 154. circa medium. And s^e this l^k^ ^octrine in
Danau, in prima parts a^tera ^arte co^tra Bell arm^n^m page 1127
assertion t at the Civil Magistrates Laws made of things lawful or
indifferent do bind us even in cons^^ence And from this sured groundwork
proceeds likewise that reverend and religious respect of love and duty,
wherewith we do admire your royal Majesty, and hence lastly it is that we
do as now in most humble remonstrance and test^monie of our Loyalty
acknowledge and recognize, even with unspeakable joy to our selves and all due
thankefu^nes therefore to ^od, that your HIGHNESS is our true undoubted lawful
Sovereign Lord and King, in whom is fulfilled the succe^full and blessed event
of a most grave and pr^dent In regard ^^d ^o^e^ight of this which ^ow is h^
pely con^ne to pass K. Henry 7. e^^owsed his eldest ^^ugh^^ to Iam^s King of
S^o^la^^, Anno 1502.
foresight, and we thereby enriched with the most happy union of our long
divided continent, by whom only also and no other, our dearest count^ie may
enjoy her established and sweetest ^eace, avoiding so, that dreadful confusion
and turbulencie of state, which otherwise our former fears have of long
imagined: and unto whom only therefore immediately and next under God, we are
by all laws divine and humane obliged in the highest degree of all earthly
alleagea^ce: To the inviolable observing whereof, against the ambitious claim
or co^petencie of all pretenders whatsoever foreign or domestical, we do
hereby (as in the presence of God and his Angels) most seriously, and sincerely
protest upon our souls: most humbly this one for ever: imploring of your
Majesty, that whereas the ancient enemy of our Catholic faith (observing
the weakness of such as are most apt to be seduced) will (in d^scredite of
our religion) still busy himself with Math. 13, 24.
Sowing of tares amongst the wh^ate. If therefore (as God forbid) and we
strongly hope the contrary, any one or other unquiet spirit should arise and
1. Ioh. 2, 19. and Act. 15, 24.
go forth from us (as amongst the John. 6, 70.
chosen twelve one was a devil) whose least error or indiscretion our
politic adversaries (over greedy of our discredit) would draw on and
agravate against us with all tragical and immoderate amplification, your
HIGHNESS would yet in your Princely and rightful Judgment, distinguish the
fault from the religion, retorning (which we wish most severely, the offense
and punishment thereof upon the offender himself according to the laws in that
behalf p ovided without imputation thereof to us, or further scandal to our
profession.

THAT THE ARGUMENT DRAWN from the Confession of the Adversaries is strong,
with a br^ef repetitio^ of the principal points throughout al th^se several
tractes, all of them proved by the testimony and confession ^f l^arned
Protestants, with an hu^b^e Pet^tio for private tolleration SECT. 6.
FOR so much as our le^^ned adversaries do af^^rme, ^h t Academiae N^mansis
respons. ad professorum ^urnoniorum Societatis Jesus assertionis etc page 84.
says, magnae prof^ct^ ^n^ustriae ^st ex ipsius a^versar^^ erbis adversarium
convincere.
it s^ gr^ate ^ee^e of woe k to convince the adue^^a^^e from himse^^e: And M. D.
Whitaker says ^ccordingly, M. Whitaker de Ecclesia Controu. 2. quaest 5. cap.
14. initio pa. 366. says Decimam tertiam notam statuit Bellarminus
adversariorum co^fessionem, firmum certe sit necesse est argumentum illad, quod
hinc sumitur: etc. efficax enim erit adversarioru^ ipsorum contra ipsos
testimonium etc. et quidem fateor veritate^ etiam and suis inimicis testimonium
extorquere etc.
the argument must needs be strong which is taken from the confession of the
adversaries, for the confession of the adversaries against themselves is
effectual, and truly (says he) I do acknowledge that the truth enforces
testimony from her enemies. And since also most gracious Sovereign) that we
have in this d^scourse (forbearing o^r other plentiful helps) restrained our
selves to this inequality or precisenes of Method, and ^ri^ging so forth as the
Pro^het says Esaias. 19, 2.
the Ae^iptians against the A^g ptians, have to the more evident setting forth
of the equity of this ou^ most humble supplication accordingly showed even by
the frequent and manifest ^onfession of our learned aduersa^ies. First, that we
English men were above a thousand Heretofore tract. 1. sect. 1. initio.
years since converted by Gregory and Austin^ to our now professed Catholic
faith, 2 Secondly that the same faith was as yet much more ancient and long
Tract. 1. sect. 2. page 5. initio.
before that time universally professed 3 Thirdly that it carries with it
great Tract. 1. sect. 2. ante and post medium and sect. 3.
probab^lities to have begun even in the Apostles time, and is so thereby
cleared from that note of novelty, which your For my part I know not how to
answer the obiectio^s of the Papists when they charg us with novelties, but
truly to tell them that their abuses are new: in the Sum of the Conference
before the Kings Majesty, page 73. ante medium.
Majesty most religiouly seems to dislike in what profession soever. 4
Fourthly that the argument of true miracles is Tract. 1. sect. 5. paulo post
initium.
strong and certain, and that our faith is confessed to have been accordingly
Tract. 1. sect. 5. page 35 and in the margent at the ma^ke *
confirmed with such 5 Fifthly, that the hopeful promises of Tract. 1. sect. 6.
pa. 40. 41. 42. 43. and 44.
salvation do appertain to it 6 Six^ly that the Roman Church being converted
in the Apostles time did never Heretofore tract. 1 sect. 7. and sect. 8.
since make change of her religion: Since also we have by like testimony of
our adversaries further showed in the 2. tract of this discourse. 1 First that
the Prophets do foretell how that Christ's true Church m^st after her first
inc^ease Tract. 2. c. 1 sect. 1. page 74. and 75 at a. b. c. d.
cont^nue Cathol cke and ^niversall and m^st likewise with great and prospero^s
success convert Heretofore tract. 2. ca^ 1. s^ct. 1. page 74. and page 75. at
q.
many nations and Kings of the Gentiles from paganism to the faith of Christ.
2 Secondly that d^ring the first 300. years after Christ these predictio^s
were Heretofore tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 2. initio. page 76.
not performed by reason of the persecutions that as then raged 3 Thirdly that
the performance of them was begun but Tra. 2. c. 1. sect. 2. circa and post
med. pa. 76. et 77.
not accomplished during the second 300. years after Christ, and howsoever it
were as then either begun or accomplished, yet was it done by our Tract. 2.
c. 1. sect. 3. pa. 77. 78. 79. 80.
Catholic, and not their Protestant Church (4) Four^hly that after the said
second ^00. years even till Luthers time, the protestants Church was so far
from performing the said predictions, that during all that time and long
before, it is confessed to have remained Heretofore tra. 2. c. 1 sect 4. page
81. 82. 83.
invisible our Church nevertheless during all the said time converting the
Tract. 2. c. 1. sect. 4. pa. 81. in the margent at the mark *. and page 83. at
q. r. and 82. at n. o. p.
Kings, and nations of the Gent^^es 5 ^if^y that the manifest and confessed
defect of the protestants Church in not performing of the said predictions,
adua^tageth the Tra. 2. c. 1. sect. 5. ante medium page 85.
Jews against them, in so much as it made their learned Tra. 2. c. 1. sect. 5.
paulo post med. page 86. at d. e.
Castali^ to stagger in his faith, and David Tra. 2. c. 1. sect. 5. prope finem
page 86. at f.
George to revolte from them to plain apostasy: Since also in the same se^ond
tract we have likewise further showed from the like testimony of our learned
adve^saries. 1 First that Christ's true Church can never Heretofore tra. 2. c.
2. sect. 1. initio page 91. at z. a. b. c. d.
want Pastors and Doctors that these shall tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 1. circa med.
page 92 at p. q. r.
always resist f l e doctrine with open reprehension: that also the true
Church can never be without Tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 1 paulo p st medium page 92. at
y.
the administration of the Word and sacraments that I^idem page 92. at z.
the only absence of them does make a n^ll tie of the Church. and that Ibidem
prope finem pa. 93. at c.
th^se notes are needful to disti^g^ish the true Church from the false, that
men careful of their salvatio may know where the true Church is a d t^ which
company they o ght to a^here: 2 Secondly that the com^on ins an^^es or
examples of Tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 3. page 98.
Waldo Tract. 2. cap. 2. s^ct. 4. page 105.
^^ic iffe, Tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 5. page 109.
Huse, T^act. 2. cap. 2 sect. 10. page 126. 127. etc. at s ct. 11.
Luther and t^eir followers alledg^d ^^^al y^^ ^^r^o^mance hereof are found
insuf^cient to pro^^ a continuance of these prem sses, but so much as for those
times in which they first begun or l^ued, and that no Heretofore tra. 2. c. 2
sect. 7. page 115. 116. 1^7. 118. 119. and 120.
sufficient example thereof during those times and sundry other ages before can
be given 3 Thirdly that in steed of example in this kin^ to be alleged, it is
confessed to the contrary that the Protestants Church has during all those
ages, and many other before remained Heretofore tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 4. ante
and circa med. page 83. at t.u. and page 82. at o.
Latent and invisible, and that our Church has nevertheless during all the
same time continued Tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 4. page 83. at r.s.
visible, reigning universally etc. 4 F^urt ly (which only point is sufficient
to co^vince our adversaries that no known example can be f^unde hereof but
during the last Tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 11.
twenty yeare^ next before Luther, which are yet in the memory of this
presentage, our adversaries acknowleeging to the contrary, that Heretofore
tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 11. page e.
the truth was at that time unknown and unheard of; and that as then Vide
ibidem.
an universal apostasy over spread the whole face of the earth Ibidem.
all Churches being as the overwhelmed with more then Cimeria^ darkne^. 5
Fifthly that therefore for the preservation of Christ's true Church (which is
confessed Heretofore tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 13. initio and in the margent there at
the letter r.
never to fail so much as for any one moment of time:) sundry of our learned
adversaries do acknowledge that Luther though being before his first preaching
against the Pope a confessed earnest Catholic, did yet nevertheless after his
said preaching against the Pope not Heretofore tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 13. y. and
also in the margent there at the letter y. and ibide^ in the margent at the
letter z.
erect any new Church, or become member of any other Church the^ before not in
being but remained still a member of he same Catholic or Popish Church without
Heretofore tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 13. b. c.
departing from it, and so withal, that the Pop^sh Church, Tra. 2. cap. 2.
sect 13. versus finem and tra. 1. s^ct. 6. post medium page 40 e. f.
is the Church of God, and the religion th reof sufficient to Tract. 1. sect 6.
versus finem page 40. at m.n.
Salvation: All which premises have been heretofore proved from the f^eque^t
^^fess^on of our learned adversaries.

Since al^^ we for our ^arts do hereby most seriously and as ^n the presence of
God, profess (according to your Highness gra e and me^orable Basilicon doron.
in praefat.
pr^uision to content our selves sob^^ly and qu^e^ly with our own opinions,
not resisting a^thority, but to p^sess^ur s^^les in peace etc. and are
accordingly in good hope that there will appear to your Maieistie just cause
to move your highness (in your Princely wisdom) so much the rather to observe
toward us, this worthy and kingly saying Ibidem.
that it can no ways become to pronounce so ^gh be sentence in so old a
controversy: By how much it is by so many confessed premises made evide^t,
that our doctrine is undoubtedly more old then was any question of that other
doctrine) or in comparison rather innovation) whereto your Majesty vo^chsafed
this gracious favor. Since Lastly the objection of dislo^alty urged against
us by our adversaries, is retorted Heretofore tract. 3. sect. 2.
fully upon themsel^es, and we found Heretofore tract. 3. sect. 3. and 4. and 5.
to deserve at the least) as well as they, some part of that princely favor,
which they (without our repyning thereat) in ^reater measure do enjoy,
therefore all p^ostrat before your royal Majesty, we do most hu^blie pray,
even by our holy communion of faith with her whose soul is now blessed in
heaven, and her memory upon the earth to your Majesty most dear and to us
reverend, and by the most humble intercessi^n of our allegiance, and ever
resolved loyalty, that your Highness would of your princely clemency grant us
so much favor, as the undoubted example of all former and present times, and
the confessed Doctrine both of Fathers and Protestants, Hereof M. Covell in
his examination etc. page 199. post med. says, Concerning the Jews, a Prince
may lawfully permit them to dwell in his kingdom etc. the laws of the
Emperors have permitted the like, and some of the fathers, but speciall^ S.
Austine was so favorable to them, that he alleges several reasons for the
doing of it etc. And Peter Martyr in his Common places in Engli^^, part. 2. page
329. b. fine, affirms likewise that they may be tolerated among Christians,
and have also Sinagog^es etc. But it is not lawful to grant unto Turks
relig^ous assemblies.
affords eve^ to the misbeleeuing Jews, vouchsafeing so, (for our humble
thoughts presume no higher) but that we might adore Act. 3, 13.
the God of our Fa^^ers, with our private freedom and liberty of conscience
The integrity of our ancient Catho^ike faith, and confessed current of so many
former ages, spent in profession thereof from the time of our Countries first
c^nver^^on, with all honor to your Majesty's most noble ancestors, can in our
opinion no less then claim it. The distressed and miserable condition of so
many your Catholic and Loyal subjects altogether needs it: our long
cont^nued hopes of your princely clemency, with cheerful expectation of
milder times to ensue under your Highne^ happy Reign, presume with all h^mble
respect, to demand it. The many yet standing monuments of sacred Churche^ and
Colleges, erected by our Catholic ancestors for the one^y profession of our
fa th, and now since impropriated to our adversaries, make (in their kind most
religious and mournful intercession for it. The doctrine of so many learned
Protestants, who) teach M. Hayward in his answer to R. Dolman dedicated to
your Majesty cap. 9. paulo post medium s^ith, all the che^fe writers of our
age are now reduced to the former opinion affirming with Tertulli^n,
Lactantiu^, Cassiodorus, Ios^phus, Bernard, and others that religion must be
persuaded not enforced: Tindall in the Acts and Monuments page 1338. a. initio,
says, the new Testament of Christ will not suffer any law of co^pulsio^ but
only of council and exhortation. And ibidem pa. 1337. b. post medium. And
ibidem page 1152. b. fine. Hawks says to Bis^op Boner, where prove you that
Christ or his Apostles did kill any man for his faith: Al^o Iacobus Acontius
stratagematu^^ satanae libri octo, ^iscourcing at large of this point says,
consequens ergo est manner quidem suo in vigore vete^^m legem aut certe
renouar^^si ^ilem poss^, n^que t^men ^ermitti haereticorum supplicia quia
videlicet ali^ sit apostatae, ^lia haer^tici c^^s^ (page 158. initio.) And
further, Dominus profecto definite decl^^uit magistratus non esse idon^os
dogmatum Iudices, interdixitque illis talis Iurisdictionis vsu ^mni (page 160.
circ^ med.) and page 161. circa med. he farther says hereof, haec quidem
Iudiciorum gen^r^ ^d magistratum non pertinent, sed ad solum Dei filium, qui in
nouissi^o die per ange^os s^os seperatu^^s sit^^t itico z^zan^^, with much more
against all punishment f^r Chr^stian religion. And Vrbanus Regius i^ loc.
theolog fol. 117. c. ^a^th hereof, Christianorum Spiritus combu^it tantum igne
ch^rit^tis and^. Deus non docet combur^re e^^ant^s ouiculas, sed Ezechi^l, 34.
sanare infirmas, ma^il^t^s pascere etc. And Luther in ass^rtionibus art. 33. de
non comburendis haereticis, ma^eth a special d^s^ours^ in proof thereof. And
Castalio in his Preface upon the Bible to K. Edward the six^e affirms the
same doctrine; and so ^ikwise does Coelius Secundus Curio in lib^o de
amplitudine regni Dei lib. 2. page 216. And ^rancis^us Goma^us in speculo v^rae
Eccl^siae p^g. 227. and 229. And M. Marbecke in his Common places page 483. and
484.
that no man ought to be compelled or suffer for his faith, prescribes it:
The graver Judgment of our forenamed learned adversaries who acknowledge our
Catholic Church to be a true See heretofore pa 4^. e. f ^h.
Church, and o^r religion for s^ffic^ent H^retofore page 40 at m.n.
to salvation makes ^ost clearly f^r it. The po^icy of the time and succesfu
l event, upon like examples See in Luc. ^siander ^^ep^tom hist. eccl. centu.
16. sundry e^a^ples of tolloration as namely in France, pa. 1135. fine. and
1136. initio. and page 816. and 713 and 750. and 735 fine. and 718. And in
Liuon^a p^g 950. initio, and in Ge^m ^ie page 629. and 630. and page 598. An^
of G^^manie see farther the Prot^stant wr^ter Dresserus in pa^te secu^da
Millen^rij texti, w^ere he says, (page 659 initio.) Anno 52. pax profitentibus
Augustan^m Confessionem perp^tua conc^ss^ ^st etc. And (page 661. ante medium)
he^ further sai^^, it was agreede v^^^, ea quidem lege and condition vt
Pontificij qui ante in sectati religione^ Evangelicam er^^^, ins^ctari
desisterent, and contra, Evang^lici qui religonem Pontificiam abro^arant
de^^^^s a tali abrogatione abstinerent, caueretque vtraque pars ne in suis
dominijs quenquam ad iu^ae religionis professionem cogat, aut a religione quam
prof^tetur contra ipsius conscienti^m ^voc^t ^ut dep^llat, And page 666. ante
med. he says (in allowance thereof) ne^ hic metuo eorum^^e ^^hensionem qui
putant non nisi vnam religione^ esse feranda^ etc. And M. D. ^^lke lib.
d^s^ccessione Ecclesiastica etc. page 285. and 286. gives very many examples
of tolleration g^uen by Catholic Magistrates to Protestants: in so much as he
doubts not to say fu^ther: H^ip^ni^rum Rex vnicus est inter omnes Europae
reges tam alienus a nobis, vt nec foueat, nec p^l^m coire ecclesias permittat
in suis ditionibus ibid. page 285. fine. And see further Ch^traeus in his
Chron. An 93.94. and 95. page 74. and 75. and 76. concerning tolleratio^ in the
kingdom of Suecia, and concerning like tolleration in France, see l. edit du
roy sur la Pacification des trobles de^^roy ^^me. Anno 1576. And see likewise
the Kings edict published in Paris, 25. February 1599. ^^gi^^d and printed
Anno 1599. And see the like example of tolleration in Heluetia in the book
entitled, Centuri^ Epistol^^um theologicarum Epist. 39. Martini Buceri page
123. and 1.4. whereunto might be added the known example of like tolleration
in Poland.
had of tolleration in other countries strongly persuades it And (above all
the general care of Chr^stian p^ofession, and long desired peace of so many
Christian kingdom, disturbed (to the Turks great advanceme^t concerning
countries which the Turk has gotten by our discention, for former times read
the oration of the French Ambassador in M. Sleydanes Comentaries in English,
lib. 14. fol. 187. a. b. And M. D. Humfrey in Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 3. page
286. And for latter times see Chitraeus his Chronicon. Ann^ 1593. and 1594. And
see the treatize entitled (ad Principes populumque Christianum de Bello
adversus Turcas gerendo etc. Guilielmi Brus^ij co^cilium Lipsiae. 1595.
and hinderance M. Fox in his Acts and Monuments Printed. 1576 in his
Alphabetical table at the word discord shows (with particular references
thereof to his book) that discord brought the Turk into Hu^gary 727. 695. And
gives him st e^ tha a^st Christendom, 712. 998. spoileth Germany 317. and
Christendom, 314.
of Christians) with intestiue division, for the appeasing and reconcileing
whereof (to the full enabling of a most holy and needful Concerning the
important necessity hereof read the oration m^de by Dress^^us a learned
Protest^nt entitled de bello Turcico oration mathae^ Dressers in Accademia
^^^sica printed 1598. And s^e the treatize entitled the Ottoman of Lazaro
Soranzo published in english by M. Abr. Hartwell An. 1603. in his epist.
dedicat. to the L. Archbish. of C^nt^rbury ^irca m^d ^^m. and see in the
treatize part. 3. c. 33. fol. 106. b. 107. a.
undertaken war against that hateful monster to ^od and man, whose
proceedings Luther and some other Protestants have over indisretely (if not
favored yet hereof see heretofore tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. initio, page 127.
furthered, your Majesty being in happy league with the^ all, is therefore and
otherwi^e the most ^orthie honorable and able instrument, most instantly urges
and requires it.

CONCERNING THE EVIDENT INCERtainety and disagreement of Protestants in their
faith and the reason and particular examples thereof with a like humble
Petition thereupon for disputation. SECT. 7.
AND now lastly, for so much as our learned adversaries do hold. 1 First that
concerning matter of faith, they M. W llet in his Synopsis page 38. initio
says, the Scripture is not one of the means, but the sole, whole, and only
means to work faith.
are to believe nothing for certain but the holy Scriptures only 2 Secondly
that M. D. Raynolds in his Conference with Heart. page 68. ante medium.
it is not the show but the sense of the words (of Scripture) that must
decide controversies: and that herein the Scripture does not M. Hooker in his
Ecclesiastical Policy lib. 2. page 116. paulo ante medium says the Scripture
could not teach us the things that are of God, unless we did credit me^ who
have taught us, that the word^ of Scripture do signify those things.
instruct them of it self, but only by certain M.D. Whitaker de Sacra
Scriptura. page 521. circa medium. says, nam qua^do Scriptura no^ habet vivam
vocem quam audiamus, vtenuum est quibusdam medijs, quibus in vestigamus quid
sit ^ nsus, quae men's Scripturarum And in his book de Ecclesi^ co^tra
Bellarminum co^trou. 2. quaest. 4. page 221. ante med. demanding of us if we
affirm the Church to interpret the Scripture without means says Si sine
medijs dixerunt est and Anabaptisticum.
means on their behalf to be observed. 3 Thirdly that these means are
affirmed to be their M. D. Raynolds in his conference page 83. 84. 92. 98. 99.
and M. Whitaker de Sacra Scriptura. page 521. 522. 523.
reeding thereof, their conf^rences of places, their weying of the
circumstances of the text, their skill in the tongues, their dilig^nce, prayer:
and such like, in which if they err, they do also thereby err in the r
understanding of the Scriptures. 4 Fourthly that these being actions on their
behal^e are but humane endeavors and such wherein every man (without
extraordinary privilege from God) is subject to Lubbertus de Principijs
Christian. dog. page 563. initio says of the le^r^^d interpreters, Hos omnes
vt interpretando errare post ostendimus, ita etiam in iudicando errare posse
asserimus. And Hierome Zanchius de Sacra Scriptura page 411. fine and 412.
initio says of the^, cum Iudicio eos audiamus p^rsu si eos esse homines, and
potu^ss^ ac post errare.
error oversight and man's infirmity (all his prayer and possible diligence
notwithstanding.) 5 Fifthly that in full demonstration hereof, as well Martine
M. Bridge in his defense o^ the Government etc. page 559. and M. Perkines in
his four treatizes tract. How to apply Gods word etc. s^ct. 10. initi^.
Luther, (whom themselves acknowledge to be Apolog. Angl. part. 4. c 4.2.
a man sent of God to lighten the world F^x^ in his Acts and Monuments page
416. a. initio.
the H^lias cond^ctor and chariot of Israel whose calling they think Aretius
Loc. Comun. loc. 63. page 198. circa medium. And Danaeus in Isagog. Christian.
part. 4. lib. 2. page 36. initio.
extraordinary and specia^ly The book entitled Antic^r^stus, sive
Progn^sti^. finis mundi page 12. 13. and 86. fine. And Schluse burg. in Cai^^
Haeret. lib. 13 and vit. page 314 and 316 fine.
foreshewed the Scriptures: and since foretold in like manner, by Act. M^n.
page 399. b. initio. and (...) in Ap^ca^. page 324.
s^ndry Prophecy, that went of him himself being furthermore affirmed to be
^leydane in Engli^^. 101. 222. b. paulo post medium. and see the margent there.
a Prophet, and most assured and Luther adversus falso nominatum Ecclesiasticu^
statum says, scire vos volo quod in posterum non amplius vos hoc honor
dignabor, vt sinam vel vos vel ipsos angelos de coelo, de mea doctrina iudicare
etc. nec volo mea^ doctrinam a quoquam iudicari, atque adeo ne ab angelis
quidem: cum enim certus de^ea sim, per eam quoque and vester and angelorum
iudex esse volo.
certain of this doctrine, and likewise M. Whitguift in his defense of the
answer to the admonition page 201 circa med. And M. Spark in his answer to
M. John d' Albines page 107. initio.
Calvine, M. D. Sutclyffe and D. Sarauia have written whole treatizes hereof
against Beza.
Beza, In M. Whitguifts defense etc. page 522. initio M. Cartwright says:
Bucer though otherwise very learned has gross absurdities.
Bucer etc. and sundry of the M.D. Fulke in his answer to a cou^terfeite
Catholic page 35. and 87. and Gomarus in speculo verae Ecclesiae Christi. pa.
93. and. 94
ancient Fathers: and General M. Fulke ibidem page 89. and 90. and M. Willet
in his Synopsis page 92.
Councels are accordingly affirmed to have erred notwithstanding all their
prayer and possible diligence in conferring the Scriptures: As also it is
further taught that even M. Fulke vbi supra page 86. fine.
the whole Church millitant may err altogether as every part thereof. These
being the confessed grounds and principles of our adversaries doctrine, they do
appear to be no other, but as it were) lincked chains or naked convections of
unavoidable incertainetie, and being such, can therefore afford to our
adversaries not assured knowledge or certainty of faith M. Whitaker de Ecclesia
contra Bellarminum controu. 2. quaest. 4. page 221. paulo post. med. says
hereof, qualia illa media sunt, talem ipsam interpretatione^ este necesse est,
at media interpretandi loca obscura sunt incerta, dubia, and ambigua, ergo
fieri non potest quin and ipsa etiam interpretatio incerta sit, si incerta,
tunc esse potest falsa: etc.
But according to the nature of the^se^ues a necessary doubtfulnes and
incertaintie of opinion: for albeit that the Scriptures be in themselves
certa^ne infallible, and free from er^or, yet what can this pretense thereof
avail to free our adversaries from incertaintie, seeing it is evident and by
them confessed that the Scriptures instruct them not otherwise, the^ by the
foresaid means on their behalf to be observed, and that their observation of
those means is but human and subject to error, and that accordingly Luther
and many other (notwithstanding all their diligent and careful observation of
the said means) have grievousely erred even in those points whereof they
thought themselves so clearly certain, that sundry of them have not doubted
to testify the same with their blood, and yet indeed were therein (as our
adversaries confess) but incertaine and deceived as also of others who have
thought themselves no less certain, some have nevertheless afterward
altered their opinions, as did Melancthon, and Bucer, concerning the real
presence, and others who as yet continue in their sundry opinions certainly
persuaded, are notwithstanding daily in many things contradicted by the many To
omit the over many books of this kind published by English Protestants one
against another: Iodocus Coccius in his Thesaurus etc. printed 1569 tom. 1.
page 1068. 1069. 1070. 1077. 1078. 1089. and 1090. numbreth up almost two
hundredth several books written and published by foreign Protestants one
against another, recyting withal in particular, the special name or title of
every of the said books their several volume and year of printe. And
concerning further testimony of the Protestants many book^s written one
against another: see Castalio alleged hereafter in this tract and sect p. and
Osiander in epitom. etc. centur. 16. pa. 822. 823. 824. vsque page 829. and
vide ibidem page 863 and 712. and 713
volumes and public writtings of their own learned brethren, who in many
chief points are as certainly and fully resolved in their judgment to the
contrary: the over many and known particular First, as Concerning the real
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament to the bodily mouth, it is affirmed
by Luther and the Lutherans: and contradicted for Po^^sh by Calvine and his
followers. 2 Secondly, the real presence not only of the efficacy of Christ's
body but also of the body it self after a wonderful and incomprehensible
manner to the mouth of faith, is affirmed by Calvin. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 17.
sect. 7. and 10. and 32. By M. Ryder in his friendly Caveat etc. the third
leaf a. circa med. By M.D. Whitaker contra Duraeum page 169. the confession of
Belgia in the English Harmony page 431. and by M. Hooker in his
Ecclesiastical Policy lib. 5. sect. 67. pa. 174. circa medium and page 177.
post medium and vide apolog. modest. ad acta conventus quindecim theologorum
torgae nuper habit. etc. page 19. and page 13. initio. and 23. and 47. And
Contradicted as inclining to Popery (to omit Oecolampadius and Suinglius) by
Peter Martyr in his epistle annexed to his Common places in English page 170. b.
epist. 25. and ibid. page 98. a. and page 108. a. By Aretius sermon. 3. de
caena, and by our English Puritaines in their Christian letter to M. R. Hooker
page 35. paulo post med, and by Lodouicus Alemanus Italus in positionibus apud
Lugdunenses editis Anno 1566. who said hereof, neque etiam per fidem sen
incomprehensibili modo vt vocant, quia hoc totum imaginarium and repugnat
apertissime Dei verbo, of whose opinion see further Beza epist. 5. 3 Thirdly,
that Sacraments do not only signify but also confer, grace is affirmed by
Osiander in Enchirid. controuersiarum quas Augustinae Confess. theol. habeat
cum Caluianu. page 272. post. med. By Iacobus Andraeas in epitom. colloquij
Montis belgar page 58. prope initiu^ and page 42. initio By M.D. Bilson in his
true difference between etc. part 4. page 539. ante med. and 592. post medium.
and 368. post med. By M. Hooker in his Ecclesi^sticall Policy lib. 5. sect.
57. page 127. and 128. And by M.D. Whitaker conta Duraeum lib. 8. page 662.
paulo ante med. and 664. post med. And Contradicted for Popish by M. W^llet in
his Synopsis page 415. ante med. and by M. Fulke against Purgatory page 35.
and many others: 4 Fourthly, the sufficiency of Christ's corporal death upon
the Cross, without his suffering of further pains in soul etc. is affirmed
by M. B^^son in his treatize entitled the full redemption of mankind by the
blood and death of Christ, in his Preface to the Christian Reader. post med.
and by many others. And Contradicted for Popish by Calvine Iustitut. lib. 2.
cap. 16. sect. 10. And by M. Willet in his Synopsis printed 1600. page 985.
ante med. and page 987. initio and many others. 5 Fifthly, that Christ after
his corporal death did descend in soul into Hell is affirmed by M.D. Hill in
his special treatize of that title printed 1592. and by Aretius Apinus, M.
Nowell, and Melancthon alleged by D. Hill vbi supra fol. 33. and 44. and
Contradicted for Popish by M. Carelile in his book that Christ descended not
into Hell: By Beza in act. 2. By Bucer in Matthew. 26. and many others. 6
Sixtlie, that the Church must continue visible is affirmed by Melancthon and
sundry others alleged heretofore tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 1. page 93. at d.
and page 94. at e. f. g. in the margent there at the letters d. e. f. and
Contradicted for Popish by M.D. Fulke in the Tower disput. with Edm. Camp. the
second days conference, by M. Willet in his Synopsis, page 48. circa med. and
many others. 7 Seventhly, as concerning the necessity of good works to
salvation it is affirmed by M. Willet in his Tetrastilon Papismi page 90. fine,
by M. Fulke against the Rhemish Testament in 2. Petr. 2. sect. 3. fol. 444. a
post med. and by M. Whitaker against M. Reynolds page 350 post. med. and
Contradicted for new Papistrie as pornitious as the old, by Illiricus in
praefat. ad Romans and many others: whereof see Colloquiu^ Altenburgense fol. 210.
a. and 231. b. and 324. a. and 382. b. fine, and acta colloquij Aldeburgensis
page 5. and 7. and 151. initio. 8 Eightlie concerning Evangelicall counsels
viz. that a man may do more then he is commanded, is affirmed for most clear
by M. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical policy lib. 3. sect. 8. page 140. post
med. and lib. 2. page 103. and 122. post med. by D. Covell in his defense of M.
Hooker Art. 8 page 49. 50. 51. 52. by Luther in assertionibus art. 30. and
others: and Contradicted for Popish by M. Willet in his meditations upon the
122. Psalm page 91 post. med. by M. Parkins in his Reformed Catholic page
241. and many others. 9 Ninthlie, As concerning the doctrine of universality
of grace, and that Christ died for all, it is affirmed by Suinglius in libro
Epistolarum Oecolampadij and Suinglij lib. 1. page 274. circa med. by Hemingius
Enchirid. clas. 3. page 220. 221. and lib. de vniuersaligra^. by Hiperius in
method. theolog. lib. 2. page 431. 435. 436. By Suecanus in Method. descript.
page 430. by M. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Policy, lib. 5. page 104. By
Bullinger upon the Apocalipes in English fol. 79. b. initio. By M. Gibbeus in
his questions upon Genesis page 108. circa med. By M. Smyth in his treatize of
Prayer in general for all mankind etc. and (besides the Lutherans) by very
many other learned Calvinists alleged by Huberus in his Theses. etc. page 159.
and 163. and 164. and 166. and 167. and 168. and Contradicted for Popish by M.
Willet in his Synopsis of Anno 1600. page 789. circa med. and 808. post
initium. and by Beza, Calvin, Knoxe, etc. in whole treatises. 10 Tenthlie,
that God does permit or suffer sin, and not will and decree the same is
affirmed by Iacobus Andraeas in epitom. colliqu. Montisbelgar page 47. 49. and
53. by Hemingius lib. de universally gra^. and all the Lutheranes, and (of the
Calvinists) by Amandus Polanus in Partition. theolog. lib. 1. page 75. 76. and
10. 11. and 12. By Snecaenus in Methodic. descript page 621. 622. etc. 645.
650. By Bullinger in his Decades Englished page 492. 493. 494. By Castalio in
lib. ad Caluinum de predestinat. By Melancthon in loc. comun. de causa peccati
and contingent. and in libro de council. theolog. part. 2. page 111. and 112. By
M. Gibbens in his questions upon Genesis page 108. circa med. And Contradicted
for Popish by Calvine. Institut. lib. 2. cap. 4. sect. 3. and 4. and 5. and
lib. 1. cap. 18. sect. 1. and lib. 3. cap. 23. sect. 8. By D. Baro in his
treatize of Gods providence cap. 4. paulo ante med. By Aretius Loc. Comun. loc.
40. de induratione page 129 By M. W^llet in his Synopsis page 562. fine 563.
ante medum. and many others. 11 Eleaventhly, that men are not certain of their
election, and that he who is once in state of grace may finally fall, is
affirmed by their public confessions cyted in the Harmony etc. page 224.
post medium. and 80. paulo ante med. and 230. post. med. and 233. fine. By
Chemnitius examen part. 2. page 193. a post med. and part. 1. page 190. b.
initio. By Musculus loc. comun page 29. circa med. By Lobechius in disput.
theolog. page 317. 318. By Haffenrefferus in loc. theolog. etc. page 184. 188.
and 331. By Rungius in disput. etc. ex epist. ad Corinth. part. 1. thest. 5. By
Cefnerus in disput. pro libro concord. page 150. 156. 157. 650. By Iacobus
Andraeas in epitom colloqu. Montisbelgar page 47. 61. and Contradicted for
Popish by M. Parkins in his Reformed Catholic page 39. and 55. By Calvine,
Beza etc. 12 Tweluethly, that in case of divorce upon adultery the Innocent
party may not many again, was some few years since preached openly at Paul's
Cross by D. Dove, and since defended publicly in the University by M.D.
Howson in tertia Thesi printed Anno 1602. and is the constant doctrine of many
others. And is yet Co^tradicted for popish by M. Fulke against the Rhemish
testament fol. 38. a circa med. and many others. 13 Thirteenthly, that to
children of the faithful dying unbaptized salvation is not promised affirmed
by Vrbanus Rhegius in 1. part. operum in Catechismo minore fol. 105. By Hoffman
in Commentar. de poenitentia lib. 3. c. 4. fol. 229. a.b By Sarcerius in loc.
comun. fol. 238. 239. 240. By the confession of Auspurg. in the Harmony page
403. fine. and by M. Bilson (now Bishop of Winchester) in his true difference
etc. part. 4. page 368. ante med. and 369. ante med. And Contradicted for
popi^^ vulgarly by Beza, Calvine etc. 14 Fourteenthly, freewill is affirmed by
sundry Protestants mentioned in M. Fox his Acts and Monuments page 1533. b.
paulo post med. and page 1605. b. fine. also by Snecanus and Hemingius, witness
hereof M. Willet in his Synopsis printed anno 1600. page 808. post initiu^ and
810. post initium, and by sundry others: and is Contradicted for popish by
Calvine, Beza etc. 15 Fifteenthlie, that in regard of Christ's Passion and
promise, our good works proceeding from faith, are mentorious or deserving,
affirmed by their public confessions in the Harmony etc. page 495. ante
medium. and page 273. circa med. By Spangeburg. in Margarit. theol. page 48.
and 50. post med. By Melancthon loc. comun. etc. de bonus operibus circa med.
and see M. Hooker lib. 5. Eccles. policy sect. 72. page 208. fine.
Contradicted for popish by Calvine Beza etc. 16 Sixteenthly, temporal
punishment reserved by God in Justice for sin remitted, is affirmed by John
Knoxe in his answer against the adversaries of Gods Predestination, page 215.
216. 217. By Gasper Oleuianus in S^a^bolum page 8. ante med. and by the public
confessions of Protestants in the Harmony etc. page 229. paulo ante med. and
page 235. circa and post medium. and 508. initio. Contradicted as inclining to
Purgatory by M. Willet in his Synopsis page 514. By Calvine, Beza etc. 17
Seaventeenthly, (were this place capable thereof) we could allege the other
points of our Catholic faith defended in like manner from the Scriptures by
sundry of our learned adversaries: as namely Vowed Chastity (By Augustine
Marloret in 1. Tim. cap. 5. verse. 11. page 375. a fine. By M. R. Alison in his
confutation of Brownisme page 71. whereof see heretofore tract. 1. sect. 4.
example 9. page 30. in the margent at 14. Intercession of Saints, by Latimer
act. mon. page 1312. a. initio. Art. 6. and page 1315. a. paulo ante medium,
and by Oecolampadius ad orationem 1. Chrisostomi de Inuentio and maxim
Martiribus. Lymbus Patrum (By John Lascicius in the book entitled de russorum
muscouitarum and tartarorum religione page 122. and. 123. and by Oecolampadius
in libro episiolarum Suinglij, and Oecolampadij lib. 1. page 19. and by
Suinglius ibidem lib. 3. page 560. and 561.) Prayer for the dead by Luther and
Vrbanus Rhegius, test Vrbano Rhegio in prima part operum in formula cante
loquendi cap. de sanctorum culta: and vide Vrbanum Rhegium in loc comun. cap.
19. and 18. and by W^lliam Thorpe act. mon. page 149. a. paulo post initium.
Purgatory: (By Luther tom. 1. W^tteberg. an. 1545. in resolut de indulgentijs
conclus. 15. fol. 112. a. prope finem, And in disputatione Lipsica cum Echt.
and by Latimer act. mon. Page 1313. a paulo ante med. and b. ante med. and page
1315. b. paulo ante med. The sacrifice of the new Testament according to the
order of Melchisadech. (By Andraeas Christouius in libro de opificio missae
lib. 1. page 28. paulo post medium, and 119. paulo ante medium, and 51. post
med. and 58. paulo post med. and 102. ante med. and 171. and see M. Jewel in
his reply page 7. initio) Seven Sacraments (By the Protestant Divines
assembled in the Conference of Lipsia, test Illirico in adhortatione ad
constantiam in agnita Christi religione etc. paulo post initium. And by the
Protestant Divines assembled in the Conference at Ratisbone anno 1541. whereof
Bucer in actis colloquij Ratisb. says, Protestants non grauatim admiserunt
septem sacram^nta: And so likewise throughout (almost) all other Controversies:
whereunto we could likewise add as well the other known different opinions in
particular between Protestants and Puritaines: and the testimony at large of
Schluss-lburg. a prime Protestante, who in his theologia Caluinistarum (in his
Catalog. praecipuorum doctrinae capitum etc. placed there before in the
beginning of his book) recites in particular three and thirty several
points of doctrine in question between the Lutheraines whom he defends, and
the Calvinists against whom he there writes at large in every of the said
questions As also Luke Osiander a learned Protestant who of late writ a
special treatrize hereof entitled, Enchiridion contro versiarum, quas
Augustinae Confessionis theolog^ habent cum Caluinianis etc. printed Tubingae
Anno 1603. And all this defended of either part upon pretended certainety from
the Scriptures.
examples whereof even in the sundry Articles of our Catholic faith defended
(and that most earnestly) against our learned adversaries by sundry of their
own no less learned brethren, and all this by either party upon pretended
certainety from the Scriptures as so evident and confessed that Nicolaus Gallus
superintendent at Ratisbone complains thereat saying Nicholaus Gallus in
thesibus hipoth^sebus etc. and vide ibidem fol. vlt.
non sunt leaves etc. the dissentions that are among^t us are not light nor of
light matters, but of the chief articles of Christian Doctrine, of the law
and the Gospel, of justification, and good works, of the Sacraments, and the
use of ceremonies etc. as also Seluecerus signifies his like grief saying
Seluecerus in 3. part. Comentar in Psalmos in Psa. 131.
concerning the public discord in the Church, their is no need to ask etc.
amongst us who glory to have the true doctrine of the Gospel, disagrements are
moved, concerning things indifferent, good works, our justice before God,
freewill, the presence and participation of Christ's body in the s^pper, the
humanity of Christ, the propriety of his human nature, his ascension and
sitting upon the right hand of God, the vbiquitie and other matters. These
things being thus, how now ca^ our adversaries avoid (in these straits) the
dangerouse sequel of their incertaintie, and ignorance, in faith and
religion: for whereas the learned Protestants hold that M. Bilson in his
perpetual government etc. page 372. initio.
to have no Judge for the en^ing of (their) ecclesiastical contentions were
the utter subversion of all peace affirming thereupon M. Bilson ibide^ page
370. post medium.
Synodes to be an external judicial means to discern error and M Bilson
ibide^ page 374. circa medium.
the surest means to decide doubts, and that M. D Couel in his modest
examination etc. page 110. ante medium.
if Synodes want, the Church neithe^ at any time was, nor indeed can safely be
without tempests themselves are yet (upon unanswerable and just Conradus
Schlusselburg. in catall. haereticorum lib. 13. and vlt. page 864. post medium
says, Hoc nobis potissimum considerandum videtur, number hoc tempore inter
exterarum ecclesiarum theologos and nostros vlla sinodus indici and cogi
possit: quis onim nostrum sibi arrogabit vt locum constituat, diem dicat,
variarum nationu^ theologos evocet etc. Ia^ vero in ipsa synodo quis
praesidebit etc. porro quis iudex erit inter li^egantes? etc. And see the
Protestant auctor of the book entitled, Laconici Antisturmij Sp^gia adversus
Lambertum Danaeum page 44. five where it is said, magna est stultitia
provocare ad vniversalem sinodum quae institui non potest, sicut ex supradictis
manifestum est. And whereas Master Whitaker lib. ^e concilijs page 56. circa
medium, truly teaches that without authority no Council can be assembled:
who now shall have this auctorttie to compel so many Christian Protestant
Princes so variablie different in religion and amongst whom is no subordination
to cause the divines of their several nations to assemble themselves to a
council?
reasons by them signified) in utter despair to have any council assembled by
the deuines of their several Churches and nations. therefore their foresaid
ignorance or incertainty (all imaginary help to the contrary by counsels
notwithstanding) it is still to them so evident and unavoidable, that their
Castalio See heretofore tract. 2. c. 1. sec. 5. at this mark *
a very learned Caluinist says concerning their reformed Church: Profecto si
verum fatere volumus, etc. Sebastian Castalio in pretat. Bibl.
truly if we will confess the truth, this our age is as yet drowned in
extreme darkness and ignorance, a most assured proof whereof are these so
grievous, so obstinate and so pernicious dissentions etc so great a number of
books every day set out, so far differing one from another etc. if the day
of the most clear truth shined unto us, we would never lighten so many
darkesome and obscure candles of books and writings, and therefore (says he)
Castalio ibidem.
Crassa Crassa (inquam seculum tenet ignorantia. And for so much as there is no
certain way in his opinion to find out the truth, he concludes saying
Castalio vbi supra.
expectemus iusti iudicis sententiam etc. Let us attend the sentence of the
just Judge and suffer the Cockle until the time of Harvest etc. Least
perhaps we pluck up the good corn. As also our other adversaries do (in
regard of this confessed incertainety) reduce all grounds and Ivdgments
whatsoever of faith, unto private Hereof see heretofore tract. 2. cap. 1. sect.
1. and in the margent at the letters p. q.
examination, alleged Lubbertus de principijs Christian. dog. page 562. and
563. And M. Bilson in his true difference part. 2. page 353. And see
Assertiones theologic. de Sacram. Caenae dom. etc. printed Argentorati. Anno
1564. page 1.
in defense thereof that we are, 1. Ioh. 4, 1.
to try the Spirits if they be of God: and to 1. Thessall. 5, 21.
prove all things and hold that which is good: Whereat we now take hold, and
charging our adversaries with their own rule, do thereupon provoke them to
open and equal trial of disputation, the which we for our parts could wish to
be proceeding, with observation of such indifferent and reasonable conditions,
as are by Mr. Hooker in his discourse hereof against the Puritanes specially
Hereof see M. Hookers preface set before his books of the laws of
ecclesiastical policy, sect. 5. and page 25. post medium. and 26. ante medium.
prescribed, or as were Hereof see acta colloquij Ratisbonensis, printed
Monachij, 1602. pa. 4. And see colloquiu^ Ratisbonae habitum, printed Louingae,
1602. page 9. 10. 11.
agreed upon, in the late conferen^e at Ratisbone: for the obteining whereof
we presume hereby to become most humble and earnest petitioners to your
Majesty. The foresaid evident and necessary incertainety of our adversaries
Judgments in doctrine, may well seem to need it: The weight and consequence
of the cause being no less then matter of faith and religion) deserves it:
our adversaries former rule of reducing all things to examination and trial
appoints it: our earnest desire of their conversion thirsts greatly after
it: Their full persuasion of our pretended erring, and like charitable care of
our reformation, should in all reason be no less willing of it.

The several examples of the some course heretofore observed and practiced in
soundry nations and by our very adversaries Hereof see Mathias Hoe in his
Tractat. duo quorum prior de disputationibus theologicis etc. in praefat.
prescribed do as it wear lead to it. The venerable and confessed antiquity of
our Catholic faith, established but never hitherto condemned in general
council, (and therefore vnworthey to be as now rejected without some
indifferency of trial) presumes very confidently to obtain it. And lastly
your Highness mature and learned judgment, able to moderate and censure the
same, makes us so much the rather to become most humbly desirous and earnest
for it.

The Almighty God who has so powrablie preserved your Majesty's most royal
person from so many dangers past, and no less graciously reserved it to
accomplish the blessings of our happy times and nation, conserve it ever
accordingly with all worldly felicity in this life and heavenly in the next.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

