A FLOORISH upon Fancy.

As gallant a Gloss upon so triflinge a text, as ever was written. Compiled by
N. B. Gent.

To which are annexed, many pretty Pamphlets, for pleasant heads to pass away
idle time withal. By the same author.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Ihones. 6. Maij. 1577.

To all young Gentilmen, that delight in travail to foreign Countries.
YOu gallant Youths, who are of mind, rather addicted to travail, through
the world for experience in the diversities, as well of Countries, as customs:
of men, as of manners: of languages, as of other laudable points, too tedious
to discourse of: as well to the commodity of your cuntry comfort of your
parents, content, of your friends as chiefly to your own advancement: rather
then to sit at home, as a chicke under a brood hen, esteeming warmth, the
chiefest wisdom: gold, their god: and a whole skin above an honorable
name: As many, the more pity, by too much dandling of their Dads and making
of their Mams do now a days. To you my young Mates Isay. I here unnamed (as
young as one) having lately taken in hand to pass a long Pylgremage to
Parnassus hill, to Pallas and her Nymphs, to sue for a schollarship in the
School of Virtue: I was not far out of mine own country, but suddenly in a
place unknown, a leage or two from any Town, imperfect to return the way I
went: standinge in a muze a while, not knowinge what best to do, seeinge many
footepathes leadinge diverse ways: at last I thought good to take the most
beaten way, as most likely, to lead me to some place of habitation, where
for that night to take up my lodginge, and the next morninge to enquire further
onwarde on my Journey. But not bearinge in mind that the broad ways are
commonly beaten with beasts: And the foot paths I mean are ever very narrow
I foolishly followed the Coxcomes Causey before me, which led me on a long
straight to the forest of fools, and so to the fort of Fancy: of which Forte,
cum pertinencijs, of my coming thither, abode there, and return from thence, I
have more largly then learnedly discoursed. Yet as it is, I hope it will serve
your turns (though not as a direction to the place I meant to go too, yet as a
diswasion (in your travail) from that way, that has led me so much out of
the way before you. Thus hoping to turn the thriftlesse fruit of my fond
travail, to the commodity of a great many of ye: that I hope some of ye
will one day thancke me for: I wish you all, with my self, in travail, to
tread the path that may bring us all to perfect paradise.

From his Chamber, in Holbourne, this.xx. of February.
The Preface.
A Proverb old, and therewith true there is,
That, haste makes waste, each thing must have his time:
Who high aspiers, must ever look to this,
To mark his steps, before he ginne to clime:
For who in climing takes no care at all,
Ere he get up, is like to catch a fall.
Who does desire, to Honor hie to clime,
By due desert, must worship first attain:
Then for to seek, in farther tract of time,
The mean, whereby to Honor to attain:
For he that thinckes, to be a Lord first day,
Will miss a Lord, and prove a Loute straight way.
Who does assault, the huge high Fort of Fame,
Must first begin, to scale the outward walls:
Long is the Ladder that does reach the same,
And happy he that gets up without falls:
Tedious the time, the labor nothing short,
To take in hand to scale so high a Forte.
This proverb old, my self observed well,
Who not assault, the gallant Fort of Fame:
But Fancies Forte, not minding there to dwell,
But for to see the secrets of the same:
And many times, I thought to make retire,
But in the end, obtained my desire.
I scalde the walls, and got into the Fort
Wi^h ease enough, short time and little fight*
And there I saw, whereof I make report,
Each thing, that was for to be seen worth sight:
And when that I some time therein had past,
How by good hap, I got away at last.
Now far from this, I see The Fort of Fame
A harder thing, to give assault unto:
I dare not seek the mean, to scale the same,
And if I durst, I know not what to do:
In scalinge Fortes, my skill is too too small,
Then if I clime, I needs must catch a fall.
By lying still, I can but little gain,
By clyminge too the fear is but a fall:
No praise in deed, is gotten without pain,
Small hurt by falls, if bruze grow not withal:
No bruze nor fall, takes he that takes good heed,
No taking heed, great haste, and little speed.
Then when I clime, my self am warnde to learn
The way to scale, ere ought I take in hand,
To set my Ladder, wisely to discern
To choose a place, where it may surely stand:
Then for to make my Ladder of such stuff,
As I may trust, to tread on sure ynouffe.
But then the Roundes, must not be made of Ryme^*
My feet will slip, in treading on the same:
And Reason says, that who so fondly clymes,
Falls down into the ditch of foul Defame,
God keep me thence, and help me so to clyme,
That Reason yet, may raise me up in time.
FINIS.
THE SCHOOL of Fancy.
ME thinks I see you smile, before you gin to reed,
At this same title of my tale: but, for you shall not need
To marvel at the same. First read it to the end,
And mark ye still through all ye tale, whereto each point does tend,
And you shall see I hope, that this same title serves
Fit for the tale, else sure my mind from reason greatly swerues.
Who is expert in any Art does bear a Masters name:
Then he who chief is in an Art, does well deserve the same.
Of Art of luckles love, first Fancy is the ground,
Although that Cupid, with his dart, do give the deadly wound.
First, Fancy liking breeds, and liking breeds love,
And love then breeds, such passing panges, as many lovers prove:
And when the troubled mind, with torments is oppressed,
Fancy does find some secret mean, to breed the heart some rest:
And Fancy she sometime to breed the lovers joy,
A thousand sundry ways (at least) does still her pains employ:
She thinks on this and that, she teaches how to love,
And tells the Lover, what to do, as best for his behooue.
But least I go to far and run to mutch at large
Out of the way and take no care what thing I have in charge,
I will begin to show, what kind of School this is,
What orders too she keeps therein. First lo, the School is this.
The room both large and long, and very dark of sight,
The most sight that her Scholars have, is chiefly by fire light:
Which fire does burn so bright, as gives them light to see
To read such books, as there are taught: but what this fire may be
Now thereby lies a case. Well mark what I do wright,
And you shall know, for I my self, have seen it burning bright.
First Fancy fetches coals, and calls for Deep desire:
By him she sets Vain delight and biddes them blow the fire:
And when the fire once burns, for to maintain the same,
The Colier Care, he brings in coals unto this dainty dame.
He makes his Coals of wood, that grows on Hare brain hill,
The ^roue is called, the Thriftles thick of wild and wanton will:
The wood is of small groth, but sticks of Stubborn youth,
Which serves as fittest for that fire, god wot, the greater ruth:
Lo thus, this fire does burn, and still does give the light
To Fancies scholars in her school, they have none other sight.
Now Sir, in this hot school, first Fancy highest sittes,
And out of all her scholars still, she takes the wildest wits.
And those she takes in hand, to teach the Art of love,
which being taught in that vayn Art, do soon fine scholars prove.
She teatheth them to mourn, to flatter and to feign,
To speak, to write, and to indight, to labor and take pain:
To go, to run and ride, to muse, and to devise,
To iuggle with a dearest friend, to bleare the parents eyes.
To spend both lands and goods, to venture Lim and life,
To make foes friends, and twixt dear friends, to set debate and strife:
To do and undo too, so that they may obtain
Their mistress love: and never care, for taking any pain.
To iet in brave attire, to please their mistress eye:
Although perhaps they utterly, undo themselves thereby.
To learn to sing and dance, to play on Instruments,
To speak choice of strange languages, to try experiments
Strange, seldom had in use: in fine, to tell you plain,
To do almost they care not what, there ladies love to gain.
And thus in tracte of time, by such instructions,
She makes them tread, the perfect path to their distructions:
Some other scholars now, are taught within her school
By Ushers that teach under her, of which one is a fool
By nature and by name, for Folly men him call:
And he will teach his scholar soon, to prove a natural.
The second Frenzy is, in teaching too as bad,
For he will teach, his scholars most the way to make them mad:
The Vssher folly first, he teaches to be bold,
Without advice to give no ear, to counsel that is told
To take delight in gauds, and foolish trifling toies,
In things of value, little worth, to set his chiefest joys.
To prate without regard, of reason in his talk,
To think black white, and wrong for right, and know not cheese from chalk
To love the things in deed, which most he ought to hate:
For triflyng toys, with dearest friends, to fall at dire debate.
To love to play at dice, to swear his blood and heart,
To face it with a ruffins look and set his hat a thwart.
To haunt the Tauerns late, by night to trace the streets,
And swap each slut, upon the lips, that in the dark he meets:
To laughe at a horse nest, and whine too like a boy,
If any thing do cross his mind, though it be but a toy:
To slauer like a slave, to lie too like a dog,
To wallow almost like a Bear, and snortle like a Hog.
To feed too like a Horse, to drink too like an Ox,
To show himself in each respect a very very coxe.
But such a scholar now, is chosen of gross wit,
Because that Beetle heddes do serve for such instructions fit.
The other Usher now, that Frenzy has to name,
His kind of teaching, he again another way does frame:
He teaches how to rage, to swear and ban and curse,
To fret, to fume, to chide, to chafe, to do all this and worse.
To tear his flesh for grief, to fill the air with cries,
To harbor hatred in his heart, and mischefe to devise:
To hate all good advice, to follow witles will,
And in the end for want of grace, to seek himself to kill.
And such his scholars are, ripe wits, but wanting grace,
And such ungracious graffes, do learn, such graceless gear a pace:
These scholars all are young, except that now and than,
To be a scholar with the rest, there step in some old man.
Who when that he a while, has bin in Fancies school,
Does learn, in his old crooked age, to play the doting fool.
And such there are sometime, (more pity) for to see,
That in their crooked doting age, would feign fine lovers be.
Which being in that school, do prove, for all their pain,
By Frenzy mad, by Folly fools, or else by Fancy vain.
My self can tell too well, for I have seen the school,
And learned so long there till I proved more half a very fool.
First Fancy dandled me, and held me in her lap:
And now and then, she would me feed, with worldly pleasures pap.
She told me I was young, and I my youth must spend
In youthful sport, I did not know, how soon my life would end:
Be merry while I might, set carke and care aside,
How mad were he that might in bliss, and would in bale abide?
Such sugared speech of hers had soon intrapt me so,
That I did think, that did me good, that wrought (in deed) my woe:
Remaining thus a while, at last I had an eye,
To see how Folly taught his Youths, and some rules by and by
My self began to learn: First this, for to be bold,
And to refuse to lend my ear, where good advise was told.
In foolish trifling toys to take a great delight:
To take in hand to prate of that, wherein I had no sight.
These rules I soon had learnd, but when I came to that,
Where Ruffins card and dice, and swear, and ware aside their hat
I read no farther then, but up again I went,
Unto my mistress Fancy fine: and straight down she me sent
Unto the nether end of all her school below,
Where Frenzy sat: and sweting hard, he began to puff and blow.
He little likte my mind, yet would I ye or no,
I learnd some of his raging rules, er I away did go:
I learnd to fret and fume, though not to ban and curse,
And often for grief to sigh and sob and many times do worse,
But yet I thank my god I never had the will:
In greatest frantic fit I felt, to seek my self to kill.
But to make short my tale, his lessons likte me not,
But up again in haste I went, to Fancy fond, god wot.
And lying in her lap, I fell a sleep anon,
Where slepinge so I dreamed sore that I was woe begone:
Me thought that Wisdom came, and warned me in have,
To loath such lessons, as I learnd, er that my youth were past.
For short should be my sweet, and time would pass away:
The man is in his grave tooday, that lived yesterday:
Thy life (quod he) poor soul is like unto a flower,
That grows but in danger still of cropping every hour.
And if it be not cropped, yet soon it will decay
And like the flower in little time, it wither will away.
Thy pleasures will be pain, thy game will turn to grief,
And thou will seek in vain to late, when y^ would find relief:
Arise thou sluggish slave, out of that loathsome lap
And be no longer like a babe, so fed with pleasures pap.
Lose no more labor so, in such a witles school
where as the best that thou can gain, is but to prove a fool.
Study some better Art, for lo thy wits will serve
To learn to do, that may in time, a good reward deserve:
Better then best degree, that thou art like to take
In Fancies school: I tell thee plain, therefore I say awake,
Awake in haste awake, and hie thee hence I say,
Take warning in good time poor soul, for time will sone away:
But since that with such Youths, words seldom will prevail,
With this same rod thou foolish boy I mean to breech thy tail.
With which (me thought) he gave a ierke, that made me smart:
Which soden smart, although but small, yet made me give a start:
And in my starting so, I waked suddenly,
And so awakte, I called to mind my vision by and by.
Thus thinking on my dream I heavy grew in mind,
Which by and by when Fancy fond, began by my countenance find
How now my youth (quoth she) what ailes thee seem so sad?
What can thou think to cheer thy mind but that it shall be had?
No no (quoth I) I not believe these words of thine.
thou sausy slave (quoth she) dare you mistrust these words of mine?
And therewith in a rage, she threw me from her lap,
And with the fall beshrew her heart, I caught a cruel clap:
Wherewith sumthing displeasd, why fine mistress (quoth I)
What can you bide no jest? alas, and therewith angerly:
Without or taking leave, or any duty done,
From Fanci^ in a rage I flong and out of doors I run.
And being out of door, these words me thought I said,
Fie on the Fancy flattering flirt, I hold me well apaide:
That I am got away, out of thy skillesse school,
For now I see, thou wentest about, to make me a right fool.
But now that I am out, by grace of god I swear,
While I do live, if I can choose, never more to come there.
But Fancy hering this to make me still to stay,
To fetch me in with pleasant sportes invented many a way
But when I did perceive how nere me still she came,
Then from her quite I flong in have, and so I left this dame.
Lo thus I tell you how, I came from Fancies school,
Where learning but a little while, I proved more half a fool:
Wherefore since my good hap, has bin to come from thence,
Although with labor lost, in deed, and some, to mutch expense.
I now have thought it good, to warn each one my friend,
To keep themselves from Fancies school, and so I make an end.
FINIS.
THE FORTE of Fancy.
The Argument.
AS Fancy has a School, so has she too a Fort.
Of which, the chiefest points, my self, will sumwhat make report:
The ground whereon it stands, and the foundation then,
How it is built, how it is kept, and by what kind of men.
What kind of cheer she keeps, who are her chiefest guess.
What drink she drinks, who are her cooks, that al her meat do dres.
Whom most she loves, who is her foe, and who again her freende,
And how the Forte, may soon be scalde: and there to make an end.
The Forte of Fancy.
THe ground whereon it stands, is hauty Hare brain hill,
Hard by the thick, I told you of, Wild and wanton will:
The fond foundation is, false fortunes fickle Wheel,
Which never stands, but still each way is ready for to reele:
Now here, now there again, with every blast of wind,
Not as she list, but as it most does please dame Fortunes mind,
The house it self is calde, The lodge of luckles love.
Within the which, are diverse rooms, beneath and eake above:
The name whereof anon, I mean at large to show,
But first, the outside ^f this house, I must declare, I trow:
The coming to the same, the walls, the gates, and then
The base courts, Courts, and gardens then, and then the gards of men.
The Porters to the doors, the officers within,
And therefore thus, in order, I will now my tale begin.
The coming to the same, is by a great high way,
Fair beaten plain, with fools foot steps, and trodden every day
The soil is pleasant sure, bedeckt with gallant flowers,
But being gathered once, will scarce bide sweet above two hours:
And in this soil, there stands, a Forest large and wide,
Which is well storde with thickes and woods the beasts therein to hide:
Of which great piece of ground, for to declare the name,
The Forest Sir of fools it is, lo now you know the same:
And in this Forest now, this beaten way does ly,
Which leads unto Harebraine hill the right way redely.
At foot of this same hill, and round about the same,
There is a diche which Deep deceipte, is called by that name:
Over this lies a Bridge, but trust me, very weak,
For when you are on midst thereof, then suddenly twill break:
And down into the diche of Deep deceipte you fall,
Rise again as you can your self, you get small help at all.
The bridge is calde The breach of perfect amity,
It Is made of Hollow hearts, of such as wanted honesty*
Which being rotten still, will never bear the weight
Of any man: but suddenly, down castes him in deceit.
Now Sir although you fall, no bones shall yet be burst,
Nor whatsoever hurt you take, you feel it not at furst.
But being fallen, if you can make a shift to swim,
Though it be but a stroke or two, yet you may get up trim
Unto the banks thereof, and so by shrubs that grow
Upon the banks, to make a shift, up to the gate to go:
But if you cannot swim you may catch such a fall,
That you may chance unto your cost, to catch a bruise withal.
Not swimming as in seas, for fear in deep to drown
But swimming sir in Worldly wealth for fear of falling down.
But if that you can swim, then soon perhaps you may,
By shrubs and bushes to the gates make sh^ft to find a way.
Then being at the gates, there shall you standing find
A pelting patch for Porter there, of nature very kind:
His name is Daliance, a foolish crafty knave
Who needs not to let you in, too mutch entreaty have.
Welcome good Sir (says he) now trust me by my fay,
I think that you have travailed a weary piece of way,
Wilt please you to go in, and take a little rest?
Thus by the Porter Daliance you go in as a guest.
Now if up to the gate you cannot find the way,
Then lustely to scale the walls you must sumwhat assay.
Which walls you soon may scale, if you will take the pain,
Or else may quickly beat them down, with beetell of your brain:
Few are to make defense, and such as are, will stay
There hands from doing harm to you, but rather make you way.
And shall I show in kind, what gallants you shall see?
That for to guard this Forte are set, and what their wepons be?
It were a sport to tell, to set them out in kind:
Well, I will show them all, as well as I can bear in mind.
First lo, a Guard of Geese, and Ganders in one rank,
With doutie Duckes and Drakes hard by, upon an other bancke:
A sight of Asses then, there stood in battle ray,
With Jack an apeses on their backs: and they stood in the way
That leads unto the Court: further you cannot pass,
Except you let a Jack a napes, to ride you like an Ass.
But if you will do so, then may you pass up straight
Into the inner court (forsooth) where long you shall not weight.
But out unto the door, cums out an officer,
And gently Sir into the Hall, this man will you prefer.
But now Sir, will you know, what means these Armies so
That stands to guard dame Fancies fort? well mark and you shall know^
The guard of Geese, are first Ungracious graffes of youth
That wallow every wanton way, and miss the trackt of truth:
The Duckes (good Sir) are Doults* as well both young as old,
That in that careless court, are set to keep a foolish hold.
The Asses, they are Lout^s* of wisdom none at all,
Yet have a certain kind of wit, to play the fools with all.
The Apes that rides them now, and rules them every way,
And turn their heds which way they list, a thousand times a day
Are Foolish apish toys* fond heds for to delight:
Not void of reason utterly, though void of wisdom quite.
Their Weapons are their Tongues, wherewith they make a cry,
Away I say, away, stand back, soft Sir, you come not by:
But if so be they see, one ridden like an Ass,
Then will they make but small adoo, but let him gently pass.
Now Sir, thus like an Ass, he goes to the Hall door,
And there becomes a Man again, and stands an Ass no more:
Yet though his ears grow short, he is not altered so,
But he shall bear an Asses head, where ever so he go.
And be he Man or Ass, Jack an apes he must bear
As long as he is in that Forte, or else he bides not there.
Now Sir, at the hall door, the porter Pleasure stands,
He looks for, er he farther go, some money at his hands:
He lets in none for thanks, he must have money, he,
He goes not in else, I am sure, for so he dealt with me.
But if he him reward, he brings him to the Hall,
And there the Usher by and by, good Sir, he meets withal:
He entertaines you then, in such a pleasant wise,
As makes you think, you are ariude, in place of Paradise.
Not long he bides with you, but to the Chamberlain
He brings you up, where curiously he does you entertain
With Bezoles manos, imbrasings down to knee:
With Cap of courtesy: and a grace, the brauest that may be.
This is a gentle youth, but er I farther go,
The names of these same Officers, I plainly mean to show:
The Usher of the hall, is called Vain delight:
He entertaineth none, except he be some witles wight.
The Chamberlain is called Curiosity,
And fellow with this Vain delight, and of affinity:
For at request of this, his fellow, Fond delight,
He brings you where of Fancy fair, you soon may have a sight
And if you like him well, he works so in the end,
That he will in your suit forth with, cause Fancy stand your friend.
To Fancy then good Sir, he brings you by and by,
And there may you behold her, how she sits gallantly:
Her chamber large and long, bed^^^e with thousand toies:
Brave hanging clothes of rare devise, pictures of naked boys,
And ^irles too now and then, of sixteen years of age:
That will within a year or two, grow fit for marriage.
But they must have a Lawne, a Scarf, or some such toy,
To shroud there shamefastnes with all: but if it be a boy,
He stands without a Lawne, as naked as my nail:
For Fancy has a sport sumtime, to see a naked tail.
Besides in pictures too, and toies of straung devise
With stories of old Robin hood, and Walter little wis^*
Some shows of war long since, and Captains wounded sore,
And soldiers slain, at one conflict, a thousand men and more.
Of hunting of wild beasts, as Lions, Bores and Bears,
To see how one an other often, in sunder straungly tears.
Of gallant Cities, Towns, of Gardens, Flowers, and trees:
Of choice of pleasant herbs, and fruits, and such like toies as these
These hang about the walls, the floor now is strode
With pleasant flowers, herbs and sweets, which in her garden grode.
But now, the names of them I purpose to descrie:
In steed of Fennel Sir, the first, is Flattery:
The other herb is Sausines, in steed of Sauorie:
In steed of Basell, now there lies Bravery:
And for sweet Sothernwood, again is secret Slavery:
In steed of Isop, now there lies Inuencion:
And in the steed of Cama^^ell, there lies Confusion:
The flowers now are these, in steed of Gilliflowers,
Fair iestes: that last not sweet alas, above two or three hours:
For Roses, Rages: which will not so soon decay,
For Paunseis, Pretty practices, that alter many a way:
For Marigoldes, Mischief: for Walflowers, Wantonness:
For Penckes, Presumption: for Buttons, Business:
For Daisies, Doubtfulnes: for Violets, Viciousnes:
For Primroses, Foolish pride: for Couslips, Carelesnes:
With these flowers and herbs, with many mo (god wot)
Does Fancy strew her Chamber flower, which I remember not.
Now Sir, in this same room, thus bravely bedect,
Sits Fancy in her bravery: and Sir in each respect,
So served in her kind, with her fine Chamberlain,
That not for any thing she has, that she needs too take pain.
Fine Curiosity her Chamberlain does all
The service in her chamber, Sir: but the Usher in the Hall,
He does her seruis too, although, not all so near
Her person, as her Chamberlain: she houldeth him more dear.
The order h^w she sittes, is this sir, in a Chair,
Fine caru^d out with Caruers work, and couerd very fair:
With a straung kind of stuff, the color is al green,
Brave Frindge and hangde, with two fine Pearls, the like but seldom seen:
Now Sir, her Chair (in deed) is but a Youthful brain,
Whose head is very green, in deed: the Frindge, to tell you plain
Are Hears upon the head: the Pearls, they are the Eyes:
Fast set unto the head (good Sir:) and lo thus in this wise,
I show you Fancies seat: But if the eyes did see
What great dishonor it is to them, in Fancies chair too be:
They rather would fall of, then hang in such a place,
Where they are ruled, when they might rule, and so to gain disgrace.
But be they as they be, I show you how they be:
Believe me, when that you come there, then you your self shall see.
Well Sir, thus Fancy sits, before whom you must stand,
Till she her self do bid you come, and take her by the hand:
And that she soon will do, for she is courteous,
And where she takes a liking too, she is as amorous.
Now being come to you, these words first she will say,
She will be asking how at first, you thither found the way?
Whereto your answer made, then she will take the pain
To show you all her rooms within, and she will entertain
You in so brave a sort, that you shall think, a while,
You are in heaven: with sugared speech she will you so beguile.
Now first she leads you in, into her Garden gay
She shows you flowers, but tells you not, how soon they will decay.
She tells you this brave tree, a gallant fruit will bear,
This is a gallant Princely Plum, and this as fine a Pear:
This is a Pippen right, this is a Filberde fine:
This is a Damson delicate, but few such fruits as mine:
When God he knows, the tree, whose fruits she bragges on so,
Is but a plant of peeuishnes, and brings forth fruits of w^.
Her Plum, is but a Pate that puffed is with pride,
Which either quickly rotten grows or breaks out on some sid^.
Her Pear is an old plant that brings Outward joy,
To sight, at least: but eaten once, will choke you with annoy.
Her Pippen is a Crabbe, that grows on S. John's wood,
Which makes a show of a fair fruit, but in taste is not (...).
This is a Secreat fo, that seems a Faithful friend,
But will be sure, who trust in him, to fail them in the end.
Her Filberds have fair shales, but Carnels all are gone:
Her Damsons are deceiptfull fruits as hard as any stone:
Hard: how? not hard in hand, nor very hard in taste:
But being swallowd, very hard for to digest at last.
These Trees with many mo, which I not call to mind,
In Fancies gallant Garden plot, you shall be sure to find.
Now in this Gardein more, alas, I had forgot:
About the midst thereof (I guess) there stands a pretty plot,
Wherein is made a Maze, all bordered with Wild breere,
Set all about the banks with Rue, that grew there many a year.
Just in the midst whereof, a huge high Mount does stand,
Which grew by nature in y^ place, not made by Gardeners hand.
The Hill on the one side, is made much like a Heart,
And as like to a Head again upon the other part.
And in this Mount, there dwells a number of mad men:
Some mad in heart, and some in head, and every one his den.
Upon the Heart side, stands The cave of cruelty,
A currish knave, which with his teeth, still gnashing close does lie.
By him has foul Despite a filthy Den likewise,
Which in that loathsome lodge of his, still fretting daily lies.
By him horrible Hate, has eke a kind of Cave,
Like a foul hole: but good enough for such a filthy slave:
Upon the hedside now, lies Melancoly first,
He beats his head with study so, as if his brains would burste.
By him vile Envy next, foul ^^end with fiery eyes
Bound about head with Serpent skins, in loathsome manner lies.
Right over him does keep, fierce Frenzy in his cave:
He frets, he fumes, he stampes and stares, and never lins to rave
Above them all, upon the top of this same hill,
Dwells Madness, Master of them all: and with him, witles Will:
His lodge is like a house, that had bin built of stone,
That had bin ouerthrown, and naught left but the walls alone:
It has a kind of r^^fe, but all uncovered:
So that the rain upon him falls, as he lies in his bed.
And for the manner now how he lies, credit me,
It is the straungest sight me thinks, that ever I did see.
His Bedsted is of Wood, engraven with Ugly faces:
And stands more half a sunder, burst in twenty sundry places:
His Bed with feathers stuffed, but all the Down flowne out:
And those that bide, are stubborn quilles, yt prick him round about.
Upon an old cracked Form, by his bedside there lies,
Duld instruments of Musicks sound, all broke in wondrous wise.
A Lute, with but three strings, and all the pinnes nere out:
The belly cracked, the back quite burst, and riuen round about:
His Virginals, with never a jack, and half the keys.
His Organes, with the bellows burst, and battred many ways.
His Fife, three holes in one: his Harp, with nere a stringe:
Great pity trust me for to see, so broken every thing:
A Pen and Ink he has and Paper too hard by,
But paper quite in pieces torn, pen burst and Inkhorne dry.
He feeds of Fancies fruits, that in her Garden grow,
He drinks of Drugges of foul Despite, a beastly broth I trow.
He fears no heat nor cold, for if with heat he glow,
The waves of woe will cool him straight, y^ there by Tides do flow
For through this Forest runs, The Seas of sorrow sore:
Whose Waves do beat against this Forte, that bordereth on the shore.
And if with cold he quake, the heat of raging ire
Will quickly warm him so, that he shall need none other fire:
In raging Frantic fittes, he passes forth the day
In strange perplexities, himself tormenting many a way.
Among many mad toys, I saw him play one part,
With look full fierce I saw him hold, a Dagger to his Heart
Ready to kill himself, and with his hear upright,
He cried, he would rather die, then bide such deep dispight:
At which same cry of his, me thought, that every one
Within their Caves, all sodeinly did make a piteous moan:
With which amazed half, not knowing what to say,
By help of God, I know not how, but straight I got away.
And then I was again, with ^ancie by and by,
Out of the Maze in her Gardeine: who led me presently,
As she will you likewise, if you will: back again
Into her house: where you will think, in heaven for to r^^aine.
The Entry first before you come unto the Hall,
Is set out gallantly with toys, and that of cost not small.
The Pauements are of stone, which Hard hearts have to name,
They grow all in a mind of man, and thence she has the same:
About the Entry walls, do hang devises strange:
And by the bravery of the same, mutche like the Low exchange.
From Entry then you come, straight way unto the Hall:
And that with many Jewels rich, is hanged round^ withal
The room it self is long and therewith somewhat wide,
And for the fashion in my mind, not much unlike Cheapeside:
There hang great store of gaudes, of which the Usher straight
Does offer to Dame fancies eye, and therefore there does wayght.
Chains, Jewels, Cups and Pots: Pearls, precious stones and Kings
Fine whissels, Corrals, Buttons, Beads, and such like costly things
Fine Brooches for your Hat, fine Aglets for your Cap,
Fine Tablets for a gallant dame, to hang before her lap.
These things with many mo in this same Cheapeside Hall
Has Vain delight, to please Fancy his Mistress mind withal.
Now though she see them all, her Chamberlain must choose
What he best thinks will like her mind, and what she will refuse.
That Chamberlain (you know) is Curiosity
He ever chooses all the ware, that Fancy fond does buy.
Now from the Hall, unto the Parlor straight you go
Which as the Hall with Jewels rich is bravely hanged so:
The room is long, not large, I met it not with feet,
But as I guess, in fashion it is, much like to Lombarde street:
This room the Usher too, does look too with the Hall:
Well, there within a little while, you quickly will see all:
Which being seen, you pass into the other room,
Which called is her Counting house: wherein when you be come,
There shall you see her books, that treates of many toys
And most of them do show, the cause of lovers greifes or joys.
Some volumes Sir, do treat of naught but Vanitat^
But very ^ew that speaks a word of perfect Sanitate
Some ancient authors write, De art a mandi.
Which who so studies thoroughly, runs mad or ere he die.
And in the steed of Tullies works, written De officijs,
There stands Tom ^atlers treatise Sir, De fine brandicijs:
Among the rest are some, Belle discorce d'amore,
And some do write discourses, De graundissimo dolor:
Some books do make discourse of Pride and Foul disdain,
Some letters Amatorie are: some of Dispite again.
Some Pretty pamplets are, some Posies, Satirs some:
Some do discourse of Falconrie, and some of Day of doom.
And they are called Drommes: and some tell pretty tales
Of Lapwings, Swallows, Fesant cocks, and noble Nightingales
Some Songs and Sonets are, and some are Lovers lays,
Some Poets paint The panges of love, a thousand sundry ways.
Now with such books as these, with other such like toys,
Does Fancy store her Counting house, for to instruct her boys
And girls too now and than: at least if they do reed,
And in such vain Discourses, most her self delights indeed.
Now Sir, when you have seen her fine Library there:
She shows you then her other rooms, and leads you every where.
But sure her Counting house, of all that ere I see,
Is built as like to Poules Church yard, as ever it may be.
Now next she leads you too, her Wardrope of fine cloth,
Of diverse kinds of colors Sir: what laugh you Sir of trothe?
Believe me, when that you to Fancies fort do go:
And if you come into her court, then you shall find it so.
The colors of her cloth, are fair and very gay:
White, Red, Blew, Green, Carnation, Yealow, and Popingay.
Of blackes but very few: but other colors store,
Of mingled colors, or such as I told you of before.
Now she that keeps that room, is a young pleasant dame
And Wantonness, I trow it be, that Fancy calls her name
Now Wantonness again, she keeps a pretty knave
That every day, deuiseth still, new fashions for to have:
He has a knaui^^ head, fine knackes for to invent,
Whereof good store of cloth, in haste in fashions may be spent:
In gardes, in weltes, and iags, in laying cloth upon cloth:
And this same youth a Tailor is, for men and women both.
His name is Fond devise: he came of Apish race,
A man, for such a mistress meet, and fit for such a place.
But for dame Fancy ^ine, no garments Sir he makes
But first the view her Chamberlain Curiosity takes:
And if he like it well, then will she stand content,
If not, his labor all is lost, and cost in vain is spent.
Now this same Wardrop Sir, is likest in my mind,
To Watling street, of any place, that ever I could find.
Now Sir, from thence you come when you have seen all there:
You go into her Gallarie, a room that I dare swear
The like is seldom seen, for gallant setting out:
If one should travail every day, almost the world about
For choice of gallant stuff, and fine devises strange
No place so like that ere I see, as is The high Exchange:
Such purses, gloves, and points, of cost and fasshion rare
Such cutworkes, partlets, suits of lawne, bongraces, and such ware:
Such gorgets, sleeves, and ruffes, lininges for gowns, and calls,
Coiffes, crippins, cornets, billaments, musk boxes, and sweet balls
Pincases, picketoothes, bearde brushes, comes, needels, glasses, belles
And many such like toies, as these: that Gain to fancy sels.
But yet of all these toies, not one will Fancy buy,
Except, they first be looked on by Curiosity:
But Folly many times, stands at his elbow so,
That makes him choose the worse sumtime, and let the better go:
Well, there not long you bide, but down you come again
Into the hall beneath good Sir, where long you not remain:
But to the Kitchen straight, she forthwith leads thee:
Where, how she dresseth all her meat, the order thou shall see
And what kind cooks she has, and how they make their fire,
To reast, to sees, to broile, to bake, and what you will desire:
The room is narow sir, in which a Harth all bare
On which the Cook, powers on his coals, and kindels the^ with care,
Then lays he to the Spit, if any meat be roast,
And if the fire be once a flame, then it beginns to toast,
The meat that most he roastes, for Fancies dantie tooth,
Are Partridges, larkes, plouers green, and such fine foul (for sooth)
The Coals are made of sticks, of stuborne youth (god wot)
which kindle quickelie of themselves, and blowinge needs not:
The kind of wood is Will, dry without Sapience sap:
The lobcoke Lust, from thriftlesse thick, does bring the^ in his lap:
Which wood with lying still, is grown so very dry,
That with a Spark of Sport, alas, they kindle by and by.
The Cook is Careless calde: the fowls he roastes are these:
For Larkes, are looks: for Plouers, thoughts: for Partridge, Practices:
The Larkes, are Looks: which when they live, do fly:
But being stricken dead, they serve for Fancy by and by:
The Partridge, Practices: which living, seem so good,
That they are put unto the fire, to serve for Fancies ^oode:
For, as the Partridge keeps her self close to the ground,
Because by color of her coat, she may not so be found:
So Practices, that shift: to keep themselves unseen,
Are Fowls most fit for Fancies tooth, and now for Plouers green
Green thoughts, that fly about: now here, now there again:
But if by chance, by Cupids dart, they hap for to be slain.
Then lyinge but a while, at this same flaminge fire,
They make in deed a meat that most, Fond Fancy does desire,
Now having seen all this, then shall you see hard by
The Pastrie, Meal house, and the room whereas the Coals do ly:
The Coalehouse, is a Cause of care and misery.
The Pastrie is a Place of open Patcherie.
The Mealehouse, is a Place with seat mischief fraught
For sure, the Meal is made of Corn, y^ is much worse the^ naught.
The Corn is called Rye: and diverse kinds there be.
Of this same Rye: as you your self, when you are there shall see:
For there is one kind, Rye, is called knauerie:
An other Flat^rie, with Treachery, and Patchreie:
An other Trumperie, an other Mockery,
And Baudrie too: and yet the best is but a kind of Rye,
Whereof the Meal is made, that makes Fancies breed:
And that is baked in the brain, of a hot foolish head:
The Grain is sown by sondrie slaves: of which one Beastliness,
The other Secret sausinesse: an other Traiterousnesse,
An other Piuishnes, and an other Wilfulness,
With Loutishnesse, and many mo, which I cannot express:
And reaped by such slaves, too Fancy, slaves, in deed
Which bring the Corn, into The Barn of beggerie, with speed:
They now that thresh the Corn, are two strong sturdie knaves,
Who have great beetels in their hands, in sted of Threshing staves
Of whom to tell the names, first, Lobcocke little wit,
And Waywarde will: a good tough knave, he stands, his fellow sit,
They with their Betels in their hands, or heads at least,
Do make it ready for the Mill: then he that grindes the greest,
Is, Many better Sir, an arrante crafty knave,
Who with his toulinge, will be sure, a good round gain to have.
Now Sir, this Mill does stand, upon an Hill on hie,
Whose sails are driven by blasts of wind, and so grind merely.
Now Sir, the Corn thus ground, to Fancies Forte straight way
The Miller comes and: in the house there down his Meal does lay
Now Sir, when you have been, in all these offices,
And that at Fancies hands, you find such love and gentleness,
To show you all her house: but soft, I had forgot,
To speak of her Bed Chamber fine, which now Sir, I will not
Let slip for any thing: the Room it self is round,
And in the night does stand her Bed, with Curtens bravely bound.
The Walls hangde all with Hope, on the one side very fair:
Upon the other side again, dark hangings of despair.
Strange pictures by her Bed: on the one side, sites of grief,
On the other side, to every pange, a present sweet relief.
Upon the one side, sweet accord, on the other Dire debate,
Upon the one side, Naked love: on the other, Couerde hate.
On ^hone side, Prodigies, with pleasant Dames in Joy,
On the other side, Chauing Peascods: in grief and great anoye.
These diverse contraries, with many thousands mo,
When Fancy gazeth on a while, she is amazed so,
That musinge so a while, she slumbreth at the last,
And being in a slumber so, she sleeps, but not fast:
Her Bed is all of Down, whereon she lies so soft,
As any Lady in this land: and at her Bed a loft,
Are written in fair hand, and easy for to reed:
(Although I seem a lovely dame, I loathsome am in deed)
This solemn sentence, who ever so does see,
And does consider the contents, will never like of me.
Her bed is thus bedeckte: the curteynes are of Say,
Not green, nor yealow, red, nor blew, nor white, nor popingaye
No Silk nor ( Cruel say, what then may be the same?
This Say is calde, say for thy self, lo now ye know the name.
Her Covering, curious cost: her Blankets, Lovers bliss:
Her Sheets, are shifts: to shroud her self. Her quiltes, are quidities.
Her Pillowes, they are points: that lovers lea^e upon.
Her Bolster, is a beggars bag: when coin and goods are gone.
Her Bed she lies upon is a young mellowe brain:
where Fancy softly lies and sleeps, and never feelith pain.
And of such beds, she has such stoare of choice (by roode)
That (if so be) she like not one, an other is as good.
Of which, some are so soft, that she does like them so,
That with her liynge in them long, they more half rotten grow:
And if they be not turned, or ere they go to far,
In time, both brain, and hedde, and all, she will be sure to mar.
Thus shall you see her bed, and chamber bravely deckte:
And every room within her house, set out in each respect,
So gallantly: that as I said, I say again,
You sure will think (at first) a while, in heaven for to remain.
Thus, when that Fancy fine, has led you round about.
Her stately house, in every room: then shall you see a loute,
Come with a napkin fine, about his body bound,
Into the chamber, there where first dame fancy fine you found:
He comes to lay a cloth, upon Dame fancies bourde:
And then to bring in all her cates: and trust me (at a word)
It is so strange a sight, to see her served so,
As I shall never see the like, where ever so I go.
Her Table is a Form, that stands without a frame.
And none but she and her compeeres, can ^it upon the same:
Her Stools, stand without feet, I cannot show you how,
Though I have seen them (credit me) I have forgot them now.
But you shall see them there, if thither you will go.
Now Sir, when you are there, and see this order so,
Then unto dinner straight, she goes by and by:
There shall you see her fine Compeeres, that bear her company.
First, upper most she sittes, in a great majesty:
Then sits there down by her a dame, called Lady vanity.
Then down sits her Compeeres, Folly and Fransie both:
Such company, as for to keep, a wiseman would be loath.
Her Waitors at her board, are Curiosity
Her Chamberline: and next to him stands Carelessness hard by:
The Cook that dressed the meat: then Nodcoke natural,
Then Jack an apes, and busy be, worst manered of them all:
Thus furnishist is this board, with waitors in such sort:
The meats whereof she feeds most, I need not make report,
I spoke of them before: but for her kind of drink,
No beer, nor ale, nor wine it is: and what then do you think:
It is a drink composde, of drugges of diverse sorts.
Discourtesie, Disdain, Dispight: and mingled with Disportes,
Sap of fair Semblaunce, with secret simulation.
With Ioice of herbs of hollow hearts, and faithful protestation:
These drugges with many mo, puts Fancy in her drink,
Which though they sumwhat please the taste, yet make the bosom stink:
And works so in their heads, that are not used thertoo,
That maks the^ more half mad: for grief, they know not what to do
Now sir, this is her drink, her meat before you konw,
Her servants I have shown you too, that do attend her so.
Now Sir, when you have fed, of Fancies fare one day:
I do believe that you will wish, your self, next day away.
I promise you (of troth) I did when I was there,
And I would not be there again, for twenty pound I swear.
And more then wishinge too, at board a loud I cride:
I would I were away, this fare, I cannot I abide.
Which when that Fancy saw, she took me from the boorde,
And thrust me out of doors, in have, not speakinge any word.
And flonge me down the steares, wherewith I caught a fall.
That grieved me sore: but yet (me thought) I stood content with all.
The usher of the Hall, he took me by and by,
And out of doors too in like sort, he thrust me presently.
Then every Jack an apes that rid upon an Ass,
Was ready for to ride me still, as I the Court did pass.
The Geese and Ganders hist, the Duckes cride quack at me:
Thus every one would have a flyrt, ere I could get out free.
The Porter Daliaunce, he drove me out in have,
And thrust me down so hard the Hill, my neck was almost brast.
And up I rose again, though bruised very sore,
And meant, if once I gat away, for to come there no more.
Well, limpinge as I could, I hit the beaten way,
Of fools foot stepps: through Forest back, that led me so astraie.
And back again I came, to Learninges narrow lane,
And there I hit The trackt of Truth, that I should first have taken,
That leaves the Forest quite: which when I had hit on,
I staide a while, and there my walk I began to think upon:
And thincking so, I saw a scholar coming by,
That came from learned Virtues School: and sighing heauely,
I calde him unto me, and told him of my woe,
Of my sore fall, from Fancies Forte, and how I caught it so.
Which when that he had hard, he took me by the hand,
And being very weak (in d^eacute;ede) scarce able for to stand.
He led me to a house of Wisdom, an old man,
His Father (as he said) he was: and there I rested than.
This Ientle youth, if I do not forget the same,
Is Honest Reason: so I think, his Father called his name.
Where, being but a while, my tale I began to tell,
To him, of this my gentle walk: whereat he laughed well.
And laughinge so, (quod he) go youth, here take a book,
And write now for remembrance thine, yt when thou chance to look
Upon the same again, then thou may take heed still.
Of leauinge Wisdoms narow Lane, and follow wanton Will.
Lo thus at his command, I wrote it by and by,
And this it was, believe me now, or else (at least) I lie.
FINIS.
IN DISPIGHT of Fancy.
AH, feeble Fancy, now thy force is nothing worth,
Thou had me in thy Castle once, but now I am got forth
Thou baarst a gallant flagge of lusty bravery,
But I have seen yt all thy show, is but mere knauerie.
Thy Feathers flaunt a flaunte, are blown away with wind,
And Falsehood is the trusty Troth, that one in thee shallfinde.
Thy valor is but vaunts, thy weapons are but words,
Thou use Shales, in steed of Shot, and signs in steed of swords.
Thy Forte is of no force, each fool may scale the same.
And thou thy self art but a flirt, and not a noble Dame.
As some do thee account, I know thee too too well,
And none but Dawes, and Doltes, within thy foolish Forte do dwell.
Thy castle is in deed, a Cave of misery,
A place in short space for to bring a man to beggerie.
Thy Forte defended is, by Duckes and gardes of Geese,
By Jack an Apes, Asses too, and such gallants as these.
Thy deep delight is all in foolish triflinge toys,
Thou make a man in things of naught, to set his chiefest joys.
Thy School may well be called, The School of littell skill,
Thy Schoolers most are waywarde wits that follow wanton will.
Thy Lessons loathsome are, thy self a Mistress too
Of naught but Mischief which thou most do make thy Scholars do
Thy Pleasure breeds Man's pain, thy Game does turn to Grief,
Thou woorkest many Deadly woe, but few do lend relief.
Thou make a man to gain Dishonor and Defame,
Thou make him think a Stinking Slut too be a Gallant dame.
Thou make him Hang on hope, and drown in Deep despair:
Thou make him like a mome to build, High Castles in the air.
Thou make him think Black, White, and when that all is known
Thou make him Like an ass to see A fools head of his own.
Thou art The cause of care, but comfort very small,
And so what ever is amiss thou art the cause of all.
My self have seen all this that I report and more,
Thou made me think yt did me good, that grieved me full sore
But long I was so blind, thou so had dimd my sight,
That I could never see the craft of this thy deep dispight.
Till I out of thy Forte, was clearly got away,
And came to Grave aduises house, where now I hope to stay.
Where when I was arrived by help of a dear friend:
True reason, one with whom I mean, to keep till life do end.
Now when that I came there, he did declare to me
What meant that foolish Forte of thine, and all that I did se.
Which when I well had marked, I did not all repent,
My labor in my Journey so, although my cost I spent.
Because thy nature so, and deeds I did discry,
Which deeds of thine, I do detest, and the^ I do defy.
And now unto the world, in deep despite of thee,
I show what a vain flirte thou art, that every man may see.
I have set out thy Forte, thy Force, and eke thy School
Thy Vshers too that teach therein, a mad man and a fool.
Thy lothsom lessons too, and how by great good hap
I am got out, although long first, out of thy loathsome lap.
What shall I farther say, I have set out in kind,
Each peevish point I know in thee, for every man to find,
Therefore let fall thy flagge, and all thy bravery,
I have at large I think, set out thy subtle slavery:
And that in such a sort, as who so lust to reed,
My whole discourse of thy disceipte, will learns for to take heed.
Of all thy gallant show, they know now what it is,
Thou long have lived unknown alas, but now discride I wis.
And for my (...), thy Fo^^e I know so well I swear,
That I do mean to keep me thence and never to come there,
But if I do look up, and follow thee again,
Then keep me fast within the Forte, and plague me for my pain.
But trust I mean it not, with Reason here my freende,
I mean to live in thy dispight, and so I make an end.
And yet before I make a flat ends ere I goo,
I will dischardge my stomach quite, and bid thee farewell so.
FINIS.
A Fool, Dame Fancies man, speaks in defense of his Mistress.
WHat means that mad man troe, that railes on Fancy ^o:
That sekes to do her such dispight, and sweres himself hirso
The man mistakes himself, it is not Fancy sure,
That for to fall into such rage, does him so much procure.
Why Fancy is a freende, to every courteous Knight,
Why Fancy is the chiefest thing, that does the mind delight.
Why Fancy was the cause, wonders first were found,
Of many fine devises strange, first Fancy was the ground.
Why, Fancy is the thing, that moves men to love,
And tells the Lovers what to do, as best for their behoue.
Fancy, finds pretty toys, to please each Courtelie Dame,
Fancy to pass the time in sport, inuenteth many a game.
To Courtiers many one, a good freende Fancy stands,
She makes them reap good liking, at their loving Ladies hands
She made the Poets old, devices to indite,
Which they in writing left behind, for other men's delight.
She seeks unto none, but many seek to her:
And those who are servant still, she seeks to prefer
To high degree in time: and that in Court (perchance)
She helps them, and many ways, does seek them to advance.
Now some (perhaps) again, that are of grossest wit,
And by their dispositions, for Folly Scholars fit.
Those now (perhaps) in deed, she lets all alone,
with Folly only to reward, and them regards none.
But those that are again of quick capacity,
Who can consider Virtue wise, from Foolish Vanity.
Such men she chiefly loves, and such although they know her
Shall have small cause in tract of time, in deed for to beshrow her.
I may not speak too much, for I am partial:
But what I have said, it is true, for I have tried it all.
And therefore sure the man, that rayleth on her so,
Has done her wrong, without just cause, to stand so much her so.
Fair words are ever best, backebitinge is too bad.
And therefore I do thinck the man, is either drunk or mad,
That seeks her such dispight, so much without desarte.
And by her countenance it seems, it greeues her to the heart.
To be so much abusde, but what, no remedy,
A wicked tongue does say amiss, and will do till he die:
FINIS.
THE LAMENTATION of Fancy.
ALas poor silly wretch, now may thou weep and wai^e,
For now thy Forte is of no force, thou can no more prevail.
Fancy let ^all thy flag, thy bravery is discride,
Thy shifts are seen, wherewith thou thoughtest, thy self from sight to hide
The man is got away, who^ late I entertainde:
And lo by him I am defamde, and all my state is stainde.
Why did I not him feed, with some more sweet repaste?
Why did I not devise to dress, some toy to please his taste?
I put into his drink, too much Drugges of dispight,
Thou moughst allayd the bitterness, with drammes of sweet delight
Why did thou in a rage, first flinge him from thy lap?
And leave to feed him any more, with worldly pleasures pap?
Why did I in my rage, not speakinge any word:
Take him so roughly at the first, and set him from my boorde?
And thrust him out of doors, in such a scornful wise:
Thou had been better let him dinde, and let himself to rise.
Why did thou throw him down the steares in such a sort?
That he of thy discurtesie may justly make report.
And being fallen down so, why did thou Vain delight
Thrust him out of doors by force, in such dispight?
You Jack an Apeses too, why caught you at him so?
To ride him like an Ass, as he alonge the Court did go.
Why did you hiss you Geese? and Duckes why cride you quacke,
To rail on him? why did you not more gently let him pack?
Why did thou Daliaunce, so thrust him out of door?
That made him catch so great a fall, and bruze himself so sore.
A las what blame I you? my self I ought to blame,
For if I had forbidden it, you had not done the same?
Could none of all my Flowers, so fair and sweet of smell,
Cause him to have desire again, within my Forte to dwell?
Could not my Bedchamber, with all my Pictures fair,
Make him yet ere he die again, thither to make repair.
Alas, I fear he saw the words at my Beds head.
And out of doubt I fear in deed, that sentence he has read.
And that has caused him, to loath my Bed and me,
But could not all the other sightes, that in the Chamber he
Did see to move delight, make him forget the same,
Oh no, well Fancy yet seek none at all to blame,
But even thy only self, who tookest so small regard
Unto a Stranger in such sort, and handle him so hard.
Well, since that he is gone, and that I am discride,
And that from him my shifts alas, I can no longer hide
I must a warninge take, the next that come again,
Unto my Forte for service mine, better to entertain.
And though he thus begone, I doubt not but there be,
Some youths a broad yet in the world, yt will come seek out me,
But all that I can ever have, to ease my pain,
Will never do me half that good, as to see him again.
Which if I ever have, I now not sorrow so,
But I shall then rejoice as much, and rid me of my woo,
Until which time alas, I languish still in pain,
And so shall do until I see, my gentle youth again.
FINIS.
A FAREVVELL To Fancy.
Fond Fancy now farewell, thy Lodginge likes me not,
I served thee long full like a slave, yet little gains I got,
Yet though I say my self, no slave that ever serude,
Of any mistress in this world have more reward deserud
But he that binds himself apprentise to a Patch,
At seven years end, will this be sure, to gain sum foolish catch.
So Nodcoke I, that long have served thee like a slave,
For my reward by dew desert, Repentance gained have.
Thou never badst me goo, but I would run with speed,
If thou did bid me stay again, two biddinges should not need.
When I had better run, when thou did bid me stay,
And better staide then goo on foot, to breed mine own decay.
When thou did bid me look, I ready was to mark,
And would not loose the thing so soon, no not in greatest darck.
When better I had been, for to have shut mine eye,
Then for to cast mine eye on that, should work me woe there by.
When thou did bid me like, I loved by and by:
When thou again badst me mislike, I hated contrary.
What shall I further say, thou nothing badst me do
But I was willinge by and by, for to agree thereto.
But what for all my pains, have I now reapt in fine,
A goodly gain Repentance sore, of such great folly mine:
When thou did bid me goo, my running made me fall:
When thou did bid me stay again, it was for no good at all.
Thou madst me study often, but what fond trifling toies,
The Art of love, and of the cause of lovers greefes and Joys.
Thou madst me think long while, that lovers grief was game,
And that no Joy could be compard, unto a gallant Dame.
Thou madst me think long time, no pleasure like to that,
With Curtisans in their kind, to do I say not what.
Thou madst me half amazed, sum time with frantic fits,
and now and then with thoughts of love, almost out of my wits.
Thou maadst me take delight, in Lodge of Love to dwell,
And for to coumpt that thing a heaven, which rather was a hell.
Thou maadst me thinck that Love did purchase heavenly Joy,
Which now I see did purchase pain, and wrought naught but annoy.
Thou maadst me take delight, to ^et in brave attire,
Which now I find was more in deed, then reason did require,
In Feathers flaunt a flaunt, and tossinge in the wind,
Thou maadst me take delight, which now a folly great I find.
Thou maadst me take delight in singularity,
In Tailors work to have a trick, that none should have but I.
Thou maadst me coumpt a praise, some fasshion to devise,
Wherewith I sought in wisemens ^ight my self for to disguise.
Thou maadst me spend my time, in vain and folish toies,
And ever did withdraw my mind, from seekinge perfect Joys.
Thou maadst me think it was a heaven, For to go gay,
But never had me look in time, how long it would hold way.
In fine, as long as I was Scholar at thy School,
For all the learning that I got, I proved my self a fool.
Thou did withdraw my mind from Perfect piety,
And maadst me cheifely to delight in worldely vanity.
But now since that I see, that it has pleased god,
To plague me well for my deserts, with smart of mine own rod:
And give me grace to find, what greefes by thee do grow,
And that although unto my cost, thy nature naught I know.
What gains by thee are got, what pinchinge penury,
What grief of mind, what plague of purse, what wretched misery:
I now forsake thee quite, and never mean to dwell,
Near thee by fifteen thousand mile, and so Fancy, farewell.
FINIS.
THE TOYS OF an Idle Head: Contayninge many pretty Pamphlets, for pleasant
heads to pass away idle time withal.

By the same Auctor. N. B.

The Preface.
MY friend, who so thou be, that feign would buy this book,
so pass away the time thereon, in idle times to look:
If so thou fyndste that like thee not, yet pardon grant to me,
And wish me from thy heart no worse, then I wish unto thee.
Against my will it shall be much, if many I offend,
With these rude rymes which I have made, unto none other end
But as I said before, for want of other glee,
For pleasant heads to look upon, when they at leisure be.
But some there are I must confess, against whom in great despite,
Some running rymes which here you see, I chanced to indight.
But such I count my deadly foes: and such one if thou be
That bu^est my book, then take the same in deep despite of thee.
But if you be my frien^, and take all in good part
That there you find: and think it is for want of better Art.
Then here with right good will, I offer it to thee,
And do but thank me for my pains, it is enough for me.
Of troth I promise ye, it is not for want of will,
That rudely thus in rymes I run, but want of better skill.
For if that I had Ouids pen, each word in printe to place,
Or Homers excercyse I had, to give my verse a grace.
Or Tullies Eloquence to talk* as I in mind thought best,
Or Aristotle's pregnant wit, that passes all the rest.
Some pretty piece of work* perhaps then moughtst thou find,
Among so many merry toys, that might content thy mind.
But tush, my beetle brain, can no such fruictes bring forth,
My v^^^es are but ragged rimes, and therefore little worth.
My head vnhoodded yet, I ready am to fly,
At every little paltrye bird, that goes whisking by,
I never have respect to any kind of Game,
Like to the hooded Hawk: that kept a long while tame
When that her Ga^^e does spring, she knows it by the whurre,
And then to make a wing thereat, she gi^^es offyst to st^rre.
But till the Game be sprung, on fyst she pearcheth still,
But I (God wot) to choose my game, have no such kind of skill.
I stryke at what I may, and give God thanks for all,
And stand contented with the same till better does befall.
And glad I am sometime, to pray upon a Bird,
I have no wit to way the best, but every worthelesse word
I ready am in ryme to put, although my reason be
But small (God wot,) and that too small, as you may plainly see.
But since you see my simple head, vnhooded (as it is,)
Accept the simple fruict thereof, and be content with this.
Until I have the skill, to fly at better Game,
Which when I kill, you shall be sure to taste some of the same.
But if ye now disdain these Birds, whereon I pray,
With better game hereafter I, perhaps will fly away.
And like a very Churl, then will I part with none,
But feed upon the best thereof, unto my self alone.
Where few or none shall see, what food I feed upon,
No* nor yet where I hyde the same, till all be spente and gone.
Wherefore my friend I say, if so thou do desire,
More of my works, and would not have the rest thrown in the fire.
Skorne not these ragged rymes, but rather soon amend,
What so thou fyndst that likes thee not, and so I make an end.
Wishing thee well to fare, if so thou be my friend,
But if my foe, then ill and worse, and so again I end.
Finis.
A pretty Dittie in despite of Fantasye.
The Argument.
Since Fantasye first moved me,
To ryme thus rudely as you see.
A pretty Dittye of Despite
Gaynst Fantasy, first will I wry^^.
NOw by my troth, I cannot ch^^se but ^myle,
To see the foolish ^yttes of Fantasye:
With what deceites she does the mind beguyle,
As pleases best her great inconstancye.
As well the wysest, as the (...) man,
She troubles, I tell you, now and th^n.
And no denial if she lyketh once,
It must be had what ever so it be:
And each day new Devices for the (...),
Only to please Mistress fond Fant^sy.
For she can never like one thing two days,
Though it deserve never so great a praise.
This thing to day, to morrow that again,
And yet the next day neither of them both:
That now she likes, anon she will disdain,
And whom she loved, seems now to loath.
Thus chopping still, and changing every day,
With vain delights she leads the mind away.
She makes the Lover think his Lady fair,
Although she be as foul, as foul may be:
She makes him eke, build Castles in the Air,
And very far in Milstones for to see.
And in the end, I think if all were known,
She makes him see, a Fools head of his own.
She makes my Lady so much to e^^eeme,
Of her green prattling Parratte in the Cage:
This makes her eke her little Page to deem,
The fynest Boy in England of his age.
This makes her set more by h^re tame white Dear,
Then some would do by twenty pounds a year.
And who can choose but laugh to think upon,
Such froward fittes of foolish fantasy?
And how alas the mind is woe begone,
If that it has not each thing by and by,
That she desires, what ever so it be,
Cost life or death, it must be had, we see.
She feeds the mind of man, with many a toye,
She makes himself to seek his own decay:
In things of naught, she makes him set his joy,
And from all Virtue leads him quyte away.
And she it is that vaynly caused me,
Against her self to ryme thus as you see.
Finis.
A dolorous discourse, of one that was beewitched with Love.
The Argument.
Since that the passing pangues of love,
Which many Lovers often do prove.
I find the cause from time to time,
That made men show their minds in ryme*
I do intend in verses few,
A dolorous discourse to show,
Of one that was bewitched in love,
What passing pangues he often did prove.
In which God wot, the more his pain,
Even till his death he did remain.
IF I had skill to frame a cunning Uearse,
Wherein I might my loathsome life lament,
Or able were in rymes for to rehearse,
The gryping greefes, that now my heart have hent^.
Such privy pangues of love I could descry,
As never any Lover felt, but I.
Some say they freeze, they flame, they fly alofte,
And yet they fall, they hope, and yet they fear:
The feeld once won, yet ielousye full often,
With vile suspect, their yrkesome hearts does tear.
They live and lack, they lack, and yet they have,
And having yet, they lack the thing they crave.
They bide in bliss amid their weary bale,
With heavy hearts, they show a smyling face:
In figures thus, they tell a mournful tale,
And set their sorrow out with such a grace.
That who so reads the same and marks it well,
Would think a Lovers torments worse then Hell.
Then think you what vile torments do I feel,
When all these pangues are but Flea bytes to mine:
I never came to top of Fortunes wheel,
But underneath in dolours still do pyne.
I never flew, whereby to have a fal^,
Yet stoop I often, although my gate be small.
Am I not then in case much worse then they?
That fly sometimes, although they fall as fast:
Oh yes, my case let any Lover way,
And they shall see, I never yet (...) taste,
One sugared joy, that they have swallowed often,
That fly and fall, although they fall not soft.
For they that fly although they catch a fall,
Yet while they fly, the time so joyful is*
The harm they take by falling is but small,
For when unto themselves they think on this,
What a fine flight, but even ere while they had,
For joy thereof, they can not long be sad.
But Fortune never yet so favored me,
To lend me wings to take one little flight,
Whereby the harm by falling I might see,
Or yet in flying find the deep delight.
I cannot call to mind one joyful day,
Which for a time, my sorrows may allay.
But lie along all weryed with this woe,
And know not how to prove to make a flight:
With chilling cold, my joints are frozen so,
That when I strive but even to stand upright,
I feel my feebled limbs to faint so fast,
That staggering still, down flat I fall at last.
My heart it self is bitten so with fro^t.
That all my senses now are waxed nome:
My tongue his taste of pleasant joys has lost,
My mind with ^^uell care is ouercom*
My dazzled eyes are waxed dim with tears,
Which show the state wherein my life it wears.
Mine ears wax deaf, no pleasant tunes they hear,
That may revive with dole my dulled brain:
Where I was wont with Music for to cheer
My heavy heart: now seems a deadly pain.
For each sweet note, I hear men play or sing,
Thorough mine ear like thunder clappes does ring.
But thus to live, oh what a life is t^is^
To live (alas) my senses all bestraught:
Though strange it seem, yet trust me true it is,
Such chilling cold my senses all has caught.
That I can neither hear, nor feel, nor see,
Nor smell, nor taste, and yet alive must be.
And shall I tell how (...) I c^ught this cold?
By looking long upon thy lovely face:
For when I did thy heavenly hew behold,
And markte there with thy brave and comely grace.
Good Lord thought I, what worthy wight is this?
Some heavenly Dame, then Venus sure it is.
Venus quoth I? with that I (...) for fear,
And shut the windows of my seeing shop:
For grief whereof my ha^^^ did swelte I swear,
Then began I strive against the hill to hoppe.
With gazing eyes to s^are on thee again,
Whose only looks have wrought me all this pain.
But when I heard a name to ^hee assignde,
And saw thou werte an earthly Creature:
Then began I thus imagine in my mind,
Which way might I this Ladies love procure.
To me poor Page that thus sore wounded lie,
At point of death, yet dying cannot dye.
But when I saw mine own unworthiness,
And could not call to mind and due desarte:
Whereon I might presume in this dis^resse,
To crave of thee some salve for this my smarte.
With grief thereof, I caught this chilling cold,
Which quaking yet, my quiuering corpse does hold.
Yet lookte I lo, and stared still on thee,
Thinking thereby to find some ease of pain:
But straight me thought, I saw thee look awrye,
As who should say, thou di^st my looks disdain.
Which lowering look, drove me into this fytte,
Which God he knows how it torments me yet.
But yet I must confess at first dear dame,
That whote desire my grief has caused so.
But by and by my fi^rce and fyry (...),
Was quickly quenchte, (...) waves of weary woe.
In which wet waves, I too and (...) ^m tossed,
Seeking in vain, to find (...) quiet cost.
Now (noble Dame) since that thou (...) plain,
How first I caught this grief that gripes my heart:
And makes me thus (...) of pain,
Since that in thee it lies to ease my smar^^.
And only thee, (dear dame) do not deny
To help me now, for if thou do, I dye.
But think upon my bitter passion,
And eke the passing pangues wherein I pyne:
And how fast bound without redemption,
I linger forth this loathsome life of mine:
And how thou may with speed, if thee it please,
Both set me free, and cure my strange disease.
Which if thou will, I know for certaynty,
Thou can not choose, but lend me some relief:
Thou will, beholding my calamity,
Lend some one grain of comfort to my grief.
Which when thou do: for a Physicians fee,
A noble name thy greatest gain shall ^ee.
And so dear Dame, when thou do think upon
The loathsome lives that Lovers often rehearse:
Among the rest, let this of mine be one,
Which here to thee does show it self in vearse.
Then shall thou see how far my passion,
In pangues of love has pasde them every one.
Finis.
A Gentleman being on a Christmas Eve in a very sollitary place, among very
solemn company: where was but small cheer, less mirth, and least music:
being very earnestly entreated to sing a Christmas Caroll, with much ado, sung
as follows.
NOw Christmas draws near,
And most men make good cheer,
With heigh, how, care away:
I like a s^elye mo^^e,
In drowsy dumpes at home,
Will naught but fast and pray.
Some sing and dance for life,
Some Card and Dyce as ryfe,
Some use old Christmas Games:
But I oh wretched wight,
In dole both day and night
Must dwell, the world so frames.
In Court what pretty toys,
What fine and pleasant joys,
To pass the time away?
In country naught but care,
Sower Cheese curdes, chiefest fare,
For Wine, a Bole of Whay.
For every daynty dishe
Of Flesh or else of Fish
And for your Drink in Court:
A dish of young fried Frogs,
Sodde houghes of mezled Hogs,
A cup of small Tap worte.
And for each courtly sight,
Each show that may delight
The eye, or else the mind:
In Country thorns and brakes,
And many miery lakes,
Is all the good you find.
And for fine Enteryes,
Halles, Chambers, Galleryes,
And Lodginges many m^e:
Here desert Wooddes or playne^,
Where no delight remaynes,
To walk in too and from.
In Court for to be short,
For every pretty sport,
That made the heart delight:
In country many a grief,
And small or no relief,
To aid the wounded wight.
And in this Deserte place,
I Wretch in woeful case,
This merry Christmas time:
Content my self perforce,
To rest my careful corse:
And so I end my ryme*
In the latter end of Christmas, the same Gentleman was likewise desired to
sing: and although against his will, was content to sing as follows.
THe Christmas now is past,
And I have kept my fast,
With prayer every day:
And like a country Clown,
With nodding up and down,
Have past the time away.
As for old Christmas Games,
Or daunsing with fine Dames,
Or shows, or pretty plays:
A solemn oath I swear,
I came not where they were,
Not all these holy days.
I did not sing one noate,
Except it were by roate,
Still buzing like a Be:
To ease my heavy heart,
Of some, though little smart^,
For want of other glee.
And as for pleasant wine,
There was no drink so fine,
For to be tasted here:
Full simple was my fare,
If that I should compare,
The same to Christmas cheer.
I saw no kind of sight,
That might my mind delight,
Believe me noble Dame:
But every thing I saw,
Did freat atwo my maw,
To think upon the same.
Upon some bushy balke,
Full feign I was to walk,
In Wooddes from tree to tree:
For want of better room,
But since my fatal doom,
Has so appointed me.
I stood therewith content,
Till Christmas full was spente,
In hope that God will send:
A better yet next year,
My heavy heart to cheer,
And so I make an end.
The same man being in very great dumpes the same time, being likewise
entreated to write some doleful Dittie of his own invention, wrote as
follows.
WHat griping greefs, what pinching pangues of pain?
What deadly dinte of deep and darcke annoye?
What plague? what woe, does in this world remain?
What Hellish hap? what want of worldly joy?
But that (oh Caytife) I do daily bide,
Yea, and that more then all the world beside.
If ever man had cause to wish for death,
To cut atwo this lucklesse line of life:
Why strive not I with speed to stop my breath?
Since cruel care, not like a caruing knyfe,
But like a Saw, still hackling to and froe,
Thus gnawes my heart with grypes of weary woe.
What do you think I jest, or that I feign?
Or Lover like, my life I do lament?
Or that my fyttes are fancies of the brain,
Which waver still, and never stand content?
Or that my sighs are naught but signs of sloth?
Oh think not so, believe me on my troath.
This I protest before my God on hye,
If that I could my doloures well declare:
I think I should such privy p^ngues descrye,
Of sorrows smarte, as surely seldom are
Seen now adays: I think especyally,
Yea seen or felt, of such a Youth as I.
But some perhaps will ask^, what is my woe?
What is the thing that makes me so to mourn?
And why I walk so solemn too and froe?
I answer thus: such fyry flames does burn,
Both day and night, within my boiling breast:
That God he knows, I take but little rest.
But shall I tell, how first this flame arose?
And how these Coals were kyndled at the furst?
I may not so my dolloures deep disclose:
For credit me, I would feign if I durst.
But since, alas, I may not as I would,
Let this suffice, I would feign if I could.
What if I could? nay durst: what did I say?
For if I durst, I know full well I could:
What could I do? no whit more then I may,
I know that too: but yet if that I would.
I could do much more then I mean to do,
As thus aduisde: but whether do I go?
What need so many words? so much a do?
To blaze the broils that I do daily bide:
Or else to tell of torments too too too,
Wherewith I am beset on every side.
These few words naught have served the turn I trow,
Then thousand plagues, but pleasures none I know.
Finis.
A pretty gyrde given by a Gentlewoman, to her servant, whereupon the verses
were made as follows.
Farewell Youth, to your untruth.
WHen as thou badst, farewell to mine untruth,
I hope thou spakest it but in jest dear Dame:
Or else for that you thought that every youth,
Most commonly, is touched with the same:
Such youths there are, I must confess in deed,
As with untruth their Ladies fancies feed.
But what of that: tush, I am none of those,
Though youthly years I cannot well deny:
For rather life then truth, I choose to lose,
By truth I mean my true fydelitye:
Which who so breaks, to him, as to a youth,
Thou may well say: farewell to thine untruth.
But yet good Lady, say not so to me^,
Till thou do see, my truth by falsehood staynd,
Which when thou see, then justly spit at me,
As at a slave, whose truth is all but faynd:
But till that time, say not to mine untruth,
Farewell again, but only to my youth.
For all untruths I utterly deny,
And to my trusty truth, I stowtly stand:
And who so list against the same replye,
Against him with speed; I go with sword in hand:
Into the Feeld, the same for to defend,
For lo in this, my credit does depend.
And though (perhaps) most commonly each youth,
Is given in deed, to follow every gaye:
And some of these are touched with untruth,
Yet some there be, that take a better way:
And stand upon their truth and honesty,
More then upon their foolish bravery.
Which two, I count to be the cheifest poynctes,
That each man ought to build his life upon:
And these hold I my chief and strongest ioynctes,
For what were I, when these two poynctes are gone?
Wherefore dear Dame, as I begone I end:
My Youth I grant, and truth I still defend.
It chanced not long after that this Gentleman happened to be in the company of
his very friend, which at Dyce lost much money: and after his loss, entreated
him to write some despightful Ditty to dissuade him from Cards and Dyce: which
with much entreaty he granted, and wrote as follows.
MY Friend I say if thou be wise,
Use not to much the Cards and Dyce:
Least, setting all at sincke and syce,
Do make thee know the cost:
Twill make thee wear a thin light purse,
Twill make thee swear, and ban, and curse:
Twill make thee do all this and worse,
When once thy Coin is lost.
Therefore take heed in time, I say:
For time at Dyce runs fast away,
No time worse spente, then at Dyce play,
I put thee out of doubt:
And say not, but it was thee told,
The nearer that thy purse is polde,
The more still friendship waxes cold,
Yea all the world throughout.
And then when once thy coin is g^n^,
And friends to help thee thou haste none,
Nor house nor Land to live upon,
Oh then, what will thou say?
Well, once I might have taken heed,
I had a trusty friend in deed,
That told me true how I should speed,
If I did hold this way.
For who continues in this vain,
Of setting still, both ^ye and main,
But in the end he shall be feign,
To leave it will or nill:
And do the thing that does despite
Most men, though some it does delight,
To them that play to hold the light,
Full ill against their will.
Leave therefore (friend) while thou art w^ll.
And mark the words (...),
If once thy land thou fall to s^ll,
Thy credit will (...):
And care not thou, though Gamsters say,
These Gamsters, Roysters call I may:
What Dastard dare thou not play?
How, reach this man a Chair.
Well, if he bring it, sit thee down,
Or else go out into the town:
If not, then walk thee up and down,
And bear a time his scoff:
And thou shalt see within a while,
How thou may fynely at him smile:
When he would gladly wish a file,
To file his yrons off.
For commonly such Knaves as these,
Do end their lives upon three trees:
Or lie in prison for their fees,
For all their bragging out:
And though one year they go full gay,
And every day play lusty play:
Yet with a Rope they make a fray,
Cre seven year go about.
And therefore say they what they list,
Take thou still heed of had I wist:
And use not too too much thy fist,
To shaking of the Dice:
For first thy gayn^ (...) but sm^ll,
The credit less, thou (...) with all:
Thy estimation least of all,
Though dear thou buy the price.
Good Lord was not that man half mad,
That once a pretty living had:
And would not rest, but out must gadde,
To Cards and Dyce in haste:
And used them so lustily,
Setting, and throwing carelessly:
Till in short space full foolishly,
He spent even all at last.
Even so will thou I promise thee,
If thou do not give ear to me:
And leave thy trouling of a Dye,
And that with speed my friend:
For they that use so lustily,
The Cards and Dyce most commonly:
Are either brought to beggary,
Or hang else in the end.
And now farewell, since that I may,
As now, no longer with thee stay:
My counsel therefore bear away,
And leave that vain delight:
That now thou have in Cards and Dyce,
And learn betimes for to be wise:
Once well warnde, is as good as twyse,
And so my friend good night.
Finis.
An other Dittie after that, made by the same man (after a sort) in defense of
Cards and Dice, as follows.
TO play at Dyce, is but good sport,
So it be used in good sort:
But who delights in Cards and Dyse,
In deed, I cannot count him wise:
For he that plays till all be gone,
With Robin Hoode and little John,
May trace the Wooddes: for wise men say,
Keep somewhat till a rayny day.
But will you therefore generally,
Disprayse the Dyce so spightfully*
What thing so good that now is used,
But by a fool may be abusde?
I speak not this unto that end,
That you should think I would defend
Dyce playing universally,
But only used moderately.
For who so long does use the Dyce,
Till he thereof has known the price,
I mean till almost all ^e gone,
Then mark this straight way such a one,
Begins to learn to cogge apace,
Whereby he does so much disgrace,
The Cards and Dyce, that men do fear^
To play, for Coggers every where.
But if that coggers all were barde,
And cleanly cutters of a Card,
And every Gamster would play square,
Then some men would hope well to fare,
And then would few so much despy^e,
As now they do, both Cards and Dyse,
For neither Cards nor Dyce be naught,
If men would use them as they ought.
For how can Cards or Dyce hurt those,
That care not whether they win or lose?
But who do so? such men these are,
As play no more then they may spare:
And when they come to any Game,
They make a pastime of the same:
But hab or nab, speed well who may,
And merrily so will spend the day.
And what is lost too, ^are well it,
Never chase nor freate a whit,
And they that use play in this sort,
With Cards and Dyce make preaty sport.
Then therefore since both Cards and Dyce,
Be good for some men, as I say:
Who does abuse them is not wise.
Nor worthy in my mind to play.
Therefore as I begone, I end,
Moderate play I do defend.
Finis.
An other time not long after, he chanced to be in his friends and betters
house: being in his bed about midnight, by chance awake, heard in the next
chamber a Page of the Ladies of the house, lamenting as he lay in his bed,
very sore his unhappy estate: which as he could well bea^e away in the
morning, put it in verse only for his own reading, to laugh at, but being by
his friend entreated, put it as you see among his Toys (as one not the least)
which was as follows.
THat I would not persuaded be,
In my young rechlesse youth:
By plain experyence I see,
That now it proves truth.
It is Toms song, my Ladies Page,
That service is no heritage.
I hard him sing this other night,
As he ^ay all alone:
Was never Boy in such a plight,
Where should he make his mo^e.
Oh Lord quoth he, to be a page,
This service is none heritage.
Mine Uncle told me the other day,
that I must take great pain:
And I must cast all sloth away,
If I seek ought to gain.
For sure quoth he, a painful Page,
Will make service an heritage.
Yea sure, a great commodity,
If once Madame he do displease:
A cuffe on the ear, two or three,
He shall have, ^inally for his ease.
I would for me he were a Page,
For to possess this heritage.
I rub and brush almost all day,
I make clean many a coat^:
I seek all honest means I may,
How to come by a groate.
I think I am a painful Page,
Yet can I make no heritage.
Why? I to get have much a do,
A Kirtle now and than:
For making clean of many a (...),
For Ales, or Mistress Anne.
My Ladies Maids will (...) Page,
Always of such an heri^^^^.
The wenches they get Coyf^s and Cawles,
Frenchhoodes and Partlets ^^ke:
And I get naught but checks and braw^^s,
A thousand in a week.
These are rewards meet for a Page,
Surely a goodly heritage.
My Ladies maids to must I please,
But chiefly Mistress Anne:
For else by the Mass she will disease,
Me vyly now and than.
Faith she will say, you (...) Page,
I Will purchase you an heritage.
And if she say so by the ^^de,
It Is Cock I warrant i^:
But God he knows, I were as good,
To be without it:
For all the gaynes I get ^oor^ Page,
Is but a slender Heritage.
I have so many folks to please,
And creep and kneel unto:
That I shall never live at ease,
What ever so I do:
I Will therefore be no more a Pag^,
But seek some other heritage.
But was there ever such a pa^^^,
To speak so loud as I:
Knowing what hold the mayde^ will c^tch,
At every fault they spy:
And all for (...) ^ore ^age,
To purchase me an heritage.
And if that they may h^^re (...),
I were as good be ^angde:
My Lady shall kno^ (...) by (...),
And I shall sure be bangde:
I shall be used (...) a Page,
I shall not loose mine heritage.
Well yet I hope the time to s^e,
When I may run as fast:
For wandes for them, as they for me,
Ear many days be past:
For when I am no longer Page,
I Will give them up m^^e heritage.
Well, I a while must stand content,
Till better hap do fall:
With such pore state as God has sent,
And give him thanks for all.
Who will I hope, send me pore Page
Then this, some better heritage.
With this, with hands and eyes,
Lift up to heaven on high:
He sighed twice or thrice,
And wept to piteously.
Which when I saw, I wished the Page,
In faith some better heritage.
And weeping thus good God quoth he,
Have mercy on my soul:
That ready I may be for thee,
When that the bell does knoule.
To make me free of this bondage,
And partner of thine heritage.
Lord grant me grace so thee to serve,
That at the latter day:
Although I can no good deserve,
Yet thou to me may say.
Be thou now free, that werte a Page.
And hear in heaven have heritage.
Finis.
The same man being desired the next day following, to sing some pretty song to
the Virginals, by a Gentlewoman that he made no small accoumpt of: was feign
Extempore to endite, and sing as follows.
AMid my joys such grief I find,
That what to do, I know not I:
My pleasures are but blastes of wind,
Full well even now, and by and by,
Some sudden pangues torment me so,
That I could even cry out for woe.
And yet perforce no remedy,
Needs must I laugh, when I could m^urne:
Yea, often I sing when presently,
To tears my singing could I turn:
Such luck have Gamsters some men say,
Win, and loose, and all in a day.
But some there are whom fortune still,
Gives leave to win, and seldom lose:
Oh would to God I had my will,
That I might soon be one of those.
That are in fortunes ^auour so,
Then need I not thus plain of woe.
For if that I were sure at least,
For to obtain that I would crave:
Yea though it were but one request,
I would desire no more to have.
I ask but even one happy day,
Let me do after as I may*
And sure I see no remedy,
But even to hope on hap alone:
And that is it that comfortes me,
For when hope sails, all joys are gone.
Therefore what with hope and despair,
My joys lie houering in the air.
Which would to God would either fall,
Or else be driven quyte away:
That I might have no hope at all,
or else that I might happily say.
Now have I found the thing I sought,
Now will I take but little thought.
Well, yet I hope or e^e I dye,
To light on such a happy day:
That I may sing full merrily,
Not, heigh ho well, but care away.
The Ship full many tempests past,
Has reached the quiet Haven at last.
Finis.
The next day after that he had written this passion of Love, diverse
Gentlewomen being then in the house: he was intreted by two or three of them at
once, to make some verses: and one among the rest, being very desirous to have
her request fulfilled, brought him a pen, and ynke, and Paper: with earnest
entreaty, to make some verses upon what matter he though best himself: he very
unwilling to write, not knowing of a sudden, how to please them al in vearse,
and yet desirous to grant all their requests, with much ado, was in the
end entreated to write, as follows.
WHat? shall I write some pretty toy, will that like Ladies best?
Or shall I pen ye praise of one fair dame, above the rest?
Or shall I write at randon else, what first coms in my brain?
No, no: for words once flowen abroad, can not be called again.
Why then since none of these will serve, what other kind of style
shall I pick out to write upon? now sure I ^eedes must smile,
To think upon my beetle brain, that can no fruit bring forth,
But such baldictum rimes as these, as are not reading worth.
Faith Ladies but for shame, I would not write one word at al,
In ryme (at least) because you see, my reason is so small.
But since it is such as it is, in deed small and to small,
I must desire you for this once, to stand consent withal.
And take the same in as good part, as if a wyser man
Had better done: because you see, I do the best I can.
And more then can, you cannot crave: for if you do of me,
Before you ask be sure to go without, I promise ye.
But any thing that well I (...), command you all of me,
And I will do the best I can, to please each one of ye.
And thus as humbly as I can, I crave of you to lend,
Your patience to my rudeness this, and so I make an end.
Full sorry that I cannot write, so fynely as I would,
To like your fancies all alyke, for if I could, I would.
And so again fair Ladies all, in courteous sort I crave,
As I deserve your favors so, and friendships let me have.
Not many days after, he saw a Gentlewoman in the house, whom he accoumpted
his dear Mistress begin to show her evil countenance without cause, and
to make very much of another, whom he thought very unworthy of such good
hap: and being not a little agreeued to see himself causlesse to grow daily
so much out of countenance, and his adversary so unworthily esteemed: wrote
one day among other, half a sheet ofPaper in verse: wherein he privily
showed his adversaries unworthiness, his Mistresses inconsta^cy, and his own
evil hap: and finding a fit time, delivered the writing to his said
Mistress: which, how she took in worth, that restes: the verses were these.
WHen Flattery falls to play the ^lee^ing Knave,
And tried trust is put out of conceit:
And cogging craft, by subtle shifts can have,
The gaynes, for which does faithful service w^ight.
Then deep deceit, must needs possess the part,
That does in deed belong to due desarte.
When fond suspect, shall cause a faithful friend,
To deem amiss of friend, without desarte,
And coye conceit, shall cause a fynall end,
Of friendship there, where friends were linkte in heart.
Then double dealing must of force prevail,
To win reward, and faithful friendship fail.
When men are scornde, and shadows are esteemde,
And shells are saude, and Kernels cast away:
And deeds be done, and words for deeds be deemde,
And outward bravery bears the bell away.
Then honest meaning must go change his mind,
Or else is sure a cold reward to find.
But when in deed, vile Flattery false is found,
And tried trust does reap his due reward:
And deep deceit, is dug under ground,
And cogging craft, can get no tale be hard.
Then right may have, that reason does require,
And due desarte, may have his deep desire.
Lo, thus dear Dame, this for my self I write,
My troth I trow, your self have tried well:
For which (alas) I reap naught but despite,
The just cause why, God knows, I cannot tell.
Except by stealth, some fleering flattering Knave,
Has got the gaynes, which I deserve to have.
Or else perhaps, some false suspect has bread
Mislyking some, of me without desarte:
Or coye conceit has entered in your head,
To hate the man, who honors you in heart,
Or double dealing, seeks some secreate mean,
Betwixt true friends, true love to banish clean.
Or else I doubt some shadow of a man,
In my despite some gallaunt words has used:
On whom I vow to do the best I can,
To seek revenge, where I am so abusde.
Wherefore good Lady, if such any be.
I humbly crave, hyde not his name from me.
That I with speed may give him his desarte,
Or else receive my just and due reward:
For then when you shall see my honest heart,
I do not doubt your heart will be so hard.
But you at last, although first somewhat long,
Will make amends to me for every wrong.
And thus in hope, no false and fond suspect,
Of liking yours, shall cause such sodeine change:
And that you will such coye conceits reject,
As to your friend, do make you seem so strange.
I rest the time that reason does require,
When my desarte may have his deep desire.
Not long after seeing his Adversary still creeping in countenance, and
himself almost excluded: sitting on a day alone in his Chamber, thinking of
the despite of Fortune, and the want of discrecion, in his discourteous Dame:
wrote in haste these verses following.
OH what a spite it is, unto a noble heart,
To see a scabbe without all due desarte.
With no account of credit, nor of fame,
To win the love, of any gallant Dame.
Which valiant hearts, with travail great and pain,
Have much adooe, long time for to obtain.
My self I count of valiancie but small,
Yet such as may my credit well defend:
And such as in my Mistress honor shall
Be well content, with speed my life to spend.
Which, let me spend, and spend, and spend again,
Yet shall another suck my sugared gain.
With much ado, I once did favor win,
Of one in deed, a fair and gallante Dame:
Which my good hap no sooner did begin,
But by and by, to overthrow the same,
A privy Patch, a whoreson skuruy Knave,
Inioyed the fruictes, that was my right to have.
His fleering face, her peevish fancye pleased,
My tried troth was put of conceyte:
He glad, I sad, he well, and I diseasde,
He caught the Fish, for which I laid the bayte.
He idle sat, and nothing did all day,
And yet at night did bear the Bell away.
But since I see, that cases so fall out,
That valiant hearts so little are regarded:
And gallaunt Dames will seem to love a Loute,
And let a noble youth go unrewarded.
I will no more henceforth such travail spend
In cases such, and so I make an end.
Not many days after, seeing his Mistress discourteous dealing, began to put
her away, and choose himself an other Mistress: and being then in the
Christmas time, presented his new Mistress, with a new years Gift, in this
sort.
THis little Toye to thee, for want of better shifte,
I here presume for to present, as a small Newyeares gift.
The value small whereof, weigh not I humbly crave,
But take in worth his great good will, whose friendly heart you have.
To use brave vaunting words, will win naught but disdain.
But valiant deeds with words but few, be they that credit gain.
Therefore for to be brief, thus much I do protest,
That if to work your hearts content, within my power it rest:
Command what so thou will, if I deny the same,
God let me never have good look, of any noble Dame.
But you perhaps will think, these words are all but wind:
But do not so: first try, then trust, and fancy as you find.
And let not false suspect, once cause you for to deem,
That there is any one alive, whom I do more esteem.
But as I do protest, so count me your dear friend,
Who lykes, who loves, who honors you: and so I make an end.
A verse or two written Extempore, upon a sighe of a Gentlewoman.
I Sigh to see thee sigh, the just occasion why,
God knows, and I perhaps can guess unhappily.
But whatsoever I think, I mean to let it pass,
And thus in secret sort, to think unto my self (alas)
Poor little seely soul, God quickly comfort thee,
Who could his sighs refrain, a Dame in such sad sort to see:
The cause whereof I guess, but not the remedy:
I would I could a medicine frame, to cure thy mallady.
For if it were in me, or if it (...) be,
To do the thing oh noble Dame, in deed to comfort thee,
My heart, my hand, my sword, my purse, which (though) but small
At your command I offer here, all ready at your call.
Of which if any shrink, when you vouchsafe to try,
As I deserve, disdain me then, and God then let me dye.
And thus from honest heart, as one your faithful friend,
In few unfeigned friendly words, farewell: and so an end.
Finis.
Verses written upon this occasion: a young Gentleman, falling in love with a
fair young Damsel, not knowing how to make manifest unto her, the great good
will he bare her, using certain talk unto her, in the end of her talk
demanded of her, whether she could or no: she answered yea, upon her which
yea, he wrote these verses following, and found time to present them unto her
presently, as he wrote them.
IF thou can read, then mark what here I write?
And what thou readst, believe it to be true:
And do not think, I do but toys indyte,
For it thou mark in time what does ensue,
Then thou ere long, perhaps shall easily find,
The effect of that, that may content thy mind.
And to be plain, I like and love thee well,
And that so well, as better cannot be:
What should I say? I wish that I did dwell,
In place where I thy self might daily see.
That yet at least, I might enjoy her sight,
In whom does rest the sta^ of my delighte.
Finis.
A Gentleman talking on a time with a young Gentlewoman, being apparreled very
plainly, she told him (...) was too plain for him, he must go seek some
gallanter (...) more meet for his tooth: to which, aunswering his mind
afterward, wrote upon the same as follows: and gave them unto her to read.
WHen first I saw thee clad, in couloures black and white,
To gaze upon thy seemly self, I took no small delight.
Thy black betokens modesty, thy white a Uirgins mind,
And happy he may think himself, that such a one can find.
That which is painted out, with colors fresh and gay,
Is of it self but little worth, the colors set away.
But that deserves praise, which of it self alone,
Can show it self in playnest sort, and craves help of none.
What should I further say? let each man choose his choice,
Though some in painted toys delight, in playnnesse I rejoice.
And why? because my self am plain, as you do see,
And therefore to be plain with you, your plainness likes me.
The playnnesse of your mind, and eke your plain attire,
For gaye and gallaunt Cotes is not, the thing that I desire.
But noble gallaunt mind, and yet too there with plain,
For now and the^ in gallant (...), does deep deceit remain.
But for in you fair Dame, both noble gallant mind,
And therewith meaning plain in deed, I now do plainly find.
Choose others what they list, this plainly I protest,
Your gallant mind in plain attire, it is that likes me best.
A comparison between a slippery stone, and a trustlesse friend.
AS he that treades on slippery stones, is like to catch a fall,
So he that trustes to trothlesse friends, shall il be dealt withal.
But he that looks before he leapes, is lykest sure to stand,
So he that tryes or ere he trust, shall be on surer hand.
But once found out a good sure ground, keep there thy footing fast
so charyly keep a faithful friend, whose friendship tried thou have
for as some grounds that seem full sure, in time will much decay
so some false friends yt seem full true, at need will shrink away.
And as within some rotten grounds, some hidden holes we see,
So in the hearts of faithful friends, so many mischiefs be.
Therefore I breefely bid my friends, for to beware in time,
For fear of further after clappes, and so I end my ryme.
A Dolorous discourse.
IF he who lingers forth a loathsome life,
In weary wise, expressed with endless woe:
To whom care still stands (...) hackeling knyfe,
To tear the heart that is tormented so:
Who never felt one hour, nor spark of joy,
But deep lies drownde in Gulf of foul annoy.
Whom Fortune ever frownde on in his life,
And never lent one lucky look at all:
With whom the Moon and Stars are all at strife,
Who all in vain does daily cry and call:
For comfort some, but yet receives none,
But to himself his grief must still bemone.
Whose grief first grew, in time of tender years,
And yet does still continue to this day:
Who all bexent does change, among the Breares,
And still hang fast, and cannot get away:
Who every way which he does seek to go,
Does find some block, that does him overthrow.
Who never was, is not, nor looks to be,
In way of weal, to rid him of his woe:
Who day by day, by proof too plain does see,
That Desteny has sworn it shall be so:
That he must live with torments so oppressed,
And till he die, must never look for rest.
If such a one may well be thought to be,
The only man that knows misery:
I may well say, that I (poor man) am he,
Who daily so do pyne in penury:
Whose heavy heart is so oppressed with grief,
As until death does look for no relief.
To swim and sink, to burn and be a cold,
To hope and fear, to sigh and yet to sing:
And all at once, are lovers fyttes of old,
To many known, to some ^ common thing:
But still to synke, frye, fear, and always sigh,
Are patterns plain, that death approaches nigh.
And do thou then sweet Death approach so near,
Welcome my friend, and ease of all my woe:
A friend in deed, to me a friend most dear,
To ease my heart that is tormented so:
Happy is he who lights on such a friend,
To breed his joys, and cause his greefes to end.
A letter sent by a Gentlewoman in verse, to her Husband being over sea.
WHat greater grief, then leese a cheifest joy?
Then why live I, that lack my chief delight?
My friend I mean, for whom thus in annoy,
In weary wise, I pass both day and night.
For lo, a friend in deepest of distress,
To friend does yield, of every grief redress.
His company does often drive away;
Such doleful thoughts as might tormente the mind:
With friend, a friend, to pass each doleful day,
Of comfort great, may many causes find.
A friend sometime, but with is only sight,
His doleful friend does many times delight.
No greater ease is to some heavy heart,
Yea, when it is with greatest greefes oppressed:
Then trusty friends, to whom for to imparte,
Such cause of grief, as breeds it such unrest.
For often by telling of a doleful tale,
The tongue does ease, the breast of mickle bale.
If heart be glad, what mirth can then be more?
Then when true friends do meet with merry cheer,
The grief forgotte, of absence theirs before,
By presence had, do soddaine joys appear.
What shall I say? as I begone I end,
No joy to love, no grief to loss of friend.
Then my sweet friend in this my deep distress,
Let me enjoy thy company again:
For thou alone must purchase my redress,
And ease my heart, that thus does pyne in pain.
Thou art the friend, that even but with thy sight,
May me poor soul, thy doleful friend delight.
What now can ease my pyning pensive heart,
Thus day and night with torments sore oppreste:
Then unto thee, my friend for to imparte,
Such cause of grief, as breeds me such unrest.
For often by telling of this doleful tale,
My tongue will ease, my breast of mickle bale.
If thou werte here, my heart that now is sad,
To think on thee whose absence breeds my woe:
With thoughts on thee, would soon become so glad,
As should forget those greefes that gripe me so.
And as before, so now again I end,
I fear to dye, for want of thee my friend.
Thou art my friend, chief fr^end, and only Fear,
My Iemme of joy, my Jewel of delight:
God only knows, for thy sweet sake my dear,
How I in dole do pass each day and night.
Come therefore, come, with speed come home again,
To comfort her, that thus does pine in pain.
Thy loving Wife and faithful friend, And so will bide, till life do end.

One sitting in doleful dumpes by himself alone, thinking to have written
some dolorous discourse, was let by occasion: and so for want of time, wrote
but only six lines and left them unfinished: the verses were these. (I like
them, and therefore thought good to place them among other imperfections.)
MY hand here houering stands, to write some pretty toye,
My mourning mind for to delight, y^ wants al worldly joy.
And Fancy offers eke, fine toys for to indite upon,
To comfort thus my heavy heart, that is thus woe begone.
But all in vain, for why? my mind is so oppressed with grief,
As all the pleasures in this world, can lend me no relief.
Finis imperfecta.
A dolorous verse written by him, that in deed was in no small dumpes, when he
wrote them.
IF any man do live of joys berefte,
By heavens I swear, I think that man am I:
Who at this hour no spark of joy have left,
But lead a life in endless mysery.
I sigh, I sobbe, I cannot well express,
The greefes I bide, without hope of redress.
So many are the causes of my grief,
That day by day torments my mourning mind,
As that almost there can be no relief,
To ease my heart, till ease by death I find.
What shall I say? what pangues but I abide?
What pleasure that, but is to me denyde?
What sap of sorrow but I daily taste?
What mite of mirth, that I can once attain?
What foul despite does follow me as fast,
To plague my heart with pangues of deadly pain?
Ten thousand Poets cannot paynt the smarte,
That I abide within my harmless heart.
And why do I by pen then seek to show,
The passing pangues that I do daily bide?
The pangues I paynt by pen (God wot) are few,
Comparde to those, which I on every side,
Am feign to feel: and that is worst of all,
Without all hope of any help at all.
Then you alas, that read this mourning vearse,
Way with your selves what loathsome life I lead:
And let your hearts some spark of pity p^arce,
To see me thus (as one amazde) half dead.
Striving for life, desyring still to dye,
And yet perforce must pyne in penury.
And thus an end of writing here I make,
But not an end of mourning, God he knows:
For when I seek one ^orrow to forsake,
Another grief a new as freshly grows.
So that of force my self I must content,
To dwell in dole, until my days be spent.
Finis.
A Gentleman having made promise unto his Mistress, to come unto her upon a
certain appointed day, to do her service, brake promise with her, but the next
day following, thinking her haste of necessitye so great, but then he might
come soon enough to accomplish such matters as he was wont to do, came:
and confessing his fault of breach of promise, professing it against his will,
showing his earnest desire of more haste, craved pardon and recovery of credit
lost, in verse as follows.
THough yesterday I brake my word, and thereby purchasd blame
Yet now too day, as you may see, I come to keep the same.
And though this be not half enough, my fault to counteruaile,
Yet do not you my word mistrust, though once my promise fails
For if ye knew the urgent cause, that kept me so away,
And therewith saw mine earnest haste, to come again this day
For to recover credit lost: I do my self assure,
With little suit I should ywis, your pardone soon procure.
Well, to be short, I hope no heart is of such crueltye,
But that in an offender, will regard humillitye.
And since that noble Ladies all, are pitiful by kind.
Let some remorce good Lady mine, take root within your mind
And do not me your servant poor, for one small fault disdain,
But let me by my due desarte, your favor get again.
And though yt once I brake my word, in matters of small weight
Yet think not therefore otherwise, in me to rest deceight.
For in a case of credit lo, wherein my word I give,
If that I shrink or eat my word, then God let me not live.
And if in me to do you good, by word or deed it rest,
Unto my power, I solemn vow do make, to d^e my best.
Finis.
A Gentleman being on a time desired of diverse of his friends sitting
together in company, to make some verses, which he granted, and yet not
knowing how to please them al, and yet willing to perform his promise, wrote
as follows.
SOme pleasant heads delight in pretty toys,
And some count toys, most meet for foolish boys.
Some greatly love to hear a merry ryme,
Some stately styles, which do to honor clyme.
Some love no rymes, what ever so they be,
And some men's minds, with verses best agree.
Thus every one has by himself a vain,
Which all to please, it were to great a pain.
Which since I see it is far too much for me,
To write what may with all minds best agree.
I think it best since I have nothing don,
To make an end of that is scarce begone.
So shall I well my promise p^st fulfill,
In writing thus according to my skill.
Which promise made of mine, I trow was this,
To write a ryme, and hear a ryme there is.
Wherein although but little reason be,
Yet ryme ^^^re is, and sense enough for me.
Finis.
A pretty Epigram, upon Wealth and Will.
WHere Wealth does want, there Will can bear no sway,
And where Will wants, there Wealth can make no way.
In many things Wealth greatly rules the roste,
In some things too, self will, will bear a sway.
To win the wager, Wealth will spare no cost,
Which to subuerte, Will works many a way:
And in the end let wealth (...) what he can:
Yet commonly Will stands the stowter man.
A Gentleman marking his Mistress angry countenance without cause, told her
of it in verse as follows.
BY countenance of face a (...) may find,
(I say fair Dame, by outward view of face)
Such sundry thoughts as occupye the mind:
Sometime by one, and este another grace.
Look with that thoughts the mind is aye possessed,
Straight by the l^^kes, the same is plain expr^^^ed.
The frowning face, declares a froward heart,
And skouling brows a sullen stomach shows:
The glauncing looks of privy grutch a part,
Which hidden lies within the heart, God knows.
The staring look declares an earnest mind,
The trouling eye, unconstant as the wind.
The smy^king look declares a merry mind,
When smyling looks are for^^^ from heavy heart:
For some can smyle, that in their hearts could find,
To weep (God wot) of grief to ease their smarte.
But who so smirking smyles with merry cheer,
That counten^unce sh^wes, that some good news is near.
Some fynely use a wincking kind of wyle,
Some look alofte, and some do still look down:
And so^^e can feign a frowning kind of smyle,
And some can smyle that in their hearts do frown,
And so do I, and so do many more,
That laugh sometime, when we could weep for woe.
But every look, a meaning does declare,
Some good, some had, some merry, and some sad:
The countenance shows how every one does fare,
Some grief, some joy, some sullen, and some mad.
And though that many be by looks deceived,
Yet by the looks, are meaninges plain perceived.
Finis.
Some other Gentlewomen in the company, angry with this toye: pleased with
these pretty verses following,
AH be not angry so, my words were but in jest,
And more then that, I meant them not, by you I do protest.
I saw no looks to light, nor frowning overmuch,
Nor any such like sullein looks, as might show inward grutch.
Nor smyling wantonly, but with such modesly,
As might declare a merry mind, but with sobriety.
But such as seem to p^ute, without just cause in deed,
Or else upon their friends will fayn, a frowning more then need.
Or giglet like will laugh, or else with anger swell,
And deal in looks disdaynfully, with them that wish them well
Gaynst such it is I wright, but none of you are namde,
Then do not you accuse your selves, and you may go vnblamde.
And this what I have said, take well in worth therefore,
If I did ill against my will, I will do so no more.
A pretty toye written upon Time.
AS I of late this other day, lay musing in my bed,
And thinking upon sundry toys, that then came in my head.
Among the rest I thought upon, the setting out of Time,
And thinking so upon the same, I wrote this ragged ryme.
Time is set out with head all balde, save one odde^lock before,
Which lock if once you do let slip, then look for Time no more.
But if you hold him fast by that, and stowtly do him stay,
Then shall ye know how he does pass, before he go his way.
And if you keep him tide by that, good service will he do,
In every work what so it be, that you will put him to.
So that you look unto his work, that he not idle stand:
For if he do, some Knauish work, himself will take in hand.
And the^ twere better want the knave, the^ have him serve you so
When you do think he does you good, yt he should work your woe.
I read besides he painted is, with wings forsooth to fly,
And Mower like with Sithe in hand, and working earnestly.
And in his work still singing thus: This da^e I boldly say,
Save Virtue, all things I cut down, that stand within my way.
But Virtue never will decay, she goes before me still,
But since I cannot, let her stand, I Will cut else where my fill.
But it is no matter, hold him fast, by that same lock I say,
And neither words, nor yet his wings, shall help him get away.
By chance my self have caught him fast, but eue^ this other day,
And by that lock I hold him fast, for slipping yet away.
And by that lock as thus aduisde, I mean to hold him so,
But I will know or ere he pass, which way he means to go.
And since I caught him so, I think he has not idle stood,
But somewhat he is doing still, although but little good.
And as this morning I by chance, did see him idle stand,
I thought it good to make him take, a Pen and Inck in hand.
And having little else to do, to spend a little time,
In true description of himself, to pen this trifling ryme.
Which time nor well, nor yet ill spent, stands til an other time,
Some better service for to do, and so I end my rhyme.
A pretty Discourse of a hunted Heart, Written by a Gentleman, unto his
Mistress.
TO read a doleful tale, that tells of naught but grief,
And of a man that pynes in pain, and looks for no releese.
Whose hope of death seems sweet, and dread of life seems sower,
Who never bid one merry month, one week, one day, or hour.
In such a tale I say, if any do delight,
Let him come read this verse of mine, that here for troth I wright.
And though the speech seem dark, the matter shall be plain,
And he pore wretch of who^ it treates, to well does feel the pain.
A pretty Discourse of a hunted Heart.
THere is a pretye Chase, wherein does rest a Heart,
Wherein for his abode (poor wretch) he keeps one only part.
Adjoining to this chase, there is a pretty place,
where stands a Lodge, wherein does dwell, the Lady of the chase.
This Lady now and then for sport, sometime for spite,
To hunt this s^lly harmless Heart, does take a great delight.
And how? with hounds (alas) and when she huntes for sport^,
With little Whelps that cannot bite, she hunts him in this sort.
Two little whelps I say she casts of at once,
To course and eke to fear him with, as meetest for the nonce.
And with these little whelps, she bringes him to the bay
And then at bay she takes them up, and let him go his way.
And if for spite she hunt, she takes another way:
She casts of no little whelps, to bring him to the bay.
But cruel biting Curres: at once she castes of all,
And with those cruel cankred Curres, she follows him to fall:
And being (fallen poor wretch) pyning in extreme pain,
She casts of her cruel curres, and lets him rise again
Until she hunts again, to make her self like sport,
And then even as she is disposde, she huntes him in like sort.
Thus lives this harmless Heart, oppressed with endless woe,
In danger still of death by Dogs, and yet cannot dye so.
And neither day nor night, he feeds but in fear,
That these same Dogs should lie in wait, to course him every where.
Thus restless restes this Heart, and knows not how to rest,
Whose hope of death in midst of course, is it that likes him best.
God send him better rest, or speedy death at least,
To rid him of his great unrest, and breed him quiet rest.
The meaning of the Tale.
BUt whereto tendes this Tale? what first may mean this Chase?
And then the Heart, which in ye same does keep one only place?
The Plot where stands the Lodge, the Lodge, and then the Dame,
which hunts the Heart: and last the Dogs which do pursue the game?
A meaning all they have: which meaning I must show?
And that so plain as in each point, the meaning you may know.
My Carkase is the Chase, my Heart the sellye Heart:
Which for his rest, my woeful breast, does keep that only part.
The Platte where stands the Lodge, my Head I count that place:
My Mind the Lodge, my Love the Dame, and Lady of the Chase.
Her Dogs of diverse kinds, that do my Heart pursue,
Sometime to baye, sometime to fall, are these that do ensue.
And first the Dogs, with which she huntes sometime for sport
To bring my Heart unto the baye, and leave him in that sort.
Are these believe me now: Discountenaunce is the first.
The second is Discourtes^e, and of the two, the worst.
Discountenaunce he comes first, and fears me in this wise:
He hangs his lyppe, holds down his head, and looks under his eyes.
And with that angry look, he fears me in such sort,
That I may not abide the same, and then begins the sport.
For then she casts of Discourtesse that Curre:
And then do what I can, alas, my Heart begins to stir.
And weerie half at last, I stand with them at baye:
and so at baye for my defense: I somewhat gynne to say.
Which said, she then takes of those hylding Curres again.
And leave me till she hunt again, thus pyning all in pain:
And now the Cruel Curres, with which she takes delight,
To hunt my Heart even till he fall, are these: not first, Despite,
But foul Disdain: then he, which Curres do course him so,
That to the fall they bring me often, and yet then let me go:
So that my Heart does live, but how? alas, in dread
Of these same deuillish Dogs: and so still shall, till I be dead.
Who would not blame this Dame, that thus without desert.
With these her cruel cankred Curres, does hunt this seely Heart,
And curse those cruel Curres, that thus do make her sport:
Both day and night without cause why, do hunt him in such sort.
And wish this seely Heart with endeles griefs oppressed,
To escape the danger of the Dogs, and find some quiet rest,
But wish who li^t to wish, except that you, dear Dame,
Among the rest do wish that wish, no wish will help the same.
But if that you in deed, so wish among the rest,
And heartily do wish that wish, your wish will help him best.
FINIS.
A strange Dream.
Who so he be on earth, that wisely can divine
Upon a Dream: come show his skyl, upon a Dream of mine,
Which if that well he mark, sure he shall find therein,
Great mysteries I gage my life, which Dream did thus begin.
ME t^ought I walked too and fro, upon a hilly land,
So long, tell even with weariness, I could well scarcely stand
And weery so (me thought) I went to lean against an Oak,
Where leaning but awhyle, me thought, the tree in pieces broke.
From which, me thought, to save my life I lightely skipt away,
And at the first, the sight thereof my senses did dismay:
But when I stayed so a while, and looked round about,
And saw no other dreadful sight, I knew not what to doubt,
But to some house (me thought) alas, I wished my self full feign:
But when I look, and could not see one house upon the plain:
Good Lord (thought I) where am I now* what desert place is this
How came I here? what shall I do* my heart full fearful is.
And therewithal (me thought) I ^^ll flat down upon my knee:
And humble prayers made to God, on high to comfort me.
And praying so, upon my knees, me thought, there did appear
A gallaunt Lady, all in white, with merry joyful ch^^re,
Holding a Citterne in her hand, wherewith to me she came:
And gave it me desiring me, to play upon the same.
More half afeard, to see this sight, O Lady fair quoth I.
My skyll too simple is, God wot, to sound such hermony.
Yet play quoth she, the best thou can, it shall suffice I say,
Do thy good will, I crave no more, and therefore (pray thee) play.
With that, me thought, I took the same, and sounded by and by,
Not knowing what I did myself, a Heavenly hermony,
Unto which tune the Lady then, so sweet a song did sing:
As if I could remember it, it were a Heavenly thing.
Of all which song one only step I still d^e bea^^ in mind,
And that was this: There is no joy, unto (...) of mind,
No plague, to pride: no woe, to want: no grief, to lucklesse love:
No foe to fortune: friend to God: no truth, till ^^yall prove.
No Serpent, to sclaunderous tongue: no corsey unto care.
No loss, to want of liberty: no griefs, to Cupids snare.
No fool, to fickle fantasy, that turns with every wind.
No torment, unto Ielosy, that still disturbes the mind.
Lo, this was all I bare in mind, the rest I have forgot:
Unto my grief, O God he knows: but since I have it not,
Well, let it pass: this Lady fair when she had sung her song,
She laid me down a Napkin fair upon the ground along:
As white as snow: which when I saw, I m^zed what she meant:
But, then (me thought) from thence, again a little space she went,
And calde me thus? hoe maids I say? when will you come away.
It Is time that dinner ready were: it is very nere middaye:
Wherewith, me thought, from out no house, but from a bushy bancke.
came out eight Damsels, all in white: two and two in a rank:
In order right: and every one, a fine Dish in her hand,
Of sundry meats, some this, some that, and down upon the land:
They laid me down their Delycates, whereas this Napkin lay*
Which done, four of the^ stayed still, the rest went straight away,
Unto the place from whence they came, the Bushy Bank (I mean)
And suddenly, I wot not how, they all were vanished clean.
But, to go onwardes with my Dream, in order brief I will,
To make discourse of these four Dames, behind that stayed still,
First, one of them fell down on knee, and solempnely said Grace:
Another, she with Pleasant Herbs, bestrowed all the place.
The third* she with a Basin fair* of water sweet did stand,
The fourth, demurely stood, and bare a Towell in her hand,
I standing still, as one amazd, to see so strange a sight:
Yet seeing nothing, but might serve my mind for to delyght,
The Lady (Mistress) of them all, that kept her Royal seat
Rose up, and coming toward me, did greatly me entreat,
To come unto her stately b^^rde: seeing me still yet to stand
Amazed so, s^e (...) he^ self, and took me by the hand.
Come on, and (...) down, quoth she, be not afraid I say,
And ^ate quoth (...), for well I know, thou have not dinde to day.
Fair Dame, quoth I* I cannot eat, my stomach serves me not,
Therefore I pardon crave: quoth she, thou art affraide I wot:
To see this service here so strange: indeed, it is strange to thee,
For men, but (...), or none, d^e come our service here to see.
And h^^py ^hou m^ist think thy self, that thou ^amst here this day,
For ^ery few (...) byll, can hap to hit the way.
We live within these desert woods, like Ladies all alone,
With M^sicke, passing forth the day, and ^ellows we have none,
We are not like the wretches of the world, in many a place,
That many si^es, for fear or shame, dare scarsly show their face.
We spend the day in fine disport, sometime, with Music sweet,
Sometime with Hunting of ye Heart, sometime, as we think meet,
With other Pastimes, many one: sometime with pleas^nt talk.
We pass ye time, sometime for sport, about the Fyelds we walk,
With Bow and Arrows (Archar like,) to kill the stately Dear,
Which being slain, we roste and bake, and make our selves good cheer
Our meat, we roste again the Sun, we have none other fire,
Sweet water Springs, do yield us drink, as good as we desire.
For herbs and roots, we have great store, here growing in the wood,
wherewith we many dainties make, as we our selves think good*
In Summer time, our Houses here: are Arbers made of Trees,
About the which in summer time, do swarm such Hiues of Be*
As leaves us then, of honey sweet, such store as well does serve,
In steed of Sugre, all the year, our fruictes for to preserve.
Besides, they yield us store of wax which from the Hiues we take:
And for our lights, in winter nights, we many Torches make.
For then our houses all are Caves, as well thy self shall see,
UUhen thou have dinde, for I my self, will go and show them thee,
Therefore, be bold and fear no more, for thou ^halt go with me,
From perils al, within this place, I will safeconduct thee:
And taste of one of these same herbs, which thou thy self likst best,
The fairest flower, trust me often times* is not the hulsomme^^.
But as for these same herbs, or flowers, (...)*
There is not one, but is right good, (...)
Take where thou list I give thee leave* (...)
pull of thy gl^ue, and wash thy hands. (...) maid broug^t m^
A basin fair, of water clear, which ga^^ (...) so sweet:
That credit me, me thinks almost, that I do smell it yet.
UUherein I softly dipped my hands, and straight to wipe the same,
Upon her arm, a towel brought, an other gallant dame.
Of whom. I could none other do, but take in court^ous sort,
UUith humble thanks, for service such, and so for to be short.
UUith reverence done, unto the Dame, who kept her (...) seat*
I sat me down: and hongerly (me thought) I fell to eat.
First of a S^let, that me thought, hard by my trencher stood:
UUhereof at first, me thought the taste, was reasonable good.
But being down, if left (alas) a bitter tang behind:
Then that I left, and thought to taste, some herbs of other kind,
And there withal, I began of her, in humble sort to crave,
The root, that I had tasted so, what name the same might have*
It is Repentance root, quoth she, whose taste, though bitter be:
Yet in the Spring time, wholesome ^is* and very rare to see:
But, in the end of all the year, when it is nothing worth*
In every foolish field it grows, to show the branches forth.
But, if the taste thou lykest not, then set away the same,
And taste of somewhat else, quoth she, and straight (at hand) a Dame.
Stood reedy by, at her command, to take the Dish away:
Which done, then of an other herb, I began to take a say,
Which better far did please my taste, whereof I fed o^ well.
Good Lady, quoth I, of this herb vouchsafe to me to tell
The proper name? This wholesome herb: is called Hope (quoth she)
And happy ^e who of this herb, can get a piece of me,
This herb preserues the life of man, even at poincte of death.
when they are speechles, often times, this herb does l^nd the^ breath.
This drives Despair, from brainsick heds, this salueth many a sore:
This is releife, to every grief, what virtue can be more?
Feed well thereon, quoth she, and thou shall ^^nde such ease of mind,
As by no means, but only that, is possible to find.
O Lady fair quoth I, I humble thanckes do yeilde,
For this thy friendly favor great, but now, if to the fyelde,
Whereas this herb so rare does grow, if you will deigne (fair dam^)
(...) to conducte: and show me eake, the true root of the same,
Twice happy shall I think my self, that thus by chance I found,
So courteouse a noble Dame, and such a fertyl ground.
The root (quoth she) yes, thou shall see, when thou have dinde anon,
Both root and herb and ^ake the ground, which it does grow upon.
Dine Lady, quoth I, I have dinde: this herb has fyld me so,
That when you will, I ready am unto that ground to go.
Which gr^unde, and roo^e for to behold, I have so great desire,
That till I see the sam^, me thinks, my heart is still on fire.
Well, then quoth she, since after it I see thou longest so,
I will my dinner shorter make, and with thee I will go,
And bring thee to the place, where thou both root and herb shall see:
And gather eake a piece thereof, and bear away with thee.
And therewith from the boorde she rose, and took me by the hand,
And led me overthwart, me thought, a piece of new digd land,
And so from thence into a wood, in midst whereof, me thought:
She brought me to a great wild Maze, which sure was never wrought
By Gardeners hands, but of it self, I rather guess it grew,
The order of it was so strange, of troth, I tell you true.
Well, in, into this Maze we went: in midst whereof we found,
In comely order, well cut out, a pre^y piece of grownde,
The portrayture whereof, was like the body of a man,
which viewing well, forthwith me thought this Lady began*
To kneel her down upon the ground, hard by the body lo,
and there she showed me the herb, that I desired so:
And ^ake the order how it grew* which viewing well at last,
She brake a piece, and gave it me to take thereof a taste,
Fresh from ye ground: which d^n straight way, well now ye root quoth she,
Thou look for: but stay a while, and th^^ it straight shall see,
The root is like an other root^, but only that in n^^e:
In difference from all other roots: and to declare the same,
When thou have seen it* thou shall know: ^ therwithal quoth she*
Come here, behold the root which thou desire so to see:
And therewith digging up a (...), she (...) very pl^^ne,
The fashion of it how it grew, and (...) she (...) again
The Turfe in place, whereas it was: O Lady fair quoth I.
If one should seem to cut the root, (...) ^ould y^ herb then dye?
No no quoth she, until the root be plucked quite a^ay:
the root it self, ^^ sure of this* will never quite (...).
Then would I cr^^^ a piece thereof (quoth ^) O (...) D^^e.
That I may know it, if again, I cha^^^e to ta^^e the same.
The taste quoth she unpleasant is, I tell thee that before:
But where the root. does rancor breed* ye herb^ will (...) the sor^.
But yet to make thee for to know, the taste thereof, quoth she,
She raisde the Turfe, and of the root she brake a piece for me:
And down she laid the same again, in order as she found.
That scarsely well it could be seen, that she had raisde ye ground.
Well, I had my desire therein, but tasting of the same,
It was so bitter in my mouth, that to allaye the same,
I was full glad to take the herb: which as the Dame did say,
The bitter taste of that vile root, did quickly drive away.
And then in humble sort, quoth I, O fair and courteous Dame,
Since that this root, (as you do say) does differ much in nam^
From other roots, O let me know what his true name may be*
His name quoth she, Necessity is, truly credit me*
And of these Roots, some less then some: but bigger that they be,
The more does Hope spread forth his leaves: and some do go with me.
Now I have shown thee thy desire, this herb, this ro^te, and ground,
I back again will bring thee to ye place, where first thy self I found.
So to be short, we b^cke returnde unto the place again,
From whence we went, where sitting still, attendant did remain
These four fair Dames, whom there we left: But al y^ dishes they,
And what else on the Boorde was left, they al had borne away.
Well, being come unto the place, up rose they all at once:
And to this Lady reverence did, and lykely for the nonce.
They knew their Mistress mind right well, her use belike it was,
Of water clear upon the ground, they full had set a Glass.
Hard by the Glass, a Towell fair, and by the Towell, Flower^:
Lo, Youth quoth she, how likst thou now this service here of ours?
Coul^st thou thus like, to live in woods, and make thy chief repaste?
On herbs* and roots, as we do here? or else the life thou haste?
Troubled, tormented, every hour, and that with endless grief?
In ^ope of help* and now again, dispayring in relief?
Still to reserve? We here thou see, do live in quietness:
We pass the time without all care, in mirth and ioyfulnesse.
We fear no foe, we feel no woe, we dread no dangers great,
we quake not here, with too much cold, nor burn with extreem heat.
UUe wish not for great heaps of gold, such trash we do despise,
We pray for health, and not for wealth: and thus in pleasant wise
UUe spend the day full joyfully, we crave no rytch attire:
This thin white weed, is even as much, as we do here desire.
UUee have our Music sweet besides, to sollace now and than
Our weery minds, with other sports: and now, how say thou man!
If thou may have thy choice, which would thou rather do?
Lead here thy life, like one of us, or else return unto
The loathsome life, that now thou leadst? pause on this that I say*
If the one thou choose, here tarry still: if the other, hence away.
Thou must return from whence thou comst, I put it to thy choice:
If the one thou choose: of thy good hap, thou ever may rejoice:
But if thou choose amysse: poor wretch, then thank thy self therefore,
Consider well, upon my words: as yet I say no more.
With that more half amazd^ hereat still standing in a muze,
Not knowing what were best, to do, to take or to refuze
The proffer made me by this Dame, I humblye fell on knee:
Beseeching God, to grant me of his grace, to govern me,
To make me choose that choice, ye best might please his holy will:
And sitting so in humble wise, on knee thus praying still,
The Dame expecting earnestly, some answer at my hand.
So long, quoth she, upon this choice: why do you studying stand?
Some answer briefly let me have, what ever so it be:
What? will thou back return again? or will thou bide with me?
One way fair Dame, quoth I, I gladly here would stay,
And lead my life here still with you: but now, another way,
Reason persuades me, to return: thus in a doubt twixt both,
I one way lou^, the life I led: another way I loath.
So that remaining thus in doubt, a certain answer for to give,
Whether back again for to return, or in these wods to live
I most desire, I cannot sure: therefore I pardon crave,
And for an answer flat, I may some longer respit have?
O no quoth she, I cannot grant thee longer time, not now
To pause upon these words of mine: and therefore since that thou
Wylt back return, lo, here behold, this narrow foot path here,
Go follow this, until thou comst unto a Temple near:
Then leave this pathe, and presently, cross over to the same:
And there for further help from thence, your prayers humbly frame
Unto Dame Pity, and her tell, that straight from me you came,
And she will help you for my sake, Dame Patience is my name,
And for a token true, that you were sent to her by me:
Say, Patience, will Pity move, and she will credit thee:
And so farewell, when thou have ben, a year or more away,
If thou will hither make return, and be content to stay,
Though thou be wounded many a way, and plagde with many a sor^
thou shall have ease of every greef: and the^ what would have more?
And so my Youth quoth she, adue, I may no longer stay,
Have good regard to this foot path, for fear thou go astray:
And for a farewell, ear thou go, to me thy courteous friend,
In song come bear a part with me, which being at an end,
Then fare thou well: and therewithal an Instrument she took,
And bade one of her Maids with speed* go fetch her forth a book,
Which term^d was, The trackt of time, which by ^ by me thought,
Ere one could well say, thus it was: in humble wise she brought,
UUith such an humble reverence, down to this noble Dame:
That sure it would have do^^ one good, for to have seen the same.
UUell, opening the Book of Songs, and looking well therein:
At last she stayde, and on she playde, which Song did thus begin.
Who seeks far in Time shall find, great choice of sundry change,
In Time a man shall pass the Pikes, of peryls wondrous strange:
But he that trauaileth long Time, to seek content of mind,
And in the end in trackt of Time* his own desire shall find,
And being well, is not content, to keep him where he is.
His Time is lost, unworthy he to find the place of bliss:
One Time, a fault may be forgeuen, but if thou once obtain
the place of res^: mark well the way, unto the same again.
For if thou once do miss the way, or have the same forgot,
thou wander may, a tediouse Time, and near the near, God wot:
Therefore in Time I warn thee well to have a great regard:
the way thou go, for to return, for trust me it is hard.
And so for want oflonger Time, I needs must make an end,
take ^ime enough, mark well thy way, and so farvvel my friend.
Till ^ime, I see thee here again, which ^ime let me not see,
till Time thou can content thy self, to spend thy Time with me:
And so take ^ime while ^ime will serve, else ^ime will slyp away,
So once again adewe quoth she, I can no longer stay.
With y^ me thought this heavenly Dame, with all her maids was gone:
And I poor soul* upon the hill, was left so al alone:
Where taking heed, unto the path, which she had shewde me so,
Cross overthwart the hill (me thought) I began to go:
At foot whereof, hard by the path, me thought a River ran,
and down ye stream in a small boat, me thought there came a man
And by and by he calde to me, to ask me if I would,
Come take a boat to cross the stream? and if I would, I should:
Now cross the river straight (me thought) I saw a beaten way,
Lykely to lead unto some Town, whereat I began to stay:
But naught I said: and therwithal (me thought) I plain did see,
The Dame who late had left me quite, approaching near to me.
And being near come to me, me thought she stoutly said,
why do you lose your labor so? what cause has here you stayde?
Keep on your way, and lose no Time, and happy sure art thou,
Thou tookst not boat or ere I came? but quite past danger now:
My self will bring thee thither, where the Temple thou shall see,
whereto I gave thee charge to go, and so (me thought) quoth she,
Come follow me, and by and by no great way we had gone.
But straight she brought me to the hill, this Temple stood upon.
And there (me thought) these words she said. Go knock at yo^der door
And say thou art a seely vvight, cast up on sorrovvers shore:
Brought in the Bark of vvearie b^l^, cast up by waves of vvoe,
The Bark is burst, thou saude alive, do wander too and froe.
To seek some place of quiet rest, and vvandring so about
The hyl of Hope, where Patience, dvvels, by chance thou foundest out,
From whom thou presently do come a message to declare.
Bear this in mind, thou shall get in, well warrant thee I dare.
And when thou comst into the Church, mark well on the right hand*
within the Quyre all cladde in why^e, does Lady Pity stand.
To whom with humble reverence. say this for thy behoue*
I do believe that Patience, in time will Pity move.
And thus this lesson I thee leave, which if thou hear in mind,
Assure thy self* straight at her hands, some favor for to find.
And thus, quoth she, again farewell, though me no more thou see,
Till back thou do return again, yet I will be with thee,
And guide thee so, where so thou go, that thou thy self shall see,
In many Melancholic moodes, thou shall be help^^ by me.
And therwithall, I know not how, she vanished away,
And I unto the Temple straight, began to take my way.
And to the door, as I ^ad charge me thought I came.
And took the ring* in my hand* and knocked at the same:
Who knocks at the door, quoth one? A silly vvight, quoth I,
Cast up of late* on sorrovves shore, by tempests soddenly:
Brought in the bark of weary bale, cast up by waves of vv^e,
Since when, to seek some place of rest, I vvandred too and froe,
And vvandring so, I knevve not how, unto a mount I came,
Whereas I found in comely sort, a noble courteous Dame:
The Mount is called, the Hyl of Hope, where does Dame Patience dwell:
From whom I come: Welc^me quoth he, I know the Lady well.
With that the door, was opened, and in (me thought) I went,
Wherewith me thought, I hard a voice, a sobbing sighe that sent,
Wherewith somewhat amazd, at first though greatly not afraid,
Still staring round about (awhile) this stately Church, I stayde:
And as before Dame Patience, to me at parting told,
Within the Quier, on the right hand (me thought) I did behold
A gallant Dame, all clad in white, to whom for my behoue,
These words I said: Dame Patience, I Hope will Pity move:
With that (me thought) this Lady said, I know thy deep distress,
and for my friend Dame Patience sake, thou shall have some redress.
And therewithal, me thought she said, unto an aged sire,
Which in the Temple, hard by sat: Father I thee desire
To show this Youth, the perfect path unto the place of rest,
Who long has wandered up and down, with torments sore oppressed,
Dame Patience, has stood his friend, and sent him unto me,
To lend him help unto this place, where he desires to be:
Lady quoth he, I cannot go my self abroad to day,
But I will send, my servant here, to show him the right way:
Whose company, if he will keep, believe me he shall find
In little time, a place that may right well content his mind.
Which if he do not, yet let him, with him return to me,
And then my self, will go with him: it shall suffice quoth she*
Go sir, quoth she, follow well, his man where so he goes,
And take good heed, that in no wise, his company you loose:
For if you lose* his company, you lose your labor quite.
But follow him, your gain parhaps, your trauyle shall requite.
His name quoth she, True Reason is, my Father Wisdoms man,
Whom if you follow to the place of rest, conduct you can.
So sir, quoth she, go your ways, be ruled by him I say:
And though ^e lead you now and the^, through some unpleasant way
Yet follow him, where so he goes, do as I bid you do:
And he in time, the perfect place of rest, can bring thee too.
And so, farewell Lady, quoth I, I humble thanks do give,
To you and eke this good old man: and sure while I do live,
You two I vow, and eke besides the noble courteous Dame,
That sent me hither unto you, Dame Patience by name:
In heart I ever honor will: And honest Reason lo.
For taking pains unto the place of rest, with me to go,
To recompense his pains, I vow, to stand his faithful friend,
To follow him, and to be ruled by him unto mine end.
And if I seek to slyppe from him, I wylling aye will be,
That as he list, he shall do due correction upon me.
So Lady, I my leave do take: And therewithal, me thought,
The good old m^n, fast by the hand unto the door me brought*
And at the door (me thought) did part, this good old man and I,
And Reason* he came stepping forth, to bear me company:
Or else to lead me to the place, whereas we then should go:
But as in every merry mood, does hap some sudden woe.
So in this Dream, as we (me thought) were going on our way*
I know not well, at what (alas) we soddainly began stay.
And staying so, a Phesant Cock, hard by me I began see,
Which flying by me, crew so loud, as that he waked me.
And thus my Dream was at an end: which when that I awooke,
I took my pen, and as you see, I put it in my book.
Which for the strangeness of the same, surely persuades me:
It does some strange effect pretend, what ever so it be.
THe huge high Mountain first of all? and then the broken Tree?
And then the Lady soddainly, that did appear to me?
The Napkin lying on the ground? and then the Dames that (...),
In order so, with Dishes all, unto this noble Dame?
And wherefore only four of them, went back again away:
And other four attendaunt still, upon this Dame did stay?
And what should mean the giving of the Cytter^e, unto me
to play upon? and that my self should sound such Harmony,
Which never playde on like before? and then the Song that she,
Unto the tune that I so playde, did sweetly sing to me.
Then what should mean the order that, the Maidens did observe*
As they upon this stately Dame, attendaunt still did serve?
The Basin, Towel, and the Flowers, wherewith she strawd ye place?
And one alone among the rest, so humbly saying Grace?
What meant her stately keeping, of her royal Princely sca^e?
And what she meant by bydding me, to wash before I eat?
And when as one amazed so: she did behold me stand:
What she should mean to rise her self, and take me by the hand?
Then what should mean the bitter root, that first I fed upon:
And tasting of the herb of Hope, the bitter taste was gone?
Then what should mean my great desire, to see that herb to grow:
And how the Lady led me straight: whereas she me did show
The herb, the root, the ground and all? and why I then did crave,
Of that same root or ere I went, a little taste to have?
Then what should mean the cutting up the Turfe, to let me see
the root? and then then the breaking of a piece thereof for^ me?
Then what should mean ye laying down, the Turfe eue^ as she found,
So closely as could scarce be seen, that she had styrde the ground?
And then what meant, the great wild Maze, the Image of a man,
Whereas it grew? and after that our back returning than?
What meant the glass of water, that at our return we found:
The towel and the flowers best^es, down lying on the ground?
Then what Dame Patience should mean, for to demand of me.
How I did like her service there, and whether I could be
Content to live with her or not, or back return to choose:
And that she put it to my choice, to take or to refuse?
And back returnde to my old life, then what she meant to say:
If well I chose, I might rejoice, for to have seen that day?
If contrary why then I might, but thancke my self therefore?
And bad me pause upon her words, and then would say no more?
Then what should mean my kneeling so, and praying then of mine
To God for grace, to take and choose, to please his will divine?
Then what the Lady meant in have, as I was kneeling so,
To ask to that she did demand, an answer yea or no?
Then what my doubtful answer meant, and pardon I did crave,
That for an answer flat, I might some longer respit have?
And why she would no respit give? then what the path way mea^t?
And what she meant, in that she me, unto the Temple sent?
The lesson that she gave me then? and then Dame Pity too?
And what besides at the Church door, she further bad me do?
Then at our parting, the sweet song, which ra^ne of Time so much?
what y^ should mean, and what should mean, our choice of music such?
Her song once done, what then should mean the vanishing away,
Wherewith my self at first awhyle, amazed so did stay?
But going onwardes, on my way, what meant the river then,
That ran so near the path? and then the Boat? and then the man?
And then what should be meant in that, he called so to me,
To take a boat, to cross the stream? the way that I did see:
Lykely to lead unto some Town? what too was meant by that,
Whereto I made no answer, but, I stayed looking at?
And then again, what meant the Dame, who vanished away,
To come unto me there again, and what she meant to say.
I happy was, I had not taken a Boat, or ere she came:
And how from thence, with me unto the Temple near she came?
Then what should mean the lesson, that she gave me for to say,
At the Church door? and then again, he^ vanishing away?
Then what should mean the stately Church? and as I said before,
The lesson, that I did rehearse, when I came to the door?
Then what should mean ye sight I heard? then what ye Lady mea^t,
Apparrelled in white, to whom Dame Patience had me sent.
Then what my kneeling meant to her? and then my words I said?
And that at my first entering in, I was so much afraid?
And what should mean the answer then, the Lady gave to me:
And how that from Dame Patience, I came she did well see?
Then what should mean her saying, that she knew right well my grief?
And for Dame Patience sake, I should be sure to find relief?
Then what should mean the aged man, of whom she did request,
To take the pains, to bring me to the place of quiet rest?
Then what the old man ^^ant to say, he could not go that day,
But he would send his serua^nt then, to bring me on the way?
Then what the Lady meant to say, that should as then suffice:
And charging me his company, to keep in any wise?
And then what meant the Lady then, to bydde me farewell so?
And the^ what meant this old man's man, that forth with me did go?
And then my thanks unto the Dame, and to the good old man?
And to Dame Patience, my friend? and eke our parting than
at the Church door, with ye old sire? And the^ what should be mea^t
By him that for to bring me to the place of Rest was sent?
And then what should be meant by this, in going of our way?
I know not how, but soddainly, we both at once began stay.
And last of that accursed Cock: what should the meaning be,
That in his flying crew so loud: as that he waked me.
Which Cock, I am persuaded sure, if that he had not been:
Some wo^drous sight in travailing, I doubtl^sse should have seen.
And that which grieves me most of all, the place of quiet rest:
That man would sure have brought me too, where now with grief oppressed,
I must perforce live as I do: and only have this ease,
To pray unto Dame Patience, my sorrrowes to appease.
Who promisde me at parting last: that though I her not see,
Long time again, in open sight, yet she would be with me.
And guide me so from place to place, where ever so I go:
That I by her shall find great ease, of many a deadly woe.
In hope whereof, thus as you see, my weary life I spend,
till I the place of rest attain and so I make an end.
This Dream is strange, and sure I think it does Pronosticate,
Some strange effect, what so it is: but since I know not what
It does pretend: I still will will pray, to God me to defend,
In dangers all both day and night, unto my lives end.
And when this loath some life I end, with torments so oppressed*
In heaven I may at latter day, enjoy a place of rest.
FINIS.
A pretty toye written upon this Theme: A man a sleep, is not at rest.
ALthough the heart a sleep, the bones be all at rest,
Yet man asleep, his mind his often with many thoughts oppressed.
He dreams of this and that, sometime with trifling toys,
His only mind is troubled sore: sometime of pleasant joys
His mind does run in sleep: sometime he dreams of Kings,
Of Princes Courts, and princely feats, and of such galant things.
And by and by, is out, in midst of all his dream,
And from the court, to country Clowns, and of a mess of cream:
Of Cattle in the feelde, of woods and pasture grounds,
Of Hawking, fyshing, Fowling too, and hunting hare with hou^ds.
And sodeinly unawares, he leaves his country sport,
And from the country by and by, to city does resort.
And there a thousand things at once, runs in his mind,
The gallant shops of sundry sorts, and wares of sundry kind.
The precious pearls and stones, on Goldsmiths shops that shine:
And then the Horsehead, but hard by, and then a cup of wine.
Besides all gallant shows, yet one above the rest,
The Merchants wives, with other dames, in fine attire adrest,
That at their doors, sometime on Sundays use to sit,
This when some do behold by day, by night they dream of it.
And then they fall in love, although their suit be small,
For in the morning once awakte, they have forgoten all.
Some dream of cruel wars, of men slain here and there,
And all the fields with bodies dead, nie covered every where.
And by and by the wars, not scarcely half begone,
But who does get the victory, and then the wars are done.
And sodeinly again, he cannot tell which way,
He is at sea, and there he sees great Fyshes gin to play.
And straight a tempest comes, that makes the waves to rore,
And then he sees how the Ships, do sail in danger sore.
Anon he sees his ship, with billows beaten so,
That comes at last a sodeine wave, that does her overthrow.
And there both she, and all her Mariners are dround:
Yet he himself, he knows not how, is safely set on ground.
He only is at shore, when all the rest are lost,
And there he sees how other ships, with tempests like are tossed.
And there he stands not long, but straight a suddayne change,
He carried is, he knows not how, into a country strange.
And there he speaks a speech, he never spoke before,
And once awake, again perhaps, he never shall speak more.
A thousand things too more, a man does think to see
In sleep sometimes, that never were, nor yet are like to be.
For I my self, have dreamde in sleep, of sightes so strange,
And in the midst of all my dream, of sudden sundry change.
That in the morn awake, I could but merueile much,
What cause by day, by night should drive, me into dreaming such.
But sitting so a while, sometime I call to mind,
A proverb old, which some count true, but I mere false do find.
That is. That man a sleep does lie at quiet rest,
For many sleep, yt have their minds, with many greefs oppressed
Some dream of Parents death, or death of some dear friend,
Some dream of sorrows to ensue, and pleasures at an end.
And dreaming so I think, that man is not at rest,
Although he sleep, his heart is yet, sore troubled in the breast.
The Boy that goes to School, does dream of Rods by night,
His breech too ready for the rod, and in a sudden fright
He starteth in his sleep, and waketh therewithal,
And then say I, although he sleep, his rest can be but small.
Some think in sleep they are, in field with foe at fight,
And with their fysts, they buffet them, that lie with the^ by night
And are they then at rest? although they sleep say you,
In deed they have a kind of rest, but rest I wot not how.
And many causes more, of great unquiet rest,
I could declare that are in sleep, but these that are expressed
May well suffice I hope, to prove my judgment good in this,
That mind of man is troubled much, when most a sleep he is.
Another Toye written in the praise of a Gilliflower, at the request of
Gentlewomen, and one above the rest, who loved that Flower.
IF I should choose a pretty Flower,
For seemly show, and sweetest sent:
In my mind sure, the Gilliflower,
I should commend, where so I went.
And if need be, good reason too,
I can allege why so I do.
The Crimson color first of all,
Does make it seemly to the eye:
The pleasant savor therwithall,
Comfortes the brain too, by and by,
For color then, and sweetest smell,
The Gilliflower must bear the bell.
This is in pots preserved we see,
And trimly tended every day:
And so it does deserve to be,
For sure if I might plainly say.
If it would prosper in my bed,
I would have one at my beds head.
What laugh you at? you think I ^est,
I mean plain troth I promise ye:
The Gilliflower does like me best,
Of all the flowers that ere I see.
And who that does mislike the same,
In my mind shall be much too blame.
A pretty toye written in the praise of a strange Spring, in Suffolk.
I Never trauayld countries far, whereby strange things to see
as woods, and waters, beasts, and byrds, wherein such virtues be
As are not common to be had, but seeldome to be found,
And herbs and stones of nature such, as none are on the ground.
But I have red of many one, and surely in my mind,
As well at home as far abroad, I many strange things find.
but many men whose running heads, delights abroad to range,
whose fancies fond are daily fed, with toys and choice of change.
what ever their own soil does yield, they do no whit es^eeme
But far fet, and dear bought, yt they most worthy praise do deem.
But it is no matter, let that pass, each one where he thinks best,
choose what, and when, and where he likes, and leave his friends the rest
And let me speak in praise of that, which worthy in my mind,
And therewith rare like to be ^eene, in England here I find.
No beast, nor byrd, no stick no^ stone, no herb nor flower it is,
No foul, nor fish, no metal strange, naught but a Spring ywis.
But such a Spring so clear, so fair, so sweet and delicate,
That happy he may think himself, that may come sip thereat.
To speak in praise thereof at large, it were to much for me,
As it deserves, but if I were a Poet: as some be,
Sure I would spend a little time, to let the world to know,
That out of our small Island yet, so fine a Spring does flow.
In Ouids Metamorphosis, I read there of a Spring,
Whereby Narcissus caught his bane, only with looking
Long while upon the same: for lo, the water shone so clear,
That through the same, the shadow of his face did so appear.
That he forgetting quite himself, fell so enamored,
Of his own face, that there he lay, as one amazde, half dead.
So long till at the last, for want of very ^oode,
He fell stark mad, and lost his life in place whereas he stood
And after his ghost yielded up, at least as Poets feign,
His Corpse was turned to a flower, which there did still remain:
Which flower if I do not mistake, is tearmde the Lilly white
If this be false, blame Ovid then, that such a tale would write.
But if it had been true, when he so sore was grieved,
Had he but come unto this Spring, he had been soon relieved.
For in this Spring he should have seen, no shadows of a face,
But such a face as should in deed, his own so much disgrace,
That he should have forgotte his own, if this he once did see,
now he that does desire to know, where this same spring should be
In Suffolk soil, who so best list, let him I say go seek,
And he may hap to see a Spring, he never saw the leeke.
A Gentleman on a time, having three sons: and being very desirous to have them
brought up at an University: being very well acquaynted with a young
Gentleman, who he knew had spent some years at Oxforde, desired him to choose
a Tutor there, for those his three Children, which as he thought were fyttest
to bring the^ up, as well in learning, as good behauyour: which he was
contented to do, and having chosen a Tutor for them, not long after having a
great desire to see them do well, wrote their Tutor a letter, and with the
Letter, a pretty Tale in verse, to move him to have a great care of them: the
Letter I let alone, but the tale I have thought good to show forth among these
pretty Toys, as one not the worst, which Tale was as follows.
A little Preface before the Tale.
A Pretty Tale, of late I heard, a learned wise man tell,
Whereto I gave attentive ^are, and markte it very well.
Touching the bringing up of youth, and who were fyttest men,
In learning and good quallityes, to bring up children.
Which Tale when I had heard told out, of troth it likte me so,
That to the like I were content, again ten miles to go.
Well as it was I did full often, reuolue the same in mind,
And many pretty poynctes therein, I many times did find.
And as one day unto my self, by chance I did rehearse
Each poynct therein, I took my pen, and put it into verse.
Which Tale so pend, according to my simple skill, I send
to you: for diverse causes Sir, first for that it does tend
Unto a little matter that, there is twixt you and me:
It has (I trow) somewhat respect, unto the Children three,
The three young Gentlemen which to you, as my friend,
I gave in charge to rule and teach: and so I make an end.
The Tale follows in this manner.
A Gentleman that had two sons, desirous was to see
Them both in learning traded up, for which great counsel he
Of diverse often did require, what Tutors he might choose,
To put these pretty Puples too, that rightly might them use.
And under whom they might in time, in learning profit most,
And under whom they lykely were, their labors to have lost.
Well, to be brief, so many men, so many minds there were,
Some would say this, some other that, and some were here, some there.
Some said they thought that liberty, was ill for Children,
Some other said that lawful it was, and needful now and then.
Some said the rod should be the sword, to keep children in awe,
And other some such cruelty, counted not worth a straw.
Some said that children should, surpressed be by fear:
Some thought to rule by gentleness, a better way it were.
Some said that children were by nature bent to play,
Which from their learning in short space, will draw them soon away.
Fro which by fear to keep the^ still, the rod should be the mean
Least little smacke of liberty, would quickly mar them clean
And use would make great masteries, for so by keeping in,
And hard applying of their books, they profit would therein.
Some other then that thoroughly this matter did discuss,
To that opinion contrary, alleged reason thus.
Children by nature are not bent, to any kind of play,
Their minds are eue^ half made by the^, that govern them always
And y^ to keep their minds from play, the rod should be no mean,
And that by fear for to subdue, that were not worth a bean.
As for examples sake (quoth one) at first take me a child,
Who has a pretty ready wit, although of nature wyld:
And let him learn to dance, to shoot, and play at ball,
And any other sport, but put him to his book withal:
And when he is abroad, if fair he do not shoot,
Or when he gins to dance, if false he chance to foot.
Then pay him, breech him thoroughly, favor him not at all,
And now and then correct him well, though for a fault but small
If that he trip or miss his time, up with him by and by,
Let him not ^lip with such a fault, but pay him presently.
And you shall see that often for fear, his legs will quiver so,
That he shall never learn to dance, nor scarcely well to go.
And when in feeld he draws not clean, his arrow in his bow,
Knock him upon the fyngers hard, and you shall see I trow,
That in a while his fyngers ends, for fear will quiver so,
That he will never learn aright, to let his arrow go.
Now if he be hard at his book, although he learn not well,
Either forget, or con^ter false: at first do gently tell
Him of his fault, and if that he do plye it hard,
Give him an Apple, or a Pear, or some such chyldes reward.
And trust me you shall see, the school shall be his chief delight,
And from his book, he seeld will be, or never if he might.
Wherefore by reason thus I prove, that children be not bent,
But that their natures much are made, by Tutors government.
But this I grant as requisite, with reason to correct,
Lest children often for lack thereof* their faults to much neglect.
But as a sword, to set it up, in school to open sight,
I like not that, for it is to some, at first to great a fright.
Their eyes are so upon the rod, they little mind their book,
For childish fear will cause them still, upon the rod to look.
And so their eyes quyte from their books, not only draws away
But eke their minds, as much and more, then any kind of play
Wherefore a rod I would in schools, should be kept out of sight,
To make the Children to their books, to have a more delight.
Another grave gray headded sire, that hard them reason so,
Thus said, so many shrewd cursed toys, and wa^ton wags I know
And eke so many Schoolemaysters, that lack good government,
That many pretty Boys will mar, that are of minds well bent.
That sure I know not what to say, but trust me in my mind,
A good Tutor, whereto a child is bent, can quickly find.
And as he fyndes the nature of the child, even so he may,
By gentle means, even as he list, soon lead him every way.
So that to keep him in good awe, correction now and than,
He justly use with gentleness, as a good Tutor can.
Well, at the last this Gentleman, when he had heard at large,
Their true opynyons every one, at last he gave in charge.
His two sons, to two sundry men, whereof the one was mild
And ever sought by gentle means, for to bring up a child.
The other was of nature fierce, and therefore rather sought,
With store of stripes for to bring up, such children as he tought.
The Children both of nature like, in time did differ much,
The difference of government, of Tutors theirs were such.
The one did prove a proper Youth, and learned for his time,
And by his learning afterward, to honor high did clyme.
This was by him brought up, that was of nature mylde,
And ever sought by gentle means, for to bring up a Child.
The other proved but a block, a Dunsicus, an ass,
Because with too much cruelty, he often dulled was.
This was brought up by him, that was so fierce of mind,
That thought y^ rod should be the sword, to rule a child by kind.
The Father sorry afterward, to see his Child so lost,
And seeing that his other son, did ever profit most.
Took him away from that fierce fool, and put him presently,
To him that was the mylder man, praying him earnestly.
To see if that he could in time, quicken his dulled wit,
Desyring him thereto to use, such means as he thought fyt.
Well, at the last with much ado, he took a litte pain,
And took in hand to sharpen then, his dulled brain again.
And many ma^^^ries he did prove, but rigor none he ^sde,
For that before, he had so much, by the other ben abusde.
But ever sought, by gentle means, to make him void of fear,
And so in time, did alter much, his nature as it were.
He made him boulder to his book, therefore more willinge to
His study still, but yet alas, what ever he could do
He could not make him like unto, his brother any way,
Although he striude, and took great pains, as much as in him lay.
Yet every way he mended had, his nature very much,
The gentle means, he ever ^^^e, in teaching him were such.
Well to be short, when that this Gentilman did see,
The difference, twixt his two sons, there shall n^ more quoth he,
Of children mine, ^e put to School, to such as still do^ use,
To rule the children by the rod: I rather ai^ will choose,
To put ^y children unto those, that are of nature mil^e,
And know by l^^^ and gent^nesse, (...) a ^^il^^.
And thus, the tale was at an end. (...),
the Gentilman that had two sons, desirous was to see
Them both in learning traded up ^e^en so no l^^se (...) I,
Des^rous for to s^ these Youths, both learn^^ly,
And virtuously brought up, as^^ch ^s if they were
The nearest hinsmen that I have, or br^thren d^ere, I swear.
Wherefore good Sir, as I in you, my faithful trust repose,
Uouchsafe, to take such pains with them, that they no time (...) lose.
And for correction, now and than, to him that does not well,
I mean not to instruct you ^ir, your self can better tell
Th^n I what long^ thereto: therefore, as you shall find,
Use your discretion Sir therein, according to your mind.
Thus you have heard, the milder man, the better Scholar made,
And yet, a bridell must be had, for a wild brainesicke Jade.
But for your pretty Coltes, I ho^e no ^ridle you shall need:
I hope you easily shall them bend, with a small twined thread.
My meaning is, I hope they will, themselves each order so:
That you shall need, to take small care, almost which way they go.
Yet now and then, though without need, somewhat look out I pray
Least that they hap, by Company, for to be led astray.
For though, their ^atures well be bent: yet you kno^ now and then,
Ill company often times, god wot, does mar an honest m^n:
And they you know, are al^ ^ut young, and Youth de^ights in toys
And toys, from lear^^^g quit and clean, wit^ wanton boys:
Yet in ^ood faith. I hope good ^^r, your pretty P^ples three,
Will both in lear^ing, a^^ all things, by you so r^led be.
And eke unto their b^^kes, (...) have so great desire:
That earnest more, or dilligent, you cannot well require.
Well, I have put them all to you, you ^^ly mu^^ be he,
That as ^ell to their le^rning, as be^^uiour ^ust se^.
I sought not out* three ^ondry men, to put these children too
To see, which ^f them ^^lde (...) best, and which again would do
Worst of the three, but all unto your charge I ^oe commit,
To teach and go^erne, by such means, as you alone thinck fit.
And as I ^^^e, the^ ^i^e^ i^ charge, to you, even so I cra^e
Th^^ (...) e^ch way behave
And (...) so, that when from you they part,
I to have found a Tutor such, (...) ^ill be gl^d in heart.
And you your (...) glad to see:
Their virtuous (...) b^o^ght up by me.
Their Father (...), is for to (...) them all
In l^^r^ing d^ily to (...), and further therewith^ll
In good behavior eke, may well in heart rejoice:
That I in thi^ behalf, have made so good and happy choy^e
As to find out, so ^it a man, to put his children too.
As under whom, they all in time, so well are like to ^^^.
And I my self, the more for that, may ^^ande your ^oun^en fri^nd:
And he reward you for your pains, and so I make an end.
FINIS.
Two or three pretty toys given to a Gentilman, to set about his Counting house.
What man can bear a lofty sa^le,
Where fortune fro^nes, and friends do fail?
And who so low, but he may rise,
By fortunes aid, and friends advise?
What woe to hate? what joy to love?
What stranger state, then both to prove?
What treasure, to a friend in deed?
What greater spite, then fail at need?
What wisdom more, then for to learn,
The truth from falsehood to discern?
From which false dealimg, god defend,
Those that mean well, and so I end.
FINIS.
A Gentilman being requested by a Gentilwoman, to pen her a Prayer in verse,
wrote at her request as follows.
Pity oh Lord thy servant h^auy heart,
her sins forgive, that thus for mercy cries:
Judge no man (Lord) according to desert,
Let fall on her with speed thy healthful eyes.
In heart who prays to thee continually,
Putting her only tru^^ oh God in thee.
Lord, Lord, to thee for mercy still I call,
Oh, set me free that thus am bound and thrall.
Not many days after he chanced to walk with the same Gentilwoman in a
garden: and was again then entreated by her, to make her an other prayer,
which presently he pend, speaking with the terms of a Gardener, as follows.
PLant Lord in me the tree of godly life,
Hedge me about with thy strong fence of faith:
If thee it please use eke thy proyning knife,
Least that, oh Lord* as a good Gardener says:
If suckers draw the sap from bows on hie
Perhaps in time the top of tree may die.
Let Lord this tree be set within thy Garden wall
Of Paradise, where grows no one ill sprig at all.
FINIS.
A pretty toye written upon a Ladies propoundinge a Riddle to her friend.
A Lady once in pleasant sort,
A question did demand of me,
For want as then of other sport,
Without offense, good Sir (quod she):
May I crave thus much at your (...),
To have a Riddle rightly scand?
Whereto I soon gave this Reply,
Madame you know full hard it is,
To read a Riddle perfectly,
The wisest men may Judge amiss:
But show theffect of your request,
And you shall see me do my best.
The Riddle.
Why then a thing there is quod she,
That breeds many deadly smart:
Which none can feel, nor here, nor see,
And yet with grief, consumes the heart.
For which is found none other ease,
But even the cause of the disease:
Now this is my desire quoth she,
To be resolu'de what this may be?
The Answer.
These doubts (Madame) quod I to skan,
Requires some time, and that not small,
They trouble would a wiser man,
Then I by roode to deal withal:
But yet fair Dame the doubt of this,
I hope to find, and not to miss,
I can but guess upon a doubt,
I will not swear to find it (...).
But as I Judge Madam quod I,
It seems Appollos sickness sure
On whom he cried piteously,
That never any herb could cure:
Nor any Physic find relief,
To help or ease him of his gree^e.
Which plainly Madam for to name,
Is lucklesse love Dame Venus game.
Which spightfull sport for to (...),
Some so do dull their senses all:
That in the end with to much pain,
They do become sore sick with all:
And so remain until they have,
Some players such as they do crave.
For every Player cannot please,
Each patient to play with all:
For then to cure his strange disease,
He some should have sone at his call:
But he must have whom each would crau^
Else he poor soul small rest shall have*
This Madam for ought I can see
The meaning of your doubt must be,
Which if you like not good Madam:
Let it even pass from whence it came.
My Lady ^awght: is love quod she
A spite, and sport, to both at ones
Now thou have given me, credit me:
A resolution for the nones.
It Is love in deed thou have found out,
The mystery of all my doubt:
And for thy pains as to a friend,
I yield thee thancks and there an (...).
FINIS.
A Letter sent unto a Gentilwoman in verse, wherein he gave great thanks for
both good cheer, and other courteous entertainment he had received at her
hands, being in the Country at her house. The Gentilwomans name was mistress
Lette^.
FIrst, to thy seemly self, my self I do commend,
And for thy friendly cheer and cost, ten thousand thanks I send
Which able to requite, I know I shall not be:
But to my power I will deserve, as much as lies in me:
But yet of all thy cates, one dish above the rest,
I ever since do bear in mind, which fare does like me best:
Which deinty dish (my dear), if I might plainly name,
Lettys it is, a houlsome herb, thy self do know the same.
An herb that we have here, but yet I plainly find,
That Lettys from our Lettys here, does much digress in kind:
For in that Lettys such virtues soon I found,
As few or none the like I find, does grow upon our ground:
This Lettys sweet art thou, in which I so delight:
And God he knows what griefs I bide, for wanting of thy sight.
No cates that I can taste, but seem all gall to me,
When that in mind I feed up on the fresh record of thee:
And so my Lettys sweet, unto thy self farewell,
And thinck no cates like Lettys fine, can like me half so well.
FINIS.
A Riddle propounded by a Gentilman to a Gentilwoman whom he loved, but was a
suter, but secretly.
THe thing on earth you most desire.
And yet of all you lest would choose:
That often times you do require,
And yet I know you will refuse:
And that here present you may see,
All this is one, what may it be?
Her answer as pretty.
GOOD Sir, the self same thing that you
Above all things do most esteem,
and that in deed is present now,
And to your self you dearest deem.
That do you take it out of doubt,
That I would choose, yet be without.
FINIS.
A Ditty in despite of a very old man, who was suter to a very young
Gentilwoman, written by a young Gentilman, who was then (in deed) suter to the
same Lady.
PErhaps you think, that all for spite I writ this running verse,
Wherein I do such deep dispraise of doting fools rehearse:
No no (good faith) I hate no man, but yet to such a snudge,
Of force I must, I cannot choose, but bear a certain grudge.
For as one way I honor age, so such old doting doltes,
That at the age of three score years would feign seem but young coltes.
Those crusty chaps I can not love, the Devil do them shame,
God let them never have good look, of any noble Dame,
Much less the love: alas, my heart it rendes for very grief,
To think upon the crabbed crust, that vile old doting thief
That seeks to rob thee of all joys, and me of my delight,
Woe worth that so shall seek to win a worthy wight.
And seem to match a miching Carle, with such a pearlesse piece.
As never yet Appelles ^yne, could paynt the like in Greece.
Well, well, this is the world, (we see) it is money makes the man,
Yet shall not Money make him young again, do what he can.
No nor yet honest sure I judge, nay more for troth I know,
The older still, the more in craft^, his brains he does bestow.
And craft and Knavery commonly with crooked crabbed age,
With Auaryce and Ielosy, does make a marriage.
These are the fruits of froward age, which thou shalt reap God wot,
When thou will say, oh had I wist, in faith then would I not.
Well say not yet but thou art warnde, by him y^ likes thee well,
Thou comber not thy comely corpse, with such a Coystrel.
Whose crusty chaps, whose Aly nose, whose loathsome stinking breath
whose tothles gums, whose bristled beard, whose visage al like death
Would kill an honest wench to view, and so it will do thee,
If so thou hap to match thy self, with such a snudge as he.
My counsel therefore follow wench, cast of the crabbed knave,
And henceforth not one merry word, ne look yet let him have.
But frown upon the froward fool, and when thou see him glad
Knit thou thy brows, ha^g down thy head, and then seem y^ most sad
As who should say, the crabbed looks of his old doting age,
Of force you know must needs offend, a youthful parsonage.
Let therefore crumbs as fyttest is, with crustes then linked be,
For trust to this, that like to like, will ever best agree.
A pretty toye in ryme.
Misero infortunato solo, lamenting his evil hap, in despair of help. WHen
purse grows pyld, and credit crackes,
And friends begin to fail:
To comfort then a heavy heart,
Alas what may prevail?
Audita vox confortans. Yet do not thou despair at all,
But comfort thou thy mind:
Though credit, purse, and friends be gone,
Somewhat is left behind.

Misero. Somewhat alas, oh tell me now,
What somewhat that may be?
That so in this my deep distress,
is left to comfort me.

Vox. Why doste thou crave to know the thing,
Whereof thou can not doubt?
Necessity ere long I^^is,
Will make thee find it out.

Misero. Necessity alas I see,
To ready is at hand:
Yet can I not, do what I can,
Thy meaning understand.

Vox. Why? doste thou not thy self (...)*
There is no mallady:
But Physic has in store for it,
Some kind of remedy.

Misero. No credit me, I fear there is
No mean to cure my grief:
If there be any, let me crave*
How I may find relief.

Vox. Will thou do as I bid thee d^e*
And thou shall soon find eas^*
Although thou be not at the first*
quite rid of thy disease.

Misero. If that thy counsel well I like,
I will agree thereto:
To ease my heart of this despair,
I care not what to do.

Vox. Have patience then, rage not to much,
Let reason rule thy mind:
And be thou sure in little time,
Some comfort for to find.

Misero. But patience does come (...),
And what is forced (God wot:)
Does more and more torment the mind,
Then patience eases not.

Vox. Yet patience procures hope,
And hope drives out despair:
And where Despair is driven away,
There comfort does repair.

Misero. Oh, but hope oftentimes is vain,
And does deceive the mind*
Therefore in hope I think (...),
But comfort small to find.

Vox. Let hope then grow by due defart,
Then follows good success:
For reason shows, who seeks for ease,
Shall some way find redress.

Misero. Oh but alas, those days be past,
For to reward desert:
And that the more, does cause despair,
For to torment my heart.

Vox. What though such days are past in deed,
Yet days will come again:
Wherein desartes shall reap defyre,
And pleasure win for pain.

Misero. But while the grass does grow often times,
The seelly steed he (...):
And he (...) wot shall reap small gain,
In only hope, that ser^^^.

Vox. Yet serve in hope, and hope in God,
And seek well to deserve:
And let the Horse do what he lift,
Be sure thou shall not ster^e.

Misero. Now like I well this lesson thine,
God well in heart to serve:
For he in deed, who hope in him,
Will never let them ster^e.

A Gentleman being in his friends house, in the country, was by him earnestly
entreated after Dinner, before his departure, to make him some verses. But
would give him no Theme to write upon* he not knowing what to write that best
might like his fancy, yet willing to grant his request, wrote as follows.
NEeds must I write, and know not what: why the^ even as it is
Accept the same and blame me not, if ought you find amiss.
On bushy banks what (...)
What look you for but rain, when ^tormy (...) gi^ blow?
What look you for of me? some (...) ^ind of verse,
You are deceaude: I cannot I, (...)
But what? me thinks you say, I make too much adoo,
Considering how little yet, I have (...) ^^^atherto.
And since I granted have, so little ^yme to write,
Some pythy shorter (...)
In deed Sir true it is, my fault I (...)
And since I have no (...)
Remain in doubt what I would (...)
And so with thanks for my good cheer, I rudely end my ryme.
But if so be you have some pretty kind of style,
Whereon you do desire some verse, if you will stay a while,
A day or two, or so, or till I come again,
Then you shall see that I in time, will tem^er ^o my ^rayne.
And whet my wits anew, that I will promise you*
Some pretty piece of verse thereon, more then I can do ^ow.
And thus I leave you here, until I come again,
This rude and ragged ryme to r^^de, and so in rest remain.
Finis.
Verses made upon this Theme: Little meddling, breeds mickle rest.
MY youthful years are spent, old age comes stealing on,
And bids me now fond Fancies fits, no more to think upon
Of worthy Wisdom I; some lessons now have learnde,
Whereby the difference twixt wit and will, I have discernde.
Among all which: this one, where ever so I be,
To keep still secret to my self, what so I here or see.
Which since of lessons all, I d^e not count the worst,
I do intend his grave advise, in this to follow furst.
First in thy self quoth he, all faults thou must amend,
Before in other men thou seek, one fault to reprehend.
Of Cato eke I learnd, it is no little shame,
To find that fault in other men, wherein I am to blame,
To hold my peace therefore, I count it always best,
And keep in mind the old said saw, thereof comes mickle rest.
I see a flattering knave, is set by now and then,
Of greatest heads as much and more, then twenty honest men.
But let me rue the same, ^ince I cannot amend it,
I might a wit^esse f^^le be thought* to seek to reprehend it.
Some Lawyer ^ee^ at first, which way the case will go,
Although he list not at the first, to tell his Clyent so:
But what means he by that? alas do you not see,
Your pence may make you pick it out, and so they shall for me.
What boot were it for me, their meaning to betray,
And so no pro^^^e to my self, to take their gaynes away?
The Merchant man he sees too sir, by your hye lusty looks,
That shortly he shall find your hand, deep in his reckoning books.
Bids he you then beware betimes, of had I wist,
No no, but lets you lash it out, as long sir as you list?
Or as you can at ^east, and if you ask me why:
He will no better counsel give, and what he means thereby?
Y^^r lo^^^ of L^nds ere long, shall learn you how to know,
As well as I can teach you Sir, and better too, I tro^*
And so shall I offend the Merchants nere a whit,
By showing of their silken snares, that in their shops do sit,
Your Tenant too he sees, that by your trym gay Coats,
Some Lease is shortly to be let, then gets he up his Groates,
And purseth up his pence, and come with coin in hand,
To crave of your good Maystership, to hyre a piece of Land.
And wot you wherefore* Sir, your Farmer fynds this feate?
To come with Coin ready in hand, your friendship to entreat
When that your goods are gone, and you the loss do see,
Of braynsick bargaynes made in haste, to maintain bravery:
The smart thereof at last, shall show you then their shifts,
Then shall you easily discern, their double dealing driftes,
Which I dare not descry, I am so chargde you see,
To make no words of any thing, what ever so it be.
Your servant last he sees, your feathers gin to fall,
And sees your Farmer buy you out, of house and Land and all.
No longer then he lykes your service Sir, adieu,
And if you mean to keep a man, you must go seek a new.
And ask you me by this, what may his meaning be?
Sure if you see it not your self, you shall not know for me.
As for the higher powers, they are too high for me,
What faults are to be found in them, I list not seek to see:
Let find their faults themselves, so shall they best be pleased,
And for my silence I am sure, I shall not be diseasde.
But to the rest again, that are of meaner sort,
Of their fine fetches secretly, I somewhat will report.
For openly God wot, I nothing dare descry,
Who hurts not me, nor yet my friends, I will not hurt them I.
But they who do me harm, I do not mean to spare,
To bid my friends in each respect, of such for to beware.
From Citizens to Clownes, what secret shifte they have,
It is a sport to see a Clown, how he can play the Knave.
The Badger first one Knave, that hauntes the market place,
When Corn is cheap, to buy good store, now thereby lies a case.
What should he mean by that? oh sir, when corn^ grows dear,
I need not tell you what he means, your self shall know next year
The toleing Myller then, when he has tollde the sack,
He finds a trade to fill it up, if any meal do lack.
Now what means he by this? this feate how does he frame?
The Mylstone greet among y^ meal, will make you find the same.
The Baker then that sees, that meal does grow so dear,
He finds a shyfte to gain somewhat, how ever go the year.
But what is that his shyfte? the Bakers man can tell,
And I say naught, but little loaves, will show it pretely well.
Some other kind of clownes, or crafty knaves by kind,
That buy whole groves of woods at once, what shall I speak my mind,
What they do mean thereby, D^ no sir by the roode,
The Coliar and the poor man knows, when they do bye their wood.
The Colyar yet* to gain will play the crafty clown:
He works a knack yet in his sack^, when coals do come to Town
But how he worke^ that shyfte, I pray you ask not me,
But when you see him shoot his coals, then mark what dust you see.
Another sort of Clownes there are, that live by buing Corn:
That secreetely use knauish shifts, that are not to be borne.
And these are Ma^lt men calde: but what their shyftes should be,
I need not tell: by speered malt, the Bruer soon will see.
The Bruer then ^e finds a shifte, to make a gain,
But what is that? small drink alas, does show it too too plain.
Another sort of Clownes there be, that Drouers are by name:
That herds of Cattle buie at once? what mean they by ye same?
Oh sir, although I know, I must not say my mind,
But when the poor man buys a Cow, then he the cause shall find,
Another sort there are, which some do Grasiers call,
And for their secreete kind of gain, they are not least of all.
But how they make their gain, I list not to descrie:
The Butcher when he buies his Beefes, he better knows then I.
The Butcher too again, he is no fool I trow.
He finds devise to make a gain, how ever Cattle go:
But shall I tell you how, Oh sir I must not I,
But mark your weight of bones and pricks, in meat when you do buy.
The Chaundler then, that of the Butcher tallowe buys,
If he buy dear, then will he work a feate in secreete wise
To make a secreete gain: but what feate may that be?
I dare say naught, but some the same by watery Lyghts will see.
Some welthy fellows are, that travel here and there,
And buy up almost all the wool, they can get every where:
And do you seek to know what they may mean by that?
The Draper when you buy your cloth can quickly tell you what.
Tush, many such things more, I see often times, God wot,
Which I would help too if I could* but (alas) I can not.
Therefore since I can not, I think it always best,
To take good h^ede and hold my peace, for silence breeds much rest.
If silence then breed rest, why have I prattled so?
Yet have I nothing said I hope, whereof just grutch may grow,
But if against my will I any do offend:
I pardon crave, I spoke in sport, and so I make an end.
The just will live upright, and make an honest gain,
And if I think to mend a Knave, my labor is in vain:
But honest men, or else what ever so they be:
Let Country, Prince, and Freindes a lone, and let them be for me.
But he that wissheth ill to Country, Prince, and friend,
I will not keep his counsel sure, but rather seek his end.
But else as I am warnd. so do I think it best,
To meddle little any way, and so to live at rest.
FINIS.
A solemn and Repentant Prayer, for former time misspent.
OH heavenly Lord, who plain do see the thoughts of each man's heart,
who sendest some continual plagues, and some release of smart:
Pity O Lord, the woeful state, wherein I daily stand,
Only for thy mercies sake, now help me out of hand.
And as it was thy pleasure, first to plague me thus with grief.
So can thou Lord if thee it please, with speed send me relief.
I must of force confess O Lord, I can^t not deny.
That I deserve these plagues and worse, and that continually,
Yet do not thou therefore on me thy judgment just extend,
But pardon lend, and grant me grace my life for to amend.
And banish (Lord) from me, delights of vvorldly vanity,
And lend me help to pace the paths of perfect piety.
And truly so to tread the paths, and in such godly wise,
That they may bring me to the place of perfect Paradise.
And not to wander up and down in ways of vveerie woe,
Where wicked vvyly vvanton toys, do lead me too and fro.
The smacke of Sapience, lykde me not, that pleased not my taste,
But fond delight that wicked vveede, was all my chief repaste.
VVherin as hook within the bayte, so do I plainly find,
Some hydden poison lurking lies, for to infect my mind.
But wherefore do I find it now? because I now do see,
That wanting smart I wanted grace, for to acknowledge thee.
But now O Lord, that I so sore do feel thy punishment:
I do lament my folly great, and all my sins repent.
And to thy heavenly throane, O Lord, for mercy I appeal,
To send me (Lord) some heavenly salve, my grievous sores to heal.
Behold (O Lord) my sorrows such, as no man does endure,
And eke my grievous sickness, such as none but thou can cure.
And as thou art a gracious God to men in myserie,
So pity me that thus, O Lord, do pine in penury.
And as thou art a help to all that put their trust in thee.
So lulde in this my deep distress, some comfort lend to me.
And hold O Lord thy heavy hand, and lay thy scourge aside,
For Lord, the grievous smart thereof I can no longer bide,
Forgive my sins, forget the same, behold my humble heart:
Who only Lord does trust in thee, for to relieve my smarte.
And after this my vvretched life: Lord grant me of thy grace*
That I in heaven at latter day, may have a joyful place.
FINIS:

