A SMALL handful of fragrant Flowers, selected and gathered out of the lovely
garden of sacred scriptures, fit for any Honorable or woorshipfull Gentlewoman
to smell unto. Dedicated for a Newe-yeeres gift, to the honorable and virtuous
Lady, the Lady Sheffeeld.

By N. B.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Jones. And are to be sold at his shop, at the
Southwest door of Paul's. 1575.

To the right Honorable and virtuous Lady, the Lady Sheffeeld, N. B. wishes
continual health, with increase of Honor.
AS I must of necessity ( right honorable and virtuous Lady) give leave,
license and liberty unto such as altogether search out the strange
operations of things welnigh incredible to the rude and ignorant sort: So
reposing a confidence in your noble degree, ready pressed to accept the simple
gift of a young and unskillful husbandman, I am the more bold to present your
Ladyship with this little handful of Flowers, the sent whereof I trust, being
gathered in so fruitful a time, will so revive your senses, that your godly
industry will vouchsafe to plant the root thereof in the Garden of nobility,
which I am assured, being watered with the due understanding of the founten of
knowledge, cannot choose but encrese to a defens(...) modest demeanor. As
therefore on the other side, your virtuous life is such as rather allows the
godly work of a simple scholar, willing by daily practice to grow unto more
and exacter ripenes of understanding. And on the other part is ready to prefer
the base and country ma^s pen, to the end that I might hereafter take the more
heart of grace, to attempt a more substantial piece of work. And then if it
shall please the almighty to be my guide, in future time I will not be forgetful
of your Honors clemency, which the almighty G^d guard and furnish plentifully
with increase and mayntenance of renown for ever.

Your most humble to command N. B.

John Parcels pamphlet in the praise of this handful of flowers.
THE little Be, fair Ladies al,
Bringes more increase then does the Kight:
Wherefore although this book be small,
The flowers thereof may well delyght,
A second peareles Saba queen,
Because they are continual green.
Peruse them well therefore and say,
We have the choice of good and ill,
Yet if my counsel by the way,
Might urge your mind or move your will,
To imitat this piece of work,
For many a pearl therein does lurk.
For though the fountain be not here,
Of heavenly health that does excel,
Yet to your sight may playneappeere,
The golden Bucket of the Well,
Wherefore dear dames keep that in store,
And time will yield to you the more.
It is no Poets fable old,
It is no gaude nor trifle vain,
It is a gift excelling gold:
In which the Gentle state may train,
Them selves to godly exercise,
And learn thereby for to be wise.
Search therefore such a Honycombe,
And try the same with diligence,
It is no fruitles vanishing foam,
It is a cerce of excellence:
The joyce whereof being pleasant sweet,
Is for a courteous Matrone meet.
Thus virgins, wives, and widows too,
If that you tender your estate,
Learn as he teaches you to do,
That framde this Posie for your sake:
And than you can not loose the crown,
Diana holds with renown.
I. P.

The book to the Reader.
SInce I poor book am put into thy hand,
although the tome or volume little be,
Yet Reader dear that I be thoroughly scand
with zealous mind I beg and crave of thee
Ne seem to judge or sentence thine to frame,
Before throughout thou do peruse the same.
Read not as though thou would forget again,
such fruitles faith bringes profit none at all:
But if thou wylt reap merit for thy pain,
let not regard from wonted custom fall,
Which as I read by wise men is defind,
While time does serve, to bear the fruits in mind.
If then I cast a jewel unto thee,
play not the Cock that Esope speaks on,
Who rather craved a barlye corn to see:
then for to find the costly precious stone,
But if I might give counsel with the rest,
First read, the^ choose such fruits as like thee best.
Hold me excused, and take my masters Muse,
in as good part as pain he does bestow,
Let his good will his simple work excuse,
for were it much more better: to bestow
For thy delyght he would vouchsafe his toil,
And yield to thee the croppe of such a soil.
FINIS.
The Author to his Lady in verse.
IN ancient time the golden guise
of Matrons great renowen,
Was for to strive in virtues school,
who should enjoy the crown:
So that each branch of noblenes,
surpassed in those days.
Because they sought by their attempt
to win immortal praise:
As for example, Lucrece chaste,
and famous sacred life
May record be, who as I read,
was Collatinus wife.
And next to her, that pearl of price,
which Triata had to name.
By constant love to Mansolus
does manifest the same.
Thirdly, queen Artimesia reapt
the Scepter by desert,
That could as well as all the rest,
most finely play her part.
But since that Sabbas wisdom great,
in honor yours does reign.
I must dear Lady wish to you
as well, as to the train.
For why? the garland that you wear
is ever fresh and green,
And serves most fit in Court therewith,
to tend upon a Queen.
The modesty of Matrons mylde,
bedect with virtue round.
There is no wight but well may see
in you for to abound.
So that a pattern to the nymphs
of Court and courtly crewe,
Your Ladyship resembles well,
as plainly they may vewe.
For on the one side guarded with
Dame virtue you do enter:
And on the other, continence
encourages you to venture.
Wherefore, since then defensed with
such ayoe to your degree.
Your noble race procures these
your days with joys to see,
That Flora, Susan, and the rest
attaind unto the end.
Your Honor might conceive my cause,
a slow and thankles friend,
If that this time he should negle
to beautify your name:
Whose merits are blown all abroad,
in golden trumpe of fame.
Wherefore as pledge of my good will,
with humble duty due,
Accept I crave this little book
that I present to you.
And though it be of value small,
or simple to your sight,
Your wisdom may conceive the Lark,
more daintier then the Kyght.
G. T.

The names of all the flowers contained in this posie, with the proper use
thereof.
Dear Dames, your senses to revive,
accept these Flowers in order hear,
Then for the time you are alive
renown your golden days shall bear:
Mark therefore what they have to name,
and learn to imitate the same.
The first resembles Constancy,
a worthy budde of passing fame,
Which every Gentle certeinlie
delights to choose of for the name:
The cause is (that) the truth to tell,
it sents and savors passing well.
This Flower in her garden green
Susanna planted day and hour,
Which by her life was daily seen,
when her good fame for to devour
The wicked Elders did pretend,
to bring her days unto an end.
But God that saw her constantnes,
and how she was unjustly wrongde,
Gave little Daniel warrantice,
to be her Judge, wherewith he throngde
Amidest the prease with help divine,
and rescued Susan at that time.
Then when her stedfastnes was known,
and how she sented of that Flower,
Which in Dianas bower was sown,
the carnal Judges fleshly power
Was cut full short, and she like case
was honored in the judgment place.
O worthy sprig of constancy,
O jewel far surpassing gold,
Preserved by the eternity,
as a looking glass for to behold,
To such as covet with renown,
to wear that chaste and peareles crown.
This pleasant branch in Saraes breast,
was daily used for a show,
So that her faith among the rest,
thereby did bountifully grow.
And she extolled was therefore,
as noble Matrone evermore.
Well might I call to memory,
Rebecca mild and Judith chaste,
By whose great faith and constancy,
Holofernes power was sore agaste,
So that as plain the scriptures say,
his hosts were feign to fly away.
Since then ye Ladies of degree,
and honors nymphs within the place,
Whereas that pearls dame may be,
which all the Gods inspire with grace,
This flower I say does sent so well,
accept the sweet and sauery smell.
There is no odious stintch at all,
of any worldly infamy,
That can procure your ruynous fall,
if you reteyne this constancy,
And therefore Ladies pluck this flower,
for why it withers never an hour.
The second budde is modesty,
which Triata did much delyght.
And furnished the company,
of many a Roman matrone bright,
So that no blemishe there did grow,
as long as they the same could show.
The third is virtuous exercise,
the fourth is called humility,
The fifth, to set beforeyour eyes,
the fear of God most reverently.
The sixth obedience to the crown,
and Princes laws with great renown.
The seventh is Patience, for to bear
the cross of Christ continually:
The eight is liberal talk to hear,
and use the same indifferently:
The ninth is called Chastity:
the tenth, to put up injury.
The eleventh is to sustain the poor:
the twelfth to aid the comfortles,
And to endeavor more and more,
to train your steps to godlynes.
The thirtenth, that is cheifest skill,
which we do call, do good for ill.
The fourtenth is to love the troth,
and flattery wholly for to shun:
The fiftenth, bar the chair of sloth,
whereby full many are undone:
For idelnes does shame but win,
and is the entrance unto sin.
The sixtenth Flower is willing zeal
unto the sacred verity:
Which is a lantarne to your feet,
to lead you to sincerity:
The seuententh blossom fresh of hue,
in words and deeds for to be true.
The eyghtenth is for to restore
that by oppression has been got:
The niententh for to cure that sore,
which careless conscience makes to rotte:
The twenteth is sweet Charity,
the fruits whereof begin to dye.
There are besides these, godly love,
whose leaves though they be not so green,
Yet who to pluck thereof will prove,
shall with Lucrecia soon be seen,
To shine in words and deeds as bright,
as when the moon does yield her light.
Lo Gentles, this small bunche of flowers,
It is that may increase your fame,
For they be watered with the showers,
that sacred Scriptures have to name:
You may discern them by the seeds,
full much unlike to wordly weeds.
Take heed therefore how you reject,
the simplest flower among them all,
For if disdain do you infect,
to pluck one leaf the rest will fall:
Do not therefore the threede vntwinde,
Which does this pretty posie bind.
The name thereof is diligence,
in seeking virtuous company:
A string of great pre-eminence,
given unto us in generally.
Therewith each godly wight does make,
A snare therewith each vice to take.
(...) Matrones therefore I require,
as one that wishes al were well:
(...) bear a zeal and full desire,
^o bye these Flowers that so did smell.
(...) shall the bounty of the Lord,
with all your works right well accord.
(...) whom be honor, power, and fame,
praise, laud, and sempiternitie:
^oth God and man sweet Christ the same,
who planted for a certayntie.
^hese Flowers in heavenly paradise,
for such to gather as will be wise.
^is blessing say, and let us crave,
to light upon our sovereign Queen:
Whom we may see in hand to have
this little branche of Flowers green.
Which sents and savors passing well,
the redyest way to heaven to smell.
Her counsel and nobility.
the Pastors of the Church like case:
The mighty God continually,
bid we with golden drops of grace.
That they may serve her majesty:
With reverence and humility.
A prayer for gentlewomen and others to use, whereby through the help of the
divine grace, they may atteyne the right sent of this posie of Godly Flowers.
VOuchsafe, O Lord, to be our guide,
thy spirit of grace into us power:
Defend our cause on every side,
that we may pass into the bower:
Whereas those heavenly Flowers do grow:
By Christ that Garden first did sow.
Illuminate our inward mind,
to seek to thee continually:
From worldly Errors that be blind,
preserve us for thy Majesty.
Teach us as we in words profess,
In deeds each one to do no less.
Assist us daily to begin,
spiritually to enterfight
Against the world, the flesh, and sin,
that we may shun the duskie night.
In which our enemy the devil,
Does watch to work each Christian evil.
Arm us with faith to bear the shield,
and sword of heavenly purity:
Crown us with Helmet in the field,
of thy surpassing verity.
Grant this O bounteous Jesus sweet,
That we with thee at last may meet.
FINIS.

