The lamentacyon of a Christian against the City of London, for some certain
great vices used theri^.

Psalm. lxx. Let them be abashed aude ashamed, that seek after my soul, let
them be put to flight and shame, that will me evil.

Impri^ted i^ ye year of our Lord m.d.xlviii.

The lamentacion of a Christen Against the City of London. and ce.
OH Lord God Father of mercy and God of all consolation, what heart cannot
lamente, to se the Testament of thy only Son, our full and only redemer
Jesus Christ, thus refused and trodden under foot, yea all though God has given
our most Soueraygne Lord King Henry the eight such an heart to set yt for
the with his most Graciouse Preuyledge. Yet the great part of these inordinate
rich styfnecked Cytezens, will not have in their howses that lively word of
our souls, nor suffer their servants to have it, neither yet gladly read it
or hear it read: but abhors and disdayneth all those which would live
according to the Gospel. And in stead there of they set up and maintain
Idolatrye and other innumerable vices and wickednesses of man's inuencyon, daily
committed in the City of London, no reformacio^ or redress ones studied for,
whereby to expulse vice, and encreace virtue: nor no pollitique inuencion for the
commenwelth. No, no, their heads are so given to seek their own particular
welthes oneli, that they pass not of no honest prouysio^ for the poor, which
thing above all other infidelityes, shall be our damnacion. As apereth Math.
xxv. where Christ says: I was hungrye and ye gave me not to eat, I was
thurstie and ye gave me not to dri^ke, I was sick and in preson, and ye
visited me not etc. For not doing these things shall Christ say, go ye
cursed childerne in to everlasting fire, prepared for the deuell and his
Angels. Read the text and there ye shall se what shall be laid against you at
the great day of the lord. And there ye shall also se, that ye shall not be
enquired of many vain folishe and supersticiouse things of your own
inuencions, and of your Popish Prestes of Baal, whether ye have done them or
not. No, no, they shall be greatly to your dampnacion.

Oh Lord God, how is it possible for this City to expulse vice and seek after
virtue, seeing they will not receive thy gospel, which is the word of
everlasting life, and that only thing that leads us into all truth: No
Lord they cannot be contented, not only to deny the receipt thereof, but also
the greatest part of the seniours or aldermen, with ye multitude of the
inordinate rich: eue^ as the Jews cried out against Christ taking part with
the high prestes, saing: Mat. xxvii. Crucify him, eue^ so does the rich of
the City of London take part, and be fully bent with the false Prophets ye
Bishops and other strong, stout and sturdie prestes of Baall, to persecute
unto death all and eueri godly person, which either preaches the word or
sets it forth in writing (if thou deliver them not from their wicked
snares) even as ded their fore fathers the most wicked, cruel and stonyherted
Bishops, Scribes and Pharysees, by thy servants the prophets, and also
Thapostels. Matthew. xxiii.

Oh Lord God how blind be these Cityzens, which take so great care to provide
for ye dead, which thing is not commanded them, nor a vayleth the dead, no
more the^ the pissing of a wre^ne helps to cause the sea to flow at an
extreme ebb, but is the work of man's own inuencion and ymaginacion,
according to the saying of the Prophet rehearsed in Math. xiii. In vain
worship and serve they me with the inuencions and Imagynacions of men. Thus
follow they their own Imagynacyons prouydynge for the dead uncommanded and
leave prouydynge for the poor living, which the scripture most ernestly
teaches and comau^deth, as apereth in the Prophet Esaias. lviii. Romans xiii.xv.
Luke. xiiii. Deuteronomy. xv.ii. Cor. ix. Prou. xxi. And that which shall be laid to
your charges, as is before said, for not doing. And ye reward of everlasting
life to the^ which to their power have provided to do for the wydowe ande
fatherless, which is to be understood of all poverty, as presoners, and
those that be abroad.

Oh Lord GOD, how is yt possible for this people to praise the aright, or to
seek thy glory, which when they be in trouble or plaged rightfulli of ye,
either be drought, moisture, or pestilence, or any such like, which do not as
the Children of Israel ded: when they saw their own iniquity, repented ande
forsook their Idolatrye with all their false gods, ande only called to the
Lord God of hosts, and so obtained? As apereth i^ Iudicum. iii.iiii.vi.x.xi.
etc. ande in many other places of the Bible. And saying Christ our redemer
teaches us i^ the.vi. of Math. where he says. When ye pray, say O father
which art in heaven, and cet. And further he says also. Mat. xi. Come unto me
all ye yt labor a^de are laden (meaning with sin) and I will refreshe you.
O what a merciful promise is this, made to us wretches, by hi^ that is all
holy, all mighty, all merciful, and will fulfill all his promyses, even as he
is God alone? How mad, yea how wicked be we then, to go, to seek, call, or to
cry, to any other the^ to him alone? Sei^ge he forbids us i^ so many places
of his holy Testament, sainge. I will have none other Gods in my sight, I am
a Iealouse God Exo. xx.

But alas, these stifnecked citizens will not comme to this only mediatoure
both God and man, but when they feale the^ selves worthily plaged, which
comes of the^ only, the^ will they run a gaddyng, yea a whore hu^tyng after
their false prophets through ye streates ones or twyse in the weke, crienge
and cailyng to creatures and not to the creator, with or a pro nobis, and that
in a tongue which the greatest part understands not, unto Peter, Paul, James
and Johan, Marye, and Martha, and cet. and I think within few years they will
(without thy great mercy) call upon Thomas wolsey, late Cardynale, and upon
the unholy (I should say) holy maid of kent. Why not well as upon Tho. Becket?
what he was I neade not write, yt is meately well known. The sainge of the
Prophet Esaye. xxix. recited by Math. in the.xv. chapter is verified in this
people. With their lips they hououre me, but their hertes are far from me.
Yea they beat their Breath against ye air, as S. Paul. says i. Co. xiiii. and
yt in vain. Oh Lord God co^founde the^ with all their false Prophets and
super sticiousnes, for they minish thy glory as much as in the^ lies. What is
their gaddinge with or a pro nobis, unto creatures, of the^ which should only
pray unto ye? is it ought else but abhominatio^? no surely. And ye City
never speadeth so evil, as when they so ro^ne a whore hou^tinge. And no
meruell, for they seek a wrong way. Oh wicked peopel do not ye se yt both
Thappost. and Ang. refused to be worshipped of men, but would have all the
glory given to God, as apereth in the.iii. of the Acts, also in the.xiiii. of
the Acts, when the prestes with ye people of Listra would have done sacrifice
to Barnabas and Paul. But when Thapostles and Barnabas and Paul hard that,
they rent their clothes and ra^ne in among the people, crienge and sainge,
Syrs why do ye this? we are mortal men like unto you, and preach unto you
that ye should turn from these vanitees unto the living God. These be
Thapostles words, read the chapter, and ye shall see. Also S. Ioha^ fell down
at the fete of the Angel which opened unto him the secrets of God, and would
have worshipped the Angel: but the Angel forbade him, sainge. Se thou do it
not, for I am thy fellow servant, Apoc. xix. Here ye se that both the Apostles
and Angels refused to be worshipped, but would have all the glory given unto
God, when they ware here upon earth. Whether they do not likewise now seek all
the glory to God and not to themselves, Judge thou gentel reader. And think ye
not that if the blessed virgin Marie were now upon earth, and saw her son
and only redemer thus robbed of his glory (which glory ye blind Citezens give
unto her) would not she tear her clothes, like as ded the Apostles? Let the
godly learned judge it.

Now shall ye hear what happened unto ye people of Judah, as appears in
the.xliiii. of Ieremye, for sekinge their own inue^cions and for offringe
oblacions with their fore fathers Kings ande heads unto the queen of heaven
which was ye moan, temptinge the Lord so far, that the Lord might no longre
suffer the wickedness of their inuencions. Thus says the Prophet. Ye have seen
the myserie that I have brought upon Jerusalem and upon all ye Cities of Judah,
so that this day they are desolate, and no man dwellinge there in, and that
because of ye great blasphemies which they committed in yt they went back to
do sacrifice and worship unto strange Gods, etc. And furyer more ye said
prophet says in the same.lxiiii. Cha. Purposely have ye set up your good
meaning, ande hastily have ye fulfilled your own intent, What followed i^ ye
end? verily destruccio^. Read the end of the same Chapter ande thou shall se.

O most dear brethern for Christ's sake give crede^ce unto the Prophet, ande
not to ye Prophet only, but also unto the Holy Ghost which spoke in the
Prophet, and then look upon your selves, how Ioi^tly ye agree with the said
people of Judah. They called the moon ye queen of Heaven, and ye call ye virgin
Marie the queen of heaven, eue^ as ye one is queen of heaven, so is ye other.
Yet be ye worsse then the people of Judah. For their fautes wear written for
your example. And where as yey called upon one queen of heaven, ye call upon
many. How many queen's of heaven have ye in the letany? Oh dear brethern be
no longer deceived with the false prophets your Bishops, ande their members,
Oh ye Cytezens be ye so blind that ye se not, that this is and blasphemy to
God, and a minishinge of the honor dew to Christ's blood, to call upon the
creatures of God created? To patche and peace them with him, as to patche the
pot with the potter? And as though he ware a merciless God, and would not
hear but for their sakes? Yea and yet know not you whether they hear you or
not, as the likelihode is they do not. For ye have no promise of them, but of
Christ ye have: As apereth Johan. xiiii. Mat. xvii. where he says. Ask and
ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and yt shall be opened unto you
etc. Thus leave ye the way certain, for the uncertain, ye patche him with his
creatures because ye believe not in him, nor have that faith in him, which is of
valor before God. Yea ye think he sees not the secrets of your hertes. Oh
unwise people, shall not he that made the heart, know the secrets thereof.
Psalm. xciiii? Well, I exhort you in the name of the Living God to repent
betime, fall fro your accustomed Ydolatry, and leave cryenge to your queen's of
Heaven, ande call only upon the name of the Lord which made all, the God of
Abraham Isaac, and Jacob, and search the scripture, and ye shall se how often
he has plaged the children of Israel for their ydolatrye and whoredom, and
all for our e^sample. Repent I say, ones again, lest the Lord give you
wholly up to your own lusts, as he ded the heythen. Romans i. and visyte you
with the plages of Egipte, which ye have already ryghtfully deserved. He is a
merciful God and suffers long, but when he stryketh felleth to the ground.

Now to lament your blind prouysyon for the dead. Alas it is more the^
blyndnes it self, for manifestly ye cast Christ's merits aside, in seking
health for the souls of your friends departed, by providing a^ idle life for
an unlearned pressed or two, of Baall, trusti^ge in their prayer, as though these
prestes had overplus of righteousness more then served them sell: ues. Ye will
say no, we trust to be saved by Christ's passion. I utterly deny your trust,
it is vain and false, and without hope, or else ye would not seek so many
superstycious ways. For Christ is the only way to the Father, and is alone
suffycyent for all. Heb. ix. yea although Christ be suffycyent, yet ye will
have a pressed to sige for you also, as it wear for a waretack.

Oh ye dispisers of the botto^lesse mercy of God, yea whorehounters and robbers
of Gods glory. Is Christ a peced God, or a patched Redeamer? does not ye
scripture say, there is none other name under heaven, where in we may be saved
Act. iiii.xiii? How mad be ye then, to seek or call upon any other? The great
substance which ye bestow upon chauntryes, obbites, ande such other like
dregs of that abominable whore of Rome, which most commenly ye give
for.iii. causes (as ye say) is all lost.

First, yt ye will have ye service of god mai^tained in ye church to gods
honor, and yet by ye same service is god dishonored, for ye supper of lord is
perverted, and not used after christ's i^stitucio^ Mat. xxvi. Marc.xiiii. Luke.
xxii.i. Corint. xi. and so is that holy instytucyon turned into a vain
superstycious Cerymoniall Mass (as they call it) which Mass is become an
abominable Idol, and of all Idols the most greatest, and never shall
ydolatrye be que^tched, where that ydol is used after Anticristes i^stitucyo^.
Daniel.ix. Mat. xxiiii. Which no doubt, shall be reformed, when the time is come
that God has appointed, even as it is used already in diverse cities of
Germany. Yea although all the Antichrists i^ the whole world would say ye
contrary, and all their disciples with them: yea although they study to set
all the Princes of ye earth together by the ears, to let that and soche like
godly redress, as it is their old cast, yet he sytteth in Heaven that
laugheth them to scorn, and he shall make their wisdom folyshnes.i. Cor. i.

The second cause is for redeami^ge your souls and your friends. which is
also abhomynable. For who soever will seek redempcyon, iustifycacyo^,
salvation, or to be made righteouse by the law: he is gone quyte from Christ,
and his merytis profit him not. Read the third chaptre to the Romans and
the.iiii. to the Hebreus the.iii. to the Galath. and also Esaye. liii.i. Cor.
i. and there ye shall see. Perchance ye will say, ye seek no soche thing
thereby. Oh ye unwise and open dyssemblers, wherefore the^ do ye it? ye say
like as the Idolatoure now adays does if he set a candle before an Image ande
Idolle, he says, he does not worship the Image, but God who^e it
represents. For (say they) who is so folysh as to worship an Image? As who
should say, none. I answer, wherefore does God i^ so many places of ye
Scripture, forbid us to worship Idolles or Images, as Exo. xx. Deuteronomy. v.
Sapi. xiii.xiiii. and throughout all ye Prophets, but that he knew that ye
would worship them with your forefathers? Even so ye, because ye have not
full trust in Christ's merits, ye grope after vain waretackes. If thou wylt
set a Candle before the Image of God, thou must be dilligent daily to help
thine neighbor, acording to thine estate, which thing I have towched before.

The.iii. cause of your good intent is, that ye profits of your goods may
come to the prestes as though they ware ye peculyar people of God and only
beloved, as i^dede to those which preach the Gospel be the people bound to
give a sufficient living. For the workma^ is whorthye of his reward. Mat. x.i.
Tim. v. But not that their prayer ca^ help the dead, no more the^ a man's breath
blowynge in the sail, can cause a great ship for to sail. So is this also
become abhominacio^, for those be not Christ's mynysters, but the minysters of
a rabble of uncommanded tradicions and popish ceremonies. Ande thus ye be the
mainteyners of a sort of lusty lubbars, which be well able to labor for their
living, and strong enough to get it with the swet of their faces, as ye
Scripture teaches them. Genesis.iii.i. Thesalo. iiii Ande thus be ye
mayntayners of their ydlenes and leave the blind, the lame, and the presoner
vnholpe^, which the scripture commands you to help, except it be on the
so^dayes with afewe halfpe^s, or by pe^nymeale, which helps little or no
thing.

But unto those blind guides. ye will give.vi.vii.viii. yea xii pou^ds yearly
to one of the^, to sing in a chau^trie to rob the living God of his
honnoure.

Ye will say unto me, what art thou, that call these things uncommanded
tradycyons and popyshe ceremonies, seeing the Kings Grace forbyddeth them not,
and uses part of them him self? I answer that ye use many things contrary
to the kings iniunccyons. And if it be that God through the king has cast
out the deuell out of this realm, and yet both he and we suppe of the broth in
which the deuell was soden, and that God has yet not opened the eyes of the
king to set all things in right frame, and utterly to break down the
serpent, as Ezechias the king did.iiii. Reg. ix. and as king Asa did.ii.
Chro. xiiii take it thus, that even your i^iquytye with calling upon vain
Gods, and seeking salvation by a wrong way, is the very cause that God
closes up the eyes of the king, as of one that hears and understands not,
and sees and perceyueth not.

But for the reverence of Christ's merits, where as ye have walked some in
very si^ple ignorance, and some in obstynate or wylfull ignorance, and groped
in times paste after a wrong way, dark, crooked, hard and endless: now seek
the right true ande only way which is light, straight, and easy to find, yt
is to say, Christ the only Messiah: and redress these things, easy to be
done. Turn your Chauntries and your Obbites from the profit of these
bearewolues whelps, which can neither help the souls of your friends
departed, nor yet yours, after God has taken you from this life, and scripture
ye have none to e^corage you, but only your own inue^tions: and against you
are places innumerable, and specially. Romans xiiii. Where the Apostle says,
what soever is not of faith is sin, your chau^tries and ceremonies are
without Gods word, and so must they be without faith, ergo they be sin.
Bestow them therefore from hence forward upon ye true Image of Christ which
is upon the poor, the sick, the bli^de, the lame, the presoner, etce. Oh ye
Cytezens if ye would turn but even the profytes of your chauntries and your
obbittes to the finding of the poor, with a pollitique and godly prouysion,
where as now London being one of the flowers of the world, as touchige
worldly riches, has so many, yea innumerable of poor people forced to go
from door to door, and to sit openly in the streets a beggynge, and many not
able to do for other, but lie in their howses in most grievous pains, ande dye
for lack of aid of the rich, to the great shame of the, Oh london, I say,
if ye would redress these things as ye be bound, ande sorrow for the poor,
so should ye be without ye clamor of them, which also cries unto God against
you, ande which he well hears, and then where as now ye have a^ hou^dreth
extreme poor people, shall not be one, and in so doi^g your own goods shall
not* be a witness against you at ye great day of the Lord, as yt will be
against your forefathers for not providing for ye poor? Besides yt, what a
Joy shall it be, to se your brethren well provided for?

ye abuse your riches, specially you that come to thoffice of the City, for ye
spend vnmeasurably. Upon whom? even upon them that have no neade, as upon
the Nobles and Ientlemen of the court, upon the aldermen and other rich
co^moners which have as great nead of your feasts, as has the sea at the
highest of ye spring tide, of the pissynge of the wrenne, the pore forgotten,
except it be with a few scrappes and bones sent to newgate for a face. Alas
alas, how little it is the Lord knows, I think in my Judgment under heaven
is not so little prouisyon made for the pore as is in London of so rich a
City, Well, the poor well feleth the bournynge of Doctor Barnes and his
fellows, which labored in the Lord. For according to there office they
barked upon you to look upon the poor, so that then some relefe they had,
but now alas yey be cold, yea even those which say they be the fauorrers of
the gospel. It is a token that your foundation was builded upon the sand,
for that GOD has suffered your Prophets to be burnt. Though they be gone
considre it was not their comma^deme^t, but gods, whose Testament ye have
even now in your very Mother tongue, thanks be to the Lord therefore. In ye
same ye may perceive that their absence should not quench nor mollifye your
love toward your brethern. And doubt not but God shall raise other, that
shall speak with the same sprete that they ded, and with no less love and
veheme^cy: if inyquytie be not cause to the contrary. There is a custom in
the City, ones a year to have a quest called ye warnmall queste, to redress
vices, but alas, to what purpose comes it, as it is used? If a poor man keep
a whore besides his wife, and a pore man's wife play the harlot, they are
punisshed, as well worthy. But let an alderman, a Ientlema^, or a rich man
keep whore or whores, what punishment is there? Alas this matter is to bad. I
say some of your aldermen keep whores to the great shame of all the rest. Yt
wear no shame to name the^. Wherefore repent and amend, or sureli I will if
God lend me life, in an other work name you, and other of your affynyte which
be openly known to be common aduouterers: which is no little shame to the
heads and other rulers of the City to suffer such abhominacion. But no
marvel though ye suffer bodily aduoutrers, saying ye your selfs are
spyrituall auoutrers, calli^g upon vain gods. Ye will say I sclau^dre you and
bring up false lies upon you. Some of you know whether I sclau^der you or not
I would it ware a sclau^der. But I sclandre you so, yt except ye repent and
amend your living, as well ye yt be sufferers of such vices as the co^mitters,
except ye amend I say and seek redress of this and such like, the vengeance
of God will light upon the City for your sins. For how can ye do Justice
upon a another and ye offend in the same yourselfe? yea and how parciall be ye
that punish the pore, ande leave unpunished those heads that should give good
example to the rest? A wake awake for the Lord slepeth not, although ye
think that he wi^cketh at this gear. I exhort you in gods name, look better
i^ chosinge of your head officers. Let not riches only cause men to rule, and
specially irke better to ye chosi^g of your officers of the law. How can
Dronkandes, whoremongers ande couetouse Parsons give right Judgment? do briars
bri^ge forth figs and thorns grapes? Ande I say unto you the parcialyte of
Judges suppressynge the pore, and aydynge the rich for lucre, and in
code^pning the innoce^tes and lettinge the wicked go fre: brings the
vengeance of GOD upon all places, as appears in Esaias. iii. Here I could say
su^what more then I now will, I mean in condempninge the Innocents.

Think ye that God has not as much to lay to ye charges of London for
killinge his servants, as he had against Jerusalem for killinge his Prophets?
Yes yes: For Gods sake ye that be elders repent and give your selfs to
readinge ye law of ye lord, yt ye may be an example to ye commons in Godly
co^uersacio^: And in ye Scriptur ye shall learn what to do, ande what to leave
undone, and how to know false Prophets, and how to cast them out of your
conscye^s, where they have sytte^ a long time, eue^ in the stead of God: I
mean not the Bishop of Rome alone, but he and all his mark with him, and
specialy his own generation, which are all i^ forked Cappes.

What a plage is this, that in no man's time alive, was ever any Christian
Bisshoppe raini^ge over the City of London, but every one worsse then other? I
think their can now come no worsse, except the same Lucyfer that fell from
heaven, come himself, which is the very father of all Popyshe Bishops.
Consyore this is for your inyquitie. Yet let ye little flock rejoice and give
God only thanks yt he has raised other meaner me^bres In ye sight of ye
world then Bisshops, to preach ye gospel, ande to set it forth in writing.

Now to all you though ye be few in no^bre which favor Gods holy word
unfeignedly and not in word only, but in works also, showing ye fruits of
your faith, say I thus: exortynge you for Christ's blood sake, to be dylygent
in prayer, only to the euerlyuinge God, yt he of his own mere mercy, give
grace to ye rulers of this City, that from henceforth they may seek Gods
glory only, the co^monwelth and prouysio^ for the poor: and then doubt ye not
but God shall give our noble King such a^ heart that he shall know, and soche
eyes that he shall plainly see, and soche ears that he shall understand in
dead. For why? it is the Lord that has the heart of all princes in his hand
Pro. xxi. So that I say, where as he has now ba^nisshed out of his realm but
the very bear wolf the whore of Babylon only: shall now also ba^nysh with her
all her folyshe tradycyons and beggarly ceremonies, against which S. Pau. wrote
ad Gal. iiii. and in many other places mo. Now shall your papistical sort
despise this my lame^tacyo^, and laugh me to scorn. Although I know there is
no Christen heart in this realm, no nor in the whole world, which knows
the vices used i^ the city, and how little Gods glory is sought, how little the
co^monewelth is set by, how barelye the poor are provided for, but he will
lament with me. And as for the contrary part: I wysh with all my heart
repentance, and will continually my life duri^g pray unto the euerlini^g
God, to draw them to the Gospel of his son Jesus Christ, and that they
may come to the father by the only way and door Christ, and that they may
also forsake their bydores and clyming i^ at the wi^dowes wherbi they shall
never atayne to any saving health. O Lord God I beseech the, call them from
that no^bre whom the almighty sytting in Heaven laugheth to scorn Psalm. xxi.
The only cause that I write this, is to exhort all me^ as well readers as
hearers, to repent betymes, ande to fall diligently to prayer, askyng mercy,
that we may avoid the plages which we rightfully have deserved, and no doubt
we shall not escape them all, onles we repent ye sooner, Remember how he warned
ye city of Jerusalem.xl. years long: and because they repented not, but slew ye
Prophets by who God warned the^, he kept promise with the^, and scourged the^
acordi^g to their deseruinges. And he that spoke ye same to Jerusalem speaks
it to you, and to all Cities, that commit like i^iquite as ye do. And whether
ye have served ye Disciples of the Lord, like as ded the Cytezens of Jerusalem
their Prophets, Judge your seifes, ande ye shall se that ye have shed more
blood, the^ ever ded that most sinful Jerusalem, even of the^ that taught you
Gods truth. Well, I can no more, but beseech the Lord God, that he will give
such grace to some, that in the time of his wrath, he may find.x. ryghteous
persons in this City, whereby the wrath and ve^geau^ce of God may be turned
from it, which is like to come shortly upon us or upon our childeren, for our
sins and our forfathers. For we have deserved a.M. times more plages, the^
ever ded Tire and Sido^, or Sodoma and Gomora, ware it not for ye great mercy
of God I think, we had found it so or this time. For we have an example of
these Cities and they be written for our learning to avoid such vices. Yea no
doubt the vices committed in ye, oh London, are as evil as ever ware in any of
ye four Cities before named. And surely I think, if they had herd ye prechi^g
yt has been i^ London this.xiiii. or.xvi. years past, yt they had repented
and ^orsaken their Iniquitye. For I say unto you that the gospel was never
more si^cerelye preached in the time of the Apostles, then it has been of late
in London: Nor never more Godly exposicions upon the scripture and that a
great nombre whereby to draw us to Christ Jesus. For why? the same sprete
even the very holy Ghost which spoke in the Apostles, has spoken in me^ now
to us.

But alas, as the Prophet says. Esaias. xxix. we have ears and hear not, eyes
and see not.

See ye not nor yet perceive ye how the blind Prophets have led you, even now
in our time? Have ye not slain the servants of the Lord, only for
speaking against ye autoritye of the false Bysshoppes of Rome that mo^struouse
beast, who^ now ye your selves do or should abhor? I mean all his laws
being contrary to Christ, and not his body, and yet ye se yt a few years
past ye bre^t them for heretics abominable which preatched or wrote against
his usurped power, and now it is treason to vphoulde or maintain any part of
his usurped power, and he shall dye as a traytoure that so does, and well
worthy. So say I unto you there shall be yet things preched unto you, and ye
shall be instructed by writers of things which ye be not yet able to bear,
and whosoever preaches or writes it (if the Lord defend him not out of your
hands) he shall dye for it: and yet out it will at ye length, though all the
deuelles in hell say nay to it, and so shall be reformed. Ande even this
followyng is one of ye chefest things.

Oh ye Cytezens, will ye never give your selfs to the reading pf the
scripture whereby ye may know the law of the Lord, to avoyde the
everlasting damnacion, which is ordained for the deuell and his angels? Will
ye ever be ignorant of Gods commandment? Exodi. xx. saying.

I will have none other Gods in my sight, and that ye neither bow your self,
nor serve any thing as God, yt is in earth benethe or in heaven above, or in
the water under the earth. And do ye not yet se how this whore of Babylon has
altered the supper of the Lord, which was i^stituted to have ye blessed
passion in continual remembrance, and for a perpetual memory of thanks
geuinge: which we should receive with all reverence and meaknes of heart geuinge
thanks unto God only for yt benefyte which we have received and obtained
through Christ's death, which this supper sygnifyeth, and that we believe as
verily as we eat the bread and dri^k ye wine, which norissheth ye body and is
seane with our corporal eye, and spiritualli represents the very body of
Christ, even so verily as we have tasted, eaten and seen this holy supper or
Sacrament of thanks geuinge: even so verelye to believe yt Christ dyed for our
sins, and that his blood only has pacyfied the fathers wrath, and so has
set us at peace with, God For he has paid yt which lay not in me nor in no
man, but only in him that was both God and man, and by none other means
might man be redeemed, and so to aknoweledge yt he is dead and has shed his
blood for our sins, and is risen for our rightwysnesse.

Thus I seeing my sins buried in Christ's wounds, must ever more be
thankful to ye euerliui^g God only. And thus to eat his blessed body and to
dri^ke his blood spiritually in faith, is Gods institucyon. Math. xxvi. Marc.
xiiii. Luc. xxii.i. Corinth. xi. Where he says, as often as ye shall eat of
this bread and drink of this cup ye shall show ye Lords death till he come.

And saint Austyn says, what preparest thou thy teth and thy belly? believe
and thou have eaten. Which agrees with ye words of our savior Christ saing.
The flesh profits nothing, it is the spryte yt quyckeneth. Johan in ye.vi.
chapter. But the institucio^ of Antichriste is clean contrary to this. For by
his institucio^ thou must fall down upon thy knees, holdinge up thy hands
as to God, In deed it is ye Bishop of Romes God which they must see with
their corporal eye, because they have no hope in the living God through the
spyrituall eye.

And thus has he changed the holy memory of Christ's death, in to the
worshippynge of his God made of fine flower, and all to bring him self and
his members alofte, and in the reputacion of the world above all degrees of
men, yea above King and Emperor, and thereby to sit in the consciences of
men, above God and his word, even in the very temple of God, where God alone
should fit. And by his institucio^ of this his God, is he crept up in to this
usurped power.

Oh Antichrist the begynner of this Idol which is head of all Idolles after
thine institucyon. Does not God say, as before is said Exo. xx? Thou shall not
worship any symilitude that his in heaven, earth or in the waters under the
earth. And thou contrari to the euerlyuing Gods commandment, have seduced
the people to honor thy God. I tell the gentle reader ones again, it is the
greatest Idol under heaven as it is used in his mass, and a God of the
making of Antichrist as is said, which mass is after his institucyon an
heap of folishe ceremonies without significacions, to avaunce ande set out his
God, to the blearynge of the eyes of the simple. Ande thu shall see if thou will read ye.xviii. chapter: of the Apocal. calling to God only to open thyn
eyes, all the trishtrashe yt Antychrist has sold us which be the only
implementes of ye mass of Antichrist, I mean not the Antichrist of Rome
only, but also of all other popysshe Bishops, with all their brethern in
Antichrist. And in the said.xviii. chaptre thou shall see the fall not only
of the whore alone, but also of her merchaundyse the same tryshtrash with her.
For even as ye whore is fallen in England already, thanks only be given to
God therefore, and yet her trishtrash remayni^g for our iniquities sake, eue^ so
I say i^ ye said xviii. chaptre thou shall see that her marchaundyse must
follow, when the time is come that God has appointed. No doubt our
vntha^kfulnesse sake, a^de ye geuinge of glory unto men which should be given
only unto God, is the cause of the long remainynge of ye premises. The
words of ye xviii. chaptre be these. Alas alas ye great City Babylon yt
mighty City, for at one hour is her Judgment come, ande the Merchantes of the
Earth shall weep ande wayle in them selves, for no man will bye their ware any
more, ye ware of gold and silver, and precious stones, nether of pearls, and
raynes, and purple, and skarlet, and all thynne woddes, and brass, a^de iron,
and sinamom, and odours, and oyntmentes, ande fra^kencense, and wine, and oil,
ande fine flower, and sowles of me^. This fine flower have yey made the
chefeste of all their tryshtrashe, and a cloak or a cloud to shadow all the
rest. Read the chapter and thou shall perceive more.

I pray ye Ie^tle reder judge, wear not ye pardoners Merchantes to them? Ye
it is well known that their pardons and other of their tromperye, has been
bought and sold in Lombardstrete, and in other places as thou wylt bye ande
sell an horse in smithfelde. Yea ande at easter when thou should come to the
supper of the lord to receive the Sacrament of thanks geuynge, there must
thou receive the God of Antichryst without significacio^ or Godly instruction,
yea and thou must bye it ande pay for it, as men sometime bought Pyes in Soper
Lane. yea ande thou must pay for his God or thou have it: yea I have hard of
pore me^ for lack of two pens bee^ put from receyuynge of their God, and for
lack of paying ye parso^ or vicare his dewtie many have been put from it.

Ande more I tell the reader that the body of our savior Jesus Christ can not
be eaten with teth, it must be eten with faith as is a foresaid.

Ande further mark this well, that thing that has beginning or endinge can
not be God, nor ought to be worshypped as God. So ca^ this sacrament no more be
God then was the pascall la^be. For God is without beginning and ending, and
so is not the God of Antichriste, for he is made many times be a synnefull
Ipocryte.

Well, then it has a beginning ande may peryshe ande moulde a way, ande
the little mouse will eat it, if he may come by it. And the wine will wax
sower and stink as does their holy water in the founte by long kepinge,
which has been the destruction and death of iunumerable childerne: where as
two or three drops of water taken out of it by the prestes hands and cast
upon ye child wear sufficyent, and the child never neade to be taken out of
his clowtes. Now to my purpose again.

OH thou blind man, can the body of Christ peryshe by any manner of means? As
to wax sower, or that any manner of beasts may eat the body of Christ? No
surely, God forbydde. For he (as concerning his Godheade) was from the
beginning, and shall be without ending. As manyfestlye it appears in Johan
ye first chapter. The word was in ye beginning with GOD and ce. But this
mark well, that eue^ as the passover la^be was a Sign, a Token ande a
remembrance to put the Chyldern of ISRAEL in memory of their corporalye or
bodily delyueraunce, and also that Messiah should come to be slain for their
sins, paying their ransom, and delyueryng the^ from everlasting death:
which moved the faithful of them to be thankful to God, for that they
believed as verily as they deed eat of the lamb which they had slain, even so
verily had God delivered their forefathers from the plages which fell upon ye
wicked unbelievers: And also that a Redemer should come which God the Father had
promised, by the mouth of his Prophets. And thus deed they both eat Christ's
body and drink Christ's blood in faith spiritually many years before Christ
was borne: Even so the Sacrament of thanks geuinge, is to us a sign, a toke^,
a spyrituall memory of our spiritual deliuerau^ce. For ye faithful believed
eue^ as verelye as they see and eat it, so do they acknowledge the benefytt
which they receive in a^de through the immortal God, and which ye same holy
Sacrament represents, ande no doubt ye very body of Jesus Christ is
spyritually in ande with us in the receiuinge of the sacrament, if it be
resayued with the faith aforesaid. Even like as he is among two or three which
be gathered together i^ his name, as it is his godly promise Ma. xviii. Thus ye
may se that the same faith which saves us, saved the old fathers: for they
believed through yt outward sign that a redeamer should come, and we through
the memory of this holy Sacrament of thanckes geuynge believe yt he is come, and
has fullfylled all that was of him prophesied. And thus both they and we eat
ye holy body of Christ spiritualie in one faith.

And farther understood reader, that unto all beleuers the ceremonye of eating
the pashcale lamb ceased immediatlye when Christ had changed it in to a
maundye of thanckes giving. For why? the next day was fullfylled by the death
of Christ that thing which the pashcall lamb to them ded represent.

Thou say it is a sacrament, which I both grant and writ. If it be a
Sacrament as it is in deed, the^ it is a sign of some holyer thing then it
self is. Ande being a sign of a holyer thing then it self is, so ca^ it
not be God, for what sign or token will thou have holier yee^ God? None. Ergo
the^ it is not God himself, but some sign toke^ or remembrance of some
benefyt which we have through him, and this holy sign puts us in
remembrance for the same to be thanckefull to the Lord.

Thou wylt say it is God himself even flesh, blood and bones, yea and
senewes thereto, as master Sta^dys one of your wise false Prophets preached of
late among you, but yet deny I that, for all his ungodly learning. For how
can it be a Sacrament of God and God him self also, seeing there can be
nothing holyer then God? And again if it be GOD that is present, thou fool,
what needs the of any Sacrament or sign of that thing which is present it
self?

AS touching this matter, JOHAN fryth ye servant of the LORD whom ye and
your False Prophets have burned, whose blood with others cries vengeance
against your Bysshoppes. He (I say) has written Inuyncibly in this matter,
whose work I exhort all those which favor the free passage of the gospel
unfeignedly, to read and to study. For it is agreing to the touchstone of Gods
word, and to the old ancient doctors. As appears by the same book of his.
Ande I exhort you in Gods name if there be any Chistian printer in London, to
prynte moo of those works, for there can never be to many of them

Fear not man although death follow, sei^g Christ says, he that loses his
life for my words sake shall save it. Mathewe in the.xx. chapter. And considre
that neither, Winchester nor London, nor the rest of the Bisshoppes the
vessels of Gods Justice without repentance, have no power to destroy but ye
body only, wherefore fear them not: But fear him only that can kill both
body and soul as apereth in the same.xx. chap. For if thou will live godly in
Christ, thou must neades suffer persecution. And truly he is not worthy to be a
membre of the body, that will suffer no dysplesure with the head. Therefore
blessed are they that suffer persecucyon or any trouble for ryghtousnes sake:
that is for Christ's sake.

And in this matter I say with the said Johan fryth, that it is no point of
our dampnacio^ nor salvation. If I believe it not it dampneth me not: But to
have the abse^ce of the benefyttes of his death and passion in my heart, may be
cause of my dampnacion: and in beleuynge of the said benefytes of ande through
his death shall be my salvation, being repentaunt for my sins.

But one thing I will tell the and mark it well, for it is true. Though thou
believe he is there like as Antichrist and like his petye membre standish
says, ande so worship it as God, I tell the that it is damnable. For thou
art commanded in the first Table of ye commandments, yt thou shall not
worship any thing yt is made after any symylitude or lykenes that is in
heaven or earth as I have before said. God is asprete and will be honored in
sprete and veryte. I say your blind and bloody Bishops or rather butchers,
dishonor not only the Sacrament, but the God of al Gods also, in
mynystrynge the same. And so do all prestes that other si^ge or say the popysh
mass which they call a sacryfyce, and thereby would have Christ's body daily
crucyfyed, where as he offered up his holy body upon the cross for our sins
ones for ever, ande never shall be offered again, while the world endures, but
has instituted the holy supper or Sacrament of thankesgeuynge as before is
said: to put us in contynuall memory of that oblacion and sacrifice, yt we
should believe our sins to be forgeuen only for Christ's sake through his
death, ande so to be thankful, which holy thing as ye se is turned into a
popyshe mass, and is to the people a domme, yea no thing else but a dead
ceremonye.

Wherefore I will exhort all prestes that wylbe of Christ's congregation, to fle
and give over that abominable massinge, which is a blasphemy to Christ's
blood, in that they make of it a sacryfice. What sacryfice can yt be where no
blood is shed? Wherefore in Christ's name all you (I say) that would be of
Christ's church, forsake this whore with all her abominable rables, ande rather
beg with Christ, then welthelye to live with the prestes of her God Beell,
and fear not, but God shall provide both clothyng and food sufficient for the
body.

Considre the lylye does not spynne, yet was Solomon never so gorgiouslie
apparelled. Mat. vi. Who clothed the lilie, ded not our heavenly father clothe
it? And be not ye worth many sparrowes? Well then we se that pure heavenly
father both clothed and fed all creatures: and shall not he also clothe and
feade you which seek his glory and trust only in him? Yes, yes doubt not. And
surely ye ca^ not remain as ye do, but ye must be partakers of there Idolatrye.

Perchance thou will say, I could be contented to live porely to follow
Christ, but I fear the Bishops blessing which is a fair fire. Set before
the ye death of Christ for prechynge his fathers will, and before him the
Prophets, ande after him his Apostles, and at this day his chosen servants,
ande consydre as before is said that the deuyllyshe Byshopes, the vesseiles of
Gods Justice: can but destroy the body only, and that God will raise it up
again at the great day of ye Lord, even as he is risen. And considre that
always it was the Bysshoppes and the high prestes yt put Christ and his
Apostles and his chosen servants to death. And by their deuellyshe sedusyng,
ever blinded the Princes and other head rulers to give there consent there unto.
Math. in the.xxi. ande in the.xxvi. chapter.

O ye Babylonyshe Bisshoppes and generation of Uipers, where have ye your
auctoryte? or how dar ye be so bold to kill a man for his faith which Christ
never ded nor his Apostelles? For it is a gift which no man can either give an
other or yet him self. No no, it is the gift of God only. Ande that must be
given a man before he can either do or think good. For all yt is done without
faith is sin. Roma in ye xxiiii. and Hebre. xi.

No, nor ye put no man to death for Christ's sake, but for y^ that no man should
either preach teach or writ Christ aryght, which he can not do, but he
shall by force be constrained of the holy Ghost to write against your pomp,
pride, vile lyuinge, and against your abhomynable sedusing of the people,
leadynge them in an endless mase of dyrtye tradicions and folyshe ceremonies.

And why cannot a man set for the Christ but he must write against you? Even
because ye be the very Antichrists. No I say it is not possible for any man
sent of God, either to preach or write, but he must open his mouth against
that most wicked abomynable, and detestable Antychryst, of ROME, as against
the enemy of Christ, which be you false Bishops, false Prophets, that bear
the false sign of the new law and the old law, with stout strong and
sturdie Archedeaco^s, Deanes, and Chanons of Cathedral churches, and other
your pyty members prestes of Baall. Ande he that opens not his mouth against
you, ca^ not truly set out Christ and that is the cause why ye seek their
deaths.

Ye bewytch Kings and other rulers, and turn their labors. I mean the
labors of ye servants of God, which cry against your Iniquytie, sayi^g
they teach sedycyon, and cause rebellyon against the higher powers

Oh ye chylderne of Satan all yt read their works may bear record with
the^ against your lies. Who teaches so much the obedience toward the higher
powers, as God only in them does, which preach or write the gospel? yea has
not GOD through their preachi^ges brought your kyngedome under the temporalle
powers, which many years has usurped over them? Ande because ye would not be
under the obedyence which the scripture teached, has cost many a thousand
men's lives, ande some prestes among. And this point I wyshe unto all kings
that will not wilfully be blind, to beware of you crafty and wilye Bishops.
Although they will not considre the injuries yt they have done to Christ's
church or congregacyon, in persecutynge them unto death, for truly preaching
ande writing Gods glory, ande minyshynge the glory of Antychryst, although I
say, that the Kings of the earth and other high powers will not considre
Christ's cause, yet let them consider their own, what and how tira^nously ye
Bisshoppes Kingdom has used their progenitors Kings of England? Against
whom they ware ever the heads and the beginners, the foundacyon ande the very
origynall of all mischeue. Read the storye of Wylliam Rufus and of King Henry
the seconnde, how he was used by Thomas Becket, King Ioha^ how he was used of
and by Stephen Lanckton Bishop of Cantorbury, which will pytye any Christen
heart to hear, as well for the wicked vsinge of the good King anointed of
GOD, as of the bondage and thrauldome that he brought ye whole realm in. But
such is the Charity of Bisshoppes as well in all other realms where they
may bear rule, as In England.

And though it appear that some of ye trobles which chaunsed to the Kings of
England i^ times past came by Abbotes of these fyllthye Monasteryes ryghtfully
deposed now of late, yet came the ground from the forked merchauntes. For be
thou sure, never came any dyspleasure to any Prince in England or else where
for seeking any Godly redress ande Gods glory: but ye original and
maintayners of ye same ware these forked cappes. Above all ye me^bres of
Antichryst, I say, beware of them, all you yt will not wilfully be bli^d.
They be the very right and chief wolves yt Christ speaks of Mat. vii.
calling them wolves in shepes clothing. What is that, shepes clothi^ge? No
doubt ye word of God, under the pretense of the which word they come to
confound the word, as much as lies in them. Their acts appear to the^ that
will not will fullye be blinded. Full well know they if they should not come
under a pretense of holiness, and specially with a pretense of the word of God,
of the church of GOD, of the doctrine of Christ, of the old true lerni^g, of
seven or eight ho^dreth years old and ce. That no man would believe them. Yet
for all their outward meakenes ande holiness, they be withyn ravening wolves,
according to Christ's sai^ge in the place above rehearsed: as their acts and
charity has appeared of late years upon the servants of GOD. And Christ
here shows us how we should know the^. Read the places, and ye shall see
them descrybed as appears.i Timo i. and.ii. and.ii. Timot. iii. ande i. Joan.
ii. and.iiii. And if ye will give no credit to it, your own blood upon your
heads, according to the saying of the Prophet Ezechiell in the.iii. Chapter.

How is this to be lamented seeing the Kings grace has set out Iniunccions,
yt all Uycars, Persons, and Curates, shall purely, and syncerely preach ye
Gospel, and leave their own dreams, and yet not with sto^dyng these
Iniunccio^s, whosoever preaches the Gospel aright, but even the very Text
which the Holy Ghost wrote, ande cries against the calli^g upon any saui^g
health through the ways and works of ma^s inue^cions, against ye which all ye
Prophets cry, as is before said, he I say yt so truly labourethe in the
vineyarde of the Lord: ye Bysshoppes will either hang him or bourne him or
pryuelie murder him. And upon the contrary part, let them never so openly
preach their own dreams, yet may no man trouble them, nor say black is
their eye. And no marvel, for Christ had promised them no trouble or cross
i^ this world, which preach not, but persecute his word.

Thus be ye thieves and robbers of all Chrystyanytye, stealing from us the
spyrytuall fode of our souls. Yea, a thousand times worse be ye, then the
thief that rob the upon the high way for neade. And yet so bewitche you
the higher powers and the rich of ye world, yt they can not escape your
robberye, and no marvel, for ye world will love his own, as Christ says
Johan. xv.

O ye deuelles ye blind guides and seducers of the people, how of late
bewitched you ye Parlame^t house? Eue^ by your inuencions and deuelishe study
have ye caused acts and decrees to be made, so clean contrary to the laws
of ye lyuinge God, that I say unto you, the very bearewolfe, that abominable
whore of Rome never made so cruel acts. He never made it death for a priest
to marye a wife: But ye shame not only to separate them that be married, so
contrary to GODS word, which says, let no man separate that which GOD
has couplede. Mathewe.xix. but have also made it death.

Oh generacyon worse then the Uyper. Does not saint Paul say, let every man
that has not the gift of chastytye take his wife.i. Cor. vii. Here is no
parso^ excepted. And that the Apostels had wives ye scripture is plain. As
saint Peter with other, Mat. viiii. Ye will say, ye have the gift of
chastitye. Well the chastytye of the most part of you that procured those
wicked acts is meately well known, and therefore make ye it no abhominacion to
keep whores. Ye abhor ye remedy ordained of God, ande mai^tayne the remedy of
satan, as appears by wi^chesters gardyn. Well ye Bysshoppes ande ye Chanons
of the church of beell, ye shutters up of Gods word, according to his own
Prophetie. Mat. xxiii. Luc. xi. To you I can say no more, but though ye world
or worldly people laugh upon you, yet will ye vengeance of God light upon
your forked cappes and cathedral churches of Beel one day, and that
shortelye, except ye amend betymes. Is not your aurycular confession also
abominable? Yes, and that one of the most fylthyest things used upon earth,
as has plainly appeared by the feats of your chaplaynes in diverse places of
England of late, and some withyn this two years. I could name the prestes
and ye places also: but I will pass it over with scylence, trustyng in the
Lord, ye higher powers shall ones se the myschefe that comes thereof and
redress it. What an abhomynacyon is it that I should go pour out my vices in
the ear of an unlearned buzarde, and specially for a woman, whereby Sir Johan
knows where to be sped. Yea if she will not grant to him, he will not shame
to threaten her to open her vice, ande so for fear she must agree to his
abhomynable desire.

What a bli^dnes is it to think my sins forgeuen me, when a Priest of
Antychryste (as the most part be) has wagged two or three Fyngers over my
head? David says. I confessed my sin unto the Lord, ande he hard me ande
forgave me. Psalm. xxii. The Israelites when they had offended the lord God, and
after ernestly repented, calling to the Lord only formercy, brynging forth
the fruits of Repentance: Ware in co^tynent delivered from their Adversaries,
as appears Iudicu^.viii.ix. and in many other places of the Bible,

This was before any auriculare confe^^ion was known. For yt no dout was the
inue^cio^ of Antichryst of To. And one chief cause was to betray princes, and
other great men. For what noble man was it in Christendom that spoke against
forked cappes many years long but the Bishop of Ro^e had his confession with
all speade, and suddenly they would bewitche the Prince of the Realm, and fordge
some Matter against him, and so of force he should be made a traitor, ande so
suffer death. I think this matter be manifest enough to many me^, as well in
England as else where. Well, this vile thing was not from the beginning,
neither shall it contynewe to the end. Even as your inordynate Possessions
ware not of your heavenly fathers plantynge, nor sowing, and therefore must be
plucked up by the rotes with your companyons and brethren in Antychryste
Abbottes, as is before said.

Some will say it may be well used, which I utterly deny. It shall nor can
never be well used, so long as prestes may keep whores without danger of
death, which burden may ryghtfullye be laid upon them, seeing thy abhor
matrimony instituted of God: against which sin was no remedy but death in
ye old law, where as theft was but rendrynge double. For this ande soche like
things, be ye learned ye rulers, lest ye Lord be a^grie. Psalm. secundo.

Again I say it shall never be well used of al prestes, as long as they
shall grope our partyculare sins which is not necessary. For why? if I be
repentaunt, ande ernestelye minded never to fall to mine accustomed sins
again, I doubt not but I am forgiven, without the priest for Christ's sake
only. Ande if I have not that repentance, even from the bottom of my heart,
ande believe not that I am forgeuen for Christ's sake, as is before said: all
the prestes in Engelonde say I, nor yet the bear wolf of ROME can forgive
me. Thus ye may se where in consyste the confeffyon for the offense to God
ward.

And as touching thy neighbor thou must reconsyle thy self to him whom thou
have offended, and make restytucyon to thy power: ande if thou be not able to
make recompense with goods, thou oughteste to offer him thy body. And even as
thou art bound so to do, so is he bound to show the mercy But thou thy
duty, ande thus every neighbor to reconsyle each to other, is the right
confession chaunsinge between brethern or neighbors, as apereth in Johan
the.vii. chapter. ande in Matthew. the.vii. chapter.

Thou Bishop, ande thou false Prophet wylt say that it is ordained of GOD,
ande wilt bring in chefely for the, that Christ sent the te^ne Lepers to the
prestes: Which serves asmoche for confession, which we make to a priest, as
to lay an onyon to my little finger for the totheache. To you blind guydes yt
be ignorantly blind speak I, and not to these that be wilfully bli^de: Let
them be still blind: yet I exhort all christians to pray for them that they
may see. But will thou know ye true causes why Christ sent those Lepers
above all other which he healed, and none other to the prestes? read
the.xiii. and the.xiiii. chapter of Leui. ande there shall thou see that it was
appointed of GOD, that no parson ones having the lepprie, should come among
the congregacyon of the whole, till he was cleansed. And for a certai^te that he
should be first whole, the pressed had the ouersyght, and kept him certain days
for a trial, to be sure that he was whole, before he would so admit him.
Ande when the prestes found him whole in deed, then deed they admit him,
after he had offered ye oblacio^ commanded in Moises law, to go abrod among ye
whole: and for because Christ would not break ye law, but was the fulfiller of
the law, sent he them to the Prestes, not to show their si^nes (for they
showed none during the hole time of Moses law) but for ye cause before said.
An other cause yt he sent the^ was, that ye Prestes sclau^dred Christ, saying
that he Blasphemed. Math. ix. Luc. v. Ioha^. v. Therefore Christ bad them offer
the Oblacyon commanded in Moses law, for a witness against their
infydelytie. For they of force must confess that Christ healed the^. For why?
they admitted them for clean and received the Oblacion, and yet sclaundred
they Christ, so settinge them selves without all Excuse of their most
worthy ande wilful Dampnacyon.

Christ ded not only send ye te^ne Lepres, but also other Lepres that he
healed. But let them find that ever Chyriste sent any other that he healed to
the prestes, as ye sick of ye palseye, the diseased of the blouddy flyxe, the
possessed with deuels and soche other like, which not wtstondynge ware si^ners as
well as the lepers and had neade of remyssio^ of their sin as well as they:
Then let me die for it.

O ye Antychristes ye your selves may see how little this text of the Lepers
serves for aurycular confession. Woo be to you ye wresters and wrythers of
Gods holy word. I could bring in as good auctoryte against the rest of your
wicked decrees, but I will defer it to the making of an other work which
shall be shortly if the lord lend me life. If not, I doubt not but he shall
raise other that shall accomplysh that which I have begone. For doubt not but
Gods chose^ will with the scripture fight against your wicked decrees, yea
although their blood be shed therefore. Yea asmoche Joy have they to set
forth the glory of God, and to bring their brethern to the knowledge of your
blind errors, ande to teach them the way to avoyde them, calling them to
Christ: Even asmoche Joy, I say, and with as free a heart, as ye have to rob
Christ of his honor, giving part to him, part to the creatures by hi^
created: yea and much more then ye have in mayntaynyge of your kingdom in
pomp and pride, and in shedi^g of the blood of innocents. For we know that
ye Lord has promised us none other reward i^ this life. And ye have made
wondrous good prouysyon for the same. FOR who soever shall preach Christ or
write Christ aright, he is incontinent in the net either of fellonie, treason,
or hearesye, or in all three. But at the great day of the Lord, at the rysynge
of all flesh, ye generation of Uipars, shall se that those shall be found
faithful both to the King of the body only, and also to the King of both
body and soul. And then ye shall be found in dead, fellons, Traitors, ande
Heretyques, both Against GOD and man, ande soche will ye be so long as ye
possess your inordynate RICHES that wicked Ma^mon.

GOD give the KING an heart to take yt wicked Mammone from you, as he may
rightfullye do with the Consent of the commones, by act of Parliament, so that
it may be dysposed to GODS Glory, and ye commone welthe. As to take hi^
self a porcyo^ for a knowledge of obeysaunce, and for ye mai^tainyng of his
estate. The rest pollityquely to be put unto a co^mone welthe. First
dystrybuted among all ye towns in England i^ so^mes according to the quantyte
and nombre of ye occupyars, where most nead is. And all the towns to be bound
to the King, yt his grace may have ye money at his neade to serve hi^. And also
a politic way taken for prouysyon for ye pore in every town, with some part
to ye marriages of young parso^s that lack fre^des. Ways there are enough, who
so lusts to study for them.

Yet one thing would I wish that all men would take you even as ye are, that
is even like as the Uipar above all other beasts worms or serpents is most
fullest of poison for certain qualities in him: even so ye above all the
me^bres of Antichrist, be ye most fullest of poison, swiftest to shed blood,
ye greatest persecuters of Christ's congregation, yea, and ye have ever done
most myschefe in shutting up of Gods word from ye people, above al other
knights of ye romysh church. Well your wicked Mammo^, your in ordinate riches
was not of our heavenly fathers plantynge, therefore it must up by the rotes,
with the riches of your other brethern of the Romyshe churches or church
malygna^t, which of late ware ryghtfully plucked up.

If thou will read ye stories of the three kings a fore said, thou will say
it is high time to pull from the^ yt wicked Ma^mon. In ye same stories ye
shall see what knavery has ever been practysed of ye Bysshoppes, above all
other Impes of Antychryst, as well against ye Kings as Against the preachers,
teachers, and writers of Christ's gospel, most like unto ye Uypar, as before
is said. Understonde also what the propertye of a Uipar is: she destroieth her
make or male in the concepcyo^, and the thing conceived (I mean the young in
the lyttirynge or forth bringyng) destroieth the damme. So Bysshoppes who-Ki^gs
make Lords of beggars: be commonly the first that procure the^ dyspleasure, as
appears by ye stories of these Ki^gs aforesayed. Yea they have put mo Kings to
troble then ever came to light. For why it must neades be true ye Christ says
of them. The Chyldern of this world be wiser in their generation, the^ ye
chylderne of light be in theyrs.

What think ye of the north? Surely in my judgment (I will speak no
farther) but it was their own inuencion, and the Bysshoppes ware the very
orygynall, ground ande foundacyon of the same Insurectyon, vproare and
tumulte. Well although Christ does say, ye be so wife in your generation,
yet makes not it against these words, that your wisdom will prove
folishnes.i. Cor. i. Which GOD grant may be shortly, that the pore selye
lambs may preach and teach the gospel, and that the rest which yet be
without, may epsy your dysceyte, and fle from your dyrtye tradycyons, ande
follow their own shepherd, which so lovingly gane his life for them.

I know ye Papystes and their flock shall sclau^derously report that I am
against the Sacrament, which am dyrectlye with it after Christ's institucio^,
and full against ye institucio^ of the Rome Bysshoppes, as ye shall perceive
if ye mark and pondre my se^te^ce aright. Or else they will say I a^ a^
anabaptist which opinions of the^ yt are against the scriptur (as they have
diverse) I utterly abhor, which opynio^s nead not her to be touched

Your old craft is also to sclau^der us saying we be causers of insurreccyo^:
i^ which point eue^ as I therein now shall show my mi^d, so have all those done
which labored i^ ye vi^eyard, of who^ ye have borned a great no^bre. I
acknoweledge and give to understood to all yt shall either read this my work
or hear it red, yt all kings and rulers have their aucthoritye and powers of
God, and they that resist the^ or those which of the^ be sent, resyst God Romans
xiii. and so seaketh his own da^nacio^. Yea although a King be a tyrant, we
may not resyste him. Yea, ande although a king should be so wicked to make
acts or laws eue^ directly against Gods laws as deed ki^ge Darius, Daniel.
vi. Ande also ye high prestes and Pharisees forbiddi^g Peter and Ioha^ to
preach christ Act. iiii. Yet may we not with fist and swerd. etc. resist the^ nor
be aue^ged of the^, no more the^ deed Daniel and ye other children resist
darius: or Ioha^ and Peter ye prestes and pharisees: or Christ pylate. Mathe.
xvi.

But gentle Reader mark, yt eue^ as we may not resist the^ with fist sweard or
weapon etc. but to owr da^pnacion, even like wise may we not observe their
wicked laws, nor consent or agree unto the^ with heart or mouth, under pain
of yt self same da^pnacyon: but rather suffer death, then either to resyste
them bodily with strength of hand or consent and agree unto their wicked laws
and acts in heart or mouth, after the example of Daniell, CHRIST, ye Apostles,
Prophets, Martyrs et cetr. And after the example of the mother with her seven
sons. Match vi. Which example is written for our learni^g with many such like.

And mark this, that eue^ as all subjects be bound to the higher powers and
to be ruled by them in all things, as laws decrees and such other grounded
upon scripture, and not to resist in pain of da^pnacio^: So must the hyg^er
powers be ruled by the scripture ande make no laws contrary to ye scripture,
in pain of like da^pnacyon unto them. For that is the only touchstone, which
tries all things, and which must govern all things.

Thus I end my Lamentacion, beseackyng God through his son Jesus Christ, to
draw you from all your old Idolatrye, fornycacyon, and aduoutrye: from
persecuting Christ in his saints, from your inordynate couetuousnes, ande from
your evil suppressynge of the pore. And give you grace, that now at the last
ye may repent ande believe the gospel in embrasynge the same, seeking GODS
glory only and the commone wealth, as in times paste ye have done your own:
and dylygentlie to provide for the pore, which above all other things shall be
demanded of you, at ye great day of the Lord, as before is said.

And thus doi^g doubt not, but ye plages which ye have right fully deserved,
God of his bottomless mercy will turn the^ from you, as he ded by ye
Ninevites, which repented when they ware warned by Jonas ye Prophet. If not
look for no less plages then Jerusalem and other Cities had for their
inyquitie.

Awake therefore and repent, ande turn to the Lord yet in time, and he will
turn to you. That grant the Lord of all Lords and father of mercy. Amen.

The grace of God (through our Lord Jesus Christ) be with you all.


