A DEFENSE OF THE GOVERNMENT ESTABLISHED IN THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND FOR
ECCLESIASTICAL MATTERS.

Containing an answer unto a Treatise called, The Learned Discourse of Eccl.
Government, otherwise entitled, A brief and plain declaration concerning the
desires of all the faithful Ministers that have, and do seek for the
discipline and reformation of the Church of England.

Comprehending likewise an answer to the arguments in a Treatise named The
judgment of a most Reverend and Learned man from beyond the Seas, etc.

Aunsvvering also to the arguments of Calvin, Beza, and Danaeus, with other
our Reverend learned Brethren, besides Caenaiis and Bodinus, both for the
regiment of women, and in defense of her Majesty, and of all other Christian
Princes supreme Government in Ecclesiastical causes, Against The Tetrarchie
that our Brethren would erect in every particular congregation, of Doctors,
Pastors, Governors and Deacons, with their several and joint authority in
Elections, Excommunications, Synodall Constitutions and other Ecclesiastical
matters.

Answered by John Bridges Deane of Sarum.

Come and See. Ioh. 1.36. Take it up and Read. Aug. lib. conf. 8. ca. 12. AT
LONDON, Printed by John VVindet, for Thomas Chard. 1587

The Preface to the Christian Reader.
WHereas in a Sermon preached at Paul's Cross about two years past, I had
touched (on occasion) some part of this Learned Discourse, then lately set
forth; and for the peoples satisfaction, I had answered some principal
arguments of the same, in defense of her Majesty's supreme government in Eccl.
causes, and for our Bishops jurisdiction; as appears by the Sermon it self,
which for the further manifesting the occasion hereof, I have set forth also,
and recommend (dear Christian Reader) to thy favorable interpretation: which
Sermon (according to the diverse affections of the auditorie) took diverse
effects; some beginning to relent and be resolved, which before had been
greatly carried away, in the contrary persuasion of these matters, and
promising reconcilement unto their Bishops, whose state before they had
misliked; some (on the otherside) took such offense at that part of the Sermon
which touched these things, that they ceased not to deface it, and to challenge
me for it: I then promised, not only the anowing of that I had spoken; but
also (God assisting me) the publishing both of the whole sermon, and the
aunswering atlarge of all the Learned Discourse.

For discharge of which promise, and because this book pretends such a
plausible title, and withal is reckoned of so great account; as I afterward
could get opportunity and leisure thereunto, proceeding by little and little in
the same; and (by the way) taking withal some parts of the like argument, that
other our Brethren have since composed; and partly passing up from them, to the
very fountains, (as I take it) from whence all our Brethren fetch their
chiefest motives, or the grounds of them, especially in these three reuerend^
and learned Fathers, Calvin, Beza, and Danaeus: I have now (thanks be to God)
at length, after many delays and stoppes thereof, thus far forth
accomplished and set out the same.

It is no small grief to me (I protest) that on this occasion, I was thus
drawn into these questions, with those, whom otherwise in Christ, I humbly
acknowledge to be our dear Brethren. And much gladlier (the Lord knows) would
I be, to have wholly objected my self (as before to my mediocritie I have
endeavored) against the public adversaries of Gods truth. And would God, all
we which are of the household of faith, professing the light and liberty of the
Gospel, would again bend our forces that ways, against the errors and
tyranny of Antichrist. In which course a while, we did run well (but as the
Apostle says to the Galathians) who has let us? Gal. 5.^.
For so long as we jointly followed the quest of that uncouth beast, and of the
purple Harlot on his back; God mightily prospered us in all our affairs. Yea
it is wonderful to consider, if we have grace to acknowledge it, how God has
still hitherto, (above any Nation in the world, in this last age thereof) and
yet does not cease to bless us, his name of us again ineessantly, be blessed
and magnified for it.

Howbeit, the shadow is not more concomitant to the body, than envy is
aemulous of virtue and glory. As there is no state so happy on all parts in
this life, but it shall ever be crossed with some or other danger, or
disturbance: so does the envious man (in these our Alcions days) labor
nothing more, than to impugn and to overthrow this our blessed state, yea, to
have bereft us of the Lords anointed, his holy handmayden, our most gracious
Sovereign, by whom (under our Lord Jesus Christ) God has vouchsafed us all
these blessings. In which practice, although the adversaries attempts have
been so perilous and unnatural, that the very remembrance of them breeds
horror: yet the Lords continual deliverance from them, has bin so admirable,
and almost miraculous; that we can not but all rejoice together, and break
forth into the praises of our so gracious father, our most mighty, righteous
and m^rcifull God, and cast all our repose upon his providence.

But as the holy Apostle S. Peter prudently forwarneth us, be sober and watch,
for your adversary the devil as a roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he
may devour: 1. Pet. 5.8.9.
so, see the malice and craft of this old serpent. That thing which he could
never atcheiue by himself, withal the subtleties of his smooth temptations;
nor by his grand deputy, the man of sin and son of perdition, withal his
stratagems and violent forces: Satan eftsoons has now not only crept in
among the children of God; but has so broken a sunder the bonds of Gods
peace; has sown the cockle of such contentions, and divisions among us that
are brethren; whereby such discord has also risen, even among those that sowed
before the good seed wheat; that no small hindrance has grown thereby to the
course of the Gospel, and as great hazard to the state of all our Church and
Realm; as could have bin inflicted by the open hostility of the public
enemy. Yea, what could lay us more open to his injuries, tha^ to fall out thus
among our selves into these garboyles? Or how freely can we now oppose our
faces to confront our adversaries; when evermore we must have a skew eye, to
the awke blows of our own fellows and Brethr. hard at our elbowes? Which
double fight is so dangerous and so distrustful; that it makes many amongst
us to r^uolt or at least to hoouer: and is such an incourageme^t and advantage
to the enemies, to be more confirmed in their errors, and strengthened in their
confederacies: that they insult upon us both; yea they blaspheme the very
gospel it self which we profess; and all by occasion of these intempestiue,
but too tempestious disagrements.

When Abraham saw the falling out between his and Lots heardmen; fearing the
evil event of such discord, he says unto Lot let there be (I pray thee) no
strife between thee and me, neither yet betwixt thy heardmen and mine: and he
adds this reason, For we are brethren. Which reason did so move the prudent
Joseph, that after he had revealed himself unto his Brethren, returning the^
to fetch his father; fearing least any expostulations might breed iarres among
the^, he gave them this especial charge; See that ye fall not out by the way.
Thus did these ancient and holy Patriarchs esteem of concord among brethren,
and shunned (as a thing most unnatural) all Brethrens discord. Which the godly
and prophetical kings, David and Solomon well considering; Psalm. 133.
the father stirring us up to embrace this virtue; Behold (says he) how good
and comely a thing it is, for Brethren to dwell in one together? Liking it to
the precious balm that was powered on the head of Aaron, and to the sweet dew
of heaven that falls on the mountains, to make them fruitful. The son (in
detestation of the vice contrary) when he had set down the 6. things that the
L. hates; Hautie eyes, a lying tongue; hands that shed innocent blood; an heart
imagining wicked enterprises; feet that are swift in running to mischief; and
a false witness that speaks lies: Prou. 6.16.
he concludes (as with a greater vice than all these) in the seventh and
complete number, with this sin, which he says, the soul of God abhors;
And him that rayseth up contentions among his Brethren.

And therefore when our savior Christ had foretold his Disciples, all the
persecutions that they should sustain by their outward enemies: against all
these, that they might have brotherly love among them selves; Peace (says he)
I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Ioh. 54.27.
And again; These things have I spoken unto you* that my joy (which is the
fruit of peace) might remain with you, Ioh. 15.11.12.
and that my joy might be full. This is my commandment, that ye love one
another. Ioh. 16.33.
And so, he knits up his exhortation with this repetition; These things have I
spoken to you, that ye might have peace in me. Which bond of peace and love in
Jesus Christ one toward another, both the Apostle S. Paul, the Doctor of the
Gentiles, and especially S. John whom the Lord loved, and S. Peter that so
loved the Lord, and S. James the just, in their Epistles, so often and so
earnestly call upon, and so vehemently dissuade us from contentions.

Empedocles among the heathen Philosophers, beholding the sympathy and
antipathie that is in natural creatures, and being moved with the admiration
thereof, concluded, that all things were do^^ and undone, by concord and
discord. But, to have this order of nature so inuerted, that those persons
which are not only chained in this natural Harmony, but also in a mo^e
heavenly concent, should dissent and be dissolved; is far more wonderful
tha^ the composition of things contrary; and (that which is worse) is much
more ieopardous. For (as the Apostle warned the Galathians, and by them us; If
ye bite and devour one another, Gal. 4.15.
take heed least ye be consumed one of an other. And since our S^uiour him
self has so severely denounced that dreadful sentence, and it is a Maximie
grounded on good reason, Math. 12.28.
Every kingdom divided against it self shall be brought to naught, and every
City or house divided against it self shall not stand: no merua^le (if these
contentions should hold on and increase) though our Brethren and we be moved
hereat, beholding this our most flourishing kingdom, with these divisions to
be thus rent in sunder, that almost no City or Town in the same (I can not
say, no house) but is either divided, or at least disquieted by these factions.

Nevertheless, this among other is our chiefest comfort against all these and
other like tentations; that having both of us (for the ground of our religion)
Gods everlasting and infallible truth; for the which our common adversaries do
malign and oppugn us, but can never expugne and overcome us; for always (as
Zorobabell ^ayde) The truth is greater and stronger than all: Howsoever
therefore we be exercised with such plunges, 1. Esd. 3.35.
I mean not of the open enemies (for the troubles that we receive from them,
do more corroborate us in Gods truth) but arising by the waywardness of our
own dear Brethren in the gospel: that yet we should not be too much
dismayed, but stayed and recomforted. Since that, albeit these last days
(according to Christ's and his Apostles prophecy) are more contentious: yet in
serching the former ages, we shall find that this self same trial of our
faith, is not now first laid upon us alone; but that heretofore the Church of
God, and the most excellent Princes, Prelates, and people among them, have
often times bought this experience very derely, and with great molestations
even from their brethren.

No sooner had God delivered his peculiar people, from the Egyptians bondage
and idolatry, by the conduct of Moses and Aaron, and given them laws and
orders to be governed by; but those their guides were more molested, and the
people more wasted them selves by their own mutinies, than by the hand of any
foreign enemies. And since the coming of our savior Christ, so soon as ever
Constantine (worthily surnamed) the Great, had extinguished all the tyrants
persecutions, and procured public peace unto the gospel: what a number of
contentions straightwayes brake forth (besides the conflictes with the
pestiferous Heretics) among the true professors of the right faith, even for
matters of discipline and orders, disquieting the unity and concord of the
Church, and breeding no small grief, and stoppall to that good Princes
proceedinges, as we feel and lament the like in these our days.

There is great difference (I grant) both in matter and manner of these
contentions, and in the qualities of the persons that breed these vexations;
even as much as is, between him that would pluck my coa^e from off my back,
and so spoil me; and him that would pull my skin over mine ears, and so
destroy me. The controversies between the common adversaries and us, are pro
Aris and focis; for matters, and that capital matters, of the substance and
life of our Christian religion; not trifles, as some newtrals would bear the
people in hand. And therefore our adversaries in matters of religion, are
incensed against us with mortal, or rather, with immortal hatred. Whereas the
controversies betwixt us and our Brethren, are matters, or rather (as they call
them) but manners, and forms of the Churches regiment: Howbeit, whether by
sufferance, or by neglect of them, grown yet unto so many heads, and so
sharply prosecuted: not now contending so much for cappe and surplesse; nor for
quarrels at the vnlearneder sort of the poor ministers; nor inuectiues against
the Bishops and their titles, or their superior jurisdictions only: but
withal, calling in question all their whole authority, and their very
ministry of the word and Sacraments; and all our form of public prayers;
yea, the prescription of any form at all; the alteration of all the Clergy;
the translation, and new limitation, of every Diocese, and particular parish
in the Realm; the erection of a new Tetrarchie, in eu^ry several
congregation, of Doctors, Pastors, Governors, and Deacons; by which four
estates and offices, all matters should be directed, and all crimes eccl. or
civil censured by their discipline. Yea, they mount up to the highest top,
even of the Princes supreme government. Since that therefore, these contentions
have aspired thus far, to the imminent danger of all our whole estate;
though in an other sort than do our adversaries in religion: it is more than
high time, against these (though otherwise in Christ our well meaning, but
misweening Brethren) to enter into the necessary defense, of these, be they
matters, or manners of such moment.

I am not ignorant that unto many, this labor will be thought superfluous,
either of those that would have these matters go forward without misliking; or
of some also that allow them not. Howbeit, because they have either before
been sufficiently trauersed in, by other already, both pro and contra: or
that now these controversies (if they be not dead and buried long ago) yet the
fervor of them is meetly well slaked; therefore according to Pythagoras wise
counsel, ignem opertum noli fodere, it were much better to let it alone, than
to rake abroad the fire, that is covered in the cinders: these men think this
to be the best answer, not at all to answer them, but to pass the^ oue^ in
silence and contemn them. Whereby, either the parties contending (having
wearied themselves in vain) will the sooner give over; or at least, other will
think the matters not worthy, to be vouchsafed any answer. And that to
answer, yea to confute them, is but to provoke further controversies, of
which we are pestred with too many, and those not a little raised, or
enkinled, by often and intemperate disputing, aunswering, and replying one to
an other.

And in very deed, with them that think thus, in some matters and manners of
proceeding, I my self am of their opinion. For this licentiousness of writing
such reciprocal inuictiues, has bred and breeds much unnecessary trouble.
Notwithstanding, as the Preacher (among all other things, that keep the
revolution of their seasons) reckons up this; there is a time to keep
silence, and a time to speak; when a matter grows to importance, and is
urged too importunately, admitting it be a wrong and dangerous error, and yet
on all sides it wins favor; to let it so pass without all controlement;
what were silence then, but gross negligence, the very yielding to the error
and danger, yea the wilful betraying of the truth, and consenting to the
ouerture of our state?

And even so fares it in this matter. The Papists, from whose gross errors in
doctrine we both dissent, and against whom, in the unity and substance of
Gods truth we both agree (and for a while conioyntly we impugned their errors,
idolatrie^, and superstitions) at the first in defense of them, they began to
write freshly and stoutly against us, but when they saw, they were not able
that way, to maintain the badnesse of their cause, they left off writing, and
followed (for the most part) this policy, to seem to despise all further
trial, by disputing and writing of the matter, and would seek to uphold it
only or chiefly, by countenance and authority: but finding again the
experience of this, that Voluntas non potest cogi, the will of man must be
persuaded, can not be compelled: and that nullum violentum est perpetuum, the
thing that is only with violence coacted, can not possibly continue: and that
in these controversies, all men are most desirous to be satisfied with some
answer or other: they fall again to writing, though hardly driven thereto,
using all the shifts they can, to bodge up the insufficiency of their cause.
But in a good matter there need no such practices.

True it is (as I said before) that the points to be discussed betwixt our
Brethren and us, be nothing of such weight as those are, wherein our Brethren
and we do vary from the adversaries, in the main and principal standerds of
our faith, but are questions most what of discipline, and of the Churches
government. Nevertheless, since that herein also, our Brethren have not only
made a breach from us, but they have bred such further contention for them, as
in which, a pacification is fo requisite, that without it, we see what broiles
and dangers daily grow, to the disturbing of our own estate, to the
advantage of the public adversary, to the hinderance and obloquie of the
Gospel. It is necessary therefore, that (as God be praised) we have the truth
in doctrine, and defend it well, not only by the authority of the Magistrate,
but by the words own authority, ^^enly in writing by the Ministers thereof,
set forth to all the world, against all the resisters of the same: so, having
(as we trust) a good established form, of the regiment and discipline of our
Church of England; if any either of our professed adversaries, or of our
malecontented Brethren, shall withstand or write against it: we are all obliged
(after the measure of each ones calling and ability) to maynteyne and defend
it, and that not only against the breakers of it, by the Magistrates execution
of authority, but the Ministers no less in their vocation, when it is openly
written against, are bound by their writing again (if the goodness of the
matter be able so to justify it self) to lay open all the whole state
thereof, by detecting and confuting all the paralogismes and fallations of the
gaynesayers, and by defending it, even with the firmness of the grounds, and
the own good nature of the cause: which manner of defense, being not destitute
of lawful authority, to see it observed, not only represseth the resisters
body, but satisfyeth, or conuinceth his mind, which is chiefly in these
contentions to be respected.

And although this also be true, that both our adversaries in the controversies
of our religion, and our Brethren, in the questions of our regiment (for such
matters as then were moved) have been by other of excellent learning,
sufficiently answered already: yet must we be still as ready to answer, in
defense of both these causes, as either of them are ready to oppugn them,
seeing that (God be thanked) we maintain nothing in our doctrine, or in our
regiment, whereof we can not render a sound reason, and sufficient proof, from
the very foundation of Gods word, to maintain it with a good conscience.
Howbeit, since that our Brethren cease not, but as they first began these
controversies, so they hold not yet themselves contented, but Plus vltra, they
proceed further, and to further matters, and as they rise higher, so more
eagerly they press upon them; not only declaiming in the Pulpits, as they get
any opportunity thereunto, and exclaim if they be put to silence, but also put
up bills and supplication^ at every Parliament; compile and scatter abroad
their printed treatises; insomuch, that in all degrees of men and women, noble,
worshipful^, ^^d of the vulgar sort, many begin to doubt of our established
government, and to suppose some great and invincible validity to be in their
assertions, if too many be not already carried away too far in thi^
opinion, that the regiment and discipline which our Brethren desire, is
suppressed only by mere authority, against the manifest prescription of Gods
word, against the clear examples of the Primitive Church, against the manifold
testimonies of the unsuspected hystories and ancient Fathers, against the
sound interpretations, and approved practice of all or the best reformed
Churches, and against reason it self, as they pretend: how much behooves it us
again, in all brotherly modesty, constantly to stand upon our guard in so
just a defense? For although many godly, learned, and wise, have in searching
found out the shallowness herein of all their grounds, yet is it requisite to
lay them open to all other, that desire to be more thoroughly satisfied, yea,
even to exenterate and rip up the very bowels of the whole cause, to examine
their chief and principal arguments, to go to the authors themselves from
whence they fetch them, to set them down at large, (least any might complain
they were mangled or inuerted) and to do all this by the more diligent search
and conference of the holy Scripture, by the better examining the state of the
Primitive Church, by the particular perusing the autentike hystories and
testimonies of the ancient Fathers, by reuising the states, and writing of the
reformed Churches, and by weighing the peyse and inference of their reasons; if
happily by all, or by any of all these means, we shall see all, or any of the
things that they cry so much upon, to be truly and substantially proved.
Which thing, while here I have labored to perform, though the volume have
grown big, and the search may seem tedious unto some, yet the desirous
readers satisfaction may be part of his recompense, which I have chiefly
intended in this answer.

I know that some, too much dazeled by preoccupate affection, and wholly
mancipated to their forestalled opinion, will be still picking byous quarrels,
to reply upon one thing or another. But to him that is desirous indeed to
boult out the truth, to sound the matters to their deapth, to level his aim,
not to every incident, but to the head and state in question: such replies (as
bubles) will die as they rise, being of no regard, but serving only to feed
and foade contentions, and foreseasoned humors: and such (I grant) it is in
vain to answer, except they be too urgent, or prevail too much, or by
silence and permission get too great credit.

But when as here the persons with whom I deal, profess in the front and
first title of their book, that this is, A brief and plain declaration,
concerning the desires (not of such, or such an one, or of some few or many of
them, but) of all those faithful Ministers that have and do seek for the
discipline and reformation, of the Church of England: and say again, in their
conclusion and last leaf of this Discourse, that if this form of reformation
(which they have here set forth) may not now be received; yet the present age
may see and judge, what is the uttermost of our desire concerning reformation,
which hitherto for lack of such a public testimonial, has been subject to
infinite sclaunders, devised by the adversaries of Gods truth, and hindrance of
godly proceedinges unto reformation: And for remedy hereof, they have now at
length joined all their heads together; consulting and consenting upon this
plotforme of the Churches government; which for greater aestimation they
recommende unto us, with this plausible title on the top of every leaf; A
Learned Discourse of Ecclesiastical government: And that this is now set
forth to this end, that the posterity may know, that the truth in this time
was not generally unknown, nor vntestified, concerning the regiment of the
Church of God: thus courageously provoking us, to answer unto this Learned
Discourse, if we be able so to do, or else to hold our peace for ever
hereafter: who may not hereby see, that it is high time, either now, or never
to speak for our selves, and for our Churches defense; or else (as conuicts) by
silence to yield unto them?

But now again, while we thus contend by inueighing against, and aunswering
one another; some good men (I know) there are, that wish us both well, which
are most of all afraid of this, that we shall lay our shame and nakedness
open to all the world, and namely to the public and deadly adversaries of us
both; who by occasion of these inferior matters of circumstance, wherein we
agree not; diffame the higher matters of substance wherein we agree. And I
confess with grief, so we do. But when this arises not by us, nor by us is
grown so far; and yet between our Brethren and us, it is so far grown,
that the adversary already, and all the world does, or may see our dissent
herein, although neither our Brethren, nor we had set it forth in writing: yet
when our Brethren by writing also diuulge it to the wide world, and still
follow it with one treatise on the neck of an other: what booteth it any
longer for that respect, to refrain from the public defending of our cause?
Yea, how does it not now stand us more upon, to publish our so necessary
defense, that all men may better know and judge it, hearing both parts? So
that we defend ours, and answer theirs, in such reverend forte, as the
Apostle puts us in mind; Let your modesty (or your patient mind) be made
known to all men. And when the world shall see us deal together thus: Phil.
4.5.
they shall see, that although we must needs (as the son of Syrach bids us)
Strive for the truth unto the death, Eccl.. 4.28.
and defend justice for thy life: yet still we are desirous (as the Apostle
also wills) If it be possible, so much as lies in us, to have peace with all
men. Romans 12.18.
And when the adversary shall see, how loath we are, and even haled to enter
into this conflict against our Brethren; and with what reverence (for our
parts) we strive with them, or rather, stand only at the bay of our
defense, in the shielding of our Churches state and governance: And again,
when they shall see, how that notwithstanding all these contentions for our
regiment; we do yet (as I hope hitherto we do, and shall, the Lord be
praised for it) continue in the union of all the groundwork and building of
our faith, doctrine, and religion; which the adversaries among them selves (for
all their crakes) do not: they shall or may the easilier perceive, (even in
the matter and manner of our contentions) both the synceritie of our cause, and
the temperature of our dealing. Which may (by the grace of God) turn to their
bettering; or at least, (to their shame) they shall or may full well discern,
how far our verbal contentions with our over zealous Brethr. differ from
their verberall persecutions of them our over furious adversaries; and are
indeed no sufficient cause, to confirm or stay them in their errors. Albeit
(I grant) they do so, of the which I am the sorier, if it otherwise pleased
God. And would to God, our Brethren with us, would better think hereon, that
we might both of us being Brethren, once again b^^therly join and combine
our selves together (...) in the unity of ^^r doctrine, so in the uniformity
of our discipline, against the professed adversaries of the Gospel and of us
both, either to their conversion or confusion. And I doubt it nor, but that if
our brethren shall yet now at length, enter with us into a more advised view,
and circumspect examination of these matters: either they will remitte their
further contention; or debate them with more deliberate moderation, to the
better stopping of the ^duersaries mouths, and to our own fuller resolution.

Which sequel (if it please God) to effect, I have thus far hazarded, (in
this just and necessary defense) to expose my self to the hartburning and
hard speaking (God knows) of how many a one, whom in the Lord (these
opinions herein set aside) I love and honor in all duty, and glad would I
have been, that some other had employed their travails in this business,
whereof many on our side (the Lord be praised for them) had been able to have
discharged the same a great deal better. And I lingered the longer, expecting
if any would prevent me: but when none did it, or did vouchsa^e it, and I was
drawn into the action, on the foresaid provocation; and was afterward of
diverse requested, not to withdraw my self from this occasion; considering
withal, that I had before opposed my self against the public adversary, in
the like argument of the Christian Princes supreme government in
Ecclesiastical causes, which our brethren here also (though in another manner,
but no less perilous) call again in question: that now I should likewise
bear my self on even hand, yea, were it against mine own dear brethren in
Christ, and her majesty's loyal and loving subjects, though greatly over
reached in the heat and preposterous earnestnes of their pursuit herein.

How leuelly I have borne my self, without gaul, or spleen, in affection, or
style (my duitie to God, to his truth, to his church, and to her majesty
reserved) having my quarrel only to the matters, not to the persons: I refer
me to the equity of the reader. My purpose (God he knows) is not wittingly,
to give just offense to any of our brethren. Which if notwithstanding any shall
take, for that I spare not to discover the defectes of their arguments; for
that I admonish them (albeit I trust, in spiritu lenitatis,) of their
untempered speeches, as well against our and their most gracious Sovereign, and
all Christian Princes soueraignetie, as against the authority and persons of
our prelates, and of us their fellow ministers in the Gospel, and against our
ministry, and prescribed form of prayer and sacraments; or for that I
observe more narrowly now and then, their absurdities and cont^adictions to
them selves, and their dangerous positions to our state; or for that I send
home again unto themselves, those foule-mouthed slanders, wherewith untruly
they burden our church and us; or for that I dissent from the judgment or
interpretation of those famous late writers, whom our brethren stand so much
upon; or for that I go to the pitche of the controversies, and so largely
prosecute the chiefest of them: If our brethren shall think these things too
hardly followed, their own importunity being the cause, and their full, at
least their further satisfaction being my drift; I hope they will the easilier
afford me their excuse.

And I humbly beseech all our good meaning Brethr. that are otherwise persuaded
herein than we are, to suspend their sentence but for the while, that they
shall with indifferency, and without partiality, read and ponder these
debatings to and fro, betwixt our brethren and us, and then a gods name, give
their verdict, as God shall move them, having the fear of God before their
eyes, and a right zeal of his truth and glory in their hearts, with ^n
unfeigned love and reverence to his church. Which done, if I for my part have
herein ^ffended any, I heartily cry them mercy, and shall be ready (by the
grace of God) on all ^ue warning and conuincing to the uttermost of my skill,
and power, to retract or amend (...): and so I trust and crave of all our
brethren, that they will not disdain to do the like. Not regarding the person
of the defender, but the proves of the defense, whereby (God ^illing) we shall
the sooner find, and the better conclude, the clear, true, and full
deter^inations of all these questions.

And to the intent (gentle reader) thou should the readilier find out any
of the ^ointes here in controversy, I have distributed all this answer to our
brethrens learned ^iscourse, into several books, prefixing their arguments to
every of them, besides the titles of the pages, and the marginall quotations,
which in st^ede of an Index may serve (...) lead thee. And though directly it
pertain not to me, yet I crave the Printers and (...) own pardon, for a great
number of petit, and some gross escapes in the impression, (...) have fallen
out the more, for the difficulty of my coppie unto him, and by so often
^^terchanging of the character, either in citing our brethrens words, or some
other testimony, or the text it self of scripture, as Page 146. lin. 34.35.
Page 227. lin. 6.7. where the letter of the text is not distinguished. Besides
the Hebrew words for the most part, and some Greek, with wrong letters. And
many words and sentences, which the composer nor corrector did well conceive,
and have so passed, I being not always present at reuising the proves. But
the learned and discreet reader may discern them, of which escapes the chief
and most are noted. The residue, I pray the reader vouchsafe to amend with his
pen, since I cannot do it with mine in all the copies. And so committing it to
the good success that God shall send it, and to the gentle construction of all
our learned and other good brethren in the Lord, and of every indifferent
Christian reader, that is rightly desirous in the fear of God and love of his
truth, for t^^ benefit of his Church, and stay of him self, to fadome the
bottom of these controversies, and wishes the final pacification of them:
Phil. 1.9, 10, 11.
I conclude with the holy Apostles most godly prayer. Phil. 1. And this I
pray, that your love may abound more and more in knowledge and in all
judgment; that ye may discern things that differ one from another; that ye
may be pure and without offense, until the day of Christ, being fulfilled with
all the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and
praise of God. So be it.

Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall be called the children of God.
Math. 5.9.
AA


A DEFENSE OF THE GOVERNMENT ESTABLISHED IN THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND FOR
ECCLESIASTICAL MATTERS.
The Preface of the learned discourse unto the Christian Reader.
THE holy Prophets having oftentimes, but searched, when and at what time, the
foreseeing spirit of God declared unto them, the manifold afflictions and
troubles of the Church to come, The Preface.
have thereupon entered into great lamentations for the same: and have not only
wept and fasted themselves, but have compiled for the Church, 1. Pet. 1.9.10
Lamen. 1.2.3 4.
whole books of Lamentations: therein instructing them what way to take, for
appeasing the wrath of God breaking out against them. Joel. 2.


The Defense, etc.
IN this applying the great lamentations, weepings and fastings of the holy
Prophets, Bridges.
for the manifold afflictions and troubles of the Church to come, either in
their days, or the time^ succeeding, whereof they prophecie^, (...) the
semblable manner of weeping, Our Brethere^s abusing of the spirit of God, and
of the Prophe^s lam^tations.
^asting and compiling like books of Lamentations, by the foreseeing Spirit
of God, revealing unto these our brethren ^^e li^e manifold afflictions, now
to in^^^ upon the church for the like offenses: our brethren here in (...)
both too much abuse the foreseeing spirit of God, and take too far upon them
(...) be such Prophets, and offer too great an injury to Gods Church, (...)
time, (God be praised) here in England, both in threatening us (...) like
calamities, and in burdening us with the like causes: (...) ^hey can show in
them selves, the like warrant of the foreseeing (...), and show also that we
provoke the ^ierce wrath of God, in like off^nces. But what speak I of their
abussingthus the applicationof t^^se hol^ Prophets, when they dare also abuse
the Apostle S. Peter's words, and his application of those Prophets, and of the
for-seeing Spirit of God in them? Does Peter apply it to any such manifold
afflictions and troubles of the Church to come, S. Peter's Testimony wrested.
to provoke any to enter into great lamentations for the same, to weep and
fast, and to compile for the church, whole books of lamentations? and not
rather in that place here quoted, cite only the Prophets foretelling of our
salvation, and of the coming of Christ: and although withal of his
sufferings, yet of his glory, etc. to confirm our faith in him? whose words
are these, 1. Pet. 1.9 etc. Receiving the end (or reward) of your faith, even
the salvation of your souls: of which salvation the Prophets have inquired and
searched, which prophesied of the grace that should come unto you: searching
when or what time the spirit which testified before of Christ which was in
them, should declare the sufferings that should come unto Christ, and the glory
that should follow: unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but
unto us they should minister the things that are now showed unto you by
them, which have preached unto you the Gospel by the holy Ghost, sent down
from heaven, the which things the Angels desire to behold. What is here in
this application of S. Peter, that is not clean contrary to that, whereto our
brethren do apply it? This therefore is too foul a wresting of the Scripture,
and that in the very^ first entry into the matter, to stumble upon such an
untruth, or rather so to enforce it, to discourage the people, and to slander
all the state of the Church thereby.

The acknowledgement of our sins, and Gods wrath.
I note not this, that we on the other side should instifle our selves, as
though we were not sinners, or as though our sins were not manifold and
grievous sins: or as though we wouldflatter any in their sins, or lay
pillowes under their arms, and lull them in the sleep of security, with
singing unto them Peace, Peace: No, howsoever they burden us untruly with that
point, we do (by the grace of God) as much acknowledge our manifold
wickedness, The fault in our selves, not in our Laws and Orders.
and heavy provocation of Gods wrath as do our brethren; though in other
respects then they do. For, that which they impute to the laws and orders
established in our Church, we see not any just cause, so to diuerte the fault
from us, but rather to acknowledge in repentance, the disorders to be in our
selves, in not submitting our selves (as we ought to do) in the duty of our
obedience to the laws and orders. For when we consider the sincerity of our
faith, which God has given us grace by his Gospel to profess; and behold the
^^^uelous light of his kingdom, into the which out of the power of darkn^sse,
The True Causes of our joy and mourning.
and shadow of death, wherein we sat, he has translated us: the vn^^ekeable
joy and consolation of the spirit of God, that we receive hereby, does
recomfort and confirm us, against the fear of our sins, and terror of the
wrath of God. But when again, we consider, how we walk not in this light that
shines to us, but profess to be the children of light, and commit the works
of darkness: how our laws be good, and our lives be evil: this is a great
touch unto our conscience, which rebating our joy, brings fear, least the
kingdom should be taken from us, and given to a nation that shall bring forth
better fruits thereof. When we see how these three capital vices of the world,
whereof S. John complains. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and
the pride of life. does so mightily carry away the greatest part: this we cry
out upon, 1 John. 2.
and bewail. the event whereof indeed we fear, and give warning of it, as
much (we hope) to our powers, as any of our brethren do: at least, we confess
this is our duty, and offer to join with our brethren, in the earnest
reprehension of these and al other vices, and in denouncing Gods righteous
judgments, on all those that continue unrepentant in their sins: and we
rejoice with them that rejoice, and mourn with them that thus do mourn: wishing
to god herein, that they also would join with us. But their mourning is not
for such grieuances, nor their thretnings for such vices. For we see many that
are great favorites of their plotformes, both dwell and swel in these vices,
and nothing by our brethren said unto them, yea, they are of the^ (to all
apparaunce) not a little esteemed, as of whom they are most maintained and
vpholden.

But our brethrens chiefest mourning, is a grudging and repining at their
brethren preachers (as themselves are) and professors of the Gospel with the^,
The causes of our brethrens mourning.
and the chiefest spiritual fathers in our Church, be they never so learned
and godly: yet are they grieved at their superior dignity, better mayntenance,
and greater authority. Yea, they malign, and burden the laws, orders, and
government it self, not the abuses only. Yea, they spare not the authority
that is given to the Prince, their most gracious Sovereign but are offended
therewith, that they cannot thereby, have the entry which they seek for, into
those laws, orders, authority, offices and discipline which they would bring
in, and whereof they have here prescribed a form unto us. All their chiefest
mourning and lamentation is for this, if indeed they weep and mourn at all,
and that every tear be not (as they say) as big as a millstone. For (God be
praised) they are merry enough and in good liking, save that they put on a
sower visour of mourning and terror. But since their grief, and al their
threats of plagues and destructions, are not for our sins, or contempt of Gods
word, but for that we follow not their misconceaued form of reformation: we
are the less to be moved with this tragical beginning, that they tell us
here of their mourning and lamenting, as those that made their faces look
sad and pale, or for that they would take upon them as Micheas, Jeremy,
Joel, and the ancient Prophets to prognosticate great calamities and
destructions, to come upon us, for yt we admit not their forms of reformation.
O, would God that we needed to mourn for no worse matter, and yt we needed to
fear nothing else but that. But let us lament and abhor in unfeigned
repentance our manifold sins and amend our lives: and then recomforting our
selves in the truth of God, which we profess, and better esteeming and living
after our laws, and or^ers of gouernnment established: let us put our whole
affiaunc^ in God, that for Christ's sake he will extend such mercies unto us,
that he will not lay greater, tentation on us, then he will make a way for us
to pass through the same: eue^ to that consolation of the comforter, in the
militant state of his Church in this present life: eue^ that joy, that none
shalb^ able to take from us, til we attain to those joys that we hope for
(though we cannot yet conceive them) that in his Church triumphant he has for
evermore prepared for us.

Which duty in semblable manner should now long agon have bin done of us, did
not the hope we conceived in the midst of many te^pests, Preface.
confirm us in such expectation of her Majesty, and her most honorable
Counsel, as that according to their clemency toward the poor ministers and
their families, but most especially according to their holy and zealous care,
which ought to abound, for the clean driving out of the Cananites, and
planting, hedging, pruning, and continual preserving of the Lords vineyard
from foxes, yea little foxes: this civil war (as a man may say) of the
Church, wherein so much of that blood (whereof S. Paul speaks) is powered on
the ground, should by their holy and just authority, fully be ended.

See how quickly our brethren have wiped away their tears. they say this duty
in semblable manner should have been done of them now long ago, Bridges.
did not the hope that they had otherwise conceived, so turn their mourning
from this semblable manner: and whereunto? to a dissemblable show of that,
which indeed they did not, but made us afraid of? For, if they meant good
sadness: what was the reason that they did it not, but made only a copy of
their countenance to do it? Forsooth the hope that they had conceived, and such
expectation of her Majesty, and her most honorable Council etc. Her M^ and
his most ho. counsel wrongfully challenged.
See again, after they have not spared to wrest Gods holy Scriptures, how
vnduetifully our brethren here also forgette themselves, even almost in the
beginning of their Preface, or ever they come to their learned discourse on
these matters: to burden her Majesty, and her most honorable counsel, for
frustrating their hope, and deceiving their expectation, and that they do not
that which they ought to have done and should by this time, have fully ended.
This is a sharp onset that is here laid unto their charges, for ye breach of
their duty. No marvel, though they spare not the laws nor ye Bishops, nor ye
residue of their brethren: when they adventure at the first dash, so hardly to
challenge both the Queens Ma. and al her most honorable Counsel, for not
answering their hope and expectation ( as they say) that by this time, yea long
ago, they should and ought to have done. Yea, and whereas they say that they
conceived this hope and expectation of them, in the midst of many tempests:
how do they not also burden them (though with a little more biows) as though
they had been the causes, or at least the sufferers of them to be tossed in
the midst, and that of many tempests? But what tempests, and those many, have
they been tossed with? God be praised, her Majesty's reign has been the days
of the Alcions sitting in the neste, most free from tempests, of all other
parts of Gods church: insomuch, that it has ever been a refuge and haven, to
harbor at anchor many other churches, Her May. reign not tempestuous.
that have indeed been tossed in the midst of many tempests: al which are
strangers borne to us (save in the new birth and commonwealth of the Israel of
God) and has denied succor to none: and are now our own native people, yea,
the pore Ministers, and faithful ministers too and their families also, denied
this clemency; that they only should be tossed in the midst of many tempests?
It is said, there is a lake in Ireland, in the which if a man cast but a stone
it causes tempests: and are these ministers of that nature? verily it is
contrary to the nature of her Majesty, Her Maie^^. comfort to the ministry.
whose clemency is known to all Churches, yea to all the world, and to her
enemies: especially to al her loving and obedient subjects, chiefly to godly
Ministers, be they rich or poor. And also her most honorable Counsel are most
ready to help and comfort any such godly Ministers: and if any should offer
any wrong, unto any the poorest of the^, would (upon just complaint) quickly
help the matter. They should not need to complain, that they also deceived
them of their hope and expectation, which were a great blot unto their
honors, if they should so do, or should willingly suffer any such wrongs to
be done. And if this be not done of them, nor by them suffered to be done;
what a great fault and unfaithfulness is this then, in these faithful
ministers, so untruly to burden her Majesty, and her most honorable counsel,
with so great a crime? If therefore any of our brethren, or any poor Minister
have been tossed, in many or any tempests, in these calm days of her
Majesty's peaceable, merciful, prosperous, and most godly reign: it is most
likely, that there is some matter in themselves, that either they are not so
faithful and godly, as they pretend, nor of so quiet disposition, or so
obedient to her Majesty's laws, and to their superiors as they ought to be; or
else, there is in them some such other matter, as whereby they have done, or do
procure their own trouble. And (till we enter further into the examining of the
cause) we may a while, rather suspect such matter in themselves, then to
believe this their accusation of her Majesty, and her most honorable Counsel,
to have been the causes, or permitters of their tempests, which they complain
they have suffered: or that her Majesty, and her most honorable Counsel have
not extended their clemency unto them, as they ought to have done, in not
satisfiyng the hope and expectation of these Ministers.

But besides, that thus (no less undutifully then untruly) our brethren do
burden her Majesty and her most honorable Counsel: not so content, they charge
them further, and in a higher matter, saying: But most especially according to
their holy and zealous care, Her May. and her most hon. counsels zeal and
care, wrongfully burdened of our brethren for not driving out of the Cananits,
etc.
which ought to abou^de for the clean driving out of the Cananits, etc. No
^oubt her Majesty's and her most honorable counsels care, is both zealous and
holy: and because it is so, it has (we trust) to their habilities abounded, in
performing that they ought to have done herein: and even therefore, our
brethren offer the another injury. Yea, if the driving out of the Cananits, had
been indeed their hope and expectation, it had been satisfied long a-go. What
Cananits are there remaining, that should have been driven out; that in such
sort^ as they ought to do, and might have done, they have not done it? and who
are these Cananits? Do they mean the Papists? but they are more aptl^ compared
to the Idolatrous Israelits and Jews, not to the Cananits, that were mere
heathen. And although in some sense, they may be so compared, yet were not the
Cananites so utterly to be driven out; but that if any^ would become in
religion true Israelits, as Rahab and the Gibeonits, etc. they were permitted
to abide, How far christians are charged with that commandment
notwithstanding the express commandment given them to the contrary. Whereas
Christians, have no such especial or general charge, to drive clean out all
that have been Papists, or superstitious, or Idolatrous, or Heritikes, or
Insidels, if they were truly converted to the faith and religion of Jesus
Christ, or else, how ha^ Christ translated his Church from the Jews to the
Gentiles? And so (God be praised for it) has he converted in these last days
infinite Papists to the Gospel. But if they mean those that remain Papists:
I do not think^ that they can show, any such to be maintained in the
Ministry. Although their words run at large, of the clean driving out of
all Cananits or Papists out of the realm, of what state or condition soever
they be: How much better is it (in my opinion) and more agreeable to the mercy
of the Gospel, and to the clemency of her Majesty's most holy and zealous
care, so to abound, Difference of the open and covert obstiuare and weak
papists.
that her Majesty has assayed to have woonn those Cananits to the Gospel, by
letting them abide, and so drive out from them their Cananitisme, rather than
to drive out all the Cananits, except they obstinatly profess themselves to be
Cananites, and to drive out such, at least out of al authority and public
Ministry, Ecclesiastical or civil, or to restrain or punish them otherwise,
as they deserve. although dissembling Cananits can never sufficiently be clean
driven out, Her Ma. and her most hon. counsels zeal and care in plan^ing,
pruning and hedging of the L. vineyarde.
that show such outward conformity to the Gospel, that they deceive her
Majesty, her most honorable Counsel, and al other, save God only. Quis hominu^
scit quae sunt homini^ nisi spiritus hominis qui in eo est. As for planting,
hedging, pruning, and continual preserving of the Lords vineyard from foxes,
yea little foxes: we trust also (as becomes us, and as we have found by the
benefit ther^f, good cause so to think) that her Majesty's, and her most
honorable counsels holy and zealous care, has not a little abounded herein.
And this, (before we shall enter into this learned discourse,) is a good
hearing, that they acknowledge her Majesty ought to have, with her most
honorable counsel a holy and zealous care, to abound in the planting,
hedging, pruning, and continual preserving of the Lords vine-yarde, Our
bretherens restraining the authority of her Majesty.
from foxes yea little foxes. For when we shall come to this learned discourse
we shall there see, that our brethren so abridge and restrain this their
authority here in, that they their selves have been a great occasion (if there
have been any defect) that the Lords vineyard has not been planted, hedged,
pruned, and continually preserved, with so full effect, as her Majesty's, and
her most honorable Counsels holy care and zeal has endeavored to bring to
pass. For under pretense of these Cananits and foxes great or little, our
brethren mean not indeed, so much to challenge the Papists, as our Bishops
and Prelates, to be the great foxes, and other the poor ministers of gods
word, the little foxes: and in general, Whom our brethren mean by Cananits
and Foxes.
al those to be Cananits ( be they never so zealous protestants) if they
acknowledge the laws and orders of our Church of England by her Majesty
established. And to show this, they mention not the open war with the common
adversary, which is the Papist: but (say they) this civil war (as a man may
say) of the church, wherein so much of that blood (whereof S. Paul speaks)
is powered to the ground, should by their holy and just authority fully be
ended: The impediments of end^ng this civil war.
And so (say I) it might have been ended long ago, had it not been more by the
importunity of our brethren themselves, who, (as the old saying accords, the
Fox the first fynder,) have both made and continually reniued this civil
war, more then either the Bishops, or any of us, who have been and are
conformable to the laws now established, or any negligence in the behalf of
her Majesty, or of her most honorable Counsel, that they should be thus
wrongfully burdened, to have been the nourishers as it were of this civil
war, but have still employed all their holy and just authority to the full
ending of it. And since they give it rightly this term of civil war: (
which is a great deal more dangerous war, than the foreign war with the
open and common adversary) who has raised this so dangerous civil war? We,
The raisers of this civil war.
that in all due obedience acknowledge ye laws and orders established of the
Church of England? Or they that have and do impugn them? and who has
contended against her Majesty's, and her most honorable Counsels holy and just
authority? we or they? yea indeed, they have not only not yielded to her
Majesty's supreme authority herein: but they plainly deny the full ending and
determining of this civil war, consisting in these controversies to
appertain unto them, but only to themselves, as (God willing) we shall see,
when we come (in this learned discourse) to the examining of the authority,
that they give to the civil Christian Magistrates in these matters.

Now, ( say they) when as we at this time, The Preface.
are subject almost unto all the afflictions, which can come unto a church,
blessed of God with such a Christian and happy regiment: Nehem. 4.2.3.4.
Nehem. 4.7. Neh. 6.5.6. Neh. 10.11.12.
as to the profane scoffing of the H^monits at the building of the church, as
at a wall which a fox should destroy: to the conspiracies of the Arabies and
those of Asshod: to the false charges of sedition, contempt of all good laws
and proceedings, like to that of Sanballat: yea to the Prophets themselves,
undermining, nay reuiling, displacing, and grievously afflicting the godly and
learned Ministry, and so consequently plaguing the Church with that plague
whereby the Priests may mourn, Joel. 19. Amos. 8.11.12.13.
because there is no offering, and the people perish, even the young men with
the famine of hearing the word of God preached: when (I say) we are subject to
all these, we can think of no way for reconciling the brethren at variaunce,
and after a most sure and holy union of both their forces, for a courageous
setting upon the common aduersarye, then the certain, peaceable, and
reasonable way following.

Bridges
Here our brethren declare who they are, whom before they calle^ Cananits and
Foxes: not the common adversary, but the brethren at variaunce. Whom our
brethren call Cananits and, foxes.
So that either they mean us, or it must light on themselves: and if now they
vouchsafe us the name of brethren: how vnbrotherlike have they dealt with us,
to revile us by these vile terms, Cananits and foxes. As though we were
beastly or heathen men, and not men and brethren as they are. How these terms
redounde on themselves.
But if we be their brethren, though at variance, and yet foxes and Cananites:
what? and are they also of the same brood or brotherhood* But such is the
eagerness of their zeal, that in their heart, they regards not what foul
terms they afforde us, howsoever they rebound: and so, expose themselves and
us their brethren, to be hissed and derided at, of the common adversary to us
both, and not to be feared of him.

But they have here devised a way which they call a certain, peaceable, The
peaceable and reasonable way that our brethren devise of reconcilement.
and reasonable way following, so to reconcile us being brethren at variaunce,
that after a most sure and holy union of both our forces, w^ might give a
courageous onset upon the common adversary. This way were worth the hearing,
and if it be such a way indeed, God forbid, but that we also (as becomes
brethren) forgiving their so late reproaches, should so much as lies in us,
accept this offer.

But see, how peaceably and reasonably they begin the very mention of this
way. First, they complain again, that at this time, they are subject almost
unto all the afflictions, which can come unto a Church, blessed of God with
such a Christian and happy regiment.

I confess, it may be, that in a church of God, and in a Church also blessed
of God, The regiment cannot be christian and happy wheral the godly learned
and faithful ministers s^ffer affliction. Our brethren grant the church of
Eng. regiment to be christian and happy. Our brethr^ causers of their own^
affliction^.
and that with a happy and Christian regiment, some few particular persons, upon
some accidents by occasion, may be subject to some afflictions. But if those
afflictions should be general to all that were the godly, learned and faithful
ministers of the Church, and that also even directly for the same Churches
christian and happy regiment: how could that church be truly said to be, a
church blessed of God with a christian and happy regiment. But since they
grant (and I hope they think as they speak, and dissemble not) that our
Church of England is blessed of God with such a Christian and happy regiment,
not meaning a mean degree of the Christianity and happiness thereof: it
therefore follows and that of good consequency, if our brethren be at this
time subject to afflictions and that, all (as they pretend) for the Churches
regiment: that they are not so godly, learned, and faithful ministers, as,
would to God they were. Yea, they plainly bewray, in that they impugn the
same regiment of the Church of God, which both God blesses ( as they cannot
here deny, and confess to be such a christian and happy regiment) that
unchristianly, and also unhappily they resist the same, and are themselves the
causers of their own afflictions. And since they can grant thus much: God
grant they would better advise themselves, and yield unto this so happy and
Christian regiment of the Church so blessed of God, least they strive too far
against Gods blessings, and against their own consciences and confession.
Whereas, if they would yield, which have begun this unhappy civil war
amongst us: they might not only be partakers of this blessing of God, and
christian happy regiment: but it should yet be more happy and Christian-like,
and both they and we also, more blessed of God. For then indeed, we that are
brethren at variance, should be so reconciled, that after a most sure and holy
union of both our forces, we should courageously set upon the common adversary,
which now (we being at this variance) unites all his forces to set upon us.

But, what be the afflictions that our brethren complain they are subject
unto, yea, The afflictions whereof our brethren complain.
almost unto all the afflictions that can come unto a church blessed of God with
such a Christian and happy regiment: As to the profane scoffing of the
Hammonits, as at a wall which a fox should destroy: to the co^spiracies of the
Arabies, and those of As^hod: to the false charges of sedition, contempt of all
good laws and proceedings, like to that of Sanballat: yea to the Prophets
themselves, undermining, nay reuiling, displacing, and grievously afflicting
the godly and learned ministry, and so consequently, plaguing the church, etc.
Is this our bretherens certain, peaceable, and reasonable way to reconcile
brethren at variaunce, and can they think of no way else, then thus at the
first dashe, to call their brethren scoffing Hammonits, conspiring Arabies, and
those of Asshod: geuers of false charges like that of Sanballat: and to liken
them to the false Prophets, and to the plaguers of the church of God? This (me
thinks) is but a sorry way, to reconcile brethren at variance. If, not rather,
such a heap of so spightful reproaches, as here they cast on us, were the
readiest way ( if we were never so much united) to separate us, and to inflambe
the civil war between us: especially being so untrue, and so ^aynous
slanders as these are. For, what worse can they say on the very Papists, which
(they say) are both their and our common adversaries? and what other were these
Hammonits and Arabies for all their dissembling, etc. ^. And i^ we be such, how
are we brethren? were these brethren to the Jews? or would they reconcile
themselves unto the^, as our brethren heer^ say, they are now devising a
peaceable and reasonable way, that we might unite our forces? with what
conscience can they do or go about this, if w^ were such? and if we be not
such, with what consciences can they burden us, with so false and grievous
slanders? Our Bretherens unbrotherly sclau^ders
or make they it no matter of conscience, so they may win credit and pity,
with the common people, they car^ not by what shameful infamies so ever, so yt
they make us odious? This dealing is not brother-like, nor the way to reconcile
brethren at variance. God be merciful to us both, and lay not this unto our
bretherens charges.

Can they not proceed on the matter, if they have ought against us, with out
such villainous reproaches? if we should replye in such foule-mouthed language,
what a hearing were this? indeed we tell them plainly that they build not
well: Our brether^ns and our building.
but both hinder and overthrow their brethrens building: yea, they contrary and
hinder their own building. And most fain^ would we have them leave this
strange manner of building: but not utterly to leave all manner of building:
but to join with us whom they confess to be their brethren, and yt we build
on the rock also, and for all material parts and substance of the building,
they say, they agree with us. And we builded, and builded well, before they
began, or were able to lay a stone, or temper mortar to this building. Thus did
not any of these Hammonits, Arabies, or those of Asshod, or Sanballat: who
being no ^rethren minded not ye the building should go foreward at al, but
clean to overthrow it, Our bretherens nearer imitation of those Hammonits, etc.
for all that they pretended building with them. And if we might liken any
aliens from the common weal of Israel, to these our brethren in this doing:
Do not they themselves play the like parts? For whereas we (before they came
in and troubled us) were building of the Church, as well as we could, they
mock at our building, as at a wall, that a fox could destroy. Yea, and I
would wish our brethren take good heed, that they may not be justly charged
with some spice of sedition ( for they may rightly be challenged for contempt
of good laws and procedings) though we burden them not like to that (
accusation) of Sanballat. For he burdened the Jews wrongfully, and as the
Jews were free (in building the temple) from those accusations, wherewith he
fasly charged them, of sedition, and contempt of good laws, because they had
sufficient authority of the Prince so to do: in like manner have we the Princes
establishment, Who are lyker to under miners,
for this our manner of building, which our brethren impugn. And therefore they
ought to think better hereof: least they be justly charged with that, wherewith
the Jews were falsely burdened Whether we or our brethren imitate those false
Prophets, that discouraged the Prince Nehemias from proceeding in his former
and lawful building of the temple: we are sorry that our brethren should rip it
up, they draw so near that evil practice.

Undermining we use not, neither (God be praised) need we use it: we go simply
and plainly to work. Undermining is more proper to them, that when the walls
are builded, would cast them down again: as our brethren by all policies
endeavor, to ouertourne all the regiment that we have builded. As for theirs
which they have not builded, and are but yet laying the plotforme of it, we may
well stop it, but properly, we cannot be said to undermine it.

Reuiling is not our practice, RevYlinge.
would God our brethren used it no more then we do: reconcilement might be made
much the sooner. But (Leonem ex vnguibus) this very Preface does foretell, what
we shall expecte in the Learned discourse,

Some of them indeed have been displaced, but by their own demerits and
importunity, The displacinge of our Brethren.
and with grief to those that have been driven to displace them: neither can
it be otherwise, except we should yield unto them in the matter, and
authorize them against our selves.

Their grievous afflicting we have already answered. They are displaced with
as much forbearance, lenity, and as much laboring to win them, as may be.
Other affliction ( except upon great occasions given further by them selves)
they suffer none. Neither do we deny some among them (although not many) to be
learned: Our Breth^rens Learning and godliness.
yea (in some respects) some among them to be godly also. Yet neither their
learning ( at leastwise, that they have here showed) is answerable to their
vau^t of A learned discourse. But their godliness ( by their leave) in this
dealing may be much amended. If our brethren be so godly and learned a
ministry: where learned they this point of godliness, not only to wrest al
these examples (contrary to their consciences, and the apparent places)
against us their brethren: and to revile us as these enemies of the church of
God: but to hale against us these testimonies also of the Prophets, The
Priests mou^ning.
that we afflict and plague the Church with that plague whereby the Priests
may mourn? What? and would they so feign bring us in the compass of such
plaguers, that they will now ^cknowledge themselves to be included in the name
of Priests? which name (although needlessly) they shun so much, as though it
signified a sacri^^cer. But indeed, if any make the Priests and ministers of
the church to ^ourne, these doings of our brethren are no small cause thereof:
and if ^hey impute the cause of the mourning, to the lack of the peoples
offe^ing: who go more about to decrease that little, which is employed to the
^riests and Ministers maintenance, then our brethren do? Although (God ^e
praised for it) we have not yet been subject to that dreadful spiritual
fa^ine, which the Prophet threatened, Amos, 8.11.12. and 13. The famine
prophesied of: Amos. 8 11.12. and 13
Behold the days ^ome (says the Lord God) that I will send a famine in the
land, not a famine of ^read, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the word of
the Lord. And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the North even to
the East, shall they run to and fro, to seek the word of the Lord, and shall
not find it. In that day s^all the far virgins, and the young men perish for
thirst. This was a fearful threate indeed, How we are rather glutted then
fam^shed with G^ds word.
from the which GOD most graciously has preserved us, and has given us such
abundant measure of this spiritual food of his holy word, that I am afraid,
we are rather glutted, and become so wanton and disdainefull, that if we
cannot have it de^iuered unto us, in such manner as our own lusts desire it,
and at these and those persons hands only: (which is a sign of no great
Famine) that we may rather fear, least for this unthankfulness, and all our
other abuses of this food, it shall be taken clean from us. And if we have
had any scarsitie in some places, by any persons default: Our bretherens
contentions make the word the searser.
Let our brethren also take heed here-unto, that they have not much more
augmented the cause, by these unnecessary contentions, both driving away
others, and making many to suspect the food it self: and by withdrawing
themselves (through their contempt of the Laws established) from delivering
this food unto the people. But we are rather contented, to repel these
apparent sclanders from our selves, than to exasperate our Brethren, by laying
the same before their own faces, to see how here they blemish themselves, in
seeking thus to deface and discredit us. But since they say they do this, for
the reconciling of us being Brethren at variance, let us construe it to the
best. Better are the wounds of a friend, then the kisses of a flatterer. God
grant that those means which they have here devised, or any other, may prove
indeed such a certain peaceable and reasonable way following, that we may
leave this striving with our selves, and unite our forces, for a courageous
setting upon the common adversary.

Which is, that whereas both by books already written, and by treatises
lately and now published, Preface.
it may appear we seek that which at the least in the judgment of all true
Christians, The way that our brethren se^ke of reconcilement
has no small probability (as we judge, necessity) of truth out of the
Scriptures: it may please her most excellent Majesty and their honors to
appoint on both sides, the best learned, most godly and moderate men to debate
al differences of weight between them and us. So that first upon sufficient
consideration, the Questions to be debated be without all ambiguiti^ set down,
the reasons of both sides without all outgoings, shortly and plainly delivered
in writing each to other, that after upon sufficient examination, the reasons of
both be continually confirmed and resolved, till either by the evidence of
truth one party yield unto the other: or the folly and madness of those
which gainsay it, do in equal judgment become manifest, in regard of the
contradictions and absurdities where-to they shall be driven, by the force of
Gods word.

It may appear ( we grant) that our brethren have both already writ^en
books, and now lately published treatises: but with what authority they could
so do, that is another question, The inconvenience of publishing books
without authority.
if it be lawful authority to do it, both against law and authority, we may
shortly have other, upon like ensample, set out worse matters, yea, never so
ill doctrine, or matters never so much against the state. For although they
pretend their books and treatises to be never so good: yet ought they not to
be published, but by good means also: least, if the good means be neglected,
ill things in like manner may be published.

But by what ill means soever they set out their books and treatises: yet for
the matter of them, it may ( say they) appear, we seek that, which at the
least in the judgment of all true Christians, has no small probability (as
we judge necessity) of truth out of the Scriptures.

Fancy might make a man bowlt branne, and think it is flower. And even so do
our brethren imagine in this necessity. But when we shall come to the
examining of these books and treatises, The things that our brethren seek
for have no necessity of truth out of the Scrip^ures.
yea even of this their learned discourse, compiled in the name of all the
faithful ministers, and of all their desires, and of all that ( they say) they
seek for: we shall find necessity of truth out of the Scriptures, in no one
thing of all their pos^tions in controversy, except they understand it so out
of the Scriptures, that is to say, clean without al scriptures, or any
necessary consequence of scriptures.

And although probability ought not to carry away the matter, yet upon better
survey thereof, we shall find not so much as any good probability, that is
grounded on the Scriptures, but only on the mere interpretations and sayings
of some the chiefest persons in estimation on their side: if at the least they
agree with them, and are not carried away by their own fancies, as in the
perusing of this learned discourse shall (God willing) appear. In the mean
season, see here how peremptory our brethren are in their own judgment.
That which they seek for, is of no probability, but (as we judge necessity)
say they, and yet they confess, that in the judgment of all true Christians,
it is but of probability, ( though say they,) it has no small probability. So
that they grant at the least hereby, that many, if not al, true Christians
judge, that, that which they seek for has no necessity of truth out of the
Scriptures, but hold themselves contented only with probability. For be it
small or not small, it is but probability of truth out of the Scriptures, that
they ground themselves upon: and yet think this hinders not, but that they
still be al true Christians. So that ^hey count them no true Christians, No
good p^obability of truth out of the scriptures.
in whose judgment the things that our brethren seek for, have not (at the
least) great probability of truth out of the Scriptures. But if they can allow
them to be al true Christians, in whose judgment these things stand but on the
uncertainty of probability: I trust we shall not leese our Christendom ever a
whit the more ^or this, but be true Christians, ( yea, their selves have
granted us even in ^his Preface, that we are their brethren, and that we agree
in the substance of religion with them: and therefore of necessity if they be
true Christians we be true Christians also) and yet we openly and constantly
anow, that the most and greatest of the things that they seek for, have not at
the least any probability of truth out of the Scriptures in our judgments:
yea, in my judgment, not one of them al any good probability, but, we al
confess they have no necessity. This therefore was too unadvisedly and too
peremptorily spoken, and upon too great a confidence in their cause, as to
hazard the truth of our Christianity, for not judging these things to be at
least probable. But let the necessity or probability be tried, in the debating
and weighing of them: let us now see how they would have them debated and
weighed.

It may please ( say they) her most excellent Majesty and their honors, to
appoint on both sides the best learned, Preface.
most godly and moderate men to debate all differences of weight between them
and us.

This is a good beginning, that they will yield to her most excellent Majesty
and their honors, Bridges
yet at the least thus much, if they would stand to this: How far forth
they yield authority to her Majesty.
but when it shall come to the debating, wayghing, or determining: they give
her Majesty and their honors no authority at al. Yea, they have their selves
already debated, weighed, judged, determined, and prescribed these things,
and that, for necessity, in their judgments, before they come to this
conference, as shall also appear by these their learned discourses: and is it
likely they will yield, and revoke this their principles, set forth in print,
and diuulged to all the world, by our reasoning afterward with them,
howesoeuer by reasoning we should euict them? Had it not been better, not to
have vaunted thus before hand on such necessity and prescription?

But they say, The best learned, most godly and moderate men on both sides
should be appointed, to debate al differences of weight between them and us.

For their parts they so glory both of their learning and godliness, The
learning, godliness and moderation of the debaters
that they give this book two titles: in the one, for godliness and
moderatenesse: A declaration of the desires of the faithful ministers: ( not
prescribing, but moderatly desiring): in the other, for their learning: A
learned discourse of Ecclesiastical government. Thus have they set forth
themselves for these virtues. But (thanks be to God) that they grant yet some
of our side, to be also both learned, godly and moderate men. What the learning
is of many (God be praised) on our side, let the learned judge. Moderation is
more easily discerned: as the Apostle says, Phil. 4.5. Let your moderate (or
patient) mind be known to all men. But since our brethren grant they can be
godly to, and yet dissent from all these things that our brethren seek for:
it argues, that they are not of such necessity, but that men may be learned,
moderate and godly to, though not only they have not these things that our
Brethren seek for, but that also they be of a contrary opinion. And if this
may be so among the learned: I see not why it may not be so likewise among the
unlearned, and so among us all in general. Our learning, our modesty, our
godliness, is no whit prejudiced, by the want or refusal of these things that
our brethren seek for. And if it be no prejudice to these three virtues: no
more is it prejudice to any other, and so, these things that our brethren
seek for may be altogether as well spared as received, nor have any
necessity at all in them.

But now, since they on their side (which likewise we deny not in the^, If
the debaters should be moderat men, then should our brethren use more
moderation in their terms and not be so peremptory in their dealing.
but so far forth congratulate the same unto them) shall have both learned,
godly and moderate men also: yet would we gladly understand this, whether
this shall be counted a piece of their moderation, to use such broad language as
has passed already, even in the giving this advice? nay would God it might
cease here. but all this learned discourse is pestered with such, and with more
immoderate speeches, against the poor ministers, against all the Bishops, and
against all us their brethren: yea, against the Prince, and all the whole state
of the Church. Me thinks if we should have moderate men on their side also,
that we might make good exception against all these, that call themselves
here, all the faithful ministers, as not moderate men. But upon hope of their
better moderation, on this moderate admonition, our request unto them is: that
at leastwise for the time of this debating, they would lay aside all this so
peremptory urging of necessity, with all these and such other indecent
terms, and violent demeanor in this conference.

Well now, when her Majesty and their honors, shall have agreed upon the
men, how shall they proceed in handling the matter?

So that, first ( say they) upon sufficient consideration, the questions to be
debated, be without all ambiguitie set down.

This first point (so far as it stretches) is right good reason, and we
hold well with it, that the questions, to be debated, should be set down upon
sufficient consideration had of them: and then, The debating of the questions
and the allowing of them
being sufficiently considered to be matters requisite to be debated upon, to
be set down without all ambiguitie. But here-vpon arises another question,
and (me thinks) no less to be also sufficiently considered, who shall have
this sufficient consideration of the questions that are to be set down,
whether they be fit questions, or no? And who shall cut off all ambiguities,
that the questions may be clear and plain? What, shall any of the parties
themselves? or both the parties that must debate and dispute upon them? Or
shall her Majesty and their honors that appointed the parties, appoint the
Questions? Or some other learned, godly and moderate men ( but also appointed
by them) to be the moderators of the disputation between them?

If now such moderators shall-be agreed upon also, to allow of the questions
that shall-be set down: how shall they begin to proceed in reasoning?

The reasons ( say they) of both sides without all out-goeings shortly and
plainly delivered in writing each to other. The manner of the debating.


What? And shall they do it then all by writing? Indeed that is a sure way:
for by that means, there shall be less escapes of the party reasoning, and
less euasions from his adversary, and less moving the affections of the
hearers, with the action of the person, when the reasons are delivered in
writing. And the other party so receiving the arguments, shall again with
more aduisement, and less perturbing, peruse and weygh the force of the
reasons, and more shortly and plainly without all outgoings, grant, deny,
or distinguish the same. And they again receiving this answer in writing,
which the party auoweth to stand unto, may better perceive what they have to
confirm or to impugn, and still on both sides (with the less explication of
their senses by mouth) go more roundly and resolutelie to the argument it
self, setting aside all circumstances: till at length the one side be driven
to a demurre or issue, that all that argument must rely upon, and look for
the final sentence and determination of the matter. But what shall we here
do? Who shall now determine that issue between them? Shall the foresaid
moderators, or any other judges? For their speeches seem to allow none: But
that the disputers among themselves, it all determine all the matter, or
without any determinations, take it for a clear case, as though it were
determined. Who shall be the determiner.
For, say they, That after, upon sufficient examination, the reasons of both
be continually confirmed and resolved, till either by the evidence of truth,
one part yield unto the other: or the folly and madness of those which
gainesai it, do in equal judgment become manifest, in regard of the
contradictions and absurdities, whereto they shall be driven by the force of
Gods word.

And might we conceive any assured hope, that if our brethren were by this
means convicted, that then they would yield? Or if they or we, had any such
madness or folly not to yield, but still to gaine-saie the evidence of
truth, and incur contradictions and absurdities, whereunto they or we should
be driven by force of Gods word: should none between them and us, have this
equal judgment, to make this become manifest? This therefore, were to leave
the matter still undetermined, except there were also some appointed, to be in
equal judgment, between the parties, the determiners of the matter. As for
our parts, we never refused, or (by Gods grace) shall refuse any way, that
her Majesty and their honors shall think meet, whereby our brethren might be
satisfied. But we shall see in this learned discourse, how their selves (except
they also be the only determiners of the questions between us, reaching even
to the highest point of the Princes authority) utterly reject both this, and
all other ways, for the final determination of them. But now, supposing all
will fall out well on their side, they proceed saying.

Which way, though it should come naked unto us, cannot well be refused, but
being richly attired with all robes and ornaments, Preface.
which the scripture gives unto the synodicall assemblies, for such
conferences: as namely, that there be much searching of the truth by
sufficient reasoning without all by matters, quarrels, euasions, and colors
whatsoever: that there be much order, Act. 15.7.
when the spirit of every prophet shall be subject unto the spirits of other
prophets, and the judgment of all shall be sufficiently heard, 1. Cor. 14.13
32.
without stopping of free and sufficient answer, without lordly carrying
away of the matter, with no substance of reason; where no authority,
pregnancie of wit, plausible persuasion of man's wisdom, shall turn the truth
aside, 1. ^or. 2.4.
but all shall stand in the evident demonstration of Gods spirit.

The way which they have before set down, Bridges.
although it be not able nor likely, without some moderators and determiners,
appointed by her Majesty and their honors, to effect a perfect reconciliation
and sure union: yet the matters in controversy, being so in writing on both
sides debated, cannot well be said to come naked, in respect of the robes and
ornaments of the scripture: The naked trial of the matter.
sith the grounds of all their proves, should be taken either out of the
express testimonies of the scripture; or out of necessary consequence of the
scripture. Except perhaps they mean, by being richly attyred with all robes
and ornaments, which the scripture gives unto the synodicall assemblies for
such conferences, their own interpretations, and rhetorical exornations of
the scripture. But, let the scriptures ( as they say) be searched out for the
true understanding of them, with as much reasoning as shall be thought
necessary and sufficient, without all by matters, quarrels, euasions, and
colors whatsoever, and so, a Gods name, naked or adorned; let the matter be
further tried when it shall.

But what mean they here, that they add yet further: Our brethre^s desire to
confer by way of prophesying.
That there be much order, when the spirit of every prophet shall-be subject
unto the spirits of the other prophets? Would they reduce this synodicall
conference to the order of prophesying, which they began of late, in the
imitation of that order, which S. Paul mentions, 1. Cor. 14? For that was
not a strict and logical reasoning, nor a delivery of their assertions and
aunswers by writing: but a discoursing at large by mouth: nor so properly any
disputing, one against another, as an interpreting, one after an other, or
exhorting, instructing, and comforting one another, as the spirit ( which at
that time wrought miraculouslie in them) gave them utterance: is this then that
conference which our brethren desire? Because they say, they would not be
stopped of free and sufficient answer. This is nothing agreeable to the way,
whereof they said before, they could think of no way but that, which should
be, When the reasons on both sides, without all outgoings, are shortly and
plainly delivered in writing each to other. And here contrariwise, they
would have the Judgment of all sufficiently heard, and the spirit of every
Prophet, to be subject to the spirits of the other prophets, and that all shall
stand in the evident demonstration of Gods spirit. So that under pretense of
the demonstration or revelation of Gods spirit ( as though yet those miraculous
revelations and demonstrations of the spirit of God were still, and in these
matters, to be expected, and not the manifest euiction of Gods word) if once
they said that we on our side had not the spirit of God, but only they:
either we must yield to them, or else nothing shall-be determined between us.
But if the matter shall come to the judgment of the other prophets ( supposing
all to be prophets in the synod or company, appointed for the conference:) our
brethren might perhaps be deceived of their hoped success, without any
lordly carriyng away of the matter. Neither is it meet (we grant) that the
matter should be stopped, without such free and sufficient answer, as is
requisite for such a disputation: Lordly carriyng away the matter.
or with lordly carrying away of the matter with no substance of reason: or
by authority, or pregnancie of wit, or plausible persuasion of man's wisdom to
turn the truth aside. These speeches are but byowse slanders, glaunsing at
the Bishops, and at the synodall assemblies in the convocation house, as though
they out-countenanced the matter with such shifts: which is neither charitablie
nor truly spoken by our brethren. But, who come nearest to these practices,
we shall see afterward (God willing) when we come to the treatise of Synods in
this learned discourse.

Preface.
Lastly ( say they) that there be peace without all bitterness, reuilings,
suspicions, charging of men dead and alive: whereby affections are moved, 1.
Cor. 14.33
judgment blinded, and men driven as with a mighty stream from the love of
the truth. When it comes thus adorned, we think, that which we labor to
procure, Act. 14.16.
to be so honorable not only before God, but also before men, that none can
judge otherwise of it than we do.

Bridges
Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum. Would God our brethren their
selves would leave off these practices, which here they would have to be lest
off. Bitterness to be left off.
What is more bitter, or bitterness it self, then are the speeches, which
even in their entry into this means of reconciliation, they have here used?
And all this learned discourse is still besprinckled with this bitterness,
with reuilinges, with suspicions, and with charginges of men both dead and
alive. For not only our Bishops, and we that (God be praised) are alive,
Charging of men dead and alive.
be charged by our brethren: but the charge burdeneth no less all those
Bishops and ministers, that first concluded upon the Eccles. Laws now in
force. Yea, it includes the Princes of so godly memory, that with their
clergy, and the whole state of the Church and Realm, established the same.

But perhaps our brethren here do mean, that we use to defend these Laws with
this argument, Moving affections.
that such and such most excellent men allowed of them: and of all things they
love not to hear of this argument: whereby ( they say) affections are moved,
judgment blinded, and men driven as with a mighty stream from the love of
the truth.

Indeed in a false matter it may so do, and has done much among the
papists: and by our brethrens leave, they also are carried too much away with
charginges of men dead and alive, and with too much forestabled opinions of
such and such men, as to say, Calvin being dead, The alleging of the late and
ancient writers
Beza or Daneus being alive, were of this or that opinion in these things. And
therefore, I have also labored some what the more, to lay before the reader
(among all other) especially their opinions: that the reader may better weigh
their proves, and see how far they agree or disagree about things. And the
like we all do with Swinglius, Peter Martyr, Bullinger, Musculus, etc. With
Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Iuell, etc. being dead: besides Gualter,
Zanchius, and others being alive. Not to use the opinions or sentences of these
most famous men, to carry away the affections and blind the judgments of
men, to be driven as with a mighty stream from the love of the truth: God
forbid. Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates: magis amica veritas. But to confirm men
better in the truth, as we also allege the holy ancient fathers, Ireneus,
Tertullian, Cyprian, Clemens, Alexandrinus, Origene, Eusebius, Epiphanius,
Basil, Theodoret, Chrysostom, Jerome, Ambrose, Augustine, etc. As witnesses
only to the truth in doubtful matters, and to hear their judgments and
consentes in these questions, what was the use or opinion of them in their
days. And this do our Brethren themselves, and give us occasion to search
these fathers better. And this was used to be done, not only in the several
treatises of the Fathers, according to the council of Vincentius Lyrinensis,
and as Theodoret uses in his dialogues, etc. but also in all the best and most
famous Synodicall assemblies, and disputations, holden in the ancient
councels, to cite the testimonies of the godly fathers deceased, and of the
most famous fathers consentes that were then living, for their interpretations
and judgments of their controversies. Neither ought our Brethren to shun
this manner of charging them with men dead or alive. For it is a good (not
adorning only of the truth) but finding out of the truth, lightning of the
judgment, and moving men's affections, driving them as with a mighty stream
to the love of the truth: and when the truth comes indeed thus adorned, we
think that which we also labor to confirm and defend, as they labor to
procure the contrary, that none ( we do not say) can judge, otherwise then we
do* but that, they which do judge otherwise then we do in these matters, may
have sufficient cause to judge as we do, and to think them to be honorable,
not only before men, but before God also. Now, when our Brethren have set
down al their devise, how they would have these controversies to be debated:
then they enter into the answer of the objections, which they suppose will be
objected against them, and say:

For if any shall object that the grave authority of Archbishops and Bishops
shall receive a check, Preface.
whilst they are brought to deal with those whom they judge few, young,
unlearned, and not comparable to themselves: or that it is a challenge not much
unlike the papists: or lastly, that it shall be prejudicial to the estate of
government established:

Bridges
In good time our Brethren remember among other these three objections. Neither
are they of small moment, being rightly set down ( as indeed they may be more
pithily objected) and require every one of them a sound and sufficient
answer. Our bretherens presupposal of our objections.
It is no small matter, if any shall object but this first and lightest
objection of these three: that the grave Authority of Archb. and Bishops,
shall receive a check, whilst they are brought to deal with those, The 1.
objection of comparison between the Archb. B. and our brethren.
whom they judge few, young, unlearned, and not comparable to themselves.
Albeit I think, that neither our Archbyshops nor Bishops do Judge of these
our brethren, that they be so few ( as it were better they were) but rather
too many; at the least, far more in number than our Archbishops, or all our
Bishops are: neither do they judge them to be so young ( although many of them
indeed be very young, Comparion of age and youth.
both in years, in judgment, and in experience of these matters,) but that
the auncienter sort of them, might for their age and time have had leisure
enough, to have sought out the state and ground of these questions long a-goe;
save that they are too much fore grounded in their own opinions. But in these
matters, their youth or age is not called into question. Neither do our
Archbishops or Bishops esteem our brethren, at least, many of them, for
unlearned: but rather wish that they would not think and vaunt too much of
their learning, Comparison of learning.
and if they would follow the Apostles counsel, sapere ad sobrietatem: it
would better become them. That (when all is done) is the best learning, which
finds out, and submits it unto the truth. Neither do the Archbishops and
Bishops ( as I suppose) judge, that our brethren are not comparable to
themselves. Although our brethren may remember, there be three degrees of
comparison, Comparison of authority
and it might well enough beseem our brethren, so to compare with the Archb.
and Bishops, that they would not forget their own callings, nor the dignities
of the Archb. and Bishops, which they call here their grave authority:
Howbeit, they give that ten, but in a light mockage to the^, when as indeed
they acknowledge the Archb. or B. not to have any authority at all, but
labor by all means, besides their scoff, to be in all respects, (specially
of authority) so comparable to the^: that they would not only give them a
check, as their equalles: but as their superiors, even check mate, utterly to
foil and overthrow them. Which if they can do, by all their learning, and in
such manner as is requisite for the matter: let the^ not spare it, a Gods
blessing. And if our Archb. and Bishops, or any other of our party, that
otherwise are as ready as any of our brethren, to give account of their hope
and faith to any orderly asking the same, shal-be by her most excellent
Majesty, and by her most honorable Counsel, brought to deal with any of all
these our brethren: I dare adventure, that they will not disdain by any
lawefull and godly means, that can be devised, to deal with them: if our
brethren for their part would oblige themselves to stand there-to.

As for the second objection, it is of greater moment: The 2. objection of our
bretherens challenge, to be not unlike the papists challenge.
that this our bretherens challenge, is not much unlike to the challenge of the
Papists. And can our brethren also foresee this, that any may object this
unto them, that they make like challenge to our Bishops, as do the Papists? And
are they neither afraid, nor ashamed of it, to draw so near the challenge of
the common adversary, against their brethren and fathers in Gods church?

And yet the third objection is the greatest: The 3. objection of prejudice to
the estate of government established.
that it shall-be prejudicial to the estate of government established: which
if it be: see what a hazard they put, not so much the Archbishops and Bishops,
and many other persons unto, besides the laws and orders ecclesiastical: as
the whole estate of the Church and realm of England, and of all the governors,
as well as of the government, and so withal, of all the civil and politic
laws established, yea, of her Majesty's own estate, government, and sacred
person, to be endangered. Which objection how they can sufficiently answer
unto: is an answer indeed worth the hearing. For, if now they can-not
sufficiently answer these objections, which here their selves beforehand
presuppose, will be, or may be objected against them: it had been better for
them to have suppressed these objections. Which will be a sore blanke to all
their learned discourse following, in the judgment of the prudent and godly
reader. Let us now therefore see their answer, to the objections. And first in
general to them all three they say:

It may please their wisdoms, who are to be judges, to consider what we have
to answer unto these things: which, if they have the truth of Gods word,
contain the safest and best way in such cases, and tend to the full quieting
of all, and the remoouing of the plagues which are upon us, and are likely
daily further to come, even from the common adversary: we may boldly, yet
most humbly upon our knees, require them before God and all his elect Angels,
not to cast it away.

Bridges
What a strange and sleeuelesse answer have we here, to so direct and
important objections? Our brethrens answer to these three objections.
I refer it to the judgment, of whosoever shall be Judges of this their
answer: And I believe it will pose their wisedoms, to judge, and miss not,
what the meaning is of this our brethrens answer. For first, whom do they
mean here in these words: It may please their wisdoms, who are to be
Judges, to consider what we have to answer unto these things? The ambiguitie of
this answer.
Do they mean the Readers of these their writings? Or do they mean, some to
be appointed to be judges of the controversies, in the foresaid conference and
debating? But, when they set down all the order of that conference, they so
little mentioned any^ judges: that they would have the matter so examined
only on both sides, till by the evidence of truth, the one part yield unto
the other: or the folly and madness of those which gaine-saie it, do in
equal judgment become manifest. Here is mention indeed of equal judgment,
but it appears, that they would have the parties only, not any judge or
vmpiere between the parties, to determine the matter: which is the thing that
we think very necessary. But they think the matter would be so clear, that
it should need no such judges, nor in y^ conference they ar^ answerers or
defendants, but chalengers, as here they confess: ^ yet her^ they speak of
those, that are to be judges of their answer unto these things, which I
understand, for their answer unto these three objections. And so I like wise
make the same request with them, That it may please their wisdoms, who are to
be judges ( that is to say, as I understand them, the readers of their answer)
to consider indeed and to weigh well, what they have to answer unto these
things, at leastwise, what they d^^ answer unto them. For if they have to
answer any thing else: why di^ they not here set it down? Except they
reserve somewhat for a further answer, which the readers wisdom, cannot, nor
is not to consider, until they show it. In the mean season, the readers or
judges wisdoms whosoever, and their own wisdoms too, that made this
answer, shall ^nd^ themselves work enough, to consider of this their answer,
here ma^^ unto these things: which if they have the truth of Gods word,
contain the safest and best way in such cases, etc.

See, how they make these things to hang together: they desire the judges
wisdom to consider, what they have to answer unto these things. What are
these things, that the readers or judges should consider? Are they not here
desired to consider of their answer to these their objections, which,
themselves say, may be objected against them? Now when they say, on these
things, that is, these three objections, which if they have the truth of Gods
word, etc. Then say I, let their wisdoms consider who are to be judges, what
our brethren can answer, that shall be able to confute even these things, that
is, these three objection. Except our brethren will take upon them to confute
the truth of Gods word. Sed magna est veritas and praeualet. But if they shall
not mean by this their answer unto these things, their answer unto these three
objections: how shall the judges wisdoms be able to know, what they should
consider? if our brethren mean by these things, the way of reconciliation
that they set down before: how say they here, these things contain the
safest and best way in such cases: if they understand by these things which
they speak of here, the way it self that before they spoke of ^ And if they
mean those things that they set down in that way: what mean they here in
saying, they will answer unto these things: when themselves set those things
down, as means and rules to be observed in the conference, and not as
questions, or as objections moved either of us, or yet of themselves, or of
any other, to be by them answered at all unto?

But the safest and best way ( me thinks) in such cases, as these uncertain
speeches are, which tend ( neither we, nor (I think) themselves that wrote
them, can well tell, whereunto) is to let them alone without a^ye answer, nor to
comber any readers or judges wisdoms in further considering of them, except
their selves shall-be able, and will vouchsafe, to tell what they meant by these
things, and by these words, that they utter as it were in riddles, so
confusedly, that Magis opus est Oedipo, quam iudice, to decide them. As for
that they add, that they t^nd to the full quieting of all: The quieting of all.
whereunto soever these things, and these words also of our brethren t^nd: the
full quieting of all is a good thing, so it be a quieting in goodness, and
done by good order. Would God our brethen, that ha^^ begun these troublesome
contentions, would yet now at length submit themselves, to a full quieting of
all. But they tell us of one thing, and go about in this discourse the clean
contrary. Yea, to make all the whol^ estate more out of quiet then we be. The
setting out of such discourses a^ this is, tends so little to any full quiet
of all, that it is the very readiest way to disturb all with a soul
disquieting.

And the remoouing ( say they) of the plagues which are upon us, The remoouing
of the plagues.
and are like daily further to come, even from the common adversary. We have
no greater plague upon us, then these civil wars that our brethren have begun.
And her Majesty and their honors, besides the Archb. and Bishops, and all we
to our habilities, with all lenity hitherto, have labored to remove. Would
God our brethren that began this plague, would not continue and increase it.
But they prognosticate that there are more plagues that are like daily further
to come, even from the common adversary. The more have our brethren to answer,
that knowing or fearing this, will not cease plaguing both themselves and us,
with these unnecessary contentions. If they would needs have begone them, they
should at least have forborne, till we had ouerpast all the dangers coming
from the common adversary.

But say they, We may boldly, yet most humbly on our knees require them
before GOD, Our brethrens bold and humble request upon their knees.
and all his elect Angels, not to cast it away. How do they make this
conclusion depend on the premises? And who are they, whom thus boldie, yet
most humbly on their knees, they may require them? Is it the Archbishops and
Bishops? But neither they require such humility of our brethren: nor our
brethren will make any request, in such humble manner to them. Or is it those,
of whom before they said, who are to be judges: not telling, who those judges
were: whether some appointed by her Majesty, and her most honorable counsel:
or the readers: nor whereof they should be judges: whether of the conference:
or of these things, to wit of these objections, or of their answer thereunto,
or of the controversies in this learned discourse following?

And what is it, that they here require of them, not to cast it away? Whereof
mean they this? Of the state of the government established: that it should
not be cast away? And good reason too: Or do they mean it of the conference:
or of the obiecting the three objections, or of their answer? But when they
s^all tell us plainer their own meaning: then may we better tell them what is
our answer. This in the mean season, is all, that they answer here in
general to these objections: which done, they proceed to the particulers of
them.

Wherefore, for the first, let us grant the great difference which they make
of years and learning: Preface.
yet the speech of Elihu gives them sufficient answer: Ioh. 32.7.8. Ioh.
32.21.22.
that this understanding is not tied to such outward respects, but to the
revelation of Gods spirit: and to accept in such cases the persons of men, or
to give titles, is but to provoke God to destroy us. Yea let the memorable
examples of Ezechias and the Priests: of the Apostles in their counsels, 2.
Chron. 30.1.5.23. ver. Act. 15.23. Gal. 1.1. Act. 11.^.2.3.4. etc. Doctor
Whitegiftes book, p. 389.
of Paul in his Epistles, and even of Peter in yielding to the challenge of
some, not so well instructed, move them: who not only not refused the Levites
and elders, but accepted the people in some manner, to be heard to speak, and
to authorize their determinations and writings. At least, let their own opinion
(that in interpreting the scriptures, and delivery of doctrine, we are equal
with them,) persuade them, not to refuse those, who if they could strain
their consciences, to subscribe to the Archbishops articles: they would gladly
receive them to be the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ.

The first objection consisted of three points: that our brethren were but
few, Bridges.
young, and unlearned, to be accounted comparable to the Archbishops and
Bishops,

To this they say: wherefore for the first, Our bretherens answer to the first
object. in yielding for years and learning.
let us grant the great difference they make of years and learning.

This is well done of our brethren (if they mean as they say) that they would
yield to the Archbishops and Bishops, in these two things, and for the most
part of these our brethren, they yield but in the things, that otherwise are
most apparent. Their exception of the revelation of Gods spirit.


Yet ( say they) the speech of Elihu gives them sufficient answer that this
understanding is not tied to such outward respects, but to the revelation of
Gods spirit.

I grant, Our Reply.
the speech of Elihu gives sufficient answer for the respect of years, to
all them that rely thereon. But our Archbishops nor Bish. neither we, do
measure the truth of the matter, by the age of the men. Neither we ascribe it
to the title of age, or dignity: but acknowledge that which Elihu says in the
same chapter verse 9. Great men are not always wise, neither does the aged
always understand judgment: and yet they, and all the world does know that
wisdom in youth is but the seeldomer example: as Elihu said before ver. 6. I
am young in years, and ye are ancient, and therefore I doubted and was
afraid to show you my opinion: For I said, the days shall speak, and the
multitude of years shall teach wisdom. And in many places, the young are
willed to reverence their ancients, and to learn wisdom of them, so that
they be wise and reverend persons. Notwithstanding if any younger can make
demonstration of the revelation of Gods spirit, not revealed unto the elder:
therein we confess, both Archbishops and bishops, and all, are to hearken and
yield unto those yo^ger. Young Samuel is to be preferred before old Helie and
all the Priests: and young Daniel before all the elders of Israel: and heere-of
Christ also gave example even in his childhood. And S. Paul gave this
precept, that none should despise Timothy for his youth: and yet was Timothy an
elder in his office, yea an Archbishop ( as God willing shall be sufficiently
showed in the debating of this learned discourse. But as our Archbishops and
Bishops must not, and (I hope) do not reiecte any of our brethren, for their
younger years: so must these our you^ger brethren take no less, (if not much
more heed), that to supply their defect in years, they presume not (on pretext
of Elihu) to father any of their own, or other never so excellent men's
devises, on the revelation of Gods spirit, except they can make apparent proof
thereof. For, so, both they in prete^ding it, and we in believing it, might
run into a great danger, as did many ancient Heritikes, and as do the
common adversaries to us both, besides the Anabaptists: which when they can
not prove their assertions, by clear and invincible testimonies of the
Scripture, they always run to this, that they have it by revelation of Gods
spirit. But though our Archbishops, and Bish. vawnt not of any special
revelation of Gods spirit: yet I trust that in this matter, as S. Paul said of
his own judgment, 1. Cor 7.40. And I think also that I have the spirit of
God: so they with good testimony of conscience may say also, that although all
have not like measure: yet they are not destitute of Gods holy spirit. Which
how far he has warranted unto them in his word, for the ground of their
function: I refer to the examining of this learned discourse.

Our bretherens examples.
The memorable examples that our brethren here allege, releive the^ nothing.
Yea* let the memorable examples ( say they) of Ezechias and the Priests: of the
Apostles in their counsels, of Paul in his Epistles, and even of Peter in
yielding to the challenge of some, not so well instructed move them, who not
only refused the Levites and Elders, but accepted the people in some manner to
speak, and to authorize their determinations and writings. For proof hereof
in the example of Ezechias, Ez^chias.
the^ quote, 2. Chro. 30.1.5.23. verse. In the 1. verse says the text: And
Ezechias sent to all Israel and Judah, and also wrote letters to Ephraim and
Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, to
keep the passover unto the L. God of Israel. What, is here any thing for
proof of any Priests, Levites, or pastoral Elders in office, but younger in
years, or in learning inferior, to have any controversies revealed by the
spirit of God unto them, that were not revealed unto the Bishops, Priests and
Levites, which in learning and age were their auncientes? For, if they bring
not their examples to this point, they allege them amiss, for instances to
answer the two former parts of the first objection, for the difference of
years and learning, between our brethren on the one party, and the Archb.
and Bishops on the other.

Likewise in the 5. verse, And they decreed to make a proclamation through out
all Israel from Beer-sheba even to Dan, that they should come, and keep^ the
passover unto the L. God of Israel at Jerusalem, for they had not done it ^
great time, as it is written.

Likewise the 23. And the whole assembly took Counsel to keep it other seven
days: so they kept it seven days with joy. Let the reader or any whosoever
judge, (and judge upright) whether this be a fit example for thi^ matter. It is
a memorable example indeed of an other matter, which makes clean against
these our Brethren, that deny the Princes authority in Eccl. matters, as is
also to be seen in this learned discourse. An^ if this be a good example, for
the ordering and establishing of these controversies: then has her Majesty
already well followed this example of Ezechias, and if it be a memorable
example, would God our Brethren would remember better, to follow those
Priests and Levites that obeye^ Ezechias orders and commandments, in those
Eccl. matters that h^^ commanded them.

Their next memorable example is, of the Apostles in their Counsels, ^or the
which they quote Act. 15. ver. 23. wherein the salutation of their letters is
set down; And they wrote letters unto them after this manner. The Apostles and
Elders. Act. 15.
The Apostles and the Elders, the brethren, unto the brethren, which are of the
Gentiles in Antiochia, and in Syria, and in Silicia, send greeting. What is
here again for the present purpose? Indeed, here is a conference and
debating holden of the Apostles and the elders assembled, and in these letters
(as some interpret it) the peoples name is also used: though other refer the
word brethren, only to the Apostles and elders before mentioned. But, be-it
understood for the people: yet had not the people any thing at all to do in
the debating, conferring, disputing, or determining of those controversies, as
shall (God willing) appear in this learned discourse: for this example is
often alleged: I refer the Reader to the answer. But to the point we now
stand on, what was done in that conference, wherein the younger elders, and
less learned, prevailed against the elder and better learned? Yea, did not
James the Bishop of that Church of Jerusalem determine all that controversy?
If our brethren therefore would submit themselves to this memorable example,
they would leave off their contentions against their Bishops, and never plead
for their youth and difference of learning, by this memorable example. As for
that they add^ of Paul in his Epistles, namely the place here only quoted,
Gal. 1. ver. 1. is likewise altogether impertinent to the purpose. Paul an
Apostle not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the father, S.
Paul. Gal. 1.^.
which has raised him from the dead. It should rather seem, that either they
mean the 16. or 17. verses of that first Chapter: or the first, and so down
to the fifth, of the 2. chapter. But of those we shall see (God willing) also
sufficiently treated, in the answer to this learned discourse. And if our
brethren can prove themselves to have the like warrant for their assertions,
that S. Paul had: they should come somewhat nearer to the purpose, in respect
of S. Paul's iunioritie. For he was younger or later at least, in the time of
his calling* then any of the Apostles: but in learning, or in dignity, or in
office, no whit inferior: nor received any of those things from them: neither
came he to Jerusalem, to confer with them, and he says, They did communicate
nothing with him, 2. Gal. 6. But our Brethren bring this for an example of
conferring, and they have received their ministry of our Bishops, whom now
they contend withal.

And even of Peter ( say they) in yielding to the challenge of some not so well
instructed: where-unto they quote, Act. 11. ver. 1.2.3. and 4. etc. in which
verses are these words: Now the Apostles and the brethren that were in Indea,
heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God: and when Peter was
come up to Jerusalem, they of the circumcision contended against him, saying:
Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and have eaten with them: then Peter
began, and expounded the thing in order to them saying: etc. Is here any thing
that makes for our brethren: or rather, is not this flat against them? They
say well herein, that they which challenged Peter, were not so well
instructed. What? and do they liken themselves to these men not so well
instructed, that yet did thus presume to contend against Peter? and indeed,
so our brethren do against our Bishops. But it should seem, that our brethren
also are not so well instructed, in that they would enstruct us, or have our
Bishops, or any other to be moved by this example. What? and did Peter yield
to these contentious men? How can our brethren say this, even for very shame?
Does not the text shew^ the clean contrary? If they had looked further, from
the 4. verse down to the 18. they might have read Peter's memorable oration,
made before the^ so effectuously, that Luke concludes all that matter thus:
verse 18. And when they heard these things, they held their peace, and
glorified God saying: then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance
unto life. Whether now does Peter yield to them, or they to Peter?

But whereto do our brethren now on these examples, come in with these words?
who not only, not refused the Levites and Elders, but accepted the people in
some manner to be heard to speak, and authorize their determinations and
writings.

To whom do they apply these words thus confusedly spoken? Do they mean
Ezechias, of whom they spoke before, that he did not refuse the Levites, 2.
Chron. 30. and that the Apostles refused not the Elders Act. 15. and that Peter
accepted the people in some manner, to be heard to speak, and to authorize
their determinations and writings? It is a world to see, how our brethren
love to clutter up these things together, one to hold up an other. Were they
afraid, least, if the conclusions of these examples should be sorted by
themselves, we should see, that not one of them fitteth their turn? Indeed,
Ezechias did not refuse the Levites: for in the Chapter before, Ezechias
dealing with the priests and Levites.
verse 4. etc. it is said: And he brought in the Priests and the Levites, and
gathered them into the east streate, and said unto them: hear me ye Levites,
sanctify now your selves, and sanctify the house of the Lord God of your
fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the sanctuary: for our fathers
have trespassed and done evil in the eyes of the Lord our God, and have
forsaken him, and turned away their faces from the tabernacle of the Lord, and
turned their backs, they have also shut the doors of the porch, and quenched
the Lamps, and have neither burnt incense, nor offered burnt offerings in the
sanctuary unto the God of Israel. Wherefore the wrath of the Lord has been
on Judah and Jerusalem, and he has made them a scattering, a desolation, and
an hissing, as ye see with your eyes: for our fathers are fallen by the sword,
and our sons, and our daughters, and our wives are in captivity for the same
cause. I now purpose to make a covenant with the Lord God of Israel, that he
may-turne away his wrath from us. Now (my sons) be not deceived, for the Lord
has chosen you to stand before him, to serve him, and to be his ministers, and
to burn incense. Then the Levites arose, Mahath, etc. and they gathered their
brethren, and sanctified themselves, and came, according to the commandment of
the King, and by the words of the Lord, for to cleanse the house of the Lord,
and the priests went into the inner parts of the house of the Lord, to cleanse
it, etc. Here indeed the King refuses not the Levites but calls them unto
him, and makes unto them this memorable oration, and those, that otherwise in
their offices were his fathers, he calls his sons, in respect of his
supreme authority over them, himself being but a young man: and they again
speak, verse 18. And they went in, to Ezechiah the king and said, we have
cleansed all the house of the Lord, etc. but here is nothing wherein they
appoint or charge the King, but all still of the Kings commandments unto
them.

Verse. 20. And Hezechias the king rose early, and gathered the Princes of the
city, and went up to the house of the Lord: and they brought seven bullocks.
etc. And he commanded the Preests the sons of Aaron to offer them on the
altar of the Lord, etc. Then they brought the he Goats for the sin offering
before the King, etc. For the king had commanded for all Israel the burnt
offering and the sin offering. And he appointed also the Levites in the house
of the Lord with Cymbals, with Violes, and with Harpes, according to the
commandment of David, and Gad the kings seer, etc. And Hezechiah commanded to
offer the burnt offering upon the altar, etc. verse. 30. And Hezechias the king
and the princes commanded the Levites, to praise the Lord with the words of
David and Asaph the seer: so they prayed with joy, and they bowed themselves
and worshipped. And Hezechias spoke and said: Now ye have consecrated your
selves to the Lord, come near, and bring the sacrifices and offerings of
praise into the house of the Lord, and the congregation brought sacrifices,
etc. Here the King still commands both the Priests and Levites, and the
people, and they all obeyed. But the Levites are commended, verse. 34. To be
more upright in heart, to sanctify themselves, then were the Priests. As for
the 30 chapter which our brethren cite, after the foresaid first verse, wherein
the King writes to all Israel and Judah: It follows in the second, etc. And
the king and his princes, and all the congregation had taken council in
Jerusalem, to keep the passover in the second month. For they could not
keep it at this time, because there were not priests enough sanctified,
neither was the people gathered to Jerusalem. And the thing pleased the King,
and all the congregation: and they decreed to make proclamation through-out all
Israel, etc. So the Posts went out with letters, by commission from the King
and his Princes, througho^t all Israel, and with the commandment of the King:
saying, Ye children of Israel, turn again unto the Lord God of Abraham,
Isaac, etc. And at this sacrifice the King prayed for the people, saying:
verse, 18, etc. The good Lord be merciful toward him, that prepares his
whole heart to seek the Lord God, the God of his fathers, though he be not
cleansed according to thepurification of the sanctuary, and the Lord heard
Hezekiah, and healed the people. And verse, 22. Hezechiah spak^ comfortablie to
the Levites that had good knowledge to sing unto the Lord, etc. And in the
chapter following, verse, 2. Hezechiah appointed the courses of the Priests and
Levites, for the burnt offerings and peace offerings, to minister and give
thanks, and to praise in the gates of the tents of the Lord And verse. 4. He
commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give part to the Priests and
Levites, that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord. And when the
commandment was spread: the children of Israel brought abundance of fruits,
etc. And when Hezekiah and the Princes came and saw the heaps, they blessed
the Lord and his people Israel. And Hezechiah questioned with the Priests
concerning the heaps. And Azariah the chief priest of the house of Sadoch,
answered him and said: Since the people began to bring offerings, we have eaten
and have been satisfied, and there is left abundance. For the Lord has blessed
his people, and the abundance that is left. And Hezechiah commanded to prepare
chambers in the house of the Lord, etc. And Iehiel, etc. were overseers, by the
appointment of Cononi^h and Shimer his brother, and by the commandment of
Hezechiah the king, and of Azariah the chief of the house of God, etc. And
thus did Hezechiah through-out all Judah, and did well and vprightlie and
truly before the Lord his God.

The example of Hezechias and the Levites, co^ futeth our brethren.
Thus have we seen both in the chapter quoted by our brethren, and the chapter
going before, and the chapter following, how the King directed all those
Ecclesiastical matters, commanded, ordered, and governed both the Levites and
the Priests. But what, is any thing here to our brethrens purpose? Did the
Levites debate any controversies with the King and Princes, or with the high
Priest before the King: And the king, the princes, or the high priest, yield
therein unto the Levites? Or not rather, they yield unto the king, and to the
princes, and to the high priest, in those matters? If now this be so memorable
an example, why do not our brethren, if they will be like the Levites, yield
to her Majesty, her counsel, and her Bishops? Except they will be rather
herein like the king, his princes, and the high priest: then like these
Levites? As for the elders in the assembly and conference, Act. 15. They also
yielded unto the Apostles: not the Apostles unto them. Although the Apostles
refused not the elders: no more do our Bishops refuse our brethren, or any
other ecclesiastical persons, The example also of the apostles and elders.
Act. 15. is clean against the^.
that are lawfully appointed and called to the conuocations, or to any other
ecclesiastical assembly or conference Neither do they deny the accepting
even of the people in some manner to be heard to speak. But whereto do our
brethren mention here the people, in this debating? This is again clean
contrary to their own^ rules, as we shall see in this learned discourse. Would
they have the people also to be debaters, or to be Judges of these
controversies? And to overrule the Bishops and clergy in the determination
of them?

But they have yet one example more: At least ( say they) let ^^eir own
opinion, that in interpreting the scriptures, and delivery of doctrine, we are
equal with them, persuade them. And heereto they quote this marginall note,
and Whitegifts book, page 389. If the Archbishop that now is, does grant
this: it is the greater sign of his reverent modesty. Neither do an^e of our
Bishops, or any of us deny, the ability of many of our brethren to be able
to interpret the scriptures, and in the delivery of the doctrine thereof, to
be equal either with the Bishops, Our bretherens gifts in interpreting the
scriptures not denied.
or with any other. For it is not the access of the Bishops dignity, that
makes the person a better interpretor, then he was before he was called to the
dignity: it suffices, if being in the dignity, he imploie himself in his
former faithfulness. And would God our brethren also would restrain their
emulation to this comparison, to be equal or better, in interpreting and in
the delivery of the scripture, then the Bishops, as Jerome contended with
Augustine.

And though Augustine were a Bishop, Jerome but a Priest, which Jerome
confesses, and yet ever sharply threatened the conflict with Augustine, if he
were provoked thereunto: Neuerthe-lesse Augustine reverently answers,
Quanquam, etc For although, according to the terms of honor which the use of
the Church has now obtained, the office of a Bishop be greater then the office
of a Priest (or elder:) notwithstanding Augustine is in many things less then
Jerome, yea, correction is not to be fled from or disdained, though it come
from any that is the lesser. And in this behalf of interpreting the scripture,
Though diverse doctors in learning excelled, yet in government they were
inferior.
Cyprian honored Tertullian, and diverse Bishops specially Alexander and
Theoctistus reverenced Origin. And yet these men, for all their gifts in
interpreting the Scriptures, and delivery of doctrine ( being far superior
to the most part of the Bishops) did not therefore encroch further into any
superiority or equallity of authority and dignity with the Bishops. Let our
brethren interpret the Scriptures, and deliver the doctrine sincerely, and
therein excel the Bishops: as they may easily do, both by cause of the Bishops
great age, and great employing in the government and jurisdiction of the
Church. As Augustine modestly confesses of himself unto Jerome, saying, Nam
neque in me, etc. For I neither see in my self so much knowledge of the divine
scriptures: yea, or that now there can be, as I see there is in you. And if I
have any faculty in this matter, I employ it (as I may) to the people of God.
But to apply my self more diligently to my studies, then for the furniture of
the things that the people hear, I cannot by any means, for the
Ecclesiastical business. So that heerin the inferior (as these our brethren)
may have more opportunity in interpreting and delivery of the Scripture. And I
warrant then, the Bishops will not refuse them ever a whit, for their so doing,
but help encourage, and defend them. Which although any Bishop fore-slowed, or
envied to do: yet ought not any of our brethren, having such equal gifts with
the Bishops, in the interpreting of the scriptures, and deliuerye of doctrine,
and withal, being lawfully called by the Bishops into the ministry, to
exauthorate, and withdraw themselves from the ministry, for these
controversies of equal government with the Bishops.

But see how captiously our brethren deal, in citing the testimony ofthe
Arch.: for where he says: It is not to be denied but that there is an
equallity of al ministers of Gods word, quoad ministeriu^, touching the
ministry: Our bretherens haling of the Archbishops words.
for they have all like power to preach the word, to minister the sacraments:
that is to say, the word preached, or the sacraments ministered, is as
effectual in one (in respect of the ministry) as it is in an other. But,
quoad ordinem and politiam, towching order and government, there has always
been, and must be, degrees and superiority amongst them. These words do our
brethren draw to this objection that they are not comparable in learning to
the Archbishops and Bishops: at least ( say they) let their own opinion,
that in interpreting the Scriptures, and delivery of doctrine, we are equal
with them, persuade them. But who sees not that these words of the
Archbishop, do not infer an equallity of the gifts in the ministers, as
having these gifts equally: but an equality of their ministry, in the
hability to have them: and do distinguish^ only, between the power, of
order, and of jurisdiction? And therefore this is, but haled, to answer the
objection of this comparison, between the learning of the Archbishops and
Bishops: and the learning of our brethren in the interpreting the scriptures,
and delivery of doctrine to be equal.

But our brethren say, Who, if they could strain their consciences, to
subscribe to the Archbishops articles: they would gladly receive them, to be
the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ.

Our bretherens intricat speeches.
These words again are somewhat intricate, so that we might miss our
brethrens meaning, while they neither plainly express, who they are that would
gladly receive, nor whom, nor what: neither yet to whom these words, to be
the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, are referred: whether to them selves, or to
the Archbishops and Bishops. But I conjecture their meaning to be this: that
if these our brethren could strain their consciences to subscribe to the
Archbishops articles, they would gladly receive those articles, that they
might thereby have liberty to preach, and so to be the Ambassadors of Jesus
Christ.

If our brethr^n here mean by the Archbishops articles, the articles
where-upon it was by the Archbishops and bishops of both provinces, Our
bretheren^ refusal to subscribe to the Arch. a^ticles.
and the whole Clergy, in the convocation holden at London etc. 1562. Put
forth by the Queens authority: some of which articles our brethren afterward
in this learned discourse, page 135. do roughly challenge for diverse gross,
and palpable errors: how truly or falsely, and with what g^^d conscience they
burden them therewith, I reserve to the examination of the proper place.

But because they seem not so much to mean those articles: ( for then, they
should strain their consciences apparently to far, in calling those articles
the Archbishops articles, which were the articles, not only of Archbishops,
but also of the bishops and of the whole Clergy, and set forth by her
Majesty's authority): therefore I rather take it, that our brethren mean by the
Archbishops articles, The Articles where-unto all such as are admitted to
preach, read, cathechyse, The articles
minister the sacraments or execute any other Eccl. function, do agree and
consent, and testify the same by the subscription of their hands. viz.

1. That her Majesty under God has, and ought to have the sovereignty and
rule over all manner of persons, within her realms, 1. Article of the
supremacy.
dominions, and countries, of what state either (Ecclesiastical or temporal)
soever they be: and that none other foreign power, prelate, state, or
potentate, has, or ought to have, any jurisdiction, power, superiority,
preeminence, or authority Ecclesiastical or spiritual: within her Majesty's
said realms: dominions, or countries.

2. That the book of common prayer and of ordering Bish. Priests and Deacons,
contains in it nothing contrary to the word of God, the 2. article of the
communion book.
and that the same may lawfully be used: And that I my self who do subscribe,
will use the form of the said book prescribed in public prayer, and
administration of the Sacraments; and none other.

3. That I allow the book of Articles of religion agreed upon by the Arch.
and By. of both provinces, and the whole Clergy: The 3. Arti. of the book of
articles, Ano. 1562*
in the convocation holden at London in the year of our L. God 1562. and set
forth by her Majesty's authority: and do believe all the articles therein
contained to be agreeable to the word of God. In witness where-of I have
subscribed my name.

If now these articles, be the articles whereof our brethren say: If they would
strain their consciences to subscribe to the Arch. articles, they would
gladly receive them to be the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ: These foree
articles, indeed, the Archbishop has set down, whereof the third
comprehends the articles set out 1562. But what mattet is there of any of all
these 3. articles, that our brethren without straining of their consciences,
may not subscribe unto.

First, will they not subscribe unto the for-most of these 3. articles which is
the sum and content of An act restoring to the crown the ancient
jurisdiction over the state Eccl. and spiritual: and abolishing all forrayne
power repugnant to the same. Anno 1. Eliz. cap. 1. But I think our brethren
will not deny to subscribe to this article.

As concerning the second article, for the book of common prayer, and of
ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons, these two points are (...) wise
enacted and authorized by like authority. The one, in an Act for the
uniformity of common prayer and service in the church, and the administration
of the Sacraments. Anno Eliza. 1. cap. 2. The other, An act declaring the
manner of making and consecrating the Archbishops and Bishops of this realm,
to be good lawful and perfect: compri^ing therein also, the ordering and
consecrating of Priests, ministers of Gods holy word, and Sacraments; and of
Deacons. Anno Elizab. 8. cap. 1. To all which enactings and authorizings by
these our high courts of Parliament, The inconveniences of refusing to
subscribe to the ^se ^se^^ articles.
( we being the true church of God, and our brethren subjects in our state)
although they ought to have, no small respect, least they strain their
consciences, in refusing to subscribe there-to, and with all, in renouncing
their charge and office of the Embassy of Jesus Christ, being so urgent and
important a function: Yet, if they could show any greater, or but equivalent
reasons, (whereas here they show none at al), for their refusal of
subscribing to these Articles: then might their refusal carry at least some
show of probability. But till they shall so do: I see not, but that, while
they pretend the straining of their consciences, if they should receive this
article: they strain their consciences, a great deal more, (if they do it
indeed on conscience) in that they refuse their subscription.

Has the whole corporation of the realm (trow ye) and all the church of
England, and all the states thereof, no conscience, or no knowledge what they
did? Or did they (contrary to their knowledge) strain their consciences, in
the enacting and establishing these things, which contein^ al, that is
comprised in this article? Yea, and all things contained in the third article
also, concerning the book of Articles, agreed upon by the Archbishops and
Bishops, of both provinces, and the whole Clergy: in the convocation holden
at London 1562. and set forth by her Majesty's authority, and also expressly
ratified and commanded to be subscribed unto, and openly read and assented
unto, Anno Elizab xi^. ca. 12.

What a prejudice then is this refusal of these our brethren? what a slander?
what a touch to the consciences of al these estates and person (...) when our
brethren refuse, (and that of pretense on conscience), to subscribe to all
these things, which upon so mature deliberation both her Ma. and all the
estrates of the realm, Eccl. and Temp. have lawfully decreeed, established and
authorized? If our brethren have any parts among these, either represented or
included: I see not how they also have not so far forth authorized that, which
here they refuse to subscribe unto. For, if they seclude themselves, from being
any parts authorizing the acts, autorized in Parliament and convocation: they
do not only seclude themselves from us their brethren (which I hope are as
faithful ministers as they, and have as g^od consciences also (but from the
whole body of the Realm and church of Eng. ye have most clearly (in all these
acts aforesaid) enacted and authorized, all the points contained in these 3.
art. and therefore, they may indeed be better called in my opinion, The
clearg^es subscription in K. Ed. time.
the art. of the whole church and realm of Eng. than the Arch. articles. And
when such points as are contained in any of these art. were thus by Act of
Parlia. enacted likewise, in the reign of K. Ed. 6. of blessed memory: did the
godly and reverend Preachers and ministers refuse to subscribe to that, which
the whole church and realm had so decreed and authorized? No, the form of
their free and plain subscription, is apparent in these words Liber qui nuper,
etc. The book which is of late set forth, by the authority of the King, and of
the Parl. of the Church of Engl. appointing a manner and form of praying and
administering the Sacraments in the church of England. Likewise also, that book
set forth by the same authority, of the ordination of the ministers of the
church, are godly, and repugne in nothing to the wholesome doctrine of the
Gospel, but they well agree, and they do chiefly further the same, in very many
things. Therefore they are of all the faithful members of the Church of Eng.
and most of al, of the ministers of the word, with all readiness of minds,
and thanksgiving, to be received, to be approved, and to be commended unto
the people of God.

Thus did the godly, learned preachers, and faithful ministers the^, subscribe
more expressly and further then is now required of these our brethren, because we
would bear with our brethren the more, since they pretend such scruple and
strayning of their consciences. But I advise them in the fear of God, How
dangerous our brethrens pretense is of straining conscience.
to beware of such prete^ces on conscience. With what conscience can they now
not look back, but turn back from the plough of God, whereunto they have been
lawfully called, and have already laid to their hand, and now cast it quyte up
into the hedge, and clean forsake it? yea. disclaim the most honor. Embassy of
Jesus C. and utterly suppress the declaring the matter of their message,
because they cannot be suffered to declare it after their manner. And yet cry
out of such poor ministers, as would feign preach if they could, and these can
well enough if they would: but except they may as they lift, they will not. Are
these the parts of good and faithful Embas. and especially Ambassadors of
Jesus Christ? Do they not fear to strain their consciences, in these dealings,
and pretend fear of straining their conscience in subscribing to these
articles? but what strains of conscience make they to spare no reproaches, be
they never so untrue, against their brethren, no, not sparing the Prince, and
all in authority Eccl. or Politic under her Ma. and against all the state of
the church, as is most apparent in diverse of their books, and in this lear.
dis. as (God willing) we shall see at large. And without authority or license,
to publish abroad in print, and scatter abroad throughout the realm, contrary
to al laws and orders, their treatises so pestred with slanders reproaches, and
suspicions: and to pretend (for the reformation which they devise) prescriptio^
of gods word, practice of au^cie^t churches, and testimonies of holy (...) and
yet cannot prove either any clear scripture, or practice of any ancient
church, or clear testimony of any holy Father: as, (by the grace of God) shall
manifestly apppeare, by the diligent search thereof, in the examining of this
learned discourse: how greatly then have our brethren strayned their
consciences in these things? Or rather do they not (as Christ said) swallow up
a Camel and strain a gnat? such doings beseem not the ambassadors of Jesus
Christ. The third point in their first objection is of their fewness.

Preface.
As for the fewness ( say they) it may be, if the ignorant ministers, the
variety of other which subscribe: some doing it with this limitation, and
some with that: some holding their former judgment, as not gainsaide by their
subscription, some lamenting their slip in that behalf, were deducted: the
number of the one would not so greatly suremount the other.

We do not obiecte their fewness to them, as any prejudice unto the matter;
Bridges.
if the points which they contended for, were material and necessary.
Comparion of number for fewness or multitud
Neither do we object fewness in respect of Archbishops and bishops, but in
respect of the consent of all the other of their brethren ministers, that have
agreed upon these articles, from whom it might better become our brethren not
to dissent: especially by making such a scisme in this our Church of Christ,
as they do.

But they say, the number of the one, would not so greatly surmount the other,
if the ignorant ministers were deducted. Of the ignorant ministers, Our
bretherens exceptions from our number. Of ignorant ministers.
we shall afterward have their large discourse. But let them deduct them from
this number, as indeed they are not reckoned. There is none chosen into the
convocation house, that is not thought and known to be sufficiently learned:
how-soeuer our brethren in conceit of their own learning do despise them. As
for the other learned Pastors in the realm, besides that they gave their
compromise to those, whom they chose (upon confidence of their learning and
sincere judgment) to agree upon the articles, and to give their suffrages in
their names, have either al of them, or ye most part of them, given also their
especial assent and subscription thereunto. But besides these, Of subscribers
with limitation.
they say there is, the variety of other which subscribe (to be deducted:)
some doing it with this limitation, and some with that. If there be a variety
of such subscribers: it is a great sign of n^rigour, nor straining of their
consciences, but of all courtesy showed unto them, and of relenting (so much
as may be) extended to our brethren, in permitting them with such variety of
limitation. Howbeit, for all this number, the variety of their limitation
containing no contradiction to the matter that they subscribe unto, they may
also be well accounted in our number.

But they say, there are yet more to be deducted, some holding their former
judgment as not gaine-saide by their subscription. If their former judgment
accorded therewith, they may well so hold it, not to be gainsaid by their
subscription. But if they subscribe to one thing, and their former judgment
hold the contrary: Of Dissemb^e^s.
except they alter and correct their former judgment: let the^ look to it,
how they dissemble: and can then some of these our brethren and faithful
ministers strain their consciences on that fashion?

Lastly, say they, there are to be deducted, some lamenting their slipp in that
behalf. Indeed, this is a foul slip of any our brethren, to subscribe
contrary to their former judgment, Of secret lamenters of their open
subscribing.
except that in their latter judgment, upon better aduisement, finding the
defect of their former judgment, they amend it: but if they subscribe against
the^r conscience, and lament it secretly to themselves, or to other their
brethren, and not renounce it to the open state: they have to answer for
their great and triple sin. First, for the weakness, ignorance and error
of their judgment, that ought to be strong, skilful, and sound in judgment:
namely, such as withal vpbrayde ignorance unto others: and also, for that
contrary to their judgment, they subscribe to that which their selves
condemn: and lastly, that they think all is so salued with their close
lamenting of their fact, and yet not renouncing of their subscription: so
that, while we plainly and simply make reckoning of them, to have subscribed
bona fide, and to have said and written as they think, and to think as they
have written and said: Our brethren come now in with a new knack, ( new to us,
and unlooked for at any of our brethrens hands, though it were practiced of old
by Arius, and ye Priscillianistes: The practice of Arius. and the
Priscillianistes.
except that the dissembling Papists and Anabaptists, do revive it,) and tell
us we must deduct out of our number, some such of our brethren, as hold their
judgment not gainsaid by their subscription, and some such as lament their
slip in that behalf. When as, who these should be, we can take no notice,
except they openly reclaimed their subscription. I am sorry to hear it, that
there should be any somes of such dissembling brethren, as can thus hold with
the Hare, and run with the Hound, besides these our open recusant brethren.

But I trust there are not many such dissemblers, or rather none, if it were
well examined: and that this is but our brethrens threaping more kindness
then needs upon them, to win some from us, or to make a show unto us, that
our number is not so great, as we account of, for so they conclude: that if
these were deducted, the number of the one would not so greatly surmount the
other. Nevertheless, for all these deductions, either open or vnderhande: this
shall not much increase their number, nor decrease ours. Neither have they any
cause to boast of such dissemblers As for us, though we are sorry for them, yet
can we well spare both them, and other ignorant out of our number: and yet (God
be praised for it) still surmount our brethren. Albeit we vaunt not of number (
as do the common adversaries to us both) though the greater our number be, the
more is our joy, and our brethren should be the more ashamed of their
separation. But the number was not the cheifest thing that was objected. But
let us now see, what our brethren say to the other objections.

As for the challenge of the Papists, knit up with the consideration of the
estate, Preface.
the difference may be considered in the matter and manner. Concerning the
matter, they make it in the substance of religion, which has in diverse
assemblies abroad and at home been disputed, resolved, and now publikly
maintained for our true and holy faith. We in matters concerning the government
of Christ of great moment indeed, yet never thus handled, nor urging the
alteration, but perfection of the state of the church, and further good of the
commonwealth, whilst by this means amongst many other things of great
importance, the ignorant ministry, and by it Popery, and by Popery, rebellion
should be avoided, which by the other are most manifestly bred and nourished.
Concerning the manner, they call it to a sudden and tumultuous reasoning,
where the readiest wit, the best memory, the most filed speech shall carry away
the truth: at least, meruelously move the ungrounded hearers. We require that
where both sides may upon mature and sufficient deliberation be heard without
any of these shows, and the matter delivered unto her Majesty and their
Honors, and whomesoeuer they shall choose to receive and examine the
Allegations of both sides: so that it need not be communicated unto the people,
until the manifest light of truth, appear first unto them.

Bridges.
This answer of our brethren, howsoever it may seem to carry a show of
perspicuity and plain dealing, Our bretherens answer to the 2. later ob.
under show of p^rspicuity, is very intricate.
because they distinguish it by matter and manner, and by (they and we), thus
do they, and thus do we: Yet, seeing that the points to be answered, consist
of these 2. diverse objections: the one, that this our brethrens challenge of
us, is a challenge not much unlike the Papists challenge: and the other, that
this form of reformation ( which they would have) shall be prejudicial, to
the es^ate of government established: which estate of government established
is differing from the estate of government established among the Papists, and
the overthrow thereof: these objections therefore, being so different, should
not (me thinks, I speak it under correction) have been thus knitte up
together, albeit with such an answer of distinction of matter and manner:
except our brethren had cleared themselves for the matter and manner. First in
the one, against the Papists: and then, they had also cleared themselves, for
yt matter and manner of the objection against us their brethren Protestants:
and showed still with all plainly and distinctly* whom they always mean by
this word they, saying, They make it, etc. and they call it etc. Whether they
understand (...) Papists, differing both from our brethren and from us: or they
vnderst^^^ us their brethren protestants, differing from them selves: Or else,
in these dark speeches, under pretense of breuity, they may offer us their
brethren Protestants too great an injury: and the Papists, (our common
adversaries) too great advantage.

Besides that, in this answer, they huddle and knit up a great many things
together, which to so weighty objections, as of their agreeing with the
Papists, and their disagreing from us in challenging an estate of government
established, would have required a larger, or (at least) a plainer answer:
than thus to have these so different objections of different professors, to be
knit up together in such a knot, like the knot of Gordias, that except it
should be loosed by Alexander, it would hardly be untied by us, but that one
quirke or an other may remain. But to assaie it: and first for the matter.

Concerning the matter, they ( say our brethren) meaning as I take it by this
word, they, the Papists ( for so was the objection, Our bretherens distinction
of matter and manner.
that it is a challenge not much unlike the Papists) they make it ( that is to
say) they make the matter of their challenge in the substance of Religion which
(challenge of matter in the substance of Religion) has in diverse assemblies
abroad and at home, been disputed, resolved, and now publicly mayntayned, for
our true and holy faith. And by whom has this been disputed, resolved, and no
we publicly maintained for our true and holy faith? Has it not been chiefly
done, by us their brethren Protestants? But go to then: herein (they say) we
disagree not, Our Bretherens and our agreement in the Substance of Religion.
for challenge of matter in substance of Religion, wherein we both agree, and
both of us differ alike from the Papists. But it follows, We in matters
concerning the Government of Christ, etc. And who again are here this we?
Forsooth not we, all the Protestants against the Papists our common adversaries:
but we, that is to say, the faithful Ministers, and learned discoursers, are
against our brethren Protestants, in matters concerning the government of
Christ: though not in matters concerning the substance of Religion. And
hereupon our brethren conclude, that their challenge of us, is much unlike the
Papists challenge. This I take to be the meaning of their words, and I am
glad yet, Our difference concerning government.
that they confess our agreement for the substance of Religion. And since they
agree with us therein, it is less reason that they should dissent from us in
the government: at leastwise, so peremptorily, that their challenge of us in
that behalf, should be not much unlike the Papists, being otherwise in the
substance of Religion, so much unlike them. But they say, the difference is in
matters concerning the government of Christ, of great moment indeed, yet never
thus handled?

What they mean by handling thus these matters of government: whether they
mean that they were never so notably handled before, as they now handle them
in this learned discourse, or as they set down a way to handle the debating
of them: that, let themselves discuss. But that they be the government of
Christ (the matter or manner of government which they desire) as though Christ
did use that government, or did apoint that government, or that indeed it is
of such moment asthey prescribe: that is but only here avouched by them, and
denied by us: the proof (God willing) will appear in the considering of this
learned discourse.

Not urging ( say they) the alteration but perfection of the estate, and
further good of the common wealth.

This seems to be referred to the 3. objection, that it shal-be prejudicial
to the estate of government established. But our brethren think, that it shall
so little be prejudicial to the estate of government established, O^r
bretherens urging the alteration of The state.
that it shall tend to the great benefit of it: and how? not vrginge ( say
they) the alteration, but perfection of the estate of the Church, and further
good of the commo^-wealth. But who may not plainly perceive that this urging is
the urging of an alteration, and the alteration of the estate, and that both of
the Church and of the co^mo^-wealth? if (as they say) they urge not the
alteration: why let they it not alone as it is? or if they so seek the
perfection of the estate of the Church, and further good of the commonwealth,
that they will not alter the estate thereof: then let that stand as it does,
as the estate of the Bishops, and other officers in the Church, especially the
estate and authority of the Prince, both in the church, and in the
commonwealth. And not to take all these away, as here they do in this
learned discourse. For, this is both the alteration, and the endangering (if
not the overthrow) at leastwise, the making both the Church and commonwealth
worse than they are. But worse or better, how do not their words implie an
alteration? For when they pretends the urging only of the perfection of the
Church, and further good of the commonwealth: what mean they else, but that
the Church is in an imperfect estate, and that the commonwealth also is not in
so good an estate as they urge to bring it unto? And how, is not this a plain
urging of the alteration both of the Church, and also of the commonwealth?
These words therefore, are either co^tradictory to the^-selues: or else, they
would and they would not. Or they would, and they dare not, for fear or shame,
plainly utter what they urge, because they touch matters of moment indeed, (
as they say) even the alteration of the estate, matters too high both for
them, and for us, to meddle withal, namely to alter, which perteynet^ to
persons of estate.

But now, how would this alteration that indeed is urged, become the
perfection of the churches estate, and further good of the commonwealth?
Forsooth say they, whilst by this means amongst many other things of great
importance, the ignorant ministry, and by it Popery, and by Popery, rebellion
should be avoided, which by the other are most manifestlye bredde and
nourished.

These purposes (I confess) are very good, that Ignorance in the Ministry,
Popery and rebellion may be avoided: so that, the avoiding of these things, be
done, by good and lawful means also. But what is this that is here said:
which by the other, are most manifestly bred and nourished? Do they mean, that
the ignorant ministry, Popery, and Rebellion, are most manifestly bred and
nourished by the estate of the Church of Eng, and the government thereof
established. What a most manifest untrue, and uncharitable challenge of our
Churches and commonwealths estate is this? Yea, (save that for my part, Our
Brethrens pretense of remooving Ignonoraunce, Popery, and Rebellion.
I hope better o^ our brethren) some ( and those good Protestants) would not
stick to say, that this challenge were now not only, not much vn-like the
Papists: but that it smelt somewhat strongly, of breding and norishing the
third of these evils. And other would (at least) say, it were a false
accusation of their poor brethren, and a foul sla^der of the estate of the
Church, and government established. But I hope they will construe their words to
some gentler meaning: since it is most manifest to the contrary, that the
estate of the church of England, and government established, do neither most
manifestly, or manifestly, or any whit at all wittingly or directly, breed or
nourish any of these three evils: either Ignorance in the ministry, or Popery,
or Reblelion in any persons: but punish the^ in whomsoever they manifestly
appear. Albeit for the ignorant ministry, not perhaps in such manner of
punishment, as our brethren would have the^ punished. Yea, our brethrens former
confession it self, does not a little discharge ye estate of the Church and
government established from these crimes, in saying, that Our true and holy
faith has in diverse assemblies abroad and at home been disputed, resolved,
and now publikly maintained. Which cannot be taken for their doing only, but
much more for ours, by far odds then theirs For so much as we are the
public maintainers thereof, and not they, whose government has yet no public
maintenance amongst us. Yea, they refuse the publik ministry of the word and
sacraments. And yet if they had that alteration of the estate of the Church,
and commonwealth ( whose perfection and further good they pretend) whether it
would come to such perfection, or such further good, as to avoid these three
evils, of an ignorant ministry, of Popery, and of Rebellion or no; and not
rather breed and nourish them: at least wise, if not directly, yet by
occasion, more then they now are bred and nourished: or, whether it would be
the best and most manifest means to avoid the^, more then they be, or may be
now avoided.: thereby (I may say unto you) lies a question. For as our brethren
told us before, of some among them, that did this and that: So some among us,
that wish well to our brethren, think that this alteration of theirs, would
breed and nourish as great (if not greater) ignorance, then is already even in
the Preachers themselves: and yt it would cut of a great part, Whether this
alteration would not be occasion of more ignortnce in the ministry.
of ye study and profession of al good letters, both in divinity and humanity,
especially seeing the example and boldenes of diverse: some prete^ding only the
study of the canonical scriptures: some pretending the revelation of Gods
spirit, without study so to suggest unto the^ at the same instant, that they
need not to premeditat what they should speak, before they come unto the
pulpit. Some, under pretense of tourning the most part of teaching and
exhorting, into conceptions of long prayers. Some, in distinguishing too
precisely the office of a Teacher, from the office of a Pastor: cutting off
ther-by the on half of a Doctors office, excluding al exhortation,
reprehensio^, consolation, and al application from his doctrine: and the most
of them such as their-selues could not deny, in the first objection, but said:
Let us grant the great difference which they make of years and learning,
between the Archbishops, the Bish. and them: and yet would these not only
overthrow their estate of government, but make every one of themselves to be
equal to them: besides the setting up in every congregation a Seniory of
Ecclesiastical governors, chosen out of all sorts and estates of men, Noble
men, Gentlemen, merchaunts, yeomen, artificers, husbandmen, etc. which ought to
have the hearing, examination, and determining of all matters pertaining to
discipline and government of that congregation, as they tell us in this
Learned discourse. page 84. And besides the Deacons, excluded from all
preparing themselves to the study of the Pastoral ministry. These things,
and a number such like, (many that love our brethrendo fear,) would shortly
breed and nourish, a greater ignorance in the ministry, then now there is:
especially, seeing the boldness of many both Ministers and others, either
manifestly known to be ignorant of the pitch of these controversies, or but
superficially flourished over, are the hoatest sticklers in these broils, or
the greatest favorites of this desired and urged alteration: and yet some of
them (if they were well apposed) while there is nothing in their mouths, more
than discipline, discipline: they cannot tell their selves, what discipline is,
and would be full weery of it, if they had it: or if they were but a little
sharply displed, but even with that discipline that is already in force, by the
government of the church established.

The fear of more breeding Pop. by this alteration.
Now as Ignorance breeds and nourishes Popery, or other errors and
superstitions: so again they fear, that this alteration by so many manifest
occasions, breeding and nourishing ignorance: either it might as manifestly
breed and nourish Popery, even by that reason whereby they suppose to avoid
Popery most of all, and that is by the erection of their Consistories. Unto
which if the people, or the Seniors, or the cheefeste in the congregation were
inclined: they might do much more hurt, then now they are able to do. Or if
it bred not Popery: it might breed and nourish as great errors, pride, and
oppressions, as Popery has done, if not a great deal worse.

And as upon ignorance and poperye, the third followed, that is to say, an
inclination to rebellion: so it may be feared, that his alteration being thus
as much subject to the two, former evils, it would not be free from danger of
the thrd: This alteration more inclinable to sedition.
especially the peoples intermedling in the government, being so much
enlarged: except some greater vigilancie be had, then as yet by our brethren is
foreseen, or then, in the estate of government already established is to be
feared. For of this government established, we have seen already the
experience, and therefore being orderly looked unto, if any such occasion (as
GOD forbid) should happen, it might the sooner be repressed, as, God be
praised, it has been.

But if this urged alteration should be put in practice, not only the
Papists might sooner take occasion of new tumultes, as it many times falls
out in alterations, especially of the form of government established: but
also it is not a little to be feared, that our brethren disagreeing from us,
and not agreeing among themselves, might in these licentious and factious
days, break forth into more contentions and pertakinges, then that the
particular Seniories of every congregation, or the Provincial Synods, were
able to compose. Whilst our brethren withal, in this Learned discourse,
reiecte and deride, uniformity in Ceremonial constitutions, page 120. refuse
and exclude the Princes authority, in the decision of such matters, page
117.141. etc. The Papists in the mean season being the less looked unto,
and the more strengthened, and encouraged to blow the coals, and to make a
blast on every sparkle, when they get any advantage by such occasions of our
disagreements: which whole matter, it might breed and nourish, to the
preparation of Rebellion: many that are no euil-willers unto these our
brethren, do greatly fear the sequel, if this urged alteration should take
place. Neither may it be said of them as David said of the wicked:
Trepidauerunt, vbi non erat timor: For they fear God, and wish as-well both
to the estate of the church and common wealth of this our Realm, as any of our
brethren do, and are as far from Popery as they are, God be praised for it.

But whatsoever they fear or conjecture to and fro, of the event of these 3.
evils, Ignora^nce in the minist. Popery, and Rebellion: I for my part would
fain know what our brethren mean by these words, yt lie houering in the midst
of this sentence, Amongst many other things of great importance: what those
other things be, being many and of great importance: as though they were more
to be avoided then all these 3. and yet are namelesse nor dare show their
faces. I fear me, least in this dark cloud, there is hidd some great
tempest, and dangerous thunderclaps, if it were their time to break forth
Sed aliquid latet, quod non patet: and therefore let them go as they came for
me, I will rather follow Pythagoras counsel, Noli fodere ignem opertum: it is
shrewd waking the sleeping Dog. For the view but even of these 3. evils, is
already (me thinks) more then enough. We can fore see little perfection of
the estate of the Church, or good of the commonwealth to arise by the urging
this alteration. And thus much to their answer of the matter, now to the
manner.

The two foresaid objections were these: The one, that this our brethrens
challenge, is not much unlike the Papists: the other, that it shall be
prejudicial to the estate of government, established. To this again they
answer.

Our bretherens answer for the manner.
Concerning the manner, they call it to a sudden and tumultuous reasoning:
where the readiest wit, the best memory, the most filed speech, shall carry
away the truth, at least, meruelously move the ungrounded hea^ers.

Who, are these they, that do on this wise? If the Papists be meant: they use
indeed, such and worse practices in their tumultuous reasoning syea in their
most solemn councels, that they call general. But if by this (they) our
brethren mean us their brethren Protestants: Who call the matter to the
manner of a tumultuous reasoning, we, or they?
as it appears heerby, that we shun not the reasoning with them of these
matters: so if they complain of any injury offered unto any of them in the
manner of reasoning, they should have done plainly to have showed; who has
called them to reason in any such sudden, tumultuous, or disordred manner. I
have rather heard the contrary, that they their-selues have oftentimes, and
not long agone, called the matter to such reasonings. But belike, they failed
in their hoped success of such sudden reasonings. ( which notwithstanding
themselves have provoked) when they should be driven to the strict and
logical order of disputing: and therefore they call this a sudden and
tumultouse reasoning. As for us. we use no tumultes, or tumultuous reasoning,
neither (God be praised) need to use any, for defense of the estate of
government established: they commonly startle and raise tumultes, that find
themselves grieved, and would make alteration of the state of a government
that is established. But I meruel they co^plain of these things: where the
readiest wit, the best memory, the most filed speech, shall carry away the
truth, at least meruelously move the ungrounded hearers* For even by these
things especially (wherein also they glory not a little) and not by any
grounded matter, or any substantial proves, our brethren carry away from the
truth of these points, so many as they do.

But belike, they have found in reasoning themselves ouer-matched in these
ornaments of wit, memory, and speech also. Which three things (we confess)
are aduauntages of no small force, a ready wit, a good memory and a filed
speech, to set forth and persuade the matter, The ornaments of wit, memory and
utterance.
when they are joined with the wissdome and fear of God, with a sincere zeal
and feruency of Gods truth, and with an humble and moderate spirit, cutting the
word of God aright, as best may serve to his glory, to yt hearers edifying,
and their dutiful obedience to their superiors. For our dram of discretion and
of these virtues, is more worth in reasoning of these controversies, then all the pregnancie or readiness of wit, then al ye promptnes or fidelity of memory,
then all the rolling of the tongue, or filed speech with the smoothest and most
eloquent rhethoricke in the world, should^ be compared thereunto. Well, may
ungrounded hearers that desire still to hear of Novelties with the Athenians,
and the unstable hearts of newfangled heads, and itching ears, of those men
or weomen which are ever learning (as says the Apostle 2. Tim. 3.7.) and are
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, be eastly carried away from
the truth, by such persuasions. But (thanks be given to God) we use no such
practices, but plainly speak the words of truth and soberness, and are ready
(when we shall at any time be called there-unto) to render an answer, to
every one that asks a reason of the hope that is in us, or of any thing
pertaining to our vocations, without tumults: as becomes both faithful
Christians, and obedient subjects to our prince and superiors, in defense of
the government established.

But we ( say our brethren meaning for them selves and excluding us) we require
that where both sides may upon mature and sufficient deliberation, be heard
without any of these shows, and the matter delivered unto her Majesty, their
honors, and whosoever they shall choose, to receive and examine the
allegations of both sides, so that it need not to be communicated unto the
people, until the manifest light of the truth first appear unto them.

This then is the manner that our brethren set down, whereby they would urge
the alteration, The manner of reasoning that our brethren set down.
and (as the objection says) be prejudicial to the estate of government
established. But let the prejudice thereof fall out as it should: if our
brethren would indeed content themselves with this manner of trial. Neither
do we, nor (I hope) shall we at any time (being lawfully called there-unto)
refuse this manner. Yea, even according to the prescription of this manner, for
the principal points thereof, have we already proceeded long ago. Where the
estate of the government before established in popery: and the estate of the
government now established under the Gospel, has on both sides upon mature
and sufficient deliberation, been heard, without any of these shows, if any
were used, either of the one side, or the other. And the matter also has been
delivered to her Majesty, and to their honors, or to whomsoever, that were
chosen or appointed by her Majesty and them, to receive and examine the
allegations of both sides: and so was this estate of government by her Ma. and
their honors, yea, by all the estates of the realm, determined, decreed,
approved, ratified, confirmed, practiced, mayntayned, continued, and by all
these foresaid means and manner established. And this was done also, partlye
in the time of the most renownie^ Prince King Henry the eight: The most part
of these matters, have been already decided by this manner.
and again better, in the reign of the mo^^ godly Prince, King Edward the
sixth. But chiefly in the beginning, and some parts ther-of, in some other
Synods and Parliaments, besides other more particular conferences, and
deliberations, since the happy reign of our most gracious sovereign Lady
Queen Elizabeth. And yet all this will not now satisfy our brethren, but they
will have the matter fetched again about, as though it were fresh to begin,
or had never yet by so good a manner and means as these, been hitherto
disputed, examined, or deliberated upon. But would once more, serve their
turn? No, nor I think one hundred or thousand times more, except it were
concluded in all points, even as they themselves would have it. But, how they
would agree amo^^ themselves, and when, and how long that agreement would
hold: God h^ knows. For my part, I see little hope of reconciliation in the
matter, by this manner which they here set down: God forgive me, if I think
amiss. Neither do I speak it of evil will unto them, Whether our brethren
would sta^^e to this manner.
to whom I wish in Christ as to my self: nor, for that I would shun ye
conference in such manner, ( if I poor soul were worthy to be called among
other thereunto) but only to show, that in very deed, this is but a mere
pretense, to countenance the matter, howsoever their intent (I grant) be good
and zealous, in the alteration of the estate of government established. But if
they intend indeed such a manner of deliberation as they have here declared:
who shall determine all the matter? Her Majesty is named and their Honors, and
whosoever they shall choose. What is here assigned to her Ma. and their
honors.
But whereto are they named? Or whereto shall they choose any? Forsooth, to
receive and examine the allegations on both sides. What mean they hereby?
would they have her Majesty or them, to be scrutators and noters of the
voices, who gives on this side, who on that, and so to examine which side has
mo voices? or, mean they by receiving and examining the allegations; to take,
to mark, and examine their reasons, and yet neither to determine any thing at
al of them, nor to ratify that, which the appointed judges shall determine?
But how then shall the manifest light of the truth first appear unto them,
except they shall so far forth determine of the matter, that either on this
or on th^^ side the truth consists?

But when the matter is thus determined: what shall now be done* it shall then
be communicated to the people. And what now shall the people do? shall they
determine again on the matter, after her Majesty, their honors, or others
whosoever by her Majesty, The communicating thereof to the people.
and under her Ma. by their honors assigned or chosen, shall have once
determined of the matters, and communicated the same unto the people: Shall
they undo all that has been done, if they mislike it, or cannot agree upon
it? whereto then served all this manner of their doing? No: her Majesty only,
in this manner, or their Honors, assigned by her Majesty: or they, whosoever
are chosen by her Majesty and them: must be, not only the receauers and
examiners of both sides: but also the judges and determiners, as to whom the
light of the truth shall first appear: and then it must be committed to the
people, to know only what they must obey and stick unto, without any further
gainsaying, and there an end. This is the manner ( as I take it) that here
our brethren desire, of their disputation.

If now it be thus: has not her Ma. upon mature deliberation of the
allegations on both sides, and that not by her self, but with their Honors,
and by them whom she with their honors has chosen, determined ( on the
approbation) of the matter: and divulged her and their determination, or
approbation to the people already? and where are our brethren then? Will they
desire to have it yet once again examined better, because perhaps al these
learned discoursers have not been called to any such disputation, conference,
or deliberation. But what now if her Ma. their honors, and those that are by
her Ma. and their honors chosen, These matters alreadi^ determined and
ratified.
shall thus determine or approve and ratify again, that which is already
determined? will our brethren then, for ever hereafter, stand any more to her
Ma. and their determ^nation, then now they do? If they will: why stand they
not now to that her Majesty has already established, and to her constant
auowing still of the same? Nay rather, why have they clean already forsaken (in
this their learned discourse following) all this devise both for manner and
matter. where-of they make all this so glorious pretense, and show, in this
their Preface there-unto? For, if they would indeed, that the matter should
not be communicated unto the people, until the manifest light of truth first
appear unto the^: whom then mean they here, that it should first appear
unto? Must it not first appear to them yt are chosen by her Ma and their
honors, to receive and examine the allegations on both sides? and what good
manner then is this, for themselves before hand, to break this manner, by
clapping out this learned discourse, and other so many treatises abroad in
print, and so peremptorily before hand, to determine upon all the points in
controversy between us, and to communicate them unto the people, before the
manifest light of the truth appear, either unto her Ma. their Ho. or to any
whosoever they shall chose, to receive and examine the allegations of both
sides, and consequently to determine of ye same ^are our brethren free from
t^eir own prescribed manner? to set out such books unto ye people, both
contrary to ye laws, and contrary to that light of the truth, that has
already appeared to her Majesty, and to her deputies determination. Yea,
contrary also to the authority that h^ere in this manner is given to her
Majesty, denying in this learned discourse, page 141. that her Majesty has
any other authority in these matters, then to make civil laws, to bind the
people to the confession of true faith, and to the right administering and
receiving of the sacraments, and to all Ecclesiastical orders, that they being
instructed by the word of God, through the ministry of the preaching of the
same ( which preaching comes, after all the matter is established, and which
preaching, is made also before the people) shall understand to be profitable for
the edifying of the Church of Christ, etc. So that for all their godly pretense
here in the Preface, of delivering the matter to her Majesty, their Honors,
and whosoever they shall choose, to receive and examine the allegations on both
sides: so that it need not be communicated unto the people, til the manifest
light of truth appear first unto them: yet, when it comes to the matter
indeed: this was spoken but for manners sake. For, the learned discourse,
makes no delivery of it unto the Prince, till it come by the Pastor preached
in the pulpit, and so the people hear it as soon as the Prince: and then the
Prince understanding it out of the pulpit, must obey it: and make civil laws
only to maintain and to punish with bodily punishment the offenders.

Neither does our brethrens quirke here help the matter, in that they say not,
so that it should not be communicated to the people, until, etc. but they say,
so that it need not: they say well therein yt, it need not, and why need it not?
All that was granted to her Ma. and their H. was but only for ma^ners sake,
and resolves to nothing.
Forsooth, indede because it should not. Neither could it be communicated unto
the people, before it were first communicated to her Ma. or to her deputies,
by the manner and order here prescribed. For els^, what mean these words, and
the matter delivered unto her Ma, etc. so that our brethren themselves have so
broken this manner, that in a manner it is no more manner at al, then was the
matter. And in this respect, our brethren have prettily knit up together their
answer to these 2. objections, by the matter, and the manner: For, both
matter and manner comes all to one effect. And wher-to serves all this
manner, but to try the matter? and in matter, concerning the substance of
religion, we differed not. Wherefore must then this manner be observed? Forsooth,
not for any matter of the substance of Religion, but, say they, concerning the
government of Christ: The moment of the government pretended.
of great moment indeed. Nay indeed ( brethren) is it not, of any great
moment indeed, to urge, and necessarily oblige all times and places, no, nor
any time or place, as to the perfection of the estate of the church. For then,
it were not only a manner, but a matter, and that v^ry material concerning the
substance of religion: wherein our brethren c^^fesse that they agree with us,
and dissent only in the government. But where will our brethren show this
government, which they pretend to be the government of Christ ( that is to
say, the government prescribed by Christ) to be the perpetual, or to be the
best, or to be any ordinary government at all of his Church? It is not yet
showed, (that I can perceive) by any other of our brethren, nor by this their
learned discourse. And if this could be showed, it were matter indeed even
concerning the substance of religion, and a very religious point to stand
upon. But since it is confessed, that all this a-doe about government is not
of the matter concerning the substance of Religion: dare our brethren adventure
so far, to urge, that (had it been a government of Christ, and that of
great moment indeed in his time on the earth, and yet not of the substance of
Religion) as to alter the government established for such a matter, or rather
not for a matter, but a manner of government not established? Yea, for this
(be-it matter or manner of government) so to shake our whole estate of
government established, that in their government which they would establish,
her Majesty ( which now has a supreme government, by the clear word of
God, and after all mature deliberation, by all our own consentes, laws, and
acts, in all our assemblies, synodes, councels, and Parliamentes, disputed,
resolved, determined, enacted, maintained, continued, and by all these good
means established) shall now have her Majesty's authority called again in
question, and a new examined, yea, so abased and set down, nay rather clean
set by, and put out? For, what title soever of her most excellent Majesty, or
bare term of supreme authority, is not denied, (although I hope, our
brethren do it of no ill meaning, but only are ouershot there-in, and when
they perceive it, will reclaim it) yet the very thing that is here so much
desired and urged, is even as Solomon foresaw, more then his good and simple
mother Bethsabee did, who thought no hurt unto her son, but meant and wished
all well, when she required so instantly of him, 3. Reg. 11. I desire of thee a
small request, say me not nay: and the King said unto her, Ask on my
mother, for I will not say thee nay: then said she, let Abysag the Sunamite
be given to Adoniah thy brother to wife. But King Solomon answered and said
unto his mother: and why do thou ask Abysag the Sunamite for Adoniah? ask
for him the kingdom also. Verelie, verelie, which is Christ's own
asseueration, Our bretherens desires prejudicial to her Majesty's chiefest
authority.
and therefore not rashly to be used, nor uncharitably, I believe, and (me
thinks) I foresee, that although these desires of our brethren stretch not,
to prejudice her Majesty's life and person, which the dogged deadly enemies
do seek (the Lord still defend her Majesty from them:) and yet I think,
that many of them seek it not so much, for any malice to her person, as in a
blind malicious zeal against her authority, which if her Majesty would give
over, many of them would perhaps give over their malice also, and acknowledge
her their Sovereign Lady, as they did Queen Marie her Majesty's sister: yet
this thing which these our brethren, though with as good meaning (I dare say
for them) and with as loving hearts, as Bethsabee bare to her son Solomon,
both think and wish unto her Majesty, as to their own selves: but wha^soeuer
they think, wish, or mean never so well, like loving subjects: not only her
Majesty, In whom (God be praised) the wisdom (as it were) of Solomon
shines, but almost every man (not affectioned that way) may see, that her
Majesty, to these her children, (as Solomon to his mother) may reply and say:
Why do you ask this thing? Ask, (if not the kingdom and all,) yet, even the
best and chiefest part, duty, and authority of the kingdom. And that these
desires of our brethren, do so nearly touch her Majesty, and every
Christian Princes government established, and supreme authority: I refer my
self to this learned discourse, where it shall (God willing) most plainly
appear, what is taken away, and what is left to all Christian Princes, and so
to her Majesty in this government. Now upon this satisfaction (as our
brethren conceive) to this last objection, they conclude this preface, saying:

And if this so safe and reasonable an offer can not be liked, in respect of
the last objected consideration, Preface.
we think it impossible, but the persons which desire a way so sound,
peaceable and dutiful, shall recover this favor, that with safety of their
consciences, they shall exercise their ministry with that liberty, which is
meet for those, who shal-be tied in all things to have especial regard to
the peace of the Church, and public orders. Wherefore most Christian reader,
when thou shall by these few, take knowledge of these things: Pray unto God
for us, and as thy place is, solicit and further so just a cause, to this end
only, that Christ's kingdom may be perfectly established, the consciences of
all the godly quieted, and the happy regiment of her Majesty honored, with
much joy, peace, and quietness at home.

What safe and reasonable offer have our brethren here made, or what answer
have they given, Bridges.
or what means have they devised (besides the other objections) to satisfy
eue^ but the last objected consideration? Our bretheren^ 3. objection not
satisfied of prejudice to the state e^tablished.
does not the objection stand still, that it shall be prejudicial to the estate of
gouernme^^ established? when their desires principally are, that, not only the
authority of the Bishops, and the most part of all the Laws and orders eccl.
established, but also, all the acts of Parliament ther-on: yea, her Majesty's
own authority, and principal part thereof, concerning eccl. matters, must be
reuersed, cancelled, abrogated, and dissolved, and a new authority in all these
things set up? Who may not see (except he will blindfold himself with too
much affection) that this is, and cannot otherwise be, but to the prejudice of
the estate of government that already is established? As for the Bishops
acceptance of any offer by our brethren, that to her Ma. and their Honors
shall be thought safe and reasonable, I dare undertake it, they shall at all
times be most ready to accept the same: so that our brethren would for ever
hereafter, stand to the final determination of the trial. As for the offer,
that here they make, is neither safe nor reasonable, nor satisfies the
consideration of the last objection. And therefore, except better prouiso be
had for the safeguard of the Princes supreme authority: it can not ( as I take
it) well be liked.

But if this offer can-not be liked: then say our brethren, we think it
impossible, but the persons, which desire a way so sound, peaceable, and
dutiful, shall recover this favor, that with safety of their consciences,
they shall exercise their ministry with that liberty, etc.

As I said before, so I say again, this way which our brethren have here set
down, is neither sound, peaceable, nor dutiful. It is so unsound, that (as we
have seen) for many parts thereof, their very words have so uncertain a
sound, that we can not sound out the sense thereof. And how can the same be
peaceable: except there were such moderators and determinors, as might with
full authority decide and determine all the controversies? For if all should
take upon them to fall a prophesying, when they should fall rather to disputing:
and all the hearers, and actors in the controuer^^es, should (as in
prophecieng) take upon the^ to be the judges: how would not this, in these
controversies, breed greater contentions and confusions, the^ ever S. Paul
reprehended among the Corinthians? Neither is it dutiful, when they call into
these questions, even the Princes chief authority. Besides the intemperate
speeches against their brethren, which we have heard even at their very first
motion of this conference. And now since that this way ( as is here set down)
is so vnsou^d, so unpeaceable, so undutiful: do our brethren think it is
impossible, but that the persons that desire this way, and make al these
troubles, Our bretherens confident opinion of recovering favor and exercise of
their ministry.
shall recover this favor ( which they have lost) yt with safety of their
consciences, they shall exercise their ministry, their consciences being thus
affected as they are? would God, they would so enter into ye due examining of
their consciences, wherefore they should have lost this favor which they now
think they shall recover? Yea, wherefore should they not more look herein to
duty the^ to favor, for the exercise of their ministry? if they be indeed
(as they say) faithful ministers, who made the^ ministers? did not our Bishops?
and if our B. be not Bishops: how could they make any ministers? How our
brethren became ministers.
and if their ordaining of the^ were not a true ordaining: the^ are they no
true ministers. And if they be true and lawful ministers: how go they about to
make their ministry, to be no true and lawful ministry, of who^ their
selves have all the ministry yt they have? Would God this would sincke into
their consciences: they would then never be the causes of their own disfavor
or restraint from the exercise of their ministry, for the oppugning of their
ministry that made them ministers. Which if they exercise not: the default is
not in the Bishops that made them ministers: for they made them of favor,
and to the end^ that they should exercise their ministry. So that the fault
of their disfavor, and not exercise, is principally in their own selves. And
yet if they will perform indeed, that which in words here they offer: they
may both with recovery of favor, exercise their ministry still, and might
still so have done, without loss of favor, if they would exercise their
ministry with that liberty, which is meet for those which shal-be tied in
all things, Our bretherens offer to be tied to have special regard: to the
peace of the church and public orders.
to have especial regard to the peace of the Church and public orders. In
what bond will they be tied to this: That her Majesty, their honors, and the
Bishops, may be assured hereof? Or will they promise this on the word of a
faithful minister, that they will exercise their ministry no otherwise? But,
why then do they it not? For, there is no other thing required of them, and it
is their duty so to do it. But what especial regard of the peace of the
Church and public orders ( if they had liberty to exercise their ministry
according to their consciences) is it likely that our brethren would have?
when as they were restrained only for the abuse hereof: and being restrained,
do thus disturb^ the peace of the Church, and the public orders of the same?
Yea, all their especial regard and drift, is against the public orders. And
if now they should thus be with favor allowed, to exercise their ministry
according to their consciences: what would our brethren then spare to do
against these public orders? I marvel therefore how they can thus co^fidently
say, it is impossible, but that they shall exercise their ministry, etc.
Whereas, it is both against all sense and reason, yea, plain impossible to be
granted to them, without we would with all, grant unto them all their
desires, and devises in these controversies.

The epiloge of the preface exhorting to prayer for these things.
For the residue of this conclusion, we say in part with our brethren also:
Wherefore most Christian reader, when thou shall by these few, take knowledge
of these things, which are contained in this preface, and in this Learned
discourse, pray unto God for us: and as thy place is, ( and so far forth as
accords with thy duty therein) solicit and further so just a cause ( as
that the peace of the Church, the public orders and government established be
not prejudiced) to this end only, that Christ's kingdom may be perfectly
established, the consciences of all the godly quieted, and the happy regiment
of her Ma. honored, with much peace, joy, and quietness, ( both) at home, among
us: and that it may ouerflowe, to the relief, comfort and good example, of
other parts of Christ's Church, that are distressed in foreign countries. To
the which effects (good Christian Reader) call upon God our heavenly Father, in
the name of his son ou^ Savior Christ, for the illumining of his holy
spirit: that thy judgment being not fore^talled in these matters, and yet,
being desirous to see the truth, and to search out the bothom of these
doubts: thou may be able to discern the spirits aright, to resolve and
stay thy self, on the very ground of truth in all these questions. And so a
Gods name enter now, into the perusal and considering of this learned
discourse.

The first book of this defense against the learned discourse of
Ecclesiastical government.
The argument of the first Book.
THE first book is of the principles of this learned discourses platform of
the Churches government; of their partition thereof, into a Tetrarchie of 4.
estates: Doctors, Pastors, Governors, and Deacons: and of their necessity and
perpetuity: of the persuasion to leave our own Estate, and embrace the Estate
of our neighbors: and of their putting back the treatise of the Christian
Princes supreme Government, in Eccl. causes: and their reasons, why they will
not first treat there-on, until they have before assigned unto all and every
of these 4. Estates, all their places, with their several and joint offices
and authorities: wherein is showed, not only what danger, and injury is
offered unto Christian Princes: but also, with what unworthy contumelies and
sclaunders, they are rejected to the end of this Learned discourse.

A learned discourse of Ecclesiastical government, proved by the word of
God. The title of our bretherens book. Page. 1.


THis is the Title commendatorie of this book, besides the other title which
they set before it: A brief, or plain declaration concerning the desires of al
those faithful ministers, The vaunt of learning in the discourse.
etc. But because this later title liked them better: our brethren take the
former part of this title, and prefixe over every leaf of all their treatise
this commendation, A learned discourse of eccl. government. I refer the
judgment of the learning to the learned. Me thinks our brethren should have
done better, to let the discourse commend it self, whether it be learned or
unlearned: vino vendibili non ^pus haedera. But what soever the reader can
judge of learning: let him still have his aim to this point, that is here
avouched, The proof by the word of God.
but not likewise set up over every leaf, proved by the word of God. For, beit
learned or unlearned, prove that: and we yield. And if our brethren prove it
not by the word of God: then we crave of them, that they will cease these
contentious discourses, and not stand so much upon their learning. But both
their learned discoursing of Eccl. government, and their proving the same by
the word of God shall appear (God willing) to the Reader, by the discoursing.

The learned discourse. Page. 1.
The Church of God is the house of God, and therefore ought to be directed in all
things, according to the order prescribed by the householder himself: which
order is not to be learned elsewhere, but in his holy word. The first of
these principles or propositions, is the very word of the holy Ghost uttered
by Paul: The second follows necessarily of the first. 1. Tim. ^.15.
The third is a manifest truth, believed of all them, that acknowledge the
scripture of God, The definition of the Church.
to be a perfect rule of all our life, and able to make the man of God perfect,
prepared to all good works.

2. Tim. 3.17.
On these three principles, our brethren lay their ground of al their learned
discourse. Bridges.
Which being rightly understood, and building well upon them, Three principles
or propositions, whereon all this learned discourse is grounded. First, that
the Church is Gods house.
are very good principles, or rather propositions, as they term the^. Of this
first, is said enough already: concerning David's comparing him self to the
stone in the corner of this mystical houses building. And most gladly we admit
this our brethrens testimony for the same, as the very word of the holy
Ghost uttered by Paul: and that this house of God, which is the Church of the
living God, ( is) the pillar and ground of truth: Because it always vpholdeth
and maintains the truth, both in this matter of eccl. government, and in all
other, so far as is necessary to salvation. Albeit, Christ in principal,
properly and absolutely, is the only ground and foundation of this house. 1.
Tim. 3.17.
And here by the way, since by this testimony of S. Paul, The Church the
pillar of ^he truth.
the Church, which is the house of God, is thus the pillar and ground of the
truth: If this government that our brethren urge be so necessary, and of so
great moment to the house or church of God: then is it likely, ye the Church of
God, though it has not always and in all places, yet for the most part of
time and places, or at leastwise, in some ages and places, had this government
maintained, and kept it, or striued for it; or else belike it was not thought
so necessary.

2. that all things should be directed by the householders prescribed order.
The second principle ( they say) follows necessarily of the first. And so it
does, which second was this: and therefore ( this Church or house of God)
ought to be directed in all things, according to the order prescribed by the
householder himself. Which principle is true within the bounds thereof, that
is to say, in all things that he has prescribed. But if he have not
prescribed all things appertayning to the external government of his Church
or house: How far this rule holds.
then are those things which are not prescribed by the householder himself,
not to be so urged, as that they ought necessarily, this way or that way to be
always directed. The Apostle Hebr. 8. verse. 5. says out of Exodus 25. verse
40. Moses was warned by God, when he was about to finish the Tabernacle: See
said he, Hebr. 8.5.
that thou make all things according to the pattern, showed to thee in the
mount. But the Apostle proceeding in the ninth Chapter, Hebr. 9.11.
verse 11. applying this first Tabernacle to the second, which he calls a
greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is, not of this
building, ( meaning the natural body of Christ) refers not this to the
mystical body, which is the Church or house of God, and much less to the
external form of regiment in all matters ecclesiastical, or belonging to the
Churches government. No, not when before, chap. 3. verse 1. Hebr. 3.1.
etc. he speaks both of Christ himself, and of his house or Church also.
Therefore (says he) holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly vocation,
consider the Apostle and high Priest of our profession Christ Jesus: who was
faithful to him that has appointe^ him, even as Moses was in all his house.
For this man was counted worthy of more glory th^n Moses, in as much as he
that has builded the house, has more honor than the house. For every house
is builded of some man, and he that has built all things, is God. Now Moses
verelie was faithful in all his house, as a servant, for a witness of the
things which should be spoken after: but Christ is as the son over his own
house, whose house we are, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing
of the hope, unto the end.

Here again, we see that this faithfulness in all his house, (as Moses was
faithful,) is not to be reckoned, as though he went about to show us, that all
points of the external regiment of the house or Church of Christ, have a
prescribed order, by which they ought to be directed in all things: but that
in the inward and spiritual regiment thereof, we should acknowledge Jesus
Christ the son of God to be the Lord and owner of this house, and to consider
him, as the Apostle and high Priest of our profession, that is, of our
Christian faith and religion, and to confirm our faith in him, that we are
his house or Church, if we hold fast ( not this or that external form of
Ecclesiastical government) but the confidence and rejoicing of hope unto the
end.

And thus far forth, and not further, we admit this second principle or
proposition.

And this is necessary to be observed, The captious setting down of the 2.
principle.
because this principle is here set down in such captious order, as
insinuating, that Christ had prescribed an order in all things, in his house
or Church: according to the prescription whereof, all things ought to be
directed. In which sense it is no principle, but a question between us, which
w^ deny, and our brethren affirm: but as yet they have not proved it.

The third ( say they) is a manifest truth, believed of all them, that
acknoweledge the Scripture of God, The 3. principle. That the scripture
teaches all the Churches government.

The caption of this third principle.


to be a perpetual rule of all our life, and able to make the man of God
perfect, prepared to all good works.

Here again, another caption is to be taken heed of, in this their third
principle: which order is not to be learned elsewhere, but in his holy
word. For if they mean it of the order that in his holy word he has
prescribed: true it is, that order is not to be learned any where else, as any
necessary prescription: otherwise then as an exposition of the same order, for
our more clear and fuller learning thereof. And so (always keeping the
foundation) the godly fathers and expositors may build there-on: and the
godly governors of the Church, may beautify and adorn the same: so that all
be done to Gods glory, and to the true edifying of the Church. And so, this
third proposition is a manifest truth believed of all them, that acknowledge
the scripture of God, to be a perfect rule of all our life, and able to make
the man of God perfect, prepared to all good works.

But it follows not heere-upon, that all general or particular orders in the
external government of the Church, are not elsewhere to be learned, but in
Gods holy word: except they mean by Gods holy word, such as are
inclusiuely comprehended, and not expresselie specified in his holy word.
For, they their selves have not all their orders expressly mentioned, and in
all things prescribed in Gods holy word. For example, their own communion
book, entitled: The form of Common prayers, The form of common prayer by
our brethren prescribed.
administration of the Sacraments, etc. They dare not auowe, that all things
therein contained, have not been learned elsewhere, but in his holy word,
and are there to be found either in plain words, or necessary implication:
but because they think, that they are not contrary: they dare avouch thus
far, to call them, Agreeable to Gods word. And yet, as though the
agreeableness also might be called in question: they add heere-to, And the
use of the reformed Churches. And as their own book of Common prayers uses
all these helps, to save all upright, for fear they might be challenged in
this point: even so, this book which our brethren commend unto us, to be, A
learned discourse of Ecclesiastical government, proved by the word of God:
we shall find in the discourse thereof, that the learned discoursers learned
not all the orders prescribed there-in, Agreeable to Gods word though not
prescribed.
out of Gods holy word: but somewhat elsewhere. Except they will likewise
say, it is agreeable, or not contrary to Gods holy word.

Wherein also, we shall (God willing) see how they fail. But if that answer
may thus serve them: I see not why, it may not as well serve us, if we have no
other government established, but such as is agreeable and not contrary to
the holy word of God, although it be not in his holy word expresselie
prescribed.

Neither does this text of S. Paul. 2. Tim. 3.17. any more infringe every
order in the churches government, that it may not be learned elsewhere, but
in Gods holy word: then it does infringe every other order in the civil
policy, or administration of every man's moral behavior: that their orders
also are not to be learned elsewhere, but in Gods holy word. Because, thi^ is
a manifest truth, believed of all them that acknowledge the scripture of God,
to be a perfect rule of all our life, and able to make the man of God perfect,
prepared to all good works. But it suffices for such orders as are not
prescribed, nor specified as things necessary to salvation, both in life and
manners, to level all such orders ( be they ecclesiastical, civil, or
moral) according to the analogy of those, that are specified and prescribed:
and to receive them, either as folded up or unfolded, in those general
specifications and prescriptions: and so to esteem them in their degrees, as
necessary or expedient to edification, for order, comeliness, or obedience
sake, although they be none of those things, that directly apperteine unto the
necessity of our salvation, or to any absolute necessity of our obedience.

And thus far (as I, under correction, take it) are these three principles,
albeit indeed no principles, because we see they are thus intricate, ambiguous,
captious, and so questionable (but propositions, are the fitter name for the
two later) to be admitted, and no farther.

This foundation being surely laid, The learned discourse. Page. 2.
against which the gates of hell cannot prevail: we ought diligently and
reverently to search the holy scriptures, that we may find, what order our
savior Christ, our only householder, has set forth in them: by which he
would have his church or household to be directed in all things, apperteining
to the eternal salvation of us men, his unprofitable servants. What ministers
are appointed in the church.


Here our brethren draw their three former propositions to an head or issue:
what order is prescribed in the holy scriptures. But whereas they make these
three foresaid propositions, Bridges.
to be the foundation of all their building of this house of God: The issue of
these three principles.
( the reverence reserved to so learned discoursers) me thinks they should
have laid a more sure foundation, whether it be of this house of Gods church,
or of their platform of building this their ecclesiastical government. Our
bretherens found^^ion, and the foundation that
For (as we may easily perceive, by view of these three propositions) they are
not all of them so sure and plain principles, as our brethren would bear us
in hand, they are. But this is apparent, that they are not that foundation,
against which Christ says) that the gates of hell shall not prevail. That
foundation was surely laid indeed: for it was Christ himself, upon whom (by
faith in him) all the house of the church is builded: as the Apostle says: No
m^n can lay any other foundation, then that that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ. Seeing that therefore, our brethren make all their foundation, where
upon their plotforme of government shall arise, to consist on these three
foresaid propositions: I doubt, least, the surelier they think that they lay
their building on it, this foundation will not bear it, being so sandy, lose,
and hollow: except their building be of very slight timber, and light stuff.
Nevertheless, the drift whereunto they drive all these three propositions, is
well to be liked, to search the scriptures, as Christ wills, John. 5.39. For
they testify of him. But although a man build on that foundation, which is
only Jesus Christ: yet (says S. Paul. 1. Cor. 13.11, etc. ^* Cor. 13.11.
Let every man take heed how he builds upon it. For if any man build upon
this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, timber, hay, stubble: every
man's work shall-be made manifest. For the day shall declare it, because it
shall-be revealed by the fire, and the fire shall try every man's work, of
what sort it is. If any man's work that he has built upon, abide, he shall
receive wages: if any man's work burn, he shall lose, but he shall-be safe
himself: nevertheless, yet as it were by the fire. And who are these that
build thus, albeit, on Christ? May we not well (among all other
interpretations) compare them unto these builders, It suffices not to build on
Christ, but also to take heed how we b^ild on him.
which being neither Heathen, nor Heretics, nor erroneous Papists ( for, all
those build besid^s the foundation Christ,) But these building and grounding
themselves (so far as reaches to the ground and foundation) all on Christ,
notwithstanding, they contend (as the Corinthians did) about matters, that were
not so necessary, but less edifiynge: of the which, although some of them
were goo^ gifts of GOD, meet for the state and time then present, (being well
used) but not to be urged so peremptorily, that even a building and
platform, should be made and prescribed unto all churches, and to all times
and states, of those things: these men (although otherwise, they lay all their
foundation only on Jesus Christ) yet when the fire of Gods spirit and holy
word, shall come in-deed to try them, this fire will consume and burn up (as
straw, or stubble, yea be it timber also) all these curious and contentious
plotformes, that these our ze^lous brethen have framed, and endeavored to set
up, on Jesus Christ, the rock and foundation of all the building. But not so,
but that they their selves (by the grace of God) shall never the less be
saved, though these devises of theirs, for all they build them on Christ, yet
because they are not so necessary to edifiyng ( as they conceive of them)
shall perish in the trial.

And as this is true of our brethrens building, so likewise of ours, or o^ any
others, if we should make any building on Christ, of the outward order of
ecclesiastical government, otherwise then as S. Paul the wise master
builder does: not to urge them as matters of salvation, or as though the
perfection of religion lay in them: nor yet to give leave to every private
congregation, to dispose of them, as they list: but so to urge and retain
them, as orders necessary, not of the building it self, but of the ornaments
of the building, of which orders he gives his general rule, 1. Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done honestly and by order, as we shall (God willing) see
further in this discourse thereon. And such orders he seems also to include,
1. Cor. 11.34. Other things will I set in order when I come. But these orders
are neither of the substance of the building: nor be all of them expressed in
the holy scriptures, though some of them be: nor all that are expressed, are
prescribed to all ages and churches, nor are things of necessity to salvation.
Albeit, they be not thereupon, to be vnorderlie plucked up or contemned, being
orderly set down and established.

But, that we ought diligently and reverently to search the holy scriptures,
that we may find what order our Savior Christ, our only householder, has
set forth in them, by which he would have his house or church, to be directed
in all things, apperteining to the eternal salvation of us men, his
unprofitable servants: This is most true, we ought so to do, and to do the same
with great diligence, and no less reverence: Diligence and reverence in
searching the scriptures.
least perhaps, of never so good and zealous a meaning, we should ouer-busie
our selves contentiouslie, for things not necessarily perteining to the
eternal salvation of us men his unprofitable servants, when we find any thing
mentioned in the holy scriptures: and not diligently and reverently
searching, and considering the same, streightwaies urge it, to be a general
order, or an absolute rule, that our Savior Christ, Urging of things read in
the scripture, as necessary to saluat^o^, that are not necessary.
our only (chief) householder, has set forth in them: by the which he
would have his house or church to be directed, as in things perteining to the
eternal salvation of us men his unprofitable servants. This were indeed an
improfitable service, and an vndiligent and vnreuerent searching of the holy
scripture. For so, Per ignorationem Elenchi, not knowing the ground of the
matter, which we searched for, we might (in a zeal not according to knowledge)
run (and lead other with us) into many and dangerous inconveniences, and so,
become not only unprofitable, but hurtefull servants too.

And if these our brethren, the learned discoursers, did always search the
holy scriptures, with this diligence and reverence ( as both they and we, and
all ought to do) they should find, that in their urging of this their
ecclesiastical government, as apperteining to salvation, they offer to great
an injury, both to all us their brethren, and to the most ages, and peoples
(if not to all Gods church) besides themselves. For, albeit they could find
some parts thereof set forth by our savior Christ in the holy scriptures: (
which how they search and prove, this discourse will show) yet, for all their
form here prescribed, to be set forth by our savior Christ, or by his
apostles, in the holy scriptures, by which he would have his church directed
in all things, and that, as apperteining to the salvation of us men, Our
bretherens to hard a censure of the greatest pa^te of Christ's church.
his unprofitable servants: They shall never find this, search while they
will. Yea, in saying this, they pronounce to hard a censure, upon all the house
and church of Christ, where this ecclesiastical government has not been
observed. Which (if it had perteined to the salvation of man) should not only
have been unprofitable, but cast away and condemned servants to, and so, no
lively stones of his house, or parts of his true church at all. For it booteth
not that other of our brethren think to help the matter, in likening our
church to a man living, but yet maimed: or to a house standing, but yet
ruinated. For, if it necessarily be apperteining to the salvation of us men:
then cannot we men without it be partakers of salvation. But none are of the
true church of God, but are pertakers of salvation. For the true church is
only of the elected: and therefore either all that have not had (since
Christ's time) this prescribed form of government, were not the church of
Christ at all, Our brethren heerin are of Harrisons opinion against ^artwright.
or else, this prescribed form of government, is not necessarily apperteining
to the salvation of us men. And if not necessary, then unnecessary to our
salvation. And then, we shall maintain our government (I trust) in peace,
honesty, and godliness, (by the grace of God) well-inough, yea, without any
deforming: and much more, without any maiming of the church of Christ ( as
Cartwrighte says) and much more, without being no true church at all (as
Harrison says) although we want it.

But now let us see, with what diligence and reverence our brethren have
searched the holy scriptures, The learned discourse. Page. 2.
and what they have found in them for this their building.

Now we find in the scriptures, that our savior Christ ascending into heaven,
was not unmindful of his church on earth: but ordained an holy ministry of
men, to the building up of the body of Christ, in unity of faith and
knowledge. Eph^s. 4.11. 1. Cor. 12.28.


Bridges
This for a beginning is well searched out, and a good beginning makes a good
ending. This is searched, found, and quoted by our brethren, Ephesians. 4.11, and
1. Cor. 12.28. But they find here, that was not lost, nor is doubted of, The
gif^^ and offices me^t^one^,
or called in question between us. For, we confess, as freely as they, (that
our savior Christ ascending into heaven, was not unmindful of his church on
earth: Ephesians. 4.11.
but ordained an holy ministry of men. But what that holy ministry of men
was, the apostle himself shows in the same place, Ephesians 4. ver. 11. He
therefore gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophet^, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and teachers. This place declares, that our savior Christ
was neither unmindful, nor vnbountifull to his church on earth.
Notwithstanding, the most part of the gifts here reckoned up, are ceased many
hundred years agone: and either there remains of this, but one, Pastor and
teacher.
understanding pastor and teacher for one office, as the apostle dividing the
other, sets down this together jointly, since the office of Pastor
chiefly consists in teaching, ( and so do the most interpretor^ expound
it) or there remains but two ordinary functions at the most, here
mentioned: if we should divide them as these our brethren do: but of that
afterward. Now only to the present purpose, for the which our brethren here
allege this place, the Apostle here cites it not for any orders of
ecclesiastical government, concerning external discipline or jurisdiction,
in what prescribed manner it should be observed, directed, set forth, and
perpetually continued in Christ's church: yea, the cheifest part of those
governors, The Apostles neither words nor scope set down a perpetual form
of external government in the church.
which the Apostle sets down, is altered, by taking away the three
principal named persons, Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists. But S. Paul
speaking there, of their diverse gifts and functions: to what purpose do our
brethren say, Christ gave them? To the building up ( say they) of the body of
Christ in the unity of faith and knowledge.

What is this to the matter that we now search to find in the scriptures, that
is to say, for some orders prescribed and set forth, concerning the external
form of ecclesiastical government for the church, to be directed by, in all
things? Can we find this, in this testimony of the scripture? If we can: let
us search the place better, and not curtall it thus, as they do. He therefore
( says the Apostle) gave some to be apostles, and some prophets, and some
evangelists, and some pastors and teachers: for the gathering together of the
saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body
of Christ, till we all meet together in the unity of faith, and knowledge of
the son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ, that we hence forth be no more children, wavering, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the deceit of men, and with
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. But let us follow the truth
in love, and in all things grow up into him, which is the head (that is Christ)
by whom all the body being coupled and knit together by every joint, for the
furniture thereof, according to the effectual power, which is in the measure
of every part, receaueth increase of the body, unto the edifiyng of it self
in love.

This is all that S. Paul in this place speaks, of these gifts, and of this
building, and of the order and ends thereof. So that, here he refers all to
unity in doctrine of faith, and to holy conversation of life, and not to the
external orders of the churches ecclesiastical government. Albeit we must
not think here upon, that because this government is not here mentioned
among the gifts, which our Savior Christ gave to his church on earth, when he
ascended into heaven: He was unmindful of his church: or that S. Paul was
unmindful of his gifts: or that the church having not had this now desired
government, for so many hundredth years, should have been so long time
unmindful or destitute of the same, if it had been any matter wherein the
perfection of the church consisted: or the want thereof had been any
impediment to those ends, that the Apostle here cites. But we may rather
think the contrary, that it was no such important matter, and therefore not
necessary to be minded.

Well, yet if it be not in the one place here quoted, it may be in the other.
Let us therefore likewise see the other, 1. Cor. 12.28. 1. Cor. 12.28.
And there indeed are governors mentioned in express terms. For where S.
Paul had said, Verse, 27. Now are ye the body of Christ, and members for your
part: it follows. And God has ordained some in the church: as first
Apostles, s^condlie Prophet, thirdly Teachers; then, them that do miracles:
after that, the gifts of healing, helpers, governors, diversities of toongs.
Here are gifts reckoned up, Apostles and Prophets mentioned before: and here
among other, are governors named: Governors.
but what kind of governors? Or whether with any ordinary form and order of
government, Neither in this place the example sets down any perpetual order
of the churches external government.
for the church alwaie^ to be directed by, any more then by any other of the
residue here mentioned? (except Teachers, which are always necessary for the
instruction o^ doctrine, and documents of life:) this place helps to our
brethrens purpose, no more then did the other. Neither was the purpose of S.
Paul heerin, directed to any such bent, but to exhort the Corinthians unto
edifiyng in unity and love, and not to distract themselves in faction, about
these gifts, as he proceeds saying: Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Ar^
all Teachers? Are all workers of miracles? Have all the gifts of healing? Do
all speak with toongs? Do all interpret? But desire yo^ the best gifts, and
I will yet show you a more excellent way. And so h^ enters into a learned
discourse indeed, chap. 13. Not of this our brethren^ plotforme of
ecclesiastical government, The examples sco^e.
as tending to the perfection of the church: But of the excellency of love or
charity, above all the gifts and offices that he had named: and makes this
the way to tend unto the perfection of the church, concluding thus: And now
abidet^ faith, hope, and love, these three: but the cheifest of these is love.
Thi^ was the full drift of S. Paul in this place, concerning the mystical
bodi^ of Christ, which is his church or house, and that the building up
thereof: even, where he speaks of Governors, and of the way tending to
perfection, and where he cites many gifts and offices: and yet can we not
here find this platform of ecclesiastical government, which our br^thren
desire and seek for, ( now in the beginning of this learned discourse, and
afterward again and again) in these place^. And yet, had there been then in
the church of Christ, any such plotforme, S. Paul had in this place, notable
occasion to have treated thereof. But here is no mention of it, or of any
pe^petuall form at all prescribed of ecclesiast. government, save only of
Teaching: except they will include that in governing. So that finding nothing
hitherto to satisfy their desires, in searching these two testimonies of the
scripture: let us now proceed, to search further with them for this matter.

We find also, that as the offices, are diverse of this ministry: The
learned discourse. Page. 2. and 3.
so they are not general unto all the church, but as order and necessity
require, for executing of their office, distributed and limited unto certain
places or particular churches, according to the division of regions, cities and
towns. For we read that Paul and Barnabas, ordained at Derbie, Lystra,
Iconium, and Antiochia, etc: elders by election in every church, with prayer
and fasting, and so commended them to the Lord, in whom they believed. Also
Paul left Titus in the Isle of Creta, that he should ordeine Elders in every
city, as he had appointed.

What our brethren did find in the two foresaid testimonies of the scripture,
we have already seen, that is to say, Bridges.
they have found out in them, for the confirmation of the question between us,
what more, what less, mere nothing. Here they tell us they find also, that
the diverse offices of this ministry are not general unto all the church.
But they find also this so doubtfullye, that we can scarce tell how to find
also what it is, that they say here, they have found. For, The confusednes^e
of our bretherens word^.
what mean they by these words: that as the offices are diverse, so are they
not general unto all the church? Whether mean they, not general unto all the
church, in respect of all the persons, of whom the church consists, that is
to say, not general or common to all men? Or, mean they it, in respect of the
time: that is to say, they are not general or perpetual to all the
continuance of the church to the worlds end? And if they do so: why do they
then allege these places for them? Sith they can neither find by them, all
the offices of eccl. government that they desire: nor those places do
di^^inguish, which diverse offices of this ministry are general or
perpetual, and which are not. Or, mean they general, in respect of all
places, wheresoever the church is through-out all the world dispersed? And
although this last sense, seems to draw nearest to the coherence of their
words following: but as order and necessity require, for executing of their
office, distributed and limited unto corteine places or particular churches,
according to the di^isions of regions, cities and towns: yet ^re these words
(me thinks) as dark, or darker then the other. And ^^ill ((...) correction) I
wish, they had (for their own sakes) set down their words more plainly.
For my part, I gather this of them that for the executing of any of those
diverse offices ( not speaking of those that are already ceased, but of those
that are ordinary offices, which our brethren also make diverse offices) these
cannot execute their offices, but that for order sake, and of very necessity,
these offices or officers must be distributed and limited, The distribution of
offices in regions, cities, and towns* for orders sake, and for very
necessity:
either unto certain places, or particular churches, where they may govern,
feed, or teach the people: and these certain places or particular churches,
are to be assigned or appointed unto these diverse offices or officers,
according to the divisions of regions, cities and towns: that is to say, some
of these diverse offices or officers, to wit, Governors, Pastors, and Teachers,
to be distributed and limited; some over regions, other over cities, and other
over towns. Is not this their meaning, that these diverse offices should be
thus distinguished and limited, and that for order sake: yea, that very
necessity does require it, for the better executing of their offices?

If this be not their meaning: I cannot see, what better construction to make
of their words And the very examples which here they find also, do
directly confirm this sense. For although in the one, Act. 14.23: they tell
us, that Paul and Barnabas ordained elders by election. Which example we shall
afterward (God willing) see more fully and oftener then once discoursed: yet
neither follows it, that those presbyters, preests o^ elders, must be
understood of a seniorie, that are governors and not teachers, to be elected or
ordained in every church: and our brethren themselves before, spoke only of
an holy ministry, which words are usually restrained, unto the divine
ministers of the word and sacraments. Neither follows it, that although the
churches had elected them ( which cannot necessarilye be gathered on that text)
whom they knew fittest to be ordained: that therefore they had any thing at
all to do in the ordeining or making of them. For, the text is plain, that
Paul and Barnabas did ordeine them, and not, the churches with Paul and
Barnabas did ordeine them. Paul and Barnabasses orde^ning elders.
As for their other example, Tit. 1.5. does most apparantli^ confirm the
same, and clean overthrows the ecclesiastical government, that their
selves desire. For first, what ecclesiastical office Tit^^ had, Titus limited
to the region of Creta.
the very subscription of S. Paul's epistle unto him, does declare: To Titus
the first elected bishop of the church of the Cretenses. Which subscription,
what it infers, we shall (God willing) have further occasi^^ to note again
hereafter. In the mean season, it accords to our breth^rens saying, that he
had by S. Paul's assignement, for the executing of (...) episcopal office,
Titus office and authority in his limited region.
the whole I Will and people of the Cretians, as his province or region,
distributed and limited unto him. And our brethren further confess: Also
Paul left Titus in the I Will of Creta, that he should ordeine Elders in every
city, as he had appointed. And not only so: but as appears by Saint Paul's
own words: For this cause, The gifts, etc.
left I thee in Creta, that thou should redress the things that remain,
and should ordeine presbyters (preests or Elders) in every city, as I
appointed thee. What these Presbyters, Preests, or Elders were, least we should
understand them to be Consistories, of governing only and not teaching
presbyters, preests, or elders: He proceeds, saying: what office the elders
had that Titus ordained.
If any be unreprovable, the husband of one wife, having faithful children,
which are not slandered of riot, neither are disobedient. For a Bishop must be
unreprovable, as Gods steward: and so forth, as by the description of the
properties there required, does appear: especially the last, that he may be
able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and improoue them that gaine-saye it.
Whereby we may plainly see, that he means only the Bishops and
Presbyters, Preests or Elders of the word.

Here, of these Bishops and Presbyters, Preests or Elders, S. Paul gives to
Titus the authority or jurisdiction to be their ordinary, or the ordeiner of
them, in their Episcopal and presbyterall office, without any mention at all,
of any others election of them, besides himself, to appoint and ordeine such,
as he should see, to be sufficiently qualified for those offices. And that he
should thus do in every city in Creta, which Island at that time, had many
and famous Cities. To conclude, he gives him charge, and so withal,
authority, that he should there continue to redress those things that were
remaining to be done, Which, what things they were (some orders, perhaps, of
ecclesiastical government, meet for their state): yet, because they are not
specified: no prescribed order of this or that ecclesiastical government, The
proof in Titus of Episcopal and Archiepiscopall jurisdiction.
can be inferred on those general words. Nevertheless, they prove, that he
had authority, and that a continuing authority, to redress such
ecclesiastical matters, as were amiss, or not yet established among them. So
that, here is a manifest jurisdiction Episcopal, yea, Archi-episcopall, not
only over Pastors and Teachers, being elders in every particular church: but
also over Bishops having authority over whole cities: Titus being above them
all, through-out y^ whole I Will, as a Regionall or Provincial Bishop, which we
usually call by the ancient term, Metropolitan or Archbishop. And all this
does here by the way (before we come to the proper trea^is^ thereof) their
own example, which they have here found out, most ^^^^festlie prove,
directly against the ecclesiastical government that they seek for. From
these places, our brethren return unto the testimonies, that they cited
before, prefixing one more, Romans 12. unto them.

Concerning the diverse offices of the ministry, The learned discourse. Page.
3.
we are taught by Saint Paul, Romans 12.6. also, 1. Cor. 12.28. and Ephesians. 4.11.
Where we read that God has ordained in the ministry of his Church th^se
several offices: namely, Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, Doctors,
Governors and Deacons: also men endued with the gifts of healing, of powers or
miracles, and of diverse toongs.

Bridges.
Concerning the diverse offices of the ministry, our brethren searched before,
but they could find nothing for their desired Ecclesiastical government. And
yet here the places which before were only cited in the margin, are now
ascited and promoted into the Learned discourse it self: (belike) on hope of
some better matter. Howbeit, they say nothing. They do here but muster on a
plumpe, come forth for a show, and so pass by in a confused order, and not
in their places, as the Apostle sets them down And, a number are left out,
that are also mentione^ in these chapters here cited, even almost as many as
be here name^. For besides these, the Apostle, Romans 12. verse. 6. reckons
up diverse other gifts.

Seeing then (says he) that we have gifts, which are diverse, according to
the grace that is given unto us: The diverse gifts mentioned in these places.
whether we have prophecy, let us prophecy, according to the proportion of
faith: or an office, let us waire on the office: or he that teaches, on
teaching: or he that exhorts, on exhortation: be that distributeth, let him
do it with simplicity: he that rules, with diligence: he th^^ shows
mercy, with cheerfulness. Here are seven gifts by the Apostle mentioned.

And 1. Cor. 12. beginning at the eight verse, he says: Now there are
diversities of gifts, but the same spirit: and there are diversities of
administrations, but the same Lord: and there are diversities of operations,
but GOD is the same, which works all in all. But the manifestation of the
spirit, is given to every man to profit with-all: for to one is given, by
the spirit, the word of wisdom: and to another the word of knowledge, by
the same spirit^, and to another, is given faith, by the same spirit: and to
another, the gifts of healing, by the same spirit: and to another, the
operation of gr^^^ works: and to another, prophecy: and to another, the
discerning of spirits, and to another diversities of toonges, and unto another
the interpretation of toongs.

Here again are nine gifts reckoned up, of the which eight were not before
Romans 12. as diverse gifts named. And in the place already cit^^ and viewed,
1. Corin. 12. ver. 28. are also eight or nine reckoned: of the which, two or
three were not before specified. And Ephesians. 4. verse. 1^. Likewise cited before
and perused, are four named: or if they distinguish Pastor from Teacher, and
so make them five: yet remain there more, then as many more again, as our
brethren have here reckoned, besi^^^ those that are not in these, but in other
places mentioned. But whereto ar^ our brethren, or should we need to be, so
curious, in the enumeration of these diverse gifts or offices? Does it any
whitte further our brethrens form of Ecclesiastical government? Or rather,
does it not in many points confute it, as by Gods grace we shall afterward
see? Or do they think, that as there were so many diverse gifts or offices,
that they were all of them: or all those persons that were of some one office,
of like measure in these gifts: or of like authority in that office? or that,
although they were diverse gifts or officers, one man might not have diverse
of them, all at one time without confusion? But those points are debated
afterward. In the mean season, all this hitherto proves nothing, for the
building of their platform. But it shows muche-how vnconsideratelie they
heap up these things, without all order, put in and put out, making
perpetual or temporary, to serve for ever, or to serve for a time, what
soever serves their turn and humor: and all to lay a modill of such
building, as whereon all this new devised Tetrarchie might be erected. Which
thing how they do: let us see now their proceeding further.

Of these offices, some were temporal, serving only for the first planting
and foundation of the church among the Heathen: The lea^ned discourse. Page.
3.4, 5 and 6
some are perpetual, perteining to the nourishinge and buildinge up of the
church for ever. Of the former sort were Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, men
endued with the graces of powers, of healings and of diverse toongs. Of the
later kind are Doctors, Pastors, Governors, and Deacons. The Apostles were
ordained by God, and sent forth immediately by Christ, having a general
commission to spread the Gospel over all the world: which when they had
accomplished, Matt. 28.19 Mark. 16.25
that office ceased. Such were the twelve Apostles, Paul and Barnabas, etc.

And for this cause the Apostles appointed Matthias, in the place of Judas,
according to the scriptures: permitting nevertheless, Acts. 1.25.
the election unto God, by casting of Lottes, that the number might be full,
for the first planting of the Church. But when Herod had slain James the
brother of John with the sword, Acts. 1^.^^
they chose no man to succeed in his place, because they had no warrante of
Gods word: but the Holieghoste, as he saw it was expedient for the church,
afterward separated Paul and Barnabas which lived at Antioche, Acts. 13.2.
as Prophets and Teachers to the work, whereto he called them.

The Prophets were such as were endued, with a singular gift of Revelation in
the interpretation of the scriptures, and applying them to the present use of
the church: of whom some also did foreshewe of things to come* as Agabus.

Also, there were in every city that prophesied to S. Paul, as he passed by
them, that bonds and afflictions were prepared for him at Jerusalem. This
office being in the number of them that were ordained for beautifying the
Gospel, in the first publishing thereof, it ceased with that singular and
extraordinary gift, to be an ordinary function of the church.

The Evangelists were such as were stirred up of GOD, to assist the Apostles in
their ministry of general charge, Acts. 8.5.
in planting the same by their preaching, Act. 8.14.
but inferior in dignity to the Apostles. Such was Phillip that first preached
the Gospel in Samaria: whither Peter and John were sent by the Apostles, to
confer unto them, by prayer and imposition of hands, the visible graces of
the Holie-ghost, which Philip did not.

Act. 21.8.
The same Philip in Acts. 21. verse. 8. is called an Evangelist. So was
Timothy, 2. Timoth. 4.5. such was Titus, ^. Tim. ^.5.
Silas, and many other. This office also, with the order of the Apostles, is
expired, and has no place. Likewise as we do plainly see, that the gifts of
healing, of powers or miracles, and of diverse toongs, have long since ceased
to be in the church: so the offices of them which were grounded upon these
gifts, must also cease and be determined. Therefore the Papists do vainelie
retain the name and office of exorcists, when they cannot cast out devils: and
extreme unction, when they cannot cure diseases: and to speak with strange
toongs, which they have not by inspiration, and that without any
interpretation, which S. Paul expresselie forbids.

It is requisite and draws nearer to the purpose, to know, what was temporal
in these gifts, Bridges
and what perpetual: what is ceased, expired, What gifts and offices were
temporal, what perpetual.
determined, and has no place, and what remains: for fear, we should offend
either way: urging that to be temporal which is perpetual, or that to be
perpetual which was but temporal. For the error of this, breeds most of all
these troubles between us. Wherein our brethren do both ways greatly
mistake these gifts. For first, where they say: Some were temporal, serving
only for the first planting and foundation of the church among the Heathen:
( and of this former sort, they reckon up the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
men endued with graces of powers, of healings:) and so they enter into their
particular proves, of the ceasing of these functions: I think they may
better be-thinke themselves, that all these gifts and offices, which their
selves have here named, did not so cease, but that they have since the first
planting and foundation of the church among the Heathen, continued longer time
among the Christians.

Yea, some of them, have for a great part of the time, continued even till our
own times, and yet continue. As the operation of great works. Or if they
mean thereby miracles, which were not ordinary, no not in that extraordinary
time: and as the hypocrites had them also, so might and had diverse of the
Papists, and yet their cause never the better. And the like may we say of the
gift of speaking with toongs, which have not been by study before learned, as
Anthony, etc: and diverse also both of the ancient fathers, and some among the
Papists, and some among us, have not been destitute of the gift of prophecy,
and much more may I say this, for the gift of healing: for none of these gifts
or graces given then, or since, or yet, to men, infer the gift and grace of
Gods election, adoption, or be of necessity to salvation. But, were there no
other gifts and offices then, in the primitive church, but these six, by our
brethren here reckoned, besides the four, which they make standerds and
remainers? Look on the places before cited, and there we shall find a great
many more, More ordinary gifts then our brethren mention.
of which the most part have ever been, and yet are, even as much, or far
more ordinary gifts or offices, then these four, which they say are
perpetual.

S. Paul ( as is aforesaid) distinguishing these gifts, says, Romans 12.6.
Seeing then that we have gifts which are diverse, according to the grace that
is given unto us, whether we have prophecy, let us prophecy, according to the
proportion of faith: or an office, let us wait on the office: or he that
teaches on teaching: or be that exhorts on exhortation he that distributeth,
let him do it with simplicity: he that rules, with diligence: he that
shows mercy with cheerfulness. Here also are other gifts and offices
reckoned up, besides these four of Doctors, Pastors, Governors and Deacons. If
he mean by office, some particular function, which is ceased: that would be
showed: or else it may remain and be still perpetual. If he mean by teaching,
Doctor, by exhorting, Pastor: by distributing Deacon. by ruling, one of those
not teaching presbyters, preests, or elders, which our brethren call Governors*
yet that which before the Apostle called an office, and that which follows of
showing mercy, are particulerlie specified and distinguished from these four,
Doctor, Pastor, Governor, and Deacon. In what place then shall we reckon those
two: either as temporal, or as perpetual? if temporal: then is there more
ceased, then those six. If perpetual: then more than these four do remain

Likewise, Saint Paul ( as is aforesaid) 1. Cor. 12. says. There are
diversities of gifts, etc. For to one is given, by the spirit, the word of
wisdom: and to another the word of knowledge by the same spirit: and to
another is given faith by the same spirit: and to another the operation of
great works: and to another other prophecy: and to another the discerning of
spirits: and to another the diversities of t^onges: and to another the
interpretation of toonges. All these the Apostle here sets down, as gifts
or offices, distinguished one from another.

What now shall we say to the gift or office, of them* that had the word of
wisdom given unto them? Was that a temporal gift or office, serving only
for the first planting and foundation of the church among the Heathen? If
they say the abundant measure of it was temporal: that may be granted: and
yet the gift and office still remain. And so likewise, of the next gift or
office, in them that have the gift of knowledge or learning. For these are
distinguished here the one from the other, (as we commonly say: The greatest
clearkes ar^ not always the wisest men,) and these our brethren, as they
profe^^^ all-ouer this their book, A learned discourse, do so believe, that
they hau^ the spirit of knowledge: otherwise they would not commend this
treatise unto us by such a Title: so that, I perceive this gift also is not
yet ceased, but that it may be joined to those (their four) remainders.

And what shall we say, to that the Apostle calls here the gift of Faith:
making it also a distinct office from the residue? If we say, he means the
faith of miracles: then are those two gifts following, of healing and of the
operation of great works, not to be understood of the gift of miracles. So
that, either the one or the other, seem^ to be perpetual. And what shall we
say, to the gift or office of discerning spirits? For Saint John, 1. John.
4. verse. 1. says unto us: Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but
try the spirits whether they are of God: for many false Prophets are gone out
into the world. Which Epistle, being called Catholic or Universal, serves
to all ages and people of the Church: and the gift of trying or discerning
spirits, is yet requisite, if not more needful now, then ever it was.

To conclude, for this place: what shall we say for the gift or office, if
not of diversities of toongs, yet, of the interpretations of toongs* Which
gift or office is not only at this day, to be with all thankfulness
acknowledged: but GOD which is the author of all goo^ gifts, is highlye to be
praised for it, and many of our good brethren are endued therewith.

Moreover, in the place here by our brethren quoted, Saint Paul^
distinguishes the gift or office of helping, from that of healing. And are
all these gifts and offices ceased, as temporal, and serving only to the
first planting and foundation of the church among the Heathen? Nay rather,
do not the most of them remain still in the church among the faithful, for
the continual building, confirmation, and establishing of them?

I grant, th^^ remain in another sort, then as they were first given in the
primi^^^e church: and for the most times since, they have been given perhaps
in an other manner, and in less abundance or measure of them. But that is not
the question: but whether all these gifts and offices, besides the four, of
Doctors, Pastors, Governors, and Deacons, ( as they divide them,) have been
expired, and ceased to be in the church, since the first planting and
foundation thereof among the Heathen. For this is our brethrens conclusion:
Likewise, as we do plainly see, that the gifts of healing, of powers or
miracles, and of diverse toongs, have long since ceased to be in the church:
so the offices of them, which were grounded upon these gifts, must also cease
and be determined. And shall not we then conclude on the contrary, that the
gifts yet in part remaining, the offices must in part remain also?

I speak not this, to confirm the Papists, of whom our brethren (I grant)
do well conclude, in saying: Therefore the Papists do vainelie retain the
name of exorcistes, when they cannot cast out devils: and extreme unction,
when they cannot cure diseases: and to speak with strange toonges, which they
have not by inspiration, and that without any interpretation, which Saint
Paul expresselie forbids.

This dealing of the Papists was mere ridiculous and impious, proceeding from
a blind zeal, and preposterous imitation of that which they had not. And yet
whether they had it, or not, would needs make ordinary offices and imitations
of them. Howbeit, how faulty soever they were therein: yet belie not (as they
say) the devil. Their fault was not, that they spoke with strange toongs,
which they had not by inspiration: for if they had not had them by inspiration,
and yet had they understood them, and the people which heard them, had
understood them also: then had this been no fault in them, except in speaking
faulty matter.

But is this true, that the gift ceasing, the office cease? What then if the
gift of ruling, that Saint Paul speaks of Romans 12. verse. 8. And the gifts
of those Governors, whom he mentions, 1. Corinthians. 12. verse* 28. (
understanding the same as our brethren do) have ceased or do cease, or
should cease: The gift^ of rulin^.
will they grant that the office of their desired Seniorie, whom they call
Rulers or Governors, should cease also, and be expired or determined? And
must we upon this presupposall, that there was any such then (which point
is afterward for to be examined) suppose also that this gift of ruling that
any such had, has so remained ever since?

Nay, if it be demanded further, whether either gift or office thereof
(understanding the same as they do) have not since that time, even from the
first planting and foundation of the church among the Heathen, and from thence
even till our time, discontinued? And besides all this: what warrant out of
Gods word can be showed, more for those rulers or Governors ( if they will
needs understand thereby their seniorie, of which neither have we any warrant)
that they be more perpetual then the other? Or the other more temporal then
these? And that these are of the later kind, as are Doctors, Pastors, and
Deacons, perteining to the nourishing and building up of the church for ever.

Our brethren have alleged somewhat for the ceasing of the other: is there
any thing alleged here, for the perpetuity of these Seniors: if they run
back to their former search of the holy scriptures, to find out what order
our Savior Christ, our only householder, has set forth in them, by which
he would have his household directed in all things, perteining to the eternal
salvation of us men: we find that all those gifts or offices, or the most of
them, yea those which they say are ceased, are drawing nearer to matters
perteining to salvation, then is this, of ruling or governing. Neither has
this any further warrant of remaining in the church, then had the other. Now
holds therefore this argument of our brethren? We find ( say they) that
there was such a seniorie, set forth by Christ in the holy scriptures:
therefore, that office must needs be one of those that are perpetual,
perteining to the nourishing and building up of the church for ever. What
reason d^^ they here allege for it? Nay, no reason, but this: Either it is of
the one sort, or of the other, temporal, or perpetual: but, it is not of the
one, to wit, temporal: Ergo, it is of the other sort, that is, perpetual.
This reason is good, if the parts of it were as good. But how do our brethren
prove, it is not of the former sort, that is to say, temporal? Of the
former sort, that is to say, temporal, and which are ceased, there are but
six reckoned by our brethren, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, men endued with
the graces of powers, of healings, and of diverse toongs: but the gift of
ruling or governing is none of these: and therefore it must needs be of the
other kind, and so, perpetual. And how do our brethren prove there are but
six of the former or temporal sort? What if we can prove by their own
place he^re cited, that there were more? And what if they all ceased not? And
why may not this gift or office o^ those kind of rulers or governors, go
among the number of that former sort with the six, which they call temporal,
and make up the seventh, or rather the seuente^nth, if they will account them
all in that former sort? Surely, except we make this our fourth Principle to
our former three or rather this our first and last, our unquestionable maximie,
against the which there is no disputing* because (as ipse dixit) these our
brethren the learned discoursers have coursed it over, and ouerruled it, and so
it is become a ruled case: here is else, nothing in the world to prove it.
And upon this they conclude, saying:

There remains therefore of these before rehearsed, The learned discourse.
Page. 7. and 8
only in the Church, these Eccl. offices instituted of God: namely, Pastors,
Doctors, Governors, and Deacons: by which the Church of God, may (according to
his word) be directed in all matters, which are commonly called
Ecclesiastical. And therefore, as it is unlawful, so it is vnneedefull for
men, following the devises of their own brain, without the warrant of Gods
word, to institute and ordain any other offices or kinds of ministry
besides these, appointed and approved by God himself, What offices remain^ in
the church.
exercised in the primitive and pure Church, until the mystery of iniquity
working a way for Antichrists pride and presumption, changed Gods ordinance,
and brought in all kind of false doctrine and confusion: and now again,
restored in all rightly reformed Churches, with such daily increase, and glory
of the kingdom of Christ, and suppression of the tyranny of Satan, that the
only experience hereof, might be a sufficient persuasion to us to leave this
disordered state of ours, wher-in we have so long labored with so little
profit: and to embrace that most beautiful order of eccl. regiment, which God
so manifestly does bless and prosper in our neighbors hands.

We have heard what invincible proves ( as our brethren imagine) they have
found, and brought forth out of the holy scriptures, Bridges
to infer the grounds of their desired Ecclesiastical government. Now upon
these grounds and proves ( such as they are) they resolutely proceed to the
final conclusion and determinate sentence of this matter, by whom all
Ecclesiastical matters shal-be directed, saying: There remains therefore of
these before rehearsed, only in the Church, these eccl. offices, instituted of
God; namely, Pastors, Doctors, Governors and Deacons: by which the Church of
God may according to his word be directed in all matters which are commonly
called ecclesiastical. Our Bretherens Terrarchie, of 4. Persons. and their
dissent from those our other Brethren, which make a Pentarchy of 5. or a
Tritarchie of 3.


In this peremptory conclusion, the direction of all eccl. matters, is here to
be only governed by four kind of persons. Howbeit, the fruitful Sermon,
upon 1. Cor. 12. printed also 1584. by Rob. Walde-graue the printer of this
learned discourse, makes five ordinary and perpetual offices: Doctors,
Pastors, Deacons, Rulers, and Attenders on the poor. But here by these our
brethren (the Learned discoursers,) is erected a Tetrarchie, or Quadriuiratus,
that is to say, a Catergouernment. And if (as diverse expound it) Pastors, and
Teachers, be coincident in one office and person, as the text it self, Ephesians.
4.11. Jointly sets them together and not disiunctiuely, which it does in the
other offices there mentioned: and as the Scottish book ( taken from the
English Church in Geneua) seems to make no necessity of having Doctors,
distinct from Pastors, saying: Although we are not ignorant, that the scripture
makes mention of a fourth kind of ministers, left unto the Church of Christ,
which also are very profitable, where time and place do permit: and so
accounting no further on Doctors, set down but three: so that by them, it is
but a Tritarchie, or Triumuiratus, as that kind of government was called, when
Lepidus, Anthony, and Augustus parted the Roman government among them
three, into a Triple regiment. If it fall not out alike, that as two then, made
the third a cifer, and the one of those two did eat up the other, and all
resolved into a Monarchy: so in the end, Monarchy and all being turned out,
a fourth stepped in, and set up a Triple crown for all. But what this Tetrarchie
heer^ erected will resolve into, in every particular Congregation, and that in
all and every Ecclesiastical matter that is to be directed, and what they will
comprehend under the name of Ecclesiastical matter: is discoursed afterward.

But if this Tetrarchie be not instituted of God himself, nor according to the
warrant of Gods word, A greater Mysterye in contending for this
Cater-gouernment of these 4. cornered Persons, then the contention was before
against the 4. cornerd caps.
ordained, appointed, nor approved so to be: as we have hitherto seen no such
institution, appoynting, ordayning nor approouing: then am I afraid (I burden
none, but I fear it shrewdelie, if I have not myste the mark) that there is a
mystery, which our well meaning brethren see not, and therefore fear not:
even mysterium iniquitatis, that lies hydden in this partition of governing
and directing all matters. I wish the best, and therefore if I fear the
worst: I hope I am the easier to be pardoned.

Now, although this conclusion of Quartering, Fiuefolding, or trypling of this
government, seems at the first not to infer any precise necessity: yet by
the Correllatiue, which of consequence they make to fall out on this
conclusion, that other offices in the direction and government of all
Ecclesiastical matters, are not only vnneedefull but unlawful: The
necessity that they make of this Tetrarchie.
What is their resolution other then this? not as they mollified it before,
that by these four or three kinds of offices, ( as other contract them, and
our brethren here enlarge them, other stretch them further into five) the
Church of God may be directed in all matters which are commonly called
Ecclesiastical: But, the Church of God must be directed by none other.

How-be-it this consequence, does not absolutely so set it down, saying: And
therefore, it is not only vnneedefull, but also unlawful, for men, etc. to
institute and ordain any other offices or kinds of ministry besides these:
But sailing as it were with a side wind, seeming rather to run upon the
needelesse, then, the lawelesse point, they rather seem to insinuate it, then
to enforce it, that it is unlawful. And in very deed, as they set out the
matter, their conclusion seems good and true, saying: And therefore as it is
unlawful, so it is vnneedefull for men, following the devises of their own
brain, without the warrant of Gods word, to institute and ordain any other
offices or kinds of ministry, besides these appointed and approved by God
himself, exercised in the primitive and pure Church, etc.

For, men's following the devises of their own brain, Men's following the
devises of their own brain.
without the warrant of Gods word, in any matter of importance, is a great
offense. Yea, be-it in never so mean a matter, have it no warrant at all,
neither expressed nor contained, either in specialtie or generality in Gods
word: It is not so vnneedefull as unlawful, and a presumptuous rashness,
when men are so headstrong and selfeweening, that they will follow no good
Counsel, but the devises of their own brain. And therefore, for our brethren
to apply this, to all those that follow the government established, were no
less unlawful then vnneedefull.

Yea, how may not this (my Masters) light on your selves? For what warrant
have you either expressed or included, for all the things contained in this
your platform? yea, No warrant of this Tetrarchie in Gods word.
for the institution and the ordayning of all these offices and kinds of
ministry, and the perpetuity of them in this four quartered government?
Will you allege that such offices are mentioned in Gods word? Take heed ye
mistake not, but that they were indeed such offices. But were this a
sufficient proof, that they were instituted and ordained to be offices or
kinds of ministry, appointed and approved by God himself: Can you show
this warrant also? And yet if you could do all this: how would this suf^^se,
except with-all ye show us a warrant for the perpetuity, of all and only
these four offices or kinds of ministry? You are not ignorant what a
warrant is: and I warrant you, and dare give you there-on your (quietus est,)
that, as you have not yet found it, so ye shall never be able (with all the
learned discoursing in the world) to find this warrant. For, think ye (if ye
were able to find thus much) that the warrant hereof does go n^ further then
here ye say, appointed and approved by God him self? so were all the offices
and kinds of ministry of the Mosaicall and Templarie Priesthood: and yet
they were but temporal, and are ceased. Yea, so were the offices and kinds of
ministry of the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, men endued with the
graces, of powers, Tetrarchy.
of healings, and of diverse tongues: and yet your selves c^^^fesse that all
these are ceased, expired, determined, and have no place. And therefore, if ye
can show this warrant of Gods word, for the Tetrarchie perpetually remaining
of these eccl. offices instituted of God^ namely, Pastors, Doctors, Governors,
and Deacons: by which the Church of God, may (according to his word) be
directed in all matters, which are commonly called eccl. show how God
appointed and approved it, be-it, by himself, or by his Apostles, to be
perpetually exercised in his Church: and then foorth-with we yield.

And if ye can not do this: then see (good brethren) how this your own
conclusion here, reboundeth on your own selves: Therefore as it is unlawful,
so it is vnneedefull for men, fo^lowing the devises of their own brain,
without the warrant of Gods word, to institute and ordain any other offices
or kinds of ministry, besides (not only as you say) these appointed and
approved by God himself: but those that are appointed and approved either by
God himself, or by his Apostles, to be perpetually exercised in his Church.

But our brethren (belike) perceauing, that they had not said enough for the
proof of these offices or kinds of ministry: they Indorse their conclusion
(for the more strength) with this addition: exercised in the primitive and pure
Church. The exercise of the primitive church.
Here is now set down (as they conceive) ^ sufficient and full warrant, for
all these offices or kinds of ministry, appointed and approved of God
himself: But where, or how, no place is here alleged, either in text or
margin. For I would feign see that place set down, that we might have the
full view thereof, whether it were s^ or no indeed, and in what manner it
were of God himself appointed and approved. But if that fail: lo the
practice, exercised in the primitive and pure Church. I think so indeed, if
ever it were appointed and approved by God himself at all. But so were the
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, men endued with the graces, of powers, of
healings, and of diverse tongues. Yea, but exercised in the primitive and pure
church until the mystery of iniquity working a way for Antichrists pride
and presumption, The bringing in of all kind of falls doctrine.
changed Gods ordinance, and brought in all kind of false doctrine and
confusion.

Nay, who there (Masters mine,) not so. For then it had been exercised without
interruption even until this day. For all kind of false doctrine was not
brought in, by many hundred years, (after your own reckoning) that this
office or kind of Governors ( if ever there w^r^ any such office as you would
now erect) was ceased. And Satan has ^^wayes been sowing new kinds of
false doctrine, and I doubt w^^ther all his kinds of false doctrine be yet
brought in, or no.

But if ye said: it was exercised in the primitue and pure Church, until the
mystery of iniquity began to work a way to Antichrists pride and
presumption: although neither this be true, for all these four offices and
kinds of ministry in such manner as you urge them: yet in saying so, you
should better limite your selves within the bounds, that you chiefly stand
on. The beginning of the mystery of iniquity.
But when (trow you) that mystery of iniquity began to work. Was it not
begun, when S. Paul, said, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. The mystery of iniquity does
already work? Was it not begun, when S. John said, 1. John 2.18. Babes, it
is the last time: and as ye have heard that Antichriste shall come, even now
are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time? But
what infers this, (had there been then such a Seniorie of Governors) that
this office should remain in the Church perpetually? For, in the primitive and
pure Church, were the Apostles: must we therefore perpetually have Apostles?
Nay (say they) it was not only exercised in the primitive Church, The pure
Church.
which may be called the time while the Apostles lived: but also in the pure
Church. Not very pure I wisse in some points, within short while after the
Apostles times.

But what time assign ye to the exercise thereof? Date some time. Until the
mystery of iniquity working a way, for Antichrists pride and presumption,
changed Gods ordinance. This is an uncertain limitation. But what is this? Was
Gods ordinance changed then, in so necessary and perpetual an office? And
how was this office changed? Was it taken clean away from the Church, so that
the Church was altogether without it? It has had Pastors, Teachers, and
Deacons: ( such as they were, good or bad) always hitherto, and never wanted
as yet, until this hour. And was this seniorie of Governors appointed to
remain as long as they, and have al they held out perpetually: and has only
this Seniorie failed? But still would I feign know, When Gods ordinance was
changed.
some more certain guess of the time, when this change happened. For here are
neither Archbishops nor Bishops named, but only these 4. Eccl. offices,
Pastors, Doctors, Governors, and Deacons, by which (they say) the Church of
God may, (according to his word) be directed in all matters, etc. And was there
no exercise of Archbishops nor Bishops in the primitive and pure Church? Or do
they include Archb. and Bishops in any of these terms, because they are
Governors of the Church, and are Pastors, and Teachers, and such as have been
Deacons too? As S. Ambrose comprehends in the name of Bishops ( as we shall
afterward, God willing, see) all the inferior Eccl. offices. And our brethren,
where they should grant that all Bishops are Pastors, grant that all Pastors
are Bishops, though their chief drift be against our Bishops: but they impugn
not only the office, but the very name and all of the Archbishops, and make
them to be other offices, or kinds of ministry besides these ( that they
say) are appointed and approved of God himself, exercised in the primitive and
pure Church: and therefore the instituting and ordayning of them, to be but
men's following the devices of their own brain: and to be, as unlawful, so
vnneedefull, and the changing of Gods ordinance.

But, if Bishops and Archbishops made this change: then was that ordinance
changed, even in the primitive and pure Church. For even then was Titus made an
Archbishop, and had many other Bishops under his government, as we have
seen partly already, for the order in Creete appointed by Saint Paul, whose
act was (no doubt) approved by God him self, and the Archiepiscopall
jurisdiction, exercised by Titus: And was this devised of Saint Paul or Titus,
following the devises of their own brains, as a needelesse and unlawful
thing? as a thing done without, and besides the warrant of Gods word? Or ha^
he not good warrant from God to institute and ordain other offices or kinds
of ministry, then these four? So that this conclusion of our brethren:
(There remains therefore of these before rehearsed, only in the Church,
these Ecclesiastical offices instituted of God: namely, Pastors, Archb. and B.
^boue all these Te^rarkes.
Doctors, Governors, and Deacons: by which the Church of God* may (according
to his word) be directed in all matters, etc.) is nothing so nor so. For
here (ye see) is another office appointed over all these offices nether is it
unlawful nor vnneedefull, nor the institution or ordinance of men, following
the devises of their own brain, or without the warrant of Gods word, or not
appointed and approved by God himself, or not exercised in the primitive and
pure Church, or any change of Gods ordinance, or any working a way to
Antichrists pride and presumption, that the Bishops and Archbishops were
brought in, and that this Tetrarchie was dissolved, if indeed ther^ had been
any such Quadripartite or four quartered government. As for the office or
kind of ministry of Bishops or Archbishops, though it be not (in the
substance thereof) any other office or kind o^ ministry, different from the
office of Pastor or Teacher: ( for notwi^^standing it follow not, that every
Pastor or Teacher be a Bishop, ( as our brethren say,) or an Archbishop:
yet every Bishop or Archbishop is in his office and kind of ministry a
Pastor and Teacher) nevertheless sith he is their ordayner or ordinary, as
we term it, and the ouerseer even as well of them, as of the people, accorto
the divisions of Regions, Cities, and Towns, distributed and limited to his
government: he is in dignity of an other office and kind of ministry,
different from them.

And shall we now dare to say, that this office of Bishop (...)
Archbishop does work a way to Antichrists pride and presumption? Nay
rather, it was the readiest way, to restrain and repress it, Archb.
if it had been always kept accordingly: that Bishops, The office of Archb.
and B. the readiest way to repress Antichrists pride and tyranny
in their Cities and Dioceses; Archbishoppes in their Provinces and Regions
distributed and limited unto them, as Creta was by Saint Paul to Titus (
reserving to Christian Princes, as their Sovereigns their Supreme
government) should (according to Gods word) direct in their Consistories,
Synodes and Councelles, all matters which are commonly called Ecclesiastical.

This was, and is, (in my judgment) even the best way, that could be devised
( and I like my judgment the better, because of this appointment and
approbation of Saint Paul) to have stopped the way to Antichrists pride and
presumption. Which way of Saint Paul, when one Archbishop afterward, under
a name and pretense of S. Peter, to have an higher office then all these
Bishops or Archbishoppes had, The breach of the Arch. and B. offices and
authorities was the readiest way to Antichrists pride and tyranny.
yea, to have an universal Bishopric over all, and to represent Jesus
Christ the head-shep-hearde and chief Bishop of our souls, above all other
Bishops and Archbishoppes, which were distributed and limited in Regions,
Cities and Towns, took upon him, as though he only had a supreme and
general office or kind of ministry without any limitation of Town, City,
or Region, but reaching over all the universal Church, yea, over all the whole
world: this breach of these Bishops and Archbishops office and ministry,
was the working of the way to Antichrists pride and presumption: and not the
institution and ordeyning, nor the distributing and limiting of this Episcopal
or Archiepiscopall office or kind of ministry. For else, why might they not
as well say, that Christ's universal Bishopric or Archbishopricke, did work
a way to Antichrists pride and presumption, because Antichrist pretends,
usurps and abuses, that office and kind of ministry, which is due and
proper only to Christ?

Christ (1. Pet. 2. verse. 7. and 8.) is called a stone, and the head of the
corner, and a stone of offense. If Christ then had not been the stone: they
had not stumbled at him. Nay, then; If there were no Christ: there could be no
Antichriste. If there had been no Archbishop: the Pope had not been the
Archbishop of Rome, nor had wrought the way to his pride and presumption. And
so, if there were no use, there were no abuse of any thing.

Shall we lay therefore the fault on the right or institution, because by
indirect means an abuse, or pretense, or vsurpatio^ falls out, or is brought
in? What then may not work the way of what ye will? but if ye mark it well:
this argument makes clean against you. For, the chiefest way to Antichrists
pride and presumption was, to change, to abridge, to pull down, and to
encroch upon the office and ministry of Bishops, and Archbishops: and
therefore the institution and maintenance of them, was one of the greatest
impedimentes, that Antichriste had. And till he brought all their lawful
offices and ministeries under his pride and presumption, he could never work
that mystery of iniquity that he has done.

So long as the Archbishop of Carthage kept him short in Afrike, and detected
his forgeries to encroch upon them: and likewise of the other
Archbishoprickes: he could not work his mystery of iniquity among them. Yea,
the little Archbishop of Rauenna under his nose, held^ him long tackling.

And if this pretended Seniorie of Governors, be as directly contrary to the
right institution of Bishops and Archbishops, as Antichrists mystery of
iniquity and his intolerable pride and presumption is: then, either is this
institution of Bishops and Archbishops in medio, and either of them ab extremo
in extremum, The Archb. office a better stop against antichrist, then th^se
Tetrarkes.
as the mediocritie of Justice between minus and nimium: or else, this
Seniorie of Governors is nearer this mystery of iniquity, to work the way
to Antichrists pride and presumption. For, let the Bishops and Archbishops
hold intierly their institution: and they may better keep out Antichrists
pride and presumption, then can these Seniours: who may more easily give
occasion to the settin^ up a 1000. petite-Antichristes full of pride and
presumption too: then (...) able to pull down or to restrain, the pride and
presumption of that on^ great Antichriste.

Neither has the office of Bishop or Archbishop, brought in all kind of false
doctrine, The evil officers and not the office of Archb. and B. brought in
false doctrine.
or any one kind, except indirectly by the officers, not by the office. And
so not only Nestorius, and some few others that were Archbishops, but a
number mo, as Arius, Pelagius, Eutiches, etc. that were Presbyters, Priests,
or Elders and Doctors, brought in false doctrine. Yea, Nicholas also (as it is
said) one of the first 7. Deacons. And should any rightly thereupon charge
these offices, to bring in false doctrine, because some such officers did bring
it in? There was false doctrine brought in, in the primitive Church: and shall
we burden the primitive Church therewith? Thus indeed do the Papists burden
both v^ and our brethren: and so here our brethren burden us. And shall we th^^
burden them again? For, (set aside all partiality) who may not easi^^^ see,
that this Eccl. kind of government which they so much desire (whi^^ the
Governors are not learned men) would of the twain give readie^ occasion, then
our government established, not only to more new devises of their own
brains, concerning government: but also, if any ne^ kin^e of false doctrine
arise, to maintain the same, and to make more factions about it,
notwithstanding all the assistaunce of their lesser and greater Synodes.

Yea, would to God all kind of doctrine brought in by our brethren, The state
of the refor. Churches.
by occasion of these their controversies for the alteration of government,
were so true and sound, as I with it were: which as occasion (God willing)
shall serve I will further declare: hoping yet that with some gentle
constructions (whereof I would be right glad) all may be construed to the best:
and that perceiving their errors, they will say with Augustine (...) rare
possum, H^reticus esse nolo. I may hap to err: I purpose not to be an
Heritike, that is, obstinately to maintain an error. But whereas they say,
all kind of false doctrine and confusion, howsoever they may escape either
all or some kind of false doctrine: this desired government is a great deal
more prone to confusion, than is the government established.

Now after these defacings of the offices and ministry in the government
established amongst us: The Tetrarchy commended.
they recommend their desired government of this Tetrarchie unto us, saying:
And now again, restored in all rightly reformed Churches, with such daily
increase and glory of the kingdom of Christ, and suppression of the kingdom
of Anti-Christe, that the only experience hereof, might be a sufficient
persuasion to us to leave this disordred state of ours, wherein we have so
long labored, with so little profit: and to embrace that most bewtifull order
of Ecclesiastical regiment, which God so manifestly does bless and prosper in
our neighbors hands.

Whether that Ecclesiastical Government which was exercised in the Primitive
and pure Church, be now again restored: The restoring Eccl. government in the
reformed Churches.
or some other (in some points perhaps) like to that, may make a quaeri potest,
and require a further view. But whether it be restored in all rightly reformed
Churches, so that, all reformed Churches are not rightly reformed, but
wrongfully reformed, and so not reformed, but deformed: as having driven out
one Devil by another, and removed one deformity, and established another:
that, might grow to more than to a question: Yea, to an open slander not
only of us, but of many true Christian and godly reformed Churches, besides
ours.

What daily increase it makes among our neighbors ( where they say this is
restored) of the kingdom of Christ, The bewtiful state of our neighbors
refo^med Churches.
and how it sets forth his glory, more then other reformed churches do:
and how it more suppresseth the tyranny of Satan: these things are carried
away so smoothly and so solemnly avowed, (as though all were Gospel) that not
only we must not deny it, but believe it: nor only yield unto it (as most
true) but be moved with such emulation of it, that the only experience might
be a sufficient persuasion to us to leave this disordered state of ours,
wherein we have so long labored with so little profit, and to embrace that
most bewtifull order of Ecclesiastical regiment, which God so manifestly
nifestlie does bless and prosper in our neighbors hands. The state of the
ref. Churches.


It is an old saying, fair words make fools feign: and here are very fair
words of our neighbors state, though as foul of our own. If now for these
fair and foul words of our brethren, we will become such fools, to mislike
and leave our own, and embrace an others. T^^ goodly show of a fayrer bone
persuaded Aesops Dog, to leave the go^^ bone that he had already in his mouth,
and to leap into the water, after the shadow of another. I pray GOD our
brethren allure us not with the like bayte of some fair shadow, to leave the
good state we have of government established.

They entice us here with marvelous goodly things, as right reformation,
daily increase and glory of the kingdom of Christ: they wilt us to embrace
that most bewtifull order of Ecclesiastical regiment, which God so
manifestly does bless and prosper in our neighbors hands. This beawtie
were enough to enamoure a man: this prosperity and blessing to set his teeth
an edge, and to enflambe the heart of any zealous, and godly meaning man, in
the spiritual love of God, for the increase and glory of his kingdom, and the
desire to have him bless and prosper our estate.

But, is all this true in our neighbors, and is our own state so disordred,,
Our brethe^ens defacing of our estate.
and so laboursome with so little profit? For, otherwise, as our brethren in
their Preface, likned our Prelates and ministers, to foxes and little foxes: so
I remember, that once I read a tale of a Fox that had lost his tail, and
because other had tails, and he had none: he went about to persuade all his
brethren, to leave their tails, for they were but an unnecessary clogge and
hinderance unto them, trayling in the mire: which if it were away, O how light
and nimble should they be. And for example to persuade them the better, he
showed them the experience ( not in his neighbor) but in himself. But one
that know before on what necessity he had lost it: cried out unto him, Brother
Fox, brother Fox; leave your fair persuasion. You have lost your own, and
therefore you would have us to leave ours to bear you company. But, what do ye
tell us here (will our brethren say) a foolish flim flam tale of a fox tail,
to dally out so weighty and so holy a matter: while we are earnest in
persuading to leave this disordered state of ours, wherein we have so long
labored with so little profit, and to embrace that most bewtiful order of
Ecclesiastical regiment, which God so manifesttie does bless and prosper in
our neighbors hands. Indeed brethren if this were as true, as you here go
about to persuade it? I would yield gladly, and be soons persuaded. But if this
be the mere following the devises of your own brain, and nothing so, neither
in us, nor in our neighbors, as you would persuade us: why may not a fained
fable applied to truth, answer a feyned persuasion, grounded on falsehoode?
If ye be so persuaded your selves, and think as ye say: it may be, ye
think so. Fortis imaginatio in a man's own brain may work wonders: but to
persuade an-other by another example, and by such an example as is neither
necessary, nor fit, nor sufficient; nor true: I may well shake off this fond
persuasion, neither comparing our brethren to Dogs or Foxes ( as they in
bitterness compare us though I may chance get a flappe with a Fox tail, (if
not worse) for my labor.

But I pray you brethren, do ye mean indeed good earneste as ye say, when
ye tell us, that the order of Ecclesiastical Government in the Primitive
Church is restored? for if it be: The state of the Primitive churches
government not restored.
then have we new Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, etc. come again. Yea,
but (say you) those offices were temporal and are expyred: and therefore, are
not to be restored. Yea, but (say I) they were the chiefest offices, then,
when the order of the Ecclesiastical government in the Primitive Church was
most bewtifull: and therefore, if they be not restored, in whom the beauty
most consisted: then that state of Ecclesiastical regiment, yea, the most
bewtifull state thereof, is not, nor is to be restored. Yea, but (say you) we
restrain most bewtifull, to the Offices that were perpetual and to remain
for ever. Yea, Resoning the office of governors
but (say I) how prove ye then your Seniour Governors, to be such, and to
have more Privilege of perpetuity, the^ those better, higher, and more
bewtifull offices had? and if they were to remain for ever, why did they not
so for ever remain, but rather, for ever till now of late, so ceased to be in
the Church, expired, and had no place: that they are now at length, even at the
last cast of the world to be restored? If ye say the truth of the Gospel
was hidden also, and the true professors of it: I grant, it was so, and yet it
was always, and remained still for ever, and we can fetch and bring forth,
(against the Gospels and our common adversaries) witnesses more or fewer, yet
some in all ages. And the like also, we can do for Pastors, teachers, and
Deacons, good and bad, in all ages, since the first institution of them. And
can you (brethren) do the like for this your pretended governing and not
teaching Seniory? if ye can, plead perpetuity: if ye cannot (admitting that it
once had been) why crake ye of in others, or secke among us, the restoring of
that, which so many hundredth years, has utterly ceased to be in the Church,
is expired and has had no place? Ceased ( say you) de facto, but not de Iure.
Prove you Ius, and we will quickly let fall our pleay de facto.

But till you can find either the right, or the practice of them: or if they
were once, where they have been hidden or banished all this while: Or if they
dyed and were buried, till with the gift of of working wonders, ye shall
reuine and so restore them: what say you to those offices, that were then also,
even when Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, etc. were alive, and were
ordained of the Apostles, and were offices distinguished in dignity from
Pastors and Teachers, from Deacons or any other governing Seniors, having
authority over them, in the cities or regions limited unto them? and these
offices have continued ever since. If now therefore, the regiment of the
Primitive church be rightly reformed to the original beawtie, Arch. and By.
not to be displaced by restoring the state of the Primit. church.
then must Bishops, and Archbishops stand, (for they stood then,) what
difference soever our brethren find of standing now. And yet find what
difference they can, they shall find, that if those Seniors ( imagining there
were such as they pretend) be restored: both all they, and the Doctors, and
Pastors, and Deacons, and all other Ecclesiastical officers, are al to be under
the Ecclesiastical government of Bishops and Archbishops. And if they stand
not thus: to displace the superior and ye old standard, to restore an
inferior, and to set up a new revived, fresh and young Senior: would so
greatly blemish the bewtifull order of this supposed Ecclesiastical regiment,
that, as it is said, at the second building of the Temple. Esra. cap. 3. ver.
12. that many of the Priests and Levites and the chief of the Fathers,
ancient me^, which had seen the first house, when the foundation of this
house was laid, w^pt with a loud voice: So those that mark the bewtifull
order of the Ecclesiastical regiment in the Primitive and pure Church indeed:
and the most bewtifull order of the Ecclesiastical regiment, that our brethren
say, the church is now restored unto, ( or rather under a name of restoring,
Who deface the bewty of the reformed Churches.
is not restored at all,) in those things for which they so contend, that
they rather hinder the course of the Gospel, and decrease, not increase the
kingdom of Christ, deface his glory, make his Church evil spoken of, rende
the unity thereof, break the broosed reed, and quench the smoking flax,
and yet set all the house on fire, and call this right reforming, and
restoring. It would so little move any that seriouslye considers it, to
embrace the state and order thereof, as most bewtifull: that if he did not
detest it (with the common adversaries) as most deformed: yet, loved he never
so well the church, yea, the more he loved it, it would make his eyes, (not for
joy, but for grief of the sight) to water their plants, and his heart
throbbe, yea, bleed, to behold now the most bewtifull bryde of Jesus Christ,
how her beawtie is vaded, how her ornaments are spoiled, how her body is
haled, and almost even pulled in pieces: what by her adversaries, what by our
brethren her own children, and all under pretense of reforming and restoring
her: all is peace and increase, and glory, and embracing, and bewtifull, and
blessed, and prospered, for the order, and state of the Church with them: and
we that are the Church of God also, our state ( for sooth) is a disordred
state, we labor long, and we reap little profit by our labor.

Well, yet thanks be to God, if our state have such ill luck: that our
neighbors have better, The state of our neighbors.
and that this most bewtifull regiment of the Church is restored, at least
among our neighbors. Our neighbors? This is a good hearing, Aliquod bonum
propter vicinum bonum: And if they be so near us, let us know them, that we
may receive some neighborlie comfort and refreshing by them.

Who are these our neighbors, where this state thus happily is restored? Do ye
ask, who they are? Even all the Churches that are rightlye restored. Nay, for
Gods sake (my Masters) say not so: for then, name me almost any one reformed
Church, that in one point or other, of order offices, discipline, rites and
ceremonies, differs not one from another. And which then among all these, are
these our neighbors, which have restored that regiment, and are rightly
reformed? No reformed Churches but in some points of gouer. diff^r one from
another.
The Scottish reformed Churches are our nearest neighbors: but is their
government and orders, and making officers, and administration of Sacraments,
and book of common Prayers, all one with these our Learned discoursers? and
with the book of common Prayers by our brethren now lastly set forth? Or
rather, is there not, even in the book of common Prayer, by themselves
compiled, between the written book, and that, that is printed at
Midleborough, and that at London, and that at Scotland, above a hundredth, yea,
200. yea, 300. differences one from an other: and all in a book little bigger
then an Almanac, but a matter, Differences eue^ in their book of common
prayer.
wherein should be greatest agreement of uniformity? Nay, do our brethren
here at home agree among themselves in these matters of reformation? Or if
all be now agreed, may we set down our rest upon it, and resolve our selves,
that these Learned discourses have here restored, the only, very, true, whole
perfect, and right reformation of that most bewtifull order of Ecclesiastical
regiment, that was appointed and approved by God himself, exercised in the
Primitive and pure Church, instituted and ordained to continue for ever? O my
Masters, take heed what ye say, least hereafter ye say, had I wist. Ye
know whose saying that is.

Well, well: (will perhaps our brethren say) some of our neighbors have it:
we name none, least ye should say, we prejudice any good neighbor of ours,
as having not rightly reformed their Churches. For, though in all points, that
most bewtifull order of Ecclesiastical regiment be not restored: yet is their
state far better than the disordered state of ours, wherein we have so long
labored with so little profit, and contrariwise which GOD so many ways does
bless and prosper in our neighbors hands, ( that if not the most) yet the
bewtifull order of Ecclesiastical Regiment which they have: Yea, the only
experience of the daily increase and glory of the kingdom of Christ, and
suppression of the tyranny of Satan, might be a sufficient persuasion for us.

Experientia est Magistra Stultorum, as our brethren themselves do^ afterward
page xlviij. tell us. Our neighbors experience no necessary pattern to us.
When the Ass that carried Salt, falling down in the water, and his salt
melting away, g^^ up again discharged of his burden: His fellow Ass being
laden with spoonges, saw that, and he fell down likewise in the water, to
try the like experience. But his spoonges kept him down, his experience
drowned him. Non omnia conueniunt omnibus. Experience is not always good upon
examples. Legibus non exemplis iudicatur. Had our neighbors restored it in
very deed: yet are not we bound to follow their example. The demur of this
question.
No, not the example of the Primitive Church it self, and much less those
that follow their example. For, we seek not now what we may do, or what
might be a sufficient persuasion unto us, if we would: but whet^er by any law
or commandment of Christ, or any of his Apostles, we be tied and bound
thereto, yea or no. Thi^ is the very point that we demurr upon.

If God have so prosperously blessed them, that would or have happily
imitated, that supposed old order of Ecclesiastical Regiment: God be blessed
for it. We rejoice of it, and congratulate with them, which soever of our
neighbors they be. But neither they, nor their imitation, pr^scribe unto us,
nor their experience would fit us. Diverse feet have diverse lastes. The
shoe that will serve one, may wring another. Neither yet is our state
inferior to theirs, or less blessed and prospered of the Lord, nor has had
less increase and glory of the Lords kingdom, nor is less bewtifull: if we
look not with an evil eye, and a male-contente^ mind on our own state (as
he says) Emulation of our neighbors state.
Fertilior seges est alienis semper in aruis,
Vicinumque pecus grandius vber habet
There grows always greater stoare of corn, within my Neighbors fields:
The greater vdder of his Cow, more milk unto my Neighbor yeeldes.
Our neighbors have this, our neighbors have that: and we want^ these
things. Fie (brethren) for shame, what need this emulation of our neighbors,
and murmuring against our own state? And yet it is not altogether so, neither
for them, (the more is the pity, if it otherwise pleased God): Our own ^st^te.
Neither for us, (thanks be given to God for it) and for that plentiful
measure of the increase and glory of the kingdom o^ Christ, in this our
reformed Church of England: and for the suppression of the tyranny of Satan
and Anti-christe, and of his Ministers and confederates. We have great cause
highly to magnify God, for the wonderful and gracious works, he has wrought
for us, above all our neighbors round about us: yea, above all the particular
Churches near or far dispersed in the world at this day, even in this estate
of Ecclesiastical Government established.

And all our neighbors, where GOD has any Church never so much reformed,
do (I hope) rejoice together with us therefore: yea, not the best of them,
but (be it spoken to the glory of God, Our vntha^kfulnesse for our estate.
and without vpbraiding to others) have found no small comfortable benefit at
our hands, and do all most thankfully reacknowledge the same, without
condemning, reproving, or grudging at our state of Ecclesiastical government
established, what other kind of reformation soever in their Ecclesiastical
Government they be directed by: Only we our selves murmur and grudge,
condemn and slander, both among our selves, and to all our neighbors, our
own state, which is so evil, that would God ( were itaccording to his
acceptable good pleasure) the kingdom and glory of Christ, and the
suppression of Satan and Antichriste ( though I had rather wish it did no
less) did but half as fast increase and prosper, then (God be glorified for
it) in our state it does. And yet God grant both in ours and in our
neighbors states, and all other parts of Gods true Church, ( according as we
al say in the Lords Prayer, Thy kingdom come) these blessings of God, may
daily more and more increase and prosper. And so by Gods grace it should still
do better and better (Maugre Satan and Antichriste) if our own brethren
would not hindervs: and all reformed Churches should do well enough,
notwithstanding we differ from them, and they from us: Yea, though both of us
differ from the state of the Primitive and pure Church, not in truth of Faith
and unity of Doctrine: But in matter, or manner of Orders, Offices, Rites and
Ceremonies, concerning Ecclesiastical regiment, so far as they are not
prescribed by any perpetual rule, other then for the time and state, or for
order and comeliness.

For, the difference of these things is not ^irectlye material to salvation,
neither ought to break the bond of peace and Chrystian concord: But they may
think and wish well to us, and we in the name of the Lord, think well, and
wish good luck to them. Yea, to wish, that they had no better state then we
have, on condition they had no worse, The harde-state of our neighbors
Churches.
and might always have as good: I think all our neighbors reformed Churches
would be soon entreated to say, AMEN. For in what hard case (God help them)
good neighbors they be, their selves feel or fear it daily: and we hear of
it, and cease not daily to pray for them, and, as we may, put to our helping
hands unto them.

The defacing of our state.
Yea, our brethren their-selues (upon better aduisement since) in their last
supplication made to her gracious Majesty: and to the high Court of
Parliament, assembled 1587. page 8. do confess it, saying: The Churches of God
round about us, go to wrack, in France, Belgia, and a great part of high
Dutche. I would Scotland had continued in her first love, and that the hands
of the builders were strengthened among you.

But in conclusion, neither their state or ours ( howsoever they stand) are
bound to any perpetual form of all the orders and offices, of Ecclesiastical
regiment. Theirs may perhaps be better for them, their aflicted state standing
as it does: ours (all things in our established state of Government
considered:) is best for us. Away therefore (good brethren) with these
disordered terms, O^r bretherens disordered spee^hes of our disordered state.
This disordred state of ours: for they are not speeches, beseeming thankful
and faithful ministers to God, nor loving and obedient subjects to our Prince
and Superiors, so disorderly cast forth on the state of Eccle. regiment.
Which touches not only Eccl. persons against whom perhaps our brethren will
make no seruple of conscience, though their mouths run over, be they never
so much their brethren, their Pastors, their betters, their superiors, their
Bish, or Arch. to whom their selves peradventure have sworn Canonicam
obedientiam. But these disordred speeches of theirs, touch the Magistrate, yea
their Sovereign very near, and therefore they are not only disordred, but
dangerous speeches.

Neither ought our brethren to vpbraid our labors, unto us, that we^ have so
long labored with so little profit, to discourage the painful laborer in the
Lords vineyard, The vpbraiding of our labors.
and to make our hands weak, because our work prospers not so fast in our
hands, as we would wish it did: And yet it prospers ( God be praised) with
more profit, then either we see, or our brethren like. But profit, or not
profit, let us still labor, and (thanks be to God) then we labor. All are
not so idle loyterers, as afterward, our brethren complain we labor not^:
and here they find fault with our labors. But labor we, or loyter we, they
must still labor infinding fault: or else they should loyter, for lack of
matter in discoursing. But howsoever they esteem of our labors: the Laborer (
says the Lord Luc. 10.) is worthy his reward. And as their-selues afterward
do note out of S. Paul, 1. Timoth. ^. The elders that rule well, are worthy
double honor, especially they which labor in the word and doctrine. But they
tell us, that sentence makes for their governing and not teaching elders:
whether it does so or no: we shall (God willing) at large examine, on their
allegation of the same. but admitting it had included any such Elders at that
time: were their labors to be honored that ruled well among them, (and yet
perhaps with as little profit)? And is the laborer in the word and doctrine to
be despised, and his labor to be left, because we have so long labored with
so little profit? But for all this discouragement of our brethren, let us not
be weary of wel-dooing, and commit the event and profit to the Lord, Our
comfort of our labors.
and hearken rather to the Apostles exhortation, 1. Cor. 16. Therefore my
beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, vnmou^able abundant always in the work of
the Lord: forasmuch as ye know, that your labor is not in vain in the lord.
And this is our comfort, against this persuasion of our brethren, to leave that
state of ours, wherein we have so long labored with so little profit. And yet
we hope, we have not all been unprofitable laborers: save in respect of merit
toward God, we confess indeed (as Christ wills us to acknowledge our
selves) That when we have done all we are able to do, we are but unprofitable
servant: but not in all respects unprofitable. But if our so long labor
have had the less profit, to our more grief: why do not our brethren, look
rather to the cause and hinderance of it? for perhaps, it is not so much of the
laborer, The cause of our labors hinderance.
as of the adversaries that have resisted us. And have we not adversaries inow,
of Satan, of Antichriste, of his ministers, of the unthankful world, etc.
but that our own brethren will be even almost as bitter against us, as the
worst? If therefore we have so long labored with so little profit: lay the
fault where it is. Remove the impediment, and then (God before) let us say with
Peter, Luc, 5.5. Though I have labored al night long, and have taken nothing:
neu^rthelesse (Lord) at thy word I will cast forth the net. And then (no
doubt) God will bless our labors with more profit. And if our brethren when
we becken to them, will come and help us, we shall enclose such a multitude of
Fishes, that our nets shall be full. And if our nets break, let us mende
them again uniformly together. And then our state shall be (if it be not,)
as beawtifull, and far more beawtifull, ( I do not doubt it,) then any of
all our neighbors is.

But God bless our neighbors, and make us more thankful, and less
contentious and newfangled then we be: and not only more obedient to our
Civil Christian Magistrates, but more reverent to the Ecclesiastical
governors, as the Apostle, Heb, 13.7. etc. gives us good counsel. Remember
them which have the ouer-sight of you, which have declared unto you the word^
of God, whose faith follow, considering what has been the end of their
conversation. Jesus Christ yesterdaye and to day, the same also is for ever.
Be not carried about, with diu^rse and strange doctrines. And in the 17. verse,
Obey them that have the oversight of you, for they watch for your souls, as
they that must give accounts, that they may do it with joy, and not with
grief: for that is unprofitable for you. And if there be any disorder in
doing this their duty, the fault being personal, the state is not to be
defaced as disordred, but the faults redressed, and the state stand.

The Christian prince repelled.
But where the inferiors will presume to disobey, yea, to alter the state of
their Superiors, and to set up themselves: will not only set out the Bishops
and Archbishops, What would indeed make the state disordered.
but the supreme authority of their Sovereign too: If this should be
suffered, the state would then indeed^ become a most disordered state. And
would work a worse way to Antichrists pride and presumption, bringing in
many strange kinds of false doctrine and confusion, and breed a greater
mystery of iniquity: while every particular congregation or seniorie among
them, may thus, following the devises of their own brain, and pretending upon
a bar^ fact, or order, or office, that they find mentioned in the scriptures
(though perhaps clean other wise then they take it) enforce a warrant of Gods
word for them to follow: Yea, to think the only experience of any of their
neighbors success, in imitation of the like, a sufficient persuasion for
them, to leave the state under which they live, and con^meliouslie to revile
it, for a disordered state, and to prejudice and alter the government
established, and to bring in a new Quaternion of Governors, by whom only all
matters may be directed, which are commonly called Ecclesiastical, without
any other superior ouer^ight or government of Bish. or Arch. or any supreme
authority of the Prince, t^ be admitted among them.

Ha brethren, mark the mystery of these devises more advisedly, an^ (I
think) you will say (at leastwise ye may say,) that if our stat^ were
disordered: these things would not bring it into better order, but set it quite
out of all order, and hazard the clean overthrow of the whole state. If the
axe were gone, is this the remedy, to hurl the helue after it? howbeit our
brethren here, if the helue be not missing, but not orderly set on, would
cast both helue, and axe, and all away.

Now, least we might perhaps mistake our brethrens words, and so might be
suspected to slander them, in saying they would clean exclu^^ with the
Bishops and Archbishops superior authority, the supreme authority of the
Christian Prince, ( and so of her Majesty) from the direction of all
Ecclesiastical matters: albeit their words aforesaid are plain^ enough, yet
this their resolute conclusion, in these words make it manifest.

Our bretherens conclusion clean excludes the Prince, and gives the
direction of al Eccl. matters. to their 4. Tetrarck^.
There remains therefore, of these before rehearsed, only in the Church,
these Ecclesiastical offices instituted by God: namely, Pastors, Doctors,
Governors, and Deacons: by which the church of God may, according to his
word, be directed in all matters, which are commonly called Ecclesiastical.

Here is the conclusion of this Tetrarchie: the Prince is not at all mentioned,
but clean excluded from the direction of all Eccl. matters, and the direction
committed to these 4. only, which particular only, debarre^^ both the Prince,
and all other besides these 4. The Christian prince excluded.
Yet because among these 4. estates, this word Governors might carye such a
general sense, as that they might seem not to exclude, but to include the
Prince: to show therefore their meaning the plainer, that they intend not to
include the Prince at al, in the Quadrant of these 4. kinds and estates of
personages, under the ambiguous name of Governors, our brethren proceed,
saying,

But while we speak of Ecclesiastical government, it may be thought of
some, The learned discourse. Page. 8.
that we should entreat first of the supreme authority of Christian Princes:
where upon it seems, that all the regiment of the church depends, which is
such a myste to dazzle the eyes of ignorant persons, that they think all things
in the Ecclesiast. state, ought to be disposed by that only high authority and
absolute power of the civil Magistrate.

In these words our brethren foreseeing, Bridges.
that some just o^fence might arise heereon, that professing a Learned
discourse: The objection why the treatise of the Christian princes supremacy is
not first considered.
and having delte thus far in the Government of Ecclesiastical matters, and
quartered the same into these 4. Tetrarks, Pastors, Doctors, Governors, and
Deacons: and that all Ecclesi^sticall matters are to be directed only by these
4. the Christian Prince ( as, God be praised, is amongst and over all us her
most excellent Majesty) is not only all this while not mentioned, but
excluded: and so excluded, that whether her Majesty's estate be prejudiced
hereby, is not so much as called first in question: and the Princes authority
being first debated and resolved upon, then to have proceeded to the limiting
and deciding of these Tetrarks, several or conjoined Government: Therefore
our brethren think it now belike high time to mitigate this offense, and to
prevent this objection. And indeed (brethren) it is a good objection, and a
point very necessary to have been first, if not decided, yet treated on and
better considered, or if not first of all (albeit in good right, even first of
all in this matter of Ecclesiastical government) yet at least, or ever ye had
proceeded thus far in the treating, determining, and giving full and only
authority, to all and every of these 4. Tetrarks.

For, ye can-not plead ignorance, that ye thought not thereon before now:
That ye were called to a sudden and tumultuous reasoning, where the fynest
wit, the best memory, the most filed speech, shall carry away the
truth: at least, maruelouslye move the ungrounded hearers: ( as in your
Preface ye complained.) For, Our brethren foresa^^ the object. in their
Preface.
even there, ye fore-sawe that it would be objected, and among other things
ye mentioned that objection, saying: If any shall object etc. that it shall
be prejudicial to the estate of Government established: And do ye now
upon mature deliberation, having professed to set forth, A Learned discourse
of Ecclesiastical government, and having entered into it, The Christian prince
repelled.
laid your principles, and distributed all ^he parts and persons that must be
Governors of it: (as though ye bethought your selves), come dropping in with
this objection, saying: But while we speak of Ecclesiastical government? As
who would say: Good Lord, how have we forgotten our selves. We speak of
Government, and have treated nothing of the Prince, which is the supreme
Governor. Well, while it is in memory, and while we are speaking of it, let us
say something to that objection, that our selves partlye have already moved,
and it is most likely will be by other objected. let us therefore answer
before hand to that objection, while we speak of Ecclesiastical government.

The tardie coming of this objection.
And it may be, when ye wrote this, that ye thought on some such^ like
matter. Notwithstanding, this is but my conjecture, peraduentur^ yea,
peradventure nay: but I take it, this is not the worst construction. Howbeit to
say, while ye are speaking of it, and have already given your resolute
sentence on the matter, who have the only government it may be thought your
objection and your answer thereunto, comes very tardie, to help the
Princes title. Except ye will revoke, or suspende your de^nitiue sentence, or
except ye have some further warrant, from the experience of their example,
that (they say) have a custom, first to give judgment, and put it in
execution, and then to enquiure whether the party were guilty, yea or no. But
Hyster^n, Proteron, former or later, let it come in question, now a Gods name:
that we may see, what is left to the Prince, and whether the Princes supreme
goue^nement be any whit prejudiced, by this conclusion already passed, for the
direction of all Ecclesiastical matters, to be made only by these foresaid
Tetrarcks.

But while we speak ( say they) of Ecclesiastical Government. N^^ sof^e (my
good and learned discoursing brethren) since ye have stay^^ to speak hereof,
all this while: let me crave pardon for a few worde^ to stay your speech
heereon a little while more. I pray you, what me^^ ye by this term here,
The Captio^ of these words, Eccles. gover^ement.
Ecclesiastical government? And a three lin^^ before, ye called it also,
Ecclesiastical regiment. For, there may be a great caption in these
speeches, which our common adversaries v^ against us, in all their writings and
inuectiues, concerning the Princ^^ Supremacy. And therefore, you being her
Majesty's true subjects, (...) dissenting from the Papists errors: I am
loathe to have you either ^^tangle your selves or us, with their captious and
sclaunderous tear^^^, which not only darken the matter, but touch her
Majesty's honor, (...) sclaunder her Royal person, and right of her cheifest
office very near: (...) be it, you do it (I dare say it for you) of an
ouershott zeal, and not of (...) malice, as they do.

They slander her Majesty to take upon her an Ecclesiastical regiment or
government, as though she took upon her, The Princes supr. government
to be an Ecclesiastical person, or to exercise a function or office
Ecclesiastical: and to do the actions that appertain to the Regiment
Ecclesiastical. The Papists selaunder of her Ma.
This is a manifest sclaunder of her Majesty, who neither exercises nor
claymeth any such Ecclesiastical Government, nor the statute names or
intends any^ such Ecclesiastical Government of her Majesty, but only that
her Majesty has the Supreme Government over all persons Ecclesiastical:
and is the Supreme Governor of them in all Ecclesiastical causes, The
princes supreme government over al Ecc. persons, in all Ecclesi. matters.
to ouersee and govern the right direction of all the persons and causes
Ecclesiastical. So that, where the direction of the consultation, and fynding
out the causes, the execution and government of the actions, belongs to the
persons: the Supreme government and direction of the causes to be authorized,
and the actions by the persons to be put in due execution, principally pertain
to her Majesty.

And if ye think otherwise of her Majesty's, ( not Ecclesiastical Government,
but) supreme Government, What belongs to the Eccl. persons, and what to the
Prince.
in or over Ecclesiastical persons and causes: ye do greatly mistake it. And
this may serve also for your third Tetrarke, who^ ye call Governors, to whom
ye attribute amiss an Ecclesiastical Government. Except ye intend by the
word Eccl. any manner of ways perteyning to the Church And thus, the
widows of whom the Apostle speaks 1. Tim. 5.9. Had Eccl. offices also, by
which reckoning weomen with you, might be Ecclesiastical persons, and have an
Eccl. government in the church.

And so your Ecclesiastical Governors, are notwith-standing populer and
plebeian persons, which commonly are called the lay people And by ye Scottish
Churches, election of them and of the Deacons, where they say: The Friday
after, judgment is taken, what persons are elected for elders and Deacons to
serve for that year: It should seem. they account them not properly
Ecclesiastical persons, but rather like ^ur Syde-men or Churchwardens. But
howsoever ye confound these ^earmes in these your Governors, it is not good
confounding them in the Prince. And ye see that great captions, sclaunders,
and cauils, may ^rise upon such great personages, by such intricate and
d^^btfull ^earmes. Non been definit, qui non been diuidit. Speak distinolye
and plain, and then we shall better understand your meaning, and either you or
we shall quickly be driven to a final conclusion, without al starting holes or
eu^^^ons.

If ye mean by Ecclesiastical government, that her Majesty takes upon her
an Ecclesiastical office, or to be an Ecclesiastical person, and so execute
the actions of the causes, that (as you say) are commonly called
Ecclesiastical: ye incur the common adversaries slander of her Majesty,
although (I trust) unwittingly, and therefore will not (I hope) unwillingly
reclaim your error. If ye mean by Ecclesiastical Government, her Majesty's
Government, in or over Ecclesiastical matters or causes: we admit your sense:
and now proceed on concerning the objection and your answer.

Good reason that al Protestants should think that the Princes supremacy
should be first treated on.
It may be thought of some, that we should entreat first, of the Supreme
authority of Christian Princes.

And good reason to, (as I take it) if you will needs take upon yo^ (by what
warrant or license thereto, I do not know) to intermeddl^ in matters of state
and Government. Whether there were any^ thought the contrary (as I hope there
are not many amongst us Protestants) come you in, saying: It may be thought
of some? as though you misliked, that any should so think; or thought not
your selu^^, that many amongst us thought not so. But go to, some were
perhaps of such a strange opinion: and what (I pray you) is the o^^nion?

That we should first entreat of the supreme authority of Christian Princes.

Here again I crave yet another interruption for my learni^^ of so Learned
discoursers. Do ye here afforde Christian Princes th^^ title of Supreme
authority, Christian princes have a supreme authority in Ecclesiast. matters.
by way of supposition; As, whether they have any Supreme authority in
Ecclesiastical matters, or no, let th^^ fall out in the Treaty, as it shall?
or by way of assertion; acknowle^ging a Supreme authority in them? For, your
words seem rath^^ to carry, that they have a Supreme authority: Howbeit,
not to be first treated upon: and so likewise do your words in the next page,
saying:

But of the Supreme authority of Christian Princes in Ecclesiastical causes,
how far it extends by the word of God, we shall have better occasion to
entreat hereafter, when we shall have described the Ecclesiastical state.

So then, Christian Princes have supreme authority in Ecclesiastical causes,
by your own assertion. But, how now does this agree with your former
conclusion? There remains therefore of these before rehearsed only in the
Church these Ecclesiastical offices, instituted of GOD: namely, Pastors,
Doctors, Governors, and Deacons: By which the Church of God may, according to
his word be directed, in all matters which are commonly called
Ecclesiastical. If Christian Princes have supreme government in
Ecclesiastical causes: how are all Ecclesiastical matters, or causes
directed only by these Tetrarcks.

Shall the Prince be one of these four, and be included in the compa^^^ of
the Governors? No, these governors are such Elders as are chosen out of the
people. How shall we reconcile these sayings then? well enough, (say they).
For, these 4. are the only Ecclesiastical officers: now we name not the
Christian Prince an Ecclesiastical officer, but the supreme governor.

This is very well reconciled indeed, for that point: save that it falls out
hardly in an other, that still the Lay people are made persons
Ecclesiastical. But what answers this the point in hand? For, Difference
between the Prince and his gov. and the 4. Tetrarcks.
if the Christian Princes have the supreme government in Ecclesiastical
matters or causes: then, none of all these four officers or offices, ( call
them Ecclesiastical or what ye will,) neither diuisim, nor coniunctim, have
the only direction of all Ecclesiastical matters or causes. For, the
Christian Princes have here some direction; Nay, the chief and supreme
direction in them. Except ye find out yet, some other quirke between matters
and causes: or, between directing and governing. But, as here,
Ecclesiastical matters, and Ecclesiastical causes, are taken indifferently:
so, for directing and governing, Directing, and gou^rning.
I go plainelye and simply to work. He that dir^cteth, he governs, and he
that governs he directs.

The Christian Prince therefore, being (as our brethren grant) the supreme
governor in Ecclesiastical causes, is also the supreme director in
Ecclesiastical matters.

But if now they stop on this point, and will distinguish between direction
and government: and they ( that is to say) these 4. officers, will direct all
the matters, and the Prince must govern them, according only, to their
direction: who a^e indeed the Governors then? The Prince or they; when he must
govern, ( nay, say rather; when he must obey) according to their direction?
For, they understand by directing, What our brethren mean by directing.
not their counseling, or showing their judgment and advise: and such
direction, (we freely grant) belongs unto them. But by directing, they
mean, setting down order, prescribing, commanding, decreeing, and
determinining: and what is this else, but governing? Who has now the more
supreme government in Ecclesiastical matters, the Prince? or these four
estates? But the Prince ( by their own confessions) is the supreme governor
in Ecclesiastical matters, and not they: except our brethren give the prince
this title, The Prince called supr. gover. in a bare title.
only for a show, and keep the matters to themselves. For, so the Pope
calls the Emperor, Emperor of Room, and yet yet can he have no more room
in Rome, then it pleases the Pope to permit unto him, who indeed has all the
Empire and government of Rome. Now if these our learned discoursing brethren
grant christian princes this title, to be the supreme governor in Ecclesi.
matters, in such a fashion: that is a planie mockery before God and man. N^n
est bonum ludere c^^ sanctis.

But if they truly acknowledge the Christian Prince to bear the chi^^^
stroke among them, in directing, prescribing, decreeing, confirming,
forbidding, and commaunding^ Ecclesiastical matters: then is the Prince
indeed, the supreme governor in them, and not they. But then, stoop
gallant; If the prince be indeed the supreme Governor then must our brethren
submit themselves to the government established.
All these iiij. estates, which (as they said before) must bear such sway,
that all Ecclesiastical matters, may be directed by them, and by them only,
are topsie turnie ouertourned. Wet may the Christian Prince by them, ( though
not by them only) be directed by way of counsel and information: but when
all is done, he is still the Supreme Governor, and all they must be
chiefly directed and governed by the Christian Prince: in all such
Ecclesiastical matters, and causes, as are amongst them to be established.

Since therefore our Learned discoursers have granted this, w^^^ yield they
not without further discoursing on the matter, to h^^ Majesty's supreme
government, that has confirmed by her Supreme authority, the decision of
these Ecclesiastical causes, and controversies long ago, and maintayneth the
Ecclesiastical government now established?

And if now Christian Princes have supreme authority in Ecclesiastical
causes: while these our Learned brethren discoursers take on them, not to
speak only, but to set down directions of Ecclesiastical government: may
not some think, ( nay may not most men think) that they should treat
first of the Supreme authority of Christian Princes? If they have the first
degree in dignity, why may they not have the first place in this Treatise?
Howbeit, because this woor^^ Supreme, The word Supreme.
may be taken as-well for the last in order, though ye first in dignity, as
the Princes give their voices and Royal assent last of all^ and when every
body has said, their voice strykes dead or quickens (...) the matter. If
our brethren here mean, to reserve the Treaty of the Christian Princes
Supreme authority, to ye purpose, and so to acknowled^^ them to be the
supreme governors: then a Gods name, proceed on, Let them say, as do the
Gentlemen-ushers before Princes, On afor^ my Lords. Let all these four
estates take their places before, because that these our Learned discoursers so
assign them. We will not greatly strive with them about the room, where they
please to place Christ^an Princes, first or last, or middlemoste, if
Christian Princes man entirely retain their supreme authority in
Ecclesiastical causes.

Nevertheless, there is no reason to the contrary, but it may be thought of
some, or of most, if not of these Learned discoursers, that they should have
treated first on the Supreme authority of Christian Princes: The
Princessupreme gov. sclan.
that the reader might first have known, what Government perteyneth to them,
and how far it extends by the word of God, that have the Supreme
authority of Eccl. causes: and then to have treated on those in their orders,
dignities, and places, that are under them, and seen likewise the differences
of their inferior Gouernements. And so should the reader of these
controversies, have eastly and plainly perceived, whether any of their
inferior Governments and authorities had incroached on the Christian Princes
Supreme government and authority, yea or no. The injury offered to the
Prince in the last place.
This (me thinks) had been the better, the simpler, and more direct
Method: then first to bring in all the other inferior persons, and to assign
this and that Government unto every of them, and when all have had their
places offices and gouernementes assigned to them: then, to come to the
Christian Princes, and tell them: this is the place and office of Supreme
Government, left for you. Your Majesty's come late, these 4. are your
Seniours, ye are but their punies: and therefore be content, there is no
remedy, you must take that which by them is not forestalled, and how far
your Supreme authority extends, we shall have better occasion to entreat
hereafter, when we have described the Eccl. state. Me thinks, that Christian
Princes may take grief hereat, yea, every indifferent Reader may suspect,
that Christian Princes might have great wrong offered them by this dealing.

But, whether our brethren, Discoursers, mean thus, or no: by bringing in
first all the inferior persons, and taking up before hand (ere the Princes be
so much as mentioned) the direction of all Eccles. matters to be directed
only by them, and bid the Princes be content, they shall have the Supreme
place of authority, that is, the last place (as they perhaps mean it) and the
Princes understand it for the chiefest place: let them now go on, and tell
their own tale, and show their reasons for thus placing of the Christian
Princes.

Where-uppon it seems, that all the regiment of the Church depends.

Where-upon? And where-upon ( I pray you brethren) speak you this? either upon
the giving to Christian Princes the first treatise? Our breath. captious
sclaunder of the Princes supreme gouerme^t.
or upon the Supreme authority of Christian Princes? The supreme authority
you have granted. But the first place of the treaty, ye will not grant.
Where-upon, it may be taken, that this your (where-upon) seems as if ye
said: If we should first entreat of the Supreme authority of Christian
Princes: then it might seem, that all the regiment of the Church depends on
them. But construe your own words whereupon ye please, either upon the one
sense or the other. Here is nothing yet alleged, but that only it seems
that all the regiment of the Church depends on it. But if it be understood
for the only first place of the treaty: it can not so much as seem to
depend all upon the first treating of the same. If it be understood of the
Christian Princes supreme government, in Ecclesiastical causes, which you
have granted and we take hold thereon, and that some what yet in time, least
all be clean given from them, if all be not given away already, but yet will
we take as good holdfast as we can, for the Princes right, that Christian
Princes have supreme authority in Ecclesiastical causes: which once being
granted: then, whether ye treat there-upon first or last: whatsoever would
seem to fall out, will seem so still. But what is this that would seem to
fall out hereupon?

That all the regiment of the Church, depends on the Christian Princes
supreme authority in ecclesiastical causes. A sclaunderoussurmise of the
Christian Prince.


Would this seem, if the Prince had the first place? Does it seem that all
the regiment of the Church, depends on the Pastor? And yet here you assign
the Pastor the first place. Though afterward upon further aduisement, you
put him back, and make him come down with shame, and take the lower room,
giving the first place to the Doctor, notwithstanding your selves do thus
here for a while exalt the Pastor. But it seems, ye have a greater
Jealousy of the Christian Prince, then of any of all these four Tetrarkes.
For howsoever y^^ set them one before or after another, the Christian Prince
must come behind them all, for fear it might seem that the regiment of the
Church depends thereon.

But shall the Christian Princes be debarred of the right of their place, in
the treaty of their authority, because it seems that there-upon the
Regiment of the Church depends? It seems, that these words are
suspitiouslie cast forth, as though her Majesty would have all the
Ecclesiastical functions, and all their ministry of the word and
sacraments, and all the mystical state of Christ's militant Church in her
Majesty's Dominions, to depend on her Majesty's supreme authority in
Ecclesiastical matters. It seemetht, his is not very good dealing, to burden
her Majesty with suspicion of such things. But we will suspende our
iudg^ment, for all this that seems to depend: for if we should not, but
straight condemn a thing, because it seems this or that: what if this
dealing of our brethren seemed hard to the Christian Prince? What if it seemed
to her Majesty, that the bringing in of all these four Estates before her
Majesty, and the giving unto them only, the direction of all Ecclesiastical
matters, might be greatly prejudicial to the state of government established;
to make a mutenie in the commonweal, to s^^ us all together by the ears; to
make an infinite number of factions and alterations; yea, to take from her
Majesty the best part of her supreme authority; and to breed many mo
mischiefs and inconveniences, then she, or you, or we, or any yet saw?

If (I say) it should seem so unto her Majesty, and to a great number
besides, which think themselves as sound Protestants, and as good subjects
as you either would seem to be, or are: would ye not straight ways answer?
What though it seems so: yet, it is not so: it is but only your surmise, and
though it seems so to you: Things not to be measured by seeming.
yet it seems not so to us ( ye will say) nor to many other. But sure it is
not so, whatsoever it seems unto any.

If now we reply: well, yet it seems not so of nothing. There can be no
smoke, where there is no fire: and if it be not smoke indeed, yet since it
seems to be smoke, it is not amiss to fear fire, We must abstain from all
appearaunce of evil. 1. These. 5. Would ye be content, to have the matter
ouerruled thus, against your Learned discourse for this Tetrarchie, because
these dangers might so seem to ensue, yea, to depend there-upon? And I pray
you brethren, what stronger reason call ye this? It may be thought of some,
that we should first entreat, of the supreme authority of Christian Princes:
whereupon it seems, that all the regiment of the Church depends.

Yea, but you will say: if it seems so, then, it comes not of nothing.
There is no smoke where there is no fire, We must abstain from all appearance
of evil. Who said this? Forsooth (brethren) that did even I: and hardily
return mine own words to mine own self, Lege Talionis. For ye see I am
bold with you (brethren) in so doing. Some regiment of the Church depends on
the Princes supreme government.
Well then (will you say) it seems that all the Regiment of the Church,
depends on the supreme authority of the Christian Prince in Ecclesiastical
causes: and this seeming, comes not on nothing. No verily, does it not. For,
to set aside your partial suspicion, and go to the matter it self. The
Christian Prince having supreme authority in Ecclesiast. causes: does no
Regiment of the Church at all, though not all the Regiment of the Church
depend thereon?

Tush, this is a thing, which is such a myste ( say you) to dazell the eyes of
the ignorant persons, that they think all things in the Eccles. state, ought
to be disposed by that only high authority and absolute power of the civil
Magistrate.

A ha (brethren) I thought it would prove somewhat. It seemed ( as the saying
is) either a fox or a fearne brake. I took it for smoke, and it was a myste.
So that I mist my mark. And yet till it came, it reeked like a smoke. And a
myste will not only dazell the eyes, but so darken the object, that we cannot
discern the truth, till the myste be dissipated, and then, (if we have good
eyes) we shall see all things as they are.

But what is this, which is such a myste, forsooth, that all the regiment of
the Church depends on the authority of Christian Princes?

A sclanderous myste.
This is a foul, thick, stinking, sclannderous, dark myste indeed.

Whence rises this myste? Do we raise any such speeches on the Prince? Does
the statute yield any such authority to the prince? Does her Majesty
claim, or take upon her any such authority? I hear of none but of the
common adversaries, ( and you now which ar^ our brethren,) that cast forth
any such speeches. Al-be-it, I join not you and them in like condition. For,
they most maliciously do anowe and blase it: you only say it seems: but
whether to them, or to the people, or to your selves it seems: that you tell
us not. But it seems, ye will exempt your selves, and I am glad thereof: for
I would not have it, that you, who are our brethren in Jesus Christ, and her
Majesty's tru^ meaning subjects, as we are, should have either your eyes
dazeled, or the very paper (whereon you write) to be stained, with the
supition, or but with seeming to suspect, such false, foggie, and infectiue
mystes a^ those are.

If ye be Iealouse of them, to drive this myste away, it is well done: so that
in this Jealousy to drive away the myste, ye drive not away withal our
Mistresses Supreme authority: It is no reason her Majesty should loose her
clear right, under pretense that a myste dazeleth the eyes of ignorant persons.

The eyes of the ignorant dazeled with this myste.
But if they be ignorant, then it is for that they know not the truth hereof:
and then is the truth of the matter clean contrary. And although the ignorant
be deceived: yet they that be not ignorant, hi^ not deceived. And can not the
ignorant be taught the truth by them that are not ignorant? The ignorant
persons were deceived in many more things, of which ignorant persons then,
many now (thanks be to God) do know the truth, except such as love mystes
and darkness more then light.

But let not us suppress the truth, for fear of what may seem to ignorant
persons For to them truth seems falshoode; and all that we say both of us,
may seem stark lies. But it lies us upon so much the rather, to tell them
the truth: and then if they will be ignorant, let them be ignorant still. But
what is the point, wherein by this myste the eyes of the ignorant persons are
thus dazeled? That all things in the Ecclesiastical state, ought to be
disposed by the only high authority and absolute power of the Christian
Magistrate. This indeed is a dangerous error of ignorant persons. But if any
be so ignorant: would this error be confirmed in them, if the authority and
power of the Christian Princes were first treated upon, and thoroughly viewed?
And not rather, if there be any such as hold that opinion (as by our brethrens
speeches it seems sh^re should h^ ^^nie) I take it were the best way which
could be taken, that this myste, were first cleared, and the Treaty of the
Christian Princes first treated upon: least, either the Princes should take
any such only high authority and absolute power upon them, or that the
people should so grossly and erroniously conceive any such matter of the^.
This is my opinion in such cases. And I would wish you (brethren) to take
heed, how in these your discourses, The casting forth of such false
suspicions is not well done.
( let them carry what name of learning soever ye will) since that the people are
taught no such matter, since that her Majesty takes no such absolute power
upon her, but (as becomes a good Christian Prince,) that, which of right
pertains to her Majesty's royal office, and most godly, with all humility,
patience and ^uldenes, tempereth the Justice of the same: you abuse not too
much her Majesty's clemency, that deserves no such sclaunders nor suspicions
at your h^ndes.

Wh^e put you such surmises in the peoples heads, if they were ignorant, to
deceive them worse? For this is the way, to make the people either become
Atheistes, as only and absolutely to depend on the Prince in all matters and
causes Ecclesiastical: or to grudge against her Majesty, as taking on her
such an only high authority and absolute power to dispose all things in the
state Ecclesiastical. What could her open professed enemies have said worse?
Save that they no less impudently then falsely, like arrant Traitors, do not
shame to affirm it: and should you (brethren) come after those shameless
children of Beliall, and say: But while we speak of Ecclesiastical
government, it may be thought of some, that we should entreat first of the
Supreme authority of Christian Princes: where-upon it seems, that all the
regiment of the Church depends: which is such a myste to dazell the eyes of
ignorant persons, that they think all things in the Eccles. state ought to be
disposed, by the only high authority and absolute power of the civil
Magistrate? What suspicious speeches, and byous glaunces, under the name of
some, and of it seems. and of they think, are here cast ^oorth? and all
this thinking and seeming to some, is turned to the people, and to ignorant
persons: they, poor souls, must bear the fault of all. What is raising of
mystes, dazeling of eyes, walking in clouds: yea, da^^sing naked in a net, and
when all the world looks on, to think no (...) sees us, if this be not?
And why is the Sovereign Prince called hereby no better term, then the
civil Magistrate: who before, was acknowledged in more reverent manner, to be
the Christian Prince, The term of civil Magistrate.
and to have also Supreme authority? What? and did you likewise mean.
herebie to grant unto Christian Princes, that all the regiment of the Church
depends on their Supreme authority, and that all things in the
Ecclesiastical state ought to be disposed by that only high authority and
absolute power of the civil Magistrate? What? and do ye h^^e grant the^ all
this? Or grant them some thing? or deny them all this, and gra^nt them
nothing, nor any regiment, nor any disposing at all? Ye say, the ignorant
persons, How far our breath. deny or grant this sclaunder.
thought thus and thus: and would you for all that, give so much unto Christian
Princes, as the Supream^ authority in Ecclesiastical causes? Did not you
fear also, least ye should rays^ a myste to dazell the eyes of ignorant
persons? And what did yo^ mean, when you gave the direction of all
Ecclesiastical matters to your four estates only in the Church? And among
other terms, her^ speaking of the Christian Princes, ye call their estate the
only high^ authority, and absolute power: but it suffices us, (if ye will
abide by your grant,) that Christian Princes have supreme authority in
Ecclesiastical causes, as for the terms, only and absolute, which are due
only unto Christ; in talking of any others usurpation of them, we kno^^ no
Christian Princes that does usurp them. It is manifest, that our most gracious
Sovereign (the mirror of all Christian Princes of this age) claims or
usurps, Her Ma. claims no such absolute power.
no such only high authority or absolute power, whereby all things in the
Ecclesiastical state ought to be disposed.

Bestow the usurpation of these terms on the Pope, or of some tyrant: or
look your selves (brethren) better unto it. For, you give three things here to
your four Tetrarkes. First, direction: and then, of all Ecclesi^sticall
matters: and that, only to these four in the Church. And were ye not afraid,
least, the fourth term, that is to say, absolute power, would follow in a
myste, to dazel the eyes of ignorant persons? Well, if after absolute, Absolon
follow not also, it is the better.

But let us now with-drawe our selves out of these mystes, and com^ to clearer
coasts, concerning some particular points, what is here granted, or denied to
the Christian Princes by these our Learned discoursing brethren

Others there be, with more color of reason, that refer only indifferent
matters to the disposition of Princes: The learned discourse. Page. 8.
but in determining indifferent matters, they show themselves not to be
indifferent Judges. For, whatsoever it shall please the civil Magistrate or
themselves to call or count indifferent, it must be so holden of all men,
without any further inquiry. But of the Supreme authority of Christian
Princes in Eccles. causes, how far it extends by the word of God, we shall
have better occasion to entreat hereafter, when we have described the eccl.
state.

When under the name and blame of ignorant persons, these Learned discoursers
have answered (as they think) sufficiently; Bridges.
that they have not first treated on the Christian Princes estate, for fear,
least in giving the Prince place, before they had invested in full seazure and
possession, these four Tetrarks in their offices assigned already unto them,
the Christian Prince might be thought to have gotten too great advantage, The
Princes auth. in indifferent matters.
as having his share set ^ut before theirs: and therefore, he is put back,
till all these four be served: under pretense, that if the Prince were served
first: ignorant persons would think, that all the other had their shares from
him, and all depended on him, and that his power might be thought absolute, and
that this were a myste to dazell the eyes of ignorant persons, which might
sound to the Princes great reproach. Least, now the Christian Prince, or any
other his wel-willers, should epsy, that this indeed, were but a myste to
dazell the Princes own eyes, that pretending to stay him, for fear he might
seem to have too much, they might leave him no authority at all, in the
directing and disposing those matters, wherein his Supreme authority most of
all consists, to wit, (be they politic, moral, or Ecclesiastical things)
in matters indifferent: least they might thus seem to spoil the Prince of
all: they come now to answer those men, that yet would leave to the Christian
Prince a Supreme authority in disposing of these indifferent matters.

Others ( say they) there be, with more color of reason, Indifferent matters
referred to the Princes disposition.
that refer only indifferent matters to the disposition of Princes.

Who those others are, they do not name: but we may well perceive, that these
our brethren discoursers favor not greatly those men's opinion, that the
Christian Princes should have any disposing of indifferent matters.
Notwithstanding, because they dare not in plain words deny it: it is worth
the sight, to see how pretyly they fetch it about, in the answering to the
opinion of those others.

And first, they clawe these others, how-beit with a hard curricombe, that
they at least have more color of reason, yet not reason, but color of reason:
Which rough or gentle yielding somewhat to them, at least of a color, must
serve for a reasonable color, to seem to give them something, though (save a
color) nothing: both to bereave these others of their reason, and the Chr.
Princes of all their Supreme auth. in indifferent matters. And indeed, as
they tell their tale, they drive it to as little reason, as they can, for in
saying: they refer only indifferent matters to the disposition of Princes:
they plainly insinuate, that these others should say, that the Princes are not
only the chief or Supreme, but also, the only disposers of indifferent
matters: and this also our brethren affirm of indifferent matters
indefinitely; as though, not some, but all indifferent matters, were in the
only disposition of Princes, at their pleasure.

Now, although that in some things, which of their nature are indifferent,
all laws, of God and man, have had no small regard, of those that are called
Principum placita, Princes cou^sellers to give advise.
drawing near to the kind of her Majesty's Proclamations: yet what good
Prince has ever reigned, (were he never so wise,) even Solomon himself, but
he had his counsel? Not to give authority and life to his decrees in such
indifferent matter^, which lies (I grant) only in the Princes disposition:
but to gi^e ^^uise and counsel upon weighty and mature deliberation, what
were be^^ in all respects, according to the Analogy of Gods word, the
grounds and rule of reason, and all other things to be considered, for the
aduanc^ment of Gods glory, the establishment of the Princes estate, and the
b^nefite of the commonweal. But howsoever any other Princes have ^bused
their authority, and followed their own disposition, rather th^n reason in
these matters: or their own reason according to Machiauelle^ rule, rather then
the advice or consents of their wise and goodly Counsel^^ shall we so deem
rashly, and beyond our duty, of her Ma. our most gracious Sovereign, or of
any other godly Christian Princes? Well then* what say our brethren these
Learned discoursers here-unto, having moved this case? The Princes authority
in disposing indifferent matters.
For, it is at this day a great question, and touches the matter to the
quick, what the Christian Princes authority is, in the disposition of
indifferent matters? Let us now listen to their answer and determination in
this point. Whereby we shall see, what they leave to the Christian Prince, all
or somewhat, Our bretherens motion of this point
ought or naught, in the disposing of these things.

Their motion is this:

Others there be, with more color of reason, that refer only indifferent
matters to the disposition of Princes.

Our breath. answer.
Their answer is this:

But in determining indifferent matters, they show themselves not to be
indifferent Judges.

The reasons of their answer.
This answer they confirm with this reason:

For, whatsoever it shall please the civil Magistrate or themselves to call or
count indifferent, it must be so holden of all men, whithout any further
inquiry.

The breaking off the further answer till hereafter.
And with this answer they break off the matter, saying:

But of the supreme authority of Christian Princes in Eccles. causes, how
far it extends by the word of God: we shall have better occasion to entreat
here-after, when we have described the Eccl. state.

And is this al then, that we shall look for here, concerning this so gre^^ and
important matter? Who moved here this point now? Indeed it w^^ looked for
before. But why at the length was it now moved, and shall not now be
thoroughly answered, but thus be posted off, till better occasion here-after?
Here was a very good occasion, and moved by your selves, and the matter
weighty and necessary: and who would not now even have said to him self,
although some great business or frien^^ had called him away? Nay, soft, I will
stay a while, and here these o^^ brethrens Learned discourse and answer, in
proving and determining of this great point: and then be gone. But we may now
be gone when we li^t, we have our answer here alre^die, such an one as it is:
and till better occasion hereafter, we must be content with this. Well, and
there be no remedy, then content: we will live in hope.

But then (Brethren) forget not the matter quite and ^leane, when that better
occasion hereafter comes. But it is an old saying, Omne promissum est aut
debitum aut dubium. I doubt w^ must take this answer for all, in this Learned
Discourse. For, hereafter, when our brethren at the end of all this their
Learned Discourse, take their better occasion ( as they think) to treat more
largelee of the supreme authority of Christian Princes in ecclesiastical
causes, how far it ex^endeth by the word of God: there is, fair and well,
better and worse, more and less, ne gry quidem, not so much as one word
mentioned of indifferent matters. And is this indifferent dealing in such a
matter? But since it is so, least we should go empty away, we must take this
or none for an answer. The objection propounded by themselves, was this:

Others there be with more color of reason, that refer only indifferent
matters to the disposition of Princes.

To this they answer. But in determining indifferent matters, they show
themselves not to be indifferent judges.

This answer beginning with a But, is given rhetoricallie Ex abrupto. The
weighing of our brethrens answer.
Uttering (as it were, for quicker ^^spatch, in a Learned Discourse,) the one
half, or part of the answer, by which they would have us to gather their
whole mind: as who should say: it is true which these others affirm, How far
our brethren grant to the Princes disposing indifferent matters.
that refer only indifferent matters to the disposition of Princes: all this
we gladly grant and yield unto. But in determining indifferent matters, they
show themselves no^ to be indifferent judges.

Is not this (brethren) the meaning of your answer? For I would be loath
wittinglie to misconster you. Howbeit, to all that shall be indifferent judges
of us both, I hope, they will say, I have more then color of reason, thus to
conster your word^. You have moved here a weighty objection: Your full,
plain, and resolute answer is expected. If ye say nothing at all unto it:
either it might be thought, that ye rejected it, as a matter not worthy to be
answered: (and why then did ye move it?) Or ^lse, saying nothing thereunto:
the old rule may hap to fasten on you: Qui tacet, videtur cons^ntire: He that
holds his peace, does seem to consent. Notwithstanding, that is but
seeming, which though it enforce not, yet still it carries more then color of
Reason, that by all probability, the party yields. And it is commonly, and
in some cases necessarily taken, pro confess^, as a clear grant. But if a
man of purpose, will take upon him to ^nswere to that, which is objected either
by others or by himself, and answer only by way of exception, as you here
expresselie begin with this exception, But: what can that intend, but that ye
freely grant, to all the objection, so far forth as is not expre^^ed nor
cont^ined, wi^^in the compass of your exception? And this goes beyond your
mist of videtur, it seems: and I plainly take it for a plain grant.

Our brethren grant it, and yet find fault with them that grant it
Now if ye grant to the opinion of these, whom ye call others, that refer
only indifferent matters to the disposition of Princes: why do ye so
minceinglie, or rather odiouslie say of them: they do it with more color of
reason, as though they had no reason, but a color of reason for it? And what
reason or color of reason have you to propose i^, and grant it, and yet to
find fault with them that do auouche it* If y^ say, ye find fault with the
abuse of it: that is nothing to the objection, which was, whether only
indifferent matters were to be referred to the Princes disposition. But ( say
you) in determining indifferent matter^ they show themselves not to be
indifferent judges. So that, if they showed themselves to be indifferent
judges, in determining indifferent matters: then they did well, and ye will
allow Christian P^inces to have authority, in the disposition of indifferent
matters.

Who are these now, that in determining indifferent matters, show themselves
not be indifferent judges? Who are these not indifferent judges.
If ye mean those others, with their color of reason: with what color of
reason refer ye this to them, who (as ye say) refer only indifferent
matters to the disposition of Princes? And how then are they become such
determiners and judges of indifferent matters, referring them only to the
Princes disposition? What judgment or determination is that in these others,
that has no disposition of the matters, whereon they should judge and
determine, but refers the disposition to the Prince? And what disposition is
that of the Prince, if these others and not the prince, be the judges and
determiners of it? If ye say these others find out only, what be indifferent
matters, and the Prince only does dispose them, how they shall-be used, when
by these others they are determined and judged to be indifferent: Mistaking
indifferent for not indifferent.
where is then the fault? In mistaking matters not indifferent, for
indifferent: and indifferent, for not indifferent: and so in determining
indifferent matters, they show themselves not to be indifferent judges. And who
do thus? these others, that refer only indifferent matters to the
disposition of Princes. The Princes right hereby not prejudiced.
What is this to the Princes right, in the disposition of indifferent matters?
The right of the Prince herein, may remain intier, for all this abuse of
others. So that (I hope) we shall sooner agree, then we were aware on. For, so
that Christian Princes may have their right inuiolablie reserved: I dare
hazard thus far of all good Christian Princes, and will presume (by her
Majesty's leave) to give warrant for our most gracious Sovereign, that she
wi^^ not abuse her authority, nor has done: nor (if any others have abuse^
her authority herein, committed by her Majesty unto them) would ^ainteyne
them, or allow thereof. The Prince slandered.


But all this will not serve. For, under pretense of this abuse, though done
by others, which other^ notwithstanding are not named: not only they
(whosoever they be) in a^thoritie under her: but also her Majesty her self is
most unworthily defaced, and her right herein, Her may. right and doings
unworthily defaced.
which cannot be denied, but for a show is granted unto, (albeit not so
neither in express words, but in necessity of consequence is euicted from
them) is here clean undermined, and with a reproch^full contumely
ouerturned. Pretending not only that the Prince disposes all these things
amiss, according to the wrong determining of others: but that the Prince
joins with these others, in the wrong determining and judging of these
matters. And that either the Prince and they, or else the Prince or they, rule
all at their own pleasure, disposing of indifferent matters for not
indifferent: and of not indifferent, for indifferent: and so, in determining
indifferent matters, show themselves not to be indifferent judges.

For, whatsoever it shall please the civil magistrate, or themselves, to call
or count indifferent, it must be so holden of all men, without any further
inquiry.

What do they (brethren)? say me that again: do they deal thus with every
matter whatsoever? And at their own pleasure, whatsoever it shall please them?
And have they no better proof, then their bare calling or cou^ting it to be
indifferent? is that all the reason they allege? And would they heerevpon
only, have it holden for such a maximie, that, not only it may, but it must
be so holden, and that, of all men: and that, without any further, so much as,
inquiry? This is a very strange dealing: this is an heinous matter indeed. If
the matter go thus: alas poor men, I cannot greatly blame you, if ye mislike
such evil dealing, and thought them not to be indifferent judges.

But (I beseech you brethren) who are they that use such dealing? The civil
magistrate, or themselves. What? The civil magistrate? God forbid. Take heed
what ye say, yea, vnsaye that again. No, no, we say (you will say) the civil
magistrate. And will ye so indeed? Whom then mean ye by the civil
Magistrate? For, The civil magistrate.
all our question was about Princes, and those not Heathen, but Christian
Princes And we (will you say) by the civil magistrate, do mean also the
Christian Prince. Well then (brethren) I now perceive your meaning. Neither
do I deny, but that the term (civil magistrate) is a fit and reverend
term, as time and place serves. Howbeit, here treating of the supreme
authority of Christian Princes, to come in (as before in a mist ye did, and
now again, and that openly) with a term, that may as well fit the great
Turk, or any Heathen, Infidel, profane, or wicked Prince, as a Christian
Prince: and speaking of not indifferent judges, to call here the Christian
Prince, only and in general, the Civil magistrate, as though it were some
Ciuilian, or judge in the Civil law, or some other inferior Magistrate, under
the Prince: Quam contemptim? quam inciuile?

But would God, this were the greatest fault in this discourse, to stumble now
and then, on a course term, though some what unfitting for so learned
discourses, and more unfit in this treatise for the majesty and reverence of
the Christian Prince, to be termed by. But let terms pass, and tend to the
charge. Not only others, but also the Christian Prince, is here charged and
accused by the subject, of an heinous crime: that whatsoever shall please the
civil Magistrate, The subjects accusation of the Prince.
( meaning the Prince) or themselves ( meaning others in authority called by
the Prince) To call or count indifferent, it must be so holden of all men,
without any further inquiry. What a sore and sharp accusation is this? And
what a number of weighty branches hang thereon? For a Prince, a Christian
Prince, yea the own liege, natural, and most godly Christian Prince: of the
subjects, yea, of the own natural, loyal, and sworn subjects, yea, of us
protestant reformed Christian subjects: yea, of those that pretend to be the
most zealous, godly, learned, faithful Ministers subjects, to be thus
burdened and exclaimed upon. If this had been true: yet would it have required
a more reverent admonition And if it be false: then, to have been spoken in
never so great secret, is both a sin grievous before God, and to our own
estate, dangerous. But to accuse the Prince openly of so foul^ a matter, not
only before God and his Angels: but to publish it in the hearing of all your
fellow subjects: to thrust it out in print to other nations, to the wide world,
to perpetual memory: and as it were, in tables of Brass, to set it down in
a plotforme, and in a Learned Discourse of Ecclesiastical government: that
the Civil Magistrate, pointing as it were with your finger, to that so
gracious Christian Prince, under whom both you and we do so happily live:
to whom we all do owe obedience, love, duty, honor, fealty: to whom by so
many great benefits we be obliged: that her Majesty does deal with us so
violently, so wilfully, so vni^silie, that whatsoever the please to call or
count indifferent, it must be so houlden of all men, The heighnousnesse of this
slander, ^ot to be an indifferent judge.
without any further inquiry: What greater crime almost can ye lay to any,
not Christian Princes, but barbarous tyrants charge, in such a matter, then
here ye have done? For, any to be called a Judge not indifferent, that is
appointed to be a judge: is to charge him with a fore matter: that either of
ignorance (which is too bad in a judge,) or of knowledge (which is worse) he
is an affectionate, partial, corrupt, and not a just judge. For, what of all
these, and worse, if worse can be in a judge, is not contained in this
infamous term? He is not an indifferent Judge. When a Judge determines a
doubt or controversy, iudiciallie, then to be not indifferent, is the manifest
perverting of his office. For, what is the cheifest point of a Judges office,
but to give just judgment, and that justly? Thou shall not (says God unto a
Judge, Leuit. 9.) do unjustly in judgment, thou shall not favor the person
of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but thou shalt judge thy
neighbor justly. The cheifest point^ of a Judges office.
And what is justice, but, Suum cuique tribuere, to give to every party and
part that, that apperteineth to the same: so that if there be accepting of the
persons, more then of the waighing of the causes: if right be not ministered
indifferently to all: if the skoales be not of themselves of like poyse, other
wise then as the weight of the matter that is put in them, causes the one to
weygh down the other: and if the tongue of the balance incline not down that
way, after the heavier weight: if were even against the course of nature. And
if the Judge, into whose hand God has put the sword of Justice, should not
strike right, but clean ouerthwarte: condemn the innocent, justify the
guilty, say good is evil, and evil is good: light is darkness, and
darkness is light: sower is sweet, and sweet is sower: false is true, and
true is false: not indifferent is indifferent, and indifferent is not
indifferent: then indeed he were a Judge not indifferent, but unjust and false.
The dang^r of this accusation.
Such not indifferent Judges God accursseth, and will root them out. Because,
where they execute not their own, but (as Iosaphat calls them) the
judgments of God: they pervert them to Gods dishonor, to the maintenance of
wrong and falsehood, and to the injury and oppression of the people. This
therefore is a most dreadful accusation.

If ye reply, that ye speak this of others, not of Princes, that in
determining indifferent matters they show themselves not to be indifferent
Judges: had ye said no more thereof, but so left it in suspense, what we might
gather by this word they: although it had been spoken very suspitiouslie, to
say: others there be, with more color of reason, that refer only
indifferent matters to the disposition of Princes: but in determining
indifferent matters, they show themselves not to be indifferent Judges: which
they, do thus show themselves? The Princes to whose disposition the matters
be referred? Or these others that refer them to the disposition of Princes?
Because here this word they, might be doubtfullie taken: and we ought not to
conster doubtful words odiouslie, to the worste part, if they may be
construed to the better: had ye therefore gone no further in the matter, and
not your selves made your meaning plain, and withal a great deal worse: I
might have been thought to have offered you as great wrong, in threaping that
sense on your words, as your words offer great wrong to Princes, in burthening
Princes with so great a slander. But when as upon these words: they show
themselves not to be indifferent Judges: The Prince sclandered.
ye pursue it at the hard^ heels, with this illatiue cause: For, whatsoever
it shall please the Civil Magistrate, or themselves, to call or count
indifferent, it must be so holden of all men without any further inquiry: do
ye not most apparantlie (to any that has but his common sense) infer this
sentence on the other? The Prince directly accused so well as others in
authority.
And although ye utter it disiunaiuelie, saying: The Civil Magistrate or
themselves, and not jointly, the Civil Magistrate and themselves: do ye not
speak it of the one as well as of the other? Yea, and place the Prince in this
crime, before the other, as of the twain, the more culpable?

If this be not a great ouershooting of your duties, a foul forgetfulness of
your estate and calling, and a very sore crime for the subie^^ to burden the
Prince withal: then with all my heart I cry God mercy, and I cry you mercy
too (my brethren) and will be most ready to make all the amends I may, for
mistaking this to be so great a fault in you, that ye have laid here so great
a fault, unto your and our Princes charge. And though I would (God he knows)
be most woe and loathe, The greeuousnesse of our brethoffence in this slander.
to be found culpable of such a crime, as to become an accuser of my brethren,
be the matter never so true, and much more loath, being false: yet could I
rather wish, to sustain all punishment of a slaunderer, then that you or any
other could prove, such foul matter as this is, in her Majesty. For what one
word have ye brought in all this your Learned Discourse, The Prince Slandered
to proou^ that the Prince inforceth you, to hold any one thing as indifferent,
that is not indifferent?

And now (brethren) alleging no one proof of any such matter not
indifferent, to be holden indifferent: consider better with your selves, what
ye have here done against the Lords anointed, against your only, so good,
and gracious Sovereign: who has of you hitherto deserved so well, and shall
she now of you her subjects, be rewarded so ill? How^ should you not be ashamed
to be thought so unthankful? yea, not tremble and quake, to be found so
undutiful? Not so much for fear only, (...) incur the danger of her
Majesty's indignation: for, (God be blessed (...) it) we have a most mild and
merciful Princess, ready to forgive yo^. But what will ye answer to
Almighty God, ( for I hope, ye fear God more then man) and God ( whose
anointed her Majesty is) gives this straight charge to every subject, Exodus
22. Thou shall not rail upon (...) Judges, neither shall thou speak evil of
the ruler of thy people. No, Reproach (...) the Prince (says Solomon) so much
as in thy thought: Neither speak th^^ evil of the rich, in thy bed chamber:
for the foul of the air shall carry thy voice, and that which has wings
shall declare the matter, Ecclesiast. 10. And yet (brethren) have not you
feared with open mouths, to cry o^^ these speeches in the air, and add your
paper wings unto them, to fly about in the world. Pinion therefore (my
brethren) these wild wings: lay your hands on your mouths, and acknowledge
this great fault, that ye have committed: Leave these contumelious speeches,
fitter for enemies then for Subjects: cry God and her Majesty in your hearts
heartily mercy, and with humble reverence and good opinion, submit your selves
to her Majesty's disposition of these matters.

And as I hope (on better aduising of these your unadvised dealings) ye will
not be grieved thus to do: so I trust that God, Inconsiderate zeal.
and under GOD her Majesty, ( considering that all this has been risen on a
feruencie of zeal (I grant) to Gods glory, but not according to the
knowledge and learning, whereof you persuade your selves, and not of any evil
will ye bear her Majesty, but otherwise, love, honor, obey her, and wish
as well as we, withal your hearts unto her) will most readily both forgive
and forget all these your distempered speeches and demeanors.

If ye think, ye have not committed so great a fault, since that the matter
( when all is done) is but for indifferent matters: and why then, should the
matter be made so great, the ground being so little? Lessening the cause does
aggrauate the fault.
I pray you (brethren) does the lessening of the matter, lessen the fault:
or not rather aggrauate the same? And yet, who make this great ado, and this
foul out-crie on the Prince for indifferent matters? Whereof (in the mean
while) ye cannot deny, but the Prince has the disposition: and when she has
disposed them, then to cry out on her disposition of them, on this fashion,
that she disposes them so, that if she call or count them indifferent, it
must be so holden of all men without any further inquiry: call ye this (my
masters) a small matter? Does not the importance even of all religion hang
upon it? For, if by this sclander, the Prince please to call or count
indifferent any one, or all the articles of our faith, it must be so holden
of all men without any further inquiry. May they not then dispose thus of
all religion, and alter the same as it pleases them? The very Antichriste of
Rome, This accusation reaches further then we accuse the Pope.
went never yet so far, neither do we burden him to have gone so far, in
all his intolerable usurpation, although, he come very near unto this
blasphemy.

Indeed the Pope and his blasphemous raylers, most impudentlie do lay such
crimes unto our Princes charge, and yet hardly they go so far as this
reaches. And shall we then our selves (to confirm their most shameful lies)
accuse our own so blessed a Prince, with so outrageous and apparent a
slander? It helps not that he^ Majesty is not by name accused.


If ye think, ye are to hardly pressed, as speaking these things against
her Majesty, whereas ye name her Majesty not at all, nor ^nye other Prince
particularly. I confess, ye show herein a point of wit and learning* in
this your Learned Discourse, to learn us, that although we sustain a snubbe
for an unseemly term: yet to save our selves upright, and out of danger, in
speaking of Princes, it is good to speak somewhat more at randon, and not of
this Prince, nor of that Prince, but in general terms, of the Civil
Magistrate, and then cannot one Prince find himself, more touched then an
other: or at least, though they see themselves gleeked at, yet cannot such
holdfast be taken on their words. Indeed if ye delte thus with meaner persons,
it were more tolerable, to put a case of John a Style, or of Ly homo, an
Indiuiduu^ vagum would save all cleanly, and might be counted but a
presupposall.

But when ye treat, not of a thing that might, or might not be doo^^ by
Princes, or by the Civil Magistrate: but flatly auouche things to be done
by them, and withal complain of, and accuse the doing of them: What? do ye
here complain of no body? Or, as if it were, not yet done: do ye cry and
be not touched? Or who offends you? Do all Princes? Or some Princes? Or which
Princes? Nay, (will ye say) we name none. The Civil Magistrate is a term
indefinite. But how indefinite soever it be, either it contains all, some, or
none. If none: why whine ye? If some: name who. If all: ye have mended the
matter very well. But what need this? Will you now also your selves, having
(almost even in your last words) found fault with mystes to dazell the eyes of
ignorant persons, go about here to cast mystes to dazell all men's eyes, with
these indefinite terms of Princes, and of the Civil Magistrate? think ye men
are such ignorant persons, and very fools, that they perceive not, of what
state ye speak, and of whom ye here say, they show themselves? Go to, go
to, I perceive you will show your selves quickly, whom ye mean. Perhaps, some
other reformed Church, not ours: it is not our state that is so disordered:
Neither is it our people, whom^ ye persuade to leave this disordered state of
ours. Of ours? What sai^ I? No, not of ours: and to embrace that most
beautiful order of Ecclesiastical regiment, which God so manifestly does
bless and prosper in our neighbors hand: it is not our Princes disposition of
indifferent matters, that ye mislike: it is not our Prince, nor others in
authority under our Prince, that (ye say) in determining indifferent matters,
show themselves not to be indifferent Judges: it is not our Civil
Magistrate, or any others under our Civil Magistrate, that ye mean, dea^^
thus with their subjects, that whatsoever it shall please the Civil
Magistrate, or themselves, to call or count indifferent, it must be so holden
of all men, without any further inquiry.

Fie, Fie, (my masters,) do ye thus so sotte and soothe your selves i^ so
Learned a Discourse, to think so courslie of all other men, as that they know
not a B from a battle-dore. Who seethe not whom ye mean (...) ye mean by all
these speeches? The Prince with others sclandered*
And what Prince and other persons ye note, and whom, ye were as good, (save
for fashions sake) to have even pointed out with your finger, and named them by
express name. But deceive not your selves, think not thus to bleare all men's
eyes with these general speeches. For, how-so-euer ye may dazell the eyes of
the ignorant persons: all men, that have any sight, or wit, not blinded with
affection, do see, as cleere^ as noone day, whom ye aim at. Yea, the blind
eyes of the adversaries see it and rejoice at it, and all godly zealous, with
discretion and knowledge, do see it, and lament it. And all her Majesty's
obedient faithful subjects, your unfeigned well wishing brethren in the Lord,
but herein greatly dissenting from you, do see it with our eyes bedewed with
our tears, and in our hearts bewail and rue the view thereof: praying for
you, that God would open your eyes and move your hearts to consider better of
these inconsiderate dealings.

But these our brethren perhaps, will bid us pray for our selves herein, and
not for them. For, if there be any fault about these matters, Our bretherens
accusation of others with the Prince.
they impute it not to her Majesty, so much as unto others. And therefore they
will say, if ye mark our words well, ye shall find that we rather burden
others then the Prince. Others? Who be these others? Have they no names
neither? Nay (will they say) we name none, look you to that, and take it among
you. As for us, we expresselie say, whatsoever it shall please the Civil
Magistrate or themselves, etc.

Yea (my learned masters) are ye good at that? Nay, then I see we must mark
your words better, and whatsouer the Princes calling or counting must be
holden without any further inquiry: we must yet by your leave, enquire
further, and take better hold of these your words, and call ye to account
also, not only for the Civil Magistrate, but for them, whom here ye call
and count these themselves, and others that ye mention.

If ye would post it off to others, to excuse your selves of any ill meaning
ye had, to blemish her Majesty: I hold well with it: neither do I urge your
words, to the intent to accuse you, but so far as I may, rather to excuse
you. Wishing you (where your accusation of her Majesty is too apparent) that
you should with submission and amendment, acknowledge the ouershooting of your
duties. For, what does this relieve your accusation, if not only the Prince,
but others also be accused of these things? If there be others besides the
Prince, well may it lessen the Princes fault, but it does not clear it; if
in giving the disposition of the matters to the Prince, and placeing herein
the Prince before them, ye make not the Prince rather principal in the
fault, then accessarie

But because here are others with the Prince accused: may we be so bold to
inquire further of these others? What have others to do in these matters?
What? Whatsoever it shall please themselves also, to call or count
indifferent, it must be so holden of all men, without any further inquiry.
Where in these others are accused.
Do they so? Then are they as deep in, as the Prince. And do they all this,
without the Prince: or with the Prince? We say: whatsoever it please the Civil
Magistrate or themselves. Then, if ye mean it disiunctiuelie without the
Prince: the Princes fault was by it self, as theirs also by themselves, and
the one neither burtheneth nor eases the other.

Nay (will they say) we mean not so, but by the one or the other, we
conclude them both. But the question was, of the Princes authority and
disposing. Belike then the Prince does not dispose these indifferent matters
all alone, nor whatsoever pleases him or her self: but, whatsoever pleases
themselves: so that, the Prince has some others assistant, at least for
enformation what these things are, The Princes clearing, not to dispose these
matters all alone.
yea to be determiners and judges, to have the same so called and accounted.
Here then, the Prince plaieth not the Tyrants part: this is not, Sic volo sic
iube^, stet pro ratione voluntas, thus will I have it, thus I command it be:
let that stand for reason, whatsoever pleases me: but contrariwise, here is
the token of a good Prince, that will not dispose of these matters alone, but
call others unto this deliberation. Well then, the Prince is cleared of that
point. And now if there be no greater, or not more faults in these others, to
abuse the Princ, ( for ought that I see) the Prince will soon be quitte.

But now, though the Prince be of a good nature and means well: yet great
fault may be in these others, who to flatter the Prince, will refer all
matters to the princes disposition. Such I grant there may be, yea, there is
no prince so good, whom flatterers tempt not now and then.

But (brethren) take heed here, that you do not eftsoons abuse the prince,
Whether the fault be in these others.
under pretense of speaking against such flatterers: and that ye^ also abuse
none others in authority about the prince, by such odious and suspicious
speeches. It is (ye know) the common practice of the arrantest rebels, not to
pretend so much their quarrel directly against the prince: as to say, Rebels
practice.
the prince ( whom still they praise to be naturally of a good disposition)
has others of counsel and authority, by whom the Prince is lead and abused.
And these others, they would have only removed. I do not (brethren) bring
this, as an instance to resemble your doings: but that ye should beware, least
ye should resemble them. And yet as it is good for princes to take heed, what
counsel of others they do follow: so if this Prince here, whom ye call the
Civil Magistrate, examine these others, of whom ye have moved this
suspicion, whether they be such ^^atterers, yea or no: need they desire any
better witnesses for them, than your selves? For who-so-euer they be, (because
it might be odious to inquire their names) they seem to be no flatterers of
the Prince. For your selves say of them: others there be, These other^ give
the Prince no absolute power, etc.
that refer only indifferent matters to the disposition of princes. In
which words, although they give to princes an authority of disposing: yet
they restrain it only to indifferent matters. So that, they give not princes
that only high authority and absolute power, that all things in the
Ecclesiastical state are to be disposed by the Civil Magistrate: or that all
the regiment of the church depends on the supreme authority of the
Christian princes: but the disposition of princes ( by these men, whom ye ter^e
others,) is restrained only to indifferent matters. Whereby it seems, These
others fear God.
that these others, are men of conscience and knowledge, having the fear of
God before their eyes, nor give the prince the disposition of any one thing,
which God already has disposed. So that hitherto, and that by your selves,
these others also are acquitted, except there be further matter against them.

But ( say our brethren) in determining indifferent matters, they show
themselves not to be indifferent Judges.

What? are these others then, These others intrude not themselves into the
office of judging.
Judges also and determiners of these matters? These are great offices: who
called them hereunto? The prince called them to be examiners, and the
judgment and determination of these matters, apperteyneth to their office. And
did they not then intrude themselves? No. But they show themselves not to be
indifferent Judges. Why so? Are they partial to themselves? These others take
not the disposing to themselves, but give it to the Prince.
And Judge or determine, that indifferent matters, belong to their own
disposition? No, they refer that, from themselves, to the disposition of
princes.

How are they partial then? Belike they refer it to the Prince, because they
are matters that only concern the Prince, and not themselves. Nay, they
concern themselves, as much, or more, then any other: and the judgments and
determinations what is the nature of those matters, do especially apperteine
unto them. Do they so? Both these others and the Prince cleared.
see how these things fall out, both for the Prince and for these others.

The Prince has here authority to dispose of indifferent matters. How-be-it
the prince will not dispose of them alone, but chooses and calls others,
which by their office and function, are most skillful, to discern indifferent
matters from matters not indifferent, which intrude not themselves into the
judgment and determining of these matters: which are so far off to encroche
any advantage or authority to themselves hereby, that they refer these
matters to the princes disposition: Nevertheless the prince will dispose
nothing, but that which these men shall be Judges and determiners of it, to be
such an indifferent matter, as whereof the Prince may dispose: neither does
the Prince impose any thing upon them, against their wills, nor craves any
thing of them, to Judge or determine, this way or that way, what is, or what
is not, an indifferent matter, but leaves that free to these others judgment
and determination. Here the subjects give the Princes their due, and go no
further: here the Princes take no more then is their due, nor all that
neither, and but by the subjects own consent, and by their advise, judgment
and determination, of the matters indifferency, to whose skill and function it
chiefly apperteineth. Here neither the Princes can complain of the
subjects, to intrude themselves, and to usurp upon the Princes authority and
disposition, Neither the subjects can complain on the Princes, to encroche on
matters disposed of already by GOD, to rule all alone, to determine all by
self-will, or to take advise of those that have no skill, or to impose on them
matters that concern them, without their own^ consents and determinations.

O what a pitiful piece of work is here. Is not this a heinous matter, and
this Prince worthy in such a Learned Discourse, to be coursed and cried out
upon: yea to be blazed forth in reproach to all the world, for this so great
and foul a crime? But what then shall we say to these others, these most
perilous others, who-so-euer they be, these others, that are the causers of all
this the Princes doing? For they, they of all others, are such off-scowrings,
out-parings, woonderments, and gazing-stockes of the whole world, as he was, on
whom the Jews cried, Acts, 22. Away with such a fellow from the earth,
for he is not worthy to live.

How indifferently these others are thus accused for these indifferent matters.
Ha, brethren, is this your indifferent dealing with Christian Princes, about
indifferent matters, and that with your own so gracious Sovereign: (yea, let
it be what Christian Prince ye please, to shift it unto) and is this also your
indifferent dealing, with such others as these are, even by your own
testimonies of them? How can ye (for very^ shame) avowe this saying, that this
Prince, and these others, do call and count indifferent matters, whatsoever
pleases themselves? What? Quicquid libet licet? Or Quicquid licet libet? Do
ye mean, that (without all regard of GOD, The further parts of this accusation.
of their callings, of their people, of the matter,) they run altogether on a
head, and follow only their own pleasure, without any deliberation of the
matter? This were not only wilful and wicked, but mere brutish. Or mean
ye, when they have deliberated and thoroughly debated thereon, that that
(whatsoever it be) pleases them to call and count for indifferent, which
they shall find indeed so to be? Yea, but howsoever they do it: yet,
whatsoeeuer shall please themselves to call or count indifferent, that must be
so holden of all men.

What? of all the nations in the world? What have they to do with all men?
Nay, of all men, that they have to do with all, as the subjects to that
Prince. And why not I pray you? Would ye have the subjects to despise or
disobey their determination? Or to esteem those things which they call and
account indifferent, to be not indifferent? And not indifferent to be
indifferent? And still to use them, Whether things lawfully determined are not
so of the subjects to be holden inuiolabl^e.
as they their selves listed, at their pleasure? Or that things indifferent of
their own nature, should be used still according to their own nature:
indifferent things indifferently, by every man at his own disposition? Or
that whether any used them or no, it makes no matter which end go forward?
Would ye have the subjects still at this liberty? But what need then any
disposing of them at all? Or any question of them? Or to trouble the Prince,
or any others about them? Or what authority at all call ye that, either of
Judging, determining, or disposing of them, when every man may do as he
please, and is not so much as bounden to hold them, or to account of them, as
they be judged, determined, and disposed, but may still dispose of them at his
own pleasure, without any restraint or controllement? For so they might have
done before, and as good never a whit as never the better. If a matter be
lawfully adjudged, determined, and disposed: why should it not of all men
that live under those Judges, determiners and disposers, be so holden and
accounted? Either it is an order, or it is none: and if an order, either to be
counted and holden orderly, or as good make none.

Yea, but (say they) must it be so holden and accounted of all men, without
any further inquiry? And what would ye inquire further? How far they are
further to be inquired upon.
Would ye call it again in question? And when should we then have done? And
what would ye inquire upon? Whether it were so? That is already judged and
determined. Whether it were to be observed and holden or no? That is likewise
already disposed. And how would ye inquire? as those that would gladly
learn, what is Judged and determined of the matters indifferency, and what is
disposed to be so holden and accounted? And understanding the same, believe it
so to be, and obey it? Or to be fresh Judges, determiners and disposers of it?
And yet when ye have so done, may not other say as much on your judgment,
determination, and disposition? So that, if further inquiry for these matters
shall be thus admitted: then shall none of all these matters be ever fully
judged determined or disposed: but still further inquiries made one after
another, and never an end, never any certain resolution of these matters: but
herein to be always like those, of whom the Apostle 2. Tim. 3. speaks, The
calling things determined into further question.
Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Would ye
have it thus? No, if it were once thoroughly inquired upon, it should go no
further. And who should be these last and full inquisitors, once for all? Will
our brethren step out and say: that will we be? You? Who are you? Princes or
subjects? Nay, but subjects also, as these others are, some of the clergy,
and some of the laity. What, and would you be Judges and determiners? Why
not, as well as those others, sith the matters concern us also. And would ye
be Judges and determiners without the Prince, and without these others: or with
them? Nay, we would Judge and determine with them. And must they then reuerse
their own former judgments and determinations? Or else how is it a further
inquiry? Let them choose: we will inquire of the matters further. What,
uncalled of the Prince? Nay, the Prince shall call us. And will ye prescribe
the Prince to call you? Then you call the Prince, rather than the Prince you.
We will not prescribe nor compel the Prince so to do: but if the Prince call
the others and not us, we will call both the Prince and them (by their leaves)
not indifferent Judges. And what if the Prince cut off both them and you, and
(to void partialllie and stinte all strife) will Judge all alone? Will ye then
stand to the Princes judgment? If the Prince Judge as we would have it: else
not. And must it be as every one of you would have it? What if some would
have this, and some would have that? Must every man, or some for all, be
admitted on your side with the others? Nay, not all, that were confusion, and
cannot well be done: but we would compromitte our voices unto some. And what
now, if ye had already all this, that ye seem to desire: and those some for
you, that have been in the Judging and determining the indifferency of such
matters, have assented unto the orders of them that are already disposed? Or
were by the most and best part of the assembly so evicted: that the matter
has been sufficiently inquired of, examined, Judged, determined, and
resolved already, and thereupon by the Prince also disposed? Will not all this
yet content you? No, no: we will then say and still cry out, that In
determining indifferent matters, they show themselves not to be indifferent
Judges. And why will ye thus complain on them? For, whatsoever it shall
please the civil Magistrate, or themselves, to call or count indifferent: it
must be so holden of all men, without any further inquiry.

This then (I perceive) must be the fa-burden of all this song. The Prince
shall have a title of supreme authority, ^he conclusion of all this accusation.
to dispose indifferent matters: and others shall inquire, judge, and
determine, which be and which be not indifferent matters. But if the Prince or
these others, whosoever they be, either inquire of, or Judge, or determine, or
dispose, otherwise of them, then shall please such as these our brethren the
Learned Discoursers: not only they may course them for it, How this touches
all politic matters.
and discourse these matters again more learnedlie: but it must be still free
for all men, when and as often, and how they please, to inquire further, on all
that is done, and revoke all their former inquiries, judgments,
determinations and dispositions: or else they shall have this peale roong them:
In determining indifferent matters, they show themselves not to be indifferent
Judges. For, whatsoever it shall please the Civil Magistrate, or themselves to
call or count indifferent, it must be so holden of all men without any further
inquiry. And now if there be any indifferent Judge, let him Judge ( I beseech
him) indifferently: If they deal thus with indifferent matters, ( wherein the
Princes supremacy has the greatest force) what is left to the Prince, or to
any of these others, to enquire, judge, determine, or to dispose upon?

And how now: may not this also reach, How da^gerouslie this accusation
reaches from indifferent matters in eccle. causes to all politic matters
by as much (not color of reason) but substance of reason, to all politic
matters in the commonweal, as well as to these Ecclesiastical, so far
forth as both of them be indifferent? Whereby they may as well, when the
Prince and all the states of the realm, have determined, judged, and disposed,
of any such indifferent matter, cry out on the Prince and all others in the
Parliament, and repeat this sclander in their former leoden: that in
determining indifferent matters, they show themselves not to be indifferent
judges. For, whatsoever it shall please the Civil Magistrate and themselves,
to call and count indifferent, it must be so holden of all men, without any
further inquiry. And thus may all the supreme authority of the Christian
Prince, both in politic and ecclesiastical matters, be clean overthrown:
and every man set at liberty, to exclaim with open mouth on their
sovereign, and of all others in authority: and under pretense of further
inquiry, God knows how far they will run. We see a turbulent and Comicall
beginning, but we see not the lamentable and Tragical ending of these things:
Principiss obsta, sero medicina paratur.

But of the Princes authority in these matters, thus roughly hewed at the
entry, they will here for this time make a pawse, and promise for a while to
go no further, having indeed at this very first step gone over the shoes
already, more then a little to far: and yet would God, they could here have
made a cleanly stop, and not made the matter a great deal worse, but have
rested at these words, saying:

But of the supreme authority of Christian Princes in Ecclesiastical causes,
how fa^^e it extends by the word of God, we shall have better occasion to
entreat hereafter, when we have described the ecclesi. state.

And I pray God, better entreating and treating to: for, this was but a hard
entreating of Christian Princes, and a sorry treaty of their supreme
authority. But belike the moving here of these matters, for the Prince, (
though indeed moved by themselves) in the course of their Learned Discourse of
ecclesiastical government, by their four estates, to be thus but a little
interrupted, by touching only, rather then by treating, of the christian
Princes supreme authority, did some what perhaps disturb and move their
patience. And therefore, as they here till hereafter take their leave: so in
this perturbation at the parting, declaring the cause of their departure now
from them, and why they need not, and will not talk further with them at this
time: in steed of shaking or rather wringing hands, they give them such a
parting blow for a farewell, such a volie for a vale: that it were enough
(unless they handle them gentlier hereafter, at their better occasion) to
dashe all Christian Princes, for all their magnanimity, out of countenance:
yea, to thrust them clean out of Christendom, except they will hold
themselves contented, with such places and authority, as they (after they have
at large described the ecclesiast. state, and fully served all their four
Tetrarks) shall please to assign unto them. And now, declaring their reasons
hereof to every man, thinking (belike) that every man has an interest in
the further inquiry of these matters, they say as follows.

And that it is neither needful nor agreeable to good order of teaching, The
learned discourse. Page. 9. and 10.
to begin first therewith, it may be plain to every man by this reason. The
church of God was perfect in all her regiment, before there was any Christian
Prince: yea, the church of God may stand and does stand at this day in most
blessed estate, where the Civil Magistrates, are not the greatest favorers.
By which it is manifest, that the regiment and government thereof, depends
not upon the authority of Princes, but upon the ordinance of God: who has
most mercifully and wisely so established the same, that, as with the
comfortable aid of Christian Magistrates, it may singulerlie flourish and
prosper: so without it, it may continue, and against the adversaries thereof
prevail. For the church craves help and defense of Christian Princes, to
continue and go forward more peaceably and profitablie, to the setting up of
the kingdom of Christ: but all her authority she receaueth immediately of
God.

In these words our brethren the Learned Discoursers, to break off this
matter, Bridges.
having alleged one of their reasons, ( as we have heard) why they will not
make their first treaty, on the supreme authority of Christian Princes:
which reason was this, that they would not seem to confirm the opinion of
those, to whom (it seems) that all the regiment of the Church depends, on
the Christian Princes supreme authority: and by the way answered (as we have
likewise heard) the opinion of others, that refer indifferent matters to the
Princes disposition: They now conclude this point with another answer, saying:

It is neither needful, To begin with the Princes author. needful.
nor agreeable to good order of teaching, to begin first therewith.

This scruple (I perceive) sticks yet in their stomakes, and peradventure
suspecting, yt they had hitherto said nothing oughtes-worth unto the purpose,
why the Prince in this their Learned discourse, should not have the principal
place: that they might therefore proceed more frankely, this offense being
taken away: (for the Princes supreme authority is no small moate in their
eyes) they will yet, ere they part, confirm it further, with a few more
reasons, and so leave it (as they promised) till hereafter.

And first ( they say) it is not needful to begin first therewith. Whether
it be needful to begin with the Princes authority.
If by needful, they mean necessary: they might seem to say somewhat to
the purpose. For so, it was not needful for them at all, to have entered into
this Learned discourse, nor to have dealt on this wise, nor to have proceeded so
far therein. Neither yet needful, as behouefull for them, or to all the parties
to whom they have communicated the same: but mere needless, and better if
they had dealt less: yea much better, if not at all, but had been deedelesse
to therein. But having unnecessarily intruded themselves into this discourse: I
think it had been very needful, Needful necessary and conuenien^.
though not in necessity, yet of conueniencie and of duty, to have given the
Prince ( being the principal party) the principal place. Yea, had it been
but for very reverence and and comeliness, or to avoid offense and
suspicion, both of the Prince and of many others, especially in this last age
of the world, whereof S. Paul prophesied. 2. Tim. 3. saying: This know also,
that in the last days shall come perilous times, for men shall be lovers of
their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false
accusers, intemperate, fierce, dispisers of them that are good, traitors,
headdie, high minded, lovers of pleasures, more than lovers of God, having a
shadow of godliness, but having denied the power thereof. Turn therefore
away from such, etc.

Since now of such as all these are, we see the manifest experience, both in
the Papists, and in the Anabaptists, in these last days: how much needful
therefore might it well be thought for us, in any treaty of government in
Gods Church, next after Jesus Christ himself, to have preferred none in
place, till we had seen how far the Princes right had stretched. And to
have followed S. Peter's order, who, after he had generally handled the
spiritual state of our Christianity, entering into the treatise of conversation
and government of the Church: first requires submission to Princes, as to the
chief, and then proceeds to the duty of husbands, and wives, of neighbors
one to another, and so comes to the Pastors and the people. Not, that this
order is so needful neither, that it should prescribe: and yet, if the
Apostles at any time give the chiefest place to Princes, Good order of teaching.
which at that time (as our brethren here say) were not yet become Christian
Princes: what would they have done, had they been Christians? And how much
more should we (they now being Christians) when as we treat of the external
Regiment of the Church, next and immediately after Christ, give the first
treatise to Christian Princes, as to the Supreme Governors of the same.
Especially, the Princes, being in lawefull possession of the Supreme
Government, and the same possession established unto them: how needful were
it, (if not necessary,) first to consider the title of them that plead in
possession established, or ever any other Governors be brought in. But needing
not stand so much on need: All things (says Saint Paul) are lawefull
unto me, but all things are not expedient. 1. Corinthians. 10. You needed not
(brethren) to have kept this order of your treatise, but you should have been
more heedefull to that, that is expedient, than to that that is needful. So
that the Princes supreme authority be reserved intyer, (for that is
needful) use your liberty in the order of your treating thereon, a Gods name.

But ye add, that it is neither needful, nor agreeable to good order of
teaching, to begin first therewith.

It will perhaps set your teachers and Seniors out of the order that ye have
placed them in, The beginning with the Princes treatise agreeable to good order
of teaching.
if it clean remove not some of them. And so I grant, it is not agreeable to
your order of teachinge in this Learned discourse. But otherwise, it is
agreeable to all good order of teaching well enough. And I take it to be as
good an order of teaching, as any other. Namely, treating of the order of
Government, first to set down the best and chiefest Governor.

Your selves do teach this Order in your Tetrarchie: first, Teachers, then
Pastors, thirdly Governors, and lastly Deacons. Wherefore (I pray you) do ye
marshall them thus, The order of our brethren in placing their Tetrarkes.
and treat on them afterward at large in this order? ( For I can show you an
other order in Gods word) but that you think this to be a good order of
teaching, to place them according to their dignities. And so you say, page. 15.
the office of teaching is the first and principal office that is in the
Church. If you now ^steeme their dignities thus, and according thereunto give
them their former or later places: since that by your own confession already
past, the Christian Princes have Supreme authority in Eccl. causes, which
non^ of these 4. Tetrarkes, nor all of them have, and so, are higher in
dignity then they all: how is not then the office of the Christian Princes,
the first and principal office in the Church: which you attribute to the
teachers? And why may not by this your own reason, the Princes interest and
office be treated upon, before any of all these Tetrarkes?

No, no, to begin first with the Supreme authority of Christian Princes in
Eccles. causes, The argument to put back the Princes treatise
is neither needful nor agreeable to good order of teaching. But to begin
with all these 4. Tetrarks, first Teachers, then Pastors, then Governors, and
then Deacons, and then to see what remains for the Christian Princes: yea,
yea, that, that, is needful, and is very agreeable to good order of teaching.

O, this is a proper, needful, agreeable, good, and orderly kind of teaching,
is it not? Our bretherens strife for the first place.
But I pray you (my Masters) in this your Learned discourse, teach me one thing
here for my learning. Wherefore make ye all this a-doe, to have the Prince come
after al these 4. Estates? Do ye strive so earnestly (as did, yea, more the^
did the Pharisees) for the highest rooms* that Princes and all, must give
room to these your new Tetrarkes, and that so soon as ever their heads
peep out of the shell? Our Chronicles tell us of the old striving for places
now and then, among the Popish Archbishops: and do you so reprehend all
Archbishops, that not only they must be clean put down, but Princes and all
put back, till every one of these new Tetrarkes come forth, and have taken
their places. Whi^, (brethren) you of all men, should not thus do, who
pretend equality. What, is it to be equal to Princes? or to have equality
in the ministry? You can-not abide these names of Grace, of Honor, of
Lords. Do ye shun the names, and shooue at the matter? And so far, that
Emperors, Kings, Queens, and all Christian Princes, for all their supremacy,
must backarie, and come after you; or else, it is not agreeable to good order
of teaching? If ye teach in this order, it is such a lesson, that (I am
a-fraide) some can not easelie learn it. But for my part, I hope it is not of
any pride in you. Nevertheless, I tell you playnelie, as my friends and
brethren, leave it: for many mislike it, and suspecte it shrewdely, if it be
not of pride, yet, to be no orderly kind of Teaching, nor good and plain
dealing with Christian Princes.

But you say, it may be plain to every man, by this reason.

The Church of God was perfect in all her Regiment, The argument to put back
the treatise of the Princes authority.
before there was any Christian Prince: Yea the Church of God may stand, and
does stand, at this day in most bessed estate, where the Civil Magistrates
are not the greatest favorers. By which it is manifest, that the Regiment and
Government thereof, depends not upon the authority of Princes, but upon the
ordinance of God.

May it be plain to every man by this reason? Every reason or argument, as
it should be good and true, both for form and matter: so it ought to be
directed to the purpose, and to conclude the point that is to be proved. And
then, to every man it is a plain reason.

What now is the point here to be proved?

It is not needful nor agreeable to good order of teaching, to begin first
with entreating of the Supreme authority of Christian Princes in Eccles.
causes. The argument*


This then (being the point to be proved) must by necessary consequence of
the premises, be plainly argued and set down in the conclusion: or else
every man may plainly see, it is no plain reason, nor needful to be yielded
unto, nor agreeable to good order of teaching; but either some intricate
Sophistication, or some unnecessary conclusion, little or nothing pertaining to
the purpose.

Plain dealing (says the Proverb) is a Jewel. Let us therefore see this
plain reason, and the parts thereof, whether it conclude this point, or no.

The Church of God was perfect in all her regiment, before there was any
Christian Prince:

Yea, The Church of God may stand, and does stand at this day in most
blessed state, where the Civil Magistrates are not the greatest favorers.

What is the conclusion?

By which it is manifest, that the Regiment and Government thereof, depends
not upon the authority of Princes, but upon the ordinance of God, etc.

Lo, how plain to every man, and how agreeable to good order of teaching,
in any figure and mood of Syllogism this reason is framed: and how patte the
conclusion of this reason, hittes the point to be proved, which they have here
so lustily avouched, may be plain to every man by this reason.

What, will our Learned brethren here say? Tush, we mean not, in saying: it
may be plain to every man by this reason; to reason so strictly, A Learned
discourse.
according to the order of teaching in Logike: but we reason at large
Rhethorically. This is (ye wotte) a Learned discourse, and therefore we are not
bound to make short conclusions, but according to our title, to show our
Learning in discoursing on it.

Call ye this discoursing? It is a Discourse indeed, but of the coursest
fashion that ever I saw. I know these Discoursers have learning enough, though
they spare it here: yet if they should utter it, I would be loath, for my
part, to contend with them.

But see, how affection in discoursing may carry Learning and all, quite
away, The hurt of too much affection.
so far from reason: that here neither in matter, truth only (which is
principal) is remembered: nor in form and manner, any good order of teaching
is observed; nor yet in the conclusion, the principal point is marked, but
gone clean from, whereunto all the reason should be leaueled.

Well, yet, since this is the best reason, and all, that here, or hereafter
they have, to make this matter plain to every man: The argument a priore.
least perhaps in the parts, or in the conclusion, there might lie hidden some
further matter, or reason, then they would open plain to every man: let us
weighe the parts and conclusion better, and lay them more open, that every man
may perceive plainly, the plain truth, and full validity of this reason.
For this seems to be a great reason, and to have many small reasons in it.

First, on this first and mayor proposition of the same, the Church of God was
perfect in all her regiment, Our bretherens arg. fr^ senioritie.
before there was any Christian Prince: although they make no direct
conclusion thereon, yet they seem to draw an argument, a priore, from the
former, as pleading from the elder hand, by senioritie; and on that also
proceed to the greater perfection, and thereupon reason, as it were, in this
manner.

That which in the regiment thereof, was perfect before the other: that is to
be treated upon before the other.

But the Church of God was perfect in all her regiment, before there was any
Christian Prince:

What follows hereupon but this?

Therefore the Church of God is to be treated upon before Christian Princes.

But the question is not here betwixt the Church of God, Our bretherens
conclusion not in question.
and Christian Princes, whether of them shall first be treated upon. For,
whereas the name of the Church, is an integrall word, and conteyneth the
whole: and the Christian Princes are, though principal parts, yet but
particular parts thereof, included in the whole: and so the question were, as
if one should ask, whether is the man before the head, or the head before the
man? they offer therefore herein an injury to Christian Princes, as seeming to
contend with the whole, and so striued against themselves, being parts of the
whole.

And yet, if a man would make an Anatomy of the whole body, and begin with
the treatise of the head, as the principal part, though the head was not the
first part that was formed, but the heart, or some other, and afterward the
head: yet, beginning with the head, and to treat first of the office and
powers thereof, he should not do a thing disagreeable to good order of
teaching. Or, in the description of a house, though the house was not perfect
till all the parts were made: if he treated first of the court, or of the
hall, or of the roof, which perhaps were builded last: yet might he in
process, orderly describe the whole house.

For our question is not here, of any part compared with the whole: but in
the whole, of any part compared to another. For, as the Christian Princes are
but parts of the Church of God: so these four estates that claim the
direction of all Eccl matters in the Church, are but parts of the Church also.
The argument a Priore.
So that, this first and Mayor proposition, might have been less captious (as
will appear after in the view of the conclusion) and a great deal plainer:
not to say, the Church of God was perfect in all her regiment: but, this kind
of government: or, these only 4. estates in the Church, were Governors, before
there were in the Church of God any Christian Princes.

But because in this proposition, you include here these two things: the one
that these four Tetrarkes ( under the name of the Church) were before any
Christian Princes: the other, that their regiment was in all points of
regiment, a perfect regiment, before that Christian Princes had in the Church
of God any being at all: let us therefore consider a little better, either of
these two things, both of what force they are in consequence, to strengthen
your reason; and of what truth in substance, to give credit to the matter
thereof.

And first, for the force of the reason and argument, A Priore, admitting the
case, A thing is said to be before another in diverse senses.
that these four Tetrarkes were the former: yet, sith Prius est multiplex:
Tempore, Natura, Ordine, Honor: A thing is said to be before an-other, in
diverse respects: either before it in time, or in the nature of the thing, or
in the order of the place, or in the honor of the dignity: we must look to
your tracke, how ye confound these things. For if ye make (as here ye
seem to do) your reason for these Tetrarkes from Senioritie, that because
they were in time before, therefore in the order of treating on them, they must
be placed before: and having encroched thus far: Former in time infers not
former in order, and much less in honor.
creep yet further, that therefore also in dignity, and honor, they must be
set before, to make up the perfection of the Churches Regiment. This must be
cut short, and your Senior in time ( presupposing he were so) must be bidden
to leave his pearching, and draw back with shame, to come after both in order
of place, and in honor of regiment, for any necessity that he can claim,
but to be Master Prior in his own Cell, which is of time only. So that
Aristotle's rule thereof is true: but every cock on his own dunghill: there
let him crow and crake, as fast as he will. And yet notwithstanding not
without exceptions.

Antiquity of time makes a iolie claim. Bonum, quo antiquius, eo melius. A
good thing the more ancient, the better. Howe-be-it, this is not true in all
good things. Neither does this rule so much respect the time, as the nature
and continuance of those good things. So that, it is true in those good
things, which either of their nature are not m^table, or their inutabilitie
does better their state, and so the time is limited till they come to their
perfection. For otherwise, in things that are the worse for wearing, or are
past the periode of their ripeness: the former and the elder are the worse.
And if the former in time be thu^ and yet more, restrained, in his own kind
of foremanship: Former in time.
when the former in time, will wax so proud of his birthright, that he must
needs have place in order, and preferment also in regiment, before all his
younger brethren: I could show you not only many specialties and examples
against it; but you can show no necessary rule, to prescribe upon it, that,
that which was former in time, Examples of the later in time former in order.
must always have the first place in treaty. Except the treaty be, to
discribe the manner how the things began. For though Moses, writing of Gods
creation of the world, set down the manner, and tell what was created the
first day, when as yet other things were not created, and so the second and the
third day, and all the residue, mankind being created last of all: yet cannot
we rightly say, yt he, which would take upon him to treat either by writing or
speaking of Gods works, or of the government of his Church, or of God him
self, which in every respect in nature, time, order, honor, and cause, is
first and before all other things, is tied to this order, so that God must be
first treated upon: or else it is not a treatise agreeable to good order of
teaching. Did S. Paul teach the Romans amiss, when he said, Romans 1. His
invisible things, being understood by his works, through the creation of the
world, are seen, that is, both his eternal power and godhead? Does not
Calvin begin his institutions first with the knowledge of man, and so ascend
to the knowledge of God? Had not Christ a number of Disciples first, out of
whom afterward he chose his 12. Apostles? And yet does not S. Paul 1. Cor. 12.
reckon them up in this order, that God has ordained some in the Church: as
first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers? And Ephesians. 4. He therefore
gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers? Yea, do not your selves also fetch your Seniors pedigree
so high, that ye make them to be Seniors in antiquity of time, both to the
Evangelists, and to the Apostles? And nevertheless in this your treatise ye
place them after them? What, shall we say therefore: it is not agreeable to
good order of teaching, thus to place the^ after: because in the Church of God,
ye say, there was a regiment of the^, before there were Evangelists or
Apostles?

If ye say, ye stand not so much of the placing of them, in respect of the
Prioritie of the time, as of the dignity: saying, Former in honor, not
always former in order.
that ye speak of perfection and of regiment, and therefore in time and
honor also it is before them: and why not then in order of place to have the
former treaty? yet follows this no more the^ the other. Is not God before al
things, in all respects? And yet first or last, by good order of teaching may
be treated upon. And as in the regiment of a man's life, though he first
apprehend a thing with his senses, and his senses conueigh it to the
intellectual powers: besides, that his senses be freshest when he is young and
vnexperthis science grows after upon long experience, when his senses decay:
again, Former in dignity.
his habites of virtues arise first on his actions precedent, and felicity
succeeds on his habites last of all, though in dignity of honor first and
chiefest: yet may any man treating of these natural and moral matters,
pertaining to the regiment of man's life, either (per synthesin) begin with
the parts, and so by little and little join and knitte them altogether, till
he come to the highest and make up the whole: or begin with the whole, and
per analysin resolve it and make (as it were) an Anatomy of all the parts and
powers: and either begin with the soul and the faculties thereof, and so
come to the body, and the parts there^^: or begin with the body, and so
come to the soul: so that (which way so ever he proceed) when he comes
orderly to any faculty or part, he so set out the same, with the full power
and perfect regiment of it, that no injury to any faculty or part be
offered, nor any confusion, by shuffling one into the office and regiment of an
other. This rule therefore, that because it is first in time before another, it
is in order to be first treated upon before an other: or, because other as yet
were not, therefore that which was before, made a perfect regiment: is no
perfect nor good argument. Which argument being grounded on so uncertain and
weak^ foundation: all that is built thereon is easily shattered.

The Papists for the traditions of the Church which they call the unwritten
word, The Papists argument a p^iore for traditions.
or verity unwritten, use the like argument against the authority of Gods
written word, and verity of the Scripture. The word was delivered by tradition
of preaching, before it was delivered by writing: therefore, traditions are of
no less authority, nor less to be believed, then the written word and holy
scripture: yea, the Churches authority is above the scriptures, and is the
judge thereof Thus do the Papists encroche from the time to the authority,
as our brethren here do.

Now, as this reason fails, both for the Senioritie of time, and
forestalling the order of place, and much more for claiming any prioritie in
dignity, and most of all for inferring any such honor as perfection of
regiment: so for the truth of this proposition, that, The Church of God was
perfect in all her regiment, The proposition untrue.
before there was any Christian Prince: I can not yet see how directly it can
be justified. For, if this were true: then there need no regiment of Christian
Princes at all. And how then have the Christian Princes any authority at all
in Eccl. causes? Or, ^f they have any, how came they by it: if the Churches
regiment were perfect, or the Church perfect in all her regiment, before there
were any Christian Prince? The Churches regiment bettered by Christian princes
Or whereto serves the Christian Princes supreme authority in Ecclesiastical
causes, if not to make the regiment of the Church in better estate. For
otherwise, the Church were as good without it, if she be no better in her
Regiment by it, then she was before she had it. But it is not so: both the
church, and her regiment, The Churches regiment. etc.
is bettered by it. Which your selves are feign in part to confess, even here
in the conclussion of your argument: saying of God who has most mercifully and
wisely so established the same ( to wit, the churches regiment) that as with
the comfortable aid of christian Magistrates, it may singulerlie prosper and
flourish etc. And again, for the church craves help, and defense of
christian Princes, The healps, that Our Brethren grant, the Church receyveth
by the Christian Prince.
to continue and go fore-ward more peaceablye and profi^ablye, to the setting
up of the kingdom of Christ. Although here ye will affoorde, no more but
this: yet, if there were no more, this is enough to overthrow your saying, that
the church of God was perfect in all her Regiment, before there was any
christian prince. For, if this comfortable aid, help, and defense, to
continue and go forewarde, ( in so great matters as) more peaceably and
profitably to the setting up of the kingdom of Christ, were taken away:
then, the church of God, though (I grant) it may continue, and against the
adversaries thereof prevail: Yet should she not be perfect in all her Regiment,
needing this comfortable aid, help, and defense of christian Princes. And the
setting up of the kingdom of Christ, should with more trouble and less
profit, go fore-warde: yea, rather it should go back-warde, and he hindered,
though it continue, and not so singulerly flourish and prosper, but decay.

And is this so small a matter in your eyes, (brethren) as that it nothing
appertained to the Regiment of the church, but that craving all this of
christian princes, and so without them, wanting the same; ye dare so boldly
avouch, that she is perfect in all her Regiment without it? Does she crave that
she wants not? Then is she a wanton. Does she want it? Our brethren straye
from the question by them s^lues propounded.
then is she not perfect in all her Regiment? Or does it not greatly pertain
unto her Regiment? Or, do ye think, that this shall salve the matter,
because the church may continue, and against the adversaries thereof prevail
without it? Our question now, is not of the substance and being of the
church, but of the Regiment of it. Neither yet simply of the Regiment: but
whether she were perfect in all her Regiment, before any christian princes
were, or no The church ( I grant) was then, and shall continue ever, and she
had even then a Regiment also. Yea, and that Regiment in soon respects might
be called perfect for that time, The diffe^ence of the Churches ^^rfe^^ion in
regiment
while there were not such open professed christian princes to be foster
fathers, and noursing moothers of the church, as (God be praised) now there
are. For, concerning the Rectors of the church then, as they were then more
perfect and singular persons: so had they more perfect and singular
extra-ordinary offices, and withal, more excellent gifts to be able to
govern it the better.

But this argues so little the churches perfection then in all her Regiment (
understanding the same of all her ordinary external Regiment, The Anabaptists
arguments confuted.
whereupon our question is,) which Regiment she was not then so perfectly come
unto: that rather their extra-ordinary gifts and offices of Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, etc. were added for that time, to supplye and furnish
that part of the Regiment thereof, that was afterward to be made more perfect,
concerning the ordinary state, by the access of the Christian Princes
following.

Except therefore our Brethren intend, utterly to shake off all Christian
Princes, and account their supreme authority in Church causes, if not now to
be naught, yet to be naught worth, and altogether unnecessary to the perfection
of the Churches Regiment; how can this be any good argument to infirm it now,
because (admitting this also were true) there were no Christian Princes the^?
and what do they infer here-upo^? that there is no more need herein of
Christian Princes now, then there was then, (presupposing that then herein
there was no need at all of them,) that were a very suspicious and perrilous
conclusion. For, although the^ there were the less need of them, because that
need was then other-wise supplied: yet, those supplies not continuing: and
malice increasing, both of adversaries without, and of Hipocrites within: and
the gifts also that remain decreasing: there is now far more need of the
Christian Princes supreme government, The state of the time differing the
argument fails for the regiment
to the perfecting of the Churches Regiment. And so, the state of the time for
the regiment of the church differing: the argument of the Regiment, from the
time then, to the time now, is defective. But if they needed then herein, the
help of christian Princes, as they do now, then was not the church perfect in
all her Regiment, otherwise, than as it was extraordinarylie supplied, before
the christian Princes help and comfortable aid, was added. Before which time,
those temporary supplies coming to the church: as the Manna and other
extraordinary helps, made the Jews estate to flourish, prosper, and go
fore-ward in the Deserts, though they ceased when they came to the land of
promise: So, the church might be said to be perfect in all her Regiment,
meaning that Regiment which was fittest for the state of her aff^iction and
trauelles then: because she had such extraordi^^ry helps. But this is no
diminishing of that perfection ( if it may so be called) that is requisite to
the ordinary regiment of the Church, under the Supreme Government of Christian
princes, albeit the offices and gifts of Apostles, Evangelists, Difference of
peculiar regiment for a special time and ordinary regiment to continue.
Prophets, etc. are ceased, nor to be expected, nor revoked.

Now then, as the proposition, (admitting there were no christian princes) is
not true, in affirming that the church of God was perfect in all her regiment,
before there was any Christian prince: unless we understand that perfection
of all her Regiment, which was appropriate to her, by the extra-ordinary
prerogative, of that particular age, and peculier state thereof, and not
extending it to all her ordinary Regiment that should perpetually continue:
So is this proposition likewise most untrue, in this other part, that there
was not any christian prince then.

Albeit this also be no good argument: there were no christian princes then:
Or, they were not reckoned among the Governors of the church then? therefore
they are not to be reckoned among the governors of the Church now. Neither
this argument The Apostle Romans 12.1. Cor: 12. and Ephesians. 4. reckons up only
in the church these 4. Pastors, Teachers, Governors, and Deacons, as the
perpetual offices, by which the Church of God may, according to his word, be
directed in all matters, which are commonly called Ecclesiastical: therefore
Christian princes ( as not mentioned) have not to deal in the regiment of the
same. It is not meet our Brethren should use the same Argum* that the
Ana-Baptists do^ against Princes.


Which kind of arguments, I am the sorier that these our Brethren, in the
earnestness of their zeal, should use: because, as Gellius Snecanus Phrysius
notes (from whom our Brethren seem to take many things in this their
Learned discourse) all these reasons that our Brethren here use, are the very
plain reasons of the Anabaptists, against christian Magistrates. Whose
heresy since our Brethren do utterly detest: I would have them utterly detest,
and in any case not to use their reasons, whichis nothing but to bolden and
strengthen the Heritikes, and to breed suspicion to themselves.

Snecanus de Magistratu page 637. alleges the Anabaptists objection,
Gellius Snecanus de Magistratu.
saying: Hucque trahunt quod Ephesians. 4. etc. And to this they draw, that
(Ephesians. 4.) the office of a Magistrate is not to be reckoned up among the
functions of the church. Whereunto he answers in the next page, Quod autem,
Ephesians. 4. But as for that, Ephesians. 4. S. Paul does not mention the office
of a Magistrate; that is to be supplied out of other places, to wit, Romans
12. and 1. Corinthians. 12. Whereas Rulings, and gouernmentes are reckoned up,
among the gifts of the church, and kinds of vocations: as is above declared.
Otherwise many things ordained in the church to edification, should be
condemned. Yea, even as the Apostle Romans 13. properly treating of the civil
Magistrates, mentions not the Bishops: so it is no marvel that Paul here
passes over the mention of the Magistrate: Namelye, when here he reckons
not up the kinds of al offices, but specially and properly the functions only
of the Ministers of the word. Whereby not only we see, that this argument is
the very argument of the Anabaptists, and therefore not to be used of our
Brethren: but also that those places, Romans 12.. and 1. Cor. 12. cited also
by these our Brethren: where-as they understand the words of the Apostle,
Rulers and Governors, only for their supposed Seniors and third sort of
Tetrarks: those words are as-well to be understood of Christian Magistrates.
Yea, if those words of Rulers and Governors should not be so understood,
to wit, for Christian Magistrates: many things ordained in the church to
aedification, should be condemned: those words therefore being thus
understood: both such ordinances in the Church ordained by Christian
Magistrates, are not to be condemned: and Christian Magistrates have power to
ordain such things. And the argument that our brethren here use, that th^re
were n^ Christian Princes, at that time, is also con^uted.

But this is handled by Gellius more at large, page 555. To this purpose (
says he) serves the likeness and conueniencie of the Civil Magistrate, The
Civil Magistrate has ever from the beginning bin joined with the Eccl.
ministry.
and the Ecclesiastical Ministry, which fight not one with the other; but
from the beginning have always been most nearly joined together, although
the proprieties of them both, in the Church are distinguished. Even as it is
manifest by the example of Moses and A^ron. This order was distinctly observed
in the Church of GOD, in the time of godly King Iosaphat. 2. Chron. 19. Which
thing of all other, is most evidently declared in the new Testament: Mat. 22.
Where Christ says, Give unto Caesar that that is Caesar's, and to God, that
that is Gods. Where-upon it is manifest, that God is no less the author of
the order of Magistracy among the faithful, Romans 13. then he is of the order
of the Churches offices, Ephesians. 4. ver. 11. These things dot^ Paul most
effectually confirm, The Testimonies Rom 12. and 1. Cor. 12. for Rulers, serve
as well to the Magist. as to the Eccl. governors.
while Romans 12. ver. 8. and 1. Cor. 12. v. 28. he reckons up Rules and
Governments among the gifts of the Church, and among the offices thereof. For
the propriety of the words which the holy Ghost, both in the Greek and in
the Latin tongue does use, not only signifies especially the censure of the
Eldershippe: but may be also generally stretched to the Rulings and
Gouernements of all offices, as it is manifest by the declaration and
conference of the Scripture.

For, besides the former places, Romans 12. v. 8. 1. Cor. 12. v. 28. The name of
government, Pro. 11, v. 14. is given to counselors. Act. 27. v. 11, and
Apocal. 18. v. 17. it is referred unto Ship-maisters. Ly^^wise also, the name
of Ruling is applied in the first Epistle to Timoth. the 3. chapter, the 4.
and 5. verses, to the administration and discipline, that is domestical. And
to these forecited places, comes that, which Paul Romans 13. v. 1.4. and Tit.
3. ver. 1. does express in the same words, as-well in the Greek, as in the
Latin tongue: the civil power and reuengement of the Magistrate against
unrighteous men and malefactors, against whom the Law is made. 1. Tim. 1. v
9.10. and the spiritual power and reuengement given of the Lord, to the
Apostles, for the edification of the church, against all contumacie: 2. Cor.
10. v. 6.8, and the thirtienth chapter, the tenth verse. For in both places he
uses these words, (...) and (...) insinuating by these self same words,
that the distinct propriety of power and power and reuengement, (both whereby
the Magistrate takes vengeance of the contemner of the Laws, and wherebye
the Church has yet in a readiness reuengement and power against all contumacy)
is of God, and to be reckoned among the offices of the Church. Sith that
therefore, the ordinance of the Civil power, and of reuengement* and the
matter and the ends thereof, are no less of God, then the spiritual power
and reuengement of the Ecclesiastical ministerye: The civil and Eccles. power
always joined in the Church.
and sith these two distinct functions have always been joined together in
the Church, and the holy Ghost (reckoning up rulings and gouernements, among
the gifts and functions of the Church) does generally comprehend all kinds
of offices: yea, does rather express both the Civil and the Ecclesiastical
power and reuengement by the selfsame means: With what rashness would the
adversaries exc^ude that from the Church, except they will take this away
withal? Besides this, not only the Scripture calls the distinct Civil and
Ecclesiastical function, by the self same names, by reason of the conjunction
and use of them both in the Church: but also calls the ministers of them
both, Guides and Praesidentes. This is manifest, by the conference of the
Testimonies Mat. 27. ver. 2. Act. 23. ver. 26. Hebr. 13. ver. 7. and 17. and 1.
Pet. 2. ver. 14. for in these places the word (...), is commonly attributed
as-well to the Civil Magistrate, as to the Ministers of the word. To
conclude, when Paul, 1. Cor. 12. v. 10.28. and 29: And 2. Cor. 10. v. 5. and.
6. does reckon up powers and reuengement against all contumacie, lifting up it
self against God (wherewith Peter struck down Ananias and Sapphira, Act. 5.
and Paul struck blind Elymas the Sorcerer) among the gifts and powers of the
Church: who would exclude the powers of the Magistracy, ordained of God for
the punishment of euil-doers, from his Church? Either of the powers is of God,
as well this ordinary of the Magistrate, as that extra-ordinary: you see the
reuengement of the wicked, to be both ways approved of God, although the
properties of the offices and the form of the revenging are distinguished. It
is not to the purpose, whether ye kill with sword or with word, (as says
Lactantius:) there is no difference, in the very substance of the reuengement:
the end of either power is al one, to wit, the glory of God shyning in the
righteous punishment of the evil. Yea, rather, since that te^porary power of
punishing the obstinat, has ceased, after that kings are now made the
nourishers and champions of the Church: Therefore the church of Christ has so
much more need of this ordinary power and reuengement of the Magistrate, whereby
the good may be defended, and the evil punished. Lo Christian Reader, the
scripture teaches, that the Civil power has always been joined with the
ministry of the word in the Church.

Thus says Gellius Snecanus (one of the principal writers at this day, of
these our brethren, the Learned Discoursers side.) Wherein we see, how our
brethren run upon the same flats, that the Anabaptists do. Grounding
themselves (against the Princes supreme authority in Ecclesiastical matters)
on the very selfsame reasons, that those Heritikes do. And the very same
reasons, whereby Gellius confuteth the Anabaptists, do also directly confute
these Learned discoursers. The Anabaptists say these words, Governors and
Rulers, Romans 12. and 1. Cor. 12. are to be understood only of Ecclesiastical
Governors and Rulers: and do not our Learned discoursers auouche the same?
But Gellius here very exactly does confute it. The Anabaptists say, that in
Christ's and in the Apostles time, there was no Christian Magistrate, as
Gellius sets down their objection, page 568. and what does this differ, from
this assertion of these our Learned discoursers: The Church of God was perfect
in all her regiment, before there was any Christian Prince? I do not speak
this, as though these our Learned discoursers did savor of Anabaptistry, or
favor Anabaptistry wittinglie: God forbid. Howbeit in a heat zeal
inconsideratlie, they run upon these quick sands. But, Ictus Piscator sapir.
Gellius who saw the state endaungered, when this old supposed and new devised
Seniorie, was set up: and that the Anabaptists used these arguments against
the Christian Magistrates; was driven, not only to wring these weapons out of
their hands, but to break them in pieces, as naughty arguments. And will
our brethren now take up the broken shyuers, and fight with them, to put back
the treatise of the Christian Princes Government?

Let Gellius therefore come forth, and plainly tell them, that this is no
plain reason to prove their matter by, Gellius confutation of our bretherens
arguments.
but both a frivolous and intrue assertion, that the Church of God was perfect
in all her Regiment, before there was any Christian Prince. No, no (brethren
says Gellius) it is nothing so, your saying is not agree-able to good order of
teaching The Scripture teaches, that the Civil power has always been
joined with the Ministry of the word in the church. If it were always
joined, it was joined even then, when our brethren auouche it was not only
disioyned: but that the one was perfect, when the other was not at all.

But because this Gellius, a Phrysian in the Low Countries, is one of the
chiefest writers of our brethrens side, in those reformed Churches, of whom
our Discoursers willed us before, to embrace that most bewtifull order of
Ecclesiastical Regiment, which God so manifestly does bless and prosper in
our neighbors hands; and here they remember us again, that the Church of
God does stand at this day, in most blessed estate, where the Civil Magist.
are not the greatest favorers: it is good therefore, that our brethren should
see, both how they are troubled with Anabaptists, among these our neighbors,
where this order of Ecclesiastical Regiment, so much extolled by our brethren,
is set up: And to see the judgments of our brethrens best favorites, and most
experienced in these matters, how clean contrary it is, to these our learned,
Our neighbors state commended before so much by our brethren, see how it is
trobled with the Anabaptists.
( but not experienced,) discoursers judgments.

Whereby our learned brethren may learn, not only to make better reasons, but
much better, and with more reason. to wax wiser herein, with this Gellius,
and rather use their reasons to beat down the Anabaptists: then to use, such
as the Anabaptists use, to beat back the christian Princes. And good brethren
mark the reasons of this Gellius well, and ye shall find them fully to
answer your reasons in this matter. Gellius still proceeding against the
Anabaptists, beats especially on these points that, the Church and the
faith, of the old and new Testament, is but one and the same. page 559. That
there is one and the same doctrine of both the couenaunts: as well concerning
the article of Magistrates, and controversy of punishing the evil, or use of
the sword; as concerning the moral works of Gods Law. page 560. Whereupon
he discourses by particular collations of the old and new Testament: how,
not only God in them both, is showed to be the author of the Magistrate, but
how the like things are required of the Magistrate in both estates: how both
Testamentes direct the Magistrate to one end: how both Testaments give
Magistrates like authority in punishment: how all manner of persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, were and are subject to the Prince in both estates:
and how even from the beginning of the world, always the Magistrates
authority was, to see, that the Law of God be in all points maintained: which
authority is not diminished by Christ, no not one jot. page 562,

After the proves of all this, he concludes thus in the 565. page. Non ergo
noua, etc. Therefore, there is no new and diverse doctrine delivered of Christ:
but the doctrine of either Testament is one and the same, agreeing with the
Law of nature, engraven in Adam even in his creation, and at length set forth
in the Tables of the ten commandments. Yea, let the adversaries show,
that Christ has taught any thing, which is not extant, either in express
words, or in consequence of the Scripture, in the old Testament: not in
respect of all things done, but as pertaining to this controversy, and to the
rule of life: and we, will yield. The extra-ordinarye examples of Moses,
Elias, etc. and other peculier doings of God, as was that also of Peter, Act.
5. and the change of the circumstances of the policy of Moses, do not
prejudice the general law of God.

There is therefore no difference between the faithful of the old and new
testament, Christian Princes from the beginning.
so far forth as appertains to the reason of justifying, and of living,
save that, certain in these last days, being lovers of themselves,
glorious, and proud, 2. Tim. 3. Despise Abraham and other godly men in
respect of themselves; as though (to say no worse of them) they were but rude
children. The state of the old Testament and new all one.


And so Gellius knits up all this point out of S. Paul 1. Cor. 10. from the
examples of punishment then, to be admonitions to us now, saying: Thou see
here (Gentle Reader) that, either the punishment of the evil is not together
with the policye of Moses abrogated, but abides perpetually: Or else these
examples of punishments for our admonition, are of Paul naughtily applied:
especially when the same were not immediately of God inflicted upon the
Israelites: but by Moses, as ech-one of them are read of, in their places. To
the which purpose, are to be applied the examples of Gods vengeance against
Ananias and Sapphyra: Act. 5. and Elymas the sorcerer, Act. 14. which, although
they be extra-ordinary, yet they teach, that God also in the new Testament,
would have sins punished with bodily punishment.

Of the extraordinary power of punishing where they wanted the ordinary.
Thus does Gellius show, that, as the state of the Magistrate ^till remained one
in all times, before the coming of Christ, and after perpetually: so, even at
that time when the Apostles lived, they extraordinarily did exercise an
extraordinary supply of the Magistrates authority for punishing. And S. Paul
brought in the examples of the Israelites punishments inflicted by Moses
extraordinarily, to the Corinthians in those days, when the chief and
ordinary Magistrates, over them, were not Christian princes.

Here upon Gellius proceeding to especial arguments, among other comes to
the Anabaptists objection, of this selfsame reason that our brethren in this
Learned discourse do urge: That the Church of God was perfect in all her
regiment, before there was any Christian prince, saying: page 568.

The Anabaptists objection.
But they object, that in the time of Christ, and of Paul, there was no
Christian Magistrate, Ergo: etc.

I answer. The authority of the Magistrate is not therefore weakened, albeit
in the time of Christ and of Paul, Emperors and Kings set in high estate,
were aliens from the faith. For, the higher power took not then her, beginning
from the unbelieving Gentiles under the new Testament or in the time of Paul:
but even from the very beginning of the world it was ordained of God
himself, and approved of Christ and his Apostles: as appears by that above
declared. Yea indeed, where Paul does say, the powers are ordained of GOD; he
not only respects the Magistrates of the Gentiles in his time: (as most of
all the first institution of God:) in the Church of the Patriarks and the
Israelites: expressly signifying, Christian Princes in the Apost. times.
that one and the same ordinance is yet ratified under the new Testament, and
that God is as well the Lord of the Gentiles as of the Jews. Neither yet to this
day are the people of all the world less governed of him, than in times
paste Israel was. For, the foundation of the ordinance of God being laid,
The untruth of our brethrens asse^tion that there were no Magist. in Christ's
and his Apostles times.
Romans 13. the use of the same, is withal established.

Moreover, here lurketh a fallacion, whereby, under pretense of part, the
whole is denied. For it is false that no godly persons or such as feared God,
did execute the office of a Magistrate in the new testament, as by the example
of the Centurion, etc. we may hereafter perceive. Besides this, the
adversaries here do stumble at that fallacy, whereby they snatch at the
causes which are accidental, One and the same ordinance in both Testa. for
Magist.
for those that are necessary: and whereby, for the vices of men, serving the
Prince of darkness in the time of Paul, they condemn the thing ordained,
which is good and holy. Might not by the same reason, all honest kinds of
life be condemned? yea, the Magistracy in the Church of Israel, for certain
wicked Kings whom God would have reign, to punish the sins of his people,
might be improued in the godly Kings that followed. We must therefore of
necessity distinguishe the matter it self from the persons. The fallatio^ and
the answer the reto
Norsubtilly confound the good ordinance of God with the infidel men, that
executed the office of the Magistrate in Paul's time. The power both of the old
and new Testament, is one and the same: which, as it depends not on the
dignity of men, but on the highest: Sap. 6. v. 4. Romans 13. so, it is not
vitiated by their indignity, or by circumstances of time and places. Moreover
those things, that are separated in time, are not by and by in the matter it
self, and in the nature of their definition diverse. Many things may be done
agreeable to Gods word, whereof no examples in Paul's time are extant. Otherwise
the credit and authority of the New Test. should be weakened, because the new
Test. was not yet set down in writing in Paul's time. Yea, it had not been
lawful to have translated the scripture in the mother tongue. Besides, that
Paul according to the letter, makes no express mention of Schools, etc.
Also, the common adversaries do not yet baptize the infants, of the faithful.
And many that yet are lovers of themselves, but without charity, and
notregarders of their bounden duty, will not keep the night watch, with the
residue of the Citizens: who will therefore auowe that they ought not to do
these things? we must distinguish the Law it self, from the factes of me^,
neither is judgment made of the whole, under pretense of the part.

If again they demand, how the wicked Magistrate, such a one as in the old
time Nabuchadnezar was: and as there was at Rome, in the time of Paul: may be
called the good ordinance and minister of God: Or how the gifts of the holy
Ghost, as the care of Peace, of honestye, of godliness, can have place in
them: I answer, we must distinguish the matter by it self, from the person:
and the lawful from the unlawful use. For, the vices of the men are not to be
imputed to the order. Moreover, the gifts of God are diverse, of the which,
some are common, as well to the evil, as to the good: as miracles, Matthew 7.
external peace, fertility, etc. For God suffers his Sun to arise, both
upon the good and upon the evil. And heereunto Marriage and Magistracy may be
referred. The substance of which things by it self, (as the good ordinance of
God, Distinction between the ordinance of God and the vice of men
) we must distinguish from the vice of me^. The question betwixt our
adversaries and us, is not of the persons, or of the abuse of the Magistracy:
but of the very matter it self. Which as it is not vitiated by the impiety of
the Gentiles in Paul's time: so, most commodiouslye may it, and ought, to be
administered of a Christian. To conclude, it makes nothing for the adversaries,
nor hinders the godly which execute the office of a Magistrate, that
Nebuchadnezer is called the servant of god. Hier. 25. For, albeit the evil
Magistrate also be of god (in respect of the Divine ordinance)
notwithstanding, the malice of man is not therefore to be imputed to the order
it self. But of necessity, we must distinguish the persons, from the offices
instituted of god. Here, the adversaries stumble on the fallacion of
composition, and on the fallacion of the accident: (as also in that sentence
Romans 13.) whereby they confound the persons of the wicked and their vices, with
the ordinance of god. Nebuchadnezar is not absolutely called the Servant of
god, but in a certain respect, to wit, of the judgment of god, as it were a
scourge, wherewith the sins of the Israelites were visited. But Paul calls
the Magistrate, the minister of god simply. Yea, he calls him also a good
ordinance.

Moreover, if Nebuchadnezar, and the heathen Magistrate, be called the
servant and Minister of god, to whom the godly were compelled to obey: much
more therefore, even by the comparison of the less to the greater, the godly,
executing the office of a Magistrate, are GODS Ministers, to whom we owe
obedience, according to Paul, 1. Tim. 6 ves. 1.2. would god all would here
mark the venom of the old serpent, how much more we incline rather to
rule, and to abuse the Christian liberty, than to obey. Last of all,
Nebuchadnezar is not reprehended in the Scripture, in respect of his
Magistracy, but in respect of his malice. etc.

The necessity of a Magist^ate among Ch^^stians.
Lo, (gentle Reader) out of these things, one of these two follows of
necessity: either there ought to be a Magistrate among the Christians, and that
they may administer their Magistracy: Or else Paul did amiss in writing to
the Romans of the matter. Whether of these 2. shall we believe? The Apostle
says, the Magistracy is of God: the adversaries deny, that a Christian may
execute this ordinance of god. Is it not lawful for a Christian to be of god?
Yea, to be good, and to be gods Minister? See, whyther pertinacy, and
partiality will carry men away. The adversaries exclude Christian Princes,
that favor not Anabaptistry, from salvation: when they themselves are not
afraid, to exercise among themselves, the office of a Magistrate, and to join
it with Faith. Did not god commit unto Moses, and to Esdras (as to the
Politic Magistrate) the Libell of Diuorcement, and matrimonial controversies
to be decided? Wherefore, do you take upon you the separation of those that
are married, for the cause of Fornication, and and of departure made from the
infidels: yea, and that also, the judgment of Civil controversies among your
selves: sith that these things (according to your saying) have no place in the
Church of Christ, nor can stand together with Faith? Truly one of these
twain follows of necessity heere-upon: either the office of the Magistrate
ought to have place among them, (as the only Christians:) or else they thruste
their sickle into an-others harvest, and arrogate to themselves, that, that
properly belongs to the Magistrate.

Lo, (gentle Reader) thou see the adversaries, contrary to their own
doctrine, turn indeed the office of the Magistrate, to their own
commendation, which in Christian Princes they discommend. As though that were
lawful for them, which unto other were not lawefull. Not that the thing is
diverse, but because the men are diverse. Markest thou not here in the
adversaries the venom of the old serpent, and the seditious spirit of the
Judicial Rebellion, how it enclineth more to Ruling, than to obeying? God
requires men, that are valiant, fearing God, lovers of the truth and of
righteousness, which hate filthy lucre, and are prudent, to be the ministers
of God. Exodus 18. ver. 21. Deuteronomy. 1. ver. 13. and 2. Chr. 19. Psalm. 2. v. 10.
etc. also Romans 13 v. 4. Whether of these men are the fitter to execute these
properties of Magistrates: those that are strangers from Christ and from his
church, as the Iebusits and Cananites (to whom the adversaries compare at this
day the Magistrate:) or those that are true Christians and beleuers?

Paul Romans 13. and 1. Peter. 2. do concordantly teach, that the Magist. is
Gods minister, ordained for the praise of those, that do well: and for the
punishment of those that do ill. To this accords Paul 1. Tim. 2. teaching
that we must pray for all manner persons, placed in high authority, that we
may lead a quiet and honest life, with all godliness. Out of which places
conferred together, we see in brief the Magistrates office is to minister unto
god: the parts of whose Ministry, consiste generally in the custody of both
the Tables of the ten Commandments, and first in the care of Religion.

Hereupon the volume of the Law is commended unto the King. Deuteronomy 17. and the
execution, against the despisers of religion. Heereunto appertain the examples
of Moses, David, Iosue, Ezechias, etc. and 1. Tim. 2. godliness properly
respects the worship of God: and then in maintaining the public peace,
as-well in defending the good, as in punishing the evil: and thirdly, in
honesty of life, whereby every one performs his duty, 1. Tim. 2. These
final causes therefore of instituting the Magistrate being set down: A Church
without magistracy never seen.
with what boldness take they away the use thereof, out of the Church of
Christ? Or else, do they dream of such a Church, as no man has ever seen?
And if the office of the Christian Magistrate, and custody of the ten
commandments were taken away: What I pray you would remain in the world,
but mere Libertinisme, and a licentiousness of all mischiefs? If the
adversaries were not blinded in their own self-love and boldness: they would
easily learn this, not only in themselves, but also in the examples of the
faithful, both of the old and new testament. For if the godly have no manner
of need at all of the Magistrate: Why does Moses complain of the Israelites
(who did eat of the same spiritual meat, and drink of the same spiritual
drink that we do) How can I labor alone, The godly have need of the Mag*
and bear your burden and contentions? Why were striuings and contentions
among the faithful Corinthians? Do our adversaries (holier then they) want
Darnel and evil doers?

But if they object, that albeit these things may be granted, concerning the
latter table of the Law: yet the former table properly respects conscience
and faith, over which the Magistrate has no power, but God alone.

I answer: the adversaries are here deceived, and do deceive: in that they
exclude out of the former Table of the Law, outward Idolatry, and profanation
of the name of GOD, and of the Saboth, and the punishment of these things. Since
that this former table of the Law, comprehends in one and the same nature of
definition, not only the inward worship of faith, and the Idolatry contrary
thereunto: but also the outward works and punishments of them both. As, when
the Magistrate punishes perjury: God testifies, that he accurseth the soul
that reuerenceth not his name. But the Magistrate when he punishes, properly
respects the outward work, although he be not able to change the mind.
Rather no commonwealth without a christian Magistrate then a Magist excluded,
etc.


These things orderly considered: it were rather to be wished, that there
were no commonwealth without a true Christian Magistrate: the^ that the same
should be excluded from the Church of God. For, who is able better to fulfill
the conditions of a Magistrate, before already noted, or the office and ends
pertaining to him, then is a Christian? Insomuch that if we shall judge aright
of the gifts of God, we must confess that it is a mighty benefit of God,
when he gives a godly and a Christian Magistrate unto his Church. Is it not
lawful for a Christian to be of GOD, and to administer the Ordinance of God?
Is it not lawful for a faithful person to defend the godly, to punish the
evil, to exercise justice, to defend the Widows, and the Father-lesse, and
to be the Minister of God? Romans 13. Is it not lawful for a Christian, to
preserve the public tranquillity, with all godliness and honesty? 1. Tim. 2.
By these works God is glorified. And the Prophets and Apostles exhort the
faithful thereunto. Therefore, the Christian Magistrates office being taken
away, all the former virtues are taken away with-all.

With what rashness therefore (O man) dare thou exclude the Magistrate from
God, by reason of the use of the sword, whom Paul even for the same reason
calls Gods Minister? Yea, when Paul says, Will thou not fear the power?
do well. He signifies that it is a manifest testification of an evil
conscience, to despise the Magistrate. Christ and the Apostles acknowledged
the Heathen Magistrate to be Gods ordinance, and gave honor unto him. It is
marvel therefore, that the adversaries will not admit, that a Christian may
exercise that divine ordinance. Especially, seeing that Paul wished after
holy Judges, and prefers them before Infidels: Yea, and expreslye teaches,
that the Saints shall judge the world. 1. Cor. 6. ver. 1.2. Heer-unto serves
that that Paul 1. Tim. 6. ver. 1.2. says: Let servant: whosoever be under
the yoke, esteem their Masters worthy of al honor, and those that have
faithful Masters, let them not despise them, in that they be their brethren:
but so much the rather serve them, because they are faithful and beloved. These
things teach, and exhort says the Apostle. Would to God, and adversaries
would teach also those that are theirs, in like manner, and enforce these
things with exhortations. If Christ and his Apostles yielded thus much unto
an Heathen Magistrate: how much more is due unto a Christian Magistrate? If
the end of the Magistrate be, to have the care of Religion, and to defend
good men: with what reason do the adversaries exclude the Magistrate from the
propriety of Religion, and of good? If they describe the office of the
Magistrate, only by Politic constitutions: I pray you, what difference make
they between the Turkish, and the Christian Magistrate? The Magist. office
necessary to the Church.
If the office of the Magistrate be not necessary to the Church: Why did Paul
and Peter write of that matter to the faithful, that were subject to the
discipline of Christ.

Wherefore had the adversaries rather, to despise rule and to rail on
dignities, by comparing them unto Iebusits, etc. according to the Apostles
prophecy of the last days, 2. Pet. 2. ver 10. then to follow the wi^^ of God.
1. Pet. 2. ver. 15, etc. And by well doing to bridle the ignorance of mad
men, and to honor the King? With what boldness call they Magistrates,
murderers: because they kill homicides, and the transgressors of the Law?
Which (Magistrates) the holy Ghost calls Gods, and the Ministers of God.
Psalm. 82. Ioh. 10. Romans 13.

No man in very deed will deny, but that al men (none excepted) are subject
unto their ordinary Magistrates, and may be compelled to render unto them, that
they owe them. etc. Romans 13. ver. 1. etc. If obedience be godly: the use of
the sword is also godly. These things of necessity follow one another
mutually: to be subject to the Magistrate, and render that we owe them; do
generally comprehend all things, without the which, the sword of the
Magistrate, by it self alone, cannot be borne. It follows therefore, that
the subjects owe obedience in the use of the sword unto the Magistrate, to
defend the good, and punish the evil, and that for conscience. See, the
adversaries make a matter of conscience, to obey the Magistrate in punishing the
evil: But Paul says, we ought to do the same, even for conscience. Unto
whom agrees Peter, saying: for the Lord, or for the Lords will. Lo, whether
of these shall we believe: the holy Ghost speaking by the Apostles, or the
adversaries?

If any man shall say, we must more obey God, than man: Paul answers: the
Magistrate, and the use of the sword, for the punishment of Malefactors, is
the ordinance of God: and there-fore here, we owe obedience not to man, but
unto God himself. Furthermore, no man can serve two Masters, Certain of the
Proph. and Apostles exercised also, the office of the Magistrate.
Mat. 6. Neither God at any time has commanded, that we should obey wicked
constitutions: but all the godly of the old and new Testament: the Prophets,
Christ, and the Apostles, have not only served God and the Magistrate both
together: but certain also of them have exercised the office of the
Magistrate. Heb. 11. etc. Whereupon most forcibly it follows, that to be a
Christian: or to serve and to exercise the office of a Magistrate, and to
punish the evil, are not contrary, neither fight with the faith in Christ, but
rather are ordained one under the other, which may both without any damage to
Christian godliness, consist together in one man. And this is evident (among
other, Why, God distinguished these Offices.
by the examples of Melchisedech, Heli, and Samuel: who were Priests and
Magistrates both at once. Yea, God did not distinguishe those two offices, for
that they fought one with an-other, but that one man was scarce sufficient to
exercise both, etc.

All this and much more writes this Gellius Phrysius, in his answer to the
Anabaptists objection, who made this one of the cheifest of their arguments,
that in Christ's and Paul's time, there were no Christian Magistrates. Neither
do I set down all this, as though these writers of this Learned discourse were
so far gone, as these Anabaptists, to deny that there ought to be any
Christian Princes: But rather to give them warning to take the greater heed,
that they come not too near them, either in whole or in part: nor strengthen
their error, and weaken the Princes state, and breed themselves suspicion: by
using the selfsame arguments, that they use. It is an old saying, He that
will no evil do: Must do nothing that longes thereto.

For, if they do, lo here, how (we need not) one of the chiefeste of their
own side, among these our neighbors, whom they before so highly commended
unto us, will not spare to set against these our Brethren also. Neither yet
does Gellius Snecanus Phrysius end this matter thus, but (as it were) sets
afresh again, upon this proposition, that the Church of GOD was perfect in all
her Regiment, before there was any Christian Prince. To improve this further,
Snecanus does enter into the fowrthe part of his treatise against the
Anabaptists, saying. Page 599.


It now remains, that having opened the foresaid rules of the Scripture
(taken from God, the only author of the Magistrate in both the Testamentes:
from the agreeable proposition of the Civil and spiritual power in the Church;
from the Church and the doctrine being one in both the Testa. and from the
examples of punishments declared by Paul for our admonition: and also from the
definition, nature, The example of Christian Magistrates, in Christ's and the
Apost. times.
or propriety and final causes of the Magistrate, and the office of the
subjects: and at the length from the special sentences of Christ and his
Apostles) we should now set down under these things certain lively
examples, that that which is in sentences set before the mind, may in a
certain manner be evidently laid before the senses, by examples. First,
thou hear Mat. 8. That the Centurion at one and the same time together, was
both a Minister of the military affairs of the Romans, and had so great
faith, as Christ at that time found not in Israel. Ver. 9.10. Also Joseph of
Arimathia is called a disciple of Jesus, who looked for the kingdom of God,
who was also a Senator (exercising judgment against the wicked, and those that
were guilty of death, as appears by that, that the Scripture mentions, and
excepteth him, that he consented not to the death of Christ) being a good and
a righteous man, Mat. 27.57. Mar. 15.43. Luc. 23.50. etc.

Moreover, Theophilus unto whom Luke dedicateth his Gospel, was a Prince and
governor of some certain Region, as it appears by the property of the
Epithete; The most excellent: which is a title agreeable to men that are
Princes. For, Acts 23. ver. 26. it is attributed unto Felix. And in the 26.
chapter likewise, the 25. verse. unto Festus, either of them being the Ruler
of Iudaea, etc.

Furthermore, Nichodemus one of the chief Rulers of the Jews, instructed by
Christ himself in the Faith: Io. 3. remained in his vocation and his
Magistracy, as appears Io. 7 v. 50. Neither did he for the same cause forsake
Christ; as it is evident, by his officiousness of Christ's burial. Io. 19.
ver. 39. Besides this* in that royal Courtier Joan. 4. converted by Christ
unto the Faith. And in the E^muche that was the chief governor of Candaces
Queen of the Aethiopians, Act. 8. baptized by Phillip. And also in the
Pro-consull Sergias Paulus, Act. 13. etc. Also Cornelius. Act. 10. ver. 1. etc.
who also is called a Centurion, and a godly man, and one that feared God: who
also continually prayed to GOD, which could not be done without Faith in the
Messiah, (except a man will absurdly say, that all before the time of Christ
were witho^t faith, when as this man especially is called, one purified of God,
and acceptable unto him, ver. 15. and 35. etc.

Here I pass in silence the example of the chief rulers of Asia: F^r, who
will affirm, that they being the friends of Paul, were without the knowledge
of Christ? Act. 19. ver. 30 etc. To these above named, comes the example of
Erastus the procurator of the city. Romans 16. ver. 25. Exercising the office of
a Magistrate, and reckoned by the holy Ghost, among the Faithful. Yea, and the
example also of the Saints who were of the house of Caesar, Phil. 4. v. 22, etc.

Thus we se most evidently, even by the testimony at large of this one man, as
one of the principal of their own side, (to press them with (...) more) how
this reason that here these Learned discoursers stand so much upon, that the
church of God was perfect in all her Regiment, before there was any christian
Prince, is not only one of the principallest reasons of ye Anabaptists, ( whom
they, I hope, no less than we detest) albeit i^ this affectionate zeal, they
do in so many points as we may hereby ^^ther, even in a manner iutte with
them (though unawares) to ius^le at the authority of Christian Princes: but also
how weak and of no force at all this their reason is. And with what a
multitude of far better reasons, yea, as the Apostle says, with a cloud of
witnesses, it is beaten down. And that, (which is most of all to be respected)
how greatly they ouershoot themselves in the truth thereof. Our Bretherens
exception of Emperors.
Neither does it avail them to say, that none of these were Emperors: For, it
euicteth the cause sufficiently, th^^ they were Princes, or at least, any
kind of Magistrates. If they replye, that yet they did exercise no authority
and government in the church but lived as private persons among the Christians:
albeit this is also the refuge of the Anabaptists; yet how can this be
proved? Which if it were true, might make indeed, not color, but ground of
reason for the Anabaptists.

But as those Princes* were converted unto Christianity: Christian Princes
from the beginning.
So (no doubt) they retained their estates still, and the Christians so
acknowledged and called them, as before. And if they submitted themselves
before to their authority, while those Princes were Infidels: shall we think,
that either the Princes did not much more think themselves bounden to ouersee
(so far as their ability stretched,) all the three especial points of their
charge, The Magist. lost no authority by professing Christianity.
in the maintenance of both the Tables of Gods Law, Peace, honesty, and
godliness, to be maintained among the Christians: or that the Christian
subjects did not now much more honor them, obey them, and commit the
Government of their controversies to them, when after they remained among them
being Christians, and retained still their Governments being Princes? But
Gellius also says somewhat hereunto, Page 634. Moreover they obiecte that
Paul 1. Cor. 6. Forbad the faithful, that they should not hale one another,
before the judgment seats of the unfaithful. I answer, Paul did not
absolutely, and by it self, condemn here the judgments ordained of God.
Deuteronomy. 16. and 17. sith Paul himself without any revenging of himself,
appealed to the judgment of Caesar. Nether forbids he those things to the
Christians in general, Acts. 25.
but reprehendeth the Corinthians, in respect of circumstances, and of their
vices. As those, who prosecuted the extreme rigor of the law against their
neighbor, and that before infidel Judges. Yea rather, they themselves endamaged
their brother. Whom notwithstanding, he did not by and by therefore
excommunicate; much less did he disallow the function of the Magistrate, in
respect of it self, or denied that it might be administered of the Christians:
but rather contrariwise, permitted unto them Arbiters and Judges, and wished
that the Magistrate were a christian, in that he requires holy Judges. And
this he clearly sets out by a comparison from the more, to the less,
affirming that the Saints shall Judge the world, yea and the Angels. Lo
(Christian Reader) here the controversy is most evidently decided. The
adversaries require an unjust, and Infidel Magistrate. Paul would have a
Saint, and a believing person, to be appointed. If Paul permitted Arbiters to
be chosen out of the faithful, in deciding controversies among the brethren,
and says that those, (al-beit the basest of the faithful.) are fitter than
the infidel Judges: how much more then are the greatest faithful ones, and
wise ones, fit persons to be set in the public Judgment seats. Besides, that
the Apostle expressly underhand, setts out a show, wherein, whenever better
times should shine upon them, those Judgment seats should be brought into a
more happy order, and more holy Judges should be ordained. The Chapter Regim. more
happy, where Christ. Princes are.
For what-soeuer is granted to an unfaithful: can much less be denied to a
faithful person. Howsoever it be, Paul wishes not (as do the adversaries)
Infidel, but holy and faithful Judges. Yea, except the Judge be holy, he
can scarce with good conscience before God, be a Judge. Here-unto we may
apply, that S. Paul wishes King Agrippa to be a Christian. Whereby we
perceive, that wheresoever any of these Christian Princes were at that time
among the Christians, they had no final authority, in decision of such
controversies as rose among them. Neither only in titles of land, breaches of
peace, civil cases, and other worldly matters: but also in matters pertaining
to the Regiment of the Church and Ecclesiastical: as were the matters, for
the which Saint Paul so often pleaded against the Jews, even before such
Judges as were not Christian. And al-be-it, Acts 18. When Paul was accused
before Gallio by the, Jews, saying: This fellow persuades men to worship
God contrary to the law; as Paul was about to open his mouth, Gallio said
unto the Jews: If it be a matter of wrong, or an evil deed (O ye Jews) I
would according to reason maintain you. But if it be a question of words, and
names, and of your law: look ye to it your selves, for I will be no Judge of
these things: Yet Paul, when he came before Felix, and he also would hear
the plea between his adversaries and him, Acts 24. After that the Governors
had beckned unto him, that he should speak, he answered: I do the more
gladly answer for my self, for as much as I know, that thou have been of
many years a Judge unto this Nation, perhapps thinking that in all that time,
he might (as Cornelius and others) have attained to the knowledge of God, and
so been the fitter Judge of these matters.

And although he was but a corrupt Judge, both in affection and religion, and
Festus also that succeeded him: yea, Nero the Emperor was worst of all: yet,
because he occupied the room of him, that should have been a better, yea, the
highest Judge in earth unto him, albeit Paul were himself an Ecclesiastical
person, and an Apostle and one of the chiefest pillars in the Church of God:
yet he appealed even to Neroes Judgment seat. And when Festus brought him
forth, to plead before Agrippa, he so rejoiced of it, that he says, Act. 26.
I think my self happy (King Agrippa,) because I shall answer this day
before thee, of all the things whereof I am accused of the Jews. Chiefly,
because thou have knowledge of all customs and questions, which are among the
Jews. Wherefore, I beseech thee, hear me patiently, and when he was even in
the chiefest point of his plea, concerning the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
ver. 24: As he answered thus for himself, Festus ( who had little skill of
those matters) said with a loud voice: Paul, thou art besides thy self,
much learning does make thee mad. But he said, I am not mad (O noble
Festus) but I speak the words of truth and soberness. For the king knows
of these things, before whom also I speak boldly, for I am persuaded, that
none of these things are hidd from him. For this thing was not done in a
corner. O King Agrippa, beleeuest thou the Prophets? I know that thou
beleeuest. The Churches state.
Then Agrippa said unto Paul: almost thou perswadest me to become a
Christian. Then Paul said, I would to God, that not only thou: but also all
that hear me to day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except
these bonds. So that, if Paul did thus submit himself unto them, in the
decision of these Ecclesiastical controversies, hoping they had been more
faithful Judges the^ they were; did not other Christians to other Princes that
were indeed Christian Princes, submit themselves also, to the decision of such
their Ecclesiastical controversies, arising among them? And though S. Paul
missed in the person, yet he wished those persons, to have been such, as he
hoped, and as they ought to have been. But (as Gellius says) if they were not
such, yet this expressly insinuates a show unto us, of those better Judges
that should come after, and better employ those places yt they abused. So that,
although no Prince had been good or Christian at those days: yet this argument
had not been good nor Christian. And there being (no doubt) even at that time,
some, (if not many) it is not only no good argument, but an untrue, and wrong
assertion to ground upon, that the Church of God was perfect in all her
regiment, before there was any Christian Prince.

But would God, these our brethren would have made the matter no worse against
Christian Princes, then that they had not yet been come into the Church of
God. But it follows at the hard heels, with so hoate a pursuit, even to the
estate at this day, saying: yea the Church of God may stand and does stand at
this day, in most blessed estate, where the civil Magistrates are not the
greatest favorers.

What have we here? O Lord, Our bretherens hard speeches of Christian Princes.
who would have looked for such speeches at the hands of our brethren, and in
so Learned a discourse of the Churches government? Yet was it much better said
before, speaking of the state thereof in the Apostles times: that the Church of
God was perfect in all her Regiment before there was any Christian Prince For
that might yet have been restrained to that time, Paul's wish of Christian
Princes.
considering the special prerogatives, of that age, to have supplied the want
of Christian Princes. Notwithstanding it was not even then so perfect, but that
S. Paul wished the Regiment thereof to have been better. And that better even
by christian Princes. Else, had he never had such troubles, nor needed to have
wished, that Agrippa, Festus, Bernice, etc. had been Christians: nor have
appealed unto Nero, nor have had such hinderaunces in his function. But when
these our brethren, thinking to have carried this clear away, will now make
a general rule thereon, that the Church may stand perfect still in all her
Regiment, and that in most blessed state, without any Christian Princes: then
GOD help poor Christian Princes. For, being such poor helps unto the
Regiment of the Church, they may be as well spared, or wished ^way (which the
Anabaptists wish them) as to be wished for, which S. Paul did wish them; save
for the Princes salvation of their own souls, in which respect, they are not
Christian Princes. Nay, if this were true: why may they not as well with the
very Anabaptists, set down this rule to, that the Church of God may stand,
and does stand, better without them? For, howsoever they seem here to allure
the reader, with these godly titles, The Churches perfection and most blessed
state.
of the Church of God, of perfection in all her regiment, and that she
stands at this day in most blessed estate, where Christian Princes are not at
all, and the civil Magistrates are not the greatest favorers* yet dare we not
ascribe these titles of perfection in all her Regiment, and of most blessed
state unto the Church of God, being militant and traveling still under
imperfection. But we acknowledge (as S. Paul says 1. Cor. 13.) that we know
imperfectly, and we teach imperfectly, but when that which is perfect shall
come, then that which is imperfect shall be done away. And then shall come
indeed the most blessed estate of the Churches perfection in all her regiment.
But if it be now already, and that where no Christian Princes are, or where
the Civil Magistrates are not the greatest favorers; then whereto serve the
Christian Princes, and the Civil Magistrates, to favor the Gospel, but rather
to hinder the perfection of the Church in all regiment, and to cause it not to
be in most blessed estate? For where any Christian Princes are; yea, the
greatest favorers of the Church of God that ever were: it could never yet
aspire heereto. But where they were not, and are not, there these Learned
discoursers tell us, that the Church of God was perfect in all her Regiment,
and stands in such estate as is most blessed. But where was this perfection in
all the Regiment of it, before Christian Princes? And where stands and yet at
this day in most blessed estate, where the civil Magistrates are not the
greatest favorers? May not the places be named, that we might view the^? Must
we run to Vtopia for to seek them out? Where was this? in Sodom and
Gomorra, under Chedor-laomer, and where the civil Magistrates, nor all the
people, were any great favorers of the Church of god? Where Lot being
righteous, 2. Pat. 2.
and dwelling among the^, in seeing and hearing the^, they vexed his righteous
soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds? Was he and his family in
most or more blessed estate, or the Church of God there, better governed, then
in Sale^, under Melchizedeck, or then in the Pilgrimage it made under Abraham?
Was the Church of God better under Pharao, The Church in better state under
Christian Princes, the^, etc.
then under Moses? under the tyrants that oppressed the^, then under the Judges
that delivered the^? Was the Churches government better under Saul, then under
David? under Jeroboam, Achab, Manasses, and other Idolatrous Princes: then
under Salomo^, Iosaphat Josias, Ezechias, and other godly Princes? and is it
more perfect in all her regiment, and stands in more blessed estate at this
day, under the great Turk in Europe, under the Sophie in Asia, under the great
Chan in India, where also great parts of the Church are dispersed: then under
godly Christian Princes in England, Germany, Scotland, Denmark, Suecia,
Polonia, Hungary, and all other places where Christianity is openly professed
at this day? Is the regiment of the Church of God better, To great
unthankfulness toward her Majesty.
and in more blessed estate in Italy under the Popes tyranny, or in France,
in Spain, in Flaunders, etc. where the Christian Princes are not the greatest
favorers of the light of the Gospel, then here in England, where her Majesty
favors the same so tenderly, and has ventered her state and life so often
for it? O unthankfulness O blind: (what should I call it?) Malice? No, but
self willed opinion, ye, to deface the good estate of the Church of God,
wherein we are (under such a right Defender of the faith) defended and sheilded
from all our enemies, in a far more blessed estate then we deserve; will make
such an odious comparison, as this is. But, as the old saying is, itch and
ease, can no man please. But if the Church be so imperfect in all her regiment
under our most gracious and true Christian Prince here in England, if our
estate be so disordered and so little blessed, in comparison of theirs at this
day, where the Civil Magistrates are not the greatest favorers: why do not
these Learned discoursers take their course thither, where the Church is so
perfect in all her regiment, even as they would have it, and in most blessed
estate that they can wish it? If this be a matter of such moment and
necessity, as they would bear us in hand, why go they not thither, where
they say it is even at this day? and they may go thither when they will. No, I
warrant you, they will none of it on that price: but will tarry here still, and
trouble their brethren, though they have it not. No, no, whatsoever is
pretended, to get that they would have: if they can-not have it, they have
learned this (or they may easily do, if they try experience) that it is good
keeping themselves well, when they are well. And welfare a good Christian
Prince, that favors the Church of God and the Gospel of Jesus Christ, when all
is done.

But what mean they by these glaunces, that the Church of God does stand at
this day in most blessed estate, where the Civil Magistrates are not the
greatest favorers? Do they mean by civil Magistrates, as they did before,
where they said, Whatsoever it please the Civil Magistrate to call or account
indifferent? etc. Referring this term to our most gracious Prince and
Sovereign? But I think they do not mean so, for as they speak more at large,
saying, Where the civil Magistrates are not the greatest favorers, noting
many, or more then one, and some other estates, which they compare with ours:
so they here give the^ an harder title, to be not the greatest favorers, then
that (I hope) they will say, Her May. favor of the Gospel*
they implie our gracious Sovereign in that term. If then they mean, that
we live under such a blessed Prince, as favors the Gospel: do these men
speak it in good sooth (as indeed sooth it is) or do they Jest, or speak it
but for fashion sake? But howe-soeuer they seem to glaunce hereat, (for they
neither say it in express words, but as it were by comparison, do seem to
infer as much, in telling us of other places in the world, where the Princes
are not the greatest favorers) notwithstanding they tell us neither what thing
it is, whereof they are not the greatest favorers. But I guess, that in this
their Rhetorical brevity, they mean that they favor not the Gospel, or the
Church of God. For it seems, they refer it not to this Regiment, that
themselves favor and desire. For so, they know, that her Majesty being also
not the greatest favorer of their desired Regiment: they might conclude, that
the Church of England, which they cry out of to be in a state disordered,
should be in that most blessed estate which they desire. They seem therefore
to mean this, that her Majesty is indeed a fouourer of the Gospel, or
Church of God, and yet the state of the Church of God, ( under Her Majesty)
is in an imperfect, less blessed, and more disordered estate, than it is,
where the Princes are not the greatest favorers of the Church of God, and of
his Gospel. Which if it be their meaning, (as I would be loath to gather of
their words any thing beyond their meaning,) so I had rather they expounded
themselves, or that their words needed not an expositer, as well many times,
as an answer. Now then, if their meaning be thus, that her Majesty is a
favorer of the Gospel, and of the Church of God, although this in some sense,
may seem but a cold and sclender commendation bestowed on her Majesty, to
be but a favorer; as though thee liked well enough thereof, and liked of
others that professed it, but her self were not so zealous a professor, and
lover of the Gospel: yet construyng all this to the best interpretation of her
favor thereunto, that her Majesty is a great favorer of the Gospel of God
and of his Church: how then does she so highly favor the same, and yet not
suffer the Church of God, to be so perfect in all her Regiment, as where no
Christian, but Heathen Princes are? and not to be in so blessed estate, as it
is under those Civil Magistrates, that are not the greatest favorers? Meaning
indeed (under a gentle name for reverence sake) are no favorers at all, but
so much as they can, hate and persecute the Gospel and Church of God: How her
Majesty under pretense of commendation is discomme^ded.
and yet (will they, nill they) suffer it more to florishe herein, than her
Majesty does, being so great a favorer of the same. What a foul rebuke,
(under pretense of commendation) is this to her Majesty? Yea, what a kind of
favoring call ye this, when the not favoring of the enemy, is better for the
Regiment of the Church, than the favorers love? Indeed, accidentalli^ things
may fall out so clean contrary, (as he that thought to kill his enemy, did
him more good in thrusting him thorough, The primitive state.
and opening that impostume settered within him, then all his friends and
Physicians that could not help him. But what gra-mercie was that to him?
Whereas directly of it self, is not this threatened of God, that he will take
away a good Prince in his wrath, and give an evil Prince, to punish the
wickedness of his people? and does not God promise, Good Princes a great
blessing* etc. ill Prince^ a great curse of God. Isai. 49.23.
as a great blessing to his Church, that Kings should be the foster fathers,
and Queens should be the noursing mothers thereof? But by these men, they had
a better Regiment, when they had Pharao to nourse them, with drowning of the
infantes in the water, and oppressing their parents on the land: and when
Herod bathed the infantes in their own blood. Did GOD mean, they should
have such Pappe with an Hatchet, and that Princes should be nourses on that
fashion? Or did he rather mean, that when he would send such Princes as
should favor his Gospel and his Church, even as the good nource comfort and
guides well the child, and is as it were an-other Parent to it, under whom
the child battelleth, and is well brought up; so next under GOD our heavenly
Father we should be nourished, fed, comforted, defended, and guided, till we
grow to our perfect age in Jesus Christ, under the godly Government of our
Christian Princes.

And is this, that is promised for so great a blessing, turned to a curse? And
the curse turned to so great a blessing? God is able indeed, to turn all
things to good. God had his Church still, even in the most dreadful
persecutions that ever were, How God can turn his curse to a blessing.
and the gold is siner that is tried in the furnace seven times. So that this
redoundeth in the end, both to the greater glory of God, and to the better
confirmation of his Church. But what can we conclude hereon? That the Church,
when such havoc is made in the congregation, and it is dispersed here and
there: is then more perfect in all her Regiment, and in most blessed state? S.
Paul says, Romans 5. Where sin abounded, grace did more abound. But what?
shall we say then, ( says S. Paul, Romans 6.) Shall we continue still in
sin, that grace may abound? God forbid. And in those days of more iniquity
abounding, in the time of planting among the Gentiles, the faith and Gospel
of Jesus Christ: the most part of the Gentiles raged, and the people imagined
vain things: the kings of the earth assembled, and the rulers came together
against the Lord, and against his Christ. Al-be-it, the faith took rooting
among some, both Princes and people. And GOD in that extraordinary time,
dealt extraordinarily with them, both with extraordinary gifts and
extraordinary offices. Whereby he so helped and beautified that Primitive
estate of the Church of Christ, among all those troubles, persecutions and
dissipations; yt the Church seemed rather to flourish the^ to be oppressed, and
to be In most blessed estate in some respects, when in other respects, it was
in most pitiful estate, as S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 6. of Gods help at such
times: For he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, How the Primitive
state was blessed and yet pitiful.
and in the day of salvation, have I succored thee. Behold now the accepted
time: behold now the day of salvation. We give no occasion of offense in any
thing, that our ministry should not be reprehended: but in all things we
approve our selves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions,
in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in prisons, in tumults, in labors.
By watchings, by fastinges, by pureness, by knowledge, by long suffering, by
kindness, by the holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the
power of God, by the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the
left, by honor, and dishonor, by evil report, and good report, as deceauers,
and yet true: as unknown, and yet known: as dying, and yet behold we live: as
chastened, and yet not killed: as sorowing, and yet always rejoicing: as
poor, and yet ^aking many rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all
things. The state of the primitive Church striving thus against all these
temptations and calamities, but by the grace and power of God surmounting them:
in this respect was in more blessed state, then when afterward enjoying peace
and prosperity, and abusing the same, contentions and other corruptions arose
thereuppon, in which respect the state was not so blessed.

Is therefore persecution and al these troubles, better for the regiment of the
Church of God, then peace and prosperity? Yea, was not that regiment that the
Church had then, abused also, in those that had the gift of tongues, the gift
of healing, and the gift of prophecieng? Which gifts not only many among the
Corinthians, did abuse? but also there were mani^ false Apostles, many ^uill
Pastors, many Teachers of false doctrine, and some Deacons not all the best.
And (no doubt) their Segniories were as much corrupted as the residue, if they
had any such standing officers among them, as these Discourses do conceive,
and as wherein they say, the Churches regiment most consisted, with the
Pastors, Teachers, and the Deacons. So that the Church of God, no, not at ye
time; no, not in that regiment that she was governed by; was then so perfect in all her regiment* nor in most blessed estate; for all that the Apostles were
then living, and for all the extraordinary gifts and offices, that then she
had.

No such Eccl. Governors in the Apostles times as our Brethren pret^nd.
And may we think, if there had bin such Governors among them at that time,
that either they (if they had not themselves been infected) would not have
reformed so many foul abuses? Or did not their authority stretch so far?
Or would not the residue be rather ruled by such governors among themselves,
then to trouble and endanger themselves being Christians, before Infidel
Judges? Or if they had had any such governors among them, would not S. Paul (
chiding the^ for going to law before infidel Judges) not rather have
exhorted, yea charged them, to have referre^ those matters to the Segniorie and
Governors, ye he had appointed over thee If he had appointed any, having
builded so great and famous a Church of God among them, continuing at
Corinthus a year and a half together: or to those that they had chosen among
themselves to be their Governors, if that were the only order of the
Churches regiment, then, and of such importance and necessity? Or how chance,
Saint Paul finding these inconveniences (in his absence from them) to have
fallen out, (perhaps because there wanted such Governors among them) does not
will them (among so many precepts, perteyning to the regiment of the church)
in one place or an other of both his Epistles, to chose and ordeine such
Governors over them? Or, mencioning Governors, What the Gouernour^ were
mentioned 1. Cor. 12.
and other gifts and offices, 1. Cor. 12. Would not say, these Governors, are
those Seniors, that either ye have, to direct these matters by: or at least, if
ye have them not, ye ought to have them? But as though, they neither had any
such, nor urging them to have any such Consistory of Governors over them,
speaking of their having business one against another, he says unto them, 1.
Cor. 6. Do ye not know, that the Saints shall judge the world? If the world
then shall-be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?
Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels? How much more, 1. Cor. 6.
things that perteine to this life? If then, ye have judgment of things
pertaining to this life: set up them which are least esteemed in the church. I
speak it to your shame. Is it so that there is not a wiseman among you, no,
not one that can judge between his brethren? By which words it appears,
that, not only in those matters, (whatsoever they were) but that also in
other matters perteining to the regiment of the church, being matters
perteining to this life, they had no such Consistories of Judges or Governors
among them. Nor S. Paul enforces any such upon them: but only to have some
one or other wise and godly man, to be chosen among themselves (and that also
without any prejudice to the authority of the government then established) to
be their Governor. For, they being without a Christian Prince, to be their
Governor, and being at that time also given to such corruptions and
contentions: either they must go before Infidels, or breed a confusion among
themselves. So necessary at all times is it to have a Governor, that even the
primitive Church could not be without her Governors. And yet neither the
thing that S. Paul persuades them to, (being one of the greatest Christian
churches in those days) was to set up a Consistory among them, but some one
Governor. Neither the matter that he diswades them from, is any other thing
more, The Corinthians had no ordinary consistory of eccle. Governors among
the^.
then for bringing their brethren and causes before Infidel Judges. So that,
this is not to be stretched beyond the state of the Corinthians then, nor any
rule prescribed to any particular church of GOD now, living under a prince or
Judge that is a Christian: That any church may, (otherwise then by way of
private arbitrament, as charitable, neighborlie, and blessed peace makers) take
authority to elect or ordeine hereby among themselves, any one or other
public Judge or Governor, and much less elect among themselves, and set up
a Segniorie or Consistory of Governors, in matters perteining to this life,
as are all indifferent matters, perteining to the Ecclesiastical regiment of
the Church: but that, when any controversy arises about them in the church,
( if they be not already prescribed in Gods word) we must all, after all our
deliberations on them, bring them to the final determination, and disposition
of the godly christian Princes judgment and censure, how they shall be used
of the subjects. And thus may we keep any other good order of Judges and
judgments, We having Christian Princes, are not bound to such Judges as the
Corinth. did choose.
even as well in ecclesiastical as civil controversies, according to the
government already established, with out any more need^ of reviving those
consistories whatsoever, that were then in any christian church used, than of
reviving this constitution of S. Paul for Judges. For, although S. Paul gave
such a prescription of Judges to them, in the want of other Christian
Governors: yet we that have now Christian Princes, and Christian Judges, and I
hope godly and righteous Judges also, are not bound to chose Judges in our
own Parishes. If we could indeed take up many needless controversies among
our selves at home: it were well done, and would save much travel, veration,
and expenses, and perhaps the Judges might be eased to. But if we should
thereupon make a rule, and say that we must needs have Judges at home in our
several Congregations, because S. Paul prescribed the Corinthians so to have:
and that all such public Judges to serve a whole realm or country, were not
lawful or were needless, because, in the Primitive Church they had no such
public Christian Judges for a whole realm or country: The danger of
imitating the Primitive Churches regiment here in.
might not this grow to the manifest injury not only of the Judges, but of
all the whole commonweal? Yea, might not the Christian Prince fear, that by
the same rule, (if it were true that ye say, there was no Christian Prince
then, when the Church was perfect in all her regiment) he might be driven
clean out of his civil regiment too, and out of all, not supreme only, but
any authority at all, among the Christians, and clean dispossessed of his
kingdom, except he would content himself, to be a Judge chosen in one
particular city? So that, neither inheritance, nor a whole Realm or Realms,
to be ruled by any one christian Prince, could hold any plea, if such rules
might be coined on such examples.

And then forsoothe, the church of GOD, as, before there was any christian
Prince: so after, they are all thrust out, or reduced to that state that they
were in, might be said to be perfect in all her regiment, once again. And
that the Church of God may stand and does stand in most blessed state,
where the civil Magistrates are not the greatest favorers, nor bear the
greatest rule, but all is brought again to the estate it was in before, in the
Apostles time, Do ye not see, what a most blessed estate the church of God
would come unto, by this rule? Caution in mutation.
And I pray you (brethren) what warrant have you more, or so much, for the
prescription of your Seniorie in every congregation, as is here prescribed by
S. Paul, for the choosing of this Judge or ruler, among the particular
congregations of the christians? We must take heed therefore, Cautio^ in
imitating examples, or prescribing upon particular rules.
how we stand on such examples, or how we enlarge any rule, that was particular
to the time, or state then, or to the place or persons there, to be-come an
ordinary, general, absolute, or perpetual rule to us, and to the whole
Church, whether it be by S. Paul, or by S. Peter, or by any, or by all the
Apostles, or by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ himself, practiced, yea,
or commanded. For diverse examples and commandments were but for certain
times, states, and places, and stretch no further. As the Disciples, to carry
neither gold, nor silver, nor money, nor scrippe, nor two coats, nor shoes,
nor staff, Matthew. 10. To abstain from things offered to Idols, and from
blood, and from that that is strangled, Acts. 15. And that men should pray
bare headed, etc. 1. Cor. 11. And albeit, that in the commandments and rules
prescribed of these things, and of the like, neither Christ nor his Apostles
tell, that they were to continue, but for a time: yet leueling the same by the
analogy of our faith, and by the proportion of our Christian liberty; we
find no such necessity in these things, nor of any other such like orders, as
in the regiment of the Primitive church was used. For though they were used as
orders, or as ornanaments, to beautify the blessed estate of the Churches
regiment then: yet neither the blessedness, nor the estate thereof, consisted in
them, when they had them. And if any church that now flourishes have any of
them, it is never the more blessed for them, as of any necessity to the
estate thereof. And if any have them not, and have other good orders of
regiment established among them, it is never the less blessed of God, for the
not having of them. If they have what is necessary: that suffices. Prove
either this Seniorie to be necessary for us imagining there had been any
such: or else all this most blessed estate, resolves to nothing.

But neither of these is yet proved, nor (I fear me) ever will be: that
there were any such Governors at all: A Confisto. of Ecclesi. Seniors not
necessary* but Magistrates necessary.
or that we are bound in every particular congregation, to obey, or to have
such a Segniorie. But we are bound to have, and to obey in all lawful
ordinances, our Princes and Magistrates: especially being Christians, and
favorers, and fosterers of the Church of God, defenders of the faith,
setters forth and professors of the Gospel. Where such Princes are, (as we
must needs confess we have, except we be too unthankful) there indeed the
Church of GOD may stand, and stands at this day, in far more blessed
state, without this Segniorie, then where this Segniorie stands, and the
Civil Magistrates are not the greatest favorers: or to speak plain English,
Whereon the churches gouer. depends.
are no favorers at all, but haters and persecuters of the Gospel.

And thus we see, how weak and untrue, both these propositions of these
reasons are, by the which as a notable great reason, in the end scars^ worth a
little currane, these our Learned Discoursers avouched, that, it might be to
every man so plain, that it was neither needful nor agreeable to good order
of teaching, to begin first to treat of the supreme authority of Christian
princes in ecclesiastical causes. Now, a^ we thus have seen the valor and
truth of these two propositions, whereon their reason is made: so let us see
their conclusion of this reason. Their conclusion is this: By which it is
manifest, that the regiment and government thereof, depends not upon the
authority of princes, but upon the ordinance of God: who has most mercifully
and wisely so established the same, that as with the comfortable aid of
christian Magistrates, it may singulerlie flourish and prosper: so without it,
it may continue, and against the adversaries thereof prevail. For the church
craves help and defense of Christian princes, to continue and go forward more
peaceably and profitablie, to the setting up of the kingdom of Christ: but
all her authority she receaueth immediately of God.

Is this then the conclusion of their reason? What is this to the present
question: The conclusion of our breath. argument against the ^irste treaty of
the Prince.
Or how hangs this upon the premises? May not the princes supreme
authority in ecclesiastical causes be first treated upon, except this must
straight be concluded on it, by which it is manifest that the regiment and
government of the church depends not upon the authority of princes, but
upon the ordinance of God? Wherefore is this so far fetched conclusion
brought in here? Before, you sai^ it seems, ( not yet telling to whom) but
now it seems, that it seems so to you, The dependence of the churches
government.
and that for a manifest and plain conclusion, that if the princes supreme
authority be first spoken of, then all the churches regiment depends on it.
But I cannot tell how it seems to you, to be a manifest and plain
consequence: I promise you, it seems not so to me. Nor (I think) to any man,
that will way the reason with any reason. And yet you threape such kindness on
us (that are, God be thanked, reasonable creatures also) that it now goes
beyond it seems: for it is manifest. Whereas indeed, not only it seems,
but is manifest, to be a manifest violent, and extorted conclusion. Yea, a
manifest injury both to God, to his church, and to all the authority of all
godly Christian Princes, and most manifest wrong unto her Majesty. Does her
Majesty in claiming the supreme authority in Ecclesiastical causes, in that
portion of the church of God committed to her Majesty's government, or in not
yielding to this your desired regiment, claim this, that the regiment and
government of the church, depends upon her authority? And if ye say ye
mean not her Majesty, but speak still upon Princes at large: though ye mend
not the matter, but make it worse, yet would to God ye would once name soon,
to put the matter out of all suspicion, and let them bear the blame, that
claim such high authority and absolute power, that all the regiment of the
Church depends thereon. No, I am sure ye can name no godly Prince that
does so. And yet see, not only how ye make this a manifest conclusion, but
how to aggrauate the matter, and make it more odious, ye conclude it also with
an opposition, between the Princes authority and Gods ordinance: saying, by
which it is manifest, that the regiment and government thereof, depends not
upon the authority of Princes, but upon the ordinance of God. As though the
Princes authority, were not also the ordinance of God. As the Apostle
expresselie says, Romans 13. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers,
for there is no power but of God. And the powers that be, are ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists, resists the ordinance of God.

And shall we now make an opposition, betwixt the authority of Princes (
especially speaking of Christian Princes) and Gods ordinance? No oppositio^
between Gods ordinance and the Princes authority.
How could the very enemies of us both, either the Papists or the Anabaptists,
have roughe hewn a sharper conclusion, against Christian Princes authority,
than this is? Notwithstanding, least Christian Princes should take just
offense, not only to have their authority thus clean cut off, but cast out
of the doors also of the Church of God, with such a contumely, as an
authority opposite to Gods ordinance, and yet claiming all the Churches
regiment to depend thereon: This conclusion shall be afterward smoothed with
gentler terms, and Christian Princes shall have somewhat granted to appease
them. And what in this conclusion is that authority, that shall be now yielded
unto Christian Princes? Forsooth, that God has most mercifully and wisely so
established the same, that as with the comfortable aid of christian
Magistrates, it may singulerlie flourish and prosper: so without it, it may
continue, and against all the adversaries thereof prevail. For, the Church
craves help and defense of Christian princes, to go forward more peaceably
and profitablie, to the setting up of the kingdom of Christ, but all her
authority she receaueth immediately of God. Why, what again is this to the
supreme, or to any authority of Christian Princes in ecclesiastical causes?
Here is somewhat indeed for the Churches authority: No oppositio^ between
the churches and the Princes authority.
but we speak not now of the Churches authority, so much, as of the princes
authority in the Church: except they will here make a double oppositio^, not
only between the princes authority and Gods ordinance: but also between
the prince and the Church, and either of their authorities, the princes, and
the churches, and so enter into a new question, which of these is greater. But
this is another great injury offered to christian Princes, The Churches
authority.
who are by this means (as it were) thrust out, not only of their authority
in the Church, but as being, either none at all of the Church ( save as an
opposite part thereunto) or if a part of the Church, yet a contentious part,
for authority striving with the Church, of the which themselves are a
principal part and member. For what else mean they by these words, the
Church craves help and defense of Christian Princes, but that they separate
the Christian Prince and the Church? And whom mean they then by the name of
the Church, the whole o^ particular body thereof? Whom they mean by the
name of the church.
But, all the people deal not with the government of themselves, nor are
their own Governors, which would breed a great confusion in their
government, and quickelie come to no government at all. If they mean these
four Tetrarches, ( as it seems they do:) they likewise be but parts to the
Church, as are the Princes, and inferior parts of the Prince also: except they
will contend for superiority above the Prince. But, inferior, or superior,
they be but parts, and cannot claim to themselves any more the name of the
Church, being but the Churches Ministers, ( if all be so) then the Prince or
the people may. Nor so much neither, the Prince representing the head, and the
people being the body. And if they say, they be Christ's ministers, so is the
Prince also, no less in his function, then any of them in theirs. And let
them look to it, thus under the name of the Church, to part all the churches
authority among them, The adversaries dealing under ^he name of the church.
and so oppose their authority (as the churches) to the Princes authority.
For thus played even the very popish Priests, the common enemies to us both.
And under pretense of the churches authority, and that they were the church,
the Ecclesiastical persons, and the church men; and that the Prince and the
people, were but mere lay and civil persons, separate from the church: they
not only kept the people down, but also wroong all authority in
Ecclesiastical causes from the Prince. And used even the same terms of the
church, and the Civil Magistrate, that here these our brethren use. Yea and
the same reason, and give the christian Princes as much, yea, the selfsame
titles, that here our brethren do. While thus, between them both, the
christian Princes are spoiled of all their authority in Ecclesiastical
causes. For what is all that is given to christian Princes here, but to be
only aiders, helpers, and defendors of the church?

Our brethren here give no more to the Prince then do the adversaries.
And do not the Papists use the same terms? And give as goodly titles as
these, to christian Princes? Yes, and more, and better too. But what is this
unto regiment, government, and authority? No, here is nothing mentioned, but
the regiment and government thereof. Whereof? Of the Prince? No, of the
church. And the church craves help and defense of christian Princes, but
all her authority is immediately of God. So that, of the Prince she receives
no authority at all. For, if s^ee receive all immediately of God: then she
receaueth none immediately, nor mediatlie of the Prince. And if the receive
none from the Prince, but all of God immediately, without any authority of
the Prince: then is she exempted from all the authority of the Prince, and all
her authority, is above all the authority of the Prince. Yea, the prince,
has no authority at all over her. And so not only the Prince, for any not
supreme, but any authority at all, over the church in Ecclesiastical
causes, The Prince spoiled of all authority in all Eccl. matters*
may go seek it elsewhere: (for the church is sped already of all her
authority from God immediately, without any from the Prince) but also the
prince hazardeth his civil authority too. For if the church finger any of
that also, it is as good as a Mort-maine against the Prince. For why? the
prince may help her, make her flourish and prosper: but all her authority is
immediately of God.

Have not Christian princes here, a fair supreme authority in
Ecclesiastical causes left them? If the church deal thus with christian
Princes: is that church worthy of the comfortable aid of christian
Magistrates, and to have it, when it craves help and defense of Christian
princes, that will acknowledge her self to receive no authority at all of
christian princes? If she says, she will acknowledge that she receaueth,
that is to say, comfortable aid of christian Magistrates, with the which it
may singularly flourish and prosper: and that she acknowledges the help and
defense that she craves of Christian princes, to continue and go forward more
peaceably and profitablie, to the setting up of the kingdom of Christ: This
is yet somewhat more, then before was granted.

So that, the church has need of Christian princes comfortable aid, The
healpe that the church receaueth of the Princ^.
help, and defense. And then without them, she is not so perfect in all her
regiment, nor in most blessed, nor so much blessed estate, but that I perceive
she is more blessed with them: and where the princes are favors of the
church, and Gospel, and kingdom of Christ: there it may flourish and
prosper, and that singulerly: which is somewhat more yet by one ace, then
where the princes are not the greatest favorers. But where they are favorers,
there the church ( that belike, stood still before, or went backward, or went
forward more difficultlye) may go forward not only more peaceably but also
more profitablie, to the setting up of the kingdom of Christ. This is much
more then was before granted. Yea, but say they, as it may have all these
benefits by the princes help: so without it, it may continue, and against the
adversaries thereof prevail. GOD forbid, else. But does it nota great deal
better prevail, with it? Yes, but what is all this unto any government,
regiment, or authority in the Prince, over the Church? My freende may help
me, yt has no authority over me: yea, so may my servants, that are under my
government, and with their comfortable aid, help, and defense, when I crave
it, I may singulerlie flourish and prosper. Yea, the prince himself (be he
never so high and mighty) may crave comfortable aid, help, and defense, of
an other prince, or of his own subjects, whereby he may both singularly
flourish and prosper. And also continue and go forward more peaceably and
profitablie, not only to the maintenance of his own estate, but also to the
setting up of the kingdom of Christ: what shall we conclude heereon? that
such persons therefore, have any authority over him? And this is all that is
here affoorded to any Christian prince over the church of God. And how much
is this? Forsoothe, What authority the Church receives immediately of God,
what mediatly of man.
for any authority more or less, when it comes all to all: none at all. And
why so? For, the church receives all her authority immediately of God. What,
and nothing mediatelie of man? No? Not of the Apostles? Nor by all, or by any
of these four estates? Or, are they only the church, and have all the
authority? Yea, are they God himself, if they only, be not the church? Or
does God give them still that power that they have, or pretend to have of him,
immediately, and by his own self, without any mediation; and that in all the
authority, not only of preaching the word, and ministering the Sacraments,
and binding and losing; but also of electing, imposition of hands, and
ordeining ministers, and of calling Councels, and of making any ordinances and
constitutions concerning any Ecclesiastical matters? What if some of these be
of God, but yet mediatelie of God, by Gods Ministers? And what if some of them
be of God also, but mediatelie from the Christian Prince? Yea, what if the
Christian princes authority be of God also, as much immediately as the
churches authority? Yea, and more immediately, then can be proved for all
these four estates? But, be the princes authority of God immediately, or
mediatlie of God by man: has not the Christian prince as much authority now,
since Christ's and his Apostles time here in earth, as it had ordinarily
before? What authority the Prince receives immediately of God and mediatlie
of man.
Or, did the church of Christ begin only then: and not rather from the
beginning of the world: as Gellius proves against the Anabaptists, that the
church still, not only in substance of the mystical body, and of doctrine:
but also of the authority of government, was even from the beginning of the
world, one and the same? Adam, Abraham, Moses, Iosue, the Judges, David,
Solomon, Asa, Iosaphat, Josias, Ezechias, Zorobabell, etc, were all christian
princes Had all of them authority from God, either immediately or mediatelie:
and have christian princes no more authority, then is here allowed? Or how,
and when, and where, have they since lost it? When we reason against the
papists, that still pretend the churches Authority ( meaning thereby their
popish Hierarchy) that they might bereave all christian princes of their
supreme authority in Ecclesiast. causes: we bring forth the examples of
Moses, Iosue, David, Solomon, Iosaphat, etc. If they had not been (in
substance and grounds of one and the same faith with us) Chri. Princes then,
(though not so called) as well as these that are called Christian Princes now:
or if Christian Princes have not as much authority now, as the Princes in and
over the Church of God had then: then are these examples, and the arguments
drawn from them, nothing to the purpose, but the Papists and the Anabaptists
will deride them.

Yea, as Saint Paul says of the Resurrection of Christ, 1. Corin. 15. If
Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also
vain, and we are found false witnesses of GOD. So, if these arguments for the
Princes authority, from the Old Testament to the New, Our Breath. confirming
the adversaries and the Anabaptists in all these examples.
are not substanciall and good arguments: then our preaching and alleging of
them against the Papists, and against the Anabaptists, is in vain, etc. But
these arguments of their examples are firm and good: (standing upon one and
the same perpetual rule of the Princes charge and government, in both
Testaments:) and so confute both the Papists and the Anabaptists* Christi^n
Princes therefore, according to the examples of Adam, Moses, Iosue, David, etc.
Have as much authority both mediate and immediate from God, as the Ministers
of the Church, or the Church it self has, to be Governors in the Church,
and over the Church of God also, or over any other of Gods Ministers. Not, to
have the Ecclesiastical Ministers peculiar offices, and Ecclesiastical
authority, or to execute the actions proper to their Ecclesiastical
functions; but to ouer-see, govern and direct all Ecclesiastical persons, to
do their duties in all Ecclesiastical causes, and to have the highest
authority in the Church, for the ordering, disposing, and authorizing, any
order or constitution Ecclesiastical in indifferent matters: notwithstanding
any assertion, reason, or proof, in this Learned Discourse, as yet alleged to
the contrary.

And as the Christian Prince has immediately under Christ, this supreme,
first and principal authority: so ought the Christian Prince, by as good
reason, in the treatise of the government of the churches Ecclesiastical
matters, to have had that supreme place which is first and principal; and not
that supreme place which is last and least of all, or rather which is none at
all: while all Ecclesiastical matters must be first distributed among these
four estates, and be only directed by them. But until these four, be all
served in their places and orders: her Majesty, and all Christian Princes,
must hold themselves contented with this: and in the end, they shall see
further, if any more authority in Ecclesiastical matters, be left unto them.
In the mean season, let us now return, whether our Brethren lead us, to the
producing of these four Tetrarkes, what their offices are, how necessary and
important they be: and what several authority, or in common, is assigned unto
them.

The second Book of the Doctor or Teacher.
The Argument of the second Book.
THE second Book, is of their first Tetrarche, called the Doctor or Teacher:
wherein, after their resolutions of all the 4. Tetrarches, with the effects,
and necessity thereof, with challenge of the Fathers alteration, and the
unhappy success, and of our disordered state: and after their Apology for
their method of this Learned Discourse: they come to their treaty of their
Doctors. That this D. is the cheifest office in the Church, and most
necessary, and to be had in every congregation. And of their name, institution
and office, whether they be a several office necessarily distinguished from
Pastors: whether the Apostles words, Romans 12.1. Cor. 12. and Ephesians. 4. do infer
such distinction of office: the interpretation of the ancient fathers, and of
the late writers on these places for this question: especially, whether the
Doctors or Teachers must only teach true doctrine, and confute false, or may
with their teaching join exhortation and application, to their hearers.
Whether there were ever, in the Old Testament, or in the New, any such
Doctors as our Brethren suppose: with the examination of the examples they
allege. What was the manner of the Doctors and Catechisers, teaching in the
Primitive and ancient churches: and what now in the churches reformed.

LET us therefore return to those offices of Ecclesiastical Regiment, which
remain to be exercised in the Church of God, The learned Dis. Page 10.
being instituted and ordained by Christ himself, which before we have
proved out of the Scriptures, to be only these? Doctors, Pastors, Governors,
and Deacons, whereof some apperteine to doctrine, some to government and
discipline. The duty of Doctors and Pastors, is chiefly to teach and
instruct the people of God, in all things, that God has appointed them to
learn. The office of Elders and Deacons, is to provide, that good order and
discipline be observed in the Church.

IN this return, Doctors.
to these four offices of Ecclesiastical regiment, Bridges.
these Learned Discoursers first set down as a clear raze, these
resolutions. That only th^se, Doctors, Pastors, Governors, Our Breath, to
bold resolution of these four Tetrarches.
and Deacons, do remain to be exercised in the Church of God: That these
four offices of Ecclesiastical regiment be instituted and ordained by Christ
himself: and that they have proved this out of the scriptures. Soft a while
(Brethren) let us return with you. Where (I pray you) and when, and how, and
out of what places in the scriptures, have ye proved this? It was said so
indeed, but not proved. Ye alleged only three places, Romans 12. ver. 6.1.
Cor. 12. ver. 28. and Ephesians. 4. ver. 11. But neither have ye Proved out of any,
or all of those testimonies, all these four offices of Ecclesiastical
Regiment: neither can ye do it. What these Governors were: whether the same
that Bishops, or Pastors and Teachers, or your supposed Seniors, or any
Ecclesiastical or civil officers, is not there, or in any other place, that
ye have yet cited, either in the Text of scripture expressed; or by any
argument, that you have made, Proved. Neither have ye proved, that all these
four Ecclesiastical offices, were instituted and ordained by Christ
himself, as here you affirm. Neither have ye proved that all these four
offices, now remain to be exercised in the Church of God. None of all these
things are yet proved, as may appear by that we have seen in all this your
Learned Discourse hitherto, and by all the places themselves in the
Scriptures. And thereupon, I put me to the veredict of every indifferent
Readers judgment. And yet see, how boldly you dare avowe all this, and
flatly say thereon: (which we have proved out of the scriptures:) where,
neither the Scriptures which ye have cited, have it: nor ye have proved it
out of them; yea, neither with them, nor without them, ye have proved it at
all.

Now concerning the distribution of this four squared government, to the
which these offices are severally to be assigned, whereas these Learned
Discourses say: Whereof some apperteine to doctrine, some to government:
What? do ye here divide these four officers, A doubtful and confused
distribution.
into three wards, or into two? If ye say into two (for, the distribution is
manifest) some to doctrine, and some to government and discipline: and not,
some to doctrine, and to government, and some to discipline: but the latter
two government and discipline, ( not dividing the same by a several some, but
by the copulative and, conioyning them together, government and Discipline,)
we conteyne under one of these two several somes. Very well said, and can
you thus your selves divide these things, and conioyne, and it must be holden
for a good dividing and conioyning, and can you not be content with Saint
Paul's like distribution, where he says, Ephesians. 4. ver. 11. He therefore gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers? The Apostle here distributeth them by somes, as you do, and when he
comes to this, The Apostles distribution.
and some to be Pastors: he adds not, as an other different office, and some
to be Teachers: but as you do here say, some to government and discipline,
including both together, (without any further distribution) under one some,
both apperteining to one office: and yet you will solemnly break this order
of Saint Paul, contrary to your own order here of distribution* and where
he makes but one office, in two diverse words: you will divide them into
another some, and make Pastors one office, and Teachers another office by it
self, as that of the Evangelists distinct from the Apostles, or from the
Prophets. But of your reasons, why ye thus divide these things, we shall see
God willing more, in your several handling of these offices.

But now, because, besides this distribution of these four offices, some are
referred but to one Province, that is doctrine; meaning the two former offices,
as you divide them, Teachers and Pastors: and some are referred to government
and discipline; meaning the two later, Governors and Deacons. Howbeit, not
telling which apperteine to which: whether government to Governors, and
discipline to Deacons: or government to Deacons, and discipline to Governors:
or (as they says in the Schools) Confuse capitur, let them take both
indifferently between them. Except ye will say, that ye mean these words
(...) as though diverse words, yet but one matter. But I cannot perceive how
ye can well do so, distinguishing so preciselie between feeding and teaching,
and yet confounding government and discipline. For though discipline, as we
usually take the word (which otherwise, by the Etimologie thereof, might be
drawn nearer unto Doctrine,) may be comprehended under the name of
government: yet is not government, being the genus, or general word to
discipline, comprehended under discipline, nor all one with it. And therefore,
as this is a confused distribution, or rather disturbation of these offices: so
the bounds and lunits here assigned to them, are much disordered, and out of
all proportion.

Neither is this any better that follows, of the several partition of these
four officers duties in their charges, saying; The duty of Doctors and
pastors, is chiefly to teach and instruct the people of God, in all things
that God has appointed them to learn. What mean ye here by this word
chiefly? Not, all their duty: but the principal? And is this the chief
duty, of both these two? Or the chief duty of one of these two, that is to
say, the Doctors? To teach and instruct the people of GOD, in all things that
GOD has appointed them to learn.

This indeed is properly called doctrine, and thereupon, ye are now content
(although it were long before) to afford this title of Doctor unto any. But
belike some of you that compiled this Learned Discourse, or some other that way
affectionate, have taken the degree of Doctors: and therefore the name is more
gracious, then when it was expresselie exclaimed upon. And if any of that
degree had written against them, he was meetelie well, Master Doctored, for
his labor. The Doctor has the cheifest place.
But Master Doctor is now become one of these four estates. Yea, Master
Doctor is the first man that shall-be treated upon. And Master Doctor has
his authority assigned to him, before any of the other three estates. Only
this, methinks, Master Doctor is somewhat hardly pent up, and scarce offered
elbowe room, in his chief duty and peculiar office. For here, doctrine,
teaching, instructing the people of God, in all things that God has appointed
them to learn, is made as well the chief duty of the Pastor, as of the
Doctor. As for the office of Elders and Deacons: it is to provide, that good
order and discipline be observed in the church, but what they contain under
the name of order, and under the name of discipline, and which of them shall
have which, or both alike: and how they shall provide: and whether they shall
make any order more then the other: or whether the other two, or any of the
other two, shall not do this, as far forth as they: or whether they shall
only look to the observation of these things, not making orders, but provide
only that the orders made among them, be observed: or whether they shall be
like to our Churchewardens and sidemen, as we call them: These things and
many other arising heereon are not here expressed. But we shall peradventure
see more hereafter, what shall be severed out to every several office, when
they shall come forth more orderly in their orders. In the mean season,
having thus distinguished and assigned these duties and charges, to these four
offices: they tell us of the fruit and benefit, that shall redound unto us,
by the establishing and exercising of them.

These offices being rightly established and exercised in the Church, The
learned Dis. Page 10. and 11.
are able to make us meet together, in the unity of faith and knowledge of
the son of God, unto a perfect man according to doctrine. And both for
doctrine and order of government, to make us one body of Christ, and members
one of an other.

All this (we hope in God) may well be done, by the Pastor or Teacher, Ephesians.
4.13. 1. Cor. 12.27
without any bringing in, establishing or exercising of any such Governors,
as is pretended. And yet this may be granted well enough also: Bridges.
these offices being rightly established and exercised. What effect^ may ensue
of this Tetrarchie.
For thereby hangs a question, about the right or wrong establishing and
exercising of them. And as for the order of government, what these are able to
make us: GOD grant, they may not as well (our order of government established
being thoroughly considered) be able to mar us, The Tetrarchie.
as to make us; or to make us not to meet together, but to separate our selves
in the unity of faith and knowledge of the son of God, far from a perfect
man, according to doctrine: and both for doctrine and order of government, to
make a foul disorder in this one body of Christ, and iarring of the members
one from another. What necessity of these effects
But the mark, that we must aim unto, is not, what we may be made able to or
fro; but whether these offices be of such importance and necessity, that
without all these four offices meet, we cannot meet together in the unity
of faith, and knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, according to
doctrine, etc. For then should we condemn all the Churches, that have not all
these four offices, thus distinguished, established and exercised, as they
prescribe. Yea, then had God no Church at all, in any part of the world here
on earth, this many hundredth years, until these days. For these Governors,
that they would set up, have not been any where, since the Primitiu^ state:
presupposing, there were then any such, as they imagine. But God forbid, that,
for the want of these Seniors, whom they call Governors, we should condemn
all the militant Church of Christ, so universally, and so long a time,
having had the unity of faith and knowledge of the son of God, according to
doctrine: albeit, it were not unto a perfect but an imperfect man. And yet all
this (apperteining to the office of Pastors and Teachers) may make us meet
together, in these things, unto a perfect man also. And is not this inoughe
withal, to make us one body of Christ, and members one of another? And is
this done by the order of government? Or not rather by the unity of faith
and knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man according unto doctrine?
Nay, the place here quoted, Ephesians. 4. ver. 13. Nor any verse thereabouts,
mencioneth Deacons or Governors, These effects without this Tetrarchie.
or any order of government, concerning any external form of Ecclesiastical
regiment: otherwise then precepts of godly life, going before and following in
that chapter. And yet the Apostle notwithstanding, sets down all this
effect, and more to, saying? He therefore gave some to be Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers: for the
gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the
edification of the body of Christ; till we all meet together in the unity
of faith, and knowledge of the son of GOD, and unto the measure of the age
of the fullness of Christ, that we hence-foorth be no more as children, etc.
Here Saint Paul adds three other things, unto those cited by these our
Learned Discoursers. For the gathering together of the Saints: for the work of
the Ministry: and for the edification of the body of Christ. And yet is no
mention at all made of any more offices remainder with us, then Pastors and
Teachers, having also joined these together as is aforesaid. Now then, if God
do all this that is here expressed, by Pastors and Teachers only: what
necessity is there here unto, so peremptorily to enforce these Governors
upon us? If they say, yet these may do good hereunto, that we may the more
easily atteine all these effects: If they press us no further: the^, with the
grace of God, having Pastors and Teachers here mentioned, yea having Deacons
also (without the setting up of these their other supposed Governors) we may
well-inough enjoy all these effects, ye the Apost. names. But these
Disccoursers, presupposing the consequence of these effects, only upon the
establishing and exercising of all these 4. offices: they shooue further and
further on ye same, to assay, if they can shooue all other order of government
out of the doors, saying: The learned Dis. Page 11. Bridges.


Now, what should be desired more then this, in the church of God?

I answer, that in respect of the inward regiment, of ye mystical state of the
kingdom of Christ, or of the necessity of our salvation; nothing need be
more desired the^ this. But in respect of the outward regiment of the Church,
and the state of this life: Many things, as means, furtherances, and ornaments
hereunto, may be more desired. They demand further:

Or what wisdom of man can epsy better than the spirit of God, The L.D Page
11.
by what means this should be brought to effect which we do desire?

I answer: if the spirit of God have set down the order of the regiment, of
all these four offices, to be the only, necessary, ordinary, Bridges.
and perpetual means, whereby this should be effected: then, the wisdom of
man can epsy none better, nor ought to epsy any other; and if it do, Man's
wisdom and wit.
it is both folly and sin. But if the spirit of God have not set down this
order, of the regiment of all these four offices, to be the only,
necessary, ordinary, and perpetual means, whereby this should be brought to
effect: then the wisdom of man ( meaning the man of God) may safely set
down, such godly orders of government, as shall be best to bring these
things to effect. They demand again:

What man's wit can devise better then the wisdom of God has expressed? The
L.D Page 11. Bridges.


I answer: what man's wit can devise worse then to tie us with necessity
perpetually to that, which the wisdom of God has either not expressed, or
not so expressed, ye he has perpetually bound us thereunto? The L.D Page 11.
Bridges.


Or, when God has established an order, for the administration of his own
house: what presumption of man dare change it?

Or, when God has not established an order, for the administration of his own
house: what presumption of man dare urge it?

But what dare not dust and ashes presume to do against his maker, The L.D Page
11.
and that with greatest inconvenience: when with best pretenses of correcting
and reforming that, which they do think to be imperfect in his doings?

But what dare not dust and ashes presume to do, Bridges.
under pretense of his maker, and of his doings? And what dare not vassailes
and subjects presume to do, against their Princes and Magistrates established
government, and that with greatest inconvenience, Doctors.
when with best pretenses of correcting and reforming that, which they do
think to be imperfect in their doings?

The learned Dis. page 11. and 12.
Example thereof we have most evident. That, which is alleged as the chief
defense of this disordred state, which now remains in our church: namely,
that our fathers of old time were not content with the simple order instituted
by Christ, and established by his Apostles: but for better governing of the
Church, thought good some offices to add thereto, some to take away, some to
alter and change: and in effect to pervert and overthrow all Christian and
Ecclesiastical policy, Ephesians. 2.20.
which was builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ being the chief corner stone.

Bridges.
True indeed, the disorderly dealing of these our Brethren, is a most evident
example of all this: we need not run to old and far fetched examples. Our
Breath. disordered speeches, of our disordered state.
That this state is disordered, is but the former standerous and disordered
speech of these Discoursers: Reaching further in such a general word of
state, then humble and godly subjects ought to do. Yea, if the state were in
some points disordred: yet would these speeches have been moderated in better
order, then so lauishlie to lashe out such terms, against the state. But if
any thing therein were out of order; were this the way to order it better, to
turn all the orders established clean out, and to bring in new strange
orders, or old antiquated orders, or that either never were, or we are not
bound to be ordered by? Were not this rather the very high way, to make a
more (if not most) disordered state, and to bring all the government
established out of order? But what order call ye this: to say, that is
alleged as the chief defense, etc. Namely, that our forefathers of old time
were not content with the simple order instituted by Christ, Disordered
alleging our allega^ions.
and established by his Apostles? Which of all us does allege this, as his
chief defense, or any defense, or alleging at all thereof? And which of our
forefathers ( I pray you) are alleged, and of what old time do we allege
them so at randon, that a man may neither know who they be that allege them:
what they be that are alleged: when, where, and what they allege: and yet to
say that they were not content, but Malcontents (as you seem herein to
show your selves) and not content with the simple order instituted by Christ,
Chris^es in^^^tution.
and established by his Apost. What simple order do ye mean, so instituted and
established? If ye mean, the order of regiment, of all these your four
offices: I pray you, where did Christ institute all these four, and the
Apostles establish them, in such order as you prescribe them? And I beseech
you, did not the Apost. themselves think good, for better governing of the
Church, to add to some offices, that Christ instituted not? And with-all (I
pray you) were all the offices that Christ did institute, yea, and all those
that the Apostles added, to be simply so holden for perpetual offices, that
neither they, nor the Church ever after, might take away some of those offices,
The Fath. sclaundred
nor alter and change some, that were instituted even by Christ himself, yea,
and established by the ^^ostles themselves in their times; but that this must
be thus roughly censured, to be in effect, to pervert and ouer-turne all
Christian and Ecclesiast. policy, which was builded upon the foundation of the
Prophets and the Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20.
Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone.

And did S. Paul (I pray you) in this place, mentioning building on this
foundation, either speak of, or mean, S. Paul's words wrested.
all Christian and Ecclesiastical policy? If he did not: how dare you add
this sense unto the Apostles words? Which speaks there altogether, of our
mystical incorporation into Jesus Christ, by the spirit of God and preaching
of his word, building v^ into his Church and habitation and not of any
external form and order of offices in the Church, builded, whether they were
perpetual or to be altered. Of the which orders that all were not perpetual,
but some to be altered and changed, though Instituted by Christ, The ancient
Fathers sclandered.
and established by his Apostles, for that time: the old Fathers that
succeeded the Apostles, did so little pervert and ouerturne, any material
part of the Church of God builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and the
Apostles, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone, letting go those orders
and offices which were not perpetual: that some of those old Fathers, rather
did offend (succeeding the primitive Church) in that they labored to retain
some of those orders and offices still, holding and urging them as necessary
and perpetual. And how much more then should they offend, that when one of
these offices presupposed, so mani^ hundred years has ceased in all the whole
Church, would now go about, (and that of necessity) to urge and prescribe
the same to all Churches? Yea, what offense then, should we call this: when to
bring in those offices that have been out so long, we should thrust out
th^se, that have been continually in: to wit, the offices of Bishops, which
were instituted and established in the Apostles times, and have continued ever
since, Perverting the Churches policy.
notwithstanding any corruptions and abusinges of them, even as well as the
office of Pastors, and Teachers has done, which have likewise been corrupted
and abused? And now, after so many hundred years establishment, to remove
the office of Bishops and take it away: what were this, but to pervert and
overthrow a great part of the Christian and Eccles. policy which remains?

But how vnha^^ie a success this good intent, (as they call it, The learned
Dis. Page 12.
) of theirs, deserved to have of God, who always abhors al good intents of
men, that are contrary to the good pleasure of his will, expressed in his
holy word: the age before us (alas) has felt, the present time does plainly
see, and we pray God the posterity, warned by examples of their ancestors,
Good intentes.
may take heed of it.

Bridges.
We defend not, nor stand upon these good intentes of men, that are contrary
to the good pleasure of God or his ^^ll, Good Intentes.
expressed in his holy word. Thanks be to God, we know, God abhors it:
and (God be praised) we abhor it, and confess, it has had, and still will
have unhappy success. But why speak ye this, more to the blemishe of the
state of Gods Churches government among us: then among your selves? Do we
maintain and enforce (as you do) any such intent? Name it. If ye say, it is
this our order of government in Ecclesiastical matters: Prove it. As yet in
this your Learned discourse, you have not proved it. And if ye can not prove
it; how do not these your own words then, with a recumbentibus, return on
your selves? If ye have no good intent: that is worse. If ye have a good intent
( as I hope ye have) and can not prove, that this your platform of Eccles.
government, is prescribed necessarily unto us, in Gods word, and ought to be
perpetual in all Churches: will your good intent, ( thinking it so to be)
excuse you? Take you also heed therefore, and we pray God for you, (as you for
us,) that we may both of us, and all of us, be warned by such examples, of the
unhappy success of good intentes of men, contrary to the good pleasure of
Gods will, expressed in his holy word. But what are these ill events, of
these good intentes ye speak of?

For where there are especially 2. things propounded in the Church of God; The
learned Dis. P. 12.13.
Doctrine and Discipline, (as if a man would say, knowledge and practice) by
which the glory of God is sought and shines therein: in steed of true
doctrine, followed all manner of corruptions of the same, both in the whole and
in every part thereof, as ignorance, heresies, Idolatry, superstition, etc.
the Discipline degenerated unto intolerable tyranny and external Domination,
clean contrary to the commandment of Christ, whereof ensued all unbridled
license of ungodly living. To be short, the exchange of the ordinance of God
and Christ, brought in nothing else, 2. These. 2.12.
but the Devil and Antichrist.

This division here, of Doctrine and discipline, ( which notwithstanding I
speak under correction) seems to me somewhat intricate, Bridges.
to make these 2. membra diuidentia, doctrine and discipline, answerable to
knowledge and practice. An uneven division of Doctrine and discipline.
Which latter twain, knowledge and practice, make indeed a good division. For
as the one is not confounded with the other, so they 2. do part the whole between
the^, knowledge and practice. But so do not, Doctrine and discipline. Of which
the one may be included in the other and so they divide not, nor comprehend the
whole between the^. Except ye conclude regiment in discipline. Where discipline
rather, should better be contained in regiment, as a part appertaining
thereunto. But let your division go; and understand discipline in your own
sense: (which now and the^ is made a part of doctrine it self: and here
parts stakes with doctrine) albeit it is good to go plain and even,
especially in defining and dividing, upon the importance of which two, hangs
the greatest moment, both of truth and perspicuitie, in all controversies that
arise. And many there be (eue^ in these controversies between us) that talk
much of discipline, and (God wot) full little know they, what it means. Now,
although Discipline contain not all the actions and practice of the life of
man, which is Membru^ dividens here with knowledge or Doctrine, nor co^taine
all the regiment of the Church, but a part thereof: yet because discipline ( as
it is usually taken) is a necessary part of Regiment: true it is, that both in
doctrine and in discipline, the glory of God is sought, Unhappy success.
and shines. And this also is very true, that when the good intentes of men,
are contrary to the good pleasure of Gods will, expressed in his holy word;
there is deserved this unhappy success, that in steed of true doctrine,
followed all manner of corruptions of the same. At leastwise, this is a ready
way to make it to have followed. For we must here again, temper and mollify
this peremptory speech: This success has not followed in every part of the
Church.
Sith (God be praised) it has not so followed in the whole Church, and every
part thereof; neither in the whole corpse of doctrine and every part thereof, as
ignorance, heresies, Idolatry, superstition, etc. For then, the faith of
Christ had utterly sailed, contrary to the promise of Christ Matthew. 16. and
the gates of hell had prevailed against his Church: these Good intentes ( I
grant) having done much hurt, even in all places, at leastwise in one thing
or another. And likewise I grant, that on this occasion among others, the
Discipline degenerated into intolerable tyranny and external domination: Too
sharp a conclusion.
Whereof ensued all unbridled license of ungodly living. Howbeit, whereas you
conclude, saying: To be short, the exchange of the ordinance of God and Christ,
brou^^t in nothing but the Devil and Antichrist. 2. Ephe. 2.
This is somewhat too short a conclusion on this matter, and too sharp also:
to impute all this, to the exchange of the ordinance of God and Christ. Ye
spoke before, of good intentes of men, contrary to the good pleasure of Gods
will, expressed in his holy word. And if ye mean, such exchange of the
ordinance of God and Christ; you say something: The Church not tied to all
the offices instituted of God.
but, to us, or to this present question between us, nothing. But if you
think, that the Church of God, is so necessarily and perpetually tied to
all those Offices, which either God (meaning the Father, or Jesus Christ his
son our Lord, being God also) did either himself ordain, or the Apostles,
or the Church ( in their days) ordained, that she can-not let go some of
those offices, and bring in other some; still retayning those, that are by
Christ and his Apostles ordained to be perpetual in his Church: this is a
great error in you. For, God himself ordained all the Leuiticall and
sacrificing Priesthood, and other offices; no we clean ceased.

Change of Gods ordinance.
And Christ ( whom ye will confess to be God also) did his own self ordain
Apostles, and Evangelists, etc. And these were the principal offices that
were established: and yet even these are ceased and gone also. So that here we
see, the manifest exchange of the ordinance of God and Christ. And will you
conclude straight ways hereupon: Is there a change of the ordinance of God and
Christ? Then, to be short, it brought nothing but the Devil and Antichrist.
Yea, but (will you say) you take us now too short: for we mean not such
changes as God and Christ made: but such changes as men make of good ententes,
contrary to the good pleasure of Gods will expressed in his holy word. Well,
if that be your meaning, Our Brethrens sclander of us confuted by their own
testimony.
what is that to us? Or else, how does your argument follow? For (God be
blessed) none of all these unhappy successes are happened yet to us, and I hope,
and pray, that God will bless us still from them. Have not we the only, and
whole doctrine of Gods truth? Do we maintain any errors? No, themselves
can not deny it. I report me to these Learned discoursers own testimony in
their Preface, that we differ not in matter, or in the substance of Religion,
which has in diverse assemblies abroad and at home, been disputed, resolved,
and now publicly maintained, for our true and holy faith. If then, we
mainetaine the true and holy faith, and differ not from themselves (as they
say) in substance of Religion: can these speeches be charitablie or truly
applied unto us: that we bring in, or maintain nothing but the Devil and
Antichriste? Or do we bring in, or maintain the Devil and Antichrist? So
hardly under the name of the old Fathers, these speeches run against us
their Brethren, whom they confess to agree with them selves in doctrine. and
who is this Antichrist that they mean? If it be the Pope: have not we driven
him out, and all his error^: and profess and Teach the only truth of God? And
if we teach the truth, have we the Devil? Or rather, may we not say with our
Savior Jesus Christ, both in our defense, we have no Devil; and demand of
you, If we speak the truth why do ye not believe us? O Brethren, take heed
of such bitter speeches, as prepostorous and eager zeal (howbeit grounded on
good intent) made the Jews break forth against Jesus Christ, with such
reproachful terms as these are. Our Breath. too peremptory censure.
And although these Discourses quotation here 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. be both
impertinent to the matter in hand, and also to the proouing of the bringing in
the Devil and Antichrist: and least of all, (as we trust in God) shall any
whit touch us: yet see here, with how sharp a censure, they be alleged
against us: which words are these; that all they might be damned which
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. But sith, (by
their own confession) we are so far from pleasure in unrighteousness, that
we both believe and profess the truth, so well as they, or any other do; we
more repose our selves upon the mercy and righteousness of God: Reformation
minded.
then that we fear to be damned for these things, or for the rash judgments
of our Brethren. For why, to those that be in Jesus Christ, there is no
condemnation. And if God justify us who can condemn us? But what is now the
conclusion of all this drift?

Wherefore if we mind such a reformation as shall be acceptable to God, and
profitable to his Church; The learned Dis. Page 13.
we must thoroughly be resolved to set up no new kind of ministry, of our
own invention, neither for teaching, nor for discipline in the Eccles. state,
but bring all things to that most perfect and absolute order, which God
himself has established by his word.

We have indeed minded such a reformation. Bridges
And God be praised for it, who gave us the mind, that he has given us the
means also, The reformation of our Church
to do the thing we minded. And we believe, the Church of England ( for the
public state thereof) has such a reformation, as is acceptable to God, and
profitable to his Church. And would be yet more acceptable unto God, and more
profitable to his Church: if it were not for such unnecessary schisms and
hindraunces of our Brethren. And if among us being reformed from the Popish
errors and abuses, there remain any particular defectes, or personal faults:
they also being convinced so to be, may be reformed in such good order, as
shall not be prejudicial to the government and reformation that is
established. And if we must ( as these discoursers say) be thoroughly resolved
to set up no new kind of ministry, of our own invention, neither for
teaching, No new Ministry to be set up.
neither for discipline in the Ecclesiastical state: Surely then (for any
thing I see) we must be thoroughly resolved, not to set up, either the officers
for teaching, whom these men call Doctors, or the officers for discipline, whom
they call Governors, in the Ecclesiastical state of this their desired
regiment: Yea, their Pastors and their Deacons to. For, in such order as they
prescribe them, I think they will be all found a new kind of ministry:
howsoever they pretend, to bring all things to that most perfect and
absolute order, which God himself has established by his word. But, to set
aside these terms of perfect and absolute: what do these men mean by so
often inculcating of these sayings? Would they have us look for Apostles,
Evangelists, and Prophets again? For, they were the chiefest that were then,
of God himself established by his word. If they say, they mean of such
established, as should be perpetual: let go, the perfection and absoluteness
of them, and prove the perpetuity and necessity of these offices.

And because all offices of the Church are so linked together, as the members
of one body, whereof Christ is the head: The learned Dis. P. 13.14.
we will so describe one part, as the description of them all may be
sufficiently comprehended therein. Our Breath. Method.
As if a man would set forth the manifold office and uses of the hand; he
should declare what it does alone, and what it does with the help of the other
hand, or with the arm, with the breast, with the knee, or with the foot. etc.
what it can do, with diverse kinds of tools, and what without all manner of
instruments. This order we thought good to observe in describing the
ministry of the Church, as by which, both the distinction and communication
of all offices and services in the Church, might most plainly appear.
Otherwise, we force not, by what Method: so the same truth be plainly set
forth by any man. And as we control not other men's Methodes by ours, so we
would not, that other men's manner of teaching should be prejudicial to ours.
This we say because of them which either for lack of wit, or through too much
wilfulness, if they see any difference in the form and order of teaching of
diverse men, though in matter and substance they all agree: they exclaim there
is no unity, and therefore no truth among them.

That all offices of the Church are so linked together, Bridges.
as the members of one body, whereof Christ is the head: I think may be
further called in question, How the head and parts of the mystical and
natural body are linked.
how it may be rightly understood. For the members of one body are so linked
together, and especially the official parts thereof; that if any of them be
disioyned from the body, beit hand, or arm, or breast, or knee, or foot: the
whole body is maimed. Yea, without the breast ( I take it) it can not live.
And as for the mystical body of Jesus Christ, whereof he is the head;
though this communion be in such a mystical sort, as the life of this head
depends not upon the mayming, or taking away of any part or member of the
mystical body, not taking any life at all, of any part of the body, but
giving all the life they have: unto all the parts thereof (as the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 4.) that we should grow up in him which is the head; that is
Christ: by who^ all the body, being coupled and knit together by every joint,
(for the furniture thereof, according to the effectual power, which is in the
measure of every part) receaueth increase of the body, to the edifying of it
self in love. So that, no true part or living member of this mystical body,
can indeed be severed from Christ their head, as Christ himself says, I am
the vine, Ioh. 15.5.
ye are the branches, etc. except they be such unfruitful branches, of who^ he
says: If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and withers,
and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they burn. But if they
be^ members of the mystical body indeed, then may they safely boste with
Paul, Romans 8. and say, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril,
or sword? As who say; no. For (says he) I am persuaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor principallities, nor powers, nor things present,
not things to come, nor heighte, nor depthe, nor any other creature, New
ministry.
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Jesus Christ
our Lord.

And shall we now say, that all offices of the Church, The churches offices
not so linked as the parts of the body.
are so linked together, as the members of one body, whereof Christ is the
head? For my part, I dare not anowe it, of all offices of the Church. Neither
only of those offices, that are ceased, as the Leuiticall Priests, or as the
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and diverse others: no, nor yet of all the
offices of the Church remaining, and that have continued, and be still among
us, as Pastors and Deacons: which are two of these your four offices. For if
we had no Deacons at all, (as we have:) yet might the Pastors and Teachers
office still continue entier, in the substance of the office ( and much less
empayred) without any such necessity of these supposed Governors, that are
so importunately required. But this cannot be either in all the members of a
natural body, and much less in any of the members of the mystical body,
where-of Christ is the head, that they can be separated one from an-other, and
remain entier: and therefore all offices of the Church are not so linked
together, as are the substanciall parts thereof.

As for these our Learned discoursers description of the Churches offices,
promising so to describe one part, as the description of them all, The order
that our brethren promise to observe.
may be sufficiently comprehended therein: although it be not material; yet I
see not also, how they have discharged this promise of theirs, in describing
every one of their four officers, after this manner, as we shall plainly
perceive in their treatise even of their first office of Doctor immediately
following. Wherein they neither deal with, nor speak of, either their
Deacons, or their Governors, or show how their Doctor has any intermedling
with them at all. And therefore, they fail both in the manner of this
description, that here vnnecessarilie they tie themselves unto; nor they do not
after this example, as if a man would set forth the manifold office and uses of
the hand, he should declare what it does alone: and what it does with the help
of the other hand, or with the arm, with the breast, with the knee, or with
the foot, etc. What it can do with diverse kinds of tools, and what
without, al manner of instruments. This order that here they affirm, they
thought good to observe, they have not observed. Although, if they had observed
the same: the truth and substance of the matter had been, neither the
further, nor the nearer, save that the perspicuitie of the order, makes the
truth of the matter more plainly appear. Otherwise ( as they say) even so
say we: we force not by what Method; The matter more to be respected then the
me^hode.
so the same truth be plainly set forth by any man.

Prove the necessity of the matter, and we will not greatly stick upon your
Method. And would to God, that, which you say here of y^ Method, ye would say
it, The Meth. of the Learned Dis.
or rather observe it, of the plain truth it self, and for the matter of the
regiment concerning these offices: that except ye can hereafter show (which
is yet not done) that we are bound by any commandment of Christ or his
Apostles, unto this your regiment, of all, and only, these 4. offices: ye
would say likewise with us, for the Government established in the Church of
England, that as we control not other men's government by ours, so we would
not that other men's manner of governing, should be prejudicial unto ours.

A Method not to be controlled would be plain and orderly set down.
But if ye will not have us control your Method; utter the same also in
plain words. Our controversy is all of the government of the Church, and
you tell us what Method ye will observe in describing the ministry of the
Church, as by which, both the distinction and communication of all offices and
services in the Church might most plainly appear.

What? do ye make all offices and services in the Church to be of ministers?
Or, all the offices and services to be of governors? How the distinction or
communication of these may plainly appear, would have been somewhat more
distinctly and plainly spoken. As touching the reason of your request, why ye
would not have your Method controlled, nor other men's methodes prejudicial to
yours? I think it reasonable, if there were no further difference, then in the
sorme and order of teaching of diverse men, when in matter of substance they
all agree. An^ yet, in such matters as these are, and so precisely urged, an
uniformity not only of matter, but also of the Order and Method in teaching
of them, might perhaps have made the matter less offensive. Howbeit, if they
all agree in matter of substance; and the matter of substance be true, be
good, be necessary, which they all agree upon; so that, they seek the truth
indeed, and plainness in their Teaching: then is (as they say) it is but
either for lack of wit, or through too much wilfulness, if any exclaim,
there is no unity, and therefore no truth among them. But when in matter and
substance, they differ not only one from an-other, but from themselves also:
Fault found with disagreement in matter.
then blame not men, nor impute it to them, that either for lack of wit, or
that through too much wilfulness, they say, there is not so much unity and
truth among them, as in matters so earnestly urged, there ought to be. But now
to the particular view of these 4. offices.

Let us then proceed in our purpose. The office of Teaching is the chief and
principal office that is in the Church. The learded Dis. Page 15.
By that we are taught to know God, and how to serve him, and what benefits
to look for at his hand: without which knowledge, there can be no felicity,
but only destruction looked for: according to the saying of the wise man: where
prophesying fails, Pro. 29.1^.
there the people perish.

Albeit the office of teaching in these respects: as to know God, The office
of teaching
and how to serve him, and what benefits to look for at his hands, ( as the
ordinary cause, sine qua non, without which there is no knowledge, Bridges.
and without knowledge, there can be no felicity, but, The office of teaching
in respect of regiment, is not the chiefest in the Church.
etc.) may well be said to be the chief and principal office, that is in the
Church: yet in respect of the Ecclesiastical government, which is the title
of all this Learned discourse ( understanding the same truly and plainly, for
the government in, of, or over al Ecclesiastical causes, how they should be
ordained, directed, or disposed) I take it, that this office of teachers (
admitting it were such a distinct office by it self, from the office of
Pastors, as they would have it) is not the chief and principal office in the
Church. In Christ him self are the offices of a King, of a Priest, and of a
Prophet. And in that he was a Prophet, he was a Teacher also or Doctor. Which
office was so necessary to reveal the will of his heavenly father: that both
God the father said from heaven, This is my well-beloved son, in whom I am
well pleased, hear him. Mat 17: And Christ of himself Luc. 4. did read this
sentence, The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me,
that I should preach the Gospel to the poor, etc. So that, where no man saw
God at any time, except the only begot^en Son which is in the bosom of the
Father, had declared him. Io, 1: As he says also, Io. 17. I have given unto
the^ the words which thou gave me, and they have received them, and believed
them, etc. without the which teaching there can be no felicity, but only
destruction looked for, as he said before in ye same prayer. This is life
eternal, to know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou have sent
Jesus Christ: yet not-withstanding, the chief and principal office of
governing the Church of God, was neither this high and necessary office of his
teaching: nor yet that of his Priesthood, which was as necessary: yea, and
higher in the actions of the office, then the other.

But his royal and kingly office was, and is, the chief and principal office
in him. And much more is it, in the outward regiment of the Church in
Ecclesiastical causes: wherein Moses, was above Aaron. Iosue, David, Solomon,
etc. were above the high-priestes themselves. And so remains it still, except
ye can show the order of these offices of the church inuerted. Of which the
Papists would be glad, and urge it hard: especially from Peter, wrestling
there-to the threefold saying of Christ to him: Joan. 21. Feed my Lamb^s:
feed my sheep: feed my sheep. Meaning, not only his governing, but his
office of Teaching, which was his especial feeding of them, and they drive it
all to governing, aduauncing themselves before all Christian Princes. And yet
(we grant) that in the action of their several Ecclesiastical function or
Church ministry, they are above all Christian Princes, representing God unto
them, teaching and admonishing them, and all other: But not above them in
government of all Ecclesiastical causes. Which is the question in controversy
now betwixt us on the one part, and the Papists and these our own Learned
discoursing Brethren, seuering themselves from us, and adhering (though not to
them) yet to their error, by a new devise, on the other part.

The L.D Page 15.
The Ministry is divided into two functions: they that exercise the first, are
called Pastors: the other are called Doctors or Teachers.

I pray you (my Learned discoursing Masters) for my learning here again, let
me ask this. When ye desired not to be controlled for your method, Bridges.
differing from others: did ye include this, not to be controlled though ye
differ from your selves also: Our bretherens contradictions in method and
matter about Doct
and speak ye care not what contradictions, both one against an-other, and
against your own assertions? Ye say here, The Ministry is divided into two
functions: that is, Pastors; and Doctors or Teachers. And when ye made this
request in the Page precedent; ye said: This order we thought good to observe,
in describing the Ministry of the Church, as by which both the distinction and
communication of al offices, and services in the Church, might most plainly
appear. Did ye mean these 2. only, whom here only ye call Ministers?
Or, did ye mean all your 4. Offices, for the which ye request this immunity?
If ye did: how are now these 2. only ministers? as indeed ye say here the
truer of the twain, and better than your Counterpoyson that says. Christ
has expreslye in his word set down sufficient ordinary Ministers, of
Exhorters, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, etc. But now, as you herein do counter
your Counterpoyson, dividing the Ministry into two functions: Pastors, and
Doctors: which I would not have forgotten, nor contraried any more hereafter:
being a difference not of method, but of matter: So, I pray ye withal,
remember this, that the form of the Scottish election deuides not the
Ministers into two distinct offices or officers: but makes them both all one.
And this also is an other difference of matter or substance, not of method.

Besides that, the order of the Church of England used at Geneua, makes first
the election and office of Ministers, The English Church in Geneua concerning
Doctors.
( whom they make to be al one with Pastors:) and after them; the election and
office of Elders, and then of Deacons. And when al these 3. are at large set
down, the^ they say: We are not ignorant that the Scriptures make mention of a
fourth kind of Ministers, left to the Church of Christ, which also are very
profitable where time and place does permit. But for lack of opportunity in
this our dispersion and exile, we can-not well have the use thereof. And would
to God it were not neglected, where better occasion serves. These Ministers
are called Teachers or Doctors. Whose office is to instruct and teach the
faithful in sound doctrine. Providing with all diligence, that the purity of
the Gospel be not corrupted, either through ignorance, or evil opinions.
Notwithstanding considering the present state of things; we comprehend under
this title, such means as God has in his church that it should not be left
desolate, nor yet his doctrine decay, for default of Ministers thereof.
Therefore to term it by a word more usual in these our days, we may call it
the order of Schools. Wherein, the highest degree, and most annexed to the
Ministry and government of the Church, is the exposition of Gods word, which
is contained in the old and new Testaments. But because men can-not so well
profit in that knowledge, except they be first instructed in the tongues and
human Sciences: (for now God works not commonly by miracles) it is
necessary that seed be sown for the time to come, to the intent, that the
Church be not left baren, and waste to our posterity. And that Schools also be
erected, and Colleges maintained with just and sufficient stipendes: wherein,
youth may be trained in the knowledge and fear of God, that in their ripe age
they may prove worthy members of our Lord Jesus Christ: whether it be to rule
in civil policy, or to serve in the spiritual Ministry, or else to live in
godly reverence and subjection.

By this order of the English Congregation in Geneua: many things are
different not in method, but in matter and substance, from the plat form of
Ecclesiastical government, that these our Learned discoursers now set down.
First, here is but three offices, as of necessity, urged, Ministers, Elders,
and Deacons. Secondlye, The differences between our brethren and and the Eng
Church in Geneua, concerning Doctors.
the Ministers that have the first place are the Pastors: and not Doctors,
according to the form of the new communion book, and to the Counterpoyson;
but contrary to these Discoursers, and to the Fruitful Sermon upon 1. Cor. 12.
Thirdly, they give these Doctors the fourth place; and call them a fourth
kind of ministry. But they urge them not, but say it is very profitable where
time and place does permit. Fourthly, they refer these Doctors to the
Schools and Colleges, and call them the order of schools. Fiftlie, they tie
them not only to teaching of Divinity, and to the function of the spiritual
Ministry: but also to be professors of moral, civil, and politic
professions. Howbeit, they make the chiefest and highest degree in these orders
of Schools, and most annexed to the Ministerye and government of the Church,
to be the expositors of Gods word, which we call Doctors or professors of
Divinity. And belike, these our Learned discoursers miss-understanding these
words, make them the chiefeste and highest office in the Churches government.
All these differences are in substance and matter: not in method only. But
our Learned Discoursers here, do not only in these material things differ
from the English congregation in Geneua, and from the Scottish: but from
themselves also. For, if the office of teaching be the chief and principal
office that is in the Church: how then is this true that follows here?

Doctors office.
The Ministry is divided into 2. functions: they, that exercise the first, are
called Pastors: the other are called Doctors or Teachers. Should they not
rather have said, they that exercise the first, are called Doctors or
Teachers; and the other Pastors? Except we shall have another quirk^ found
out between these words, office and function, or between these words, first,
chief and principal. For, if ye will say, ye mean by the word (first,) the
first place, and not the dignity: ye neither give the Pastor the first place:
and ye call the Teachers office, to whom ye give the first place, the chief
and principal office that is in the Church. But what? Do ye mean the Doctor
shall overrule all the residue? No, God wot. For when it comes to the government
in Ecclesiastical matters, except it be for an Ergo in the Schools, I am
afraid, Master Doctor were as good come last, as first: or left clean out,
or, but permitted in time and place, ( as the Geneua and Scottish form do say)
for any great government yt shall be allowed him. But let him shift for his share
of government as he can, he is in place already, and admitted first: and now
let us hear, what shall be his office.

The learned Dis. Page 15.
The office of a Doctor is to teach, as the very name does declare: but yet
every Teacher is not meant thereby, for it appertains to Pastors also to
teach: yet this later is distinct from the former.

The office of a Doctor
Since, the office of a Doctor is to teach, (as the very name does declare:) I
marvel, that not long ago, the very name of Doctor was so hissed out both of
the Schools, Bridges.
and of the Church, by some of these our chiefest reformers, The name of Doctor.
that it could not be named, but in disdain and reproach. And now, the very
name of Doctor is not only admitted, but thus advanced, that it is named the
first, the chief, and principal office in the Church. Thanks be to God,
they see now more into the matter: at least, the name has gotten greater
credit. Belike, some of these Learned discoursers, or some of their favorites,
are either Doctors: or could be now content to be named, Master Doctor. And
(by the grace of God) as this title of Doctors is now so plausitly admitted,
not only into the Schools, but into the Church: so (I hope) we shall wax
more temperate and wise also, in accepting of other reverent names and titles
of the Ministers, offices, and dignities, of the Church: then so odiously and
contemptuously, to exclaim upon them, by that time we shall have more
advisedly considered of them. But yet (say they) every teacher is not meant
hereby, for it appertains also to Pastors to teach. Ye say well, and so it
may appertain to Deacons to. Example Stephen Act. 6. and Philip, Act. 8. etc.
Yet this later is distinct from the former. What mean ye by this? is the
Pastors office now again the later, that in your former words was so late,
the former? Where you said but half a dosen lines before: ye first are called
Pastors, the other are called doctors or teachers.

What a Teaching call ye this? that what is later, or what is former, The
office of Teaching.
neither you can teach us, nor we can learn a certainty, by this teaching. But
former or later, how is it distinct? For if the Pastor not only may teach,
but also it appertains to Pastors to Teach, and so it is a part of their
office; yea, and as the form of the English Congregation in Geneua says, The
Pastors or Ministers chief office, stands in preaching the word of God, and
ministering the Sacraments: how then are these offices distinct. (and that in
Teaching,) one from another? Pastors and Doctors not distinguished in
teaching.
Especially sith that these Learned discoursers say withal, that the office
of a Doctor, is to teach, as the very name does declare. But, it pertayneth to
Pastors also to Teach: therefore it appertains to Pastors, to be Doctors, and
that by their office: Where-upon it follows, that these offices in the
Pastors and Doctors, are not such distinct offices ( as is pretended,) yea,
their own repugnant confessions do confute it,

But they, not so careful to avoid these contradictions, as careful to
follow their purpose: proceed, and say.

Almighty God being careful, The learned Dis. Page 15. and 16.
that true doctrine should continue in his Church from time to time most wisely
provided, that certain men should be appointed in every Congregation, (whom
he has endewed with gifts meet for the same purpose) which should employ
themselves either wholly or principally, to the study of holy scriptures:
thereby to learn, to auouche the principles of true Religion, and to repress
and beat down all false and strange opinions, of which, Satan never cease,
to sow the seeds, but chiefly where this office is not set up and mayntayned
according to Gods ordinance.

Most true it is, that Almighty God is careful, Bridges.
that true doctrine should continue in his Church. And so, (he be praised for
it) it has done: Doctors not necessary in every Congregation.
spite of all the enemies practices to corrupt it. And his provision also (we
acknowledge) is most wife. But, that he has provided, that from time to time,
certain men should be appointed in every Congregation, whom he has endewed
with gifts etc. as a distinct office from the office of the Pastors of the
Church: this is confidentlie avouched, but no so carefully considered, or as
yet proved at al, of these so Learned discoursers. The English Congregation in
Geneua, more carefully considering of this matter: durst not go so far, but
only said, it was a kind of Ministry very profitable, where time and place
does permit. For, otherwise they saw that Christ left no such necessary and
ordinary officer, appointed for every congregation, nor they saw any such
practice of it from time to time in every congregation. But understanding the
office not so precisely neither, (as these Discoursers do): they saw it had
been in some times, and in some Congregations, but not in all, and every time
and congregation. Yea, they plainly confess, of their own time and
congregation, that they neither had, nor could well have it, saying: But, for
lack of opportunity in this our dispersion and exile, we cannot well have the
use thereof. So that, (al things considered) it is almost impossible (I speak
as to man) so to have it: nor there is any absolute necessity of it at all.
Beza therefore making a difference between Pastors and Doctors: says, Pastors
are those, that govern the Church: Doctors are those, that govern the
Scooles. And yet see, how these our Learned discoursers make so clear a
matter of it, how, carefully and most wisely god has appointed: yea, and
provided, that from time to time, and in every congregation, such Doctors
distinct from Pastors should be: and the continuance of true doctrine and
Religion depends upon it, etc. But their very own words do still (and best)
confute their own selves. For, speaking of false and strange opinions, of
which Satan never cease to sow the seeds, chiefly where this office is not
set up, and maintained: it clearly appears by these words, that they
themselves do grant, that in every congregation, and that from time to time,
such Doctors distinct from Pastors have not been set up, nor maintained. And
yet had God his Church and many congregations, and the careful wisdom and
providence of God, and his true doctrine and Religion still continued, for all
Satan's seeds sown of false and strange opinions.

The learned Dis. Page 16.
These me^ must not content themselves with co^templatiue knowledge^ but, as by
the grace of God they excel other men in understanding: so they must
diligently enstruct other men in the same learning, and openly confute all
false doctrine and heresy: and especially they ought to take pain in the
instruction of such men, as may be made meet to serve in the Church: as
Pastors, and to succeed in their place, as Doctors.

All this in ye Schools, or in any place else convenient, that professors of
Divinity, Bridges.
Teachers, Readers, or expositors may be maintained, were ^ very good thing.
The Doctors office. Our brethere^^ positio^s of the Doct
But to tie every congregation, and that from time to time thereunto: and to
make thereof a distinct office several from the office of Pastors: and to
limite these Doctors only to teach and confute, and not to exhort, and
dissuade, and to say, they must instruct other me^, in the same learning, and
yet, that especially they ought to take pain in the instruction of such me^,
as may be made meet to serve in the Church as Pastors: where as these our
brethren discoursers, make the principal part of a Pastors office, to exhort
and rebuke, not to enstruct and confute: how they can prove all these things
to be true, and the last of them to hang together with it self: I refer it
to their better advice, and more Learned discourse, and proves thereof.

Their institution is set forth, 1 Cor. 12.28. also Ephesians. 4.11. In the former
place the Apostle teaches, The learned Dis.
that they are the ordinance of God: says he, GOD has ordained in the
Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophet^s, thirdly Doctors or Teachers.

In the later place he testifies, that our Savior Christ ascended on high,
led captiuitye captive, and has given gifts unto men: amongst which
gifts, he accounts the function of Teachers. Page 16. and 17.
Who should then refuse to embrace the ordinance of God? Who should deprive us
of the free gift of Christ? Ephesians. 4.11.


Your argument is this: The ordinance of God, and free-gift of Christ is such,
as none should refuse to embrace it, or deprive us thereof: The instit^tion of
Doctors.


The office of Doctors or Teachers distinct from Pastors, is the ordi^aunce of
God, and the free gift of Christ:

Ergo: None should refuse it, or deprive us of the office of Doctors, or
Teachers distinct from Pastors.

Your Mai^r you let alone, as so clear and invincible, that nothing ca^ be
said thereto. Your Minor you confirm by. 2 places out of S. Paul, 1. Cor.
12.28. Ephesians. 4.11.

And ^^rst, because you would carry your Mayor so clear away, without touch of
breast: Let us see, how the very proof of your Minor beats it: if we should go
no further. True it is, in your former proof, 1. Cor. 12. that it is the
ordinance of God; and that there he reckons up, thirdly Teachers: but if
this be named there the third, then belike there were two reckoned up before.
Neither does the text stay at the third, of Teachers; but proceeds, saying:
Then them that do miracles: after that the gifts of healing, helpers,
governors, diversities of tongu^s. And even so likewise for your other proof,
Ephesians. 4. that the function of Teachers, i^ among the gifts of Christ: he
reckons up there also, three other before it: yea, four, by your reckoning
of them, if a Teacher be distinguished from a Pastor. Now then, if the Mayor of
this argument may go so scotfree, what aileth this argument on the same.

The Ordinance of God, and free gift of Christ is such, that none should
refuse to embrace it, or deprive us ther^of.

But, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, they that do miracles, the gifts of
healing, helpers, Governors, diversities of tongues, are the ordinance of
God, and the free gifts of Christ:

Ergo: None should refuse to embrace Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, them
that do miracles, etc. or deprive us of them,

My Minor I prove out of these two testimonies, 1. Cor. 12.28. and Ephesians. 4.11.
Nay, soft, (will you peradventure say) stay your proves of your Minor, till
ye have proved your Mayor. For, except ye distinguishe what manner
ord^naunce of God, and what manner free-giftes of Christ they be: your Mayor
can-not be so roundly yielded unto. No can? (say I,) are they not all the
ordinances of God, and free gifts of Christ.

Who then should refuse to embrace them, or deprive us of them? N^y, be not so
hasty (perhaps will you say) for, we refuse not to embra^e them in their
kinds, nor we deprive any of them, but allow them, as ordinances and free
gifts of God: D^fference in the ordinances of God and free gifts of Christ,
some perpetual some temporal.
but not ordinances or gifts all alike. For, (say you) of these offices, some
were temporal, serving only for the first planting and foundation of the
Church among the Heathen: some are perpetual, pertaining to the nourishing and
building up of the Church for ever. Is it even so? I pray you then (my
Masters) turn the glass, and look here vponyour own argument. Yea, (but
will you say) we speak here of that ordinance and gift that is perpetual.
Do ye so? Look on your words better once again, and also on the proves of
your Minor. Do ye find there any such distinction, either specified or
inferred, of these two Testimonies? What though it be not: (will you say) will
you deny that the ordinance and gift of Teaching is perpetual? No I deny it
not, in that sense the Apostle speaks it. Nowbeit, as you would distinguish
it, from Pastors, and make it a several office, and in that sort make it as
perpetual as Pastor is: I may well deny it, nor you do prove or ever are
able for to prove it. But the thing that in your Mayor* I now deny; is, that
every ordinance of God, and free gift of Christ, is so perpetual, that none
may now refuse it or be deprived of it. And yet properly we may well say, it is
no refusal, to embrace the ordinance of god nor deprivation of the free gift
of Christ, on our parts: when Christ himself refuses to continue the
ordinances and gifts in his Church, then are we no longer to urge them, or to
look for them.

To the Minor, that the office of Doctors or Teachers (distinct from Pastors,
in such forte as is here prescribed) is the ordinance of GOD, or free gift,
or any gift of Christ at al: til ye can better prove it out of these 2. places:
I deny it. For these places do rather infer, that the ordinance, gift, or
office of a Teacher, is not so precisely distinct from a Pastor. The auntie^t
fathers and late writers interpretation of 1. C^r. 12. for Doctors and Pastors.
Chrysostom in 1 Corinthians 12.


The former place, 1. Cor, 12.28. not omitting the ordinances gifts and
offices transitory, and coming to those that are perpetual, mencioning
Teachers: ( Since Pastors are Teachers also by your own teaching) does rather
infer by Teachers, Pastors: then clean omit them. And so do many both
ancient and late interpreters, expound the word, Doctor, or Teacher in that
place. Chrysostom. Tertio Doctores: Nam qui etc. For he that fortelleth
things to come; fore-telleth them all by the spirit suggesting them. As for
the Teacher, it often falls out, when as his reason is of his own making.
Whereupon also ^e says in an other place, the Elders that govern well, should
be honored with double honor, especially they that labor in the
administration of the word and of doctrine. Page 21.
etc, Which sentence of S. Paul to Timothy these our Learned discoursers
apply unto their Pastors.

To whom accords Theodoret. Tertio Doctores: Nam i^ quoque, etc. For they
also being inspired with Divine grace, did both allege doctrine out of the
divine sentences, Theodoretus in 1. Cor. 12.
and also they brought foor the moral Exhortation: which these Discoursers
here forbid them, as appertayning unto the Pastors office. Hieroms opinion of
the word Doctor, or Teacher in the said place, as it is in his common places
cited by Musculus* so the same Wolfgangus Musculus on 1. Cor. 12. says: Non
recenset Accurate. etc. He does not exquisitly reckon up all the offices of the
Ministers of Christ. For, Ephesians. 4, he places Euang and Pastors after Prophets,
Musculus in 1. Cor. 12.
and then places Teachers. And it appears that Teachers are the same whom
there he calls Pastors. The word is apparent, that we should understand
them to be Teachers, who Teach in the church. This was the office of Bishops
and Presbyters, who also by a Metaphorical word, were called Pastors. Whom,
the Apostles placed over the Churches that they had planted. And
notwithstanding Act, 20. Paul here by the spirit of God says, that they
were placed to this end, that they should feed the Church of God. Which
can-not be understood but of the Doctrine of the word.

And in his common places on the title de Ministris Verbi, Musculus in Loc.
com. de minist. verbii.
he says also: Pastors and Teachers are all one or the same, who also are
called Presbyters and Bishops. These are assigned to feed and teach certain
Churches. But by a Metaphorical speech they are called Pastors of feeding,
that is to say, of Teaching. Where-upon they are also called, Teachers, (or
Doctors.) But they are called Presbyters, (or Priests,) because they are
Elders to other both in age and wisdom. (For, that word signifies Elders or
Seniors.) But they are called Bishops, for because that a care is committed
unto them, over the people of God. But as for this, that Pastors and Teachers
are all one, even as to feed and to teach, is al one thing: I suppose it is a
manifest matter. The which also Hierome notes upon that, that the Apostle
says, not some Pastors, and some Teachers, Caluinus i^ 1. Cor. 1^.
but jointly Some Pastors and Teachers, etc. Yea, Calvin himself upon this
place 1. Cor. 12 says. Between them ( speaking of the Prophets) and the
Doctors or Teachers, this difference may be noted. That the office of Teachers
consists in that, that sound opinions may be retained and continued,
wherebye the purity of Religion may remain in the Church. Nevertheless,
this name also (Doctor or Prophet) is taken diverse ways, And here
peradventure it rather signifies a Pastor. Except perhaps, ye had rather take
it generally, for all that are furnished with ability of Teaching. As Ac^s 18.1.
where also Luke joins them unto Prophets.

Thus we see how this place by the testimonye of all these, and many more
learned, ancient, and late fathers; infers not, that this ordinance of God,
or gift of Christ, or office of Doctor or Teacher, is always distinct and
several office from the office of Pastors, as these our Learned discoursers so
peremptorily affirm: but rather that sometimes, either they may be taken all
for one ordinance, office, gift, or function: or at leastwise, though diverse
in some respects; yet compatible, and coincide^t in one and the selfsame
person. Hieroni. in Ephesians. 4.
As Hierome notes on this later testimony Ephesians. 4. Nec Vero putandum, etc.
Neither must we think, that as in the other three he said, some to be
Apostles, some to be Prophets, some to be Evangelists: so also in Pastors and
Masters ( for so Hierome interprets the word (...)) he should have made them
diverse officers. For he says not, and some Pastors and some Masters: but
some Pastors and Masters: that he which is a Pastor, ought also to be a
Ma^ster. Neither in the Churches, although he were a saint, should he take on
him the name of a Pastor, except he can teach those whom he feeds, or
verily otherwise, that one and the same Praelate of the Church be Pastor and
Doctor.

And albeit Calvin himself on Ephesians. 4. dissalloweth there, in some part the
foresaid fathers interpretation of the word Teacher: yet is he not so
peremptory. By Doctors and Pastors ( says he) some do think one office to be
therefore assigned, because this disjunctive particle, is not so set as in the
former, that it discerns the one from the other. In which opinion was
Chrysostom and Augustine: for those things that are read in the commentaries
of Ambrose, are too childish and unworthy of Ambrose. And verily in part, I do
subscribe unto them, that Paul speaks of Pastors and Teachers indifferently,
or as mixed together, as though it were one and the self same order. Neither
do I deny that the name of Doctor or Teacher, does agree in a certain sort to
all Pastors. Notwithstanding, still this reason moves me, not to confound them
two, which I see differ between themselves. For, although it be the office of
al Pastors to teach: notwith-standing there is a peculier gift of interpreting
the Scripture, that the sowndnesse of opinions may be retained, and some man
may be a Teacher, that is not fit for preaching. They therefore (in my
judgment) are Pastors, to whom the care of a certain flock is committed, unto
whom the name of Doctors or Teachers to be given, misliketh me not. So that,
in the mean while, we know, that there is another kind of Doctor or Teacher,
who has the government as well to inform the pastors, as to instruct the
whole Church. Not, but that now and then, the Pastor may be the selfsame
which is the Doctor, but because the faculties are diverse. To conclude,
Bullinger says on this place. Ephesians. 4. Bullingerus in Eph^s.
There is none that may not see, that these words are confounded together, and
one taken for another. For as an Apostle, is also a Prophet, a Doctor, or
Teacher: an Evangelist, a Presbyter or Priest, and a Bishop: and a Bishop is an
Evangelist, and a Prophet: a Doctor or Teacher is a Presbyter or Priest and
Evangelist. So that on these words thus confusedly here taken: what argument of
necessary distinction of offices, especially between pastor or Teacher, can be
inferred? and yet see how these Learned discoursers urge the perpetual
necessity of these offices, not only to be distinct in faculty: but to be
severed in several persons, and to be so continued in every congregation. And
now (as they imagine) having proved out of these a places, the institution and
ordinance of their Doctors: they proceed unto their office.

The office of Doctors is briefly expressed in Romans 12.7. Let him that is a
Teacher, attend upon teaching, The learned Dis. Page 17.
where also it is distinguished from other offices, and namely from the office
of Pastors. For it follows immediately, Let him that exhorts (which is a
principal part of a Pastors office, not necessarily required in a Teacher) be
diligent in his exhortation. Romans 12.7.
For the office of Doctors is only to teach true doctrine, R^m. 12.8.
and to confute all heresies and false opinions, by the word of God, concerning
all articles and principles of Christian Religion, without applying their
teaching to any particular state of time, of persons, or places.

This place (as ye say) is briefly indeed expressed, and brieflier than you do
set it down: not (...), or he that is a Teacher. But, Bridges.
(...), Or, he that teaches in doctrine. Which brevity seems rather to
infer some distinct part or action of an officers gifts or duties: The action
of teaching distinguished from exhorting, infers no necessity of* distinct
offices in Teacher and Exhort^r.
the^ to express a distinguished office of a distinct officer. So that, of
this actio^ there noted by the Apost. can-not be concluded by any necessary
consequent to be any distinct office of a Doctor, and much less that it is
distinguished from other offices, and namely from the office of Pastors. For,
how can it be namely distinguished, that is not there namely expressed?

If ye say, what though the Apost. name it not? no more he does al these words,
Let him that is a Teacher attend upon his teaching: but only says: Or he that
teaches in doctrine: nor, let him that exhorts be diligent in his
exhortation: but only this in brief, or he that exhorts, in exhortation: and
yet, though these words be not named, they are intended: or, at least, they are
not contrary to the meaning of the Text. What is this to the purpose? Does that
warrant you, not only to Paraphrast thus largely on the Text, in a
distinguished letter, where no such words are, and perhaps, no such meaning:
but so expressly to au^uch of the Doctors office, that in this place, it is
distinguished from other offices, and namely from the office of Pastors: no
such distinction, or officers names, either exhorters or teachers, being there
so much as named? If ye say, although, neither these words, Let him atte^d, nor
let him be dilligent, be named in ye text: but either they, or some like words
understood: yet are these words named there, (...): or he that exhorts, in
exhortation, and they follow immediately upon the other words.

They do so, But how chance ye interpret it not? Let him that is an Exhorter,
etc. might ye not as-wel have said so, as to say, Let him that is a Teacher?
and yet, he that Exhorts, is an Exhorter, in respect of the action of
exhortation: and so is he that teaches, (I grant) a Teacher, in y^ action
wherein he teaches. Yet, as the action of exhorting gives not to the exhorter
a proper and ordinary denomination, as by a distinguished office to be called
an exhorter, more then of his rebuking, a rebuker; of his admonishing, an
admonisher; of his applying, an applyer: of his comforting, a comforter: and of
his persuading, or dissuading; a perswader, or disswader. By all which terms,
he may be well called, in respect of the parts and actions of his office:
so, no more does it follow, that he that teaches, true doctrine, should be
named a Teacher, as by a peculiar office distinguished from an exhorter, more
tha^ he that confuteth false doctrine should be called by a distinguished
office, a Confuter. And yet, he is a confuter, in that action, no less, if not
more, distinguished from teaching true doctrine, than exhorting to embrace true
Doctrine or godly life, is distinguished from Teaching

Iunius translation
And although Iunius do translate the Syriake thus, Et est qui Doctor est in
doctrina sua, and est qui Exhortator est in exhortatione sua: And he that is a
Doctor is in his doctrine, and he that is an Exhorter, is in his exhortation.
At which translation, I do some what muse: yet, does not Iunius so exactly
separate these, as distinguished offices: but expoundes these words thus: He
that has a singular aptness and dexterity in executing these gifts.
Notwithstanding, neither he nor you, can infer ther-vpon, that he that
teaches is always a distinguished officer from an exhorter: any more, then
he that exhorts, The signification of the word Pastor.
is always a distinguished officer from a Teacher. And least of al, can ye
rightly conclude heeron, that a Teacher is distinguished from the other
offices; and namely from the office of Pastors. For, what is a Pastor, but a
feeder? and what is more, his feeding, then his teaching? Save that, (as
Musculus noted well before) Pastor is a Metaphorical and improper term: and
the proper term is Doctor, or Teacher,

But (say you) exhorting is a principal part of a Pastors office, not
necessarily required in a Teacher.

That exhorting is a principal part of a Pastors office: I assent: albeit the
principal part is that, whereof he has his name, Pastor: and that principally
is teaching, though the Greek name (...) betoken also a Governor. But now, if
exhortation be a principal part of a Pastors office, the^ is it but a part,
though a principal part, and not a whole several and distinguished office by it
self. And if exhorting be but a part: why may not Teaching be another part
also: and not a full, several, and distinguished office by it self, as
exhorting is?

Yea, if we shall go thus precisele to work, with all the gifts that the
Apostle here sets down, The late writers on Doct. exhorting.
and of every of them make distinguished offices, and several officers.: we
should not only rack and hale S. Paul's both meaning and words, clean from
his purpose: but bring in more offices and officers, then these our Learned
discoursers would erecte: and make them still speak one contrary to another,
about these offices. Does the Note heereon in the English Geneua Testament,
make such distinguished offices, of all here mentioned? Does it not say, by
prophesiyng here he means preaching and teaching? and yet ye see, the
Apostle sets them down distinctlie. First, Prophecy: then office, Deconship
( or) Ministry: then teaching: then exhorting: then distributing: then ruling:
and then showing mercy. And says the Geneua Note, by office or ministry, all
such offices as appertain to the Church, as Elders, Deacons, etc. And yet is
every one of these, by the Apostle set down distinctly by it self,
distinguished from that which he called (...), office Ministry, or Deaconship.

Yea, where he speaks here first of prophesying, saying: Whether in
Prophesying according to the proportion of Faith: the Geneua Note says: By
faith, he means the knowledge of God in Christ, with the gifts of the holy
Ghost And yet, S. Paul 1. Cor. 12. says: To one is given by the spirit, the
word of wisdom, to an-other the word of knowledge by the same spirit: to
an-other is given faith, by the same spirit.

As therefore it can-not necessarily be inferred, that, because they were all
several and distinguished gifts of the spirit of God, they were several and
distinguished offices, and so to continue perpetually several and
distinguished offices in the Church, the gifts of wisdom, knowledge, faith,
etc: Wisdom, knowledge, faith, languages interpretation, etc. were distinct
gifts: but not distinct offices in distinct persons The judgment of the late
writers concerning the office of Doctors.
No more can we necessarily infer it of these two gifts, Teaching and
exhorting, that they must needs be in the Church, several and distinguished
offices.

And as we have seen the judgment of the ancient fathers: so it shall not be
amiss, to consider withal, the judgment of the most famous late writers for
this point.

The Historiographers of Magdeburge, Magdeburg. Centur. 1. li. 2. cap. 7. page
509. lin. 12.
noting the Primitive Churches order, for the use of these offices in the
Apostles times to say: Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors, did not
make certain degrees of persons in the Ecclesiastical regiment: but either
they seem to be numbered among the Apostles and their fellows, or among the
Presbyters, or the Deacons.

With what moderation Calvine distinguishes the gift of teaching and of
exhorting into 2. offices: we have somewhat already heard. Caluinus in Romans 12.
He that is ordained a Minister ( says he) let him exercise his gift in
ministering. Neither let him think, that he was taken into the degree for
himself, but for others. As though he should say: let him fulfill his office,
by ministering truly, Doctors
that he may answer to his title, even as straightwaies unto Doctors, he
commends under the name of doctrine, whole (or sownde) edification, in this
sense: he that excels in doctrine, Let him know the end thereof is, that
the Church may be instructed truly, and let him meditate that only: A Doctor
is not debarred from exhorting.
that he may make the Church more learned by his doctrine. For, he is a Doctor
that forms and brings up the Church in the word of truth. He that
excels in the power of exhorting, let him look to this end, that he
exhort effectually. But these offices have a great affinity, and also a
knitting together between themselves, albeit they leave, not be diverse. No
man indeed can exhort, but with doctrine: nevertheless, he that teaches, is
not straight ways endued with the gift of exhorting. Now, no man either
teaches or exhorts, but, he ministers. But as we see also and acknowledge
in Gods gifts: it is enough to be fit for the order Ecclesiastical. Thus
modestly does Calvin mitigate the matter, even where he makes them diverse
offices. Not, that he which teaches, can not, nor may exhort (as our brethren
here peremtorily permit him not) but that straight ways he is not endued with
the gift of exhor^ing. As who say, in time he may be, and many are, and it is
enough, if he be fit for the Eccl* order of the ministry.

Peter Martyr says on these words, Petr. Mart. in Romans 12.
He that teaches, in teaching: The Apostles gave a most fair example of this
precepte, when they said, It is not meet that we should leave the word of
God, and minister at the Tables. For, since they were instituted of the Lord to
teach the world, their will was to be done in doctrine.

Now, if this be the fairest example of this precept of Paul concerning
teaching: Did not the Apostles always intermingle exhortation with their
doctrine? But, let Peter Martyr proceed on these words, He that exhorts in
exhorting. These two are of very near affinity between themselves, to teach
and to exhort, and sometimes both of them are granted to one man.
Notwithstanding now and then, and for a great part they are divided. For, ye
may see some, that can teach aptly, and clearly set forth most cunning
matters, and expound hid things manifestly: and yet for all that, even the
same men are marvelous cold in exhortations. Some there are whose dexterity
and forciblenesse is wonderful in exhortations, who notwithstanding to teach,
are of all other most unfit. Out of the words of the Apostle to the
Corinthians a little before alleged, we see, how the gifts of Prophecy are
distinct We have in the first place, He speaks edification, which
appertains *to doctrine: Secondly, exhortation, whereby men are stirred to do
good and to shun evil. In the 3. place is added Consolation. For it often
comes to pass, that some are broken with adversity: who thereupon may
seem, either that they will despair, Doctors exhorting
or that they will fall away from the truth.

Wherefore it is necessary, that they be helped with consolation. this part
Paul here does not prosecute: I suppose, because he comprehends it under
exhortation. But how much, doctrines and public exhortations were in use
accustomed in the Church in the ancient time, may be gathered of that chapter
to the Cor. 14. Yea, Example^ of the Doctors teaching with consolation
these were never left off: no, not in the Synagogues of the Jews, so often as
the sacred assembly was. Which may be proved of that, that when Christ sat
among them in the Sinagogue, a book was sent to him, to expound somewhat to
the people. And when Paul and Barnabas came to Antiochia of Pisidia, as is
contained in the 13. chapter of the Acts, and when they came to the Synagogue
with other Jews, the ruler of the Sinagogue said unto them: If ye have the
word of consolation for the people, say on.

Whereby it is apparent, that consolation being contained under exhortation:
and by these examples of the Doctors and the Teachers, thus intermingling
consolation with their doctrine and teaching: that although in some, excelling
in one of these gifts, and not in both, yet the ordinary use was, as well to
join exhortation unto doctrine, as doctrine unto exhortation.

And this does Gualter set out yet more plain. In the 3. place ( says he) he
sets Doctors. Gualterus (...) Romans 12.
These he wills to be diligent and industrious in teaching: to wit, that
they should instruct the people committed to their trust, diligently: and
edify all in true faith and godliness, etc. To conclude, let them apply every
thing unto their hearers, that they may perceive these things to be spoken unto
them, and to appertain unto them. And so shall they be true Doctors, and cut
the word of God aright: when they shall remember, that there is no less
need of prudence, then of faith, if they will perform these things.

In which words he makes not only the doctrine of true faith, but
godliness, prudence, and application to the hearers, to be necessary^
points: and no less needful than the other, appertayning to the office of
the Doctors.

In the fowrth place ( says he) he sets exhortation under doctrine. For,
although these 2. may seem to be joined together, most nearly between
themselves: yet are they diverse gifts. Neither is he always furnished with
both of them, that has the one of them. For, such there are, that have an
excellent perspicuitye and facilitye of Teaching, and when they come to
Exhortation, those men arevery cold: especially if they light upon such as
are stubborn, and such as will answer them again: and upon great
personages, and on such as are advanced with public authority.

Again, ye shall see others, who; when they can do less in teaching, if at
any time they must dispute of darker matters: and yet are they most vehement in
exhorting, and with a certain marvelous weight of arguments, do pierce even
the most obstinate minds. But howsoever things are, we ought always to
remember, that in the Church of God there is need not only of mere doctrine,
but also of exhortations, and that for the disposition of the froward flesh,
which often is wont to look back: yea, and to stay in those things, which
it knows to be holy and wholesome.

For, there is such negligence of men ( says Hemingius) yea even in the
business of their own salvation: Hemingius in Romans 12.
that except they be prodded with the goades of exhortations and chydings: the
doctrine remains ineffectual. Let therefore the P^eachers of the word in
this place be admonished, that not only they should think it is their office,
to teach those things that are right: but also to apply the doctrine to the
hearers. Which thing is done, when as according to the example of Christ, of
the Prophets, and of the Apostles, those things which they have taught, they
do (as it were) instill them by exhorting, and stir up diverse motions of
affections.

Let him teach in doctrine, exhort in exhortation ( says Bullinger) that is
to say: Bullingerus in Romans 12.
let him so teach and exhort, as godliness persuades, and becomes the
Christian doctrine to be. Of the which also the Apostle Peter says. If any man
speak, let him speak as the words of God. In which words he makes both these
actions of teaching and exhorting, to belong to one person.

Of which words also, He that teaches in doctrine (Oleuian says:) It is said
Act. 2. that the people perseuered in the doctrine of the Apostles. Oleuianus
in Romans 12.
And what especial doctrine the Apostles urged, that Sermon of Peter, Act. 2.
teaches, to wit, that Christ died, and was raised again. And now let us
show the contrary example out of the 7. of the Act. how they reprehended false
doctrine. But in either of these examples, both Peter an^ Stephen are full of
exhortation, and application, and use not only bare teaching of true doctrine,
and confuting of false doctrine. He that exhorts, in exhorting, etc. Before
he spoke of those that set their study on doctrine, as the professors in the
School, and certain Doctors also in the Church: now, of those that have the
office of exhorting. Sometimes, these offices are distinguished; sometimes,
both of them are borne of one and the selfsame person.

Thus do all these late and excellent learned writers agree, in the exposition
of these words, that these gifts ( or if you will so call them, offices or
duties) though they be distinguished: yet not so, but that they d^^ either
and both of them, and well may oftentimes concur in one officer, Doct.
Exhorting.
whether ye call him Doctor or Pastor. But it seems these our Br the Learned
Dis. rely more on Bezaes interpretation of this place, then upon all these.
Let us therefore see also, what is Beza his judgment hereupon.

When the Apostle ( says he) had generally admonished, that every one should
consecrate himself to God; Beza in Romans 12.
he woorthily places after the same, those things, that appertain to the
difference of vocations, that every man should contain himself, within the
compass of his own lotte. Which thing now he expounds by the parts. And
first he reme^breth the Ec. functions: which he deuideth into 2. sorts (or
kinds) which they call subalternal, that is to say, into prophecy, and into
Deaconship or ministry: to wit by the name of prophecy, co^prehending those
things that pertain to the gift of teaching: But by the name of Deaconship or
ministry, those Eccl. gifts which the Apostles renounced. Act. 6. a. 2.3.
and 4. But now because in the gift of teaching, there is not one function, but
there are diverse degrees; neither in one and the same function the measure of
the spirit is a-like even: therefore the Apostle admonishes the Prophets,
that they should prophecy according to the proportion of the faith. That is,
that every man keep the measure of his revelation: least one should seem to
himself to know all. Which thing if it had been kept in the Church, it had
never fallen in those dangers, from the which, when now scarcely it has
begun to wade out, we must still take very great heed, least it fall not
again therein: except that be done which the Apostle admonished, 1. Cor. 14 f.
30.32. and 33. Otherwise, the name of prophecy is taken in a straight
signification, as Ephesians. 4. b. 11. and 1. Cor. 12. d. 28. And Deaconship or
ministry in a larger. So that it comprehends all Ecclesiastical gifts.
Yea also, the Apostolical fun-action: To wit, because that publicly
andpriuately we must all minister unto God, as is abouesaide. Cap. 11. b. 13.
Acts. 6. a 4. and 12. d. 25. In ministering, (...). Erasmusin administration.
Which interpretation though I refuse not: yet I put it back. For, (...) in the
former place, signifies the gift it self: and in the later the very function
of the gift. Which distinction the old Interpreter, by the gerundiue mood, me
thinks did better express, then, he that teaches: (...). Or as the vulgar
translation and Erasmus; or he that teaches. But in that Paul altered the kind
of his speaking: I see, it wroong diverse, who yet seem not to have known the
cause of that matter. For these things are wont (of the the most part of the
Interpreters) to be so expounded, as though the Apostle reckoned 5. diverse
kinds of Eccl. functio^s. Which, I suppose not, neither doubt I, but that they
will assent unto me, whosoever shall more attentively consider this place. I
therefore think, that Paul first of all (as I have before said) reuoketh the
Eccl. functions that are perpetual (for the other that are temporary, he
worthily omitteth) unto 2. kinds, after the example of the Apost. Act. 6. a
2.3.4. (as a little before we have said) that is to wit, to prophecy, and to
Deaconship (or ministry.) which distribution also, our Apostle follows. 1 Timothy 3. making mention only of Bishops and Deacons. Afterward, to divide
every of those 2. kinds, into 2. sorts: that is to wit, Prophets into Pastors
and Doctors: but Deacons, into those that distribute alms, into Governors, and
them which served to care for the poor of the Church, who for the most part
were widows, of who^ is treated severally 1. Tim. 5. b 9. and that this
distinction might be better understood (my opinion is) the Apostle changed his
kind of speech. In teaching, (...) the vulgar and Eras. in doctrine. Which
interpretation (as doubtful) I refuse. For, to the Latins, (for the most
part) it declares the thing it self, the which is taught. Whereas (...),
signifies the gift it self of teaching. But the Apostle calls him Doctor,
who studieth the only interpretation of the Scripture, in the Church, that the
pure and sincere doctrine may be retained. As the most learned interpreter in
the Institution of Christian religion, (he means Calvin) most truly taught,
etc. But he calls him an Exhorter, which other-where is called a Pastor, as
1. Cor. 12. d 28. and Ephesians. 4. c 11. And now and then also, a Prophet. as 1.
Cor. 4. f 31. that is to say, him that joins doctrine, with admonitions and
exhortations: yea, and that with the administration of the Sacraments.

This is Bezaes interpretation on this place. Who^, howsoever in the L. for my
part (as I trust al other godly do) I honor as an holy, learned, and reverend
Doctor himself, and with admiration praise God, for his great and manifold
gifts in him, to the edification of his Church: notwithstanding if it be
lawefull for Beza so freely herein to dissent from all the holy, learned,
Dissent from Beza.
and ancient Fathers, and from all these already named (as ye see) and from
many other such excellent interpreters, and Doctors of our own age, (the
proportion of faith, and bond of charity always reserved:) may it not be as
lawefull for another, upon the more attentive consideration of this place,
(which himself here requires) finding his reasons not to be of sufficient
weight, against all these old and new writers, to dissent herein likewise from
him. For what sufficient proof is here alleged, that S. Paul here only
speaks of perpetual Eccl. offices, and those to be always distinguished by
diversities of persons? What sufficient proof of this general division and
subdiuision? That first Paul divides all generally into two subalternall
kinds: Prophecy, and Ministry or Deaconship: ( although therein some of
these late writers agree with him) and then, that prophecy must be taken
larger here, than it is 1. Cor. ^2. and Ephesians. 4. where he likewise speaks,
of diversities of gifts and offices in the Church, so well as here he does. Why
may it not be taken there as large as here? Or rather here as strict as there?
And what sufficient proof is here alleged, that prophecy is here to be
subdivided into these 2: Doctors and Prophets? Or that ministers or Deacons are
again subdivided, into other 2. sorts: to wit, into those that distribute
alms: into Governors: and those that serve the Church in caring for the poor,
such as for the most part were the widows? And why are these called the
ministry, more tha^ the other, that minister the word and Sacraments, and
so are more properly to be called Ministers? And if we call the^ Deacons, how
are Governors called Deacons, so well as the distributers of the alms, to who^
that name more properly was attributed? Or if the name must be distributed into
these two: whence rises this third, or out of which does it result? And why
is it rather put with Governors, than with distributers of alms, being
called shewers of mercy: and the name of alms, derived rather of mercy, than
of Governors? And if these Governors be the Segniorie so much contended for:
why are the Deacons distributers, placed before the Deacons governors? And
what sufficient proof is here alleged, that these prophetical Doctors must
only be interpreters of the Scripture? He appealeth to Caluines Institutions.
But I appeal to the Scripture it self. Does not S. Paul manifestly 1. Cor.
12.29.30. distinguish between Doctors and Interpreters? Are all Apostles? are
all Prophets? are all Doctors? are all powers? Have all the gift of
healinges? Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret? And also if Doctors
be Prophets ( in the large sense of Prophet) so well as Pastors: does not S.
Paul even in that sense of Prophet, distinguish between Interpreters and
Prophets? 1. Cor. 14.5. He is greater that prophecieth, than he that speaks
with tongues, except he interpret it, that the Church may receive edification.
and v. 27.28.29.

And if Calvin be here appealed unto, as the most Learned Interpreter, in his
Christian Institution: why is he forsaken even in the very interpretation of
this place? 1. Cor. 12. and yet, does he not say in the same place, in his
Institutions, where he handles this matter? Quod si, etc. But if we shall
join Evangelists to Apostles: Cap. 8.39.
there will remain unto us two pair, in a manner answerable the one to to
other. For look what likeness Doctors have with the old Prophets: the same
have Pastors with the Apostles. The Prophetical office was the more excellent,
for the singular gift of revelation, wherein they excelled. But the Doctors
office has almost the same reason, and altogether one end. The Doct. applied
their interp^etations.
But which of all the Prophets can ye reckon, that was but only a bare and
mere Interpreter of the Scripture? And this better appears by Calvin in the
place which follows that, which I cited before, upon, 1. Cor. 12.28. But why
I assent not to them, that include all the office of a Prophet in the
interpretation of the Scripture: this is the reason. Because Paul prescribes
the number of 2. or 3. that ought to speak, and that in order. Which would not
agree, with the bare interpretation of the scripture.

To conclude, I thus think, that they may be called Prophets, who by applying
the fortellings, the threats, the promises, and the whole doctrine of the
scripture, rightly and cunningly unto the present use of the Church, do make
open the will of God. If any man think otherwise: I easily suffer him. Neither
will I raise up brawlings for that matter. For it is a difficult thing to judge
of the gifts and offices, of which the Church has so long while been
destitute: save that steps only or shadows, do yet appear. Thus modestly
speaks he of these things, to who^ Beza referres himself. And withal, Calvin
is to be noted in this, that where he thus denies, the Prophet to be all one
with Interpreter: yet he does it not absolutely: but he does it in this sense
(that you urge) yt he should only interpret, which he calls bare
interpretation: but he would have application joined thereto, and so he
admits him for an Interpreter. Yea, he says, if interpretation come thereto,
1. Cor. 14.5.
( meaning, to the speeaking with tongues) then it is phophecie. Of which, we
shall (God willing) see more afterward. In the mean season, Calvin retains
the old interpretation of the word here, (...) calling it Doctrinam, Doctrine,
as also Peter Martyr does. Albeit, Beza reproves the vulgar, and Erasmus his
interpretation, for calling it doctrine. For ( says he) doctrine betokneth
that thing it self, that is taught. Whereas (...) signifies the office of
teaching. And if it do so; then, in docendo, In teaching, ( which Beza
follows) is not the true interpretation, neither. For these words, in
teaching, signify rather the action or exercise of teaching, then the office
of teaching. And that is the point that Paul drives all his exhortation unto.
That they should exercise themselves therein. And take away this
interpretation, in doctrine, that is, the thing it self, the which is taught:
then what lets, but the Doctors office may stretch further then doctrine or
teaching, even to exhorting, co^forting, applying, etc. As well as the Pastors
may? Yea, if Beza may say of the word (...), that in the former place, it
betokens the gift or office it self: but in the later the function or
exercise of the gift or office: which distinction ( says he) the old
interpreter (me thinks) did better express, by the gerundiue mood: then, why
may not likewise, (for any thing here alleged) by the same reason and
proportion, if not the doctrine, yet the action exercise or function in
teaching, ( being by Beza also translated) by the gerundiue mood be so
expounded, in teaching rather the^ expounded, the office of teaching? But, beit
actio^, gift, function, office, or what ye will call it: if (as Beza says) the
word prophecy signify a general subalternall kind, which is divided into
these 2, Doctor and Exhorter: how may not the Doctor be called as well a
Prophet, as may the Exhorter? And this rule holding, Me^bra diuidentia non
debent ^onfundi, if the Exhorter may labor in doctrine, so well as exhortations
and admonitions why may be not he called, and be indeed, Edification
and have the office of Doctor or Teacher: so well as of Exhorter, which ye
call Pastor? And then, how do not both these offices, concur in one person:
he having the gift, Doctors may be Pastors as well as Pastors DD.
and exercise also of the Doctor? And so all this devise of so precisely,
necessarily, and perpetually distinguishing these degrees into several
officers, is clean confounded and confuted, even in their Pastors office. And
if it be so in Pastors: what reason is here alleged, why Doctors on the
other side, may not be called, and be Pastors, so well as Pastors Doctors; and
deal, (besides the interpretation of the scripture) with exhortation,
admonition, consolation, application, etc. so well as Pastors may with teaching
and interpreting? But when all is done, both Calvin and Beza standing upon
their (puto:) I think so ( says Calvin) and yet with such a lowly modesty,
as ye have heard: and Beza, I suppose thus, or, The modesty of Calvin and
Bezaes supposall.
I think not thus: and shall we now upon these 2. reverent Fathers only
thinking and supposals, be pressed with plain assertions; or rather, oppressed
with the necessity and enforcing these things upon us? For here these
Learned discoursers come not in, (as Calvin and Beza) with puto and opinor, I
think it, I suppose it: But resolutely they determine the matter, saying: For
the office of Doctors is only to teach true doctrine, and to confute all
heresies, and false opinions, by the word of God, concerning all articles and
principles of Religion, without applying their teaching to any particular
state, of time, of persons, or places.

This is a very precise and straight limitation, of this supposed old lost, No
example of any one Docto^ restrained from applying in all the old and new
Testament
and prescribed new found (or rather) vpstarted Doctor. Neither, as I think
and suppose, ( to use Caluines and Bezaes moderate terms herein) can they
show in the old or new Testament, any such one Doctor, that was thus
restrained, that he might use no application of his doctrine or
interpretation, to his hearers. Does Saint Paul speak of such interpreters?
Although he distinguish Interpreter from Prophet: yet (says Calvin, upon 1.
Cor. 14.29.) In disputing, the interpreter was in place of a Prophet: As I
showed also before, in Caluines comparison of Christian Doctors, to the Jews
Prophets. And therefore, the name of Prophet comprehending alike both Doctors
and Pastors, by Bezaes own opinion; when S. Paul declares, 1. Cor. 14.3. the
use and end of prophesying: he that prophecieth, speaks to men to
edification, exhortation and consolation: though he distinguish, ratione, (as
we say) in consideration ot the diverse gift or use thereof, between these
things: yet, re, he joins them altogether in the Prophecy. Which prophecy
( as he said, Romans 12.) must be according to the Analogy or proportion of
faith. Faith properly in respect of the matter it relieth upon, appertains
unto doctrine: howbeit, not so strictly, that it goes no further then, it is
here bounded: only to teach true doctrine, and to confute all heresies and
false opinions by the word of God, concerning all articles and principles of
Christian Religion, without applying their teaching, to any particular state of
time, of persons, or places: But as Paul says here in plain words, to all
these ends and uses, to edification, exhortation, and consolation. Whereupon
(says Calvin) to speak to edification, Calui^^.
is to speak that, that conteyneth doctrine fit to edification. For I take
this for doctrine, whereby we be instructed to godliness, to faith, to the
worship and fear of God, and duties of holiness and righteousness: because that
oftentimes, we have need of proddes or goades: and other are pressed with
afflictions, or labor thorough imbecillitie; he adds unto doctrine,
exhortation, and consolation. And hereunto accords Beza himself. Beza in 1.
Cor. ^4. ver. 3.
Aedificatione^ (...). That is, those things that further men in the knowledge
and study of godliness.

On which words also says P. Martyr. Aedificatione^ loquitur: hoc maxim, etc.
This most pertains to the co^firmatio^ of the faith, to the purity of
opinions and synceritie of religion. Ambrose expounding this place, said, the
church to be edified, because the dissoluing of questions may be had. He
speaks exhortation and consolation, because generally, we exhort men, that
they be heedfull to their salvation, and according to their strength strive
thereunto. But consolation is, when singulerly we exhort the^, that they should
not be broken for adversities, nor discourage their mind but have it erected
and unfearful. And either of these things comes to pass by setting before
their eyes, the profit and the damage that will follow. And to declare
further, yt Doctors are here understood by these Prophets; Musculus says:
Musculus in ^. Cor. 14.
But this sentence (I suppose) does enough declare, of what kind of Prophet he
does speak: to wit, of him, by whom the Church is taught and instructed He
says not: he that prophecieth foretells things to come: for here he speaks
not of foretellings. But; he that prophecieth, speaks to men edification,
exhortation, and consolation. But this do the Doctors of the Church, who with
the word of doctrine, exhortation, and consolation, do edify the people of the
L: those Prophets therefore that in the Church do teach, are more to be made of:
then if by a miracle they fange; or prayed with tongues. But mark the brief and
clear description of this Prophetical office. He that prophecieth (says he)
speaks to men edification, exhortation, and consolation. The parts therefore
of an Eccl. Prophet are, to edify, exhort, and comfort. Edification is a
Metaphorical word, set for doctrine. He that teaches the ignorant and rude,
does edify the^ to the building of the Lords house. Hereunto appertain all
those things that concern faith and godliness, to be planted in the hearts of
the elected* By the which, upon the foundation (that is Christ,) we are builded
into the temple of God, as living stones, etc. The 2. part is exhortation, in
Greek (...), hereby the Prophet diligently exhorts those that already
believe and profess the religion of Christ, that in faith and true godliness
they should constantly go forward. Doctors and Prophets.
And as it were by name, he calls on the^: even as those that are wont to be
cried upon, who being set on a journey, either stray aside, or go forward more
slowly. This part of prophecy is chiefly necessary for them, who have known
the truth of Christ and all godliness; but in study and conversation of life,
do not express it, as it were meet they should. This part the Apostle
diligently executed* Who when he was at Ephesus for 3. years, he ceased not
day and night, with tears to admonish and exhort every one of the faithful,
Act. 20. The 3. part is consolation in Greek (...). But (...) is, to speak
lovingly to those that travel, are afflicted, are sad: Such as are the poor,
the desolate the captives, the distressed, especially for Christ: And to lay
before the^ such things, whereupon they may receive consolation, and be
confirmed in the spirit of patience. This study to comfort pertains to all
Christians, especially to Prophets, the ministers of gods word. The people of
Christ gathered together, has ignorant, has sluggish and slow, has
afflicted persons. The gift of prophecy is therefore given to the Church:
whereby the ignorant should be taught, the sluggish admonished, and the
afflicted receive consolation. Bullinger in 1. Cor. 14.


Bullinger also says of these Doct. He understands prophecy, not the
foretelling of things to come: but the interpretation of the holy scripture.
For says Ambrose, by Prophets he understands, the scriptures interpreters. (
which you say are your Doctors) for as a Prophet foretells things that are
not known: so also he is said to prophecy, while he opens the sense of the
scripture that to many is hidden etc For the church has nothing greater, and
more profitable then Christian doctrine and the interpretation of the
scripture, etc. And again: he that prophecieth, studieth on every part to
profit his Church. For he that prophecieth, performs that for which cause the
assembly is gathered together. For, he speaks unto me^ edification,
exhortation, and consolation. To wit, while he expounds the secrecies and
mysteries of the scripture, and out of the^ does either exhort to the study of
godliness, or else comforts those, who^ faint heart, or terror, or despair,
or impacience of travail, has almost broken. And this it is, to speak to
edification. That is to say, by speaking to endeavor and tend thereto, that
thou may profit the hearers. But, of this place it is clear, that a Prophet
is the same with Paul, that unto us is a Doctor, a Bishop, a Preacher, or an
Evangelist.

To this agrees Aretius, and says: Hereupon it appears, A^etius in 1. Cor.
14.
that most great are the profits of interpretation, whose parts are so bright.

And says Gualter upon the same place: Gual^er in 1. Cor. 14.
Hereupon Doctors in the scriptures, are called Edifiers. And for this cause
the Apostle called himself a Master builder. It pertains to these men
before all things, to care, that they lay a good foundation, that is to wit,
even Christ, which otherwher is called the foundation of the Proph. and Apost.
And the^ that upon that alone they build, nor mingle any stubble, hey, wood, or
ought else strange from Christ. Moreover, that diligently they plie the work,
and with all care: least satan with his mines secretly wrought, do undermine
it; nor that it be ouer-turned with the whirle-windes and storms of tempests;
nor finally, that any (as sand without lime) of their own voluntary, slide
and fall away. Ministers also must remember, that there is need of continual
and perpetual building. Partly, because the infirmity of the believers
requires daily anew renewing: partly, because new stones must often be laid
upon this holy edifice: that more may daily be gathered to Christ, and his
kingdom be enlarged perpetually. But in this place is evident the craft of
Satan: who, that he might make all men more remiss and slothful in this
study, devised certain edifices of Temples, Towers, Colleges, and Chapels,
that are called eternal, and are builded with great charges, the spiritual
Temple of the Lord being in the mean time neglected, which lies there almost
altogether in ruin, where this frantike lust of building raygneth. For either
there are no builders at all, or they are treacherous. Who (as the scripture
speaks of the Priests of the Jews, having rejected that precious stone of
the foundation, do declare that all their help of salvation, is in things
improfitable and pernicious. Let them take heed therefore of their examples,
that will speak edification. The other head of the eccles. ministry, is
Exhortation. Exhortation.
There is need of this, for those, who do not straightway obey, when they are
taught those things, that are necessary to attain salvation. For by nature we
be more slow to heavenly things. And (that is more hurtful) we are delighted
with sins and errors. Wherefore there is need of rebuking our sins and errors,
need of reproving and exhorting. Whereof we have most grave examples in the
Prophets, whom God in old time commanded, as watchmen to blow the trumpet of
his word, that they might stir up all men to do their duty. The Apostles
each where followed these, (to say as now, nothing of Christ) whose most
grave exhortations are read in the Evangelists. Therefore they do very greatly
err, that at this day will have none of this to be done, but as though the
naked and simple doctrine might suffice, do take most grievously all rebuking
and exhorting. But how necessary these are: the licentiousness of most cruel
wickedness daily increasing, and the most corrupt manners of all men,
abundantly bears witness: but because the Church has many that are
exercised with tentation and all kind of afflictions, there is added a third
head, consolation. Consolation*
To the which appertain those things, that in Ezechiel are spoken, of the
office of the good and faithful Pastor: when as the Lord promises that he
will be he, which will require the lost sheep, reduce the expulsed, bind up
the wounded, and strengthen the weak. And in consideration of these things,
the ministers of the Churches ought so to behave themselves, Application.
that they always remember* they shall then at length be faithful to God: if
that (being intentive with all their mind, on the peoples studies and manners)
they set forth all these things most diligently, according to the
consideration of the hearers, and of the times. To this ought to be referred
those things, that S. Paul to Timothy writes: of cutting aright the word of
God. And the things that Christ delivered under the parable of the Steward, 2.
Tim. 2. Matthew. 24. Zuinglius on the 24. verse of the same chapter, Zuinglius.
breefelie knits up all the matter, saying: To prophecy is to teach to
admonish, to comfort, to reprove, and to rebuke. And Peter Martyr upon 1. Sam.
10. ver. 9. Pet. Martyr.
But in the Primitive church, when Prophecy flourished: what difference was
there between a Prophet and a Doctor? I answer, that although the office of
them both were al one, yet were Doct^rs instructed by Masters: but Prophets
spoke on the sudden, being moved by the inspiration of the holy Ghost,
without any help of man.

Thus do all these, and many more late and notable learned writers (agreeing
with the old Fathers, and almost with all the interpreters of the Scriptures)
accord, that by this Prophet here mentioned he means a Doctor or Teacher:
But withal, that this Prophet, Doctor, or Teacher, communicates in his
teaching and interpreting of the Scriptures, in all the parts of a Pastors
office, without restraint, any more then the Pastor is restrained from any
part that apperteineth to a Doctor. Yea, as Peter Martyr notes on the same
chapter, verse. 6, on these words: What shall I profit you: except I speak
unto you, either by Revelation, Petr. Mart. in 1. Cor. 14.
or by knowledge, or by Prophecy, or by Doctrine? Chrysostom thinks,
revelation, prophecy, science, and doctrine, to signify the same thing. And
that Paul by a certain circumlocutio^, expressed (...).
a gentle diminution, that might easily be perceived of the hearers. Other
believe, that these are diverse gifts, by which the Church might be edified:
and some do fit these words thus: that revelation should be joined to
prophecy: for Prophets do not treat or speak but that thing that is
revealed to them. And likewise they will, that knowledge should cleave to
doctrine. For no man teaches right, but that which before he knew. Whereupon
also it appears again, that we said before, the estimation of the gifts are
to be esteemed according to the profit and edification of the church, Musculus
i^ his Commentary o^ 1 Cor. 14.
which is set in the confirming of faith and religion. And Musculus to the same
purpose says. Wherefore even as he there said he that prophesies speaks to
men to edification, exhortation, and consolation; so here also, when he had
said, except I speak to you: he adds, either by revelation, or by knowledge,
or by prophecy, or by doctrine, etc. Or by doctrine, (says he) he that
speaks by revelation, or by science, or by prophecy, Examples of Doctors.
serves to inform us in our faith and understanding of things, either hid or
to come. But he that speaks by doctrine, serves to compose our life, and
frame our manners. Thus far I think this term (...) in this place, may not
unfitly be separated from the general doctrine, by the which all things in
the word of God are taught. Hierome also thinks so, for he expounds it with
this paraphrase: except either I interpret it unto you, or make plain those
hidden things of the law that I know, or expound prophesies, or teach you
moral institutions. I know that Ambrose diuides not these things. For he
says, all these signify one thing. For none can teach, except it be
understood: Ambros.
neither indeed can they be Revelation, knowledge, prophecy, and doctrine:
except they be understood. Wherefore, to speak by Revelation, by knowledge, by
prophecy, or by doctrine, is altogether to speak with understanding. And so
does Ch^^sostome expound it, (...)* etc. But that which he faith, is on this
wise: Except I shall speak that, Chrysostom.
which may of you be easily conceived, and is clear. Notwithstanding, in the
mean time, he forbids not, that we may not by a fit division, and
perteining to the purpose, distinguish between these things, and give to
every one his proper sense. For as, when he said before: he that prophesies,
speaks to men to edification, to exhortation, and to consolation, he
expressed the profit of general prophesiyng: so here he sets down
certain parts and instruments thereof, or rather founteines. For that,
whereby, is one thing: and that, whereunto, is another thing, that the Prophet
speaks in the Church. Gual^eru^ in 1. Cor. 14.
And therefore ( says Gualter) Paul sets doctrine after these things, which
applies every one of them to the hearers, according to the consideration of
the places and times: that they may serve for the instruction of every one.
And to conclude for the amendment of their life and manners. And this is that
part, wherein the edification of the Church, and of every member thereof,
does chiefly consist, etc.

And to this purpose, speaking of these gifts, as instruments to edificatio^,
Paul brings in the similitude of musical instruments. Whereon (says
Gualter) we will not think, Gualterus in 1. Cor. 14.
that Paul does rashly use this similitude, For very well and elegantlie, it
shadoweth out the use of the Ecclesiastical ministry, and office of the
Ministers. The Pipe admits many and diverse ways of tuning: and the
Citheran or Harp consists of diverse chordes and stringes: and even so the
manner of preaching the word of God, is not one: but often in one Sermon, with
a marvelous harmony, do concur, doctrine, admonition, exhortation,
rebukings, threatenings, and consolations. etc. This was Saint Paul's doctrine
for a Doctor, ( whom here he calls a Prophet) and for Prophesiyng. And
which your selves call teaching, Page 15.
saying; The office of teaching is the principal office that is in the
Church. By that we be taught to know God, and how to serve him, and what
benefits to look for at his hand. Without which knowledge there can be no
felicity, Gualoerue in 1. Cor. 14.24
but only destruction looked for: according to the saying of the wiseman,
Where prophesing fails, there the people perish. So that as your selves
confess also, that by Prophesiyng is meant this your first office of
Teaching, which is indeed (being used as it ought to be) an excellent office.
But (as Gualter says, on the verse, 24.) concerning the use thereof: it is
not a simple reciting and interpretation of the scripture ( as you would make
it) But (as we have heard in the beginning of this chapter) such another, as
is applied with exhortation and consolation, to the edification of the whole
Church, and of every one. And therefore it ought so to be exercised: that it
should pearse into the minds, and convince them of sin (which property,
Christ said should be the work of the Holy-ghoste in the Apostles.) And to
conclude: that it so work, that all may perceive that they are spoken of. But
of this chapter you give more occasion to note hereafter. Only this now at
large, for the office of Doctors or Teachers of Doctrine, called here Prophets
and interpreters of Scriptures: that they were not thus limited, only to
teach true doctrine, and to confute all heresies and false opinions by the
word, concerning all articles and principles of Christian Religion, without
applying their teaching, to any particular state of time, of persons, or
places. And now let us see how ye can prove this by examples.

The example or practice of this office, The learned Dis. Page 17.
is set forth Acts. 13.1. where it is recorded by S. Luke, that Paul and
Barnabas (before the Holie-ghoste commanded them to be separated for the work
whereunto he called them) were in the number of Prophets and Doctors, with
Simeon Niger, Lucius of Syrene, and Manahen in the Church of Antiochia: where
they continued in that office a whole year, in which City the Disciples were
first called by the name of Christians Act. 11.26. Act. 11.26.
Likewise, Apollos which was an eloquent man and mighty in the Scriptures,
first at Ephesus but afterward being more perfectly instructed in the way of
GOD, by A^uila and Priscilla in the Church of Achaia, exercised the office of
a Teacher, with great profit of them which had believed, and to the great
confusion of the stiff-necked Jews, while he proved plainelye by the
Scriptures, that Jesus was the Christ, Acts. 18.28. Acts. 18.28.


For the practice mentioned in the Scripture, Bridges.
this might suffice that is noted by Saint Paul, in this chapter 1 Corinthians.
14. with the judgments of all these writers: yea* of themselves, concerning
these prophets that were Doctors, and of the manner of their teachings.

But now, because for this practice and example hereof, these our Brethren
the Learned Discoursers, have here set down some other examples also, Our
Breath. examples of Doctors.
to prove this practice: let us follow and peruse the same. And first note
this, that these examples here alleged, mention no perpetuity, much less
prove it: nor any prescribed rule unto themselves, much less to others. And
because of all the persons here named, Act. 13. Barnabas is first, and Paul
is last, the other have little record save the bare names: let us look upon
this first and last, as the more notable, by whom we may level the others as
less known. And here at the entry, in plain and express term, we meet
(in all these persons) with those that are entitled by the name of Teacher or
Doctor, on which title our Brethren take hold. And albeit the Text sets it
down not in the name of Doctor only, but calls them Prophets and Teachers
or Doctors: yet that makes no matter. For, as (speaking of teaching) they
alleged prophecy before; so here they take these names (...), as diverse
names betokening one matter. For, if they do not so, either they speak
contrary to themselves: or nothing to the purpose. Contrary: if the Doctors
intermeddle in other men's functions, distinguished from theirs. Nothing: if
they mean not, they were such Doctors, as here they take upon them to prove
unto us: whose office is only to teach true doctrine, and confute all
heresies and false opinions, by the word of God, concerning all articles, and
principles of Christian religion, without applying their teaching to any
particular state of time, of persons, or places. But it follows: The example
or practice of this office is set forth, Acts. 13.1. etc. So that their
meaning is, to prove all these here recorded by Saint Luke, to be such, and
no other sort of Doctors. To which purpose, how truly these examples fit;
let us see (besides the conference of the Scripture) how they contrary (in
these examples) the Doctors, that their selves most esteem.

Calvin upon these words, Acts. 31.1, Caluinus in Act. 13.1.
writes thus: What Doctors differ from Prophets (at the leastwise in my
judgment) I have expounded on the fourth chapter to the Ephesians. 11. And on the
twelfe of the former Epistle to the Corinthians, 28. In this place these two
are synonyms, ( that is, diverse words signifiyng all one thing) that Luke
might signify, there were many men in that Church, indewed with a singular
grace of the spirit, for to teach. Truly I see not how it agreeeth to take
prophets, for those that excelled in the gift of foretelling. But rather I
suppose, The Doct. mentioned Act. 13. were exhorters.
it is noted that they were excellent interpreters of the Scripture. But such
did exercise the gift of teaching and exhorting, even as Paul does testify,
in the foureteenth of the former to the Corinthians, 29. We must regard the
drifte of Luke: Paul, and Barnabas, were ministers of the Church of Antioche:
from thence God now calls them to another place. Least any should think,
Doctors.
that Church to be stripped naked, of good and fit Ministers, that God
provided for others with the damage thereof: Luke preuents it, and teaches,
that there was such plenty, that helping the need of others; notwithstanding
it had a residue left, so much as was inoughe for the use of it self.
Whereupon it appears, how liberally the grace of God was powered on that
Church: from whence Rivers might be drawn, hither and thither. So also does
God enriche certain Churches, above others in our time, that they might be
Seminaries, to spread abroad the doctrine of the Gospel. By which judgment
of Calvin it appears, that those Prophets of whom we have spoken, 1. Cor.
14. were these Doctors, being Interpreters of the Scriptures. How-be it, not
bare interpreters, but such as joined the gift of exhorting with their
teaching. Gualter says on the same place, Act. 13.1. Gualterus in Act. 13.1.
But they are called Doctors, who do publikelie instruct the Church, and do
orderly apply the holy Scriptures, to the institution of all, These Doctors
were appliers of their doctrine.
whom at this day we call either Pastors or Ministers of the word.
Therefore, there was not at Antioche only a Church, but also a School, out
of which the learned Ministers were sent to other Cities, etc.

Beza also upon the second verse. Act. 13. Beza in Act. 13.2.
When as they ministered, (...), that is, while they exercised their office, to
wit, of teaching, and of Prophesiyng. For a little before he had said, they
were Doctors and Prophets. Therefore Chrysostom rightly interpreting (...),
while they were ministering, that is, says he, (...), while they were
preaching. Whereupon says the Geneua note. The Geneua note.
The word signifies to execute a public charge as the Apostleship was, so
that here is showed, that they preached and prophesied. While they preached (
says Bullenger) while they read holy things, interpreted and taught others,
Bullingerus in Act. 13.2.
and while they were occupied with holy things. For holy things are
preaching, the reading of the Scripture, interpretation, doctrine, and such
other matters.

So that by all these learned men's judgments, and by the appearance of the
very text it self, concerning the example and practice of this office: it
appears how untrue this is, that the office of Doctors, is only to teach
true doctrine, and to confute all heresies and false opinions, by the word of
God, concerning all articles and principles of Christian religion, without
appliyng their teaching to any particular state, The example of Doctor Barnabas.
of time, of persons, or places. But to see this practice better, by these
particular examples: let^vs begin with Barnabas, which in the text is first
named. And whose very name (says Saint Luke, Acts. 4.36.) is the son of
consolation. On which Beza says, they that are skillful of the Chaldie derive
it from (...) Bar, which is, Son, and (...) Nephesh, that is, Doctor Barnabas.
Soul, as though ye would say: he that refres^eth the Soul. Vatablus
says: Full of consolation, that is, one most apt to comfort. Vatablus.
And (trow ye) this Surname, given him of the Apostles, ( for other-wise his
proper name was loses, Barnabas his name.
or as some copies have it Joseph, even as Christ had given surnames to some
of the Apostles, as Peter, signifiyng a Stone: and Boanerges, signifiyng the
sons of Thunder,) was given him by them for any greater cause, then for his
comfortable and effectual kind of Teaching? And if it were so: can we suppose
his Teaching was without application and exhortation? But let us not stand
upon conjectures, nor on his name, but on his doing. Does not the text
expresselie say? Acts. 9.26* When Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assaied to
join himself unto the Disciples, and they were all afeard of him, believing
not that he was a disciple: but Barnabas took him, and brought him to the
Apostles, and declared to them, how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that
he had spoken unto him, His application.
and how he had spoken boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus. Can we
conceive that Barnabas could do all this, (or be-it that Paul did declare
some part thereof) without application of the particular state, of the time,
of the persons, of the places? But what say you to this place, containing the
four verses, 22.23.24. and 25. immediately preceding that place, that is
cited by your selves, Act. 11.26. Then tidings of those things, (to wit, that
a great number in Antiochia, believed and turned to the Lord,) came to the
ears of the Church, which was in Jerusalem. And they sent forth Barnabas,
that he should go to Antiochia. Who when he was come, His exhortation.
and had seen the grace of God: was glad, and exhorted all, that with purpose
of heart they would cleave unto the Lord: for he was a good man, and full of
the Holie-ghoste, and faith. And much people joined themselves unto the Lord.

Upon these words, they sent Barnabas: ( says Bullinger) for consolation and
for help. Bullingerus in Act. 11. Caluinus in Act. 11.
Moreover ( says Calvin) this was the cause of sending Barnabas. The
Apostles did then sustain the whole burden of the kindome of Christ. It was
their parts therefore, every where, to form (or frame) the Churches, and
what company of the faithful were any where, to reteyne them in the pure and
holy consent of faith, Wheresoever there was any number of the faithful, to
ordeyne Ministers and Pastors. The sleight of Satan is known, so soon as
ever he sees a door opened to the Gospel, by all means he labors to
corrupt, that that is sincere. Whereby it has come to pass, that straight
ways with the doctrine of Christ, diverse heresies have boiled forth.
Wherefore, with how greater gifts every Church excels: it ought to be
careful so much the more, least Satan mingle and disturb any thing among
the rude, and such as are yet but little established in the faith. For
nothing is more easy, then the corn to be corrupted in the prime grass
thereof. To conclude, Barnabas was sent, that he should advance higher the
rudiments of the faith: that he should compose their matters into a certain
order: that he should give a form unto the edifice new begun: that it
might be a lawful state of a Church.

So that, the end whereunto Barnabas was sent, was not only to teach the
principles of religion, without applying his teaching to any particular state
of times, of persons, or places: for; no doubt, this his applying his teaching
to the particular state, both of the time, and of the persons, and of the
place, was one of the greatest parts of his office in his commission, and
causes of his sending thither. And if it were not; he had done greatly
amiss, and been an intruder into another man's office: and so, not answerable
to his high commendation that is given him, that he was a good man, and full
of the Holie-ghoste and faith. And being full of the Holie-ghoste, the
comforter: no doubt his teaching was correspondent to his name, and not void
of consolation. And even so expresselie says the text, (...), and he
exhorted, or befeeched, or comforted them all, that with purpose of heart they
should continue in the Lord.

Here ( says Marlorate) he brought no new doctrine into the church of
Antiochia: Marlorate.
but rightly and simply encourages and confirms them, being instructed in
Christ Jesus: that being constant, they should persevere in that purpose to
clean unto the Lord. Last of all ( says Calvin) the exhortation of
Barnabas is to be noted. Now, Caluinus.
we have beforesaid, that Barnabas to the former doctrine which they had
embraced, did subscribe. Howbeit, least the doctrine should slip away, it is
necessary, that the same should thoroughly be fixed in the minds of the
faithful, with continual exhortations, for when as we must have continual
battle, with so many and so mighty enemies, and our minds are fickle;
except every one do diligently arm himself: he will streight-wayes fall
away. And that do infinite numbers declare to be too true, by their daily
reuolting. And here Marlorate adds Bullingers note: Marlorate.
We gather also with how few laws the apostles being contented, did bend all
the force of their mind on this, that those which are set in the way of the
Lord, they might retain them, Bullinge^.
and very far set them forward in the some. For, except we travel in the
way which we have entered into, (...) have begun the journey to no purpose.
For he that setting his hand to the Plowe, shall look back; is not fit for
the hingdome of GOD. Luke. 9. verse. 61. And by these continual exhortations
of Barnabas, God wrought so effectually in this people (who before were taught
by others) that (says S. Luke:) A great multitude was added unto the Lord.

Doctor Paul.
Whereupon, says Calvin: Where the number of the faithful was already
plentiful, Luke says it increased by the coming of Barnabas. Caluinus.
Thus does the building of the Church go forward, when one helps another,
with mutual consent. This addition therefore of the faithful, ( says
Marlorate out of Bullinger) is the effect of Barnabas his preaching. Marlorate.
So that he did not only teach: but with-all he preached, he exhorted, he
comforted, he applied, etc. So clean contrary is the practice of Barnabas
example, to this imagined office of a Doctor. Whereunto these our Learned
discoursers, apply the same. And as we thus most evidently see, for Barnabas,
before he sought out Paul to help him, in that place: The example of Doctor
Paul.
so likewise for Paul, both before this his coming to Antiochia, and
jointly with Barnabas being there, and always after, for the manner of his
teaching, joined with applying, exhorting, rebuking, etc. For, Paul, Acts. 9.
being replenished with the Holie-ghoste, after he had tarried certain days
with the Disciples at Damascus, he streightwaies preached Christ, that he was
the son of God. Here the principal point and ground of his Treaty, was
Doctrine. But did he barelie teach it? No, says the text, he preached
Christ, and that was done with such persuasion and application to the
hearers, that says Luke ver. 21. All that hard him were amassed, and said: is
not this he that destroyed them, that called upon this name in Jerusalem: and
came hither for that intent, that he should bring them bound unto the high
Priests? Came this astonishment among his hearers, of bare teaching? Trow ye,
Paul did not as earnestly exhort them to embrace Christ; as he did breath
out threats before, against all those that professed Christ? If he had done
the one earnestly, and the other barelie, without all appliyng and alleging
of himself unto them for a lively example, of the mighty power of Christ,
that had beaten him down and converted him: could his bare teaching of
Christ, have moved such amasement in them?

Caluinus in Act. 9.
No, (says Calvin,) he that of late rushed with a furious onset against
Christ, does not only mildly submit himself at his commandment; but
even as a standerd bearer to recover his glory, does fight even to the
extremest danger. True it is, that he was not so soon informed by the labor
of Ananias; but when as he had received the rudiments by the mouth of man, he
was by divine influence exalted to higher matters, etc. And he increased
(says the text) more in strength, and confound^d the Jews, etc. ^^^reon
says Calvin: Here Luke not only commends the zeal of Paul to be
strong, in confessing the faith of Christ: but he teaches also, with how
mighty reasons he did fight, by which he convinced the Jews. He waxed
strong, that is, he was on the ouer-hand in disputing, and his confession had a
force and efficacy joined therewith: because, forsoothe, he being furnished
with the testimonies of the Scripture, and other helps of the Holie-ghoste,
did (as it were) ouerwhelme all his adversaries. For the word (of disturbing
them) that Luke uses, does signify, that when Paul pressed them beyond
measure, they were so dashed, that they were not their own men. The manner of
his disturbing them is expressed, in that Paul confirmed Jesus to be Christ.
For the sense is: when the Jews chiefly would strive against it, they were
notwithstanding overcome and confounded. So that Paul by experience proved,
that it was most true which he pronounces, that the Scripture is profitable
to reprove. 2. Tim. 3.16. And he performed that, which in another place, The
manne^ of a Bishops and a Doctors teaching.
he required of a Bishop and a Doctor. For he was armed with the word of God to
auouche the truth, Tit. 1.9. And indeed Luke comprehends two things that
Paul in disputing was a Conqueror, in such sort, that he made the Jews to
fall. And yet their stubbernesse was not so broken and tamed, that they would
yield unto the truth. Because for all this, their consciences turmoiled within
them, and being dashed down from the degree of their false opinion, they never
a whitte submitted themselves to Christ. Therefore, so often as heretics do
arise to oppugn the right faith: so often as the wicked do enterprise, to
shatter all godliness; so often as naughty persons do obstinately
withstand: let us remember from hence to fetch our armor, etc.

Thus does Calvin lively express the vehement moving of affections, to
astonish the hearers, that S. Paul used in his teaching, and making it all one
office in the Doctor and in the Bishop, and applying his precepts to Timothy
and Titus, to this doing of Paul, and to the duty of all true and zealous
Teachers. Gua^terus in Act. 9.
And heerevpon also does Gualter gather this general rule: This place (
says he) admonishes, that the doctrine of the Gospel ought to be preached.
In which point the opinion of many is, that they think a simple and full
explication of the mysteries of salvation does suffice, and that they labor
in vain, A D^ct^^^ expli^ation of doctrine, though simple and fu^l suffice^h
not.
and are intolerable authors of dissensions, which reprove the tyranny of
Antichriste, oppugn superstition, and publikelie undertake to enter into
controversy with the professed enemies of the truth. True it is, that the
simple doctrine of the truth might have sufficed, except there were such, as
would endeavor to lap the same in errors and darkness, and withdraw the
vnheedfull out of the pathe of truth: but sith there have been such both
in times paste, and at this day may commonly be found: it behooves the
faithful to be admonished, that they should not give ear unto them. Which
thing you shall never bring to pass, except ye make an evident proof, that
they err all the world over. Again, when the impudency of many breaks out
so far, that openly they dare gaine-saie the truth, they are publikelie
also to be confuted* least by their rashness they should make the cause of
the truth suspected.

We read, that not only the Apostles, but Christ himself did either of
these things. Whose example all these worthily ought to follow, whosoever will
be called and counted the Ministers of his Church. Which is the cause, that
Paul would have such kind of Doctors, which cannot only instruct the rude
in sound doctrine, but also convince those that speak against it. Titus. 1.
And he testifies also that the Scriptures are given to the same end, that they
may serve for rebuking of the adversaries, 2. Timoth. 3. Which seemed to the
Holie-ghoste a matter of such importance, that he would not only have the
Deceauers of that age to be reproved by the Apostles, but he would have us
also to be admonished of those, that in the last times should moleste the
Church.

By which general rule of Gualter, agreeing with Calvin heerevpon, it
appears, that Paul applied his doctrine, and joined admonition and
redargution, as well as exhortation and consolation, to his Teaching. And that
this Teaching is so little distinguished from the Pastors office: that it is
common with the office and duty of all Bishops and Ministers of the word. And
that except these applications be joined thereunto: the simple declaration of
the truth, although it be fully set out, does not many times suffice, to
overthrow the malapart importunity of the adversaries. And as Paul thus, not
only for the occasion of that time, but for the example of our and all times,
made this introduction into his office of Teaching: so he continued in such
feruencie, till he met with Barnabas at Jerusalem, after three years travel
in Arabia, and all in this City of Damascus, that the Jews ( no doubt,
exasperated by his laying so hardly their errors and obstinacy to their
charges:) went about to kill him. From the which danger being escaped, and
come to Jerusalem, after Barnabas had exhorted the Disciples to admit him
into their company: He was conuersante (says Luke, verse. 28.) with them at
Jerusalem, and spoke boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus, and disputed with
the Grecians. But they went about to slaie him.

Belike he was still more earnest in reproouing them, than all the res^due. For
the word (...), signifies, not o^elie that he spoke boldly or confidentlie,
but frankelie and freely, and that with liberty and reprehension.

Whereupon the Geneua Margin notes, The Geneua note.
making open profession of the Gospel. And says Calvin; Calvin.
In which words, Luke praises his fortitude in professing the Gospel. For
among so many hindrances, he durst never have hissed: had not his breast
been endewed with a rare constancy. In the mean season, all are prescribed
what they ought to do, to wit, every one according to the measure of his
faith. For although all be not Paul's; nevertheless, the faith of Christ
must breed so much confidence in our minds: that when it is needful for us
to speak, we wax not altogether dombe. We must ( says Marlorate here) be
always ready, to render a reason to all that ask it, Marlor^te.
of the hope that is in us.

And is all this freeness, of Saint Paul's teaching, and example to all men,
without any application, etc. that so moved the adversaries, that they still
went about to murder him? Lo ( says Calvin) for zeal: fury. Neither can
it be otherwise, Caluin^.
then that superstition should be fierce and cruel* Indeed it beseems the
godly, to be kindeled with an holy anger, when they see the pure truth of
God to be corrupted with false and naughty opinions: but so, that they
moderate their zeal, that they determine nothing, except the cause be
thoroughly viewed, that they may reduce them that err, into the way. Last
of all, if they see their frowardness to be paste hope: yet may not they
snatche the sword: because they should know that reuengement is not of GOD
committed unto them. And therefore Paul peaceably auoydeth from them, whom
he had thus provoked by his earnest teaching, etc.

Therefore ( says Luke) the Churches through-out all Jury, and Galilee, and
Samaria had peace, and were aedified: and they walked in the fear of GOD, and
were replenished with the consolation of the Holie-ghoste.

Whereupon (says Calvin) Luke signifies, that the presence of Paul was a
grievous provocation to the enemies of the Gospel. For why did peace so
suddenlye shine unto the Churches by his departure: except that even the
sight of him, did provoke the fury of the enemies? Neither is this turned to
him for a reproach, as though he had been as it were a Trumpet for a battle:
but Luke rather sets down this for his commendation, that he drove the
enemies to a rage, even with the only smell of his approaching near unto
them. For so would Christ triumph in him, that he should sprinckle upon the
Church no less molestation, then renown. Wherefore, by this example we are
admonished, that they are not streight-wayes to be condemned, who do more
enflambe the rage of wicked men, then other do. Which admonition, is not a
little profitable. For as we are too soft and loving of our own quietness:
so now wax we angry with the best and most excellent servants of Christ,
if by their vehemency, we think the evil will-be stirred up to hurt us.
But by this means, we be injurious against the spirit of GOD, whose force
and breathing has kindeled all this flambe.

Thus as we still see the zealous manner of S. Paul's teaching: so when
afterward, Act. 11.25.26. Barnabas being also an other Teacher and exhorter,
and having such an excellent gift therein, (as is aforesaid) and yet knowing he
was in these things, especially, in the vehemency of exhortation,
application, and persuasion, nothing comparable to Paul, ( as appears Act.
14.12. Where the Licaonians called Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul Mercury,
because he was the cheifest speaker): yet Barnabas sought out Paul, and found
him, and brought him to Antiochia. And they were conversant with the Church (
says Luke) a whole year, and taught much people: in so much, that the
Disciples were the first called Christians, in Antiochia. Shall we now think
that Barnabas haueing begone so soon; Paul in his Doctorship, changed not his
manner of teaching.
to join exhortation to his teaching, and that Paul being more vehement in
exhorting, than he: they both of them left their former trade of teaching, and
all that whole year fell to a new trade, to teach only without exhorting,
admonishing, rebuking, comforting, and without applying their teaching to any
particular state of time, of persons or places? Neither is it any thing
likely: neither the text inferres it: neither does any learned writer so
gather on the text, that I have yet seen: neither does it accord with such
a fruitful sequel. Their preaching ( says Marlorate) was so effectual and
so fruitful. So that their continuance the whole year in teaching, was in
such teaching, as was preaching, which consists much in exhortation,
admonition, application, etc. and apperteineth to the office of a Pastor.
Whereupon, says Gualter: Gualter.
Let the Ministers of Churches follow this example. And while they persuade
perseverance to other, they themselves persevere constant in their office:
neither let them glory in the bare name of a Pastor, but let them do that,
which becomes true Pastors. Least they seem to be followers and successors of
that foolish pastor, that is described in Zachary, the eleventh chapter.

So that S. Paul, practicing all that whole year at Antiochia the off^ce of a
Doctor, This place Act. 13. wrested for any other Doctors, the^ for such
Doctors as are examples to Pastors.
( as these our Learned Discoursers say) and this Doctor preaching, and
showing an example for Pastors to follow: how is this any example for such,
as must not meddle with the Pastors office? But neither here, nor at any
time else, (that I can find) Saint Paul ever practiced the office of such a
Doctor. But look, as he began, so without any alteration, for this point of
joining exhortation, admonition, and application, to this doctrine, he still
continued. For as I noted before on these words, (...), While they were
ministering unto the Lord, that is, (as Beza, and the Geneua Margin notes)
while they were preaching: and calls it a public charge, as the Apostleship
was, and the Apostles were not tied to such an office, as taught without
exhorting or applying.

so does not the Holie-ghoste say here, Separate me Barnabas and Saul into
another office, then they were in before: but, for the work where unto I have
called them. Which work was still the same, that it was before, though done
in other places. For Paul changed not here his office, as though he had been
but a Doctor ^ntill now, and now was made an Apostle: for, as he continued a
Doctor s^ill, so he was an Apostle before. S. Paul's teaching still after the
same manner
And look what manner of Teaching he used after, he used before: And as
before, so he still continued in his teaching. Whereupon says Calvin: But
here Luke says, that Paul was ordained by voices, which seems not to be
agreeable to Paul's words, Gal. 1.1. Where he denies that he was called either
of men, or by men. I answer: Calvin.
he was created an Apostle (and that, not by any men's voices) long before, that
he was sent unto the Gentles: And had already exercised his Apostleship for
many years, when he was called to the Gentiles by a new Oracle. Wherefore,
in that respect, that he had God the author of his Apostleship, he does not
unworthily exclude men. Neither does he now command him to be ordained of the
Church, that his calling should depend of the judgment of man: But that
decree, that was known as yet, but to a few, God does now set forth the
same by a public edict; and command it to be sealed with a solemn
subscription of the Church. The sense therefore of the words is: Now is the
time that Paul must spread the Gospel among the Gentiles, and pulling down
the wall, Ephesians. 2.14. Collect a Church out of the Gentiles, who before were
strangers from the kingdom of God. For although hitherto, God used his travel
at Antiochia, and in other places: this peculiar point is added now at length,
that God would adopt together the Geneiles into the self same inheritance of
life with the Jews. Howbeit, if he had been created Doctor thus even from the
beginning, neither yet then had he been called by man. For when as the Lord
pronounces that he was called of him: what remains for the Church, but
obedientlie to subscribe thereto? For neither is here the judgment of man
placed between, as in a doubtful matter; neither have the voices freedom.
But we must hold that which I said, that Paul and Barnabas are not now at
length, ordained in the order of Doctors: but an extraordinary office is
enjoined, Paul and Barnabas not made here such Doctors as our Brethr.
imagine.
that they should begin to set forth at large the grace of God in common to
the Gentiles. And this do the words sound when it is said; separate to the
work: for (no doubt) it signifies a new work, and as yet unaccustomed. But
how is Barnabas joined here a companion and colleague with Paul: whom we
never read to have exercised the office of teaching? Yea, who always himself
holding his peace, yielded the parts of speaking to Paul? I answer: he had
many occasions inowe, of speaking offered him in Paul's absence: that there
was business enough for them both; for one could not be always present in
all places. There is no doubt, but that he faithfully went about the parts
that God commanded, nor was a dombe looker on. Neither is there any cause that
we should marvel, why the Sermons that he made, are not in plain words
expressed of Luke: sith that he scarce recites the thousand Sermon, of those
that Paul made. Thus says Calvin.

Whereby it appears, that as Paul's Doctorship and Apostleship, was all one,
both before and after: the difference being only this commission, of doing
the same thing in common to the Gentiles, the which also was foretold before,
both to Ananias that baptized him, and to himself in his trance at
Jerusalem, as he declared after in his Sermon, Act. 22.21. But here it was
enjoined unto him. And being a Doctor before he was here made the Doctor of
the Gentiles: even so, his manner of teaching, and executing this doctors
office, was ever one and the same manner: that is to say, ever ioining
exhortation, admonition, consolation, rebukeing, or some kind or other
application to his doctrine. And this appears, even in the selfsame 13.
chapter, verse. 14. etc. But when (says Luke) they departed from Perga, they
came to Antiochia of Pisidia, The Doctors, reading the Lectures of the Law and
the Prophets, joined exhortation Calvin.
and went into the Synagog on the Sabbath day, and sat down: and after the
Lecture of the Law and of the Prophets, the rulers of the Synagog sent unto
them, saying: ye men and Brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for
the people, say on.

Here ( says Calvin) is no mention made of prayers, which notwithstanding
(it is certain) were not omitted, nor neglected. But because Lukes purpose was
to rehearse the Sermon that Paul made there: Act. 13.
it is no marvel, if he only mention those things, that apperteine to the
order of teaching.

But this is a notable place, out of which we learn, what was the manner of
treating on doctrine among the Jews in that age. The first place was given to
the law and the Prophets. For it was not lawefull to propound any thing unto
the Church, which was not drawn out of that founteine. Heerevpon also we
gather, that the Scripture was not suppressed among a few, but all were
indifferently admitted to the reading thereof. After this, they that excelled
in the grace of teaching and exhorting, The interpreters used teaching and
exhorting.
had the second parts, as interpreters of the Scripture that was read.
Notwithstanding, last of all, Luke does show, that all were not permitted to
speak: least of that license, confusion should spring.

But the office of exhorting was committed unto certain men, whom he calls
the princes of the Synagog, or the Masters. Paul therefore and Barnabas, do
not by and by, shooue themselves forth to speak; least they should disturb
with too much haste, the accustomed order: but they modestly expect, License
to exercise their office.
until leave be given them for to speak, and that by the permission of
those, unto whom the authority thereof by public consent belonged. We know
how corrupt the state of that people at that time was: and Luke at length in
the end of the chapter will declare, how these Antiochians in refusing the
grace of Christ, were more then proud and froward. And yet notwithstanding
this goodness remained among them, that their assemblies were ordered comely
and honestly, etc.

Which saying of his is worthy to be the more considered, for that diverse
of these our Brethren, do make an argument of proportion, for the offices and
orders of the Church under Christ, correspondent to the offices and orders of
the Jews Synagogs, under Moises. That for their sacrificing Priests, we have
Pastors: for their Levites, The Counterpoyson. Page
Doctors of the Law, we have teachers, doctors of the Gospel: for their
rulers of the Synagogs, we have Governors: for their Leuiticall lookers to
the treasury, we have Deacons: for their presbytery we have Elders, etc

Which enumeration and proportion, though it be very disordered and confused,
and the argument thereon more weak and faulty: yet to make the best of it
that might be, it appears (if we go no further then this place) that
these Jews observing their ordinary custom, were not acquainted with such a
kind of Doctors, as used no applying, nor exhorting in their teaching, but
such as still joined these together. For what did they else mean in this
demand: The Jews knew no Doct. but that were exhorte^s.
If ye have any word of exhortation: But that they took it to be the
office of a Teacher, to use to the people, the word of exhortation, with the
word of Doctrine?

But perhaps they did this of ignorance of their own orders, and had not been
acquainted with such Doctors. But what-so-euer they thought, or conceived, or
demanded aright or amiss herein; let us see (as we began) Caluins judgment.

Does he mislike it? No This speech ( says he, Caluinus in Act. 13.
) does betoken that whatsoever grace is in men to edify the Church, it is,
as it were pawned unto them. Although the particle, in, (if there be in you
any word of consolation) according to the Hebrewe phrase, may be
superfluous: and therefore I urge not stiffelye that matter. Because the sense
may be plain, if you have any exhortation, The Doct. office in exhorting
and applying with teaching.
that is apt and profitable to the people: howbeit, exhortation excludes not
Doctrine. But this name seems to come of the common use that was received
among them. For properly the office of a Doctor is, The Jews Doctors.
not to bring forth any new thing of his own sense, but the Scripture,
wherein all the wisdom of the godly is comprehended: and to make it fit
unto the present use of the people. By this means they do not so much
teach, as they apply the doctrine taken from another matter unto the
edification of the Church. Which I suppose to be noted by the word exhorting.
What can be spoken of the office of a Doctor, more plain then this? And how
plain withal, this judgment of Calvin ( both for the Doctors of the Jews,
and the Doctors of the Christians) is clean contrary, to these Discoursers
distinguishing, and limitting of a Doctors office from a Pastors, by exhorting
and applying; I refer me not only to any Doctors, but to any godly
Christian readers judgment, be he never so simple, yea (almost) be he never so
much affectionate.

And with-all, let the Reader mark the Geneua note heere^n: The Geneua note,
on Act. 13.15.
This declares the Scripture is given to teach and exhort us, and that they
refused none, that had gifts to set forth Gods glory, and to edify his
people. Belike then they regarded not the nice distinguishing of the persons
office, but only respected these ends in him, Gods glory, and their
edifiyng. To which ends they required, not bare teaching, but teaching and
exhorting: whereunto, they thought, the Scripture to be given them. But
whatsoever they thought: did S. Paul satisfy their demand, being now
appointed to become the Doctor or Teacher of the Gentiles? as h^ calls
himself, 1. Tim. 2.7. And would he join exhortation to his teaching? Yea, the
very first words of his Sermon are an Exhortation to them, to give him
audience, verse. 16. And although he proceed from the 16. verse, S. Paul's
application.
until the 26. verse, all in doctrine: yet he enters again into
application, and uses, not only a most grave exhortation an^ reprehension:
but (returning to matter of doctrine) knits up all his Sermon with an
application, and a dreadful admonition to the dispisers of his doctrine.

And the next day again, both Paul and Barnabas, as they begin with
persuasion: so afterward reprehending the obstinate Jews, and comforting the
believing Gentiles, they conclude with Doctrine. And this order, to join and
enterlace these things together, was always the manner of Saint Paul's
teaching, being the Doctor and Teacher of the Gentiles. And this manner of
teaching he constantly observes, S. Paul to Timothy concerning the office
of teaching.
in all his Epistle^, and wills other Teachers so to do. For, charging
Timothy, to give attendance, to reading, to exhortation, and to doctrine, 1.
Tim. 4.13: And willing him to teach and exhort, 1. Tim. 6.2: And bidding him
to ordeine Teachers; does he limite it only unto doctrine? No. But says he,
2. Tim. 2. What things thou haste heard of me by many witnesses, commend the
same to faithful men, which shall be able also to teach others. And what was
that? All and only doctrine? No. S. Paul's precepts of teaching.
But doctrine intermingled with exhortation, admonition, reprehension,
consolation persuasion, or still some kind or other application.

These things (says he) admonish, etc. ver. 14. and 15. study to show thy
self an approved workman before God: and one not to be ashamed of cutting
a-right the word of truth. 24. Moreover the servant of the Lord must not
strive, but be gentle toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the evil men
patiently, instructing them with meekness, that are contrary minded:
proouing, if at any time God will give them repentance, that they may know the
truth. Lo here the duty and office of a Teacher. And does he not herein most
plainly insinuate, that he should teach them so, that with exhortation,
persuasion, application, and all gentle means, he should assay to win them?
and does not this Doctor of the Gentiles, to this purpose, set out himself an
example hereof, 2. Tim. 3. ver. 10. saying: But thou have fully known my
doctrine, manner of living, purpose, faith, long suffering, love, patience, S
Paul's example in teaching.
etc. 14. but continue thou in the things, which thou have learned, and art
persuaded thereof, knowing of whom thou have learned them, and that thou have
known the holy scriptures of a child: which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation, through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. For the whole scripture
is given by inspiration, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct,
and to instruct in righteousness: that the man of God may be absolute being
made perfect unto all good works, cap. 4. I charge thee therefore before GOD,
and before the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall judge the quick and the dead
at his appearing and in his kingdom: preach the word, be instant in season
and out of season, improoue, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and
doctrine. S. Paul's admonition to Titus for teaching.
Hitherto always wish teaching doctrine, Paul joins exhortation: and
wills Timothy to join application of these things with doctrine. and the
like he does to Titus. Tit. 1.9. Holding-fast the faithful word according to
doctrine, that he may be able to exhort, with wholesome doctrine, and improve
them that say against it.

If now it be replied, that here he speaks of a Bishop, and Paul was an
Apostle, and Timothy and Titus Bishops: not only the text makes them
Teachers or Doctors: but what office or degree of the ministry of the word
soever they had, S. Paul does always so join these together, that Calvin
on, 2. Tim. 3.16. says* He sets doctrine in the first place, Calvin on 2.
Tim. 3.16.
as in order it goes before all other. For he should exhort or reprove to n^
purpose* except ye should teach before: Teaching going before and exhorting
joined after it.
but because doctrine is cold by it self: he adds improouing and
correcting, etc. and on 2. Tim. 4.2. he wills him to be instant in reproving,
rebuking, exhorting: by which words he signifies, that there is need to
drive us on with many proddes, S. Paul's praecepts of teaching
that we may proceed in a straight course: for if there were that docilitie in
us that ought to be, the minister of Christ might draw us with his beck
only. But now, no, not moderate exhortations (I say not, sound counselles)
do suffice to shake off our sluggishnesse: except a greater vehemency of
reprehensions and chydinges do come thereto. With all lenity. A very
necessary exception. For, reprouings even with the very pushe of them do fall
away, and vanish into smoulder, except they be strengthened with doctrine. For
as well exhortations, as reprehensions are helps only unto doctrine. And
therefore without it, they are of small force. Example whereof are they, which
excel only in feruencie and eagerness, but they are not defenced with sound
doctrine: for they stoutly tire themselves, they make loud cries, and make a
turmoyle, and that without profit, because they build without a foundation. I
speak of good-men otherwise, but too little learned, and too much fervent. And
on Tit. 1.9. But what means he by this, according to doctrine? Teaching of
doctrine is to be referred to godly life.
To wit, such an one as is profitable for the aedification of the Church. For,
whatsoever is learned or known without any fruit of godliness, Paul is not
wont to account it in the name of doctrine. But rather he condemns for
vanity all speculations, that bring no profit, although otherwise they be
never so witty. So to the Romans the 12. chap. 7. He that teaches let him do
it in doctrine: that is to say, let him study to profit his audience. To
conclude, this is the first point, that a Pastor must be furnished with the
knowledge of doctrine: but the second is, that he must reteyne the confession
thereof, with a firm constancy of mind, even to the uttermost. The third,
that he apply his manner of teaching in edifying: Doctrine is to be applied.
nor fly about by subtleties of frivolous curiosity, but al-onely seek the
sound profit of the Church.

Thus does Calvin not only in a Bishop, Pastor, or any Minister of the word,
show how these two, Doctrine and Application, cannot conveniently be disioyned,
without the hindrance of edification, doctrine is cold and mooues not men
without these helps: and yet they help not without doctrine: but also one of
these very places, which these our Learned Disc. and other of their mind do
chiefly urge for Doctors, Calvin on Romans 12.7.
Romans 12.7. Calvin speaking of Pastors, applies it to them, and to their
duty. And simply expounde^ it thus: he that teaches, let him do it in
doctrine: that is to say, let him study to profit his hearers. As who say,
let him even in this sort as I have said of Pastors, not stand upon mere
speculation of doctrine, which moves coldly of it self, by reason of the
hearers dullness or hardness, but let him join such application thereof unto
his doctrine, as may best redound to their profit and aedification.

And now, as this was Paul's continual teaching, both by mouth and writing,
and moving all others to do the like, even the Doctor, so well as the Pastor,
as appears in all his Epistles: D. Apollos.
so Barnabas ( if the Epistle to the Hebr. be his, and not rather, as it is
commonly accepted, The Epistle to the Heb. taken of some to be written by
Barnabas.
S. Paul's) though the argument stand most of doctrine above all the other
epistles: yet does he still among the greatest points of doctrine, inserte
application and adioyne sundry and singular exhortations, admonitions,
reprehe^sions, co^solations, etc. to his doctrine. And the like does Peter both
in all his preachings, recorded in ye Acts of the Apostles, and in both his
Epist. And John and James, and Jude, and Stephen, Act. 7. etc. For, they all
learned this order of Jesus Christ the chief Doctor, and both their and our
M. of all our doctrine, and of all our teaching of it: Who ever joined
exhortation, application, etc. to his doctrine. And sent out both his 12.
Apostles, and his 72. Disciples, to keep the like manner of teaching: and never
taught, or enjoined other to teach in other order. Which is eue^ as much, as so
to sever the letter and the spirit, The danger and absurdity of our Br.
doctrine.
in seuering the doctrine from al application of the same, yt the lively and
quickening sense thereof is damped. neither only to say, that a man may do so
upon occasion, or in time and place, as some Doctors in the schools, and in
their lectures now and then: but to make a rule thereon, and a several office,
of such Doctors, and that ordinary and perpetual, distinct from Pastors: and
yt they must not exhort, nor rebuke, nor comfort, nor apply, but only teach
without all these things; and that such Doctors must be in every congregation,
and must so teach the common people, who, of all other are most moved by
affections; and that if the Doctor should persuade or apply he is an intruder
into other men's functions, and a confounder, and breaks off the ordinance of
Christ: Counte^poyson.
I do not only see how this is not yet sufficiently proved, but yt (as me
thinks, and I will speak it under correction of better proof, than is yet
brought, either in the Fruitful Sermon on, 1. Cor. 12. or in the
Counterpoyson, or in this Learned discourse): I take it not agreeable to the
Apostles precept, (...) to cut a-right the word of God; nor fit for the man
of God, which is his minister; The right cutting of Cods word.
nor according to the effectual woorking of his word; which is the power of
God to salvation to all that believe it: which is written to our consolation;
which is profitable to reach, to improoue, to correct, to enstruct, etc. which
is, lively, and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword,
and enters through, Hebr. 4.
even to the dividing a-sunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the
joints, and of the marrawe, and is a discerner of the thoughts and ententes
of the heart. All which, and all other principal virtues ther^of, are no less
wrought by the apt and right application, then by the true interpretation of
the same.

And thus much for these examples of these Doctors teaching, or rather (never
teaching) without applying of their doctrine.

But soft we have yet an-other example, that if all these will not prove it
(as on the contrary they plain confute it) to see, if that, will yet at
length infer it.

Likewise Apollos, which was an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures,
The learned Dis. Page 18.
first at Ephesus, but afterward being more perfectly instructed in the way of
God by Aquila and Priscilla, in the Church of A^haia, exercised the office of a
Teacher, with great profit of them which had believed, and to the great
confusion of the stiff-necked Jews, while he proved plainly by the
Scripture that Jesus was the Christ. Acts. 18.28. Acts 18.28


Apollos was an eloquent man, ( I grant) but can you (my Learned Masters) with
all the eloquence and learning ye have, Bridges.
prove this; that Apollos did exercise the office of such a Teacher, Apollos
no such D. as they urge.
as you have here described? Which if ye could do; yet, one swallowe would not
make a spring.

But even this example of Apollo, makes as much against you, as the residue.
For, Apollos being so eloquent, and mighty in the Scriptures, so seruent in
the spirit, and so diligent in his teaching, ( as Luke testifies,) do ye not
see, how all these things do manifestly infer, yt he used application and
persuasion with his teaching? He was excellently well learned, which he calls
mighty in the Scriptures: which point more properly indeed does appertain to
doctrine, and he was diligent also in his teaching which thing like-wise
belongs to doctrine: and yet was not he so mighty in the scriptures, Apollos
eloquence.
for all his diligence in his teaching, but that he was (God w^t) a very mean
and insufficient Teacher, till he was taught further, even by a poor mean
learned handie-craftes man, and his wife. So that his Eloquence was more in
persuasion then in doctrine: and his feruencie of the spirit to move
affections; as much as his diligence in his teaching. And what (I beseech you)
were the matters, he taught? Were they not those things that are of the Lord?
And is not life and manners, and exhortation thereto, and dehortation from the
contrary, pertaining also to the way of the Lord? But only the teaching of
the articles of religion, and the confutation of the contrary? And what was
the doctrine that he only knew and taught? Apollo ministered the Sacrament of
baptism
Is it not here named John's Baptism? And did he not then administer the
Sacrament that he taught? Yea, was not the Sacrament of Baptism that John
used: unto repentance? And did not John in ministering it exhort and apply,
saying: Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand? Did he not apply,
when he pointed out Christ with his finger? When he sent them to Christ, that
came to him? Did he not apply, and exhort, and rebuke, even in particular,
almost all sorts of persons: when they came to be baptized of him? And does
not the name of John's Baptism comprehend all his ministry? And how was
Apollo then such a Doctor as is here imagined, without all ministering of the
sacraments, or preaching, or exhorting, or applying? But now, when Apollo was
instructed more perfectly, and was minded to go into Achaia, and the brethren
exhorting him thereunto, wrote to the Disciples to receive him; when he was
come he helped them much, Apollo.
who had believed through grace. For, mightily he confuted publicly the
Jews, Apollos mighty teaching.
with great vehemency ( says Luke) showing by the scriptures that Jesus was
Christ.

Now, as though he did nothing there, but only teach and confute, you leave
out these words (mightily, and with great vehemency,) and thrust in another
of your own, plainly as though he had used nothing but plain teaching. Which
words left out by you, Beza
notwithstanding Beza does especially observe, (...), For with great
contention: I would use this Periphrase, to express the forceablenes of the
Greek word: whereby is signified, that this eloquent man stretched all his
sinews, to overcome the Jews. The vulgar, and Erasmus, call it, vehemently,
that is, (...). Moreover a little after, they do not seem sufficiently to
have expressed (...), they overcame. For the preposition (...), increases the
signification, as in (...) thoroughly to endure, (...) an exquisite, perfect,
knowing, or doing of a thing: and in such like. And therefore I translated it,
he did more and more convince them. As who say, he did more by his vehement,
eloquent, and zealous exhortations and admonitions, on the one side, confirm
and strengthen them, that had before believed, and were taught the principles,
and grounds of Religion by others: then he did by teaching. So that, though he
taught them also by the Scriptures, that Jesus was Christ, which is the
foundation of our doctrine: yet, he did this greater help unto them, in
confirming of them by application and exhortation in his teaching. And even so
against the adversaries: he did mightily convince them with the scriptures. But
this mightiness, this vehemency, and so exquisite conuincing of them, could
not be done; without a singular application, and great reproouing of them. And
to this (besides that Calvin does agree;) Gualter gathers a general rule of
this teaching of Apollos, saying: Gualterus (...) Act. 18.
This example also does admonish, what manner of teaching ought to be retained
in the Church. First there is need of zeal and feruencie of spirit, that all
men may perceive the matter is handled even from the heart. For except this
zeal be joined thereto, the doctrine will serve but for ostentation. Even so,
that Christ did burn in zeal: Feruens Doctors.
his study of teaching (which was never wearied,) and that fervent spirit in
reforming the temple, do abundantly declare. Neither shall those lukewarm
Doctors, or Teachers be ever allowed of him, when as Christ would have, no not
so much as private men in the cause of religion, to be lukewarm. Look
Apocal. ^. And then, it is necessary that diligence be added both for the
slownesse of our wit, which receaueth not matters that are divine, and also for
the corruption of our nature, which always is wont to strive against the
commandments of God. To the which also comes the wicked industry of Satan
our common enemy, whose suares to meet with, by continual industry, it
behooves the faithful ministers day and night. And therefore Paul
commands Timothy, whom he knew to be trained up in the study of the
Scripture from his childhoode, to apply reading. 1. Tim. 4. and the same Paul
will afterward exhort with most grave arguments, the Pastors of the
Ephesians, to watchfulness and diligence. Thirdly, it behooves the ministers
to be endewed with a freeness of speaking, least they should dissemble any
thing, being deceived either with fear or favor.

Thus does Gualter declare, that this teaching of Apollos, was not a peculier
kind of teaching in Doctors without applying and exhortation: but such as was
the office in common of all ministers, and namely Pastors. And upon this, that
he profited the faithful, and convinced the Jews, ( says Gualter): Further,
this place admonishes us of many things necessary to be observed. Gualier.
For first, we are taught, that there is need in the Church not only of
institution, but also of confuting of the adversaries: for it cannot be that
they should profit the Churches much, that endeavor not with chief diligence
to root out false opinions: as neither husbandry can be fruitful which
suffers shrubbes, or unfruitful darnell to grow up. Jeremy therefore is
bidden to pluck down, and root up, and then to build and plant. And Paul
would have a Bishop to be such, as should be able also to convince the
gainesayers. Tit. 1. but that, that is spoken of false Doctors, who must
utterly be confuted: that also ought to be understood of those, that are
openly wicked livers, ad evil doers, which are wont to be offensive to the
weaklinges. For against these also, the faithful ministers with the sword of
the spirit ought to fight: except they will lay open the Church, to be spoiled
of wolves. Greatly therefore do they err, who at this day would have the
Gospel so to be preached, that we should not withstand wicked doctrines and
corrupt manners.

Besides, we are admonished, what weapons in the Church we mu^t fight withal,
to wit, with the scriptures, which ( Paul teaches in an-other place,) to be
inspired from God, and to be profitable to teach, to reprove, to exhort, and to
rebuke, 2. Tim. 3.

Thus does this example of Apollos, not serve for such a Doctor, as may not
do the actions of a Pastor: but may as well deal with life a^ doctrine, and
may as well apply, exhort, and rebuke, as teach and confute. And yet, to the
further consideration hereof, let us note even the place it self, and the
office of a teacher, ( that ye say) Apollo in Achaia exercised. Which as it
appears, cap. 19.1. even in the next words fo^lowing to your own quotation:
(and it came to pass, ^hile Apollo was at Corinthus) conferred with this 18.
chap. by you cited for Apollos teaching: this Apollo succeeded Paul, who had
planted a Church to Christ before at Corinth: after this (says Luke v. 1.
etc.) Paul going from Athens came to Corinth; so that Apollos was Paul's
successor in that place. And even by that term does Calvin call him, ver. 28.
Calvin.
This is rightly to be attributed to the providence of God, Apollo was Paul's
successors to the Corinthian^
that while Paul is forced to go from Ephesu^ Apollo is sent in his place, who
might recompense the loss of his absence. And it is to purpose, to note, in
what sort this man's beginning was, sith he was also Paul's successor among the
Corinthians, and behaved himself so excellently, and employed so faithful and
earnest travail, that Paul commends him honorably, as his singular
colleague, or one sent in the same commission with him, 1. Cor. 3.6. and 4.6.
etc. So then, this Apollo succeeding Paul in place and office; by Paul's
exercise in the same place and office, we shall see Apolloes: except Apollo did
not his office, or were inferior in execution of the same: where Paul
prefers him even above himself, in the point that we are now in hand
withal. And how did Paul teach at Corinth, and at Ephesus: in which places
this Doctor Apollo did succeed this Doctor Paul? He disputed ( says Luke) in
the Synagogue every Sabbath day, and exhorted the Jews and Graecians. (...),
therefore, that is, to persuade ( says Calvin) I take it for that, that is by
little and little to induce. For in my judgment, Luke signifies, Calvin.
that when the Jews did coldly and foolishly handle the law: Paul spoke of
the corrupt and lost nature of man, of the necessity of grace, of the promised
redemption, of the manner of obteyning salvation: that he might awake^ them. For
this was a sit and an apt preparatiue unto Christ. Then, when he joins under
it, that he was straightly driven in spirit to teach Jesus to be Christ: the
sense is, that he was stirred up with a greater vehemency, freely and openly
to dispute of Christ. So that, we see, Paul brought not forth all at once, nor
at one time, but tempered his doctrine according as occasion served. Prudent
Doctors*
And because at this day that moderation is profitable: it behooves faithful
Doctors prudently to waighe, from whence they should make their beginning,
least a preposterous, and a confused manner do hinder the course of the
doctrine.

And was this done in him, or may be done in any, without application? Or
consisted it all in doctrine, and nothing in exhortation, where exhortation, or
persuasion is as expressly named as disputation?

Beza on this word (...), says, Beza.
that it signifies such an arde^cie of Paul, that altogether forgetting
himself, with an heroical force, he was carried forth to preach Christ. He
watched ( says Gualter) the Sabbath days, and the sacred assemblies, that
(according to the manner in those days) were gathered together. And first he
prudently did te^per his doctrine, applying himself unto the capacit^e of the
he^rers: Which ^e in an other place confesses, while he writes, that he
nourishet^ them with milk. Because, as yet they could not brook stronger
meat. Apollos insinuation to the hearers minds.
That does Luke express in the word of persuading. To declare that he
insinuated himself aptly unto the minds of the hearers. Least he should even
in the very thresholde, (as they say) offend any. And truly it is credible
that he proceeded in the same order, that otherwise he was accustomed to do,
etc* And afterward when the Jews resisted and blasphemed, he renounced a most
dreadful threat against them, ver. 6. and turned from them unto the Gentiles
there: among whom he abode teaching the word of God a year and 6. months.
From whence he departed to Ephesus, where, in what fort and manner he taught,
is not here so largely set down: as afterward in the two next Chapters
following, persuading, exhorting, admonishing and applying.

So that Apollos succeeding Paul in this commission of teaching in these
places: it follows, that Apollos teaching was not without these things. And
no doubt, he had with such eloquence, and his persuasions so moved the
Corinthians, and he was grown thereby into such estimation: that sects and
contentions springing among them, S. Paul 1. Cor. 1. 12. and 1. Cor. 8.
notes, how one said, I am of Paul: and another I am of Apollo. Paul
planted, Appollo watered.
Whom he rebukes saying: Are ye not carnal? who is Paul then, and who is
Apollo: but the ministers by whom ye believed? And as the Lord g^ue unto every
man. I planted, Apollo watered: but God gave the increase. And again, These
things brethren, have I figuratively applied to mine own self, and to
Apollo, for your sakes, etc. By all which, it is manifest, that Apollo was of
so great fame, that he was comparable, in many men's opinions, to the chiefest
Apostles. And shall we think that all his eloquence, and might, and
vehemency, was only in teaching, and planting the articles and principles of
Christian religion, without applying his teaching to any particular state of
time, of person, or places? Nay rather, S. Paul ( in this comparison, and as
in time he was before him, in those places) takes that to him self. And says
not, Apollo plants, and Paul waters: but Paul plants, and Apollo waters. As
though he had (not figuratively) but in plain words said, I am rather the
Teacher and the Doctor of the Gentiles, as he also calls himself, 1. Tim.
2.7. But (says he) Apollo waters: he comes with his flowing streams of
eloquence, and waters that, that Paul had planted, If Paul the Doctor and
planter be so eloquent: was Apollo the D. and watererwith out persuasion?
to confirm and strengthen them by exhortation and persuasion, as Paul there
says, ver. 10. I have laid the foundation, and another builds thereon. Now,
if S. Paul liken himself (for teaching) to the Planter, and layer of the
foundation, who notwithstanding spiceth all his teaching with so manifold
figures of surpassing eloquence, full of exhortation, admonition, reprehension,
consolation, and all kind of perswasiue application, to who^ all Orators may
give place: shall we think of Apollo this eloquent waterer, whom Paul so
highly advanced, whom the Corinthians so greatly esteemed, Doctors.
whose zeal and labors God so mig^tily blessed and prospered, to his glory,
his Churches benefit, and his enemies confusion; that he used no exhortation,
no admonition, no reprehension, no consolation, no application to any
particular state, of time of persons, of places, in his teaching? No testimony
of Scripture for this furmised Doctor.
But the Text in all these points is plain contrary. This therefore is a mere
surmised kind of Doctorship, that is here pretended, nor any one testimony of
the Scripture as yet alleged, nor any one of these, or any other examples in
the Scripture, does enforce it. And as this Doctorship can-not be proved by
these examples, but rather that they were Presbyters or Priests, whom you
call Pastors: so the compilers of the Ecclesiastical history of Magdeburge,
Centuria 1. Lib. 2. cap. 7. fol. 508. Colum. 2 do say: In the Church of
Antioche, for a time, were Paul and Barnabas, who are called Apostles, and
Prophets, and Doctors: whom it is lawful to call Priests or Presbyters. And
so like wise the same writers, speaking of all the Doctors of that age, do
further say, fol. 509. Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors, did not
make certain degrees of persons in the Ecclesiastical Regiment, but they
seem to be numbered either among the Apostles and their fellows, or else among
the Priests or Deacons. So that there was no several degree, or any ordinary
appointed office distinguished in persons, by reason of these diverse gifts at
that time.

Which Centuriographers also in the same book and chapter, fol. 510. De
ratione and forma Gubernat. do say: These were the works in common of the
Apostles, and Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Doctors, Priests, Deacons:
they taught the Church purelie and sincerely, concerning all the points of
Christian doctrine, etc. They interpreted the Scriptures. etc. They delivered
the Catechism, etc. They preached repentance, etc. toward the obstinate they
were more sharp, etc, they exhorted those that were justified, etc.

To conclude, they had Schools no doubt and teachers in many churches: and
while they taught, they employed their diligence in teaching, as S. Paul
willed, He that teaches in teaching. But that those Teachers might not
exhort, nor apply, and that if they so did, they encroched upon the office of
the Pastor: this is not yet, (nor I think will ever be) proved. and the
foresaid Collectors of the Ecclesiastical story, of that first Centurie or
hundredth years, Chap. 10. in the title of the Doctors of the Church, reckon up
indifferently, all the Apostles, the Evangelists, Barnabas, Agabus, Timothy,
Titus, Silas, Siluanus, Judas, Barsabas, Aristarchus, Aquila, Prisca,
Archippus, Alexander, Andronicus, Iunias, Crispus, Chloas, Carpus, Apollo,
Zenas, etc. And of this Doctor Zenas they write, saying: Paul mencioneth once
only, of one Zenas together with Apollo, and he calls him a Lawier. As, Tit.
3. Bring Zenas the expounder of the Law, and Apollo diligently, that they lack
nothing. But it is likely, that in the increasing of the Gospel, he sustained
the same office that Apollo did. As Hierome witnesses these things of them
both, in his declaration of the 3. Chapter of the Epistle to Titus, rehearsing
it in this manner. Apollos was a man of Alexandria extraught of the Jews
marvelous eloquent and perfect in the Law, Zenas a Doctor.
the Bishop of Corinthus: who is thought to have sailed over with Zenas the
Doctor of the Law, unto Creta an Isle neere-hande, by reason of the
dissensions that were at Corinthus, and to have returned to Corinthus after
that, by the Epist, of Paul the dissentions sproong at Corinthus were
appeased. But who this Zenas the Doctor of the Law was, we can-not by any
other place of Scripture, tell: but only this, that he also being an
Apostolical man, had that work in hand, of building up the churches of
Christ, that Apollo exercised. Which by the way declares, that this Doctor
Apollos was also a Bishop: and that this Doctor Zenas, did join exhortation
and application to his teaching, as is before showed Apollos did.

And so the writers of this Centurie, proceed on in the lives of the Doctors of
that age, taking Manahen by the way, cited by these our Learned discoursers for
one of these Doctors, Manahen a Doctor.
that may neither exhort nor apply. Of whom they say: Who also without doubt
was among them, that first converted the Antiochians unto the acknowledging of
Faith in Christ. After whom these Centuriographers descend to Gamaliel. Who
because he was a Doctor of the Law among the Jews, I would note also their
testimone of him out of the Scriptures, the rather, that we may the better
perceive what was the manner of the Doctors teaching among them. Because some
think, this office of only teaching, was ordained in the Church, to be
correspondent to the manner of teaching, i^ the Synagogues and assemblies of
the Jews. Gamaliel ( say they fol. 621. was borne at Tharsus, a worshipful
Doctor of the Law. Act. 5. Of whom Paul declares before the tribune at
Ephesus, Act. 22. That he was at his feet instructed in the Law of his
Fathers. Where-upon Athanasius in the book of the passion of the image of the
Lord, calls Gamaliel the Doctor of Paul, which was the Doctor of the
Gentiles. When As the multitude of the Jews being stirred up at Jerusalem,
against John and Peter, took counsel to kill them: Gamaliel with very prudent
counsel, did withdraw them: which thing Luke declares in this manner. A
certain Pharisie (says he) in the counsel by name Gamaliel, a Doctor of the
Law, Doctor Gamaliel his exhortation and application, Act. 5.
honorable among all the people, arising up, commanded the men, for a little
while to be put forth, and said unto them: Men of Israel, take heed to
your selves, what ye are about to do, concerning these men. For, before these
times, rose up Theudas boasting himself, to whom resorted a number of men,
about four hundredth, who was slain, and they all that obeyed him, were
scattered and brought to naught. After this man arose up Judas of Galilie, in
the days if the Tribute, and drew away much people after him. He also
perished, and all that obeyed him were scattered abroad. And now I say unto
you, refrain your selves from these men, and let them alone. For, if this
counsel or work be of men, it will come to naught, But if it be of God, ye
can-not destroy it, least ye be found even fighters against God. Unto whose
council that he declares, that all the multitude agreeed, and having beaten
the Apostles, sent them away.

Did not this Doctor here also among the Jews, both exhort, and apply to
the particular state of time, of persons, and of places? And as this Doctor
Gamaliel, so no doubt, (opportunity serving) did all the other Doctors of the
Law. Yea, Esdras himself did not teach the Law unto the Jews, without
exhortation and application to them. Esdras a Doctor.
And as it was thus before Christ's time among the Jews, and in all the age of
Christ, and of his Apostles: So, for the ages succeeding them, as the Churches
had their Doctors or Teachers, so did those Doctors continue as well in
exhortation, and application of their doctrine to their audience, as in
teaching of them.

To which purpose, The Catechists Doct. and their order of teaching in the
Pri^itiue Church.
in steed of particular examination of all the Doctors that succeeded in three
or four Centuries following, I will note the only collections of Hyperius De
Catechesi, which was the especial office of the Doctors and Teachers: as Beza
testifies even in his distinction between Doctors and Pastors. Confessione
Christiana cap. 5. Artic. 26. For the Doctors office is simply to declare the
word of GOD, that the true sense may be drawn forth: and especially, to
instruct the learners of the Catechism: Which office Origin enjoyed in the
Church Alexandria.

In the old time ( says Hyperius) they delivered the Catechism to the rude.
They did it, whosoever were endued with sufficient doctrine. Hyperius de
Catechesi cap. 2. fol. 445.
There is no doubt, but Peter the Apostle expounded the whole doctrine
Catechisticall (or teaching by voice the principles of Faith) in the house of
Cornelius the Centurion, before that he baptized any. Act 10.

Likewise, Philip in the city of Samaria: and declared forthwith in the way
before the Eunuche, the principal head points of Christian Religion. Which
the Scripture signifies briefly, saying: That he preached Jesus unto him.
Act. 8. Here is Peter the Apostle a Doctor, and Phillip the Deacon a Doctor,
and their Catechizing is preaching.

But ( says Hyperius) in success of time, even as the Apostles rejected from
themselves the office of baptizing, being drawn away with greater, and more
difficult matters, so was it expedient to commit unto others the business of
expounding the Catechism.

When the Church began to increase, it was necessary for the variety and
weight of businesses, which a few were not able to sustain: that offices
should be distinguished, and the same to be enjoined to diverse persons: even
as Ambrose expounding that place of Ephesians the 4. does well teach: And he
gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, and some Pastors, and Teachers, to
the renewing of the saints, etc. Grave men therefore, notable for the
sincerity of their life, and such as besides had a grace of teaching, and a
prudence joined thereunto, were chosen to the office of Catechizing: for to
instruct those that were aliens from our religion. Verily, it behooved such to
be chosen, who, not so-much in their speech, as in the actions of their life,
should even bow down their minds to love the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
his sincere Religion. Certes, to persuade one in speech and words to embrace
Christ, to inuit him to godliness, to open the way to faith: but in doings
to drive him from Christ, to give an example of doing wickedlie, to bring
forth no fruits of faith: is no other thing, then, as much as the day before
thou buildest up, so much the day following to pull down: and with
Penelope, to vntwiste the web again, which thou wast minded to have gone
thorough.

More-ouer, before them whose condition is of very diverse sorts, and wits
are not al like; The Teachers applying his doctrine to all sorts of learners.
to temper the manner of teaching, to the profit of each one of them, is need
of singular prudence.. Heere-unto therefore appertains that which Clement
writes in his first epistle to the brother of the Lord: They that Catechize,
that is to say, they that instruct beginners with the word, it behooves that
they themselves be instructed. For, it is a matter of the soul. And it
behooves him that teaches and enstructeth rude souls, to be such an one, that
he may be able even to proportion or fit himself, and direct the order of
his word, according to the capacity of the hearer.

He therefore himself, must especially be very well learned and skillful,
blameless, ripe, vnfearfull. And S. Augustine at large teaches, how a
Catechist, or Teacher, ought to rouse up oftentimes his mind to diligence and
labor, to break of all irkesomnesse in the difficulties that he meets
with. How furthermore it should be his special endeavor, to frame his
speeches, according to the diversity of the persons. And to deal otherwise
with those that are of the Gentiles: Otherwise with those that come to the
Church, from among the Jews: Otherwise also, with those that are of the
city, and politic men: Otherwise with those that are husbandmen, and
altogether vntrayned up: Otherwise with those that are Gramarians, Orators, or
Philosophers: Otherwise, with those that are unlearned: otherwise, with those
that have been before accustomed to foul offenses: and to treat on all
things otherwise, with them that are thought to live vn-reproueable.

Besides this, there are many that feignedlie and not from the heart, come to
hear the doctrine; some desire diverse places of Scripture, and obscure
questions to be expounded unto them. From whose minds, except the scruple be
in time removed: it is to be feared, least at some time, they leap back
again from their holy purpose. Therefore, these men which were called to the
office of catechizing or teaching, had not only need of learning, but also of
no mean wisdom. Of which things Augustine teaches in his book of
Catechizing the rude, in the third, the fifth, and in eleven chapters following.
And against Faustus the Manichaean, the thirtienth book, the seventh chapter:
and so forth unto the ending. And out of doubt such an other was Panthenus, the
first Doctor of the Ecclesiastical school after the Apostles, and Master of
the Catechismes, (or of these manner of Teachings) in Alexandria. Whom Clemens
in his first book (...) (of his scatterings or strawings) witnesses that he
learned all of the Apostles. Of whom S. Hierome writes, that he labored
much in the Chruches with his liuelye voice. Such an other was Clemens of
Alexandria the successor of Panthenus in either function. As also besides
Hierome, Eusebius witnesses, in the first book, the tenth and eleventh
chapters of the Ecclesiastical History. Such an other was Origin there
succeeding in the third place. Examples of the ancient Teachers.
Such an other was Heraclas, unto whom Origin delivered up the school. Such an
other was Dyonisius the Catechizer or teacher of the people of Alexandria. Of
whom Eusebius, in his Ecclesiastical History, the 6. book, Chap. 16.19.22.
speaks. Moreover, such an-other at Jerusalem was Cyrillus: of whom, mention
is made before. To conclude, such an other at Carthage, was that godly man
Deogratias, whom S. Augustine greatly does commend.

All this notes Hyperius of these ancient Doctors, Teachers, or Catechists.
Whereby we may perceive these Doctors Teachings, and much more by their own
works and treatises, to be full of exhortations and applications. Yea, some of
their Catechistical books, are called by the name of exhortation, as that of
Clemens Alexandrinus his oration exhortatory to the Gentiles. etc.

Neither herein did they invade the office of other men: For, it specially
appertayned to their own office, as Hypperius further notes, 499. For those,
which for the confession of the Christian truth, The teachers animating unto
constancy.
were deteyned captives, or led to punishment, he was woonte (speaking of
Origin, and likewise of Cyrill) with reasons brought forth out of the holy
Scriptures, to comfort them, and to animate them unto constancye, and to many
the children of the heathen, (unto whom with the rules of Grammar, he had
studiouslye beat upon the points of religion) to them was he an author to
embrace Christianity. etc. And in the 3. Chap. (what doctrine, and points of
Religion should be taught in a Cathechisme) fol: 472. he says.

The 4. head is of doctrine: but in the name of doctrine I take all those
things, Exhortation to newness of life, contained in doctrine.
which were proposed to them that were newly baptized, and are exacted to be
severely kept. That is to wit, of the new life and innocence of the
regenerate. For, it beseems him that is baptized, to become even a new man:
and by all means to die to sin,, to live afterward only to
righteousness: and to show himself to be such in all the actions of his
life, that it may be understood, he used the mysteries truly, and with fruit.
Of the which newness of life after Baptism Romans 6. Know ye not that so many
of us, as are baptized, we are baptized into his death, we are buried together
with him, by baptism into death: that even as Christ was raised from the
dead, by the glory of the Father, even so we should also walk in newenesse of
life: For, if we be grafted with him, to the similitude of his death, even so
shall we be to the similitude of his resurrection. Knowing this, that our old
man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin. etc. Also to the Ephesians. 4. This therefore
I say and testify by the Lord, that ye walk not hereafter, as the residue of
the Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, etc. And a little after, of
the doctrine succeeding baptism. But you have not thus learned Christ, if so
beye have heard of him, and have been taught in him, even as the truth is in
Jesus. To lay aside, according to the former conversation the old man, which
corrupts according to the lust of error. But be ye renewed in the spirit of
your mind, and put on the new man, which is created according to God, by
righteousness and holiness of truth. The like things thou read Col. 3.
and 2. Pet. 2. In which the doctrine of new obedience, and of the fruits of
faith, which ought chiefly to be regarded in the late baptized, is (as it
were) in a painted table, set before our eyes.

Doctrine stretches not only to Faith, but also to charity and good works.
And we see the Apostle, in the most of his Epistles, proceeding in that
order, that in the former part he treats of the Faith of those that are to
be justified: where all things run to this head, of faith in God, and of
Baptism the Sacrament of Faith: but in the later part, of the faith, and
charity, or works of those that are justified. To wit, where he handleeh the
offices of a Christian life, and all things that are there expounded, are
rightly referred to that head of doctrine, that follows Baptism.

To conclude therefore, all the precepts, the exhortations, the rebukings,
which are extant in the Apostolical writings, concerning the charity,
justice, innocence, purity of those, that are by faith Justified and baptized,
were comprehended: and such (teaching) as in times past, was in the fowrth
place expounded before the learners. What is here left out for the Teaching of
the Pastor, that is not common with him unto the Doctor?

And in the 4, Chapter of the manner of this Doctors Teaching. After he has
again at large declared,: how, The teachers Exhortations.
having his audience of all kinds of persons, he must apply himself unto
them every one: fol. 488. He says: To conclude, if there were among the
hearers, some learned, as Philosophers, Rhethoricians: they were gently warned
that they should not despise, nor hear with lothesomnesse, the doctrine of the
gospel. Which in show, and in the manner of the delivery, seems base and
somewhat rusticall. Nor, that they attribute more then is right to man's
wisdom, and to the books of the Philosophers, that they were before inured
withal. But that they should more attentively consider the matters themselves,
and the reverent largeness of the mysteries. And that they should religiously
examine all their rules, by the squyre of the holy Scripture. And if they had
read over any good authors, they should constantly cleave fast unto them. But
unprofitable and stained with evil opinions, they should in time lay them out
of their hands. And if any things were more at length and groselye expounded,
they should not be grieved thereat: for that was not for them, who already
partly by private reading, partly by conference with godly men, were pretily
entered: but ought many times to be done, for the ruder sort: And if they
seemed to require a more full explanation of any certain Chapters: it was by
the way declared unto them, the reading of what writers was able to satisfy
them,

Which things, that they were wont thus to be done, S. Augustine in his book
of Catechizing the rude, in the 8. and 9. chapters, does declare. According to
this manner therefore, did the Catechists or Teachers, when they did publicly
teach, apply themselves wholly unto all men. And as the Apostle said, to
become all unto all, to the intent to win the most part unto Christ: and to
give no man occasion of starting back, of erring, or so much as staggering.
And if moreover, they perceived it were expedient: oftentimes they asked the
Bishops themselves; to the end, that of some certain more difficulte points,
or more needful to be expounded; they might also publicly and more fully
preach unto the people. Whereunto no doubt those things are to be referred:
because the fathers oftentimes, do intermingle in their Sermons, exhortations,
etc. 497.

Again, speaking of their diversity in teaching of children, and those of
riper years, he says: For, children also, the same form of sownde words is
well used: which in little books that are borne about, we see prescribed. But
with those that are elder, there must be a freeer course of speech, and place,
by yielding to examples, similitudes, descriptions, amplifications, The
Rhetorical manner of the doctors teaching.
and to the mouings of the minds. If at any time any vices are to be reckoned
up, and reprehended: (which must needs be done in the expounding the ten
commandementes) those things in children shall be noted, and chastifed with
gentle words, which we know are familier to that age. In young and old
persons, verily, it is meet that other vices be cured with another medicine.
And even as these things fall out more and more in the eyes of men; so must
the reprehension be tempered: for they are able to sustain a sharper
reprehension.

In Exhortations, the like moderation must be used, and duties prudently
prescribed, that are agreeable to every age, and perswasiue arguments aptly
applied unto them. What need many words? Whatsoever shall be offered to
tender minds: that must be, as though it were milk or delicate pulse. Those
things that shall be distributed to them of full age, they must express
(after a manner) the nature of strong meat. Generally, the Catechist or Teacher
must often admonish all his hearers, that they often deeply in their minds
consider with him, what they once promised to God, and to the Church, in their
baptism. What confession of their faith they made. How haighnous a thing it
is, for those that have given their names, to fall from their Emperor Christ.
What life Christ requires of those that are his. Finallye, by what bayte,
art, prudence, and counsel so-euer he can, he shall diligently study to
draw them to the true fear of GOD, and love of virtues, and hatred of vices.
And thus much of the manner of his teaching in public.

All this at large, and much more writes Hyperius of these Doctors and
Teachers: which in the Primitive Church were called Catechistes, because of the
sounding of their voice in their teaching. And other Ecclesiastical Doctors
then these, from the Apostles times: (except the Deacons Priests, Pastors or
Bishops) I have readde of none in all the Church of Christ. But what Teachers
soever have been; none have been debarred, (till now) of exhorting, and
applying of their doctrine. No, not the best of the Doctors, Teachers, Readers,
or Catechists, what name soever they shall be termed by, that God in these our
last days, has raised up in his Church, to reform the same: and to restore
the true Teaching of the Gospel, which the enemies had suppressed: No, not one
that I can yet read or hear of, but that now and then he exhorts,
rebukes, or applies in his teaching: as appears in all the works of
Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Musculus, Martyr, Bullinger, All the
later Doctors in the ^eformed Churches manner of ^eaching.
Simlerus, Gualter, Calvin, Danaeus, Zanchius, Hyperius, Oleuianus, Vrsinus,
Sadeelus, Beza, Tremelius, Iunius, or any other learned, godly, and famous
Doctor, Teacher, Catechiste, Reader, interpreter, Expositor, etc: but in their
teachings by mouth, you should have hear^ and in their teachings by writing ye
shall find more or less, erhortations, reprehensions, admonitions,
consolations, and applications, etc. Only the nearest that me thinks (I
speak it under correction) do draw to this imagined Doctor, that these our
brethren and Learned discoursers would set up: are the Scholasticall,
Thomisticall, Scotisticall, The new urged Doct. are likest to the schoolmen.
Sorbonicall, Cherubinical, Seraphical, ( or call them what ye wit,) the
Speculatiue and contemplative doctors. They of all other, used a kind of
teaching and confuting, much like this manner, for the most part, without
applying their teaching, to any particular state of time, of persons, or
places. As for all other examples of the practice of Doctors, both before
Christ's time, and in Christ's time, and in the time of the Apostles, and in the
time next after them, and so continuing till these Schoolmen began, and from
them, until God raised up better Doctors among us: and among us, of all these,
and other godly learned Doctors, not so much as one appears, that thus
preciselie was limited, only to teach, but had liberty to exhort and
apply, and yet, exceeded not his office, But now, having considered the
institution and practice of this Doctor thus far forth let us return to our
Learned discoursers collection hereupon.

Therefore, if we purpose to have the Church to flourish in true knowledge, we
must provide that this office be restored, The learned Dis. Page 18.
both in the universities, and in as many other places as may be, as well for
the better instruction of all men, which are desirous to learn, as especially
for the information of those, which should occupy the rooms of Pastors. Of
which sort there ought to be a great number always in good towardness, to
take charge of so many several flocks, as must of necessity be in so great a
Church as this is.

By this kind of Doctors that is here urged, the Church would sorily
flourish: restored that can-not be, which never was. Howbeit, Bridges.
to have Doctors or Teachers more especially, though not only to dedicate
themselves to teach true doctrine, Doctors in the Universities and in as many
places, as may be.
and to confute all heresies and false opinions by the word of God,
concerning all articles of true Religion, both in the Universities, and in as
many other places as may be: Is not thus far said amiss. But this far
differs, not in method, but in matter, and that in one of the principal
points thereof, from that which before was urged: that hereunto God had
provided that certain men should be appointed in every congregation. But
here ye are well fallen, from every congregation, to the universities, and as
many places as may be. This draws near indeed, to the English form at
Geneua, and to the Scottish. But the nearer to any of them: the further from
yourselfe.

And as ye were too peremptory in that point, which here ye mitigate: so
there, where ye said, they should employe themselves wholly or principallye
to the study of holy scriptures, etc. Which word principally, being also
a gentle lenitiue of the word wholly, is clean contrary to it self, and
to your last assertion, that the office of Doctors, is only to teach true
Doctrine, and to confute all heresies, etc. Which again is an-other
difference, not from your brethren, but from your selves; nor yet so much in
method, as in matter. Neither can I see, how this also does hang together,
that the especial end of these Doctors is for the information of those, that
should occupy the room of Pastors; and the Pastors office is not only
teaching, but exhortation is the principal part of their office: And should
the informers and Teachers of their offices, not deal at all with exhorting
and applying, which principally pertayneth to Pastors, but teach only? So
indeed, they might make them Learned Doctors, like themselves, but sorry
Pastors, with whose office, they have not to meddle. Me thinks it were better
said of the twain, (these offices being thus distinguished) if Pastors did
inform Pastors and Doctors too: since they may both Teach and exhort: and
Doctors may not exhort, but teach only.

But of these things, I wil-be glad to be my self a learner, when I shall
get a Doctor, that can more learnedly discourse upon them. In the mean
season, let us now leave both these imagined, and other Doctors, not to every
congregation, but rather to the Universities, and other fit places for them,
as Cathedral and Collegiat Churches, etc. Where (I trust) some good Teachers
and Doctors be. And now let us come, to view the Pastors.

The Argument of the 3. book concerning the 2. Tetrarke, called the Pastor.
Pastors.

First, for the titles and names of Pastor, Elder, Priest, Superintendent,
Ouerseer, and of Bishop: Of the indifferent usage of the names of Pastor,
Elder, and Bishop: Of one or many Bishops in one City: Of their equality in
dignity, and authority: Of those Bishops, that S. Paul called together to
Miletum: Whether the name were not made peculier to one in the Apostles times:
Whether Timothy and Titus were not such Bishops: How the Apostle calls them
Bishops at Philippos. Of the Superiority among the Apostles, and whether James
were Bishop of Jerusalem. Of the name and office of Priests, and Bishops in
the Primitive Church: and so continuing, till Aerius moved the first question
heere-of: and of the Fathers, opposing themselves against him. Of Ieromes
reasons for the occasions and ends thereof. Of the ancient Fathers
interpretation of the former places; and of the continual practice heerof in
all Churches. That this order was no way to Anti-Christes pride, and tyranny;
but the stop thereof. And of the original and state of the Church of Rome:
and of the schism made therein by Nouatus a Bishop of a new making, and of
his Puritanisme.

BEsides Doctors, there must be Pastors ordained in every congregation, which
have diverse appellations in the Scripture. As, The learned Dis. Page 19.20.21.
and 22.
Ephesians. 4. they are called by the name of Pastors, because they ought to feed
the several flocks of Gods sheep committed to their charge. As it appears
Act. 20.28. 1. Pet. 5.2. They are called also Elders, not always in respect of
their age, but of their office and gravity. For, Timothy was but a young man,
and yet had the office of an Elder. This name was received of an au^cie^t
custom of the people of Israel, who used so to call those that were rulers or
officers among the^, Pastors and their titles. Act 20.28. 1. Pet. 5.2. Numb.
21.16
as it appears by many places both of the old and new Testament, but
chiefly in Number. 11.16. Where god ordained seventy Auncientes, to assist Moses
in his government, who were also endued at the same time with the spirit of
Prophecy, from which time it became an ordinarye office and name of Governors
in Israel. Wherein we have to note against the Papists, that the Ministers of
the Church, are never called in the new Testament, by the name of sacrificing
Priests, which were under the Law: but often are called Elders of the
similitude of those ancients, that governed the people of GOD. Whereas, if
they had been appointed of God to be sacrificers: the similitude and name of
sacrificing Priests, would a great deal better have agreeed unto them. But
wher-as both these names, were usual amongst the Jews, (...) and (...), the
one signifying sacrificers, and the other Elders, the spirit of GOD does
often call the Ministers Elders: but euer-more very preciselye auoydeth to
name them Sacrificers, or Priests (as we use the term:) yea, though they
succeed them in one principal part of their office, Mal. 2.7.
that is to say, in teaching, as is written. The lips of the Priest should
preserve knowledge, and men shall seek the Law at his mouth. Heb. 7.12.24
The cause where-of is evident, to be this, that the sacricing Priesthood of
Aaron, is wholly translated unto Christ: in whom only it rests, and passes
from him to none other. But by the name of elders, the Pastors are called, Act.
14.23. Act. 14.23.
Where Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders by election in every congregation.
And Act. 20.17. Act. 20.17.
Paul sent for the Elders of Ephesus to Miletu^. 1. Tim. 5 17.
Also he affirms those Elders especially which labor in preaching and
doctrine, to be worthy of double honor. Which place also testifies of an
other kind of Elders, of whom we shall have occasion to speak more
heere-after, whose office consists only in government and not in public
teaching More-ouer, Tit. 1.5.
he shows that he appointed Titus to ordeine Elders in every City, and
after-ward describes what manner of men, he would have to be chosen into the
office. Also S. James cap. 5.14. Iam. 5.14.
wills, that if any besicke, they should call for the Elders of the Church,
who being indewed with the gift of healing at that time, should pray for the
diseased, and anoint him with oil, 1. Pet. 5.2.
and he should be restored to his health. Finally, S. Peter as a fellow Elder
exhorts the Elders to employ all their diligence to the feeding of the flock
of God.

Bridges.
THis Discourse ( as says the marginall note in the beginning thereof) is of
Pastors and their titles: as though this name Pastor were the chiefeste, and
more usual name, then any other of these Ecclesiastical offices, and al other
were but titles appendant to Pastors. Whereas, not only (as I have declared)
Musculus says, that the name of Pastor, is but a Metaphorical name; signifiing
feeder of feeding, and is in right English commonly called a Sheephearde, not a
Pastor. But also, these our Learned Brethren discourses themselves do here
confess, that they are called by the name of Pastors, because they ought to
feed the several flocks of Gods sheep committed to their charge. But, as the
people of God are called flocks of sheep improperlie, and only by similitude:
So are the Ministers of Gods word and Sacraments; and none otherwise called
Pastors.

Now, this their pasturing or feeding, being their teaching: The name of Pastor
seeldome used in the new Testa.
the Pastor ( as Musculus says) is the Teacher, or Doctor. And this word
Pastor albeit (as is afore-saide) improperly taken, though it be somewhat more
used by some of the Prophets in the old testament: yet (in the new Testament
( save, where it is ascribed only unto Jesus Christ) it is rare or never to be
found, directly ascribed to the Ministers of Gods word and Sacraments, as it
is in this place here quoted. Ephesians. 4. Upon which we have already spoken. And
as for the other quotations, Act. 20. and 1. Pet. 5. do rather insinuate them
than call the^ by the name of Pastors. The name of Doctor or Teacher more proper
and significan^ the^ the name of Pastor.
This Metaphorical name therefore of Pastor or shepeheard, or feeder, is no
more (if it be not much less) significant, for the office of the Minister of
gods word and Sacraments: then is the name of Doctor, or is any more proper
name of this Ecclesiastical office, then are the other which here be reckoned
up. Whereof, as these our brethren the Learned discourses do first name the
title of Elders: so in this example that they bring thereof, Numb. 11.16. Where
God ordained 70. ancients to assist Moses in his government, who were also
endued at the same time with the spirit of Prophecy, from which time it became
an ordinary office and name of governors in Israel. This is so hardly brought
forth, for the applying of this name unto the spiritual Pastor or Minister of
Gods word and Sacraments, that their-selues both here do rather apply it to
the name of Governors, which name they give unto their Seniors, that are not
Pastors: And also, page 88. saying: That Pastors seem to have borrowed this
name of Elders, especially in respect of their Government. Whereas, it is
apparent for those Elders ( for all their prophefying) that their government
consisted no white in Ecclesiastical, but in civil and temporal matters
only. So, that those Elders were nothing like either these Elders, which they
call Pastors, nor like the Elders that they call Governors, which they would
have not only to govern ( though, some civil and temporal, but chieflye) all
Ecclesiastical matters. but of these 70. Elders, we shall see more hereafter.

Now, concerning your note against the Papists, that the Ministers of the
Church are never called in the new Testament, by the name of sacrificing
Priests, which were under the Law. Which, as it is true: so that which
follows, but often are called Elders, of the similitude of those auncientes
that governed the people of God, I take, not to be so true, Elder.
or so necessarily proved to be true, that the name (...), came of the
similitude of those 70 auncientes, The minist. of the new Test. have neither
name nor office from the Elders
their manner of government of the people of God; being so different and
contrary.

True it is, that those auncientes are by the 70. interpreters called by that
name, but so they call also both Abraham and his wife, and his man, and Lot, and
the Sodomites, and the Elders of Pharaohs house, and all the ancient men of
the people of Israel, besides and before they so call those 70. auncientes.
And of the office that they were called unto, says, Calvin, on the same
place, Numb. 11.16. Numb. 11, 16


Calvin on Numb. 11.
For, before the Law was set forth, Moses was bidden to take 70. persons with
him, who should conduct him into the mountain, that they might be eye
witnesses of the glory of God. In the mean season I deny not, that there were
2. more above the number of 70. But only I show why God determined this
number, to wit, that he might restrain the guides and heads of the
people, to the family of Jacob, which was the beginning of the nation, and the
name. Yea, it seemed before, when as Moses to take the tables at the hand of
God, ascended into mount Sinai, that he did lead with him threescore and ten
Governors.

Where-upon is gathered, that even then were chosen in that number, such as did
excel in honor. Albeit the province of governing whereof mention is now made,
was not as yet enjoined unto them. And it is likely, that those selfsame men
which before were created Captains, were called to this new and unaccustomed
office. Which also the words declare. Indeed, certain it is that where-as
the Jews returned from their exile in Babylon, because it has not lawful for
them to create a King, they imitated this example, in ordayning a Counsel or
session of Senators So great honor was given to the memory of David and of the
Kings, that out of their stock they choase their 70. Governors, unto whom
appertayned the chiefeste power of all kind of matters.

Thus says Calvin of them. so that, the office of these 70. being mere
lay, and nothing like to the government of the Ministers of Gods word and
Sacraments: and the name (...) being indifferent to other as well as to them,
and that, both before and after them: it has no likeliehoode, that the
ministers of Gods word, are called Elders of the similitude of those seventy
auncientes. True it is, that they are so called, and that often in the new
Testament, and never, sacrificing Priests. But what is this to the name
priest? Can you say, The spirit of God never calls them priests? The
spirit of God ( say you) does often call the Ministers Elders, but euer-more
precisely auoydeth to name them sacrificer, or priests. Yea, does it so? How
does it then often call them Elders? Priest.
when that which we name in English Elder, Priest and Elder al one
is in ye very term of the spirit of God (...)? Of which very word the
English term priest by contraction is derived. Do ye think this is a
sufficient warrant, to come in with this Parenthesis (as we use the term)? And
(I pray you) what an usage call ye this? Before, ye called them sacrificing
priests, and made your argument all on sacrificing priests: And now ye come
in with Sacrificers or priests. Priests and sacrificers not all one.
Not making these sacrificers or priests to be terms disjunctive, and
distinguished offices: but as betokening al one office or thing, that to be a
sacrificer, is to be a priest: and to be a priest, is to be a sacrificer. and
that sacrificing priest is all one. As we use the term ( say you) they are all
one. As you use the term ( say I) you use it greatly amiss, and verry far
from the usage of the spirit of God, and from the usage of all the writers,
both of the old testament, and the new.

And if both these names (as you confess, were usual among the Jews,
Reformers of names should mark not so much how things are used, as how they
should be used.
(...) and (...) the one signifiing sacrificers, the other Elders: then to use
these words one for an-other, (as you here do) is a foul error and abuse.
Especially, where we would, or should of purpose speak properly, and
distinctly of these things.

For we must not think, to escape here with this saying, every thing as it is
used, or taken: but what it is it self, and how it should be taken. Namely
here of you, going about to reform things and terms, that (you say) have
been abused, and to reduce them to their first original use, and institution.

Now, the term (...) howsoever the spirit of GOD used it in the old Testament,
and yet most commonly different from the sacrificer: but especially in the new
Testament, never for sacrificer, but chieflye for the Minister of the word and
Sacraments: Our English word priest being derived from the same greek word,
as also, the Latin, the French, the Italian, the Spanish, the high and low
Dutche, do all derive their names of this office, from this word (...): as
Presbiter, Prestre, Priest Prete, Priester, even as we say, Priest: And many
such words we have as (...) Episcopus, Euesque, Vescoue, Obispo, Bischoff, and
we say, Bishop: and as the French, Eglise, etc. of the Greek word (...), and
we Ecclesiastical on the same: and Church, which the Northren English calls
Kyrke of (...): Deacon, of (...), and a number of our English words are
derived.

But, if now the Papists, have afterward abused this term Presbiter, which
we commonly call priest, for sacrificer: Is it not lawful for us, to reduce
this word, unto the same use, it was then, and long time after, in good sense
used? Since, when so-euer we use the same for the Ministers of the Gospel,
Pastors.
we protest to use and understand it in no other sense, than the new testament
does.

And if we wanting a fit term for Sacrificers, the word Priest has been
ill applied unto Sacrificers, has not the word Bish. Deacon, Clerck, Church,
Sacrament, Ceremony, Baptism, Euchariste, Cross, Image, Saint, Doctor,
Gospel; and a number terms more, been most shamefully, abused? and yet does
not their abuse debar our liberty of using these terms, understanding them
in the true senses of them.

And although I for my part do not mislike the name Elder, ( being the true
English of the word (...), as likewise shepherd or feeder, is of the word
Pastor) if this word Elder had been in our English tongue more ordinarily
used, Why the name of Elder though the more natural English, is not so fit a
term, as Priest for the minister of the word.
and more properly applied to the Ministers of Gods word and Sacraments,
where-as the word Priest, being derived from the Greek, and arrived here, is
at the most but a free denizen: yet, since this free borne Elder, is so freely
used to so diverse senses, that not only your selves use it, for an-other kind
of Elders: and because also it is more usually taken for those that be mere
Politic officers: and for all that are more ancient than others, and so, ye
here call the 70. auncientes: and ordinarily, we use it for Elders in years
and for those that have lived and died long before our times: therefore (me
thinks) the term Elder, is not so fit a term (having so many, profane
senses) to be applied to the Ministers of Gods word and Sacraments, as is this
our indenized word, Priest. And as also Pastor is an-other word forreyner
borne, and yet your selves had rather use that term: yea; and make it your
especial proper term, then shepeheard, or feeder: because the word shepherd
is, although the righter and playner English, yet properly betokening baser
persons, and feeder too generally applied to profane uses.

Howbeit Brethren, without too earnest strife for these terms, this is but my
simple opinion, a little declyning from your Learned discourse upon this title
of Priest. Notwith-standing, as far from all allowing, or liking the popish
sacrificing Priesthood, or any other of their errors, or superstitions, as
(thanks be to God, you our Learned brethren, or any other reformed Churches are.

As for the Latin word Sacerdos, as who would say, a giver of holy things:
albeit indeed Sacerdos is no more the true exposition of (...), then priest is
of Sacerdos: Yet is not this word so utterly left out of the new Testament,
but that S. Paul says Rom 15.16. (...). To this, that I might be the minister
of Christ, among the Gentiles, sanctifiing them to the Gospel of God. Wherein he
(...) alludeth to the name (...), that Feguernekinus in his promptuary of Marl.
says in the title of Pastor. Pastores quo sensu sacer. dicu^tur. In what sense
Pa. are called sacerdotal priests. But for the use thereof, as either the penury
of the tongues permitted, or the use prevailed: so the Graecians ( though
having otherwise a tongue most copious) retained still their old name (...),
and the Latins, Sacerdos. Wherefore (says Kemnitius confuting the Council
of Trent about the Popish sacrificing Priesthood: Neither do we strive for
names. Kemnitius. contra Trid. conc. tom. 2. page 1140.
Paul by a general name calls the ministers, Doctors, Pastors. In the
Scripture of the new testament, the name Sacerdotum, of Sacerdotall Priests,
and Sacerdoty, of Sacerdotall Priesthood, is no where ascribed to the
ministry of the new Testament: but by the use of Ecclesiastical writers, it
is grown in custom, to call the ministry priest-hoode, and the Ministers
Priests.

So Chrysostom calls (...), what-so-euer pertayneth to the Ministry of the
new Testament.

August. de Ciuitate Dei, Lib. 20. says, Aug. deciuit. Dei. lib. 20.
Bishops and Presbyters (or Priests) are now properly in the Church called,
Sacerdotes, Sacerdotall Priests.

If therefore the Papists minded only this, that there should be in the new
Testament an external sacerdotall Priesthood: that is to wit, an external
ministry of the word and Sacraments, as we have already declared: there
should be no controversy, nor troubles should be moved, for the name of
Sacerdotall priesthood: so that the matters that be true and necessary, may
be safe. And even thus as Kemnitius says hereon: so say we.

But although our Brethren, and we agree herein, against the adversaries of
the Gospel, that the Sacrificing Priest-hoode ( understanding it as Kemnitius
here said for the external function and action of real sacrificing) be
translated unto Christ and rests in him only: For other-wise, spiritually
he so communicates both his kingdom and priest-hoode, to his whole mystical
body, that all the whole is an holy priest-hoode, as Peter says 1. Pet. 2.
and all the parts thereof, Kings and Priests in him: Apocal. 5. yet can not
our Brethren here justify this, to be the cause, why the spirit of God
auoydeth in the ministers of the new Testament, the name of sacrificers or
Priests, because the sacrificing priest-hoode of Aaron, is wholye translated
unto Christ, Aarons pri^sthoode not wholly resting in Christ only.
in whom only it rests. For (as they here confess their selves) the
ministers of the new Testament succeed the sacrificing priest-hoode of the
old Testament, in one principal part of their office, that is to say, in
teachinge: as it is written, the lips of the Priest should preserve
knowledge, and men shall seek the law at his mouth.

If then, the sacrificing priest-hoode rests wholly in Christ: we should
have no external public teaching of Gods Law. And therefore our Brethren
must correct their words in that point. Neither suffices it to say, they
mean it only in respect of their sacrificing: For, the sacrificing
priest-hoode consisted not only in sacrificing, i^ teaching were a principal
part thereof. And was not prayer an-other principal part thereof also? And
both distinguished from the real external sacrificing part? Yea, if our
Brethren separate exhorting from teaching: as they said before, page. 17.
exhorting is a principal part of a Pastors office: and those sacrificing
Priests were Pastors: and are oftener so called in the old Testament, then in
the New: if then, in so many, and all principal parts of that priest-hoode,
the ministers succeed them, although not in the sacrificing part: then is
neither this true, that the sacrificing priest-hoode rests wholely and only
in Christ: neither is this any cause, that though the name of Sacrificer be
avoided in the ministry of the New Testament, the name also of Priest (
signifying Elder) should be, or is avoided. Which indeed it is not. For they
are often called (...), Presbyters or Priests, in the new Testament.

As for the places here by our Brethren cited, because they are afterward
recited, upon more material occasion of questions between us, and be here
only referred to the use of the name: I defer them to their particular
answers of them.

An-other name they have in the Scripture, which is Superintendentes, The
learned Dis. Page 22. and 23.
or Overseers, because they ought to be vigilant and watchful, to ouer-see the
flock, and every member thereof. Which name is never used in the Scripture,
for such Bishops as claim and exercise dominion, and authority over whole
Regions, and all the Pastors of the same, but only for those that be Pastors
of every several congregation, having no superiority over their fellow
Pastors, but be all of equal dignity and authority. So are they named Act.
20. where Saint Luke in the 17. verse, calls them Elders of the Church of
Ephesus. S. Paul in the 28. verse, calls the same Ouer-seers; saying: Take
heed to your selves, Act. 20.17.
and to the whole flock, over which the holie-Ghost has made you Overseers,
to feed or govern the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood. In this place all the three appellations concur: namely, of
ouer-seers plainly, and Pastors inclusiuely in the word flock, and in the
word (...), which signifies to feed, or govern as a Pastor does his sheep.

We are now come to the name (...), which in our vulgar English we call
Bishop, Bridges.
which name likewise by our Brethren, is almost as much shunned, The name of
Superintendent or Ouer-seer nothing so fit a name as Bishop.
as the name of Priest, and called rather by the names of Superintendent or
Ouer-seer. And although these terms (where they are better known, and
properly used for this office) are not to be misliked: yet because the word
Superintendent, is not derived of the word so often used by the spirit of God,
but is only a signification or exposition of the same; Superintendents and
Overseers.
howbeit, so dark and strange to the Learned, that they are not so well
acquainted therewith, as with the usual name of Bishop: and the name of
Ouerseer, though it be English plain enough: yet, being used for many mean
and worldly offices, as the Overseers of works, the Overseers of wills, etc.
I take it therefore not to be so proper and apt a name, as the usual and
peculier name of Bishop, being the very Etimologie of the Greek name, that
the spirit of God uses in the scripture.

But say our Brethren, this name is never used in the scripture, The use of the
name Bishop.
for such Bishops as claim and exercise dominion and authority over whole
Regions, and all the Pastors of the same: but only for those that be Pastors of
every several congregation, having no superiority over their fellow Pastors,
but be all of equal dignity and authority.

This is said only, and not proved, either out of any place, before, or here
alleged. As for this present, Act. 20. ver. 17. and 28. neither names, nor
infers any such thing. But argues rather of twain the clean contrary.
For, what means this confused collection thereupon? That in this place the
three appellations do concur, namely, Our Breath. confused collection of
these names out of Act. 20.17.28.
of Overseers plainly, and Pastors inclusiuely in the word flock, and in the
word (...) which signifies to feed, or govern, as a pastor does his
sheep. Where is here the concurrence of the three appellations? Here are two
appellations by you named, Overseers plainly, and Pastors inclusiuely. Where
is the third appellation that ye speak of? If ye mean in the Greek verb
following, when ye say, and in the word (...), call ye that also an
appellation, because ye say it signifies to feed or govern, as a Pastor
does his sheep? And how chance then ye add not the 3. appellation, and of
governing also, call him a Governor? Fu^ye add only, as a Pastor does his
sheep. And why not also as a Governor does his people? For else, the term
of Pastor might have sufficed.

What, do ye shun of purpose the appellation of Governor here also
included, and give the appellation of Governor to your other Elders, whom ye
call (as it were) by their proper name Governors; and pull it from Bishops:
least you might seem (perhaps) to ouerthwarie your self, and infer (by
giving them the name also of Governors,) that they exercised Dominion and
authority, yea, perhaps over whole Regions, and all the Pastors of the same?
Which is y^ thing that of all other ye can-not brook. But let the proof of
that fall out after as it shall: out of this place, as ye prove nothing to
the contrary; so, if ye mean, by these three distinct appellations either
plainly spoken or included, that Bishops are Ouer-seers, are Pastors, and
are Governors: then it follows, that these three several appellations have
three several respects. Bishop.
Ouer-sight or superiority of vewing and examining the states and duties of
them, whom they ouersee, as Overseers: feeding, by preaching the word of GOD,
and ministering the Sacraments, the food of the soul, as they are Pastors:
and government, which, what it implies, besides these two former, I referr^
to every indifferent concluders judgment.

If now, ye would conteyne this third under the other two, ye should both
confound your selves, and these three concurring appellations. So that, the
exercise of dominion and authority, of jurisdiction and discipline in the
Church of God, appertayning to the office of Bishops, is either plainly or
inclusiuely to be inferred of this place: even by our own observation thereon.
Which exercise of authority and dominion, how farce it reached, whether over
whole Regions, and all, or any the Pastors of the same: shall more and more
appear by further discussing that which follows.

Where is to be noted, that Bishops or Ouer-seers of one City were many: The
L.D Page 23.
which plainly argues that they were none such, as nowe-adai^s are commonly
called Bishops, which can be but one in one whole Diocese, much less many in
one City.

Although we need not greatly stand on this, whether those Bishops, that were
called together by Saint Paul, Bridges.
were at that time more, than one there continually resiant, being so headde and
famous a Church as Ephesus was, Whether there were many that properly were
called Bishops in one City.
and so in that point were different from Bishops nowe-a-dayes: yet may they
well be such, in many other more necessary, material, and nearer points, to
the point now in hand, though in this or some other point, they were not
such. Would to GOD, all in Christendom, that have the name and office of
Bishops nowe-adayes, differed no more but in this. The Popish Bishops
differ in many more and far greater. And yet all, in all the offices of a
Bishops differ not, though they all abuse their office diverse ways. As may an
evil Prince, and a good Prince, and yet both Princes. As Aaron and Caiaphas,
both Bishops: as Peter and Judas, both Apostles. And so may there be both
Doctors, Pastors, Governors, and Deacons, so well as Bishops, good and badde.

And much less difference: being both good, and differing only in number of
the persons, and not in the principal substance of their office. In which
point is not so great difference, as these our Learned Brethren ween. For
diverse times there have been two or more Bishops at once in one see.
Whereupon such were in the ancient time named (...) and Coepiscopi, as
Clemens, Linus, and Cletus, by diverse men's opinions, all Bishops of Rome
together.

And as Hierome Catalogo scriptornm Ecclesiast. tells of Alexander, Bishop
of Capadocia coming to Jerusalem where Narcissus was Bishop: he was made
Bishop jointly with him, Suffragane and Coadiutor Bishops.
and both of them together ruled the Church of Jerusalem.

Although this have the seeldomer happened, and orders since ^aue been made to
the contrary, as at the Council of Nice, etc. to avoid emulations and
contentions: and the immitation of suffragranes, yet to this day testifies the
same. Now although this be plain enough, to be no such material matter. To
conclude, that Bishops, be it, they be more together in one Diocese, or in
one City, have no authority over other Pastors, but that all Pastors are of
equal dignity and authority: The question is of the equality of all Pastors.
yet if this were denied (I mean for this place here alleged Act. 20.) can it
be necessarily inferred thereupon? The text it self (say you) plainly
argues it. So are they named Acts, 20. where S. Luke in the 17. verse calls
them Elders of the Church of Ephesus.

What say ye (my Masters?) dare ye avouch these words, Our Breath. wresting
the words of the Text. Acts. 20.17.
for the text it self in deed, and in distinguished letters? Read the text
better, and you shall find these words: Wherefore, from Miletum he sent to
Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church. Does this of necessity infer,
that they were the Elders of the Church of Ephesus? Meaning by Elders, only the
Pastors or ministers of the word and Sacraments, to the which purpose ye
allege it, and not the Elders that ye call Governors ( which, as ye
afterward say, meddled not with teaching) for the^ ye, should allege it clean
amiss for Pastors. And I pray you, do ye think there were then, (the Church
there being so lately founded) many Pastors or ministers of the word and
Sacraments, What likelihoode of many Pastoral Elders in Ephesus when S. Paul
came to Miletum.
abiding at that one Church of Ephesus? It is not likely, considering that
time. For in the Chapter before save one, Chap. 18.19. is the first mention
made of Ephesus, how Saint Paul coming thither, entered into the Synagogue
and disputed with the Jews, who desired him to tarry a longer time with them:
but he would not consent, but bad them farewell, etc. After whose departure
came Apollos, as is aforesaid, verse, 25. The same was instructed in the way
of the Lord, and he spoke fervently in the spirit, and taught diligently the
things of the Lord, and knew but the baptism of John only. And he began
to speak boldly in the Synagogue, etc. After whom Cap. 19. ver. 1. Paul
returning came to Ephesus, and found certain Disciples, and said to them:
have ye received the holy Ghost, since ye believed? And they said unto him,
we have not so much as heard, whether there be a Holy Ghost, etc. And all the
men were about twelve, ver. 7. So that, all this while there was yet no great
number of sufficiently enstructed Christians, much less of Pastors, ( and all
in the Synagogue of the Jews) at Ephesus.

But it follows in the text of their increase. ver. 8. Moreover he went into
the Synagogue and spoke boldly for the space of three months, disputing, and
exhorting to the things that appertain to the kingdom of God.

But when certain were hardened and disobeyed, speaking evil of the way of
God, before the multitude: he departed from them, and separated the Disciples,
and disputed daily in the school of one Tyrannus. And this was done by the
space of two years. So that all they which dwelt in Asia, heard the word of
the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Graecians.

So that although Saint Luke say, on the occasion of the miracles following:
verse 20. So the word of God grew mightily and prevailed: yet all this while
here is no store of Pastors ordained in this Church of Ephesus that we read
of, during Saint Paul's aboade among them. Now (says Luke ver. 21.) when
these things were accomplished: Paul purposed by the spirit, to pass
through Macedonia, and Achaia and to go to Jerusalem: saying: after I have
been there, I must also see Rome. So he sent into Macedonia two of them that
ministered to him, Timotheus and Erastus. But he remained in Asia for a season.
And the same time there arose no small trouble about that way. For a certain
man named Dometrius a silver Smith, etc. And so Luke enters into the
declaration of that sedition, which to have pacified, ver. 30: When Paul would
have entered in unto the people, the Disciples suffered him not. Certain also
of the chief of Asia, which were his friends, sent unto him, desiring him,
that he would not present himself in the common place.

Whereupon it follows in this 20. Chapter, verse 1. Now after the tumult
was ceased, Paul called the Disciples to him, and embraced them, and departed
to go into Macedonia. So that, here is described by Luke all the state of the
Church of Ephesus, from the time that it first received the faith of Christ,
till Saint Paul in his return toward Jerusalem, having passed by Ephesus,
because he would not spend the time in Asia, being come to Miletum, (
says Luke:) Wherefore, from Miletum he sent to Ephesus, and called the
Elders of the Church.

By all which conference it may appear, that there were not at that time many
Pastors of the Church of Ephesus. And that (though the word of God grew
mightily there and prevailed) yet we may perceive, that the most part of the
City remained Idolatrous: so that the greatness of this Church, was but in
comparison of other lesser Cities. And if it were as Calvin observes, on Act.
14. verse 23. Calvin on Act. 14.23.
And when they had ordained them Elders, by election in every Church, etc. I
interpret Presbyters, (Priests, or Elders) to be here called those, unto
whom the office of teaching was enjoined; for that there were some, that only
were correctors of manners, appears out of Paul, 1. Tim. 5.17. Now where
Luke says, that they were placed over every Church: hereupon is gathered
the difference betwixt their office, and the Apostles. For the Apostles had no
certain station; but oftentimes ran about hither and thither, to fownde new
Churches. As for Pastors, (as placed in holds) were addicted every one of
them to their proper Churches.

If this now, were the Apostles disposing of these Pastors, every one of them
to their proper Churches: that is, singular men, in singular Cities: ( besides,
that by the way, he makes the office of the Pastors to be teaching:) is it
likely, there were many having pastoral cure, in this one Church of Ephesus?
For, we find not in all Paul's aboade there, of diverse congregations or
Churches among them. Who may not therefore (if we confer these things
together) plainly enough perceive; that where the text says not, from
Miletum he sent to call the Elders of the Church of Ephesus: but, from Miletum
he sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church: that it should rather
seem, he means the Elders both of the Church of Ephesus, and of other
Cities of Asia, bordering there-about. For, as Luke said before, Chapter, 19.
ver. 10. All they which dwells in Asia, heard the word of the Lord Jesus,
both Jews and Graecians. And again, verse 3. Certain also of the chief of
Asia, which were his friends, sent unto him, desiring him that he would not
present himself in the common place. So that, it might very well be, that
hearing of his approach, and (belike) thinking, he would have come thither, or
of some other occasion being there assembled, as to the chief City, and
greatest Church of all those coasts, he sent thither for them. And yet the
words drive not so straightly neither, that he sent thither for them: but
only that, he sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church.

So that, they might be called as well from other places, as from thence. And
the words of Paul unto them apparently stretche further than to Ephesus. Who
when they were come to him, ( says Luke,) he said unto them: Ye know from
the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you at
all seasons. These words being directly spoken to these persons whom he
called for, and expressly saying, he had been with them, from the first day,
he had been in Asia: and he had been long before in Asia, in his first
peregrination: which these our Brethren mentioned before, out of the 13.
Chapter: that he and Barnabas were by the holie-Ghost severed out to travail
thither: wherein he had been at Perga, in Pamphilia: at Antioche in Pisidia;
at Iconium, Derbe, Lystra in Lycaonia and Attalia, all Cities of this Asia the
less, where Ephesus was the chiefeste of them all: Saint Paul with Barnabas,
having planted the Faith, and ordained Elders in every Church, as is
afore-saide: in his second peregrination returning with the Apostles decrees,
to confirm these forsaide and other places: and being again in Asia, till he
was (Acts. 16. ver. 9. and 10.) called by the Lord to preach the Gospel in
Macedonia: which done, departing from Corinth, he came first to this City of
Ephesus, at what time he tarried not, Act. 18.20. till in his return from
Jerusalem, Act. 19. ver. 1. he came again to Ephesus, where he remained two
years and a quarter. Howebeit, the most writers call it two year, including
the three months that Luke speaks of before, ver. 8. for the time he taught
in the Synagogue, with the time that he taught in Tyrannus his schole. And
this ( says Luke) was done by the space of two years, S. Paul includes
other Churches besides Ephesus.
ver. 10. but Saint Paul in this Oration says to them, verse, 31. By the
space of three years, I ceased not to warn every one, both night and day
with tears. So that he plainly includes with them other Churches of Asia,
where he had likewise travailed. Which also he had before as it were
expressed, ver. 25. And now behold, I know that hence forth, ye all through
whom I have gone, preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more.

By all which we may safely conclude, that these Elders, ( were they Bishops
or Pastors, or any other ministers of the Church, few, or many,) were not
only of this one City of Ephesus, but of diverse besides there-aboutes.

Neither is this my conjecture only, although if it (were, I hope the
indifferent marker not of men but matter, shall find it carries probability,
Gualter on Act. 20.
) but Gualter also is herein of my opinion. For ( says he) he calls out even
unto Miletum ( which is about thirty or forty miles distant) the Elders or
Bishops of the Ephesians, and of the Cities adjacent: and takes order with
them for weighty matters in a general Synod.

But now, let us presuppose that all these Pastors, Priests, or Elders were
only of the Church at Ephesus; does it follow necessarily thereupon, that
because Saint Paul calls them all by the name of Bishops, they might not
hear be Metaphorically called, or rather in some respect: then as the name
might afterward, and even in the Apostles times, be more properly restrained,
to some Pastors, that had some superiority over their fellow Pastors? So
that, all were not of equal dignity and authorite, though these at that time
were.

For as this name (...)* came from the heathen, so when it was first borrowed of
the sacred writers, and began to be used in the Church of God, it might be
used more indifferently. As also the name (...), The diverse senses of the name
of Bishop.
etc. Which names are not always understood in the Scripture, in like proper
sense, as since they have usually been and be accepted. And yet to this day,
we do not so restreine this name Bishop, but (in respect of that the nature of
the word implies) we may not only use it still, Ecclesiastical titles and
offices.
for every Pastor or Minister of the word and sacraments, but also (as we
commonly say) every man is a Bishop over his own family: and families also
are sometimes called Churches. As, The name of King and of Priest in some
sense, general.
Col. 4.15. and every faithful man is called even a sacrificing Priest, as you
translate it, and a King, Apoc. 5. But all this debarreth not, but that these
words may in other places, be taken in other senses, and may more properly
be applied to some especial offices. And so is the name of Bishop both ways
taken. And to show this more manifestly, as we allow not any of the errors or
abuses of the Popish Bishops, or other their ecclesiastical orders or offices,
any more then any of our most zealous Brethren do: so, if we peruse even their
own assertions, and the ancient Fathers, both for this title of Bishops, and
other titles, orders, degrees, dignities, and differences of the state
ecclesiastical in the Primitive Church; we shall find sufficient proof and
warrant hereof.

The writers of the Centuries, Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 7. page 507. in their
title of the policy or government of the Church, Historiae Magd. Centur. 1.
li. 2. cap. 7. Page 507.
do say: Among the persons that governed the Church in this age, these
differences do occur. For some are called Apostles, Ephesians. 4. 2. Cor. 12. And
not only those twelve Disciples of Christ are noted by that name, The titles
of the Eccl. offices in the scriptures.
but Paul every where in all his Epistles, calls himself the Apostle of
Christ: and Act. 14. Paul and Barnabas are called Apostles. Epaphroditus is
named the Apostle of the Philippians. Philip. 2. Andronicus and Iunias, are
notable among the Apostles, Romans 16. Other: Prophets, Ephesians. 4. 1. Cor. 12.
By this name, both they were called that were famous in the gift of
Prophecy, and also they that interpreted the Prophets, that is, the
Scriptures, Act. 11. etc. Act. 13. Other: Evangelists, Ephesians. 4. He gave other
to be Evangelists. By this name they not only appear to be called, who
wrote the history of the Gospel, as were Matthew, Mark, Luke, John: but they
also which every where did teach the Gospel. For Philip one of the seven
Deacons, ordained in the beginning at Jerusalem, is called an Evangelist, Act.
21. And Paul bids Timothy do the work thoroughly of an Evangelist. 2. Tim.
4. Other, Pastors, Ephesians. 4. Other, Doctors, Ephe. 4. and 1. Corin. 12. Other,
Elders, 1. Pet. 5. or Bishops, for Bishops and Elders are taken for the same,
Act. 20. Paul says to the Elders of Ephesus; the holy Ghost has placed you
Bishops to govern the Church of God, Tit. 1. I have left thee in Creta that
thou should in every town ordain Elders, etc. For a Bishop must be
blameles, etc. Iac. 5.

Here even as you would have it these Centuriographers, do distinguish
between the persons that, were Pastors, and that were Doctors. And also they
made Elders and Bishops to be all one. But they make Elders or Bishops to be
distinguished from Pastors. And how agreeeth this with that you here auouche,
that by the name of Elders the Pastors are called: and that Bishops be Pastors:
and that the names of Pastors and Ouer-seers do concur? Neither agreeeth
this with you, that they say, after they have reckoned up Deacons and waiting
Ministers, or attendants on the Apostles: Meminerunt, etc. They remember only
three degrees: Apostles, Presbyters or Bishops, and Deacons. All which three
were found in some Churches, while as the Apostles were yet alive. For in the
Church of Jerusalem, in the beginning, there were twelve Apostles, who
exercised the ministry of the Church. But the number of the Church
increasing, and when necessity required, a more diligent care of the things
that were common, seven Deacons are chosen and ordained, Act. 6. There are
also in the same Church, Prophets, Act. 11. There are Apostles and Elders,
Act. 15. They were received of the Church and of the Apostles and Elders. When
Paul came last of all unto Jerusalem, he found there James and the Elders,
who are said to have come together, Act. 21. In the Church of Antiochia, for
a time were Paul and Barnabas, who are called Apostles and Prophets, and
Doctors, whom it is lawful to call Elders.

If now, the sacred writers of the New Testament, do remember but only
three degrees: Apostles, Elders or Bishops, and Deacons: which all three were
found in some Churches, while the Apostles were yet living, (which is the time
that you prescribe, and which is the time whereof these men said in the
beginning of this matter, Our Breath. Tetrarchie dissolved.
that in this part, no age is to be compared hereunto,) where is then become
the Ecclesiastical government of all these four persons, Doctors, Pastors,
Governors, and Deacons? Where are here your Governors, if ye include them
in the name Elders, they express what kind of Elders they were: Elders or
Bishops. As you here say, and ye call them Pastors; and they say, that those
whom we may call Elders, were Apostles, Prophets, and Doctors. So that your
other governing Elders, that were neither Apostles, Prophets, nor Doctors, are
excluded, and your distinction also between Elders and Doctors, is removed.
Neither do even your own examples, which immediately follow, any whitte
help you. In the Church of Phillippos are Bishops and Deacons, Phil. 1. Paul
and Barnabas are said to create only Elders, Act. 14. Paul bids Titus to
make Elders or Bishops in every town in Creta, Tit. 1. He prescribes to
Timothy what manner of Bishops and Deacons he should ordeine, 1. Tim. 1. Paul
sends for Elders out of Ephesus, whom he calls Bishops, to come to
Miletum unto him, Act. 20. Thus do they diligently search the Scriptures: and
examine the churches state; and conster the word Bishop as you would have it
for Elder, or Minister of the word; and say, that these were the Elders of
the Church of Ephesus, that Paul sent for: and yet all this will not help to
find out one place recorded in the Scripture, while the Apostles lived, where
the government Ecclesiastical, was directed by all these four kind of
persons joined together, and one distinguished in office from another, as you
(by the examples of the Apostles) would prescribe. But since they cannot do
it: I beseech you do it, and set down the place where all these four
concurred. And yet if ye so did, and no rule prescribed, for all to do the
like: may not we plead also to be the church of Christ, though we have no
such preests, Elders, Governors, nor such Doctors distinct from pastors, as
these Churches had not in all the Apostles times? To conclude, say these
writers of the Centuries. The Tetrarchie again ouerthrown
But how many persons exercised the ministry in every church, is not
noted in the histories, nor is any where commanded, that they should in every
place be a like many. But as the fewness or the multitude of the assembly
required: so were fewer or mo admitted to the Churches ministry. They
appointed Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors, not to be certain
degrees of persons in the Ecclesiastical regiment, but they seem to be
reckoned either among the Apostles and their fellows, or else among the Elders
or the Deacons. So that, as still these your Governors are not mentioned; so,
still your quadrible distinction of these persons and their offices, is
overthrown, and no number commanded or prescribed. Thus do these setters
forth of this first Centurie ( or hundredth years) of the Apostles time, and
of the Primitive Church, even where they make for you, concerning the title of
Bishops, make clean against you for your Doctors, for your Governors, and
for your Deacons, whom they make to be Teachers also: saying of them Page 508.
These men's office was to Minister to the table at Jerusalem, while the
community of the goods was there, Act. 6. Deacons taught.
But notwithstanding that they taught also and wrought signs, appears by
Steven, Act. 6, and by Philip, Act. 8.23. And in other Churches every where, it
was the Deacons office to teach and minister. Mention is also made of women
Deacons: for, To. ^6, Women Deacons.
Phoebe is called the minister of the Church of Cenchrea. The author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, calls them by a general name, the Ministers of the
Church, Heb. 13: Obey your Rulers. Thus write they of the office of Deacons:
so that, they were Doctors or Teachers also of the word, and had the cure of
souls, for so it follows in the foresaid text. And submit your selves: for
they watch for your souls: all which is clean contrary to your
prescription. Kemnitius also in his second Tome aforesaid, before he come to
the Treatise of the equality or superiority of Bishops, Kemnitius 2. tom.
contra Triden^ con.
confuting the decree of Trident council, for their seven degrees of orders;
says at large on this wise: as for the matter, thus it stands; because many
duties ( or offices) do apperteyne to the ministry of the Church, which in
a great assembly of believing people, cannot all and every one of them
conveniently be dispatched of one man or of a few: that therefore all things
should be done in order decently and to edification, the assembly of the
Church being multiplied: those duties or offices of the Ministry, began to
be distributed into certain degrees of Ministers, the which they called after
(...), or (...), ordinances or orders, that every man should have as it were a
cerieine station, in the which he should serve the Church in certain offices
of the Ministry. So the Apostles in the beginning, attended on the Ministry
of the word and Sacraments, and also on the contribution and dispensation of
the alms. But afterward the number of the Disciples increasing, they
commended that part of the ministry which perteyned to alms unto other,
whom they called Deacons. And they allege the reason that they so do, to
wit, that they might travel in the ministry of the word and prayer more
diligently, without any withdrawings of them from the same. Act. 6. And this
first beginning of degrees or of orders of the ministry of the Apostlicall
Church, declares wha^ ought to be the cause, what the reason, what the end
of such either degrees or orders: to wit, that according to the
consideration of the Ecclesiastical assembly, all offices which apperteine to
the Ministry, may be executed more commodiouslie, rightlier, more
diligently, and in order, with some gravity to edification.

And because the Apostles out of those Deacons, did assume them, which were
tried afterward into the Ministry of teaching, as Steven, and Philip: it is
gathered, this also to be the use of these, either degrees or orders, that they
should be prepared before, and proved in the lesser, that afterward the more
weighty offices of the Ministry, might the safelier and with profit be
commended unto them. And this is that that Paul says, 1. Tim. 3. Let them
first be tried, and so let them minister. Again: They that have in the
Deaconship ministered well, shall get to themselves a good degree. So in the
Liturgy of the Church of Antiochia, Act. 13. There were Prophets, and Doctors:
of whom, those did either foretell things to come, or expound the more
difficult places of the Scripture, 1. Cor. 14. These did set forth unto the
people the principles of Christian religion, Heb. 5. Paul and Barnabas do
assume Mark to be a Minister, Act. 13. Not only that he should Minister
corporal things unto them: but that they might commend to him certain parts
of the Ministry of the word, as Paul expresselie says, Act. 15. How
contrary this is to your doctrine, both for the general considerations of
making degrees in the ministry on these aforesaid causes: and namely, how
flat against your assertions for Deacons, Page 108: I refer to the conference
of the Reader, till we shall come to your Learned Discourse thereon. Now to
proceed on with Kemnitius.

In the Church of Corinthe, there were Apostles, Prophets, Doctors, certain
that spoke with languages, certain that interpreted: some had Psalms, some
prayers, blessings, and thankesgiuings; not in private exercises, but in the
public conuenticles of the Church, 1. Cor. 12. and 14. Certain degrees of
the Ministry, Ephesians. 4. are reckoned up. First, Apostles, which were not
called to any certain Church: neither by men but immediately of Christ. And
had commandment to teach every where. And were adorned with the witness of
the spirit, and of miracles, that they erred not in doctrine, but that their
doctrine was divine and Caelestiall: to the which all other Doctors should be
bound. Secondly, Prophets: who either had revelations of things to come;
either who interpreted languages, and the Scriptures: for those that were more
grown: for these things are attributed, 1. Cor. 14, to the Prophets of the new
Testament. Thirdly, Evangelists, who were not Apostles, and yet they were not
assigned to one certain Church, but were sent to diverse Churches: that there
they might teach the Gospel, but chiefly that they might lay the first
foundations. Such an Evangelist was Philip, Act. 21, Timothy, 2. Tim. 4,
Tichicus Syluanus, etc. That also there were such Evangelists after the
Apostles times: Eusebius testifies, lib. 3. cap. 37, etc. Fourthlie, Pastors:
who were placed over a certain flock of the Church, as Peter shows, 1.
Peter. 5, and did not only teach, but also ministered the Sacraments, and had
the view of the hearers, as Ezechiel. 34. describes the office of the
Pastorship. Fiftlie, Doctors, unto whom the chief government, and view of
the church was not commended, but only to set forth doctrine simply to the
people, such as afterward were Catechists. So, Romans 2. Paul calls him (...),
A Teacher of Infants: and so, in this signification is the word (...), to
Teach, expresselie used, Heb. 5.

Here Kemnitius seems to make greatly for your dinstinguished Doctors, and
that they might not exhort. And yet mark that place better, where S. Paul
says, Hebr. 5.12. For whereas concerning the time, ye ought to be Teachers:
yet have we need again, that we teach you the first principles of the word
of God, and are become such, as have need of Milk, and not of strong meat,
etc. And ye shall see, that S. Paul even in those words, very oratoriouslie
does move them. Besides, that the Epistle has many and singular exhortations
and applications, etc. And if ye further mark, ye shall find all contrary to
you: even where your Eldership and Bishoprike is also made all one. For it
follows; but all these degrees the Apostles comprehend in the name of
Eldership or Bishoprike. So that your Elders that are Bishops, are not only
Pastors ( as you would have them) but your Doctors also are Elders, that are
Bishops: clean contrary to your distinguishing of them. Now and then also by
a general name they call them Deacons, unto whom the ministry of the word
and Sacraments is committed. Col. 1, 1. These. 3, 2. Cor. 3. and 11, Ephesians. 3.
Paul himself also, did sometimes so regard the Ministry of the word, that
he commended the administration of the Sacraments unto others, 1. Corinthians. 1.
Christ sent not me to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel. And 1. Tim. 1, he
mencioneth two kinds of Elders (or Priests) of whom some labored in the word
and doctrine, some were set over the ecclesiastical Censures: of which kind
of Priesthood (or Eldership) Tertullian also records, in Apologet. ca. 39.
These are almost the degrees, into which the offices of the Ecclesiastical
ministry in the time of the Apostles are read to be distributed. And that
distribution has the examples also of the old Testament. For David 1. Par.
23, and in the chapter following, distributeth the Ministry of the Temple
into certain degrees and orders. There were also in the Synagog, Readers,
which only read the text of the Scripture. But besides, there were Doctors
which interpreted the Scripture, and applied the text to exhortations, Luke.
2, Act. 15. And this was the difference between the Scribes and Phariseis.
Whereby we see also, that these Doctors that were interpreters of the
Scriptures, Doctors exhorting and apply^ng.
both before the time of Christ, and his Apostles, here in earth, and after
in all their time, were not so to teach and interpret the principles of
religion, but that with-all they applied the same to exhortations. Now upon all
these degrees and orders, Kemnitius gathers these general rules. But for
this present disputation, this admonition is to be added. First, that it is
not in the word of God commanded, which, or how many, or that such orders
ought to be. And here I beseech you good Learned Brethren, note this
admonition well, and I think, this one admonition may suffice, to answer all
your Learned Discourse. For, The principal question between us, how many
Ecclesiastical ord^rs are commanded.
the principal question between us, is not, what orders and degrees were in
the Apostles times, of the Ecclesiastical Ministry; but whether those orders
and degrees, or such orders or degrees, and how many of them are commanded;
and so of necessity ought to be retained, yea or no. Secondly, that in the
time of the Apostles, there were not in all churches, and always, the
selfsame, and so many degrees or orders. The which thing is manifestly
gathered out of the Epistles of Paul, written to diverse, Churches. Not all
places alike for Eccl. orders, nor al times in the Primitive Church.


And this is also another notable admonition, to be well pondered, yea all the
peyse of our principal question, lies again heereon. For as before, if there
were no commandment or prescribed rule to all ages; so here, if there were
no universal practice in all Churches, in the Apostles times: or where there
was a practice of these orders and degrees, it continued not then always, but
changed: how are we now bound to an universal and perpetual practice of
those degrees and orders? Neither do we find in Paul's Epistles this
diversity of practice, for other orders or degrees only; but even of
Pastors, whom ye call Bishops, not mentioned 1. Cor. 12, where so many are
reckoned up, and among other; Governors, whose office (ye say) consists
only in government, and not in public teaching. And S. Paul, Ephesians. 4.
where he mentions Pastors, omitteth these Governors: and yet in both
places of purpose he handles the orders of Ecclesiastical ministry. And in
the latter, where he omitteth these Governors, that you urge, he sets
down without any mention of them, the end of these orders to be, for the
gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the
edification of the body of Christ: till we all meet together in the unity
of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the
measure of the age, of the fullness of Christ. And would we have a more
fullness then this? And yet are your Governors clean left out. This (I say)
would be substantiallie noted for these orders. And albeit, Kemnitius here do
with-all gather, that in the Church of Ephesus, there were also
Elder-Gouernors, somewhat like such, as you prescribe: yet by this Epistle to
the Ephesians, and by Kemnitius admonition, it appears, they were not there
always. Nor the words to Timothy do necessarily infer, that there were
there, and then, any such kind of Elders. But whatsoever they were, all
Churches were not alike in these orders.

Thirdly ( says Kemnitius) there was not in the time of the Apostles, One man
executed diverse Eccl. offices in the Apostles times.
such a distribution of those degrees; but that more often one and the same
man did sustain, and execute all those offices that apperteyned to the
Ministry. The which thing is manifest by the Apostolical History. This third
note again, clean overthrows all your Learned Discourse, and fully
answers all the bitter outcries of our Bretherens Fruitful Sermon ( as
they term it) on the 1. Cor. 12. for encroching, confou^ding, The unfruitful
terms of our Bretherens Fruitful Sermon, on 1. Cor. 12.
foolish and pernicious shuffling together, of diverse duties. Which terms
savor of more zeal (to say the best thereof) then of charity or knowledge.
Now, says Kemnitius upon these three admonitions: These ordinances therefore,
in the Apostles times were free (consideration being had of order, comeliness,
and edification) save that at that time, certain peculiar gifts, as of
toongs, of prophecy, of Apostles, and of miracles, were given of God to
certain persons. As for these degrees whereof we have hitherto spoken, were not
any thing besides and without the ministry of the word and Sacraments, but
the same and the very offices of the ministry were distributed into those
degrees, for the causes now declared So that all this that is before spoken, is
not so much to be noted for the extraordinary offices; as for these that you
make ordinary.

Now, upon this liberty of the Apostles times, how the Primitive Church
next succeeding them, did follow or alter any of these orders: Kemnitius
still proceeds saying: That example of the Apostles, the Primitive Church
with the same reason, and the like liberty did imitate. The Primitive Churches
liberty in th^se things after the Apostles times.
For the degrees of the offices of the Ministry, were distributed. Howbeit,
not altogether by the same reason, as in the Church of Corinthe, or in the
Church of Ephesus: but according to the reason of the circumstances of every
Church. Whereupon is gathered what a liberty there was, in the distribution
of those degrees. And this requires, no less to be marked, then all the other
three admonitions. For, if there were such a liberty in the Primitive
Church, immediately after the Apostles times; Our liberty herein after the
Primitive Church
and that on the imitation of the Apostles; and that in these two and so famous
Churches, Corinthus and Ephesus: and yet different in these degrees and orders,
of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, one from an other, and other from them,
according (not to any commandment prescribed) but to the reason of the
circumstances of every Church: have not we as much liberty now, in the
distribution of the degrees and orders of the Ecclesiastical Ministry? Well,
let us proceed with Kemnitius, to his particular examples of these orders.

Dionisius, cap. 5. of his Hierarchy, expresselie numbreth only three
orders. First, (...), of the principal divine Minister, to whom he gives
the chief and most perfect office of teaching, in the declatation of all the
mysteries of Christ, and administration of the Sacraments. Secondlye, (...),
Sacerdotum, of the sacred Ministers or the giuers of holy gifts, The name
(...), or Sacerdotall Priest.
( or as we usually, for penury of proper words, improperlie say, Priests,
which is derived properly of (...), as is aforesaid, and you call Elders:
whereas (...) signifies a sacred person, dedicate to the Temple, and the
divine offerings or ministry) which do more fully instruct him in the
Catechism, and bring him to the Bishop, and help in those things, that
perteine to the administration of the Sacraments. Thirdly, (...), Ministrorum,
of the ( public) Ministers: to whom he gives the office of cleansing, and
preparing those, that are to be entered, that is to say, of Catechizing. And
cap. 3. he says, by the office of the Ministers, the reading of the holy
Scripture, in the order thereof, is recited. Again, of the Ministers: some
stand to shut the doors of the Temple, while they which are learners of the
Catechism, which are poenitents, which are possessed or vexed with a spirit,
are thruste out. Other, have an other office, to strippe him that it to be
Baptized, etc. Thou seeest, that he reckons many offices of the Ministry:
and yet he does not give to every one of them peculiar orders: but reckons
up only three orders. The Canons of the Apostles, namelye, Bishop, Priest,
or Elder, Three orders.
and Deacon, Reader, and Singer. But there is no mention made of doore-keeper,
exorciste, and acolyte. Bishop.
Ambrose on the 4. chapter to the Ephesians, describing the degrees of the
offices of the Ministry of his time, rehearses Bishops, Priests, or Elders,
Deacons, Readers, exorcists. In the book, which is ascribed to Hierome, of the
seven degrees of the Church, Exorcists and Acolytes are not reckoned: Seven
orders not catholic.
therefore the opinion of those seven orders is not Catholic. But some of the
ancients, number mo orders above those seven: the Epistle of Ignatius
reckons (...), Laborers: whom Epiphanius calls (...), the little book of
Hierome, calls them Fossores, diggers; to wit, which attended on the
corsses of the dead, and buried them. The Graecians have a peculiar office of
those that are syngeli, (or rather, as I take it) sygeli, silensaries, or
keepers of silence, or bidders of the congregation to hold their peace.
Ignatius reckons unto the orders, Confessors: Clement, The Canonists make
nine orders.
Catechists: the Canonists reckon nine orders, for they reckon in Psalmists,
and Bishops. But the multiplication of Ecclesiastical orders, from
thencefoorth, arose afterward. For Cyprian in the 3. book, Epistle 22,
shows, that nothing that was to be done in the Church, and in matters of the
Church (although ^hey properly perteined not to the Ministry of the word)
should be done by any other, than by clearkes. And so it behooued the waiting
and household servants of the Bishops, and of the Priests or Elders, to be
Clearkes. Clearkes.
From thence afterward Stewards, Defenders, Vidoms, those of the houses which
were the greater (or Bowrgraues) were taken from the Clearkes. Clearkes
therefore were those, which by a peculiar and more straight discipline, were
framed and prepared to the Churches Ministry. And they were first appointed
to certain lesser offices: that the study, diligence, faith, and gravity of
them, might be tried, whether they would become fit for greater and more
weighty offices. And in the Churches more frequented, when as especially out
of the fields, villages, and little towns, chiefly in the more solemn
feasts, they must come from all parts to the Metropolitan Church, (as many
ancient canons or rules do command this) one or a few were not able to
execute all and every of the offices of the Ministry. Therefore, degrees and
orders were distinct: not in idle titles, but in certain offices apperteyning
to the ministry of the Church. The Bishop was treating of the word of GOD,
and caring for the discipline of the Church: the Priests, were teaching and
ministering the Sacraments. And here note this difference betwixt the Bishops
and the Priests: not meaning your Priests that ye call Governors only,
Difference between the Bishops and Pri^sts.
but Priests that taught and ministered the Sacraments; that is to say, were
both Doctors and Pastors, and with-all note the superiority (over the
Priests) of these ancient Bishops in the Primitive Church next the Apostles
times. The Deacons were the Governors of the Churches treasures: that they
might thereupon provide for the maintenance of the poor, and chiefly of the
ministers of the Church. The Deacons also afterward began to be assigned to
ease some part of the Ministry of the Bishop, The Deaco^s exercise.
and of the Priests, or Elders, as also Hierom ad Rusticum does testify: as
before to read something out of the Scripture, to teach, to exhort, etc: to
admonish the people to be attentive, to have their hearts to the Lord, to
pronounce the peace, to make ready those things that perteine to the
administration of the Sacraments, to distribute the Sacraments to the people,
to present those that are to be ordained to the Bishop, to warn the Bishop of
those things that perteine to discipline, etc. But Hierome complains to
Rusticus of Narbona, that many such things especially in the Church of
Rome, were imposted upon the Deacons, besides the Apostolic all tradition, and
besides the custom of other churches, insomuche that the first and true
office of the Deacons, was in Deacons almost blotted out. For sith that
Deacons were occupied with those new offices; Subdeacons were substituted unto
them, which gathered the oblations of the faithful, that were given for the
sustentation of the poor, and of the Ministers. Besides these, there were
readers, which out of the Scripture, especially out of the Old Testament, red
publikelie before the people. For the reading of the New Testament, was
afterward given unto the Deacons.

Inferior orders.
There were Psalmists or singers, which did fore-sing (or set the note) to those
things that all the people are wont to sing. There were door keepers or
Porters, which in the time of the mysteries, after the denouncing of the
Deacon, thrust out of the Temple the Heathen, the learners of the Catechism,
the penitents, the possessed with spirits, the heretics, and those that were
excommunicate. For so does Dionysius describe this office. The Bishops, the
Priests, and the Deacons, had their servants, ministers, companions, or
followers of them, whose labor as necessity required they did use. As Paul
used the labor of Onesimus. Those they called Acolyths. From whence afterward
ignorance made them taperbearers. There were besides Exorcists, that had the
gift of casting out or repressing devils.

Where and how these distributio^s of degrees were observed.
This distribution of degrees in the more frequented Churches, by reason of the
offices that perteined to the ministry, was profitable, for because of order,
to comeliness and to edification. But in smaller and seldomer frequented
Churches, such destribution of degrees was not judged necessary. And in the
more frequented also, was not every where the like and the same distribution
of those degrees. But by this reason, to this use, and in the same liberty,
the most part of those degrees of the old Church, are also kept of us.
These things have I rehearsed, that it might the more commodiouslie be showed,
what in this chapter is put in controversy, of the degrees or orders
Ecclesiastical, for neither do we simply reject or condemn the distribution
of those degrees, as it was in the Apostolical and in the old church: How
far they are rejected.
but according to the reason of necessity and edification, we use the same in
our Churches, after the same sort as is declared.

Thus d^o we see, all the state of the Ecclesiastical ministry in the
Apostles and in the ancient time, in what forte and what variety they were
used, and on what occasions, and to what purposes they were ordained, and how
farre-foorth they or we are bound unto them, or at liberty from them. All
which, in how many and how forcible points, it overthrows all your
platform of Ecclesiastical government: I refer to any indifferent readers
judgment. But because my chief occasion, to set this down so far at large,
was here especially to consider among these orders, what he notes,
concerning the office and degree of a Bishop: I mind therefore, yet further to
proceed with him* where of purpose and directly he confuteth also the decree
of Trident counsel, that Bishops and priests are not equal.

But as we have seen all this in him at large, for all the orders and degrees
of the Ecclesiastical Ministry: so by the same aforesaid, and in general,
have we to leuel all that, which in particular he sets down after
concerning Bishops, of whom, and as before in speaking of these orders he
allows none of the popish abuses in them: neither any of us (I hope,) do
favor, or would go about by any means to mainteyne any errors, usurpation,
pride, and tyranny of the popish Bishops; so does not Kemnitius any more then
we condemn, in true and godly Bishops, simply all superiority over priests
or pastoral Elders, neither would these our Brethren, on the better
consideration of the proves thereof, both in the Apostles, and in the ancient
Fathers, and by the grave and modest judgment, even of the very best, and
most learned late writers of their side.

And first, as we are not, (at leastwise should not be) desirous of
contention, especially to contend about questions of names only, and mere
titles, but rather to search and follow the truth of the matter: so I
gladly grant for the name Bishop, and for the name priest or pastoral
Elder, though they differ in sense, (as Hierome in his Epistle to Oceanus
says) the one being a name of dignity, the other of age: yet in the old
time, and namely when these names were first in the New Testament, applied
to the Ministers of GODS word, The n^me Bishop and Pri^st, at the st^st
accepting of ^^e^* v^ed ind^^f^^^ntlie.
and Sacraments, they were (I grant indifferentlye used, Priest for Bishop,
Bishop for priest, and both for one. The reason was, because such commonly as
were chosen and ordained hereunto, were in ripeness of years ancient men.
Or if in years not so ancient, ( which was the seldomer,) yet ancient in
judgment and gravity of manners. Timothy Bishop.
Whereupon they had the name of (...), Priest, or Elder: and with-all in their
office, having an ouersighte; the name Episcopus, that we call Bishop, was
likewise given unto them. The state of the question for Bishops superiority.
But the question lies not in this, whether at that time, until these names
were grown into more peculiar uses, they were thus indifferently taken one
from another; or, whether they might not be reduced to that indifferent
acceptance again: but, whether those that were so called then indifferently,
had likewise no kind of difference in oversight, authority, and government
among them, but were meerelie in such sort all equal alike ( being equally
of like and of one order and degree of Ministry) that no one or other among
them, to whom the name and office of Bishop was competible, had, or might have
any superior oversight, government, and authority, over any other in the
same order, of Priesthood or Eldership, that himself was of: whereupon this
name Bishop ( or some other name equivalent) began to be more restrained unto
that Priest, or Pastoral Elder, than unto the residue: albeit, they were still
indeed (and so were called) in the office of the Ministry and Eldership, his
fellow Elders. And how ancient the original of this superior authority was.
For this I take, to be the ground and principal substance of this controversy.

Concerning the etimologie of the name of Bishop, because I have so largely
begoone with him. I will only set down Kemnitius, tom. 2. page 1181.
Kemnitius tom. 2. exam. cap. 4. de sacr. ord.
But that those things which in this place concerning Bishops may the rightlier
be understood, certain things before hand out of the Scriptures, and out of
the true testimonies of antiquities, are in brief to be repeated. The names
therefore (...), of Bishop, and Bishoplie office, The original of the name
Bish.
are in the Aposticall writing read, to be used for the Ecclesiastical
ministry, Act. 1. and 20. Phil. 1. Tit. 1.1. Tim. 5.1. Pet. 5. But those
names are taken from the use of the vulgar tongue, and are applied to the
Ministry of the Church, for the care of administration and of viewing.
Suidas says, that in the commonweal of Athens there, were Bishops and (...)
Keepers or watchemen, that were sent to the cities subject unto them: not to
govern them with an absolute government, as Lindanus does interpret it:
But, (...), that is, as Budeus out of Liuie translateth it, to view their
fellows matters. Plutarch in the life of Pericles, says: Phidias was (...),
the Bishop of all the works: that is the viewer of them, etc. And so noting
out of Homer, Plutarche, Tullie, and the Pandects: The Apostle ( says he) did
the more gladlye apply those names to the Ecclesiastical Ministerye, because
they were known and common, by reason of the Greek translation of the Old
Testament. For the word (...) Pakad Pekudah, and (...) Pekudim, which
signifies a visitation, a viewing, an office, a care, an administration
committed, Bishop.
a duty given in charge. The Graecians translated it, (...), to ouersee, an
oversight, and overseers, or surueiors, Number. 31. the overseers of the army,
Iudic. 9. Abimelech has Zebull his Bishop or ouerseer, 4. Reg. 11. The Bishops
or overseers that are over the army. Ibid. the custodies placed over the house
of the Lord, are thus expounded of the Graecians he has placed Bishops over
the house of the Lord, 2. Par. 34. The viewers of the workers, are called
Bishops, Number. 4. The office or duty of Eleazar in the Tabernacle of the Lord
is called (...), a Bishoprike. So, Psalm. 109. The function of Judges is called
(...), a Bishoprike. I have rehearsed these examples that I have observed, that
it might be considered from whence the Apostles took that name. The force
whereof also may be gathered and understood of those places. Hierome
translateth it a super-attendent. Ambrose, a Super-inspector. Thus far
Kemnitius on the name. Now in this sense, every one to whom an
Ecclesiastical charge was committed at the first might well be called a
Bishop. In which sense, the name Bishop stretches especially to the Apostles,
Act. 1. as likewise all the Apostles were Deacons. The general sense of the
name Bishops.
Yea the name Deacons conteins all the Ecclesiastical Ministry. But when
these offices began more seperatlie to be divided: then the name of Deacon
began to grow peculier unto those, that attended especially on the tables,
the name Bishop remaining as it did, unto the Apostles. And when the Apostles
planted the faith of Christ in any Churches, and ordained in the same
Pastoral elders, ( in respect of this their ouerseeing the people, and good
orders among them) they indifferently communicated this name of Bishop unto
them. And so the name continued taken indifferently, and was well used by S.
Paul to these Pastors, mentioned Acts. 20. ( admitting they were all of
Ephesus only,) until factions rising among the people, as they were affected
to some Elders, more then to other: so the name of Bishop which was before
indifferent, became more appropriate unto one; The appropriating of the name B.
unto some one among the Pastors.
who (as haueing the ouerseeing not only of the people, but also of his
fellow Pastors,) began by their consentes, more especially to be called
Bishops, than the residue.

Which title, of being the Ouer-seer of them, as it could not but carry
with-all a jurisdiction and authority over them; nor could be wrong from them
without all their consents, that were before invested with this title and
authority: so, who were the first that began the appropriating of this title
Bishop, unto one above his fellow Pastors; and when, and where it first began;
though it be not purposelie expressed in the Scriptures: yet that the occasion
and introduction of it, had his entry even in the Apostles times; many
reasons (and those I hope of substance) may induce us thereunto. And that not
only of the testimonies of the ancient Fathers, Timothy Bishop.
and practice of the Church of Christ, This appropriating of the name B.
began in the Apostles times.
in all the ages nearest succeeding the Apostles; ( which should some*what
move us) but even by the conference and examining the Scripture it self, we
shall find more then probalitie of the same.

For, if we should go no further, then this Church of Ephesus, of which ye
make all these to be Pastors: and all these Pastors, Bishops: and all these
Bishops equal, having jointly an ouer-sight over the people, or parted into
(...), which we call parishes: yet notwithstanding for all these Bishops, it
does plainly appear, they had afterward in S. Paul's time, one Bishop that
had an oversight, over all these Bishops and overseers.

And what (I pray you) imports that, (if it be proved) but that either he
was an Archbishop or chief Bishop over them, if they were Bishops: or if they
were not, and did but for the time portake the name of Bishop, that was but
late taken up among them; yet at the last he had a superior episcopal
jurisdiction over them? And first, what means, (in the end of the later
Epistle of S. Paul to Timothy,) this subscription? (...), The subscripcion of
the later Epistle ^o Timoth.
etc. The second Epistle written from Rome unto Timothy the first Bishop,
ordained of the Church of Ephesus* True it is, the former part of this
subscription, is omitted in the common Latin translation. But since it is in
the Greek, and not omitted either by Erasmus, or by our Geneua translation,
though Beza ( likewise translating the same) do add his censure-saying:

This member is not extant in some old books, and indeed, I think it is put
in underhand: yet since he shows no reason at all, wherefore he should so
think: it is free for other, not to think so lightly of it: Timothy being
of so many learned and ancient Fathers and interpreters, so rep^^ted and
called Bishop of Ephesus. Now, if Timothy were the first ordained Bishop of
Ephesus; what? Was he first in time, and before all these* or was he any of
these, whom S. Paul Act. 20. calls Bishops? the text is manifest to the
contrary. For as Paul took him to go with him, Act. 16.3. so he traveled
with him till he came to Boerea, Acts. 17. verse. 14. and 15, and there
abiding, when Paul went to Athens, he came at his commandment unto him to
Corinthe. Act. 18.5. And so went with Paul, and abode with him at Ephesus, How
Tim. was called the first By. of Ephesus.
Acts. 19. until (verse. 22.) he sent him and Erastus into Macedonia. Whither,
when Saint Paul came, Acts. 20, and traveled from thence to Greece: he sent
again Timothy, with diuers^ other to Troas, where while Timothy abode: Saint
Paul ( as it is likely) wrote his First Epistle to the Corinthians, in his
return to Macedonia at Phillippos, Act. 20, verse. 3. and 6. Timothy Bishop
of Ephesus.
Determining to send Timothy with that Epistle back again to Corinthe, which
of likeliehood he did, when he came to Troas, where Timothy with other abode
his coming. Who, when he came thither, sent Timothy, accompanied with
Stephanus, Fortunatus, and Achaicus, with that Epistle, as in the end thereof,
1. Corinthians. 19, verse. 8. appears. I will tarry at Ephesus until
Pentecoast, for a great door and effectual is opened unto me: but there are
many adversaries. Now, if Timothy come, see that he be without fear of
you. For he works the work of the Lord, even as I do.

And even so says Luke, Act. 20. verse. 16. Paul had determined to sail by
Ephesus, because he would not spend the time in Asia, for he hasted if he
could possibly be at Jerusalem, at the day of Pentecost. Whereas before he
had minded to tarry at Ephesus, till the drawing near of that feast. So that
(if I conjecture not amiss, which if I do, I will be ready in all humility,
to reform my computation) it appears that Timothy was at that time, none of
these Bishops, nor among them, whom Saint Paul called from Ephesus to
Miletum. How then was Timothy the first Bishop ordained of Ephesus? Not,
first in time: for if any at all in time; then must he needs have been
ordained Bishop after them. Neither yet, that all the other Bishops were
not at all ordained, or were now all dead: but that in dignity he was the
first, that is to say, Timoth not first Bishop there in time, but i^ dignity.
the chief or Archbishop among and over them all. And to confirm this, let us
see the jurisdiction and authority by S. Paul given him, over all the
Ecclesiastical Ministry, in this City. For, whenever Saint Paul wrote
his first Epistle to him, which some take to be during the time that he
tarried for the assembly of these Bishops aforesaid, in the mean while,
stepping over to Laodicia, which is about the same distance from Miletum, that
Ephesus was, (as appears by the charte or map thereof) and there at Laodicea
he wrote that Epistle.

Other suppose (and it is far more likely) that it was after he had been at
Rome, and was by Nero set at liberty, in which time of ^0 years space, as he
visited again, (which the Centuriographers note) the Churches of Syria, Asia,
and Greece: so having a great care of this Church of Ephesus, and keeping his
former course of visitation, as he did, Act. 20. from Ephesus to Macedonia,
and so back again, as before he had done: he writes from Laodicea unto
Timothy, whom (...) had before ordained Bishop there, giving him this charge,
1. Tim. 1. v^^s^. 3. As I besought thee to abide still in Ephesus, (...)
when I departed into (...) so do, that thou may command some, that they
teach none other (...) neither that they give heed to fables and genealogies.
Whereby (...) app^^reth, that he had authority given him by the Apos^le, to
(...) control, Timothy Bishop.
and command such Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors, as were at Ephesus, both for
the matter, and the manner of their teaching. Upon which sentence says
Calvin: Calvin on ^. Tim. 1.
The word of denouncing signifies power, for Paul would furnish him with
power to restreine others. And this power he gives him; not only that they
should teach no other doctrine, but also not the same Doctrine, otherwise. So
that the manner of setting forth doctrine, as well as the doctrine it self,
apperteined to his charge and ouer-sight. In the 2. chapter he shows him some
orders, that he would have observed in the Church, concerning prayers, and the
public Ministry of the word. In the 3. chapter he describes the office and
duties of Bishops, and their wives: of Deacons and their wives, so that,
although the name of Bishop, be there taken indifferently, for the Pastors of
the word and Sacraments: yet still has Timothy, an authority given him over
them, both to make such Bishops, as should so be qualified; and to ouer-see,
that they being made, should behave themselves accordingly.

Whereupon, after he has described them, he says to Timothy, verse. 14.
These things write I unto thee, trusting to come shortelie unto thee: but if I
tarry long, that thou maiste have knowledge how to behave thy self in the
house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of
truth. In which words, he plainly gives him an authority and jurisdiction
of ordering and governing these offices, in the policy and regiment of the
Church. Calvin.
In this speech ( says Calvin) he commends the weight and dignity of the
office, Timothy, a Pastoral elder in Ephesus.
because Pastors are as it were Stewards unto whom God has committed his
house. So that, Calvin here makes Timothy a Pastor, whom ye call a Bishop,
and he gives him authority over other Pastors or Bishops there. And how does
not this plainly infer, that though all in the pastoral office may be a
like, and equal: yet in dignity, one may have charge and government over
another. In the 4 chapter, verse. 11. and 12. he says, Commend and teach these
things. Let no man despise thy youth, but be unto them that believe an example,
etc. As though he would have him become a myrror and pattern, not only to
the people, but to the Pastors. Whereupon ( says Calvin) we also acknowledge,
that Timothy was a young man, who notwithstanding far surmounted many
Pastors. And on the 15. verse, he says: Grace was given him by prophecy. How?
To wit, for because (as we have said) the Holie-ghoste by oracle had
appointed Timothy, that he should be chosen into the order of pastors. Yea,
your selves have clearelie confessed, page 19. that, Timothy was but a young
man, and yet had the office of an Elder.

If then, a Pastor, and an Elder, and a Bishop, be all one; then must Timothy
needs be a Bishop: and if a pastor, must have a charge and flock assigned him:
then must Ephesus be his pastoral or Episcopal charge and flock. Which
charge that it stretched above his other fellow Pastors or Bishops: is most
apparent in the 5. Chapter, where, Timothies authority above other Pastor^
there.
( besides his authority in choosing and ouerseeing the widows,) for his
authority over these Pastoral Elders or Bishops: rebuke not an Elder
rigorously ( says the Apostle, to Tim. v. 1.) but exhort him as a Father. And
ver. 17. the Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, especially
they that labor in the word and doctrine, etc. Against an Elder receive no
accusation, but under two or three witnesses. Them that sin rebuke openly,
that the rest also may fear. And here our Geneua Bible notes, On them that
sin, chiefly the ministers, and so all others. I charge thee ( says Paul)
before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, that thou observe these things without
preferring one before an-other. And do nothing partially, Lay hands suddenly on
no man. And here again says the Geneua note, in admitting none without trial.

Here Timothy being himself a Pastor of Ephesus, ( and so with you a Bishop
of Ephesus,) has a very precise and special charge, above all other in the
Church of Ephesus, concerning all degrees of persons that should have any
office in the Church, especially these Pastoral Elders, whom ye call Bishops,
to admit them into this ministry: to rebuke: to see that they have
maintenance of living: and to see them that rule well, and take pains in
preaching the word of God to have a double honor in comparison of other: and
that the preferring of men to this function pertayned to him, and that he must
take heed he prefer none of partiality, and to admit no accuser of the
Pastor, but such and such, etc. Does not all this infer that he had a
superior authority over them, (using it rightly, and not wrongfully) to do
these things? For, if they being Bishops and Pastors, were all equal, by such
a flat and perpetual rule, as is pretended; then were every one of the^
equal herein to him. And though Paul would have written to him for love and
acquaintance, rather than to them: yet, if all the Pastors then were Bishops in
all dignity and jurisdiction alike: S. Paul could no more have attributed
these things over them unto him, then unto all or every one of the^ over him.
Yea, even Beza himself on the 16. verse confesses, that as he speaks of
such Elders as were Doctors, so (says he) we must moreover note out of this
place, Beza in 1. Tim. 5.16.
Timothy to have bin in the Presbytery of Ephesus, both (...), id est,
antistitem, that is, the Prelate, or chief Bishop, or one that ruled and
guided the other, as Iustine calls him. Not as one that should do all things
after his own fancy, but one that according to his godliness and prudence,
should moderate all things that in the assembly should be done rightly and in
order. Whereby it appears plainly, that as by Calvin, he is called their
Pastor, which ye call Bishop: and by Beza, a chief Bishop in Presbytery
Presbytery or consistory of Elders. Which accords to the foresaid
subscription of the later Epistle to Timothy, where he is called the first or
chiefest Bishop. It sufficiently (I hope) does argue, that not all Pastors nor
Bishops, were always even then in the Apostles time, of equal dignity and
authority, no, not in the very Church of Ephesus that is here alleged

Neither can all the shifts in the world, that he was bidden also to do the
work of an Evangelist, that he was a Prophet, that he was a man indewed with
so many, and so great gifts, that by the Apostles authority he was appointed
there for a time, that he did nothing by his own self alone, but by the
consent of his fellow Bishops or Pastors, and a number of such euasions, be
able to elude this plain example of Timothy, but that either he was an
Archbishop over Bishops, or at least wise, a Bishop over Pastoral Elders.

The learned Dis. Page 23. and 24.
The same thing is to be observed, in the name of Bishops, used by S. Paul,
Phil. 1.1. where he and Timothy send salutations unto the Bishops and Deacons
of the Church, Phil. 1.1.
which was in the City of Philippi: which Bishops were the Elders or Pastors,
else would he not have saluted in special words, the Deacons which were in
inferior office, and omitted the Elders, which were of more excellent calling.

Bridges.
This example tends to the confirmation of the former, that in the name of
Bishops, Whether there were mo Bishops at Philippos
was signified Pastors, and that there were more such Pastors called Bishops,
than one in a City. All this we have sufficiently seen in the former
example, Act. 20. But will this infer any more then did the other, that all
Bishops ever after must be, or there and then were, a-like, and equal in
dignity and authority? Or is this argument that is annexed here to
strengthen this example, of force sufficient to conclude this equality?

He that saluteth in special words, those which are in inferior office, Our
Breath. argument.
will not omit them which are of more excellent calling. But S. Paul saluted
the Deacons which were in inferior office in special words: Ergo, he would
not omit the Elders which were of more excellent calling.

If this be the argument of this our Brethrens Learned discourse ( for it is
the best argument yt my simple learning can bring it unto) it stands (God
wotte) on too feeble supporters of probability, to bear the peise of any
firm and necessary consequence. Paul's salutations.
Paul saluteth in special words, and proper names, in this Epistle to the
Philippians, diverse women: and yet in special words and proper names he
saluteth not one man among them. But because the argument, (though weak)
carries a likelihoode, that although there be no special words of Elders,
so well as of Bishops and Deacons: yet that they be not omitted but included:
I will gladly grant them, that Pastoral Elders are not here omitted, but
included in the name of Bishops. What now are they the nearer to this
equality? Is this reason, that they seem here to encroche thereon a
sufficient reason? In the name of Bishops Paul comprehends, Pastors, Ergo,
Bishops, and Pastors are all one, and all alike equal? If this argument be
good: then, In the name of Bishops Acts. 1. Peter comprehends Apostles:
Ergo, Bishops, and Apostles are all one and alike equal. Yea, Beza himself
and that on this self same place, Phil. 1. does say: Beza in Phil. 1.1.
He understands those to be Bishops, whosoever are set over the word and
the government. As Pastors, Doctors, and Elders, (...), on the word to
ouer-see, because they must as watchmen, inquire on the doctrine and the
manners of the flock committed to them, as Act. 20, verse 28. whom sometimes
by general name he calls Elders, as in that place, verse, 17. And 1. Tim.
5.17. And the like does Beza, 1. Tim. 3.1. Upon the word Bishoprike: So he
calls the office both of teaching, and of governing in the Church, as we have
said Phil. 1. a 1. And the quotation of the Geneua Bible follows Beza in both
places. On the Phil. 1. By Bishops, he means them that had charge of the
word and governing, as Pastors, Doctors, and Elders. And again, on the
word, the office of a Bishop, 1. Tim. 3. whether he be Pastor or Elder, says
the quotation of our Geneua Testament. Now then, by your argument and their
interpretation, we must reason thus: by the name of Bishop he means not
only a Pastor, but a Doctor: Our Brethren overthrow all their own devises.
and not only a Doctor, but also a Priest or Elder, whose office ( ye say)
consists only in government, and not in public teaching: Ergo, a Doctor,
and a Pastor, and a governor ( for so ye call your not teaching Priest or
Elder) are all one and equal. Which is the clean overthrow of all this your
Learned discourse of Ecclesiast. Government.

Likewise, as on this former word Bishop, Beza, and the Geneua Testament
comprehend Doctors, Pastors, and Elders, not teaching, but only governing: so
also on the other word, Deacons: But ( says Beza) he understands Deacons to
be the stewards of the Eccles. treasury, Beza.
and the college of the widows. And 1. Tim. 3: Deacons: These are they that
have the care of the poor, etc. And the Geneua note: By Deacons, such as had
the charge of the distribution, and of the poor and sick.

Yea, Beza here proceeds further, and says: when otherwise, this name is
sometime universal, The name of Deacon.
in so much that it comprehends even the Apostles themselves also. So then,
we must again conclude, that the name Deacon comprehends the treasorers, the
widows, the Apostles, yea, and all the Ecclesiastical ministers, and so,
Doctors and Pastors too: Ergo, all together are but all one office, and all
alike equal in the same.

Who sees not the evil sequence of this conclusion? And surely, though your
argument fail, and your selves also are not comparable to the excellent
Learned Master Beza: Our Breath. cont^arie to Beza, and to the Geneua Testament
herein.
yet of twain, (in my judgment) ye hold the truer opinion, in not
understanding here by the name of Bishops, Elders, those that are only
Governors and not Teachers: but understanding thereby, Pastoral Elders,
contrary to Beza, and to the Geneua Testament. Our Breath. and we, with Calvin
and Daneus etc. against Bezaes opinion. and the Geneua note herein.
And as we will all join with you thus farre-foorth herein, that by the name
of Bishops he comprehends Pastors, and not those that were not Pastors: so
shall we have Calvin on our side, yea, and Danaeus too, who is also of
Geneua, and a most earnest fauorer of your opinion, and one that has written
best (in my fancy) of all our side, for the maintenance of it. And yet where
he goes about of set purpose to 1. Tim. 3.1. to prove Bishops and Pastors to
be all one: and makes your last example Act. 20 his second argument, and this
your present example, Phil. 1. to be a part of his fourth argument: Danaeus in
Christ. Isag. 3. Part. c. 10.
and where he distinguishes of Elders as you do: even there (says he) of
these Elders therefore that have here their name of dignity, not of age: there
are two sorts in the Scripture. The one of the^ that watch on manners only,
the other of them that attend both on doctrine and on manners, and labor in
both. The which may be easily gathered out of this Epistle, cap. 5. ver* 17.
Concerning therefore the first sort, as it is distinguished from the second,
so it is to be severed from the Bishops and Doctors. And so he enters into his
process, the whole beginning whereof was this, which I should have set before.
But Paul in all this chap. treats of Bishops and Deacons. Howbeit, there are
other Ecclesiastical and necessary dignities besides Deacons and Bishops, as
are Elders, of whom some think that Paul spoke nothing at all in this place.
But rejecting their opinion, and distinguishing of these two sorts of Elders,
he encludeth only Pastoral Elders, ( as you do) in the name of Bishops.

Caluinus in Phil. 1.
The like does Calvin in this place, Phil. 1. upon the word Bishops: He
names the Pastors by themselves for honors sake. Moreover, it is lawefull to
gather hereon, the name Bishop to be common to all the ministers of the word,
when he attributes many Bishops to one Church. Therefore the name of
Bishop and Pastor are Synonyms (or diverse words meaning one thing, etc.)
And on the name Deacon, he says also in the said place. This name may be
taken two ways, either for the ministers and carers for the poor, or for the
Elders that were appointed to govern the manners. But because it is more
commonly taken of Paul in the former sense, I rather understand it for the
stewardes, that had the ouer-sight of distributing the alms. Thus you and we
herein have these two most famous men of our side, against Beza and the quoters
of the Geneua Testament. And to say the truth, (all respect of persons set
aside,) our opinion is the better, having the manifest not example only, but
rule of Gods word, in both places: that the Bishops there mentioned, Act.
20.28. must feed which (ye say) inclusiuely, is as much as Pastor. And 1. Tim.
3.2. he must be apt to teach, which appertains not unto an only Governor.

Now, although ye do well herein, to dissent from Beza, and from the notes of
the Geneua translation, unto whom if ye would have agreed, you might easilier
perhaps, have found many Bishops, both there in one City, and here in
another: (but then must you either amend this your argument, or else ye should
confound all offices in one, and make all equal) yet still your argument (even
as theirs also) is not of sufficient force, that, because Pastors are there
named and included under the name of Bishop; therefore simply Bishop and
Pastor are all one, and yet, The weakness of our Breath. argument.
I will gladly grant both you and them also, more than the argument can make
good. That in the nature of the Pastoral Eldership and Episcopal ouer-sight,
though, ratione, they differ in this, or that consideration, one from the
other: yet, re, and indeed, they are so joined together in one office, that
the one might then very well, till the name Bishop grew to a more proper
signification: yea, and may yet well enough interchangeablie be spoken the one
of the other: a Pastor is a Bishop, and a Bishop is a Pastor: How B. and Pastor
differ and yet are all one.
notwithstanding it does not follow hereupon, that in all respects they are
now, or were then, simply and absolutely all one and the same offices, and
especially that in dignity, they were all a like and equal. For that is the
chief point that should herein be proved. Must al, that be of one order or
office, of necessity be of one equal dignity in the same? What degree or
calling have you, of Gentlemen, Esquiers, Knights, Barons, Lords, Earls,
Dukes, Princes, or Kings, but that, being in any one of these estates, orders,
degrees, or offices, as they may be equal; so, one may have dignity,
authority, government, and superiority well-inough over another even of the
same estate, order, degree, or office, that themselves be?

If ye say, we must not bring examples of offices in the civil policy, and
apply them to Ecclesiastical: though your selves brought in such examples a
little before, out of Numb. 11.16. how God ordained 70. ancients to assist
Moses in his government, which were civil Seniors, and apply them to these
Ecclesiastical and Pastoral Elders: yet, will not you grant this, that when
it shall come to any assemblies of Synodes, or Councels, one of these equalles
may notwithstanding for the time, have a superiority over all the residue of
the same function, that he him self is of? Yes, but say you, this is done but
for the time. Well then, if this may be done with a safe conscience, and
without injury to other of the same function, for the time of such an
assembly of Synod or Council, ( which how short or long it may hold,
Superiority of Pastors.
is uncertain: can it not then be longer? Yea, can it not then become
ordinary and standing? If it be injurious and contrary to the nature of the
office, If superiority among Pastors b^ simply naught, it can admit no
shortness of time.
it is not time long or short, that marres or makes it. Continuance may make it
a continual injury, and the longer time the longer injury, (if of it self
it be an iniurie^) for then at no time, or by any means of man it can be
lawefull, being not compatible at all, with the nature and substance of the
office. But if it be compatible, and may well enough agree therewith: then, as
upon occasion the office may receive access of further dignity and
superiority for a time: If it can be admitted for a time, it is not simply
evil.
so the occasion longer or still continuing, why may not the accessorie
dignity and superiority, longer also, and as need requires, still continue,
without any prejudice of the equality, in the essence and substance of the
office? Substantia non dicitur secundum magis and minus.

Peter, James, and John, were in the very function of the Apostleship ( which
was all one in every one of them) all but equal, Superiority of dignity in
the equality of the Apostleship Gal. 2.
fellow and fellow like, with all the residue of the Apostles. And yet these
words of Paul Galat. 2. verse, 6.7.8. and 9. are not so lightly to be shaken
off, where he says: And of them which seemed to be great, what they were in
times past, it makes no matter to me. God accepts no man's person.
Nevertheless, they that are the chief, did communicate nothing with me. But
contrariwise, when they saw that the Gospel of the uncircumcision was
committed unto me, as the Gospel over the circumcision was unto Peter (for he
that was mighty by Peter in the Apostleship over the circumcision, was mighty
by me toward the Gentiles) and when James, and Cephas, and John knew of the
grace that was given unto me (which are counted to be the pillars) they gave to
me and Barnabas the right hand of felloweship, that we should preach unto the
Gentiles and they unto the circumcision.

Here is fellowship which carries some equality with it, and that in the
Apostleship. But is there no superiority at all in this fellowship and
equality of Apostleship? What mean these words, Great and chief among them?
Or, were they so in times past, and did they not so continue? And what mean
these words, that James, and Cephas, and John seemed pillars, more than the
residue? Did they but seem so, and were not so indeed? And what means this,
that the Gospel over the circumcision, (that is to say) over the Jews, was
committed to Peter, and that God was mighty by Peter in the Apostleship over
them? Was it not committed as well to the residue of his fellow Apostles? Or,
had he no superiority over the Jews in this Apostleship, more then his
fellows had? Or was he, or any of his fellow Apostles, equal to Paul in
the authorite of the like Apostleship over the Gentiles? Or, did this
superiority of both their Apostleships, the one over the Jews, the other over
the Gentiles, more than their fellows, come and go by starts and sittes, of
times and actions, Superiority of dignity among the Apostles.
and was not still restant in them, after it was committed to them?

Well, what concludes Calvin hereupon? Now ( says he, on the 9. ver.) I have
before declared that this (James) was the son of Alpheus. For, he could not
be the brother of John, Calvin on Gal. 2. v. 9. The superior dignity of
James in Jerusalem among his bre^hren, and fellow Apostles, etc.
whom a little before Herod had killed. And to have been one of the
Disciples, which so much excelled above the Apostles, were (in my judgment)
very absurd. But that he was the chief among the Apostles, Luke also
shows, who attributes the peroration unto him, and the defining of the cause
in the council. Act. 15. c. 13. and 21. c. 18. He tells that all the Elders
of the Church of Jerusalem, were gathered together unto him. As for that they
seemed pillars, he speaks it not by contempt, but cites the common opinion,
because that follows there-vpon which could not rashly be refused. Here
where as the question is of dignity, it is marvel that James is preferred
before. Peradventure it was done, Quod Hierosolymitanae Ecclesiae erat
praefectus, For because he was set over the Church of Jerusalem, or he was
prefect, or to speak plain (as the ancient Ecclesiastical^ writers do) the
Bishop of Jerusalem. And yet were the Apostles then resiant there, besides
other Pastoral Elders. As for that, that appertains to the name of pillar,
we know, that so fares the nature of things, that those which in wit or
prudence, or in other gifts do surmount other men, they also are made
superiors in authority. Even thus goes the matter in the Church of God, that
how much more each one excels in grace: so much the more honor ought to
be given unto him. For it is an unthankfulness, yea rather, a wickedness,
not to worship the spirit of God, wheresoever he appears in his gifts.
Furthermore, as the people can-not want a Pastor, so every assembly of
Pastors require a certain moderator. Howbeit, let that always hold, that he
which is the chief or first of all, must be as it were the minister.

In which words, Calvin plainly allows, not only one Pastor to be
superior, above his Brethren and fellow Pastors, James hi^ superior dignity
standing and continuing in Jerusalem.
for a small time or present action: but for a standing continuance. For, this
assembly of the Apostles, and of the 70. Disciples, that were preachers
likewise of the word, and so, Pastoral Elders, began even from Christ's
ascension and so continued till the Apostles were dispersed. If therefore, (as
Calvin says) no assembly of Pastors can be without a Superior: and the
Apostles and Disciples assembly at Jerusalem was then standing and continuing:
how follows not withal, this standing continuance of James his superiority
over them? especially* sith that, when many of them were afterward
dispersed, yet this standing assembly of them brake not off, over whom (
says Calvin) James was made the ruler, who continued still in this Superior
dignity, James B. of Jerusalem.
both Act. 15. and Act. 21. and Galat. 2. both over the Apostles, and all other
Pastoral Elders, at Jerusalem.

And to prove this further, even by Calvin himself, that James had this
standing and continuing superiority of dignity among the Apostles and
Pastoral Elders at Jerusalem; Caluines citing Eusebius, that James was B. of
Ierus.
yea, so far, that he disalloweth not of the testimony of Eusebius, that he
was Bishop of Jerusalem: Calvin on the 15. of the Acts verse 13. writes
thus: They are greatly deceived in that they deny him to be one of the twelve
Apostles. For they are compelled to grant him to be the same, whom Paul so
honorably does celebrate, that he gives him the first place among the pillars
of the Church. Gal. 2.9. verily, never any of an inferior order, should have
so excelled above the Apostles. For Paul adorneth him with the title of an
Apostle. Neither is it worth the hearing, that Jerome alleges, that the name
is there general: when of purpose the dignity of the order is treated upon,
how far forth Christ preferred the Apostles, before the other Doctors of
the Church. Moreover, out of this place is easy to gather, that he was
esteemed of no common price, sith that with his sentence, he so confirms the
words of Peter: that all yield unto his sentence. And afterward upon the 21.
chap. ver. 18. we shall see again, of how much value his authority was. The
Ancients think that to be done, because he was Bishop of the place. How-beit,
it is not probable, that the faithful at their will, altered the order by
Christ set down, Wherefore I doubt not, but that he was the son of Alpheus,
and of Christ's consanguinitie, in which sense, he is called his brother.
Whether he were Bishop of Jerusalem or no, I leave it indifferent. Neither
makes it much to purpose, save that clearly hereupon the impudency of the
Papists is refelled. Sith that the decree of the Council is established,
rather by the authority of James then of Peter. And truly Eusebius in the
beginning of the second book, doubts not to call James (whosoever he were,)
the Bishop of the Apostles. Let the Romanistes go now, and vaunt, their Pope is
the head of the universal Church, because he is the successor of Peter, who
suffered another to rule him, if Eusebius be believed.

And as James at Jerusalem, so Peter and John were also pillars indeed, as
they were counted, among their fellow Apostles. And Peter and Paul had a
higher authority and dignity of Apostleship, ( the one over the dispersed
Jews, the other over the converted Gentiles) than the residue of the Apostles
had, though in the very function of the Apostleship, all were equally alike
Apostles. And Paul might and did preach unto the ^ewes also, and Peter to the
Gentiles, and all the residue, to either Jew or Gentile. But these two, had a
more special and higher dignity, and GOD their company. Which example of the
Apostles, (...).
and Caluines judgment thereon, if we shall well consider: we shall not only
find, that Calvin answers himself sufficiently, in that place, albeit he
write very moderatly on the matter: but, that we and all our brethren may be
fully satisfied, not*onely it may well be, that many in one Ecclesiastical
office and in that respect all equals one to an other, may safely
notwithstanding have some superior in dignity and authority of government
amongst them, without any prejudice at all to one jot of the equality, in the
nature and substance of their office, but withal, that it was so even among
the Apostles them selves: yea, even from Christ's ascension, and so continued,
and that not onele as a specialtie sproong among them, and dying with them, but
delivered by them to the ordinary office of Pastoral Eldershipp in the Church,
as we showed before in the example of Timothy, whom Calvin confesses to be
the Pastor of Ephesus,, and Beza, to be (...), the Provost, ( the principal,
the Prelate, or chief governor) of the Ephesine Pastors. And that not only
it was, and may be, but (as Calvin says) it must be, and ought not, nor can
be well otherwise: which (me thinks,) fully and clearly satisfies all this
question.

Neither do I see, but as we safely dissented from Beza before, not suffering
him here to apply the name of Bishops, to his new Priests or Elders that are
not Teachers: so, I see not how we should approve him in yt which he concludes
thereon, neither with any necessary consequence to prove his sayings, nor
according to the verity of the ancient Records, and Fathers, nor agreeing
with many the best learned of his own side, nor yet correspondent to his own
assertions. Bezaes confession of appropriating the name of By. unto one


For, Beza proceeding in his observation on this place: This therefore ( says
he) was the appellation of Bishops, until that he, which for policies sake,
was placed in the company over the residue of his brethren, whom Iustine
calls (...), a principal ruler, or one being in chiefest authority, began
peculierly to be called Bishop.

All this hitherto, I gladly accord unto: if Beza agree on the time when it
was done, and show the reason of it, and allow thereof. Or else, show some
sufficient reason to the contrary. For, here he confesses, that before the
name Bishop became peculier unto one, the matter that the name imports to be
an ouer-seer: yea, and a greater matter too, and a name that is far higher
than the name Bishop is, was before the name Bishop became peculier. And what
makes it matter for the name, if the matter be granted? Let them yield in
the matter here with Beza, that one should be above his brethren, and we
should soon end the strife for the name. The matter being yielded unto, why
strive we for the name?
Yet some name or other he must have, and if we find no peculier name then
recorded of this Superiority, and yet find the matter then practiced, might
not the Church make a name, so it be a modest name, as the church has done in
other things, where names wanted and matter appeared. The modest name of B.
And may it not much more take the reverent and modest name it self, that the
Scripture uses, and by all their consentes, that had interest before (and yet
have) in the same, yield it unto that man peculierlye, that before was their
governor: but that this must be made so great a matter, being but the very
express title that the scripture uses, and nothing so great indeed and
significant in matter, as is (...) a Prefecte or Primate, a governor over them.

But this name and office (say they) was not continuing in him, but for the
assemblye. What mean they: did it cease, when the Assembly ceased? and did
they chose a new Prefect at every new Assemblye? and so every day, The
continuing of the n^me and office.
when they came together, a new was chosen? or did they continewe the old
still? But neither Pastor, nor ever Bishop did or could feed or ouersee
continuallee without intermission: and yet they continued still those Officers,
though the exercise of the offices now and then ^eased. And (as we have
showed) the Apostles assemblye was daily, which we call continual. And
therefore (which Calvin also confesses) their Praefecte James, was their
continual Praefecte. And as Calvin rendereth a reason here-of: so Beza says,
it was for Policy. But what policy was it, good or bad: in having such a
Prefect over them, before they gave him the name of Bishop? No doubt, if James
among the Apostles, ( as Calvin says) and Timothy ( as Beza says) were
such (...) among the Pastors: The Primitive Churches policy
then could not this Policy be but good, yea, very good and necessary for
them: else would the one part never have given it to them, nor the other have
ever taken it on them. But it was given, and taken: yea, but in Iustines time.
Well, and Iustines time immediately succeeded the Apostles. But what called
they this one Superior over his fellow Brethren Pastors in Iustines time?
Forsoothe, (...) Why, and who was he that told us, not long since, out of 1.
Tim. ver. 19. That we ought to note out of that place, that Timothy was then
in the Ephesian Eldershippe ( understanding there Elders for Doctors or
Pastors) (...)? Must we note it there: and must we forgette it here? Was that
in the time of Iustine? or just in Paul's time? yea, but it was then, O^e among
the Pastors was (...). in the Apost ^ime.
in Paul's time. then? and how long (I pray you) held that then? Forsooth?
while Timothy tarried at Ephesus. And can you tell, how long, or short that
was? Well, he aboade not there, no did? S. Paul requested him earnestly to
abide there. 1. Tim. 1.3. And did he neglect S. Paul's request? no, but Paul
sent for him afterward. and where find ye that? If this Epistle be doubtful
(with Beza) where it was written: in my opinion, it is more doubtful, when.
And if, as is likelye, after his liberty from prison, as is aforesaid: then
will it hardlye be proved, that Paul, after this Epistle written, sent for
Timothy, to come to him from them, whom so earnestly he desired to tarry with
them? Well, yet at the most, in th^s aboade with them, he was but (...). And
carries not this word as great a force of superior dignity, or rather of a
certain Primacie or principality: as the word (...) doothe: whether ye call
it Super-attendent ot Ouerseer?

But (I pray you) who expoundes this word in the same place, Beza his own
confession that Timot. was B. of Ephesians.
and says (...) (id est Antistitem,) vt vocat Justinius? The interpretation of
Gelenius calls him, praecipuum fratrem: and Praesulem, and praepositum.

Which word praesul, and especially Beza his own word Antistes, is in Latin
(as I take it) the very selfsame. that we commonly call in English a
Bishop: so that the Office at the least, and superior dignity of a Bishop
began to be peculier unto one among his fellow brethren, and pastoral
Elders, even in S. Paul's time, by this reckoning. Though this one that thus
had the matter before, began a little after, that is to wit, about Iustines
time, to be peculiarlye called Bishop.

Now, if the matter were peculier to one before: what need so great adoo,
though the name followed to be peculier after: this name (...), being indeed a
greater and a higer title. Insomuche, that it is applied unto Magistrates, and
princes, as well as to these superior Bish. As where Plato, epist. 7. says:
(...), the Praefecte, Prince, or Magistrate of the great City, etc. Now if this
appellation were given to one over the Pastoral Elders, ( as Beza says) in
the Apostles time; which appellation notwith standing is often used in the
Scriptures, and applied to Elders and to Bishops: as, 1. Tim. 5, ver. 17.
even but 2. verses before this note of Beza: (...), Those Elders (or Priests)
well Rulers, or that behave themselves well, in their praefectshippe (or
principality:) let them be counted worthy of double honor: chieflye they
that labor in the word and doctrine. Out of which words you gathered before
page 21. saying: Which place also testifies of an other kind of Elders, of
whom we shall have occasion to speak more hear after: whose office consists
only in government and not in public teaching. ( the reverence reserved of
all those famous men, from whom ye take this observation) me thinks, the words
there, S. Paul's words. ^. Tim. 5.17. seem rather to infer Bish. then not
teaching Elders.
infer no such distinction, but seem rather to be referred to those (...),
yt such principal or prefect Elders, as, for all their godly pains and travel
in this Government of other Elders, and rule of the Chur. discipline intermit
not ye labor of the word and doctrine, any more then do their fellow brethren
Elders, that are not such (...), where all generally are to be honored: they,
both for their dignity and good behavior in the same, besides that, for their
labor in the word and doctrine, ( as the others do) more than any other, as
they have a double and greater care, deserve a double or a greater honor. The
resemblance of an house and the Churches government.
And this rather seems to my simple judgment, (howbeit under all correction,
and without all contention) to be a good exposition of that place.

And of this Superior government in the use of this word, (which is used
also, I grant, in many meaner matters,) he gave before an example to be a
Bishop in the government of the Bishops own children and family, by
comparison to the government of Gods Church, 1. Timoth. 3.4. (...) which
governs well his own house, having children (...) in subjection with all
honesty. For if he cannot (...) rule (or stand as chief, or be principal) of
his own house, how will he care for the Church of God? But in every house
there may not be many Sovereigns, and chief Rulers, but one principal over
all the other, nor yet many stewards, etc. And therefore, by the force of this
word and similitude, the Church being compared a little after, ver. 15. to
the house of God, though we be all fellow servant in respect of Christ, and
al Pastors fellow stewards of Gods mysteries: yet in respect of particular
Churches, and the external Ecclesiastical policy and Government thereof, as
it is also aptly compared to particular families, though there be diverse
Pastors in the same: Yet must one be a (...), a Provost, a principal, a chief
bayliffe under Christ, that must there govern all his fellow servant and
all the children, within the Region, Diocese, or city limited unto him: and
keep them all in an orderly subjection, even as a Father does his children;
or else the Ecclesiastical policy is disturbed. And the same that here is
attributed to him over his children and house is attributed also unto him, for
this his principal rule, over the particular Church of God, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. We
beseech ye brethren, that ye acknowledge them that labor among you, (...)
etc. And them that are chief over you in the Lord, and admonish you.

Now if this were the name whereby he was called, that had the Superiority not
only over the people, but over his fellow and brethren Pastors in any
assemblies, while the name Bishop was yet indifferent to them all and that the
name Bishop began to become peculier to one, The good change of the name (...)
to (...), and the iniquity thereof.
( as Beza says) while there was such a (...) among them, the^ as the name was
very well changed from (...) to (...) from one that had a principal being or
standing office over them, to a Superintendent or ouerseer of them, which was a
lower title of superior dignitye, and therefore not given or taken of any il
purpose: so withal, it argues ye antiquity both of the matter, and of the
appropriating of the name Episcopus more peculierly unto one, then before it
had been, to be either in or immediately following the Apost. times, even by
Bezaes own testimony, out of Iustine and by examining of this word and title
in the Scripture.

And, as Calvin and Beza here confess the matter, so Gellius Snecanus also
de Disciplina Ecclesiastica, page 440. Golliu^ Snecanus de discipl. Eccl. page
440.
speaking of the ministerye of the word, concludes out of 1. Tim. 5. uer. 19
20. Whereupon it manifesthe appears, that even then a certain order was
ordained at Ephesus, Cui Praefectus erat Timotheus, over the which Timothy was
the Prefect. Whom Iustine calls (...), and Beza translateth Antistite^,
whom wecall Bishop. All this being considered, with the subscription
aforesaid unto Timothy, argues that this name. Bishop, (to become peculiar
unto one above his brethren and fellow Pastors), was neither so late, (as
diverse take it,) nor was merely and altogether man's inuen^ion: and yet, if it
had been ordained of man, being not other-wise prescribed of God: it may well
be called also even Gods ordinance, as we shall see after (God-willing) upon
Peter.

The Centuriographers writing of the government of the Church, The
Ecclesiastical orders and degrees in the Primitive Church.
in the time next succeeding the Apostles, do say: Cent. 2. ca. 7. page 125.
and 126. But as there was no certain and prescribed number of Minist. of the
Church, commanded in the holy Scriptures: so according as the necessity of
the Churches required, they had more or fewer. And as among them, (to the intent
that there should be some order, and that the Ecclesiastical offices should
be better administered among many, by a certain reason or consideration, and
that the succession of Ministers might be made in order): necessity compelled
them to ordayn and to keep certain degrees of persons. But in that matter, and
also in this age, the most part of the Churches, kept a small number, and a
simplicity. For, more orders than these 3. that is to wit, Bishopric,
Priesthood, and Deaconrie, are not found with approved Authors. And, the
offices which afterward were distributed to dore-keepers, to Readers, to
Exorcists, and to Acolyts, were al names joined to the office of Deacon and
Subdeacon. So in the French Church, (as appears by the Epist. of the^ that
were of Lions unto the East churches), are reckoned up more Ministers of the
Church, then Bishop, Priests, and Deacons: the other are called brethren.
Eusebius. lib. 4. cap 1. Clemens of Alexandria, in the books of him, that are at
this day extant: makes no where mention of more, then of Bishop, of Priests,
and of Deacons: except that in some places he adioyne Widows. Neither yet
does he in plain words, ascribe unto them a Ministry in the Church, much
less a degree. Also Hierome in his Epist. to Euagrius does testify, that in
the Church of Alexandria, there were no more degrees, from Mark unto Dionise,
then bishopric, Priest-hoode, and Deaconship. And so proceeding to other
Churches, and to Antioche, and Rome, where out of Iustine they note, vnum
perfectum (...) fratrum, and certain Deacons and the other brethren.
Nic^phorus, li. 3. cap. 29. declares that Eleutherius, which was taught the
holy Scriptures of Anicetus, Ecclesiastical orders.
(or rather of Anaclecletus) was enrolled in the sacred number of the Clergy.
And in the 15. year of his age, took the degree of Deacon, and three year
after was made Priest, and in the 10 year of his age, was chosen Bishop.
Whereupon may be gathered, what degrees were in Rome, under the reign of
Hadrian, etc. It is worthy memory, that of every one Church, is only found a
Bishop; in the Priesthood, and in the Deaconship, are always found many,
according to the necessity of every place or Church. Hierome testifies in his
epistle to Euagrius, that in the time of the Apostles, the degrees of Bishops
and Priests were not distinct. but afterward for remedy of schism, one was
chosen out of the Priests, and placed in a higher degree, and called bishop.
Which only in the office of ordeyning should differ from the Priests.
Whereupon it appears, that about these times, this change began in the
Church, and the office of a bishop higher then the degree of Priesthood, not so
much by the institution of God, as by humane authority, for because of good
order, aedification, and succession. Hereupon it is that Irenaeus calls
Soter, Anicetus, Hyginus, Pius, Telesphorus, Priests: Eusebius. lib. 5. cap, 24.
And this indifferent usurpation of this word bishop and Priest, is also found
with others. Under Traiane as yet lived John the Apostle, which was the
chiefest founder of the Churches that were in Asia, and which also was wont to
go out of Ephesus, to the places near adjoining, both partly to ordain
bishops, partly to chose the Clergy by lotte, as Clement tells in Eusebius
lib. 3. ca. 23. but he being dead: the Apostleship ceased in the Church,
because that unto their doctrine and writings, God would have the Church at all
times to be bound. But the Apostles gave Churches to Bishops in every one
place: as Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 63. does testify. But because the doctrine of
the Gospel was to be published throughout many nations, therefore the Churches
were wont to choose famous and constant men, pressed to travel, and ready to
teach and to suffer for the Gospel, and to impose on them this office, that
according to the imitation of the Apostles, forsaking their goods, or disposing
them: they should travel through many and far places of the Gentiles, and
preach the Gospel. These were called Evangelists or Apostolical men: and
Eusebius testifies lib. 5. cap. 9. that very many of them were yet under
Commodus. In the number of whom is Pantenus reckoned, who was sent of
Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria into India, etc.

Out of these observations of these Centuriographers upon the ancient
fathers, concerning the government of the Churches in this age, which was
partly in the time and life of some of the Apostles, The observations of the
Magdeburgenses.
we also may note these things appertayning unto our controversy First, that
there were ordinarily but three degrees of the Ecclesiastical Ministry:
Bishops, Priests or Elders, and Deacons. by which Priests or Elders, The
PrimChurches obseruatio^^
they mean such Priests or Elders, as were ministers of the word: For they
speak of those Priests or Elders, whose office at the first was not distinct
from Bishops. So that, in the ordinary regiment of the most famous Churches in
that age, and while some of the Apostles lived, and immediatlye after their
death, these unpreaching Prelates, Preests, or Elders that meddled not with
teaching, but were al in governing: were not accounted any offices or degrees
of the Ecclesiastical ministry. But they had only three: as we have,
Bishops, Priests, or Elders, that were teachers of the word, and Deacons.

Secondly, and that which they call worthy memory, One Bishop in one Church.
that always there was but one Bish, of one Church, and that the placing of
Bishops one in every Church, was the doing of the Apostles, while they lived.
But always in every Church (meaning all the faithful of one City) there were
more Priests or pastoral Elders, and more Deacons: Ergo: These Bishops and
these Priests or pastoral Elders were not all one.

Thirdly, that albeit at the first, in the Apostles times, Jerome testify,
they were not distinct degrees, and some other fathers take the name
indifferently, of Bish. and Priest, as Irenaeus that calls so many Bish. of
Room, Priests: yet this alteration of the name, and this setting of him to
whom they gave it in a higher degree, was done at ye furdest (if not in Paul's
time) yet in the time of John the Evangelist, and so continued. And therefore
though these Bish. of Rome are by Irenaeus called priests, as Eusebius
reports. (although indeed the words of Irenaeus are not priests, but bi^h.
as is mafest in Irenaeus him-self: in the translation that we have extant. Lib.
3. cap. 3. Although, in the Chapter before, How Irenaeus uses the name Bish.
and Priest indifferently.
he generally calls the Apostles successors priests: and in Li. 4. cap. 44.
etc.) yet it follows not, that either Eusebius or Irenaeus, took a bishop
and a priest to be al one and of aequal dignity, though now and then, they use
the name indifferently, after* this appropriating of the name: because the
persons which they speak of, were both priests and Bishops. For though every
priest or pastoral Elder, ( after the name Bishop was made peculier to one,)
was not properly a bishop: yet every Bishop was properly a priest or pastoral
Elder, and therefore might be well called by that name. And because they are
now and then used one for an other: it rather argues, we should not mark so
much, the interchaungeable using of the name, as whether the parties be all
alike equal in degree of dignity, that many times communicate in like name.
And then shall we find, that these Bishops were not only Superiors, in
Dignity, above pastoral Elders, but above all the Evangelists remaining
after the Apostles times. And that Bishop Alexander ( as we shall afterward
see) sent the Euangeliste Pantenus into India to preach the Gospel.

Bishops Gods ordinance.
Fowrthly, that this application of this name Bishop, to this one, placed in
higher authority among the Pastoral Elders, though it were not so much done by
any divine institution, or ordinance of God, as by the authority of man: ( as
Jerome says) yet these words debar not, but it might be (though not so much)
yet in some part so done: or, not clean rejected from Gods ordinance. For
although no such ordinance appropriating the name Bishop, be expressed in the
manifest word of God: yet the ordinance of the matter is plainly expressed:
as we have showed out of Timothy, Caluines, and Bezaes plain confession of
the same. And the name also applied to Timothy in the subscription of the 2.
epist. if that may go for Scripture. But, let the application of the name, be
not so much the express ordinance of God, as of godly men, and those in the
Apost. times. And now, the Apostles alive, being not unwilling thereunto, was
this ordinance of man, good, or ill? First, that it was done to good purposes,
here are plain words, that it was done, for good order, aedification, The
appropriating the name Bish. to one in some part the ordinance of God, though
in some part the ordinance of man.
and succession. yea, that very necessity did compel them so to do. Could
there be any necessity, good order, and aedification, against the institution
of Christ? It is then apparent not that it is not lawful, because Christ gave
to or fro no institution of it: but because he gave none, and that there is no
institution of Christ against it, (which had it been material to salvation, or
had it been of doctrine, no doubt had been expressed and commanded) but
being none, this ordinance of man was a thing, that man might do. And, being
done for so good and necessary purposes: it was requisite also that man should
do. And so, though it be not expressly, so much the ordinance of God as of man:
yet because it is not forbidden but allowed of God, it is in a sort even the
ordinance of God also, and to be contained under Peter's sentence, 1. Pet.
2.13.14. For, though he apply it in particular to Kings, and those that are
sent of him: yet the words are general (...) unto all or every humane
creature, or ordinance: so that whatsoever good law is made by lawful
authority of man, not contrary to Gods word, we are here bidden to submit
our selves unto it.

And therefore, either prove this law and ordinance of man ( to make the name
Bishop, more peculier to one, then to all the other, among a number of Pastoral
Elders) to be contrary to Gods law: or else, except this law be as lawfully
removed, as it was made, I see not how we may lawfully disobey or contemn the
same. Well may we now and than use the word indifferently, as did the fathers;
but to deny them, both the title and the dignity also: that none of the
fathers (that I read of) did, until Aerius came. Who, holding other more
perilous points than this and perceauing himself ouer-matched with a Bish.
Aeri^s his impugning the superio^ity o^ Bish.
as ill as himself: when he could not have his own will, be an as a
mal-content, mis^^king with the Superioritye of Bishops, to call this
selfsame matter into question. About the year of our Lord 340. And went
about, Aerius opinion.
under pretense of the first acceptance of these names Bishop, and Priest,
used at the first, indifferently in the Apostles times, to reduce them
altogether there-unto, and in all respect to make them alike, and equal, even
for all the world, as now our Brethren would do. And although Aerius opinion,
(had it been maintained no further of him, then that in the Apostles times they
were sometimes used for all one. and had been, or st^ll were, in the substance
and nature of the office equal and all one:) had been no matter worthy such
great contention. Yet, when he did simply condemn this ancient order of
superiority, instituted in the Primitive Church, and in the Apostles times,
forgood order-sake among the Pastors: and stiffly with all contention
maintained his opinion: the question grew from brawling to schism: and not so
resting Aerius opinion was at length rejected and condemned for an herisie. And
so stands, for any thing I know to the contrary. Neither was it thus judged of
the Bishops only themselves, that might be thought partial to their own
part, albeit we may not so judge of all the holy Fathers that were Bish. in
those days, which universally condemned this opinion, that they did it for
ambition, or partiality, or pride, or ignorance, which were too hard a
judgment of Epiphanius, Chrysostom. Ambr. August. etc, Whose learning, as it was
able to reach the depth of this question, or else (God wot) it had been
small: So they seeing the truth, would never be carried away against their
consciences, for worldly superiority, in the which many of them were most
humble.

But not only (I say) those holy learned fathers, that were theirselues
Bishops, but those also that were no Bishops. yea Jerome that was much offended
with some Bishops, and was a man also very passionate, where he took offense,
when he saw this controversy hot in his days, S* Ieromes opinion of the
superiorite of Bish.
by reason of the insolency of some Bishops, did he ever like and allow of
this opinion, that Bishops and Pastoral Priests should still be counted as
names indifferent, and their authority be alike equal in all things. And but
all one? Or, but alter and differ by toornes, and on occasion of some present
actio^, this Priest chosen to be Bish. or be Superior to day, or at this
assembly: and to morrow, or at the next assembly, another Superior chosen, and
no Superior standing? Did Jerome ever like of this? No, read al his works over,
and whersoeuer he writes: as he often touches this matter and many times is
very vehement against bishops, and favoring Priests* himself being one: so
he always acknowledges, th^s difference of bish. and Priest, that though in
substance of the Ministry they be both all one: yet in degree of dignity, the
bishop is superior, and the Priest is inferior to the bishop. Yea, where of
purpose, most favorably he sets forth the Priests authority, as in his
epistle ad Euagrium, where he alle^geth even these examples here alleged, 1.
Phil. and Act. 20. concluding thus: Wherein most manifestly it is proved,
Ierome^s observation.
that a Bishop and a priest are the same: etc. Yet, even there also he
determines the matter, saying: But that afterward, one was chosen which
should be placed before the residue, it was done for the remedy of schism,
least every one drawing the Church of Christ after him, should break it.
For, also at Alexandria, even from Mark the Euangeliste, unto Heraclas and
Dionisius Bishops, the priests did always name the Bishop, one chosen from out
themselves, whom they placed in a higher degree, even as if an army should
choose a Cheftaine. Or that Deacons should choose from out of them, him whom
they knew to be industrious and call him Archdeacon. For, what does a Bishop,
that a priest does not, except it be the giving of Orders?

By which it appears, that howsoever the names were taken indifferently, and
as all one, at the first original of them, for a while in the Apostles time:
The observation of Ieromes sentence of Bishops original.
though there were no institution of the Lord, for the change hereof: yet, as
it was done for a most excellent and necessary cause; so it was done in the
time of the most of the Apostles, even S. Paul and S. Peter and many other of
the Disciples, as yet living: Mark deceasing (as the same Hierome notes) in
the 8. year of Nero: Yea, if we shall consider Ieromes words further: we shall
find this change both before, and also fully confirmed, and begun
universally to be practiced in the Apostles times. And even there also, where
he alleges all these selfsame examples and testimonies out of the
Scripture, to the contrary of yt, which these our brethren and all on the other
side, at this day allege therein. As Phil. 1. Act. 20. Heb. 13. 1. Pet. ^.
even as though S. Hierome had led them to these places. And his words are
their own conclusion. Therefore a priest is the same that is a bishop, and
before that by the instinct of the Devil, studies (or factious pertakings)
were made in Religion, and that it was said among the people, I am of Paul, I
am of Apollo, but I of Cephas: the Churches were governed by the common
council of priests, or pastoral Elders, ( for so Jerome takes the name
Presbiter, and not for such Priests, as only governed and were not Teachers,)
but after that every one did think, those whom he had baptized to be his, not
Christ's, it was decreed in all the world, that one of the priests being
chosen, should be set above the rest, unto whom all the care of the Church
should appertain, and the seeds of schisms should be taken away. And when
he has alleged (for proof, that Bishops and priests were first all one,) al
our brethrens examples aforesaid: he concludes again, saying: These, to this
purpose, that we might show, that among the ancients, priests were the same,
which all were bishops. But by little and little, that the plants of
dissensions might be plucked up: all the careful provision was given unto one.

As therefore priests know, Ieromes observation.
that they by the custom of the Church are subject unto him that is placed
over them: so let Bishops know, that rather by custom, than by the verity of
the Lords disposing, they are greater than priests. And that they ought to
govern the Church in common, following Moses, who when he had in his power to
rule the people of Israel alone, The Bishop among the Pastors, compared to
Moses among the Elders.
he chose 70. with whom he would judge the people. Here is your former
example also. Numb 11. but not as you allege it, that the office of the
Eldership in the one, is an imitation of the Eldership of the other, meaning
there the Ministers of the word and Sacraments. For, these offices are nothing
like: the one being mere temporal, the other mere Ecclesiastical. Neither
like your other, not Teaching Elders, as we shall after see. And yet, if they
were alike, it would clean beat down your aequality of dignity. For, though
Moses took these to be assistants in Government to him, yet were they not
equal to him, but his inferiors. And thus the Bishop should have his
assistant priests and Minister of the word and Sacraments, in preaching and
ministering the Sacraments, in ordeyning Ministers, and in making any
Ecclesiastical constitutions, and so, rule in common: but not that every
Minister, or those that were chosen to be assistants, should be hayle fellow
well met, equal and all one in dignity with him: or else there is no
imitation, but manifest breach of the example of Moses, and the 70. Elders, his
coadiutors in the burden of the government.

Thus equally in this controversy then, did Jerome bear him self, both to
the Bishops and to the priests, being himself a priest, and favoring their
cause, and pleading for them, so far as possibly he could. Neither would
these testimonies (being not taken by the way, but of set purpose thus set
down) be slightly considered For, (if we list not to be contentious) it may
be a notable pattern unto us, sith we see this controversy so hot, in
these ancient and holy Fathers days, that were nearer the time of the
original of this change then we are, what was their opinion (that were the
best learned, and holiest Fathers) thereon: and what reasons and resolutions
moved them thereunto; to be the more persuaded to follow their judgment: or at
least, to beware, how far we stir and move factions and scismes for the same,
as then Aerius and his sectaries did, to the disturbance of the Churches quiet
in those days. For our Brethren do still allege this sentence of Jerome
against Bishops; but they still pass over all those things that should open
the grounds, the causes, the meaning and all the necessary observations
thereof. Five things to be observed out of Ieromes sentence.


Now, out of this sentence of Jerome, first we may plainly see, that although
he say Bishops and priests were at the first all one: yet they were not so all
one, that they had any law or institution of God, so to remain all one, for
then could they never have been changed.

And therefore, being changed by these so holy and so ancient fathers, it is
apparent, that they al judged it, not to be any whitte of the substance of the
order and office, that they were all one: but a mere accessory and changeable
thing, to be made different, as the Church should see most expedient*

Secondly that this change was made, not only while the Apostles were alive,
but that it drew fast vponthe time, after that those factions, mentioned by S.
P. 1. Cor. 1, and 3. began to disturb the Church of Corinth. where it is said
Silas was ye Bish. and it may well be: for it is said of Silas, Act. 15.22. that
he was one of those, that the Apostles appointed to send to Antioch. (...), Men
that were principal Rulers among the Brethren. Whom, being left at Beroea,
Act. 17, 14. Paul being at Athe^s sent for, ver. 15 Who came unto him at
Corinth, where after these factions happened, it is little enough he was made
Bishop, being commended in the Scripture for such an able man, to be a chief
governor among his brethren. Neither is it unlikely, that he or some such
other was ordained there, where Jerome says the occasion thereof did spring.
But whosoever was there, or in other places, the first Bishop so ordained:
this change was not very late, ere it began in the Apostles times.

Thirdlye, the occasion arising by reason of these factions, that sprang in the
time while the name Bishop was yet indifferent to every Priest or Pastoral
Elder, and while al among them were alike and equal in dignity, if that such
and so many factions arose so soon at that time, while the Apostles lived:
what would it have done, if this equallity had continued longer? What would it
have done, if it had continued after the Apostles days? If it had c^ntinued in
all the ages following? especially in these our factious and licentious times?
When the very beginning to renew this equality by Aerius, in the time of these
so reverend fathers, did breed such troubles in the Church of God, as scarce
Theodoret, Epiphanius, S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, Chrysostom, Hierome, and
other holy and learned men, could express. And it is likely, if it were now
admitted, and that all were reduced to that first equallity of name and
dignity, that we should now be cumbred with no factions? When as the very
motion of it brings withal in question, so many points of question, and it is
so eagerly urged, and so peremptorily cried upon, as though all discipline were
lost, all doctrine professed in vain, yea, we are no true Church of Christ,
without it? If the beginning to reduce it, make us thus to leave the battle
of the Lord against the open enemy, and fall to biting and defacing thus one
an-other, that are brethren: verily (I fear) were it set up again, we should
find far more perilous factions in these days, then ever those fathers
either felt or feared, when they first made this ordinance.

And as of the occasion, so, of the end wherefore, I (fowrthly) note on these
words of Jerome, that the cause why they did it was good, and necessary. It was
not directed to any tyranny, to any pride* 4. The good and necessary end and
effect thereof.
to any ambition, or to any ill purpose, but clean contrary. Especially, to
pull up those factions that were bred: and to prevent, that other should not
so easilye spring, and spread in the Church of Christ. To which good purposes,
nothing in very deed is better, than to have one in moderate order, without
oppression and usurpation, to be over and under another. As we see how it was
even at that time in Jerusalem, when factions and questions began to arise, and
that they could not decide them at Antioche, and other places, where this
equallity yet remained, when they came or sent unto Jerusalem to the Apostles,
those that were the pillars and chief among their fellow Apostles, did call
them and all the Elders of the Church together. Which they could not have done,
had they had before no superior authority over them. Neither read we of any
given them, at any time after they were assembled. And therefore, it plainly
argues (though it be not plainly set down) that their superior authority
was standing and continuing in them. By the orderly direction and determination
whereof, all their controversies and affairs were the speedilier dispatched,
and the easilier composed, and they afterward continued the freeer from all
such factions. But who did that among them, and in what manner, we shall see
afterward.

Lastly, I note upon these words of Jerome, that these considerations and
causes did so move them, that it was liked generally on all sides. 5. The
approbation of it.
Neither any Pastor did refuse (in respect of the public benefit offered to
the Church) to become an inferior, to leave their equallity, and surrender
their title of Bishop unto one, that should be chosen among them, and submit
themselves to his superior dignity. Yea, that it was so well liked that by
little and little, it was approved and decreed in all the world. Which, if it
were so: (as, why should we not credit these learned fathers affirmation, so
many hundredth years nearer to the doing of it, then we are?) then (no doubt)
but as it was in the Apostles times, which by many proves (I hope) I have
clearly euicted: Augustine^ rule of general obse^uations.
it must needs be done by the assent and approbation also of the Apostles: and
may safely be accounted among those things, whereof S. Augustine says Lib. 4.
cap. 24. de Baptismo c^ntra Donatistas. That which the universal Church does
hold, neither is instituted in the Councels, but has been holden always; is
most rightly believed, not to have been delivered, but by the authority of the
Apostles.

And more at large in his Epistle ad Ianuarium: Epist. 118. Which Ianuarius,
had moved a question unto Augustine, concerning the observation of Customs,
Rites, and Ceremonies. To whom Augustine answers saying: Augustine his rule.
to those things that thou have demanded of me, etc. First therefore, I will
that thou hold, that which is the head of this disputation: that our Lord
Jesus Christ, even as he speaks in the Gospel, has set us under a gentle
yoke, and a light burden. Whereupon he has bound together the society of
the new people, with Sacraments in number most few, in observation most
easy, in signification most excellent. As is baptism consecrated in the name
of the Trinity, the communicating of his body and blood: and if there be any
other thing that is commended in the Canonical Scriptures. Those things
excepted which burdened the servitude of the old people, according to the
congruence of their heart, and of the prophetical time, and which are read in
the five books of Moses. But those things that are not written, but that
being delivered we keep, which are indeed observed throughout the whole
world: are given to be understood, that they are to be retained, as either
of the Apostles themselves, or of plenary (or general) Counsels (whose
authority is most hole-some in the Church,) they are commended or decreed
upon. As, that the passion of the Lord, and the resurrection, and the ascension
into heaven, and the coming of the holy Ghost from heaven, are celebrated. And
if any such other thing shall occur, which is kept of the universal Church,
whither soever it spread abroad it self. As for other things, which are varied
by Coasts of Countries, and by regions; as is that, that other fast on the
Satterday and other not: other every day communicate the body and blood of the
Lord, other do receive but certain days: somewhere no day is left of, in
which there is not an offering made, somewhere on the Satterday onele, and the
Lords day; somewhere only on the Lords day. And if any such other like
thing may be noted, this whole kind of things, has free observations.
Neither any discipline in these things is better to a grave and prudent
Christian, then to do after that sort, after which he shall see the Church do,
unto the which he shall happen to come. For that, which is enjoined, neither
against the Faith, nor yet against good manners; is to be holden
indifferentlye: and to be kept according to the company of them, among whom men
live.

So that, according to this fatherly advice and sound judgment of S.
Augustine conferred with these and other circumstances, for the uniting of this
name Bishop unto one more peculierly, By this counsel of Aug. this superiority
is allowable.
then to other his fellow brethren, it being neither against the faith, nor
against good manners: though there had been no mention at all thereof, or of
that which might infer it, in the Scripture: and though diverse Countries
had one custom of Government and we another: yet were not ours to be
disobeyed, but strangers coming to us, are to conform themselves (as
occasion requires) to ours, and much more our selves not to despise the same.
But now, it being such an universal order, Bezaes conclusion against By.
that it has al-waies continued even from the Apostles times, and all over the
Church in every place, without alteration: nor any age or people have been
known, or can be named in all Christendom; where this pretended equality,
since the Apostles times has been maintained: but that there have been
Bishops, good or bad, that have been superiors, though not in the office of
their Order, yet in the office of their Dignitye: albeit we could not show in
the express scripture, the time, the place, the manner of the institution, and
beginning thereof: yet may we safely with S. Augustine conclude, that it was
not nor could be done, without the Apostles. Especially, when we can show,
(as we have showed, even in the plain words of the Scripture,) the very matter
it self, not among Priests in the old Law, among whom they had an high
Priest, over them, and all the Levites, Princes, and Rulers of the Levites; as
our Brethren reason, from the Prophecy of Esaias: that God would take of the
Gentiles, to be Priests and Levites; to fulfill this Prophecy, by proportions
of our Pastors and Doctors: but we stand (for the original practice of it)
on the manifest examples in the new Testament.

The Apostles, ( and that not in respect they were Apostles; for so they were
sent abroad, and not resiant in a place, but as they were resiant, Some
superiority among the Apostles.
and so Pastors,) had some higher then the residue; some that were Pillars and
chief among them.. And like-wise had the other brethren (...), those that were
guides and Rulers among them. And Timothy the Pastor of the Church at
Ephesus, ( as Calvin says,) was the chief Ruler ( says Beza) of all the
Pastors there. Yea, the very plain subscription of the Epistle it self,
calls him plat and plain, The first Bishop of Ephesus. Sith therefore,
both the gift of this superior dignity, and the application of the name: had
such ancient original in the Apostles times when it began; had such urgent
occasions where it sprang: had such godly purposes where-to it tended: had such
plausible allowance and authority of all the worlds decreeing to confirm it:
(among whom, I hope at least were some good men,) And lastly, sith it has
had such universal and continual practice of it, among whom also, such a
multitude of holy and learned fathers, have taken them this peculier title and
superiority: shall we now yield to Beza his proceeding on this example, Phil.
1. Bezain Phil, 1.
That this was the chief occasion of all the mischief following? Here-upon (
says Beza) began the Devil to lay the first foundation of his tirannie in Gods
church as though all the administration of the Church, Bezac^ wrong conclusion
against Bish
were together with the name translated unto one. All this, and that which
follows in Beza, hereupon (be it spoken with all dutiful reverence to so
worthy a man, and unworthy affection with in these matters, to be so carried
away) is unnecessary collected on the sequel here-of, howbeit directly,
indeed, no sequel at all. True it is, that of any never so good a thing, the
Devil indirectly may pick occasion to work mischief. But that can-not be
properly avowed, that it comes from thence. For (as S. James says) does a
fountain send out at one place sweet water and bitter? Sequels of direct and
indirect occasions.
and directly (as Christ says) a good tree brings forth good fruits. If
therefore, so good an actio^, done for so good purposes, have not had so good a
sequel: it is not to be imputed to the matter, but to other ill occasions
afterward. When the good householder had sowed wheat: the envious man, ( on
occasion of the servant sleeping) sowed Darnel. When God had sent Christ
into the world, to be the corner stone of the building, by the occasion of
man's malice, he was called, and was indeed to many, the stone of offense and
stumbling. But what of that, shall we take offense also? or, conclude, that
Christ is not the God of peace and love, because war and discord follows,
while Satan stirs occasions to make sects and divisions, where the Gospel
is preached and received? if that were proved to be the very necessary and
proper occasion; and those evils following, to be the direct and natural
sequeles: it were a good argumit ab effectis. otherwise, on every accident, you
may condemn all things.

But all this runs on this supposal, that the whole administration of the
Church, together with the name, is hereby translated unto one. If this sequel
did consequently follow: B^zaes mispre suppos^l
then indeed we might well conclude, that hereupon the Devil laid his first
foundation of his tyranny in the Church of God. But when Beza conts in with a
byowse presupposall, as though it were so: who seeeth not, he dares not, nor
indeed can say, if did or does so? may not every one still for all this
order, reteyne all the administration of his office, both in preaching Gods
word, and administering his Sacraments? neither is all government taken away
from although a moderate superior government be given of all to some: and not
yet of al in all the Church to one; but to one over some in several particular
Churches. And this orderly superiority, beneficial unto al ye church, injurious
and tirannous unto none, as on the foresaid originals it sprang even from the
Apostles: so, howsoever the wicked abused the same, yet very many most godly,
excellent, and holy fathers, being lawfully called thereunto, did accept it, and
acknowledge the state and challenge to be both lawful, and to be a high
calling, not so much of Superior dignity, as of Superior charge in governing
of Gods Church. We must rather look to the right end and v^e of a thing, the^
to the wrong occasions and abuse it.
And they traveled painfully, and faithfully and fruitfully in the function
thereof, God blessing and prospering their good labors. And lo, we that reap
the benefit of these Bish. travels look with an aw^e eye, rather on the hurt
which we surmise may come, or has come by sinister occasion, or by evil
possessors of this good dignity. And look not (which we rather should) with a
single eye on the marvelous good it may do, yea, it has done, and ever will
do, if they yt enjoy this superiority, do not abuse it, but use it according to
this first institution of it.

But now that we have seen Beza his censure on this example, Thefathers
interpretation.
Phil. 1. till he proceed from Bishops to Archbishops, etc. let us see what
these ancient holy Fathers Bishops theirselues, write also, otherwise then
Beza hereupon. And from them, come to the judgment of the best learned, of our
own late or yet living Brethren, concerning Bishops, and their exposition of
this place.

And first Jerome that before (as we have heard) cited among other this
testimony, The ancient Fathers judgments of the name Bishop.
Phil. 1. to show that Bishops and Priests were sometimes all one: Phil. 1.1.
when he commenteth of purpose thereupon, does say: Here we understand
Bishops for Priests. For there could not be many Bishops of one City. But
this is had also in the Acts of the Apostles. So that Jerome in both these
places, understands the word Bishop, to be not properly, but improperly
spoken. Ieronimus in Phil. 1.
And he rendereth the reason aforesaid: because that Paul writing this
Epistle, when he was prisoner at Rome, and so be-like after this order was
begun: There could not be many in one City, to whom this name properly
could be given.

And to show, that it was but spoken in a general and improper understanding,
our Brethren also will perhaps at length confess it. For whereas they
distribute all into four offices, and here are but only two reckoned up:
and Beza says, that Paul here sets down the most beautiful distribution
of the Church: It either follows, that then there must be but two offices,
Pastors, and Deacons, The name Bishop Phil..1.1. understood improperly.
taking Bishops and Pastors but for one: or else, if as Beza deuides it, he
understand by Bishops, who-so-euer are over the word and government, as
Pastors, Doctors, and Priests or Elders ( understanding them for Priest
Governors only) of the word to ouer-see, because they must be as watchmen
to enquire of the doctrine and manners of the flock committed to them. Act.
20.28. whom now and then by a general name he calls Priests or Elders, as
there: verse, 17. and 1. Tim. 5.17. And so including both these Lay Priests
whom you call Governors, and including Doctors, whom you distinguishe
likewise, from your Governors, and from your Pastors: it follows, that the
word Bishop here, and also in other places, Act. 20. is not taken properly,
but in a general sense. And if this word Bishop here, be so properly taken,
that it comprehend neither these Lay Priests ( whom ye call Governors,) nor
yet your Doctors ( which ye make the first and chiefest officers) but only
Pastors, upon whom here ye treat distinctlie from the other: how is this the
must beautiful description of the parts of the Church, when neither of these
are mentioned? but belike there was no such most beautiful distribution of the
Churches offices, in the Church of the Philippians, in those days, as Beza and
our Geneua quoters did imagine. And you do well to reject this so general
understanding of the word, that Bishop and Pastoral Elder or Priest, were
here taken, and so still must be, for all one office.

Chrysostom writing on this place, Philip. 1. with the Bishops and Deacons:
Chysost. in Phil. 1.
what ( says he) is this? Were there many Bishops of one City? No. But so
he called the Priests. For at that time they did now and then communicate (or
parttake) in names, and a Deacon was called a Bishop. Wherefore writing to
Timothy he says fulfill thy Deaconship. When as he was a Bishop, for he
says unto him, because he was Bishop: lay hands hastily on no body, and
that, which was given to thee with the laying on of the hands of the
priesthood or Eldership. But Priests or Elders laid not their hands on a
Bishop. And again, writing to Titus, he says: For this cause I left thee in
Creta, that thou should ordain Priests (or Elders) in every City, as I
appointed thee, if any be blameless the husband of one wife, he speaks of
a Bishop, and when he had said these things, he straight ways this sets
under it: for a Bishop must be blameless as the steward of God. Not froward.
Therefore, even as I have said, Priests in the old time were both called the
Bishops and the Deacons of Christ. Whereupon now also the most part of Bishops
do write: To his consenior (or fellow Elder) to his Comminister (or fellewe
minister): Howbeit, for all that, every one has his own name severally by
himself, given unto him, be he either Bishop, either Priest. What can be
plainer spoken than this? that here, and in the other places by our Brethren
quoted, to prove, by the indifferent taking now and then of the names and the
offices that they were equal and all one; it is not so meant, but yt these names
were there taken improperly: whereas properly they are separate, and neither
all one, nor equal. And that also is here proved by good reasons alleged for
the difference of the offices in the matter.

Theodoretus in Phil..1.
Theoderet likewise upon this place, writes thus: He sends to all at once,
as well to those that had received the Sacerdotall priesthood, as to those
that were fed of them. For he calls them that were vouchsafed in baptism,
Saints. But the Priests or Elders he calls Bishops. For at that time they
had baothe names. And that also the story of the Acts declares. For when S.
Luke had said, that the divine Apostle had called to Miletum the Elders of the
Ephesians, he tells also the things that were spoken to them, for says
says he, look to your selves, and to the whole flock, in which the
holie-Ghost has placed you Bishops, to feed the Church of Christ. He named
the same men both Priests and Bishops. So also in the Epistle to blessed Titus:
therefore have I left thee at Creta, that thou should by the Cities ordain
Priests or Elders, as I have disposed unto thee* And when he had told what
manner of men they ought to be, that are ordained: he adds under it, for a B.
must be without crime, eue^ as the steward of God. Moreover, he shows this
here also: for he joins Deacons unto Bish. when as he had made mention of
Priests. Otherwise it could not be, that many Bishops should be the Pastors
of one City. Whereupon it comes to pass, to wit, that they were Priests, who^
he called Bishops. But he called in his Epistle the blessed Epaphroditus their
Apostle. For your Apostle (says he) and the helper of my necessity. Therefore
he plainly taught, that the Episcopal dispensation was committed unto him,
when as he had the appellation of Apostle. Thus also plainly says
Theodorete, that although the other Pastoral Elders were called by the name of
Bishops, yet the matter which he calls the Episcopal dispensation, was
committed over all the other but to one.

And with these accords Theophilactus, saying: Theophilactus in Phil. 1.
He calls the Priests Fellow-bishops, for there were not many Bishops in
one City, for as yet the names were notdistincte, but that also Bishops were
called Deacons and Priests. For writing to Timothy being a Bishop, fulfill
(says he) thy Deaconship, that is, thy Ministry. And again, that which was
given thee by the laying on of the hand of the Eldership, that is, of the
Bishops: for priests or Elders did not ordain a Bishop. Again, Priests were
also called Bishops, as those that look also upon the people, and bore a care
of them, to cleanse, and to lighten those whom it was needful. Thus does
Theophilact with all the other agree, that it was but a partaking of the name
improperly, as the name of Deacon was used, till they were more properly
distinguished. But all that while, the matter and office was not so confounded,
as one or equal, but distinct and one Superior and inferior to another.

And howsoever Ambroses judgment on these words, Ambr. in Phil.
is lightly cast off by some of our Brethren, because he takes these words,
with the Bishops and Deacons, not for such Bishops and Deacons, as were among
the Pphilippians to whom he wrote, but for himself and Timorhie and other
with them: yet is he plain also of this opinion with the residue. For ( says
he) he wrote to the people: for if he had written to Bishops and Deacons, he
would have written to their persons, and he should have written to the Bishop
of that place, not to 2. or 3. even as also he wrote to Titus and to Timothy.
So that he verily thought, there was but one Bishop of that place, to who^ when
he wrote, he expounded these words of S. Paul's salutation: with the Bishops,
etc. to be understood of joining himself and Timothy, etc. in the
participation of the grace and peace that he wished to them. Thus do the
ancient, holy, and most learned Fathers agree, and all other (that I read of)
before these, from the Apostles times, not only such as were Bishops
their-selues, The Churches practice.
but also all other Pastors and Doctor^ that the name of Bishop, was properly
peculier but to one Pastor, that had superior dignity, government, and
authority, over the residue of the Pastors in the Churches, Cities, and
Diocesses, assigned to them:

And that this was the practice of the primitive Church, from the Apostles
age, The universal practice of the primitive Church.
universally both for times and places: the Fathers own testimonies conferred
with the ancient Ecclesiastical hystories, do sufficiently record. Which,
as we have seen it begun, in the practice among the Apostles and Disciples
themselves, at the first Metropoliticall or Mother Church of Jerusalem: so, for
confirmation thereof, Eusebius lib. 2. cap. 1. cites Clement of Alexandria,
Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 1.
to prove that James was Bishop there. Even this self same James, I say, (
says Eusebius) which of the auntientes was surnamed the Just, by the
worthiness of his virtues, and privilege of his notable life. The stories
have declared that he obtained the first seat, James B. of Jerusalem by the
testimony also of Clem. Alex.
(or, was the first, which received the seat) of the Church, that is at
Jerusalem, as Clement he speaks not of Clement Bishop of Rome, whose works
are manifestly forged and fathered in his name; but he speaks of Clement
Priest, Doctor, and Pastor in Alexandria) in his 6. book of Informations,
affirms, saying: For Peter (says he,) and James, and John, after the
ascension of our Savior, although they were preferred before all,
notwithstanding they claimed not to themselves, the glory of the Primacie,
but they ordain James that was called the Just, the Bishop of the Apostles.

Which words of Eusebius, living within three hundred years after Christ,
are yet not so much, as this testimony that he alleges out of Clemens
Alexandrinus, that lived in the very next age to the Apostles, and therefore
could not lightly be deceived in this point. Neither does he only ascribe
unto James, the Episcopal office, but he calls either him the first, or, the
seat the first, as a Primacie, over all his fellow Apostles, Ieroms
testimony of Egesippus for James to be B. of Ierus.
and Brethren in that seat. Whose Bishoprike is also confirmed by Jerome,
citinge Egesippus, more ancient than Clement thereunto.

Eusebius reckons up diverse Bishops of Jerusalem, succeeding James, till he
come to Narcissus and Alexander, who were both at once Bishops there, and it is
noted for a rare example, and fell out when this Clement came thither. Hieron.
in catalog. illustriu^ virorum.
Of whom, and of this Alexander, says Hi^rom in Catalog. illustr. virorum.

There is extant an Epistle of Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, who together with
Narcissus ruled the Church, etc. In the end of which Epistle he sets down
these writings. My Lords and Brethren, I have sent over unto you, Clem.
Alexander.
by Clement the blessed Priest (or Elder) a man renowned and approved, whom ye
also know, and now ye shall more fully reacknowledge. Who when he came
thither according to the providence and visitation of God, he confirmed and
increased Gods Church. Which shows, that this Clement being Presbyter, as
also Jerome calls him a Priest or Pastoral Elder of the Church of
Alexandria, and yet with all (says he) (...), The offices that our Brethren
make al one, were distinguished: and those that they distinguished, were al one.
the Doctor of the teaching or Catechizing, in the Ecclesiastical school of
Alexandria: it appears, that those offices, which our Brethren make to be
distinguished, were not distinguished. And these offices that they make not
distinguished but all one, were distinguished. For, Clement was a Doctor or
teacher, and yet withal, a Presbyter, a Priest, or Pastoral Elder. And though
he were a Pastoral Elder, yet was he no Bishop. Neither was his Pastoral
Eldership so tied to one place or fold, but that he traveled abroad, to
enstruct and confirm other Churches. Nevertheless, both in other and in his
own, Pastors teaching in other Churches.
though otherwise for learning, he was one of greatest authority in his age:
yet lived he in all Ecclesiastical obedience under his Bishop Demetrius, who
made him Priest or Elder in that Church, and also Doctor or public teacher in
that school; and before him the famous Pantaenus, Clementes Master; and after
him, Origene, Clementes Scholar, were all under Demetrius this Bishop of
Alexandria. And to prove that this Clement flourished under Commodus within
80. years after the Apostle Saint John: not only Eusebius testifies Libr. 6.
cap. 11: but Clement himself infers it. Strom. lib. 1. saying: This book
is not for ostentation, with scripture gathered together artificially: but
monumentes, (the help of forgetfulness) are gathered unto me, for mine old
age. Verily, an image and shadow of those manifest and lively speeches, How
near Clem. Alex. that testifies of James his Bishopric lived to the
Apostles.
which I was vouchsafed to hear, of those blessed men, that indeed were of
highest price and estimation. The one of them was in Greece an Ionian, the
other in Greece the great (or Apulia.) The one was from Coelesyria, the other
from Egypt. And other there were from the East, and one of those an Assyrian,
the other an Hebrew in Palestine, of high pedigree. But when I light upon this
last, albeit in power he was the first, I stayed in Egypt, hunting after those
things that were hidden from me, even as a very Be of Sycilia, sucking the
flowers of the Prophetical and Apostolical meadowe. He ingendreth a certain
sincere and incorrupt knowledge, in the minds of them that heard him; but he
was such an other, as indeed kept the true delivery of the blessed doctrine,
even straight from Peter, and James, and John, and Paul, and the holy
Apostles, the son receiving them of the Father, (howbeit, few sons are
like their Fathers) these have by the will of God come also to us, who will lay
up those Apostolical seeds, that we have received ceaued of our ancestors.
Pantanus.


Eusebius testimony of Pantaenus D.
Wherein, as this ancient Father declares his synceritie and diligence, in
following the Apostles: so withal, how near he was to the Apostles times,
and so notable a scholar picked out such notable Masters, but the Master,
whom in the Doctorship he succeeded was Pantaenus.

Of which Pantaenus, Eusebius says, Lib. 5. cap. 10. ( to whom also accords
Jerome) when at that time Pantaenus the most Noble man in all learning, had the
rule of the Ecclesiastical School, and of the office of a Doctor, from whence
the custom with them from the old time was delivered ( as Jerome also says,
according to an ancient custom in Alexandria, were Doctors always from Mark
the Evangelist) it remains yet until this day that in the Ecclesiast.
School, there are to be had Doctors of divine Scriptures, ( or, as we call
them, Doctors of divinity) most choice men in science and learning. Of this
office therefore, the man of whom before we spoke, was counted a certain
author, and a chiefetaine very famous: as one that also among those
Philosophers, which are called the Stoikes, had before that time nobly
flourished. Whose study toward God word and great love is reported to be so
much, that of the feruencie of faith and devotion, he went to preach the
Gospel to all the Nations that are hidden in the uttermost corners of the
East, and that he came to the hither India, preaching the word of God.
Evangelists.
For there were yet in those days many Evangelists, who according to the
imitation of the holy Apostles, traueling in diverse parts of the world, by
the grace of God, and the virtue of their mind, brought the word of God, and
the faith of Christ, to every of those Nations that knew it not.

Whereupon say the Centuriographers, It happened that the Indians moved with the
renown of the Church of Alexandria, and perhaps with the fame of the same
Pantaenus, did by certain their legates, request of Demetrius the Bishop of
that Church, that he would send a Doctor fit and sound, which might more
fully instruct them, in the true doctrine of the Gospel, and win other unto
Christ, that as yet were rude and ignorant of the Gospel. What is done?
Pantaenus the moderator of the holy school in his Church, is before all chosen
of Demetrius, and appointed unto that vocation. Pantaenus here does not draw
back, nor is terrified with the labors and perilles: but foorth-with obeys
this vocation, as it were Gods vocation, and fetteth on the journey, although
it were long and sharp. To become after the Apostles, the Evangelist of the
Indians.

Thus are these Doctors, and Pastoral Elders, chosen, ordained, and appointed
by their Bishop, which in authority of learning, was far inferior to them,
but in authority and dignity of place, far their superior: yea, although
they were Evangelists, Bishops superiority.
yet were they subject to the Bishops.

And as this Bishop Demetrios, Doctors and Pastors under the B. government.
had this superior government over all the Doctors and Preachers in his time,
which was the 11. Bishop of Alexandria: even so had all before him. Who are all
said to rule and govern the Church, notwithstanding there were diverse
notable Doctors and Pastors, besides the Bishops in Alexandria, and had so
continued even from the very Apostles times, yea, from S. Mark himself, which
was the first planter of the faith of Christ among them, both Paul and Peter
being yet living. Hierome calls Mark, the Doctor of Alexandria, and says,
that Philo Indaeus had friendship with Peter and for this cause did also set
forth with praises, the Church of Mark, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 16.
the disciple of Peter, and his followers at Alexandria. Among which praises of
Philo Eusebius says thus: He describes diligently the degrees of them that
exercised the ecclesiast. functions, which excelled the one the other, also the
ministers of the Deacons. And finally the chief and principal honor of the
Bishops office.

And as it was thus, even from the Apostles times, in the Church of
Alexandria: so likewise was it in many other places. Polycarpus ( says
Hierome, Hieron. in catalog. script. eccl.
in Catalogo scriptorum Eccl.) the disciple of John the Apostle, being of him
ordained Bishop of Smyrna, (...), was Princeps (which is Ieromes own word)
the Prince, that is, the chief Prelate, or as we more moderately call it,
Policarpus primate of Asia.
the primate of all Asia. For he had many of the Apostles and them that had
seen the Lord to be his Masters, and had seen them.

Eusebius Lib. 3. cap. 36. says of Ignatius: Ignatius.
Moreover Ignatius notorious in the renown of fame, even to our times,
obtained the Bishoprike of Antiochia, by the second succession after Peter;
not that Peter was Bishop there; but that Peter being there, made Euodius the
first Bishop of Antioche, after whom succeeded this Ignatius, that calls
himself the Scholar or Disciple of Saint John. Which Ignatius going to his
Martyrdom writes thus in his Epistle to the Antiochians:

Remember the rightlye most blessed Euodius your Pastor, Ignatius ad
Antiochenos.
which was the first Bishop ordained unto you, even of the Apostles? And anon
after, speaking to the Priests or Pastoral Elders, that he left at Antiochia
behind him, he says: The Pastoral Elders had a Bishop their Governor.
Ye Priests or Elders feed the flock that is committed among you, until God
declare who he shall be, that shall be the Governor among you. As for me, I
now make haste that I may gain Christ. Let the Deacons acknowledge of what
dignity they be, and study to be unreprovable, that they may be the
followers of Christ. Let the people be subject to the Priests or Elders, etc.
And after he has saluted many, and done salutations from many, both
Bishops, Pastors, and Deacons, etc. that accompanied him: for, he was of high
estimation over all Asia: I salute him ( says be) which in my place shall
be-come your Prince, (Primate, or chief Prelate) whom I have also begotten in
Christ. Which he meant of Heron that did succeed him in the Bishoprike, who
was a Deacon in the Church of Antioche.

These Epistles, ( of what credit every thing contained in them is,) I will
not plead for them. How far the credit of Ignatius Epistles stretches.
But think verily, that there are some Popish foystinges crept into them, as
also is found out, in the works of other famous men. But, that the whole
Epistles should be utterly denied, or suspected, especially those that are
not only mentioned, but parts of them also word for word set down,
according to their manner, by other Ecclesiastical writers, both by Jerome,
that was very curious in finding out forgeries, and also by Eusebius, that was
within two hundred years of Ignatius: yea, Irenaeus that was Polycarpus
Scholar, to whom Ignatius writes one of these Epistles, and diverse other
ancient Fathers of great credit, make mention of some of the words
contained in them: it can not be that they should all be forged, especially
this point, for the distinction of the Bishops from Priests, or Pastoral
Elders, and the superiority of the Bishop over them, being concordant with
all the other writers. And especially, to be observed almost in every one of
these Epistles. In the Epistle ad Trallianos, he says: Ad Trallianos.
I know ye have an undefiled mind, and without deceit in perseverance, not
on doubtfulnesse, but on the possession of says, as Polybius your Bishop has
signified to me, who came to Smyrna by the will of God the Father, and of
Jesus Christ his son, by the woorking together of the holie-Ghoste, and did
so congratulate unto me, being bound in Christ Jesus, that in him I might
see all fullness. Receiving therefore him according unto GOD, I have by him
acknowledged your benevolence, finding you to be the followers of Jesus
Christ our Savior. Be ye subject to the Bishop as to the Lord, for he
watches for your souls, as he that shall give account to GOD. For which thing
ye shall seem unto me, not to live according to the flesh, but to live
according to Jesus Christ, who dyed for us, that we believing in his death,
might (by baptism) be made partakers of his resurrection. For it is
necessary that you should do nothing nor take ought in hand ( he means
concerning Ecclesiastical causes) with out the Bishop. But submit your
selves to the Priests (or Elders) as to the Apostles of Jesus Christ our hope,
in whom abiding, we shall be found in him. you must also therefore by all
means please the Deacons, Practice of Bishops superioritye.
which are for the Ministry of Jesus Christ. Eor they are not ministers in
meat and drink ( he alludeth to the Tables whereon they attended (but they
are the Ministers of the Church of God. Ye must therefore observe that which
they command you, even as if it were fire burning. As for them, let them be
such. And as for you, reverence ye them, even as the Lord Jesus Christ. For
they are the keepers of his place. The Bishop distinguished from the Priest.
Even as the Bishop is the form or type of him that is father of all. But the
Priests even as the assembly of God, and the conjunction of the Apostles of
Christ, etc. And again, after he has warned them to take heed of Scismes,
of Seducers, and those that are puffed up with pride: and exhorted them to
humility, he says, and yet reverence your Bishop, even as Christ, according
to which, the blessed Apostles have commanded you. For he that is placed
between the altar ( which word altar, is often used of the ancient Fathers
for the Lords Table, and is here meant, for the participation of the holy
Communion,) he is clean. For the which, obey your Bishop, and Priests or
Elders. For he that is placed without the altar, is doing somewhat without
the Bishop, the Priests, and the Deacons. He that shall be such an one ( that
is, excludes himself from the participation of the divine mysteries,
delivered by the Bishop, the Priests, and Deacons) is polluted in his
conscience, and is worse then an Infidel. For what is the Bishop, but one
holding a principality and power over them all, thus far forth, as
becomes a man to hold, that is made the follower of God according to virtue?
What is Priesthood or the Eldership, but a holy institution of a counselor
and confessor of the Bishop? What also are the Deacons, but the followers of
Christ, ministering to to the Bishop, as Christ to the Father, and working unto
him that clean and undefiled work, as S. Stephan to the most blessed James,
and Timothy and Linus unto Paul, and Anacletus and Clemens unto Peter.
Therefore he that shall be disobedient to these, shall be altogether without
God, and wicked, and contemning Christ, and an abaser of his ordinance. And in
the next Epistle of Ignatius, to the Magnesians: Howbeit, Ad Magnesios.
I deserved to have seen you by the worthy in God your Bishop Damas, and the
worthy in God, your Priests or Elders, to wit Bassus and Appollonius, and
my ghest Socion, whom I have nourished, because he is subject to the Bishop,
and to the Priests, in the grace of GOD, and in the law of Jesus Christ, and
it behooves you also not to contemn the age of the Bishop, and according to
God the Father, The Priests reverenced the Bishop.
to give him all reverence: according to which I have also known the holy
Priests to have yielded it him. Not thinking him to be contemned for the age
that appears in him, but in the wisdom of God to obey him. Sith that, not
the ancient in years are the wisest, neither the old men understand prudence,
Bishop of Rome.
but the spirit which is in men, etc. And in the next Epistle ad Tharsenses:
Ye Priests or Elders, be subject to the Bishop. Ye Deacons, to the Priests,
Ad Tharsenses. Ad Philadelphios.
ye people to the Deacons. And in the Epistle to the Philadelphians: Ye
Princes be subject to Caesar, or to the King. Ye Soldiers, to the Princes,
Deacons, and to the Priests or Elders, as to the administrators of the holy
things. But let the priests and the Deacons, and all the clergy, Our Priests
obey the B.
together with all the people, and with the soldiers, and with the princes,
yea, and with Caesar also, obey the Bishop, and the Bishop Christ, as Christ
the Father, and so is an unity kept by all. What can be plainer spoken, both
for the difference, and for the superiority of these ecclesiastical offices?
I urge not these Epistles, as approouing all things in them, nor auouching the
credit of them, and therefore pass over the residue, serving also to this
purpose. Neither yet dare I discredit them in all points, namely in this, for
the distinction of these three offices, Bishop, priests and Deacons: and for
the superiority of the Bishop, in any city over all the clergy there.
Because these things accord with all the other writers, and state of that age,
immediately following the Apostles.

In Asia also about the same time, was Papias, of whom Ieromie says: Papias
the hearer of John, Papias saint John's disciple, Bishop.
the Bishop of Hieropolis in Asia, and diverse other famous Bishops of that
age, of whom says Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 20, etc. At Antiochia about the same
time, Theophilus held the Bishoprike of the Church, The Bishops succeeding the
Apostles
being the sixth from the Apostles, where Cornelius was the fourth after Heron
(Ignatus successor) whom in the 5. degree Heron succeeded. At the same time
also was Egesippus holden famous, of whom we have spoken before. And
Dionisius Bishop of Corinthe, and Pimitus was the most noble among the Bishops
of Creta. Phillip also, and Apollinaris, and Melito, Musanus and Modestus. And
the cheifest of all, Iraeneus, of which men, most excellent monuments of the
Apostolical faith, and sound doctrine, are come even unto our age. Egesippus
in the first book of his Commentaries (where he sets down the sentence of
his belief, Egesippus testimony of the Bishops sincerity.
with most full proof) declares also this: that when he traveled to Rome,
having conferred in speech and amity, with the Bishops in all places, he
found them all Preachers and Teachers of one faith, and also in the Epistle
of Clement, written to the Corinthians, he mencioneth somthings that I thought
necessary to insert into this work. He says therefore: And the Church
(says he) of Corinthe, even until Primus the Bishop, whom (sailing to
Rome) I saw, The superitie of Bish. no alteration dissenting from the Lords
ordinance.
and abode with him at Corinthe many days, being delighted with the
sincerity of his faith: but when I came to Rome, I abode there, until Soter
succeeded Amcedus, and Eleutheims succeeded Soter. But in all these their
ordeinings, or in other things that I saw in other cities, all things were in
such sort, even as the law from of old had delivered, and the Prophets had
judged, and the Lord had appointed. Moreover, the said party records
certain such sayings, Bishops superiority.
also of the Heretics, that arose in his time. And after (says he) that
James called the Just, was martyred, even as the Lord also himself, bare
witness to the truth: Simeon the son of Cleopas, the uncle of Christ, was
by the divine election ordained Bishop, chosen of all, in regard that he was
the cousine of the Lord, The Bish. superiority no defiling of the church.
the Church then was called a virgin, because that as yet she was not
defiled with the undermining of the adulterous word. But one Theobatus, for
that he deserved the repulse of a Bishoprike, began even in the beginning to
disturb and corrupt all things, etc.

Here we see again by Egesippus, that lived in Iustines time, (not by the
suspected Egesippus, that we have, but by the fragments of the true Egesippus,
taken out of Eusebius,) another firm testimony, that James was Bishop of
Jerusalem, and Simeon after him. Yea Eusebius reckons up, lib. 4. cap. 5.25.
Bishops of Jerusalem, one succeeding another, from the Apostles times, until
that destruction of Jerusalem, under the Emperor Adrian; besides all the other
Bishops in other places; and yet, that the Church continued still undefiled.
So that, this superiority, was no defiling of the Churches discipline, but the
godly government of it, and (as Egesippus notes) even the appointment of the
Lord, being practiced and approved by the Apostles. And that all the
disturbance and corruption entered indeed (as Beza and our Brethren note) on
occasion of striving for this superiority: but yet, this superiority was not
the cause, but their diuilish ambition and pride, as in this Theobutus, and
Simon Magus, and Diotrephes, etc. who could abide no rulers over them, but
would themselves be rulers over others: and when they had repulses, then (as
the for dispraised the grapes) they brake out into schisms and heresies. How
corruption and disturbance entered about this superiority.
So that, this rather confirms this superiority, then makes against it. And
these godly Fathers, that gave not this offense, though other took it,
continued this order of superiority in Bishops, and were the greatest
defenders of Gods truth and Church, against these Scismatikes, Heretics, and
disturbers of it.

But now at length ( says Eusebius. proceeding ca. 23.) we must come to the
mencioning of the blessed Dionysius Bishop of the Church of Corinth, whose
learning and grace that he had in Gods word, not only those people enioied,
when he took upon him for to govern: but those also that were far off, to
who^ he gave his presence by his Epistles. There is extant an epistle of his*
concerning the Catholic faith, written to the Lacedaemonians, in the which most
florishingly, he treats of peace and concord And an other to the Athenia^s,
wherein he moves the^ to belief of the Gospel, and stirs up the
sluggish, and withal reprooueth certain, as almost fallen from the faith, when
as their B. Publius had suffered martyrdom. And also he mencioneth Quadratus,
that in the Sacerdotall Priesthood succeeded Publius. And he tells, how that
by his labor and industry, a certain reviving or quickening warmth of faith
was renewed in them. Publius and Quadratus Bishops of Athens.
Here this Quadratus is said by this Dionysius, to succeed Publius in
Sacerdotio, in the Sacerdotall Priesthood, not that the Priesthood and the
Bishoprike, was equal and all one, for then he had not succeeded him, being a
Priest or pastoral Elder in Publius time. But that which Ruffinus translateth,
in Sacerdotio, Eusebius himself calls (...), And Publius that was Bishop
before him, he calls (...), This Quadratus was also a Prophet, as says
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 37. For having reckoned up Ignatius and Heron, that
governed the Church of Antiochia, he says: Among them flourished Quadratus,
who togithee with the daughters of Philip, was most famous in the grace of
prophesieng, and also many other Disciples of the Apostles were alive at that
time. Who upon the foundations of the Church laid by them, did build up most
worthy buildings, increasing in all things the preaching of the word of God,
and scattering more abroad through all the earth, the wholesome seeds of the
kingdom of Heaven. To conclude, many of them (kindeled with more fervent
desire of the divine Philosophy) did consecrate their souls to the word of
God, filling up the wholesome precept of perfection, that distributing their
goods to those that had most need, they might be made ready to preach the
Gospel, if that perhaps they should preach in any provinces, where the name
of the faith was not known. And laying among them the first foundation of
the Gospel, and committing the Churches that they had founded, to some
certain chosen of them to the office of governing the Church, that they
themselves hastened to other nations, and to other provinces, and exercised the
office of Evangelists, so long as likewise the effect of divine tokens, and the
grace of the Holie-ghoste, did follow, as it did the Apostles in the
beginning. Insomuch, that at one preaching, whole peoples were brought to the
worship of the divine religion, and the hearers faith was not more slow, then
were the Preachers words. But because it is impossible to reckon up every one
of them, who were after the first successions of the Apostles, in the
Churches that are through-out the world; either the princes, ( he means the
Bishops that were the chief Ecclesiastical Governors, or primates of the
Church) or the Evangelists, or the pastors: let it suffice to have only
remembered those; the monuments of whose faith and preaching, set down in
books, have come even to us, as of Clement, and Ignatius, and of other, of
whom we have before made mention.

Thus (as Ruffinus translates him) says Eusebius there, on occasion of this
notable Bishop Quadratus, whereby (nothing withal the distinction of all these
Bishops, to be the chief rulers, over the Pastors, even from the first
planting of the faith, and founding of the Churches throughout the world: it
plainly appears, that this Quadratus was long before he was Bishop, a
pastor of the word, both at Athens, and at Corinthe, as the Centuriographers
note, saying: It is out of controversy, that he was at Athens, and there with
singular faith and dexterity, delivered the Evangelical doctrine. But
whether he were also an Athenian by country, or in what place, specially in
the beginning, whether he taught in the Church or in the School, it is very
obscure. That he was furnished with learning, with faith, with an excellent
liberty of reprehension, and with all gifts that beseem a successor of the
Apostles, is clear, both by the testimony of Eusebius, and by the things
themselves that he did. Yea, he was famous in the gift of prophecy, as also
at the same time were Philips daughters, It appears: that before he entered
into the function of a Bishop (although we may not avouch that for certeintie)
he had offered his writing for the Christians unto Hadrian, and thereupon
gotten himself an excellent fame. By this (also) it is most manifest, that
Publius was alive Quadratus continued under him, and was not Bishop although he
were so famous a Priest or pastoral Elder, yet so long as this there nor his
equal. So that, although a Bishop was a Priest or pastoral Elder, yet was not
every such Priest, a Bishop, though otherwise he were never so famous a Priest
or Pastor.

But to return to Dionysius of Corinthe, in Eusebius lib. 4. cap. ^2,
Dionysius B. of Corinthu^ in the Apostles days.
And this he notes in that Epistle, that Dionysius the Areopagite, which being
instructed of the Apostle Paul, believed in Christ, according to those things
that are noted in the Acts of the Apostles, was of the said Apostle ordained
Bishop at Athens. And so reckoning up other Epistles of this Dionysius, and in
them commending Philip, Bishop of the Gortinians in Creta, and Palmus a Bishop
of Pontus: unto these ( says he) is joined another Epistle to the Gnosians, in
the which he warns and beseeches Pinitus their Bishop, that he should not
lay upon the necks of the Disciples, heavy burdens, nor impose a necessity
of a forced chastity upon his brethren, in the which the weakness of many
should be endangered. Whereby it appears, that he would have enforced the
Priests under him, to have absteined from marriage ( for it cannot be
understood, Philip Bish. of Gortinea, his superiority over the Pastors.
that he went about to have so enforced all the people) but as the papists
afterward did enforce the Priests, or pastoral Elders, whom he calls his
Disciples and his brethren. Which plainly argues (though he abused the
same) his superiority over them: for had they been his equals he could not
have done it. Next to whom, Eusebius reckons, Theophilus Bishop of
Antioche, an excellent writer. Whom Maximinus succeeded, Theophilus. Bishop of
Anti-chia^.
the 7 ( says Eusebius) after the Apostles, in the Sacerdotall Prieststood of
the Church of Antiochia. By which term again he means the Bishoprike, and
not the Pastoral Eldership or Priesthood. As shall yet more plainly appear,
even in the next example of Irenaeus, which was the most singular instrument
of God in all that age, a scholar of Polycarpus, Bishop of Smyrna, who after
coming to Lions in France, where living with Photinus their reverend Bishop,
Irenaeus the scholar of Polycarpus.
he was made Presbyter, a Priest, or pastoral Elder of that Church. And when
troubles grew in the East parts, about Montanus, Alcibiades, and Theodotus,
troubling the Church with a new kind of prophesiyng: which Montanus ( as
notes Eusebius. li. 5. cap. 16, was inflamed with too great a desire of primacie:
the Church of Lions sent Ireneus to them, to pacify the same. And by the
way, sent him also (says Eusebius, lib. 5. cap. 3.) to Eleutherius Bishop of
the city of Rome, warning him of the Churches peace. Who also commended (to
the foresaid Bishop of the city of Rome) Irenaeus, being then as yet a priest
or Elder of the Church of Lions. Yielding a testimony of his life, which the
words under written do declare: we wish you (O Father Eleutherius) in all
things, and always in the Lord, well to fare We have requested our brother and
fellow Irenaeus, to bear these writings unto you, whom we beseech that you
will have recommended, as one that is zealous of the Testament of Christ. For
if we knew, that any man's degree would get and purchase righteousness, as in
that he is a Priest or Elder of the Church, which also this man is;
certeinelie we would have commended this chiefly in him. By which testimony,
it appears (especially being sent in such weighty affairs) that he was a
great and famous Preacher at that time, and yet was no Bishop in that Church.

Yea, it should seem, that he had been a Pastoral Elder, or Priest, a good
while before he was Bishop. For Eusebius in his Chronicle, makes the
persecution in France to be in the seventh year of Marcus Antonius, which
belike lasted long, and Photinus Bishop of Lions, being yet alive: How long
Irenaeu^ was Priest before he was Bishop.
and the prophesiyng of Montanus and his fellows, being in the eleventh year:
he is not reckoned there as Bish. till the 3. year of Commodus. So that he was
Priest before he was Bishop, about a dozen years by this rockoning, if not
more. Yea the Magdeburgenses, that say, there are which affirm, that in the
13. year of Marcus Antonius, he came to his Bishoprike, about the year of
our Lord 176. But under Commodus he flourished most of all. The contention
for Easter when it was hoattest, Eusebius in his Chronicle places, in the
fourth year of Seuerus, that is the year of our Lord 199: other refer it
to the fifte year of Seuerus.

Therefore, he should have been in the ministry, especially in his
Bishoprike, about 23. years. To the which, if we add the years of his
Priesthood or Eldership, perhaps it will run to 30. years. And so at the
least, by their computation, he was seven years a Priest, before he was
Bishop.

And this also did these Centuriographers confess before, saying: Photinus
being cruelly murdered in the persecution, for the confession of the truth
of the Gospel: Irenaeus hitherto being but a Priest or Elder in the same
Church, was substituted in his place. Whereby it is most evident, that
Presbyter and Episcopus, a Priest or Pastoral Elder, or minister of the word,
and a Bishop, were not all one and equal, in this holy and singular learned
Fathers days, so near unto the Apostles, that he was scholar to Polycarpus,
which lived in the Apostles times.

And even in Irenaeus time, he tells, that neither the gifts of healings,
nor of speaking with strange toongs, were yet ceased. Although (I grant) we
shall now and then find, where (when he speaks of Bishops) he calls them
Priests or Elders: as lib. 4. cap. 43: wherefore we must hearken to those
priests or Elders that are in the Church, those that have their succession
from the Apostles, as we have showed; who with the succession of the
Bishoprike, have received the certain gift of the truth, according to the
good will of the Father. And in the next chapter:

But those that are indeed of many believed to be Priests or Elders, and
serve their pleasures, The name of Priest and Bishop, now and then taken
indiff^rentlie.
and prefer not the fear of God in their hearts, but vex the residue with
reproaches, and are lifted up with the puff of sitting highest, and secretlye
do evil, and say, none shall see us: shall be reproved of the word, that
judges not according to glory, nor looks on the countenance, but on the
heart, etc. From all such therefore we must absteyne, but cleave unto those,
that (as we have said) keep both the doctrine of the Apostles, and the
sound word, with the order of their Priesthood or Eldership, and express a
conversation without offense, to the information and correction of the residue,
etc:

Such priests or Elders the Church nourishes, of whom the prophet says:
And I will give thee princes in peace, and thy Bishops in righteousness.
Although in these and such like places of Irenaeus, the word both Priest and
Bishop, may be taken, the one for the other indifferently: yet does not this
debar, but that as Irenaeus himself was a Priest, for a while, before he
were a Bishop: so lib. 3, cap. 3. he there speaks, all of the succession,
until ^is time, of the Bishops of the Church of Rome, that cannot be
understood of every Priest there.

Bishop of Rome.
And indeed among all other that were Bishops, I have cheeflie forborne the
naming of these, not so much for any corruption in this point, that at that
time was in them, more than in other Bishops, ( for I take them rather to have
been as sincere as any of all the other) but that their successors since those
times, upon the honor for their virtue and sincerity given to them, of this
first age, and for the dignity of the place, and for the number of them that
then were martyrs there, and with-all, for the memory of Paul and Peter,
supposed there also, to have suffered martyrdom, and to have established the
Church there, and to have ordained a Bishop also over them: because (I say)
their successors waxing insolent, and abusing all these good occasions, have
also abused the memory and names of those good ancient Bishops of Rome, with
a number of forgeries fathered falsely on them: I have therefore mentioned none
of them. But because Ireneus ( as they were then the mirrors of other Churches,
and Bishops excelling in synceritie of doctrine, The succession of the Bishop
of Rome, till Ireneus time.
in good order of discipline, and integrity of life) brings in all the
Bishops of that see, until his time, to confute the new devises of the
heretics errors, by their constant continuance in the truth: I will therefore
also set down, some part of Ireneus words, for our further confirmation of
this matter.

The tradition ( says he) therefore of the Apostles, is made manifest in all
the world. It is present to behold in the Church, for all that will here
the truth. And we have to reckon up them, which have been ordained Bishops
in the Churches from the Apostles, and the successors of them, Ireneus lib. 3.
cap. 3.
until our days. Who have taught no such thing, neither have known how these
men doat. For if the Apostles had known any such hidden mysteries, which they
taught those that were perfect by themselves and privily: they would most
especially have taught them unto those, to whom they committed the Churches
themselves. For they would have them to be very perfect and unreprovable in
all things, whom they would also have to be their successors. Delivering to
them even their own places of maistership that they had, who behauing
themselves without fault; great profit might come thereon; but offending,
great calamity. How beit, because it is very long in such a volume as this,
to reckon up the successions of all Churches: therefore of that Church whith
is the greatest, and most ancient, and known to all to be founded and
ordained, of the two most glorious Apostles, Peter and Paul, declaring that
tradition that it has of the Apostles, and faith published unto men, coming
even unto us by the succession of the Bishops, we confound all those, which by
any manner of mean, or by their own evil self liking, or by vain glory, or
by blindness and evil opinion, do gather otherwise than they ought to do.
For unto this Church, because of the more mighty principality, it is
necessary that every Church agree. That is, they that are faithful every
where, Whom Peter and Paul made Bish. of Rome.
in the which always of those that are every where, the tradition that is
from the Apostles, is kept. The blessed Apostles therefore, founding and
instructing the Church, delivered unto Linus the Bishoprike of administering
the Church. Of this Linus, Paul mentions in those Epistles that are to
Timothy: but unto him succeeded Anacletus, after whom in the third place from
the Apostles, Clemens obtained the Bishoprike. Who also saw the Apostles
themselves, and conferred with them, while as yet he had the preaching of the
Apostles sounding in his ears, and their tradition before his eyes. For (not
he alone) many at that time were yet alive, that were taught of the Apostles.
Under this Clemens therefore, no small dissension falling out among the
brethren that were at Corinth, the Church which is at Rome, wrote most forcible
letters to the Corinthians, gathering them together unto peace, and repayring
their faith, and declaring the tradition that they had even of fresh received
from the Apostles. Which tradition declared, that there was one God Almighty,
the maker of Heaven and Earth, the former of man, who brought on the world the
general flood, who called Abraham, who brought the people out of the land of
Egypt, who spoke unto Moses, who disposed the law, and sent the Prophets, who
has prepared fire for the devil and his angels. That this GOD should be
declared of the Churches, to be the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, they that
lift may learn, even out of the Scripture it self, and understand it to be
the Apostolical tradition of the Church: sith that it is a more ancient
Epistle then these are, which now teach falselie and feign, that there is
another God above: the Demiurgus (or speaker to the people,) and the maker of
all these things that are. But to this Clement succeeded Euaristus, and to
Euaristus, Alexander, and then Sixtus, the sixte, ordained from the Apostles,
and from him Telesphorus, who most gloriously suffered martyrdom. And then
Higinus, after him P^us, after whom Anicetus: but when Soter had succeeded
Anicetus: now in the twelfe place from the Apostles, Eleutherius has the
bishoprike. By this ordeining and succession, has the tradition and
publication of the truth, which is from the Apostles, come unto us.

Thus says this ancient father Irenaeus, of the Bishops of Rome, from the
Apostles times, until his days. Which sentence, How the Papists wreste this
sentence of Ieromes.
howsoever the Papists snatche thereat, to abuse the simple with the name of
tradition, of succession, of agreement with the Church of Rome, of Peter and
Paul as the first Bishops there, and as the head and principal Church of all
other: as it makes nothing for them in any of all these things; so
notwithstanding for this point, that all Priests or pastoral Elders are not
equal, but that one more peculierlie then the residue, called the B. of that
church, had a superior and especial government of the same, Bishop of Ro^me.
though not absolute and tyrannical, yet, in jurisdiction above the rest of
his brethren, and fellow priests or pastoral elders there: This superiority no
matter of unwritten and necessary doctrine or tradition.
and that this was so ordained of the Apostles, and so continued from them till
Irenaeus time: is by this testimony of Irenaeus, as clear as any thing can be:
that it makes no whit for any popish tradition, either of doctrine or of
discipline necessary to salvation, besides the manifest published and written
word of God: if a man would wish he cannot find a better place then this in
all the fathers: For all the papists urging and writhing of the same. And
therefore this argues, that this episcopal superiority was then accounted, to
be no such unwritten and necessary doctrine, but a matter of well ordered
government, practiced usually in the Apostles times, and ordained by the
Apostles in many places, How far and wherein Irenaeus pleads on succession.
and sufficiently apparent in the scriptures.

And as for the succession that Irenaeus speaks of: true it is, that hi^
fetches it from the Apostles, and in a plain line without interruption till
his time but he neither makes a general and perpetual rule thereof, nor
stretches it any further then he did reckon it, nor did, nor could make
promise of further continuance, nor stands on that time neither for the time
sake, nor for the persons sake that did succeed: but only and altogether for
the doctrine, which is the tradition that he speaks of, and in respect that
they succeeded one after another, The B. of Romes plea in these days.
not so much, in the place as in the doctrine, without alteration or
interruption of the same, for which cause he mencioneth the succession of them.
But now, whereas the Bishops of Rome proceed further then these here reckoned
up, to th^se that afterward added any other doctrine, besides that which the
Apostles in the scripture did deliver, or any other tradition superstitious and
hurtful, or any other discipline, as necessary to salvation: this place of
Irenaeus does nothing in the world help them: and they alleging this place in
such a general sort, Cou^terfeit works in Clements name.
do manifestly wrest it, and abuse Irenaeus, and all those that believe them,
on the credit of this ancient Father. Y^^, this place of Irenaeus, if it were
to be measured no further then the personal succession of the B. does not only
ouerthr^w that succession, which they pretend from Peter to Clement, but also
the works that go in Clement^ name to be mere counterfeit. Yea, this
succession has had iarring about the reckoning of it, even in Ieroms days, who
says in his catalogue, that Clemens was the fourth B. of Rome after Peter, for
the 2. was Linus, the 3. Anacletus. Although the most of the latin writers
think Clemens was the 2. after Peter, and Hierome took this opinion from
Eusebius, and Eusebius ( as him self confesses) from Irenaeus. But none of
them reckoned Cletus in this number, which Dammasus, Pletina, Onuphrius, and
others do. So intricate and doubtful is also the very personal succession
of these Bishops: and yet all these 3. later writers, agreeing with these
three auntiente Fathers, that Clemens did not succeed Peter: Pet. and Paul no
Bishops of Rome.
and all these three Fathers speaking also of Clemens works, and mentioning
this his notable Epistle to the Corinthians, which we have not, and not
mentioning any such works, as are now thrust upon us in Cleme^s name: it is a
manifest argument that the Bishops of Rome that now are, and long have bin, The
corruption of the B. of Rome. Irenaeus plea of succession broken off.
have altered the tradition that their predecessor Clement here alleged, and
have thrust out the true Clement, and brought in a false and conterfeit
Clement, and so, though they could agree upon the persons to be successors, yet
have they again broken the plea of this succession, that is here urged by
Irenaeus.

Neither does Irenaeus in pleading on this succession of these 12. Bishops (
whom our adversaries make 13.) reckon Peter or Paul themselves to have bin in
the number of the Bishops, as all our adversaries do, and the Popes make their
cheifest crake thereon, that Peter and Paul were the first Bishops there: but
only says Irenaeus: The Church of Rome was founded and constituted of them:
How Paul and Peter were founders of the Church of Rome.
as in the end of the same chap. he says the Church of Ephesus was founded by
S. Paul. And yet these words also, cannot be simply understood. For, albeit
Paul was more among them, even by the manifest tradition of the scripture (
which both Clement and Irenaeus here do plead upon) then can stand with any
truth, that Peter had such continuance there as Paul had: yet was the church
founded and constituted at Rome, before not only Paul did come among them, but
before he wrote his Epistle to them. Nevertheless, it may in some sense, be
safely said, that when as S. Paul came to Rome, and found the Church there,
neither such in multitude, neither such in ripeness of knowledge, as the same
went of them, and as he hoped of them, when he wrote vntothem Romans 1. ver. 8.
Your faith is published throughout all the world, and yet at S. Paul's first
coming to them, they were such a slender, and especially so raw a company, as
appears Act, ^8. Yet, since the text testifies, ver, 30 and 31. And Paul
dwelt two years full in his own hired house, Paul's continuance two years at
Rome.
and received all that came in unto him, preaching the kingdom of God, and
teaching those things that concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence,
no man forbidding him: all which was before his first arraignment at Rome, and
he had much more leisure and freedom after his deliverance and before his
second arraignment and condemnation: he might well deserve this commendation of
Irenaeus, to be the founder, constituter and instructor of that Church.

And as for Peter it might be well also, yt he came thither afterward, for there
is no likelihood of his being there before, when the Jews yt were so willing
to hear Paul said unto him, Act. 28. ver. 21.22. we never received letters out
of Jury concerning thee, neither any of the brethren that came showed or spoke
any harm of thee, but we will here of thee, what thou think, for as
concerning this sect, we know, that every where it is spoken against. Whereas if
S. Peter had bin among them, especially their B. it could not be, but they
should of* often and fully at least have heard thereof. But (as I said) it may
bre that Peter also traveled to Rome afterward, Peter not Bishop of Rome.
desirous to see the faithful there, and to do some good among them, as Saint
Paul also confesses of himself, that he likewise was desirous, saying,
Romans. 1. verse, 10, etc. Praying always in my prayers, The likeliehood of
the causes of Peter's coming to Room.
that by some mean, at the last, I might take a prosperous journey, one time
or another, to come unto you: for I long to see you, that I might bestow among
you some spiritual gift, that ye might be established. I would ye should
know (brethren) that I have oftentimes purposed to come unto you (and have
been let hitherto) that I might have some fruit also among you, as among
other of the Gentiles. And no less cause had Peter of the like good desire,
for those that were of the circumcision, of whom there were many at Rome, and
desirous to hear (as they called it, unto S. Paul) of that Sect. And many
godly men came to Rome, on such good desires, as Origin, etc. yea even Irenaeus
himself, that ioineth Peter with Paul in these actions: or else if Peter had
no will, (as Paul had) of traveling thither: yet it might be, that Peter being
of so great fame among the Christians, and accounted one of the chief pillars
of the Church, was upon some occasion, carried thither, (as Christ said)
whither he would not have gone, and brought prisoner to Rome ( as S. Paul was)
and many other were, though not recorded.

And most likely it is, that he suffered there also, from whence Neroes
persecution sprang. Which though it be not mentioned in the Scripture, yet the
Scripture mentions these words that our Savior Christ said to Peter, John.
21. verse. 28. and 29. Verelie, verelie, I say unto thee, when thou wast
younger, Christ's prophecy of Peter's death fulfilled.
thou girdedst thy self, and walkedst whether thou would: but when thou
shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and another shall girde
thee, and carry thee whither thou would not. This spoke he, signifiing by
what death he should glorify God. And therefore, since this was Christ's own
prophecy of Peter's death: this is most certain, that he died not a natural
death, but suffered martyrdom for Gods glory. And why should we deny,
without any proof, that which all the ancient Fathers, so near Peter's time,
on so great likelihood, have with one full consent, so universally affirmed,
that Peter suffered at Rome? If it be said, that this may confirm their
opinion, that say, Peter was Bishop there: although that follows not of any
consequence; yet sith that opinion arose not all of nothing, it is the more
likely, that he glorified God by his death there: at leastwise, that there he
had been, and not been idle nor unfruitful, in that Church: when they grew
so far, as to say, that he was there also the first Bishop. For my part,
(upon the deeper consideration of these things, being matters whereof the
dissent is no prejudice to our faith), I am not of their opinion, that say
Peter was never at Rome at all. I suppose rather, that both he was there, and
that for some time of abode, he taught there also: and that as Saint Paul
suffered there, which his words there written, 2. Timoth. 4.6, do in a manner
plainly declare, where he prophesied of his own death saying: for I am now
ready to be offered, Whom Peter and Paul made Bish. of Rome.
and the time of my dissolution is at hand: and as Ignatius and other famous
men, were fetched thither to suffer death; that even so, was Peter carried
thither, (to use Christ's own words) and that being at Rome prisoner, before
he dyed, Irenaeus ( who flourished about the distance of fourscore years
after Peter's death, which is no great time, and little more than many a man's
age, This testimony of Ireneus, was within 80. years after Peter's death.
and therefore it is very likely, that Irenaeus could tell somewhat of it)
did know, that Peter and Paul had both been there, and done both of them
so much good there, that he thought, he might worthily bestow these titles
upon them, that they were founders, constituters, and instructers of that
Church.

For although they were not both of them, yea neither of them, the Bishops of
Rome their selves: yet the Church there growing great, they had not only
instructed them: but set down such Ecclesiastical orders among them, as
whereby their Church was then governed. And as Ireneus says, Lin^ Episcopatum
administrandae Ecclesiae tradiderunt, they delivered the Bishoprike (or office
of the Bishop) for the administering of the Church unto Linus: not delivering
the same to Clemens, as that puppet which counterfeits himself to be Clement,
most impudentlie vaunteth in a forged letter to James Bishop of Jerusalem:
Clemens Epistles convinced.
that Peter made him Bishop of Rome: but this place of Irenaeus being
autentike, does notablye convince that shameless forgerie, and shameth all
the Popes and Papists, that build their succession, and many other
riffe-raffes thervpo^. Neither does Irenaeus ascribe the action of making
Linus the B. of Rome, to Peter alone: but to both the Apostles. And although
this be a good record of Ireneus, being almost of the same age, and living not
far from Rome, yea, having been himself at Rome, and so, searched out the
matter more exactly, or ever he durst put it in writing, and make argument
thereon to confute the adversaries: which, had it not been so, would quickly
have taken him tardie, and triumphed on the advantage: yet is not his
testimony alone, for he also might else (as he was in some greater points) be
by others deceived: but Eusebius. likewise cites other as ancient as Ireneus, to
the same purpose. For says he, lib. 2. Eccl. bist. cap. 25. Nero therefore, as
he professed himself an open enemy of the Godhead, and of godliness, so
before other things, he thirsted for the death of the Apostles themselves,
because they were the Capteines and standerd bearers among the people of God.
And verelye he beheaded Paul in the city of Rome it self. Eusebius
testimony of Pet. death at Rome.
As for Peter, he condemned him to the gybbet of the cross. I think it
superfluous to seek abroad other-where, the testimony of these things: sith
that, notable and most clear monuments of them, remaining even until this
day, do testify the thing to have been done. Notwithstanding a certain
ancient writer Caius, writes of these matters, Who, Witnesses of Pet. and
Pau. death at Room.
with Zephirinus Bishop of Rome, disputing against one Proculus, a
Cataphrygian, mencioneth these things, of the places of the Apostles. ( This
Zephirinus succeeded Victor whom Irenaeus reproved as we shall see afterward.
I ( says he) have the tokens of the Apostles, which I will show. Eusebius his
confirmation out of Caius
For, if ye go in the Kings high way, that leads to Vaticanum: or in the
way that leads to Ostia; you shall see the tokens pight, which being set on
either part, the Church of Rome is established. But that they suffered at one
time, Dyonisius Bishop of Corinthus, when he was placed in the City, An other
confirmation out of Dyonisius Bish. of Corinth.
and disputed of the Scripture (or in writing) says thus: But you also having
had warning of Peter and Paul, have joined together the planting of the
Romain, and of the Corinthian church for both of them coming together, did
teach also in our Church of Corinthus, and throughout all Italy, and teaching
together in this Church were together at one and the same time crowned with
Martyrdom, These things have we rehearsed, that the story which is in the
opinion of all men, might be more confirmed.

This Dionisius here mentioned, lived also in the time of this Irenaeus and
wrote (says Jerome) an Epistle to the Romans, The Testimony of Jerome for
these 2. witnesses.
which he wrote to Soter Bishop there, next before Eleutherius, to whom
Irenaeus being but Priest, was sent, and of whom he says here, which now
has the Bishopric in the 12. place from the Apostles. Of this Caius also
Jerome mencioneth, and of his famous disputation. And Eusebius also libr^ 6.
cap. 16. although his words here, should rather make Caius to be himself
the Bishop of Rome, next to Victor. But I follow here Ruffinus his
translation, because he was so near to Eusebius own time. Of which Bishops of
Rome, How near Ireneus was in place and time to the doing of ^hese things
Irenaeus himself, that reckons up the succession of them, and flourished in
the time of Eleutherius, and had seen the race of some of them, and had
himself in his youth, been a scholar under Polycarpus, the Disciple of S.
John, as Eusebius lib 5. cap. 20. notes out of Irenaeus own words, in an
Epistle that he wrote to Florinus, how he did freshly remember, where
Polycar^us satte, his gesture, his words that he spoke of John, how he wrote
them not in paper, but in his heart, and laid them up, etc. And how that, if
Polycarpus had lived till then to have heard Valentinus haeresies: he would
have cried out, O good GOD unto what times, haste thou reserved me, that I
should hear such things?

Is it now likely, Irenaeus writing thus in a matter so notorious, and
reckoning up twelve Bishops, neither sparing Victor the 13. that succeeded
Eleutherius, when Victor abused his authority, but reproved him: that if this
superiority of one over his fellows, and this pecularitye of the name Bishop
to that one, had been a new and strange thing, and not so ordained in the
Apostles times, and by the very Apostles themselves: that Policarpus would
not also have cried out against it? Peter not Bishop of Room.
Or that Irenaeus would have commended all these Bishops: or durst have
fathered the ordayning of them on the Apostles? Or could have made any
argument at all thereof: when in Rome, so great a Church, How Irenae.
arguments prove the superiority of one Bish. over all the other Pastors in
that Church.
in all these Bishops times, there were other besides them, that were
Pastoral Elders, as well as they? And how then goes the argument of the
succession of one, and none of all the rest mentioned: if al of them were all
one, and equal with that one Bishop, in the Episcopal dignity and authority?
No, he could not do this with any reason: except this succession which he
deriueth from the Apostles, be of this peculier title and authority of Bishop
unto one, and that in superior dignity of the Churches Government, over and
above the residue of his brethren Pastors in that Church.

I know that both Eusebius in his Chronicle, and Jerome with others, in not
thoroughly considering these words of Irenaeus, Eusebius and Ieromes escape in
misunderstanding Irenaeus.
gather further, and unnecessarily, that Peter also himself was Bishop there
For so go Ieromes words, that Clemens was the fowrth Bishop of Rome after
Peter, for the second was Linus, and the third, Anacletus. But the very words
of Irenaeus, are otherwise.

The blessed Apostles therefore, founding and instructing the Church, delivered
to Linus the Bishopric of the Church to be administered. Of this Linus Paul
mencioneth in these Epistles that are to Timothy. But unto him succeeded
Anacletus.

Post eum tertio lo^o ab Apostolis Episcopatum sortitur Clemens, qui, and vidit
ipsos Apostolos, and contulit cum eis, etc. After him in the third place from
the Apostles, Clement enjoys the Bishop-ricke, who also saw the Apostles,
and conferred with them.

In which words he does not include as Jerome gathers, Peter to have been
the first Bishop: but makes the reckoning, beginning first with Linus, and so
to Anacletus, and the third to be Clemens, proceeding till he come to the
Bishop in his own time, saying.

Nunc duodecimo loco Episcopatum ab Apostolis habet Eleutherius. Now in the
twelfth place, Eleutherius has the Bishopric from the Apostles. So that,
still he excludes the Apostles, from being in the number of these Bishops
themselves, but only makes them to be the Founders, Constitutors, and
Instructors of that Church.

And this (he says) was known to all men. So that except we will utterly cast
of Irenaeus for a notable liar herein, or, that notoriously he erred, and all
other Bishops: And also his Master Polycarpus: I see not but how it
manifestly falls out, that this name of Bishop, to be made peculiar and
proper to one, more then to all the residue of the pastors, and the same one
Bishop, to have a superior government and authority in that Church, above
all the other Pastors in the same: is not only the practice of the Primitive
Church, next after the Apostles: but the very founding and ordeining of the
Apostles themselves. Neither is there any point of popery, or of the popes
pretended claim, from succeeding Peter, here established. And many Churches
had Bishops in them before Rome had any.

And although here be mentioned, that all Churches ought to agree with the
Church of Rome: yet he notes, that this agreement must be in this doctrine,
that is here set down. Let the Church of Rome that now is, agree in that:
and then let them call for our agreement with the Church of Rome. But, sith
the Church of Rome, that now is, differs so notoriously, and in so many
great points from that, yea, is clean contrary thereunto: we must needs
differ from the Church of Rome, that is now, that we may agree with the
Church of Rome, that was then. And for this our disagreement now, we have our
placarde also, even from this selfsame father Irenaeus. Ireneus own
acquittance for our disagreement.
For, when Victor ( which followed this Eleutherius) did contrary, or went
beyond his bounds: Iraeneus that so highly commended his good predecessors,
did as sharply reprove him their evil successor. And he that said before,
all Churches must agree with the Church of Rome; even he, and his Church, and
many more Churches, did by and by, dissent therein, from the Church of Rome,
and from the Bishop thereof. Whereupon Erasmus, or Grineus, makes a good
caution in the margin, on these words, All Churches ought to agree with the
Church of Rome. How much to be given to the church of Rome
What and how much is to be given to the Church of Rome, if so be, it hold
the doctrine of the Apostles. Neither yet does Irenaeus mention, in this
agreeing with the Church of Rome ( whatsoever superiority the Bishop had
there, among his own clergy and people) any obedience of all Churches, or of
any other churches thereunto. No, although he allege a mighty reason, that
All Churches should agree with the Church of Rome, for the more mighty
principality of it, then other Churches had. For even at that time, it was a
mighty Church, and one of the principal churches in the world. And yet the
might consisted not in worldly might, Wherein the might and principality of
the Church of Rome consisted.
nor in any claim of principality over all churches; nor Peter, nor Paul,
were then pretended to that purpose, but it was mighty, in constant defense
and maintenance of the sincere faith of Christ, and less defiled with
Schisms and heresies, then other Churches at that time were. And therefore, as
it was more in light so was it more looked upon, honored, and renowned in the
world, then other lesser, or more distracted Churches were.

Neither was this more mighty principality given to the Bishop, but to the
church; for although he had a principality in some respects over all the
Clergy in his Church: yet had his whole Church, in other respects, The
church of Romes principality.
a mightier principality above him, yea, every Pastoral Elder in some
respects, was his equal and all one with him. But the most mighty letters
that were written by the true Clement to the Church of Corinthe, are not by
Irenaeus called Clements: but, under this Clement, the church that is at Rome
wrote most mighty (or effectual) letters to the Corinthians, etc. And
therefore says both Eusebius, and Jerome: he wrote, as of the person of the
Roman Church. So that here was a superiority, but no Tyranny. The Bishop
did it, by the obedient consent, and ready approbation of the Church. Now
although these Bishops by Irenaeus are afterward called also, Sacerdotes or
Presbyteri, sacerdotall or Elderly Priests, as were the other ministers of
Gods word: The government of the Church of Rome not equal to every pastor in
the same.
as appears in his Epistle, cited by Eusebius, lib. 5. cap. 24. which he
wrote to Victor Bishop of Rome after Eleutherius, for his rash excommunicating
of the Eastern Bishops dissenting from him in the controversy of celebrating
Easterday: yet gives he not the government of the Church of Rome, to all the
Pastoral Elders there alike, but to one only over them all, even where he
calls him also by the name of Priest or Elder. Which still, more confirms
this our question.

I will not reckon out of Damasus, or other after him (though ancient
records) how many Bishops and how many Priests or ministering Elders, and
how many Deacons, Many priests or Pastoral Elders in Rome not Bish. there.
such and such a Bishop of Rome made in those days: but, when Eusebius ( whom
I dare better credit therein) settes it down, then dare I make an argument on
it. And even about the same time Eusebius notes, lib. 5. cap. 15. that in the
City of Rome, one Florinus a certain Priest in degree, fell from the Church.
Shall we say now, that this Florinus was a Priest at Rome, or pastoral Elder:
therefore he was Bishop of Rome also? It is plain therefore, that though in
degree of Priesthood, they were equal and all one; yet in dignity and
government of the Church there was great difference. Which appears better
by that Eusebius notes, for the pacifying of this controversy of Easterday.
For Eusebius having reckoned up (lib. 5. cap. 22.) Victor succeeding
Eleutherius in the Sacerdotall Priest-hoode (or Bishoprike): and Demetrius,
succeeding Iulianus at Alexandria; and Serapion, Bishops at the same time in
other Churches.
ordained the eight Bishop from the Apostles at Antioche; Theophilus at
Caesarea of Palestine; and Narcissus in Jerusalem: Bacchus at Corinthus: and
Polycrates at Ephesus, being counted Noble among the Bishops: and many other
excellent Sacerdotall Priests at that time in other places: he proceeds,
saying: cap. 23. While these governed the Churches in that time there arose no
small question in the provinces of Asia, arising as it were of their ancient
custom, because they thought that in any case, the Feast of Easter must be
kept the 14. day of the monethe, to wit, When the Jews were bydden to offer
the Lamb. Contro^^rsie about Easter.
Auouching it as necessary, that whenever the 14. day of the month did
come: they should leave off to fast: when as altogether in no other churches
such a custom was ever wont to be observed. For which cause, Assemblies of
Bishops and Councilles, through all the Provinces are called together. And
sending forth their Epistles, one to another: they all of them, out of every
their several places, confirm one Ecclesiastical decree. That it should not
be lawful at any time to celebrate the Lords mystery of Easter, except on
the Lords day, in the which the Lord arose from the dead, and on that only
day, the fasting should be broken up. To conclude, The Bishop of Rome not
universal Governor of all
there remains even to this day the decree of the Council holden at Caesarea
of Palestine, in the which Theophilus B. of the same Caesarea was the chief,
and Narcissus the Sacerdotal Priest (or Bish.) of Jerusalem. Another like
decree, is also had in the Council of the City of Room, over the which Bishop
Victor is said to be the Governor, and Palmeas of the Province of Pontus.
There was likewise an assembly of the Priests of the French, assigning Irenaeus
to be their guide. And Eacchilus Bishop of Corinth for Achaia. Who, all of
them out of diverse places, set forth one and the same sentence of their
judgment.

All which as it confutes apparently the Bishop of Rome, that he was not the
only head and chief ruler over all: but every province had at that time, a
Metropolitan Bishop, to be President, or chief Ruler, among them, concerning
the Government of this present action, and sessions in these several Councels:
so, while all these assemblies were made, did the Bishops leave their own
Churches and Cities, in all these great Provinces, destitute of Pastoral
Elders,, to teach the word, and minister the Sacraments? It is not likely.

The Churches not destitute of Pastors in the B^. absence.
And yet, notwithstanding, though all and every of these Bishops assembled, are
indifferently called Elders or Priests; yet are not the other (whom no doubt
they left behind them, being Priests also) any of them called Bishop of those
Seas, or in any one of those places, saving only Jerusalem, that had then 2.
Bishops together in one City. Which fell out upon a strange occasion, and is
noted as a rare accident. And yet, in every of those famous places, they had
many, (at least more than one) that were Pastoral Elders, that preached, and
ministered the Sacraments in the Bishops absence: which again plainly
conuinceth, that there was a great difference, in the ordinary Government of
the Churches, besides the extraordinary government of the Councels, between a
Bishop, and a Priest or Elder: In the one, the Bishop, being always the
Superior, in his particular Diocese: In the other, some Bishop being chosen
the Superior or Praesident, over the other Bishops, in that provincial
assembly.

And to show this yet more plain, and not only this, Co^trouersy about East.
but to measure this matter, being but a matter of government, ( if it had
been diversely used in diverse Churches, and not universally alike in all) to
declare by this matter, here in question, how far forth we ought, and no
further, (at the furdest) to strive against it, without making schism or
division of the Churches peace, and unity: Let us see the collections of
Eusebius, and Jerome, about the trouble and pacification of this question; for
it fitlye serves to our purpose. But the Bishops of the coasts of Asia (
says Eusebius lib. 5. cap, 24.) did rather confirm the custom delivered them
from their auncientes, Amongst whom, Polycrates, Polycrates letter to the B.
of Rome.
(which seemed to bear the Primacie, among them, writing to Victor Bishop of
the church of Rome, notes in these words, the manner of the ancient
tradition, continued even to his own time. We therefore, (says he) do
celebrate the inviolable day of Easter, neither adding nor diminishing any
thing. For, the great lights in Asia, the chief and choice men are fallen
asleep: whom the Lord in his coming shall raise, when he shall come from
heaven in glory, when he shall call for all his Saints. Among whom, is Philip
the Evangelist, which fell a-sleepe at Hierapolis, and also his 2. daughters,
which waxed old being virgins, and another daughter of his, replenished with
the holy Ghost, which fell a-fleepe at Ephesus.

And John also, which leaned on the Lords breast, who was the chief Sacerdotall
Priest, and wore the pontifical ( or golden) plate: ( he alludeth (as I take
it) unto the High Priest among the Jews, signifiing the chief dignity and
estimation he had in Asia,) which was a Martyr and a Doctor of the Church, who
also is fallen a-sleep, or died at Ephesus. Polycarpus also at Smirna, both
Bishop and Martyr, and likewise Thraseas Bishop at Eumenia, but by martyrdom
he died at Smirna. What shall I name Sagaren, being no less a Priest and
Martyr, which rests in peace at Laodicea. More-ouer, Papirius and Macarius
(or rather) Papirius the blessed, and Melito, but an Eunuche for the kingdom
of God, and filled with the holy Ghost, who heth in the City of Sardensias,
expecting the coming of the Lord from heaven, to raise again the dead. Al
these therefore, observed the Easterday on the 14. day of the Month, according
to the Gospel. Doing nothing at all otherwise without it, but by all things
and in all things following the rule of faith.

Yea, and I Polycrates also, the least amongst you all, do observe it
according to the tradition of my Fathers, these only whom I have followed
even from the beginning. For, seven of my Parents have been Bishops by
order, and I the eight, who have also thus observed this day, that it might
agree with that day, wherein the people of the Jews removed the leaven.
Controversy of Easter
Wherefore (most dear brethren) I am now (in the name of the Lord)
threescore and five years old, having also most full understanding of many
Bishops through-out the world, and intentiuely marking the Scriptures, I will
not be moved by those things, which are set out to make men afraid: sith
that mine-elders have also said, we must obey GOD more than men. And after a
few words, he sets these under it, concerning those Bishops that were
present with him: But I could also make mention of those Bishops, that your
selves desired I should call forth, as also I have done. Whose names if I
should write, it is too great a multitude. Who all knowing my business, have
confirmed those things that we write with their consent, being persuaded that
we have not carried graye hayres to no purpose, but have been always
conversant in Christ's discipline.

Thus wrote this reverend Bishop of Ephesus against ( says Jerome) the Bishop
of Rome about this matter: The Bishop of Romes authority stretched no further
then his own province.
but I follow Eusebius as he is translated by Ruffinus. In the which Epistle,
we may again perceive, that the Bishop of Rome had no such superiority over
these Bishops, as he now pretends. Only he in the name of his Church, or of
those Bishops that were likewise at Rome, assembled, over whom Victor was the
President, had requested this Bishop of Ephesus, ( it being so great and famous
a Sea, above all the Bishoprikes of those parts of Asia the less) to assemble
and call for the Bishops of that province, to debate and give their judgments
on this question. And yet this argues, that not only this Polycrates called
such a great multitude, from several places, o^ such only as were Bishops in
the same: but also, that as these Bishops were called from their own Cities,
for the decision of this controversy: not only there appears a difference,
between a Bishop and the Priests or Pastoral Elders left at home, to minister
the word and Sacraments: but also an ordinary superiority of this Bishop of
Ephesus, The authoof an Archb.
over the other Bishops of that Province, to call and assemble them together
to a certain place, and to propounde this petition of the Italian Bishops unto
them: or else, that he usurped it and encroched upon them; or else, that the
Bishop of Rome had some authority over him and all them, to will him so to
do. But sith it is apparent, that the Bishop of Romes authority was never
(no not when it was greatest) there acknowledged: it follows, that not only
Bishops were then Superiors unto the ordinary sort of Pastoral Elders; but
that even at that time, there was an ordinary superiority, in that and such
other principal places, over the ordinary sort of Bishops also.

How near Polycra^es wa^ to Saint
And no doubt, he being the eight Bishop there, and by the count of his age,
having lived within 40. years after John the Evangelist, and in the time of
Policarpus, whom he also mentions, Polycrates.
and all of them being so precise, that they would not go one jot, neither in
adding too, John, and how precise in any thing not allowed by the Apostle.
nor taking from the scripture; no not in so much as the alteration of a day,
nor would vary in any thing from their forefathers, nor any of their
forefathers from the Scripture: how is it likely, but that they took this
order, both for one Pastoral Elder in a City, to be superior in dignity to
his fellow Elders, to whom this name Bishop should more properly belong: yea,
and in that City, the Bishop to have a superiority also over other Bishops:
to be the very order of the Apostles, and to be sufficiently testified by
Saint Paul's Epistle to Timothy, the first Bishop there: or else, Polycrates
would never have taken these things upon him, nor he could ever (even for
shame of all the world, and the testimony of his own conscience) have
avouched such preciseness in his Epistle.

But ( says Eusebius) Victor the Bishop of the Church of Rome, behauing
himself more frowardly for these things, The Bishop of Romes frowardnes.
goes about to cut off from the fellowship of the communion, the Churches
every where of all Asia, and of the provinces adjoining, as though they
declyned into Heresy, and sends out letters, Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 24.
wherein he separateth all without discretion, from the Ecclesiastical bond
of peace. But all the Bishops liked not this, but rather on the contrary,
writing unto him, they commanded him, that he should do those things that
pertayned to peace, and that he should study for concord and unanimity. To
conclude, their letters also are extant, in the which they rebuke Victor more
sharply, as one that does unprofitably regard the benefit of the Church.
For Irenaeus also with other Bishops of France, (over whom he was chief)
does in writing indeed confirm, Irenaeus reprehension of the B. of Rome.
that the mystery of the Lords resurrection should be celebrated on the Lords
day: notwithstanding he reprooueth Victor that he had not done well, to cut
off from the unity of the body, so many and so great Churches of God, who
kept the custom delivered to them of old. Neither only (says he) the
controversy is handled of the day of Easter, but also of the form of fasting.
For some think, that the fast must be kept one day only; some two days; but
other, more days: many also 40. days, so that they make the day, by reckoning
the hours of the day and of the night. Which variety of keeping the fast,
began not first now, nor in our times, but long before us, of those (as I
think) who not holding simply that which was delivered in the beginning: did
fall afterward into an-other custom, either by negligence, or by lack of
knowledge. And yet notwithstanding for all that, all these, yea, though they
differed among themselves in their observation, have always been and are at
peace with us. Neither has the discord of the fast, broken the concord of
the Faith.

Irenaeus reprehension of Victor.
And after this, he inserteth a certain story, that for the fitnes thereof
ought not to be omitted. To conclude (says he) and all those priests or
Elders before Soter, which held the sacerdotall (or sacred) priesthood of the
Church, which you now govern, I mean, Anicetus, and Pius, and Higinus, and
Telesphorus, and Sixtus, neither did they themselves hold it thus, neither they
that were about them. And yet notwithstanding while they observed it not, they
had peace always with those Churches, which kept this manner of observance,
yea, even when it seemed contrary unto them, that other did not keep it also
in such like manner as they did. Yet were they never repulsed from the society
of the Church, or such as came from those coasts not received. Yea rather, all
the Priests or Elders also that have been before you, have solemnly sent the
Eucharist ( which under correction, I take not here in this age, as many do,
to be the mysteries of the holy communion it self; but rather of an ancient
custom of honor and courtesy, to send the bread and the wine (as they say)
unto them at their coming to the town, and the word Eucharist may well bear
it, Comitas, gratitudo, or as Jerome calls it, gratiositas, which we call
thankfulness or courtesy) to all the Priests or Elders of other Churches,
not observing it as they did. When the blessed Polycarpus came to the City of
Rome under Anicetus, when as they had some little jar between them in many
other things, and nevertheless joined themselves streightwaies together in
peace: they so handled the matter for this question, that neither of them
defended his opinion, with any obstinate contending for it. For neither
Anicetus could persuade Polycarpus, that he should not observe those things,
which he had known that John the Disciple of our Lord, and the other Apostle
(with whom he always had been) did observe: neither again Polycarpus
persuaded Anicetus, to forsake those things which he said he had kept after
the manner of his ancestors. And while these things were thus between them,
they did communicate together. Insomuch that Anicetus granted to Polycarpus,
at the only contemplation of doing him honor, to exercise the function of
the sacerdotall ministry. And so in full faith, and entire peace, and
steadfast charity, they parted a-sunder, that all Churches whether they keep
the Easterday so, or not so, notwithstanding should keep concord among them.
These things writes Irenaeus, performing the work that his name imports,
to wit, procuring peace to the Churches of God. Neither only unto Victor, but
also in like manner unto diverse Governors of Churches, by his Epistles he
affirms, that no dissension ought to arise in the Churches of God for this
question.

Thus far collected by Eusebius, out of this ancient father Irenaeus All
which very fitly serves also unto our question. This gov. of necessity or of
no necessity.
For if our question of the manner of the Churches government, be of
necessity; we see then, how we should condemn all these holy Fathers
manner of Ecclesiastical Government, which was of one Priest or Pastoral
Elder, to have an ordinary superior government and Jurisdiction over his
fellow ministers, and the name Bishop to be more peculier unto him, then to
them. For, we manifestly hereby do see, that thus had they, not only
Victor, Ierenaeus, Polycrates, Howsoever this B. differed in other orders, yet
in this of B. superiority received from the Apostles they all agreed.
and the Bishops of that age: but they also that were before them, both
Anicetus Bishop of Rome, with his predecessors, even up to the Apostles
times and also Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna that knew Saint John, and some of
the rest of the Apostles, was conversant with them, marked their orders, as
here Irenaeus notes of this Policrates, that he would not observe any other
thing, then that he had marked to be approved of them. And therefore
how-soeuer they differed in other things, as in the observation of these
Feasts and fasts: yet neither of them differed, in the superiority of Eccl.
government, from the orders, which they had both of them received from the
Apostles. Save that Victor began to abuse his authority too rigorously, which
not only Policrates with the Eastern Bishops being of contrary opinion; but
Irenaeus and the Bishops of France also, that were of Victors own opinion, do
utterly mislike, and thus sharply reprove in him, and disallow his censure.
For, this superiority of Victors clergy at Rome, stretched not then either
Eastward or westward, over them. They mislike therefore, not his lawful and
ancient superiority; What they mislike, and what they mislike not in Victor.
but his new insolent ouer-reaching the same. So that, if we make our question
for the form of Eccl. government, to be a matter of necessity: either we
must of necessity condemn it in them, which were next unto, yea, and in the
Apostles days: or else, they using such an ordinary superiority, that so
narrowly marked the Apostles, and the Apostles again, This question of
government whether of necessity o^ no.
( as we may well suppose) no less narrowly marking them: How can it be, but
that of necessity, we must needs allow it, that one among the pastoral
Elders, should have a superior dignity and government, to whom the name of
Bishop should be more proper and peculier than to the residue, as Anicetus,
Sixtus, Telesphorus, Higinus, Pius, Irenaeus, Policrates, If of necessity we
must needs have it as these fathers had*
Policarpus, and other mentioned had?

If now, on the other side, this be not a matter of necessity, but such as may
be varied, being but a form and manner of Ecclesiastical government, as the
observation of this Feast and these Fastes, were of accustomed order, not of
necessity: then, so long as it is used in moderate sort without tyranny or
pride, nor any thing contrary to the proportion, of Faith and Godliness of
life, necessarilye maintained there-by: (for otherwise, if those Fastes, or
this Feast had been used to be kept superstitiously, Feasts and Fastes.
it had been so farre-foorth to be condemned) there is no reason, why we should
break the bond of peace, and make such trouble in the Church of God, The use
of feasts and fasts
to reject the Government, that in the nature thereof, is as much indifferent;
as the solemnizing this or that day, the memorial of the Lords resurrection.
And yet, we celebrate the same on the Sunday only, as those Bishops of Rome,
at that time did. Which I hope we do, without all offense, though we have no
precept in Scripture for it. And therefore, as Polycarpus and Anicetus,
differing in that point, notwithstanding, did not violate the peace and unity
of the Church: so according to Irenaeus rule, while no such excessive
superiority is maintained of us, as the Pope since that time has usurped, but
such as we find practiced in the primitive Church, and in the very Apostles
age: we ought neither to condemn, or speak, or think evil, of other good
Churches, that use an other Eccl, government, than we do: neither ought they
to do the like of ours. Though diversity may be in diverse states of Churches,
yet in one state one uniformity.
Not, that every person in one and the same Church, should use this liberty
of difference, without controlement and restraint of the superior in that
Church, wherein he lives. For, though it were lawful for one Church, to
differ from an-other, being not so tied to uniformity, as to unity: yet, is
it not meet, for one Church to differ from it self: but to be both in unity,
and be ruled also by uniformity. Especially, where Law binds them to
obedience. Which argues, that the Bishop of Rome, had not the Government and
direction of all other Churches; for then, he would have brought then unto his
bent But he in his jurisdiction, and they likewise in theirs, had such several
superiorities: that those which would not obey their orders, being thus
disposed, continued, and established, before their times, might worthily be
punished for their contempt, and should well deserve as sharp, if not sharper
reprehension, of every good Polycrates and Irenaeus, than did Victor.

The examples of the Doctors and Pastors obedient knowledge to their Bishop
Now, as this was the state of Bishops then, even from the Apostles times (till
Victor began to disturb the same) as we have seen already, in Pantaenus
and Clemens of Alexandria, that were Doctors or Teachers in the schools, and
withal, Priests or Elders pastoral in the Church, and yet, not Bishops: so
likewise, in Origene, Heraclas, and Tertullian, etc. it is no less, if not a
great deal more apparent. For, when Origene for his singular reading and
preaching, began to grow so famous, Origene.
that he was of many desired to come to their Churches: and that a Prince of
Arabia had sent to his Bishop Demetrius, to have him come and preach there: of
this briefly says Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 15. being entreated, he went thither;
he taught them, they believed; he returned. Howbeit, before he went, he left
Heraclas in his place, Heraclas.
of whom he himself testifies, as Eusebius notes: Heraclas that now
beautifieth the chair of Preist-hood or Eldership at Alexandria: and yet at
that time Heraclas was not Bishop, but chosen after Demetrius. But after a
small time, Origin.
civil war arising at Alexandria,, while other went to other places, he ( to
wit Origin) withdrew himself to the parts of Palestine, and tarried at
Caesarea, where the office of disputing in the Church, and expounding the
divine Scriptures was enjoined unto him of the Bishop, even while as yet the
order of Priest or Elder was not bestowed upon him, as we find recorded in
the epistle of Alexander writing again unto Demetrius, reproving these things
long after. But he writes in this manner: As for that ye added in your
letters, that it was never heard of or done at any time, that lay men should
dispute, where Bishops were present. I know not why ye would auouche so
manifest an untruth. Since that the custom is this, that if any where such
men be found in the Church, that can enstructe the brethren, and comfort the
people: they should always be invited or bidden thereunto of the holy Bishops,
as Euelpius was of our brother Neon at Larandos, and Paulinus of Celsus at
Iconium, and Theodorus of Atticus at Synnada. Neither also it is doubted, but
that very many likewise in other places, if there be any that competently can
fulfill the work of God in the word and doctrine, they should be invited of
the Bishops.

Now, Origin thus traveling in preaching, before he was ordained a Priest or
Elder, and being requested ( says Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 18.) of the Churches
that are at Achaia, to come thither, When, how and of whom Origin was made
priest.
and convince the heretics, that in those places were grown up more at
liberty: while he was traveling thither, and of necessity must pass by
Palestine, he was ordained a Priest or Elder at Caesarea, of the Bishops of
that Province. The Bishops that made him Priest were (says Jerome) Theoctistus
B. of Caesarea, and Alexander B. of Jerusalem ( who had (say the
Centuriographers) the cheifest authority in those parts. Which dignity, (
meaning of Priesthood and Eldershippe) when it brought great admiration unto
Origin, and that he was every where in great authority and reverence with all
men for his learning and wisdom: Demetrius envying his glory and fame, did
grievously and bitterly accuse those Bishops that had promoted Origene unto
priesthood. etc. Being certified therefore in his absence of the envy and
evil will of Demetrius against him, he abode at Caesarea, and there taught,
leaving Heraclas his successor at Alexandria. At what time ( says Eusebius
lib. 6. cap. 19.) among the bishops of the nation of Cappadocia, Firmilianus,
of the city of Caesarea was bountiful, he bore such reverence for wisdom and
Learning, still toward Origin, How other B. honored O^ige^.
that he was ever constrayning him to stay with him. And he also, forsaking his
Church, made speed to come to him. And he used a certain religious recourse,
while now and then he called him thither, for the instruction of his Church,
now and then, he to aedifie himself, would go to him, Origin. Tertullian
and day and night sit by him while he taught. Yea, and Alexander also, whom
we showed before to govern the Church of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus which
governed the Church of Caesarea (of Palestine) did even captiuate almost all
the time of their life to hear him, and yielded unto him alone, the
sovereignty of Maistership or Doctorship in the divine Scriptures, and
Ecclesiastical doctrine. Whereby it appears, that the office of a Priest or
Elder being a Minister of the word and Sacraments, howsoever the party
excelled, and were in admiration for his learning: yet in dignity, he was
distinguished from, and was far inferior unto him, that was the Bishop of
the Church. And that (as appears also in many places of Origens works),
bishops, Priests and Deacons, were 3. degrees superior and inferior one to
an other.

And even at the same time or before it Zebenus being bishop of Antioche, ( as
Jerome notes) Gemnius, or, (as Eusebius calls him Gemianus) a Priest of
Antioche flourished. The succession of the B. of Antioche.
Which again argues, that a bishop and a Priest is not all one. Which bishop
being dead, Babilas ( says Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 16) received the principal
government of the church. These bishops so continuing (as the Magdeburgenses
note them), succeeding one after another, from the Apostles, until Paulus
Samosatenus the Heretic was chosen bishop, against whom, Malchion a Priest
of the same Church of Antioche disputed before all the bishops there assembled
so singulerly, that the disputation was written and published with great
admiration of the same, and afterward under Cyrillus bishop there, the
Magdeburgenses reckon Dorotheus, a learned Priest of Antioche, who after
Cyrillus was made bishop. So that still Bishop and Priest was not all one.
Tertullian.
Before which time, under Zephirinus next bishop of Rome after Victor,
Tertullian a Priest or Elder of Rome did flourish. Who in his book de Baptismo
says: Superest ad concludendum. etc. It remains to conclude the matter, to
give warning of the observation, both of giving baptism and of receiving. The
right of giving has Summus Sacerdos, the sacerdotall Priest that is the chief
(or highest) which is the bish. and then the Priests (or Elders) and the
Deacons: howbeit not without the authority of the bishop, for the honor of the
Church. Which remaining intier, the peace is safe. For otherwise, there is a
right unto lay men. It may be given equally, except now the bish. or the
Priests or the Deacons be called, Bishops prerogative above priests and Deaco^s
saying: the word of the Lord ought not to be hid from any. I defend not
Tertullians opinion, that lay persons may baptize: but I note that which he
sets down for the order in his time of the degrees of the Clergy: that
the bishop was superior to the Priests, as well as to the Deacons: which also
appears in his book De Monogamia. Wherein, though he slipped into the error of
Montanus, yet in this distinction of a Bish. of a Priest, and of Deacon: he
swarued not from the continual approved custom of the Church. And in his
book, Puritans.
De fuga in persequutione. But when the very authors themselves, that is, the
very Deacons, and the Priests, and the bish. do flee; how shall the lay people
understand in what sense it is said, Flee from City to City? By which and
other places in Tertullian you may see the difference of these degrees in his
time.

Which more manifestlye appears in a matter, that fell out a little after,
though before the foresaid condemnation of Samosatenus, Nouatu^the author of a
sect of Puritans.
as appears by Eusebius lib. 6. cap, 33. At what time Nouatus a Priest of
the Church of Room, puffed up with a certain pride, utterly bereft the^ that
fell of al hope of salvation, although they worthily repented. Whereupon also he
became the chief of the Nouatians heresy who being separated from the Church
by a proud name, called themselves (...), that is to say, puritans. For the
which matter a most famous sacerdotal Council was called, to the number of
threescore B. and as many priests with a great many Deacons. Besides this also,
through every several province, with great deliberation had upon this matter,
it is by decrees signified what was needful to be done. It is therefore
decreed that Nouatus being puffed up with a proud mind, with all those that
followed him, and whosoever should fall into that cruel opinion, keeping no
whitte of brotherly love, should be excommunicated out of the Church. But those
that in the conflict had fallen should be healed with brotherly mercy, and be
helped with the fomentations of repentance. Upon this matter also, Cornelius
the bishop of Rome, writes to the Church of Antioche: declaring to Fabian the
B, thereof, what the council assembled in the city of Rome had decreed, What
also the Italians, the Africans, and other Western churches thought, etc. And
an other epistle of Cornelius written to Fabia^ bish. of Antioche is exta^t,
showing al things concerning Nouatus, who he was, of what manner life and
conversation, and how he fell from the church of God. In which epistle he
declares, The author of the Puritanisme dissembling that he would be Bishop.
that he fell into all these things, even for the desire of a bishopr. which
secretlye he nourished in himself. But chiefly he was puffed up in that, that
he had taken unto him certain excellent men, of those that were confessors, to
be in the beginning his companions, among whom was Maximus a certain priest
of the church of Rome, and Vrbanus, which remained among them that were
confessors (of faith in persecution). Yea and Sidonius A Celerius which were
very famous among those, that were holden for confessors because they had
overcome all kind of torments. but these (says he) when more diligently they
had perceived that he dealt al by deceites, by lies and periuries, and that he
counterfaited holiness to this only purpose, that he might bleare the
ignorant, they forsaking him, or rather cursing him to the church, with great
satisfiing returned. And confessed to the bishops, (being present,) and also
to the lay men first their error, and then his frauds and deceauings.

How he suddainlye started out a new kind of Bishop.
Moreover, in this epistle he adds these things, that whereas he was always
wont to swear to his brethren, that he desired not at all to be a bishop:
upon a sudden and unwittingly, (as though he had been a thing newly formed)
he started forth a bishop. Even he forsooth, that challenged the discipline and
the decrees Ecclesiastical: he also took before hand, a bishoprike upon him;
but such as of God he had not received, For, having gotten from an out part of
Italy, 3. bishops, most simple me^, and altogether ignorant: or rather, they
being deceived of him with subtle circu^uention, How he abused some simple
Bish.
he wringeth from them an imagined rather the^ lawful imposition of hands upon
him. Of whom notwithstanding, one forthwith returned to the Church, confessed
his sin, and was received into the communion or fellowship of the Laitye.
Yea, the people making intercession for thus much But into the place of the
other twain, that laid their hands upon Nouatus, were other bishops ordained
and sent. He therefore that claimed to himself the Gospel, knew not that in
the Catholic Church, How many Priests in Rome besides the B.
in the which he saw there were 46. priests, and seven Deacons, and seven
subdeacons. (or inferior Deacons) 4^* acolytes (or waiting servants,)
Exorcistes and Readers, with Dore-keepers 52. Widows with needy persons, 1500.
all whom God nourishes in his Church) that there ought to be one bishop or
ouerseer of them.

What can be playner to show the difference and superiority between priest
or pastoral Elder, and bishop, then this story? I stand not upon their
diversity in the offices then, whereof I have spoken before out of Kemnitius
against Trident Council: But to the present purpose, of these 2. degrees now
in questions, bishop and priest in that age, while the bishop of Rome took not
upon him, any such supreme authority, as now he claims: but only, as
bishop of Rome, or as chief bishop in those parts of Italy about Rome: what a
number of priests or Elders he had under him, how he called them and other
bishops and priests or Elders, when this controversy fell, to consult with
them upon the matter: how he in the name of his Church, and of this Provincial
Council, sent about to other chief Bishops in other Provinces, to show
what they had done, not prescribing nor commanding, but brotherly requesting
them to do the like in their Provinces. Which shows, that as he at Rome, so
all other chief or inferior bishops, had likewise authority over their
priests or Elders. And so long as this order was thus maintained, their was
neither tyranny in this superiority, but very good and necessary order: nor
such schisms, errors and heresies, nor such Hypocrites as were the broachers of
them, could peep out, but straight they were found, examined, and (so much
as could be) were suppressed.

I grant, they could not utterly suppress them in those days, when
their-selues were yet suppressed by Heathen Princes. Ignorant Bishop.
And among these bishops also, that had this superior dignity, in some
places some simple and ignorant bishops did creep in* As, what age was ever
free? no, not the Apostles times. And this Superiority did tickle some also,
that had not the fear of God, by such ill practices as here Nouatus used, to
attain by new devises to this dignity, under pretense of reformation of
Ecclesiastical discipline, of the purity and sincere profession of the
Gospel, and all this gear: and that there should be more Bishops, than
one, in one church. Yea, as Nouatus did: of whom says the former Epistle:
that in the time of persequution, when he hid himself in a little cell,
and was by the Deacons, according to the manner, requested, The Author of this
Puritanisme deemeth himself to be a Priest.
to come and help at their departure, those that were learners of the faith:
he, fearing to come forth, denied himself to be a Priest* And that, when
he divided the Sacraments unto the people, he would hold fast the hands
of the receauers, nor suffer them to take it, before that every one of them
had sworn by those things, that they held in their hands: that they should
never (forsaking him) return to Cornelius. Though counterfeit Puritanes were
then, and some such mnght even now also, disturb the peace of the church of
Christ, and good order of governing the same: and by these practices deceive
many, even such as have been most earnest Confessors of the Gospel in the
time of persecution, and are most zealous of Gods truth and glory; Yet, if good
Bishops follow Cornelius his steps, that at that time was bishop of Rome, and
was also a most constant Martyr, when the time of trial came, suffering death
for the Gospel, and yet retayning with good conscience, (as nothing against
the Gospel,) his right of his calling, in Superior dignity and jurisdiction
over all his people, and his Clergy: he shall find out these imagined
Bishops, ( made in corners, pretending purity), well enough. And all the godly
zealous, that have been, or be deceived by the^, will (I hope) on better
aduising of them, and of the matter, forsake them, and acknowledge their fault,
as Maximus, Vrbanus, Sidonius, and Celerius here did: yea, although they had
vowed, and sworn, and received the sacrament of the holy Communion thereupon,
to the contrary: and return to the due obedience and acknowledgement, of
their lawefull Bishop. Although (this by the way) I must confess, The Bishop
worthilye punished for making such Minist.
that the Bishops then of Rome were worthily punished in this man: for he was
made Priest, all of affection, and beyond all order. For Nouatus, having been
vexed in his you thewith an unclean spirit when he had consumed sometime
with Exorcists fell into so grievous a sickness that his health was past hope:
and even for necessity lying in his bed, he was baptized, he had so long
deferred the time of Baptism. But afterward recovering, when he was of
private favor so loved of the Bishop, that he would make him Priest: albeit
all the Clergy, and very many of the Laitye stopped it, saying: it is not
lawful for him to be a Clerk, which in extremity received grace lying in his
bed. Yet the bishop besought them of a special favor, that this might be
granted unto him for this man only. So that he whom the Bishop so
extraordinarily advanced and made so much of, he of all other revolted from
him, and caused the people also to disobey him. And though he differed not from
his bishop Cornelius, and other true believers* in matter and substance of
faith and religion: A caveat to all B. Magistrates and people, in this matter.
yet under pretense of reforming discipline, and reducing all things to the
Purity of the Gospel. he bredde this faction and schism in the Church, that
afterward brake out into foul heresies. And therefore, let all Magistrates
Bishops, and all the people that fear God, take heed to this matter. We must
not only abstain from that which is evil, but from all show of evil, so
near as God shall give us grace thereto.

The very God that is the author of peace, sanctify you throughout, that your
whole spirit, and soul and body, may be kept blameless until the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Thessalonians. 5.


Thus have I run through the most part of this Primitive age, from the very
Apostles times, ere ever the bishop of Rome usurped any such supremacy, as he
now most falsely challenges: save, one over rasheexcommunicating, which Victor
pronounced, not, for that he claymed any jurisdiction, government or authority
over those bishops, whom he excommunicated: but because they dissented from his
opinion in those matters.

Wherein we have seen, how all this while, in all parts of Christendom, at
leastwise. in the most famous parts at that time, this peculier applying of
the name, and this superiority of bishopps in dignity and authority, over such
Presbyters Priests or Elders, as were Ministers of the word and Sacraments, (
whom our brethren call Pastors,) was with one consent, allowed and practiced,
without any interruption, reclayming, or misliking of any person, either of the
Clergy, or of the people, by a continual succession from and in the very
Apostles days. To the which purpose, I have not urged such authors, as are
suspected to be forged, in those holy and ancient Fathers names: but such as
even our brethren theirselues do acknowledge, to be the true authors of those
books and stories, whence I cite them.

As for the holy Fathers following, Cyprian, Athanasius, Cyril, Basil, etc. do
not only all of them agree heereto, and for the most part were such bishops
themselves: but also upon any occasion offered in their times, do defend and
maintain by the authority of the word of God, this superior dignity and
authority that they had and exercised, as shall yet further (God willing)
appear in that which follows.

But here, because our brethren may seem already to have answered all that
can be alleged, out of the ancient fathers: I am now to crave license of the
reader, to set a-syde for a while our brethrens Learned discourse, that we may
hear and mark for our further satisfaction, what our other Learned brethren
answer heereunto. And first they answer to all this, by distinction of the
order of bishops, in a little book late come forth, called: The judgment of
a most reverend and Learned man from beyond the Seas, concerning a threefold
order of bishops, etc. Which answer being so briefly and plainly perused,
as may satisfy: and conferred with the resolutions of our other brethren from
beyond the Seas also: we shall the readier return to this Learned discourse of
these our brethren at home, for the titles and equalitye of the Pastors.

The Argument of the 4. book, aunswering that part of a Book, late come
forth, called The judgment of a most reverend and Learned man from beyond
the Seas, etc. that concerns the superior Authority of the Bishops.
THis Book contains a division of three kinds of Bishops, to wit, of God,
of Man, and of the Devil. With Danaeus proves of this triple division.
Treating first, of the lawful use, and honorablenes of the name B. Of
Daneusand the most reverend man's Definitions, and their confuting the
definition of the Bishop of man: Of the power that the most Reverend yields
unto: Of the continuing Assemblye at Jerusalem, under James: Of their office,
that are called the Angels of the Churches in the Revelation, and of the
churches Moderators Of the greatness of Peter, notwithstanding the rendering
accoumpt of his doings; and of one going before the other Pastors Of the
impugnyng and defending the arguments of Epiphanius, against Aerius: And of
the Fathers report, that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus: with the shifte for
his being an Evangelist: and what the word, Eldershippe, imports: Of the
Order and authority of one laying on of hands: and of the differences between
ordayning and electing: with the prerogative of one even in the elections: Of
one or more Bishops in one City: and of the schisms in the ancient
Churches, where more have been: and withal, of the lamentable schism by the
Meletians: Of Cyprians defense for Bishops to succeed the Apostles: and Ieromes
defense for the original of B. superiority in the Apost. times: and of the
Apostles remaining superior although they join other with them in their
actions, as Paul Softhenes: and that one was superior in excommunicating: and
that all this superiority of Bishops, was no privy custom, but the continual
and universal practice of all Christendom. This book entitled, Three kinds
of Bishops.
The judgment of a most reverend and learned man from beyond the Seas, etc.
begins with this prefixed distinction. The most reverend.


WE must needs make three kinds of Bish. of God. of Man. of the Devil.

WHO this most reverend and learned man should be, Bridges.
since his name (for what purpose I know not) is not dicouered by our Brethren:
I mind not to pull off his visour, but with all due reverence both to his
person and learning, I may take the advantage (with less envy, in a
namelesse person) the better to consider the reasons of his judgment. Howbeit,
because the reverend and learned Danaeus professing openly his name, does use
also this selfsame distinction, from whence this namelesse most reverend
man, might seem to have barrowed it: I would therefore a little higher begin
with him, that began before with this distinction, and so one answer serves
both.

Danaeus in his Christian introduction 3. part, cap. 8. ( after he has
briefly referred us for the dignity and office of Pastors to Bernards sermons
on the Canticles, 41. and 77,) says on this wise: Danaeus in Christ. ^ sagog
3. par. lib* 2. cap 8.
Haec breuissime verum iam latius. Episcopi, etc. These things briefly, but now
more at large* bishops and Pastors are one, in the holy Scripture. 1. Pet. 2.
v. 25.5.2. We at this day, name them Ministers of Gods word, because men
have now long since abused both the name and dignity of bishops. And at this
day, the name Episcopatus, of a bishoprike or bishops office, is esteemed to be
the name of honor only and of gain, but not of burden and of labor. Albeit,
contrariwise, Augustine in the 9. book of the City of God, chap. 19. says:
The name of bishop is of work, not of honor. For, of the office of a Bishop,
or bishoprike, which in Paul's time was one and Evangelical, was afterward
made a threefolde bishoprike, that is to wit, a Bishopric Evangelical,
Human, and Sathanicall. Evangelical, where is greatest equality among all
the pastors of the Church of God. Human, when unto some one of the Pastors a
power and prelacie (or preferment) not indeed the greatest, howbeit some
power, is given over the other men of the same order: that is to say, over
other pastors and Elders. Sathanicall, when unto one pastor is given upon
other Churches, an Emperors or Dictators power: as, in popery are bishops,
Archbishops, the Pope.

The name of Bishop honorable.
Be it spoken with protestation of all duetifull reverence I wonder at so
renowned and learned a man. How zeal (against the corruptions of Popery)
makes now and then such a notable man also, and yet but a man ( Homines sumus,
labi possumus: We are all but men, and may ouerslippe) to confound and carry
things away in presupposals, clean from their right course and places, even
where they would most preciselye distinguishe and dispose them. How bishops
and Pastors are all one in the Scripture, we have seen already at large,
though not yet out of that place of S. Peter here quoted, which (because our
brethren Discoursers) do afterward mention: we shall (God-willing) in order
come thereto.

For the name of Minister of Gods word, understood both for Pastor and bishop:
it is a good name, and a good reason. But, that we should so call B. and
Pastors, ministers of Gods word, that we should clean exclude either the
dignity or the name of bishop: it is no reason at all. The Doctor both is, and
may as-well be called a minister of Gods word. And yet will you (brethren)
distinguishe a Doctor from a Pastor, whom yes call a Minister, as we do* Yea,
the Deacons name in the natural signification thereof, signifies a Minister:
and yet, we commonly call not the Deacon, a Minister.

But, that the name bishop should not be shunned, and turned to Minister, The
name of Bishop not to be abolished though it has been abused.
because the name and dignity has been long time abused: If this reason were
good, we may take away the name and dignity of Doctor too, and the name of
pastor would not be far behind. Yea, the name both of Church and Gospel.
Yea, the name of Jesus: and the names of many things else, have been both as
long, and as much abused, as ever the name and dignity of bishop has been. But
since Danaeus, has here granted, that their is a name and a dignity of it in
the Scripture: me thinks, it were good reason, that we should rather seek,
to retain both the dignity and the name, in such order as is not contrary to
the Scripture, and so (without the abuse grown since) to use both the dignity
and the name of the Evangelical bishop, that is of God: than thus clean to
cast off, both dignity and name of bishop, for the abuse of them. But what now
is this so long and great abuse.

A bishops office is counted at this day, for a name of honor only and of
gain, but not of burden and of labor.

That it is of honor, I ask no better witness; then Danaeus himself upon 1,
Tim. 3. ver. 1. The name of B^sh. as well of honor as of burden.
Who after he has said that priests, or Elders and bishops are all one: he
says: Deacons are here distinguished and plainly severed from bishops. The
name of priest is in Greek (...), and therefore it is a Greek word. But this
word (...) and (...), differ as in Latin do vetus and senex.

For (...) is a name of age, and (...) also of dignity, The name of B.
honorable.
as may be gathered out of Plutarke in Nicea. If now (...) and (...) be all
one, how is not the name of Bishop, a name betokening an office of honor? Yea.
the very Etymology of the name, signifiing an Ouerseer: who sees not it
conteyneth an honor and preferment? Yea Hierome also whom Danaeus alleges,
in his Epistle ad Euagrium says: A Priest and a bishop, the name of the one is
of age, the name of the other is of dignity.

But to say as Danaeus here does, In what sense S. Aug says it is a name of
burden no^ of honor.
that the office of a Bishop is counted at this day, a name of honor onele and
of gain, but not of burden, and of labor, or pain: I know no Papists, much^
(less Protestants) so carried away with honor and gain, that ever said it, or
(me thinks) can think it. S. Augustine says (I grant) it is a name of
work not of honor: yea God says I will have mercy, not Sacrifice. Such
negatiues are not simple, but comparatiue. God requires both; howbeit, the one
more than the other. As he said of justice and of tithing, Haec oportet
facere, illa non omittere. And if Elders and bishops be al one: does not S.
Paul say, 1. Tim. 5. The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor,
chi^fly that labor in the word doctrine? But what says he? ( says Chrysostom
upon 1 Timothy 3.) If any (says he) desire a bishoprike. I reprove it not, I
disallowe it not: for it is a work of government. If any therefore desire
this, not with the pomp of principalitye and lordlines; but with the care of
government, and affection of Charity: I improoue it not, for he desires a
good work. For Moses also coueted that matter: how beit he sought not such
power and ambition of governing: but he sought the matter so, that it was said
unto him: Who made thee a Prince and a Judge over us? If any therefore
desires it so he desires it well. For thereupon is it named a bishoprike,
because he looks upon all men, and vieweth all things. But of what bishop
did S. Augustine speak, when he said A bishops name is of work not of honor?
spoke he it not of such a bish^p, as had a superior dignity and government over
pastoral Elders, as all the holy bishops long before his time had, and
himself also? Or, did he condemn the^ all, and himself, and his calling,
when he so said? I marvel much (be it spoken still with meet reverence of so
Learned a man) what Danaeus and our brethren mean, so often to allege the
Fathers, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, Theodoret, Cyprian, Bernarde? For, all
those Danaeus alleges in this chapter, and approoueth their sayings, for the
name and office of bishops. And yet all such of these as were bish. yea,
Archbishops* used theirselues, this superior dignity and authority over pastors.

This sentence of Augustine ( here also alleged) Epistola ad Valerianum. 143.
There is nothing in this life, especially at this time more comfortable and
acceptable unto man than is the office of a bishop of a priest, and of a
Deacon, if the matter be handled sleightlye, and flatteringly: Bishop
Evangelical
but then, before God, nothing is more miserable: and also in this life and
chiefly at this time, nothing is more hard and dangerous, than the office of
a bishop. But with God, nothing is more blessed, if we go to war, as our
Emperor, that is Christ, would have us. Is not here by the way, a plain
distinction of al these 3. offices, bishops priests and Deacons. Again, Ambrose
( says Danaeus) does say, that in a bishop is the power of all the
Ordinations. And (as says Cyprian) a bishop is set to be a watchman over
all. Did they mean hereby that they had no more authority than all other
Ministers of the word had? Or not rather, that they had a greater, then they
all. But now to come to our triple distinction, that must answer all that is
alleged in all the fathers.

In the Gospel they are all one.

I deny that. In the Gospel, is mention of Bishop for Apostle* and in that
kind of Bishopric, The Bishop Euangelical or bishop of God.
all the Apostles were Bishops. But in the Gospel ( I mean in the records
and state of the new Testament) some were Bishops that were not Apostles: And
therefore all were not all one. And does not Beza, and the Geneua translation,
take the name of Bishop ( even in the places cited by our Learned discoursing
Brethren) for those unpreaching Prelates, or Elders not teaching, whom they
call Governors? And if it be so: then again, all the Evangelical Bishops
are not all one. And if the difference lay only, in the pride and vicious
life: were all Bishops good, that are mentioned in the Gospel, and by S. John
in the Revelation?

But the Evangelical bishop is, where there is most great aequallity among
all the Pastors of Gods Church.

Neither can that be. For, if it should: either there must never be
assemblies and Councels, such as were at Jerusalem among the Apostles,: for
then, their-selues confess, there can-not be aequalitye. We confess ( say
the Learned discoursers page 114, The equality among all the Pastors, makes not
the Magist. Bishops.
) that in every assembly or company, some one of necessity must have this
prerogative, to order and dispose the same with reason. So that, if one must
have preeminence above the residue: then is there not so much equality, as
before, and after. And so, for that time, wherein of all other they should be
most Evangelical, by this most great aequality among them, being left off:
they should not be Evangelical at all. And therefore, they may be Evangelical
well enough, both in such assemblies, and without them, having not such most
great aequality, as is here imagined.

Neither can I see how this summa equalitas, this most great aequalitye can at
any time, consist among the Pastors, For, if Caluines reason be good, The
Bishop of Man.
upon Galath. 2. ver. as we have heard (that greater honor (speaking there of
the honor of dignity) should be given to those Pastors that have greater gifts:
and all the Pastors in one City have not gifts alike: then not only this,
inequality of dignity must be of the Pastor, to the people; but also of the
inaequality of the Pastors, arises an inequality of the honor in dignity among
the Pastors.

The reasons that our little English book of the judgment of a most reverend
and Learned man, Thehumane B. or B. of man, and his definition
etc. alleges for the Bishop of God to be all one with Pastor; are the
places cited already by our own Learned discoursers alleged, as Ephesians. 4.11.
1. Tim. 3. and Phil. 1.1. and therefore, I pass them over to the places, where
they are answered, and come to the 2. kind of Bishop, the Bishop of man; for,
on him lies now all the controversy.

The humain ( says Danaeus) is when unto some one out of the pastors, there is
given upon the residue of the men which are also of the same order, that is,
upon other pastors and priests of the Church, a power or prelacy, which is not
indeed the chief; but some it is.

If the bishopric of man, be no worse than this definition makes it: I see
not, but that it is a good bishopric: yea, why may it not be counted all one
with the Evangelical bishopric? Shall I say, as much? nay, more then that,
which is most equal with all the pastors? For, this we have showed by
manifest proves, out of the word of God it self, even in the example of Tim.
and by the example of James, Act. 15. and 21. and Gal. 2. and eue^ out of
Calvin and Beza: and by the exposition of many the ancient and best approved
Fathers, and by the track of the universal practice from and in the Apostles
times: and by the testimonies of more than 2. or 3. most ancient and credible
witnesses: that the bishop of man ( as he is here defined) is the very bishop
of God also. As for the 3. bishop of the Devil, let him go to the Devil from
whence he came. We have (God be praised) naught to do with him. And howsoever
our Br. might warble at the bishop, if any were so evil a man, that he might be
called the Devil himself, The definition of the B. of the Devil.
as Christ called Judas: yet was his bishoprike of God. We have none to whom
is given ye summa potestas. We acknowledge it to be only in Jesus Christ, which
is the only high bishop of our souls. If he be the bishop of the Devil, to
whom alone is given over other churches imperatoria and dictatoria potestas, an
imperial and dictatorial power: then be our bishops in England, Our Bish. in
England have no such power^.
no bishops of the Devil; which have no such most high imperial or dictatorly
power Whosoever should so say of them, should most manifestly slander them,
and of whom a sclaunderer: is that, let the Etymology of the name Diabolus tell
you. As for our bishops, they are of the number of those bishops of God, Of
whom this most reverend man says: That the same were subject to Magistrates
though profane: appears not only by the example of Christ the highest
Priest, The. B. of man's power.
and of the Apostles, but also by the express words of Paul, 1. Tim. 2, and
Luke 12.13. and such (God be praised) be our bishops, and such were all
these holy and ancient bishops that I have mentioned. Howbeit, though the Pope
may go in this crewe, whether this definition suffice for all Popish
Archbishops, and Popish B; I doubt me of it. For they have no such highest
power, though they would. But they are rather his slaves that has it: and so
it comes all to one reckoning for them, so long as they like it and maintain
it in him, and serve under him, and as near as they can or dare, aspire to
some part of his tyrannical pride, and devilish usurpation. But, (God forbid)
that we should so think (when we cannot so say, except we say amiss) of any
of our Reverend Fathers, bishops over us, that have renounced him, nor taken
any such power on them, over either prince, pastor, or people, in their
gouernme^ts. But to annswere Danaeus with the judgment of as reverend and
learned a man as is himself: Let Danaeus his self answer himself, The
superior authority that Danaeus allows to a B^. over the Pastors.
what manner of superiority he allows in Bish. For writing upon the 5.
chapter of the 1. Tim. ver. 22. Unto whom the election of a pastor does
belong: After he has taken it from prince, from patron, from praelate,
neither yet that it perteyneth to all the Church alike, (which were to
disturb all things) neither to any one, because none in the Church save only
Christ, is (...) the governor by himself alone, ( but of his arguments of
election, we shall see God willing afterward:) at the length he says: Neque
eriam obstat. etc. Neither also does this let it, that the Bishop is of the
fathers called (...)* President, as though he only might order the whole
Church after his fancy: and therein advance whom he pleased: for that word
(...) a Praesident, declares only an order, that he which was called the
Bishop, ought to sit among his colleagues and fellow Priests or Elders: but
it gives not unto him a kingly or a chief and Pretor-like power, upon the
Church. Ambrose in lib. de dignitate Sacerdotum cap. 6. does confirm that
which we say. If thine eye shall be simple: thy whole body shal-be clear.
that is, If that the B. which deseued to rule the body, be bewtified with holy
simplicity and innoce^cie: all the Church shines with the brightness of the
light. But if thy eye be evil, etc. That is, if the B. which seemed to give
light to the body subject to him, be shadowed with the blindness of wicked
behavior: what shall the other members do, that are bereft the light of the
eyes? That is to say, what shall the seculer multitude do, when with unlawful
actions forbidden, the B. shall provoke the multitude to the like gulf of
mischiefs. For what other thing should a B. be interpreted to be, but an
Ouerseer: chiesly, when he siateth in a higher seat in the Chapter and so looks
upon al, that the eyes of all may look on him.

So that here at least, the bishop is made a Praesident, that sits, though
among them, yet higher then all his fellows. And is this sitting higher, only
to look on them? or this beholding and looking on them, The Bishop of man's
power.
for no governing of them? But let Ambrose tell his whole meaning: who, after
he had highly commended the honor and dignity of the high calling both of
Bishop and Priest, both above the prince and people, in his spiritual
function, cap. 2. and showed the danger if their life were not aunswerable
thereunto, cap. 3. Therefore brethren ( says he unto the Bishops and Priests
under him,) as the Roab sets forth the Senator, as the tillage the
Husbandman, as the Barbarian his armor, as the skill of sailing the shipman:
and the qualitye of every Artificers work declares the Authors: So nothing
betokens a Bishop, but a bishoplie work. That he might be known rather by
his good work, than by his profession: and more to be a Bishop by his well
deseruings, than by the name whereby he is so called. For, (as we have said)
there is nothing more excellent then a Bishopp: so nothing is more wretched if
the Bishop be in hazard of his holy life. And as it is lighter to run on the
plain, so is it more heavy, when one falls from high dignity. For the
ruin that is from an high, is frushed with the more weighty fall. Indeed, the
bishoply honor before men, is renowned, but if it sustain a fall, it is a
great grief. For how much the degree of a bishop is higher than others, so
much the more grievous is the fall, if that by negligence he should slip. A
great height, must have great heed. The greater honor, must be environed with
the greater circumspection. To whom more is of trust committed, of him (as it
is written) is more demanded. For, the things that are mingled, are with the
worste. And in an other place, The mighty shall suffer more mighty torments.
And to him that knows the Law and does it not, the sin is heighnous. And
the servant that knows the will of the Lord, if he shall not do it, shall
be much beaten. For, it is another thing that God requires of a bish* and
another, that of a priest, and another that of a Deacon: and another, that of
a Clerk, and another that of a lay man, either else, of every singular man.
And albeit GOD shall examine in his judgment the works of all men, yet shall
more be required for of him, to whom more is committed. For he shall suffer
greater punishments, to whom a cure having greater multitude of people to be
governed, shall be committed. Thus much says Ambrose in that Chap. of this
matter, not only for the honor and charge of a bishop, more than other; but
also of the several and distinct degrees, of bishop, of priest, of Deacon,
of Clerk, and of the Lay people. In the Chapter following, he describes th
properties of a bishop, out of S. Paul to Timothye. And in the^ 1. Chap. he
inueigheth most against the Arch-bi. in his time, that made bishops for money,
and the bishops also for money, made priests and Deacons. All which as it
shows their abuses: so it necessarily infers, both their degrees, and
also their dignities, to be different: and even confuteth that, The Bish.
higher Seat.
that Danaeus in the same place principally defends.

Last of all S. Ambrose comes to this sentence by Danaeus cited: For thou art
called of all men a Bishop without doubting. Especially, when thou art esteemed
by the very name, if so be that the action agree to the name, and the name
associate it self unto the action. For what other thing does he interpret
Bishop, but an ouer-looker upon? chiefly, when he sits in a higher seat,
and so looks upon all men, that the eyes of all men also do look on him.
This is in very deed, both the sentence and meaning of S. Ambrose, that he is
set in a higher seat, than other in the Church, because of his higher dignity
in the Church. And that his action should so answer to his name, that as he
ouerlooketh ( whereon he has his name,) so should he overrule them in the
discipline of the church. And therefore he is called (...) a president, or one
that sits highest. as Hierome confesses in his epistle ad Euagrium. For
also at Alexandria, from Mark the Euangeliste, unto Heraclas and Dionysius
Bishops: the Priests do always take one chosen among themselves, whom,
being placed in a higher degree they called the Bishop. Whereby withal, it
manifestly appears, that this Bishop of man ( as they term him) is of good
antiquity, even from Mark the Evangelist, and so an Ecclesiastical Bishop:
so that, if he could plead for his higher chair, no better title, but only
so fair a prescription from S, Mark: me thinks he should be dealt too
hardly withal, to be turned out now.

Neither was this first begun at Alexandria from S. Mark There is yet a more
ancient record than Ieromes testimony. For (says Eusebius lib 7, cap. 15.)
To conclude also, the Chair of James, (who was even of our Savior himself
and of the Apostles in Jerusalem, elected the first Bishop in the earth, The
chair of S. James at Jerusalem.
and whom books do note to be the brother of the Lord) is yet to this day
there kept. And in the same chair do all they sit, which until this present
time, do enjoy the sacred Priesthood of that Seat. It is kept therefore with
great diligence, as a memory of holiness delivered from the ancestors, and is
had in due reverence, either in pretense of the antiquity, or of the first
sanctification of the sacred Priesthood.

Neither does Eusebius write this, of the common estimation of the people, and
his own assertion, whereof he also spoke before, libro secundo, cap. 2^: That
unto James an Episcopal seat in Jerusalem was given of the Apostles: but also
cited out of Clemens, which likewise he ha^ done more at large before, lib. 2.
cap. 1. and he adds, for further confirmation hereof, saying: But Egesippus
which was straightwayes after the very first successions of the Apostles, with
more assured search, rehearses of him in the fifte book of his commentaries,
after these words: James (says he) the brother of the Lord, The definition
of the B. of man.
who of all men was called the Just, received with the Apostles, the Church,
who endured from the very times of the Lord until our days. (And so at
large Egesippus declares the manner of his Martyrdom, The authentike
testimonies of Egesippus, and Clement, Alex. cited by Eusebius
and in conclusion says) These things more at large, but agreeable unto
Clement, has Egesippus recorded: that James was so marvelous a man and among
all men, so highly thought of in the observing of all righteousness; that all
that were wise among the Jews believed, that this was the cause of the siege
of Jerusalem foorth-with following, that they had again on him laid their
wicked hands. And that Josephus did think even so, he evidently declares
by these words: all which things (says he) happened to the Jews for the
revenge of James the Just, which was the brother of Jesus, that is called
Christ, whom they killed, being by the confession of all men, the most
righteous and most holy man.

So that this Bishop which Danaeus calls the Bishop of man, and his
Episcopal chair wherein he sat among his fellow Brethren, and thereupon was
called (...), the president of them, is of man indeed, but of such men, even
of the holy Apostles of Jesus Christ: that we must needs confess, it is of
God also. Except we will disavowe the Apostles doings of the same, or call in
question the credit of these Historiographers, that were so near, and as it
were even in their times, which do auowe it of them.

But now that we have heard Danaeus judgment, let us hear also the
judgment of this most reverend and learned man from beyond the seas, that is
now arrived in England. For we Englishmen love many times to hear of news
beyond sea; where (in sooth) are many most reverend and learned men, and it is
good to hear the judgments of them, to see if they agree with these men's
judgments. For, if he be never so much most reverend and learned a man: yet,
(I perceive hereby) he is but a man; and so is the Bishop of man, as well as
he. And we have heard, for this one man's judgment, the judgment already of
a great many more, and that as reverend and as learned men, as this one most
reverend and learned man, who so ever he be. The style of most reverend man.
But is he not some Archbishop himself? For this style most Reverend sauoreth
much that ways, if the style of Archbishops be not by you misliked, for that
he is called a most reverend Father, and your style is to be well allowed of,
that calls him but a most reverend and learned man. But, as we have heard
other most reverend and learned men from beyond the seas also, and from the
most famous parts of all the world, and all of so many hundred years before
our times, yea, and before the usurpation of the Pope: so let us now hear also
the judgment of this most reverend and learned man, and confer it with the
other, and with the best learned even of our Brethren themselves, The triple
distinction overthrown
and so return to proceed upon our Learned Discourse.

The Bishop that is of man, ( says this most reverend and learned man) that is
to say, The most reverend,
brought into the Church by the alone wisdom of man, besides the express
word of God, is a certain power given to one certain Pastor, above his other
fellows; yet limited with certain orders or rules provided against tyranny.

In this definition of the B. of man, made here by the judgment of this most
reverend and learned man, Bridges.
( except in the party himself that is here defined) I see as yet (in my
simple and unlearned judgment) no great matter to be misliked in him, Another
B. of man defined than we defend.
or cause that he should mislike in the B. of man. Save that here (me thinks)
he defines an other B. of man, then we defend or know of, to be among us. And
this is principally to be marked, that definitum and definitio do so agree,
that whatsoever is spoken of the party defined, be aunswerable to the
definition of him: and whatsoever is put in the definition, be in all points
answerable, and neither more nor less, than is proper to the party that is
defined: or else, it is no good definition of ye party. For, here concerning
the B. of man, are adjoined these words, that is to say, brought into the
Church by the alone wisdom of man, besides the express word of God. Where
here this most reverend and learned man, takes on him to define such a B: we
take not upon us to defend or maintain, such a Bishop, as is brought into the
Church by the alone wisdom of man. If he be brought in by the only wisdom
of man which is folly to God, he is the very B. of the devil.
For, the alone wisdom of man, is mere foolishnes before God. Yea, (says S.
Paul 1. Cor. 8.) The wisdom of the flesh, is death, but the wisdom of the
spirit is life and peace, because the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against
God. For it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. But, it
is such wisdom as S. James speaks of, earthly, sensual, and devilish. Iac.
3. while therefore, this most reverend and learned man, speaks here
distinctly of the B. of man, from the Bishop of God: he confounds him with
the B. of the Devil. For what is the alone wisdom of man without the wisdom
of God, but the very wisdom of the devil? For when man would be wise without
God, he became a fool, and lost the Image of God, and was deformed with the
image of the devil, till by the lively character of Gods express Image Jesus
Christ, the Image of God was renewed in him. And if he do any thing of himself
without the wisdom of God, which is Jesus Christ, though in some respect it
may be said his own: yet, it is the Devils, from who^ all sin first came. So
that, here this triple distinction is confounded, neither indeed can it well be
maintained, The overthrow of this most reverend ma^s triple distinction.
that he says: we must needs make 3. Bishops. There is neither need nor truth
in this distinction, and (saving the reverence of every reverend and learned
man) it is but a captious distinction. Where with, seeing they dare not for
very shame, nor indeed can condemn all these holy fathers that maintained it,
as mainteining a B. of the devil: The ancient Bishops were of God.
they turn that cunningly to the Papists, that are the open adversaries: and
devise a mean betwixt Gods Bishops, and the devils, and that (for sooth) is
the B. of man. Wherein, good simple men, or rather well weening fools, brought
in a B. of their only or alone wisdom, There is no B of man, but either he is
the B. of God, or of the devil.
and that (for sooth) is not the devils B. but whose is he then? Is there
halting here betwixt God and Baal, and a mean between Christ and Beliall? Was
not Saules alone wisdom, without God, witchcraft? And is not witchcraft of
the devil? Does not Christ say, he that gathers not with me, is against me?
And is not he yt is against Christ, with the devil? Why then do ye seek out
these figs leaves, and not plainly say (if ye can so say, if ye dare so say)
that this Bishop, which all these holy fathers did acknowledge, was the devils
B? if ye say it was the devils B: I pray you look upon the fathers a little
better, that brought this B. in into the Church. And mark whether they look
not like Gods children, Whether the holy fathers in the primitive chapter set up
the devils Bis^.
yea the notable and excellent, most reverend and most learned saints of God,
many of them. And would all these set up such an Idol puppet as the devils B.
to be governor, and ouer-seer of Gods Church and many of them be such their
selves? If ye say it was not the devils Bishop. For he was not yet come, but
that (as Beza and Danaeus say) he made notwithstanding a way for the devils
Bishop to follow after. The reverence still reserved of so learned and
reverend men, I dare not think so hardly of them. For what is that, but to
be the devils Bishops gentlemen vshers, preparers, and forerunners of his
Antichriste? And so all comes to one, they were all the devils Bishops, save
that the less hurtful devils went before, and the more perilous devils came
after. But all of them devils incarnate, and no better then the devils Bishops.
But, God forbid, that ever we should so say, or think of them. It is no
charitable judgment of any (be he never so reverend and learned man) upon so
many holy, ancient, as good, and perhaps better Bishops of God, then is
himself. But if (to mollify all this) he will defend this part of his
distinction, they are of man, but not of the devil: the^ let him put out these
words brought in by the alone wisdom of man: yea, then let him confess, (for
in the end, he shall be driven unto it) that this B. of man, is even the very
B. of God also. The B. that was among these holy fathers was not so besides but
that he is included in Gods word.
If he say, it can not be, the B. of God, because it is besides the express
word of God: that which is included, can not well be called besides, but
within. And then who sees not, that if it were so, besides, yet, that is no
bar, if it be not debarred by the express word of God, but be either of
necessary consequence included; or a matter left at liberty, and not
expressed? Neither is this any whit enclining to the errors of the Popish
Bishops of the devil, that would bring in any doctrines of devils, or
devilish traditions of man into the Church of God, besides, that is, without
and against the Scripture.

The Bishops power limited.
For if the Papists can prove any of those things though not expressed, yet
of necessary consequence included in the scripture, and we refuse them: then
had they matter indeed to be justly offended with us. But where their
doctrines and traditions ( which we refuse) are such, as are neither expressed
nor included in Gods word: what are they but in effect against it? Prove this
Bishop that ye call, of man, to be of that stamp, and then indeed: Out on
him, yea and out with him. He is then of man (I grant) but he is of the Devil
also: and we will (God willing) with you renounce and defy him. But as for
those holy ancient Fathers, they brought in no other Bishop but such as had
good warrant, both inclusiue and also express in Gods word. And we have none
(I hope) nor defend any, but that accords with these holy Fathers, and is
not only of man, but of God also.

As the most reverend misseth in the party defined, so likewise in the
definition.
And as we say thus, for the party defined, so, for the definition, that this
Bishop of man is a certain power, given to one certain Pastor above his other
fellows, yet limited with certain orders or rules provided against tyranny.
That the party to whom power is given, may be called figuratively the power it
self, is indeed in the express word of God: Romans 13. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers. Now-beit, for such a learned man, in a definition
to set down, in the front of any treatise, to express the nature of a thing,
upon the light and truth whereof all the treatise depends; he should (me
thinks) avoid such figures, and speak plain, and not say a Bishop is a
power given to a Pastor, for this is rather a definition of the Bishops office,
then of the Bishop that enioyes it. But because they be so nearly conjoined,
and have relation one to the other: let that go. And although this difference
here set down, that applies this definition to the party defined, be so
large that it stretches to other persons, as well as to a Pastor, and so
conteyneth more than does a Bishop: yet let that go too. But do ye think
that a power limited with orders or rules provided against tyranny, is not a
good and lawefull power? Or is such a power of the Devil? If all power ( that
is indeed power) be of God: is not this much more of God, and acceptable to
him? Yea, but (say you) be it never so good, yet the same to be given to one
certain Pastor above his fellows, that is the point this learned man denies.

Yea? is that the matter? And what if he himself, or ever he turn the leaf,
The most reverend confutes himself, and his own defition.
in express words do say: all things ought to be done orderly in the Lords
house, and therefore, that some one should be president in every assembly?
And can this be done, without a certain power be given to one Pastor above
his other fellows? Yea, but that (will he say) is not given him to continue,
but for the continuance of the assembly. But, this was less out of the
definition, and he was called simply the Bishop of man, The differenceof the
time.
that had a certain power given to one certain Pastor, above his other
fellows, yet limited with certain orders or rules provided against tyranny.
So that, he that has this power given him for a time of an assembly, is by
this reckoning the Bishop of God. And he that has given him for longer time
than an assembly, is the Bishop of man. But I pray you, have me reverently
commended to this most reverend and learned man, and desire him to show me
this, in the express word of God. For, I fear not, but that where-soeuer he
shall find the one, I will hazard to find the consequence of the other. And
if this power may be given of man for a time: it is not then, The most reverend
confesses superiority of the power, but he differs for the time.
( I take it) the difference of the power it self so much, nor of the
competencie of it to the persons as the difference of the time, how longer the
person shall enjoy this power that we contend for. We agree, that such a power
as is limited, with certain orders or rules provided against tyranie, is good,
and lawefull, and of GOD. We agree also, that it may be given of man to a
Pastor, above his fellow Pastors for a time, and he still remain a Pastor,
and they still remain therein his fellows; but in respect of this his limited
power given him, he is above them for the time. Is now the limitation of time,
of the substance to make such difference, and that before God? But (I doubt
not) if there be no worse matter in the power it self, we shall easily
obtain a little longer time, than of a short assembly, that our Bishop of
man, being the man of God, may be Bishop of GOD also, and not so soon made a
quondam, and an-other placed in his Bishopric. Since, (be-it short or long)
there is no danger at all of any tyranny in it. But as he limiteth him for
the time, so he adds after this definition, a limitation also, or rather, a
specification of the power, saying:

They which did bear this office of Bishops, The most reverend, Bridges.
are called Bishops in regard of their fellowe-Elders, and the whole Clergy,
as watchmen set over the Clergy.

True it is, that they are so called, though not only in regard of their
fellow Elders, and the whole Clergy; but in regard also of the whole people
under them. And the regard that is toward their fellow-Elders and the whole
Clergy, since it takes not away the fellowship of their brethren Elders, nor
is any absolute power, but a certain power limited with certain orders of
rules provided against tyranny: is a good regard and neither injurious unto
their fellow-Elders, or to any man, and even therefore acceptable unto God.

But, says this most reverend and learned man: The most r^uer^^^*
that this calling was not brought in by the word, it is manifest, by that,
that there is not to be found in the new Testament, so much as one syllable,
whereby there may be the least surmise of any such thing. The continuing
assembly.


Whether there be not to be found in the new Test. so much as one syllable,
Bridges.
whereby there may be the least surmise of any such thing. I refer it to the
consideration of that, which is already alleged, not only concerning Timothy
and Titus: but also out of the testimony of those historiographers and fathers
cited, that lived either in the Apostles times, or followed next the^. Yea, I
refer it to Calvin and Beza themselves in the places before noted. And that
is more, I refer it to the very judgment of this most Reverend and learned
man from beyond the seas, even in the very next sentence, immediately following
this ouer-bolde, and too peremtory assertion.

The most reverend.
For ( says he) although we doubt not, but all things ought to be done
orderly in the Lords house, and therefore that some one should be president in
every assembly, whom John in the Revelation seems to call the Angel of the
Churches.

If some one should be president in every assembly, because al things ought
be done orderly in the Lords house: Bridges.
and the assembly be of Priests or Elders: then should one of the Priests or
Elders be president over the residue. And if the assembly continue not only
for actions done at one time, but continue still; then this presidentship over
the Priests or Elders should still continue, by the testimony of this most
Reverend and Learned man; The continuing of the assemblies at Jerusalem when
James was president.
or else, all things should not be orderly done in the Lords house. But now,
whether the assembly of the Clergy and Pastoral Elders, did not continue at
or about Jerusalem, and that there be not so much as one syllable, whereby
there may be the least surmise of any such thing: look Act. 1. ver. 4.13. and
14. Act. 2. ver. 1. and 42.43. and 44. Act. 4. ver. 32. Act. 5. ver. 11.12. and
13. Act. 6. ver. 2. and 5. Act. 8. v. 14. and 25. Act. 9. ver. 27. Act. 11.
ver. 1.2.3.4. and 22. Act. 12. ver. 12. Act. 15. ver. 2.4. 6.12.22.23.24.25.
etc. Act. 21. ver. 18. By the conference of all these and other places, it is
most apparent, that the assembly of the Clergy at Jerusalem was still
continuing. And therefore it follows, that one should be still a continuing
president over them: or else, all things should not have been done orderly in
the Lords house. And what differs this continuing president ( that is to
say, one that sits higher than all the residue,) from the Bishop, whom
Egesippus, Clem. Eusebius. Jerome, and Ambr. (as is aforesaid) described to be
placed in the higher seat to ouer-see his Brethren, whereupon this name
Episcopus Bishop, is derived?

Neither do I refuse the example, that this most Reverend and learned man
alleges, Marloraeu^ in Apocal. cap. 2.
saying: whom John in the Revelation seems to call the Angel of the Churches.
And what gathers Marlorate, that S. John means, by this Angel? Angel and
sent are all one. Whereupon we learn, that none can minister the word of the
Lord purely, and with profit except, he be sent of the L. Romans 10. c. 15. John
foretold that he would write to the 7. Churches, as is aboue-said, The Angels
of the Churches.
1. a. 4. which thing he now begins to put in practice, while he writes to
the Pastoures of those Churches. For the Pastors ought not to be estranged from
the Churches, of whom is made one body. Of Ephesus we spoke 1. c. 11. What
office they had that are called in the Revelation, the Angels of the Churches.
From this Church of Ephesus, John begins, because for the multitude of the
believers, and the celebritie of the place, it was esteemed for the chiefest
Church. And profitable was it to make the beginning from the same: that it
being corrected, it might more easily be provided, for the correction and
health of other Churches. And although certain things were to be corrected,
as well in the people, as in the Clergy, (as they call the^) notwithstanding he
sets not on the people, but on the Clergy. Neither calls he upon every
one of the Clergy by name, but on the Prince of the Clergy, that is to say,
the Bishop. And that not without a reason. For the Pastor is to render account
not only for his own sins, but also for the sins of those that are subject
to him, if it chance any perish by his negligence or slothfulness, as is
contained Ezech. 3. c. 20. Moreover, even as, so long as the stomach is sick,
health is provided to the other members to no purpose, but the chiefest regard
is to be had thereof: even so, ought the medicine of correction, to be ministered
to the Pastors before the people. For, as the ill stomach infectes the
nourishment with the which all the members are increased: so by the evil and
noisome life of the Pastors, the life of the people is corrupted. Albeit, it is
likely, that not any one of the governors of the Church, is in this and in the
places following, noted: but with all, the whole succession of the B. and
Elders of that Church, is by order to be taken. Although the minister of the
place ought to be accounted always among these to hold the chiefest.

By which collection of Marlorate it appears, that although S. John by name
of Angel, may comprehend generally the Clergy, to wit, chiefly the Pastors;
yet here in writing especially to one, and calling that one the Angel of this
or that Church; it is apparent, that some one or other, had a superiority over
the other of the Clergy in those Churches. Which one, is here peculierly
called the Bishop and Prince, or chief of the Clergy or Pastors. Among which
Churches, Ephesus being reckoned one and the first, wherein (as we have seen
Bezaes testimony) were many Pastors: it is evident, that although after
Timothy, yet in S. John's time, the Church of Ephesus, of whose Elders (if
they were Elders of that Church only) called by S. Paul to Miletum, we had
heard so much debated, how soever they might there be termed by the names of
Bishops improperly: yet notwithstanding they had but one Prince or chief of
all the Clergy there, which was indeed the Bishop or ouer-seer of them all,
whom Christ here calls, the Angel of the Church of Ephesus. And so likewise,
we have also to think of all the other Churches there named.

A Moderator.
Lo, how this most reverend and learned man, has himself against
himself, found out in the new Testament, a great deal more than one syllable,
not of gathering the least surmise, but manifest evidence, that some one, yea,
diverse some such ones, bare this office of Bishops as Princes or chief in
regard of their fellow Pastoral Elders, and of the whole Clergy, as
principal watchmen, set over the other inferior watchmen, in their several,
greater or lesser Cities and congregations. And therefore this Bishop that here
is called the Bishop of man, is manifestly brought in by Gods word, clean
contrary to this ouerbolde assertion, of this most reverent and learned
outlandish man, who-so-euer (saving his reverence) he be. Neitheir can this
shift following, elude this proofa, wherein he says:

And Austen calls the moderator Proestota, yet this moderator of actions of
the Church, The most reverend.
saving this one thing, that he was the first in order in the company, had no
authority over his fellows, neither did he exercise any higher office.

I would feign the place had been quoted where S. Augustine calls the
moderator Proestota. Bridges.
That we might turn unto it and peruse it, whether it be appliable to this
question, yea or no. I fear me greatly, S. Augustine has no such saying,
especially meaning it, of a Bishop, that he was such a Moderator of actions of
the Church, saving this one thing that he was the first in order in the
company: but, had no authority over his fellows, neither did he exercise any
higher office. And what a Moderator call ye that which does not exercise any
higher office? A Modera^or.
Is his moderatorship no office? And how can it be a moderatorship, and not
higher? And how can he moderate his fellows, except he have some authority over
his fellows? Is this no more but this one thing, to be the first in order in
the company? Or rather, is it not to be the last in order, and the first in
authority of higher office? For in order, the moderator speaks the last, and
in all deliberations, determines, that is, ends and knitteth up the matter.
And the first in order, is rather in dignity and authority the lowest, and
commonly the punie (as they term him) to all the company. Whereas, if he be
the moderator, to moderate the sentences of the^ all, his last voice strikes
the stroke, and has the first and highest authority in the company. Yea, but
he is the moderator of actions of the Church. And does that abridge his
authority? What should he moderate, being a man of the church, but actions of
the church? Grant this, and there an end. For, whether ye mean by the Church,
all the people of God, or only the Clergy, as usually, we take the name; if
he must moderate all their actions, how has he not in this moderation an
authority over them, and an higher office? If ye mean by the actions of the
Church, the actions of the Clergy assembled in a Synod: And is this no
action of the Church to call and assemble the synod together, and appoint
the^ time and place, and propound matter to them, as causes of the said
assembly? or shall not the moderator (the Christian Princes supreme authority
always preserved) moderate these actions of the Church? if not; name who
shall. The moderating the actions of the Church not the actions of the synodes
only.
if he shall; by what authority? and how then are these actions of the Church
to be understood only, of moderating the actions of those that are assembled
in the synod? But if this party whom S. John in the Revelation seems to
call the Angel of the Churches be this Proestos, and this moderator of the
Churches actions; was there then in every one of those 7. Churches when S. Ioh.
wrote to their Angels, that is, to their Proestotes and moderators, a synod
holden at that instant? for if there were not; the^, these angels, Proestotes,
and moderators, were not so called in that respect: but in respect of those
actions, that were usual, and continuing among them, And indeed, such are the
matters that Christ there, does commend or discommend them for: and not for
moderating actions of any Synod then holden, or for being president in any
such assemblies. It follows therefore, that if they be of Christ himself
called Angels in the Revelation: and (as here is said of Austen) Moderators
and Proestotes, that is, Prouostes, or, such as had a principal being or
chief standing among and over the Clergy; that the terms were given them,
rather for a continual office of higher authority, whereby they should be the
presidents and moderators of every assembly, when any such should by them be
summonced, rather than they should be called by these names only, for being
presidentes and moderators of them, when they were assembled, The most reverend.
when as there were no such assemblies there at that time to moderate, nor
Synodes whereof they should be Presidents.

But, says this most reverend and learned man: Therefore the author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, as Hierome notes, does call the whole company of the
Elders, governors, not any one certain man.

Where Hierome notes this, is not here noted, Bridges
and therefore I can not note, what Hierome notes thereon. But, that the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews calls the whole company of the Elders,
Governors; What hinders this but that they also might have a governor over
them, and yet their selves be governors over others? and does S. Paul speak
there, of any such company of these governors assembled in a Synod, as this
learned man speaks of? else: wherefore is this here alleged? and yet, if he
spoke of such an assembly of these governors; if his speech should not admit
any, some one certain man to be governor also of them: how should then one be
president in every assembly ( sith that all things ought to be done orderly
in the Lords house) if they be all alike and equal governors? neither is the
example of Peter next alleged, any whit against it, but rather for it,

The most reverend.
Such a one ( says this learned man) was Peter many times in the very assembly
of Apostles, of a great authority surely amongst the Apostles, who were all
otherwise equal, and yethe him self one of the company of thapostles sent by
his companions to Samaria with John, Act. 8.14. and in the assembly giving an
account of his ministry, to those which were of the circuncision. Act. 11.2.

Bridges
If Peter many times were such an one, that is to say, a President, Proestos
and moderator of the assemblies of the Apostles: This is not only to be of a
great authority among them, but also, if of any authority at all, then this
great, was greater among the Apostles, then the authority of others at that
time was. But did this great or greater authority by and by cease from among
them, How Peter, James and John were greater.
upon the ceasing of every particular assembly? Does not S. Paul acknowledge
Peter to remain still great among the Apostles, even when he mencioneth no
assemblye of them? and what means he by this great, but by way of comparison,
that the other Apostles were less? and so James, and Peter and John to be
greater then the residue. True it is, that here is said, they were all
otherwise equal. But what do these words also import, otherwise equal?
ergo, this otherwise, being set aside: they were not equal. So that I perceive
in some respect, they that are not equalles, may otherwise be superiors or
inferiors one to another, without prejudice of their equality well enough*
Yea, Calvin, Calvin in Act. 8.14.
on this very example of Peter here alleged, Act. 8.14. does say: In that Luke
declares that Peter was sent of the residue, hereon may be gathered that he
exercised not an empire over his colleagues, but did so excel among them, that
yet, he was under and obeyed the body. As who say, his superiority among the^,
was rather in respect of their particular persons, than of the whole Church or
corporation. So that, this confutes the immoderate pride of the Pope, but
denies not a moderate superiority in the ministry, wherewith it may very
well agree. And this accords with Christ's saying, Luke. 21. He that is
greatest among you, let him be as the least. Neither does this debar Peter's
superiority, that in the assembly he gave an account of his ministry to
those which were of the circumcision, Act. 11.2. For, if we better regard
those persons, Peter's giving account deb^rreth not his superior^tie.
to whom he gave this account: I doubt not, but all our brethren, yea, even
this most reverend and learned man will confess, that he was far superior
unto them. And if Apostleship have any high authority: S. Paul Galat. 2.
calls him the Apostle of the circumcision. So that, this his fact, debarreth
not his superiority over them. And on those persons to whom Peter gave this
account, says Calvin. But note, that when as before, Calvin. in Act. ^^.2.
Luke had said that the Apostles and the brethren heard this same: he spoke
not a word of offense. But now to bring in as it were a new sect of men, that
attempted strife with Peter: The brethren (says he) hard it, he adds
nothing afterward: it follows, Peter rendering accounts.
when Peter came to Jerusalem, they which were of the Circumcision chod with
him, Who (verilye it must needs be) were diverse from the former. The
particle (...), of the Circumcision, does not simply note the Jews, but those
that were too much addicted to the ceremonies of the Law. For there were no
people of Jerusalem then in the flock of Christ, but such as were
circumcised: from whom then should they discern these? Last of all, it
seems not likely that the Apostles, and those more moderate, which were of
the number of the faithful, did attempt this strife. For although they had
been offended, yet might they have come to Peter privately, and required a
reason of the fact. By these reasons I am moved, that I think them to be
called of the circumcision, whom such a religion of circumcision held, that
they would permit no man to have place in the kingdom of God, but him that
received the profession of the Law, and being initiated by this holy
ceremony, did put off uncleanness. To men having Circumcision: This was not
forbidden by the law of God, but it was an observation delivered of the Fathers
by hands. Neither yet does Peter except, that in this behalf he is handled
too preciselie, that by the necessity of the law of man he is not bound: he
omitteth all this defense, but answers only, that they came to him before,
and were offered to him as it were by the hand of God. Howbeit we here see the
rare modesty of Peter, that whereas trusting on the goodness of his cause,
he might have despised the unskillful men, that unjustly were troublesome unto
him: notwithstanding, How Peter submitted himself.
(as is decent to be done among brethren) he does gently excuse him self unto
them. Indeed this was no light tentation, that he was unworthily accused,
seeing that he had faithfully obeyed God. But because he knew, that a Law
was given to the whole Church, that every one should be ready to render an
account of his doctrine and life, so often as the matter so requires: and he
remembered that he was one of the ^locke: he not only suffers him self to
be brought into order: but of his own voluntary, he submits him self to
the Churches judgment. Verily the Doctrine if it be of God, is placed above
the dice of man's judgment, but because God would have prophecy to be judged.
1. Cor. 14.29. and 32: this condition must not be refused of his servants, to
prove themselves to be, How Peter's fact confuteth the Popes pride and tyranny,
not any moderate superiority.
such as they would be counted for to be. But how far the defense as well of
doctrine, as of facts, ought to proceed: we shall see anon. This (for the
present) must be holden, that Peter willingly descended to plead his cause,
when his fact was improoued. But if the Pope of Rome be the successor of
Peter, why shall not he be holden by the same Law. Howsoever we grant this
kind of submission was voluntary, The naming of the superiors.
notwithstanding, why does not the successor imitate such an example of
modesty showed unto him? albeit, here need nothing circuit: for if it be
true, that the popes vomit up in their sacrilegious decrees, Peter falsely
forsook the privileges of his sea, and so was the betrayer of the Roman Sea.
For, after that they have made the Pope, the judge of the whole world, who may
not be subject to the judgment of man: after that they extolled him above the
Clouds, that being free from all reason to be rendered, he might account his
own will and lust for Law: straight they ordeine ( him) Patron of the Sea
Apostolical, which stoutly should maintain the privileges thereof, Of what
slothfulness therefore shall Peter be condemned, if by yielding so easily*
he cast off the right by God collated to him? Why did not he at the least
object, that he was free from Laws and exempted from the common number? but
he alleges before hand no such thing, but straight enters into the cause.
But let us remember, that nothing lets whereby we may not falsely despise
that idol, since that usurping to himself such unbridled tyranny, he has
put him self out of the number of the Bishops.

Thus we see it at large by Calvin, though it be rightly alleged against the
insolency of the Pope: yet makes it nothing against the lawefull superiority
of Bishops, but rather for it: showing, how they should use it with such
humility, that not only they should subject themselves to the whole Church,
but now and then, to base and unskillful men being their accusers. ( Such, as
Beza also calls these unworthy accusers of S Peter) and of humbleness of
mind, and of their own good will render reasons to them of their doings, and
yet, may well be, and (for all that) are, superior in all ecclesiastical
authority to those persons. The most reverend.
But ( says this most reverend and learned man) if any such Byshoplike
authority of any one above the rest, as there was afterward, had been then:
surely the Apostles would have set down their names even at that time, in
their letters which they sent from one to another, especially, seeing Paul in
his Epistle to the Philippians, does name Bishops in their plural number, and
Deacons: or there should have been at least, some peculier mention made of
them. Which seeing it is not done: it appears that amongst those governors,
there was none in degree above their companion and fellow Bishops: but as
occasion served, the Churches were governed by a fellowlike and equal
authority, among the fellow elders in their elderships, he only going before
the rest, whose godliness and authority the company did most allow of.

This argument, if any such Byshoplike authority etc. had been then: surely,
Bridges
the apostles would have set down their names, etc. which seeing it is not
done, it appearth etc. is gathered of probability, not urged of necessity. And
therefore with as easy probability, may be rejected. The naming of the
superiors.
If not: why is not this as good an argument: If any such doctors as might not
exhort, and if any such elders as might not minister the word and sacraments,
had been then: surely, the Apostles would have set down their names, in their
letters which they sent from one to another. The most reuerends argument on
probability, and of not naming the persons.
etc. Which seeing it is not done; it appears, that among the ministers of
the Church in the time of the Apostles, there were no such doctors nor Elders.
If now this most reverend and learned man shall say, what though the Apostles
set not down their names, which they were not bound to do, nor needed: yet if
the matter be proved plain enough, that there were then such offices; it
makes no matter, though we want the names, to know who were then such officers.
Now, If the matter be proved it suffices.
although this for the matter of those offices be not yet showed; yet, were it
showed, if the names of the officers be not showed also; where is the virtue of
our most reverend and learned man's argument then become? and yet (God be
praised) the assumption of this argument is not so true. For we can show, and
do show, both apparent matter, and names also, that there was some one amonst
the governors even at that time, that was in degree above his companions and
fellow Bishops. As, besides Peter, The persons are named that had superior
authority.
James and John, who (as is aforesaid) are expressly in the text it self, by
S. Paul, named greater than the rest of the Apostles, not only the
subscriptions of the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, declare: but also a great
part of the matter contained in them, does not of probability but of necessity
infer it. But what need further proofs or playner testimony, than this most
reverend and learned man's own mouth against himself, and that in this self
same sentence? for, what exception is this that follows here? There was none
above their companions and fellow Bishops, but as occasion served, The most
reuerends confession of one going before the residue, and that in au^hority.
the Churches were governed by a fellowlike and equal authority, among the
fellow elders in their Elderships, he only going before the rest, whose
godliness and authority the company did most allow of: For if he only were
going before the rest: how then was their authority equal? yea, but he had
none authority, but by their allowance. What is that to the purpose? had he
authority by their allowance? So much the better, when so good men did allow
such authority, for one amongst them to go before the rest: and the worse for
all those that will not now allow the like. Yea, but (says he) he only going
before the rest, whose godliness and authority the company did most allow of.
So that here is not only his authority allowed of, but also his godliness. And
well worthy. Think ye that we defend, that any should be allowed this
authority without godliness? allow the authority to the godly; and then,
dissalowe and prove the party to be ungodly that is allowed it, and I hope, if
it be done in good order, all that allow of godliness will allow your
dissalowing. Epiphanius oppugned and defended.
Yea, but what was this authority here allowed? but of one only going before
the rest? What means this learned man, by only going before the rest? Does he
mean of going only, as the gentlemen others or other officers prepare the way
for Princes, and more honorable personages than themselves, to follow? or as,
when those that are companions in each respect, fellow and fellowlike, having
equal authority, and yet they can not go altogether cheek by cheek: some
one of necessity must go before his fellows in a narrow passage,
notwithstanding all they that came after him, are in all points of of equal
authority and fellowlike unto him? What a going before is this? or how is this
said, to be a going before by authority? For if one amongst them went before
the rest of the Pastors or B. This B. of man had his beginning in the apostles
times.
with authority, what else is this, but that one was in degree above his
companions and fellow pastors or bishops? yea, but this says he, was as
occasion served. And I think so, for occasion served very well. But howsoever
it then served, then it was. And so by this learned man's own confessions, he
answers and confuteth himself, still inferring that this Bishop of man, had
his beginning even in the Apostles times.

After that this most reverend and learned man, has in this sort (as he
thinks) proved, that this calling was not brought in by the word, and that,
it is manifest by that, that there is not to be found in the new Testament so
much as one syllable, whereby there may be the least surmise of any such thing:
( which assertion how true or false it is, I refer to the indifferent readers
verdict, on this foresaid improouing of it, yea to that he has himself
already alleged against himself) presupposing now, The most reuerendes
confutation of the auntie^t fathers, for this B. of man.
that this calling was brought in only by the fathers: he enters into the
confutation of them, and first inueigheth against Epiphanius, who lived about
380. years after Christ, and that we may the better way the judgment of
this most reverend and learned man, and how he confuteth Epiphanius: let us
before at large set down Epiphanius own words, The most reverend.
and then peruse his confutations of him.

But first, in that he says, Epiphanius against the Arians defending the
contrary opinion.

True it is, Epiphanius did mightily oppugn also the Arians, as the Capital
enemies of our faith, Bridges
and Aerius that began this schism in the church about this equality, was
likewise an Arian. Howbeit this is not here so properly said, Epiphanius
against the Arians, ^piphanius against the Aerians.
defending the contrary opinion, namely, the Bishop ordained by man, etc. As
to have said, Epiphanius against the Aerians. etc. For although Aerius were
also an Arian, and denied the divinity of Jesus Christ: yet was not Arius an
Aerian, nor (that I read of) made any Question about this matter. Which that
it may appear, and who this Aerius was, and what in these points (besides
other) he oppugned: Aerius.
let us hear Epiphanius himself declare it.

And likewise ( says Epiphanius) there arose one Aerius, a great hurt unto
the World, being of a boystrous mind and lift up in his own opinion. For,
whether it were by reason of vainglory, Epiphanius contra h^res. lib. 3.10.1.
Her. 75. The original from whence Aerius conceived this error against bishops.
or of haughty pride, he effected all their haeresie, that by rashness has
been wroughte, even from the beginning to the ending. Verily, either lust or
envy against his neighbors, or grief of mind, or frowardness, wrought these
things. In conclusion, blindness is of the Devil, not that the Devil can
do any thing against a man's will, but that every one is the author to him
self of the work of sin. Whereby (as he says) those that be good and
sound, may be made manifest. This Aerius lives in the flesh, and is yet
alive even at this day. Verily altogether an Arian, for he thinks not
otherwise than even as Arius does: yea, and stretches further beyond the
points that are of Arius. Quick of speech, and in this part having his
lips armed, that he might draw to him self, even an army of such as are
beguiled, Whom Aerius beguiled,
and a multitude of such as have itching ears, and a loose mind. For he also
has devised unto the world, a certain fabulous and vain opinion, which is
ridiculous to those that are prudent, and yet has he deceived and allured many
by the same.

This manne was Schoole-fellowe with Eustathius the Sebastian, of the region so
called of Sebastea, of Pontus or little Armenia. For they were both trained up
together, Emulation and envy the ground, on repulse of promotion.
the foresaid Eustathius and Aerius: but when E^stathius came to a
Byshopricke, he (Aerius) did the more lust after it, but he obtained is not.
Heerevppon arose envy, but Eustathius seemed to flatter Aerius. For straight
ways after, he made him priest, and committed an Hospital unto him, which in
Pontus is called Ptochotropheum, of nourishing the poor.

For the prelates of the Churches do build such places for the love of
hospitality. Aerius promooted to be master of an hospital of the poor.
Causing the maimed and impotent persons to lodge there, and according to their
ability, provide victualles and necessaries for them. When as therefore his
wrath was not yet appeased, speeches daily increased, and their emulation
brake forth abroad, and talk not very good, yea, slanders were given forth
of Aerius against Eustathius. But the Bishop Eustathius calling Aerius unto
him, flattered him, exhorted him, B. Eustathius flattering and sawning on
Aerius*
threatened him, chafed with him, comforted him, and yet wrought nothing with
him. For that platform that was laid down in the beginning, drove him into
this great evil work: and so, at the length forsaking the hospital,
Aerius went away. Heerevpon purposing to find a pretense against his enemy, or
searching to hurl a dart at his adversary, and from that time forth
slaundering Eustathius before all men, Aerius unthankful and false slaundering
and backbiting of Eustathius.
he said, he is now no more such a person, but he is fallen to gathering of
money, and to the possession of all sorts of things by all manner of means.
And this verily devised he of mere slander. Howbeit in very deed, whereas
Eustathius had in his hands the necessities ecclesiastical, he could not
otherwise do, and the things that were spoken by Aerius seemed probable. But if
any shall thus think with himself, since that (speaking against Aerius) we
have by the way brought in Eustathius, do we therefore with prayers extol
Eustathius? verily, not a few men have his life and policy in admiration. But
would to God he had also thought a right in the faith. Eustathius error.
For even he also held the opinion of Arius, from the beginning to the ending.
Neither did the troubles of persecution amend him, for he suffered persecution
with Basilius, with Bleusus and with others. Yea, he was seen also to travel
in legacy with many other Bishops to Liberius the happy bishop of Rome, (
or rather unhappy for he him self also fell from the faith and became an
Arian) And to subscribe to the confession of the right faith made by setting
forth of the Nicene council, but afterward as bethinking himself, and as one
awaked out of sleep, he left not of to co^sideragain his former points, of the
wicked opinion of the Arians, but we have to speak of Aerius and therefore we
must again direct our speech to him. He (for the forsaid reasons) does in the
beginning crake of his renou^cing. And having forsaken the hospital, he
toulled unto him a great multitude of men and women. But he with his company
was driven from the Churches, the fildes the villages, and other cities, and
often with his great company they lived watching and sober in the fields, and
continued all night abroad under the open sky, and under the rock, and fled
to the woods. But his speech was rather furious, then according to the
condition of man. Aerius renouncing his living because he would not live
under Eustathius.
And he said, what is a Bishop to a Pastor? the one differs nothing from the
other. For, it is one order. Yea (says he) it is one honor, and one dignity.
A Bishop uses imposition of hands, so does a priest. A Bishop baptizeth, so
does a Priest. A Bishop makes the dispensation of the worshop of God, and a
Priest likewise. A Bysh. fitteth in his throne, a Priest sits also. Herein
he deceived many, and they had him for their guide.

Thus far Epiphanius upon the occasion and description of this error. Whereby
we see, that this most reverend and learned man is ouershot in this, that he
says. Epiphanius here wrote against the Arians: for although by the way he
mention them, with whose heresy Aerius an^ Eustathius were both infected: yet
having written against the Arians before, Lib. 2. to 2, haeres. 69. Here Lib.
3. to 1. haeres. 75. Epiphan. against Aerius.
He wrote against Aerius: And makes this his proper and his first error. And
withal Epiphanius tells, on what occassion of emulation and envy this error
sprang and with what odious slanders and devises it was set out, and with what
reasons and arguments it was defended, and what multitudes of men and women
were allured by it, and how they behaved themselves, etc. Al which things
draw so near (the heresy of Arius, and other errors of this Aerius set
aside) to the foreshadowing of these controversies, that we may all now (with
grief and tears) see the very cause, why the malicious and slanderous
adversaries of the Gospel, object falsely unto us to be Aerianst because these
our brethren (which we do not) do seem so nearly to follow the error, the
occassion, the dealings and the arguments of Aerius: in this matter. Now to
Epiphanius confutations of them.

But let us come ( says he) to the oppositions against him, Epiph.
co^futation of Aerius.
reciting but a few things, and so passing over them, and that indeed
because the whole matter is full of folly, and manifest unto those that are
wise. For, to say that a Bishop and a priest are equal, how is it possible?
sith that the order of bishops is the begetter of the Fathers. For that order
begets the fathers to the Church. but the order of Priests is not of
ability to beget the fathers, but begets sons to the Church, by the
regeneration of baptism, but not the fathers or Doctors. And how was it
possible to ordeine a priest, nor having imposition of hands, for to elect, or
to say, he is equal unto, a bishop? The B the fathers of the pastors* the
pastors the fathers o^ the people.
But his trifling and his envy, deceived the foresaid Aerius. But he alleges
for his error, and the error of them that harken to him: that the Apostle
writes to the Priests and Deacons, and writes not to the Bishops, and says
to the bishop, despise not the gift that is in thee, which thou haste received
by the hands of the priesthood (or eldership,) and again in another place,
he writes to the Bishops and Deacons. Therefore (says he) a bishop and a
priest is all one, and he understands not, (being ignorant of the
consequence of the truth) and has not read the most profounde hystories,
that while as the preaching was new, the holy Apostle wrote according to the
occasion of the matter, even as it was. The occasion of diff^rence in the
apostles writing.
For whereas bishops were ordained, there he wrote to bishops and Deacons? For
the Apostles could not ordain all things forthwith: for it was needeful to
have priests and deacons. For, by these two, the ecclesiastical things may be
filled up. But whereas there was not found any worthy of a byshoprike: the
place abode without a bishop. but where as need was, and there were that were
worthy of a byshoprick, there bishops were ordained. But when as there was no
multitude, and there were not found among them that should be ordained priests
or elders: there were they content with a bishop only, ordained in that place
alone. But it is impossible possible for the Bishop to be without a deacon. And
the Apostle provided that Deacons should be made unto the Bishop, for the
ministry. Thus did the Church receive the filling up of the dispensation, thus
were the places furnished at this time: for every thing had not all things at
the first beginning: but in the process of time, those things were provided
for, that are requisite to the perfection of things necessary. Indeed Moses
was sent into Aegipt, (as has the old Testament) only with a rod* but
being sent of God, when he should go forth into Egypt, his brother Aaron was
added to be an helper unto him: and then after he had given his commission to
his brother, a senate was gathered to him* and the princes of the people of
that time. And after these things, the work being corroborated, and a company
to follow him being gathered together, he passed through the sea: and as yet
things were not according to the Law, till the Lord called him into the
mount: and then he gave him the foldinges (or tables) of the commandments,
and showed unto him how he should build the tabernacle, and promote Princes
and Captains of ten, of fifty of hundreths and tribunes of the soldiers:
And thou see how things are enlarged. Thou shall do all things (says
he) according to the form showed thee in the mount Sinai. And thou see how
the cansticke, having seven lights is added, the vestiments reaching down to
the feet, the preestely garments, the belles, the cloakes, the little coats,
the capppes, the miters, the setting of the precious stones, the Cups, the
morters, the censers, the Basins, the Alters, the dishes, Masmaroth, which are
colanders: Midicoth, which are called gobbettes, Mechonoth, which are steps,
and whatsoever the Law reherseth, Cherubins and other things. The Arc of the
Testament, the staves, the rings, the tent, the collars, the skins died red,
the pottes and other things, porters, Trumpets cast and crooked, golden and of
silver, brazen and of horn, and other things that the Law names: diverse
sacrifices and doctrines. For whereas these things were not at the beginning,
did not these things therefore after the order was made put men to business?
and even so those things that are written by the apostle, until such time as
the Church was enlarged, until she came to her proper measure, until she was
most rightly governed with the ornature of understanding, by the Father, the
Son, and the holy ghost. And down fell the saying of Aerius. And that it
cannot be all one, the divine saying of the Apostle teachet^, who is a
Bishop, and who is a priest or elder: When as he says to Timothy, that was
a Bishop, Rebuke not a Priest or an Elder, but exhort him as a Father. What
should a Bishop have to do not to reprove a priest or elder, if he had
no power over a Priest or elder? even as he says again, Admit no
accusation lightly against a preeste or elder, evcept before two or three
witnesses, Defense of Epiph. argument.
and he said not to any Priest, admit no accusation against a Bishop:
Neither wrote he to any Preeste, that he should not chide a Bishop. And thou
see, that all the ruin of him that is shaken of the devil, is no small
ruin.

These are the arguments of Epiphanius against Aerius on this matter. Now
let us see how This most reverend and learned man, does answer the
arguments of Epiphanius.

Epiphanius ( says he) against the Arians, defending the contrary opinion,
namelye, the bishop ordained by man, The most reverend.
as ordained by God, does bring forth three reasons to the contrary: Two as it
were out of the word of God, the third out of the historye of those times:
the first place is, 1. Timothy 5.1. Rebuke not an elder. etc.

It is strange to see, how these our Brethren under countenaunces and Titles,
forestalling the credit of most reverend and learned men, Bridges
would carry away the matter, against these reverend and learned aucient
Fathers: Yea, and that against the manifest word of God: And first,
concerning this Father Epiphanius, has he here brought forth but three
reasons? If this most reverend and learned man him self, in prosecuting
Epiphanius reasons, do allege more then three: Epiph. has more arg. then
three.
then blame him self, for this so manifest an untruth. Except he will
peradventure salve it thus: What though he brought forth threescore? yet we
may say, he brought forth three, And think ye we may thus dally with these
Fathers? But as he handles the number of the Reasons: so likewise he
proceeds in the order of them. He says the first place is 1. Timothy 5.1.
If by the first place, he means the first reasonne that Epiphanius
bringethe forth: Epiphanius is most plain to the contrary, and he
manifestlye inuerteth Epiphanius Order. But let us take his aunsweres, as it
pleases him to answer them.

The first place is 1. Timothy 5.1. Rebuke not an Elder. etc. Whereby he
gathers that Timothy had some authority over the Elders, The most reverend,
that is, the pastors of the Church of Ephesus: but (be it spoken with the
favor of so worthy a man) he should have marked, that here an elder is called,
he that is such by age, not he that is a pastor, which is declared by the
opposition next following of young men.

I deny not, but that the word (...) in that place is aptlye, and most
commonly understood, in the natural sense, Bridges.
for Elders in respect of age. But to deny that Epiphanius or any other, may
not also apply it to Elder in office, which on the Greek, by contraction,
Epith. understands well enough the name of elder.
is called Priest: is too hard a challenge of so worthy a man: especially since
he makes the key of his reason on the word (...): saying, what should a bishop
have to do, Defense of Epiph. argument.
not to reprove a priest (or elder) if he had no power over a priest (or
elder)? And understanding elder in his natural sense for elder in age, as also
younger in age, that Timothy should not rebuke them: does not this presuppose,
that he had some power over them so to do? if then Saint Paul anon after in
the same chapter, would have Timothy openly reprove them that sin: and there
(without all exception) he especially speaks of the elders in office and
pastors: and this infers an authority, that Timothy had over the pastoral
elders, whereby he might or might not so rebuke or reprove them: how then,
is not this reason that Epiphanius makes a good reason? That, being forbidden
to abuse it: he had authority for to use it, and so therein, had some power over
them. And that this may be applied, not only to the elder in age: but also to
the elder in office: as Epiphanius sets down the whole sentence, rebuke not an
elder but (...) exhort him as a father: So Peter, 1 Pet. 5 1. for this latter
part, uses the same word (...) (to the Elders, to whom notwithstanding he
was Superior) that Paul prescribes here to Timothy. To conclude, sith
Calvin and Beza both confess, that the 20. verse of this chapter is
understood of those that are Elders in pastoral office, what differs it in
effect from this sentence? and how holds not Epiphanius reason? He might
reprove pastors: Ergo he had some authority over them, and so one pastor had at
that time a superior authoity over other his fellow pastors.

The most reverend.
Another place ( says this learned man) is out of the same Epistle, receive not
an accusation against an elder. 1. Tim. 5.19. Whereby he gathers, that the
elders were subject to the bishops and tribunal seat: but who will grant
him that Timothy was bishop of Ephesus? Bridges


Epiphanius here does mention no tribunal seat at all, nor gathers his
argument in this loose manner, and me thinks (by good reason and law of Logike)
if this learned man would deny Epiphanius reason: he should set down his
words and make some argument of them: and deny, or grant, or distinguish some
part of the argument. For yet at the least, The most reuerends il answering
Epiph. argument.
he did so before. But now he lets the argument go clean away, and only
denies another assertion: that Epiphanius had set down, before he made the
former argument: where only speaking of Timothy, that was ( says he) a
bishop. These words, this learned man catches up for halting, And as for the
argument, that Epiphanius gathers on Saint Paul's words to Timothy: he
medleth nothing with it. Wherein (me thinks) he goes wisely (though not so
learnedly) to work to slinke ^ away from the words of the argument, and make
as though he saw them not. For if he had but looked on them, he should
playnelye have seen, how fully they prove the matter now in uestion. those
Pastors that have authority given them to admit or not admit accusations made
against other pastors, Timothy Bishop of Ephesus.
are superior pastors or Bishops unto them. And on the contrary, they that have
no such authority given them, are not superior pastors. But Timothy a pastor
in Ephesus has authority given him. 1. Tim. 5. ver. 19. to admit or not admit
accusations made against other pastors: and contrariwise, the other pastors in
Ephesus have no such authority given them over him: Ergo, Timothy was a
superior pastor in Ephesus over the other pastors, That is to say, their
Bishop. This being the effect of the argument, this learned man denies only
this, that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus. But go to, The most reverend.
Bridges.
let us see how he denies the same, or proves his denial.

Who will grant ( says he) that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus?

Forsoothe, that will I, for any thing I see yet. Nay rather; not who will;
but, who can rightly deny, or elude the force of this, and other arguments that
infer it? But says this most reverend and learned man. The most reverend.
Bridges.


For the history will easily refell that which the fathers do report as
certain.

And do the Fathers then report it, and that, as certain? and does this most
reverend and learned man, so confidently ask, who will grant it: when he
himself confesses, that the fathers grant it, and that, as certain? Do
they report it as certain, and yet deny it? The Fathers report, and that as
certain.
or is the report that the reverend and learned fathers make, as certain: of
so light regard with him? this (me thinks) be he never so much his self, a
most reverend and learned man, is a little too much liking of his own, The
history of the Acts refelleth not the fathers report of Tim. to be B. of
Ephesians.
and too little esteeming of the learned fathers judgments. But what reason
has he, why we should thus discredit the Fathers report, and, credit his?

For the history ( says he) will easily refute it. And what history: the
history of the Acts by S. Luke recorded? And did not the fathers know; or did
they reject the credit of this history? but let us see how the history will
easily refell them.

For no man ( says he) can deny, that Timothy was one that accompanied Paul,
and therefore no Bishop assigned to any certain place, The most reverend,
who was sent one while to this place, another to that, for the establishing of
the Churches: and finally, that he was an Evangelist, and not a bishop of any
one certain flock. I have desired thee (says he) to abide at Ephesus,
whilst I went into Macedonia. And why so? namely to look to the Church which
he had begun to establish, until he were called for again, which he does in
the other epistle. What? and did the Apostle rob the Ephesians of their
Bishop, without asking their Church at the least? Surely, when he went last
to Jerusalem, never minding to return to Ephesus: either he would have
restored Timothy unto them, or the Ephesians would have required him again of
the Apostle, when he put them in mind of the great danger at hand? or if
another were to be put in his room, he would have made express mention in
that his divine Sermon: but he is said to have sent for the elders only, and
to have warned them of the duty belonging to them all.

Bridges.
To all this (save yt which is inserted of his being evangelist) I answer with
the old rule, distingue tempora, concilias loca, Distinguish the times, and
thou reconcilest the places. The time of Timothy being B. after the hist. of
the Acts.
For, if this epistle were written after Saint Paul's first being prisoner at
Rome, as I have already proved it likely enough so to have have been: then
is all this descant lost, and the fathers report, may be as certain, as they
report it, for any thing in the history to the contrary, well enough. Yea, if
it had been written before: why might not Timothy ( after he was by the
Apostle settled, and commanded to stay at Ephesus as bishop) have come from
his Byshopricke, at Saint Paul's sending for him, to do further good at his
return, and another supply his absence at such a time? Neither did Paul rob
herein the Ephesians, sending to them another faithull minister to supply his
place, or (if he came no more again unto them) to succeed him. And though
this change might at the first be somewhat grievous to the Ephesians, yet
knowing the Apostles mind and authority herein, no doubt they yielded their
willing assent thereto. Of his return the history of Luke mencioneth not, nor
any other part of the Scripture: The history of the Magdeburgenses, Cent. 1.
lib. 2. cap. 10. page 614. lin. 35. write thus of him: When he was requested of
Paul to abide at Ephesus, and there instruct the Church, of the which matter
Paul prescribes to him certain precepts, through out the whole former
epistle to Timothy: he stayed at Ephesus. Upon which occasion Eusebius, li. 1.
Cap. 14. says Sophronius and very many other have delivered forth, that he
was made the first bishop of the Ephesians, but that he was sent before to
the Corinthians, for because also of the ministerye, it appears out of the
former epistle, Chapter 16. and that in joint labor with Paul he wrote the
later epistle to the Corinthians 2. Cor. 1. because it is also coniectured out
of the Epistle to the Philippians, Chap. 2 that he was with Paul at Rome under
Nero: but how, and how long, he ruled Doctor and governor of the Church of
Ephesus, nothing plain and certain is delivered forth, of any approved
writer. Wheruppon, neither can we affirm for certain, that at Ephesus,
(because, he coming near to the Porche of the Temple of Diana, reproved the
Idolatry of the Ephesians) he suffered martyrdom, being overwhelmed with
stakes and stones, which very many have delivered forth, as Antoninus, and
Vincentius, Lib. 38. Chap. 10. out of Polycrates the Priest or elder. Henricus
de Erephordia, that said Timothy suffered under Nerua: but Nicephorus, Lib. 3.
chap. 71. under Domitian. As for the Ephesians requiring him again, (when Paul
Act. 20. was at Miletum, and foretold the bishops there collected of the
great danger at hand) arises only on this learned man's surmise, that
Timothies being among the Ephesians, and his calling away from them, was before
Paul's coming to Miletum. Which both we have sufficiently improoued, neither
can it agree either with the former, or especially with the later Epistle of
Paul to Timothy. For how could they require him again of Saint Paul, or that
he would restore Timothy unto them: when in the former Epistle Paul requires
him, that as he left him there, so he would tarry there? and in the later
Epistle he writes for him being there, to come from thence to Rome to Paul,
where he was then prisoner and ready to be offered up to death: so that, all
that while, he was not from them, and this was long after Paul's being at
Miletum: and so with all, this unnecessary conjecture depending heereon, is
clean cut off: that if another had been put in his room, Paul would have
made express mention thereof: or of the others name, in that his divine
sermon. For, neither is it likely, that of all things then and there done or
spoken, in that his divine sermon, express mention is made, but only of that,
that was sufficient for Luke to have expressed, to that purpose, for the which
he sets down that his divine sermon, Neither could this sending for of
Timothy be mentioned then, Tychicus sent in supply of Timothy.
which was done in another place, and long after, in the other Epistle, Chapter
5. as this learned man him self confesses: and yet even there, Paul plainlye,
expresses also, whom he sent to Ephesus, even by name, Tichicus, when he
sent for Timothy to come from them. But least none of all these shifts should
serve the turn: This learned man also has learned the old refuge, that he
was an Evangelist: and then for soothe, what authority soever he had: The most
reverend.


Yet it need not seem strange to any, that the Evangelist Timothy, a man
endued with so many, and so great gifts remaining at Ephesus, did govern all
things by his direction, as one in degree above the Elders, and by the
Apostles authority appointed there for a time. Bridges.


This seems somewhat strange, at least to me, that this most reverend
and learned man, should deal in this matter in so strange a fashion. For that
after these arguments of Epiphanius, enforcing a superior authority in
Timothy, are by him slatlye denied, and with these shifts eluded: here in the
end it is now granted, that both he had a superior authority over the
Pastors of Ephesus, and that he remained there, and that he governed all
things by his direction. Which withal, The shift of Timothies Euangelistship.
implies an higher authority then either Epiphanius urged, or is in question,
Howbeit, here is yet another stale shift. This is not granted him as Bishop,
but as Evangelist, and as a man endued with so many and great gifts. For his
gifts, they are no hindrance why he might be no Bishop, The shift of
Timothies being an Evangelist.
nor any debar to any other Bishop, but rather the contrary: both he was the
better bishop, and the better example to all other Bishops. The gifts of S.
Steven bebarre not, but another which has not so many and so great gifts may
be Deacon, as well as he. As for Timothies being an Evangelist, because Paul
bids him, do the work of an Evangelist. If this be enough to prove he was an
Evangelist: then whereas the words in the same sentence, 2. Tim. 4. ver. 5.
Immediately follow, (...), fulfill thy Deaconship or ministry, it should
follow he was a Deacon or a Minister jointly with his Euangelistship, and so
was Titus, and those that were joined with him, as appears, 2. Co. 7. ver.
6.7 6. that Titus fulfilled this work of a Deacon, and gathered the alms and
benevolence of the Corinthians, How one person the head, diverse functions at
once.
and Paul requested Titus, ver. 6. that as he and 13. c. 8.1. had begun, so he
would fulfill this benevolence, And ver. 16. he gives God thanks, that he put
such carfulness for them in Titus his heart, and commends his promptness to
travail herein. And verse 18. he says: But we have sent together with him,
that brother whose praise is in the Gospel, through all the Churches etc. On
which words says Calvin; that three are sent: it is an argument, that a
great great expectation was conceived of the Corinthians, whereupon it behooued
them to be more heedefull unto their duty, least they should deceive the
hope of the Churches. Moreover, who this second was, it is uncertain, ^aue
that some conjecture it was Luke, other that it was Barnabas. Chrysostom
rather thinks it was Barnabas, to whom I assent, because it is certain he
was by the voices of the Churches, joined a companion with Paul. Howbeit
because it is received by the common consent almost of all, that Luke was one
of those that carried his Epistle, I mislike not to have him assigned to the
third place. As for the second, whosoever in conclusion it was, he adorneth
him with a notable testimony, that he was exercised in the gospel with
commendation, that is, he deserved praise in promoting the Gospel. Gwalter (
and much better in my opinion) thinks rather that it was Saint Luke, and
could not be Barnabas, sith Paul and Barnabas fell at strife about Mark,
and parted asunder, Acts 15. verse 39. before the Corinthians were as yet
converted to the faith. But were it the one or the other: ^^the both here, with
Titus, he did so diligently exercise and fulfill the work of a Deacon: and
Barnabas was a Doctor: and Luke an Evangelist: and Titus also is called of
Calvin an Euangeliste: if these offices then (without confusion of them) might
be thus ioyntlye combined in person person, why might not Timothy be as well
a Bishop as a Deacon, though he were also an Evangelist? He could not (says
he) be a Bishop. No? And why so? For, a Bishop is one that is assigned to a
certain place: but, no man can deny that Timothy was one, that accompanied
Paul; and therefore no Bishop assigned to any certain place, who was sent one
while to this place, another to that, for the establishing of the Churches. And
had not a Deacon a certain place to, although on occasion he might be sent
to another? Timothy did not accompany Paul from place to place.
But a Bishop must be Bishop of a certain flock. Timothy was not a Bishop of
any certain flock: This is a mere flock and not true. Did Timothy
accompany Paul from place to place, after he was assigned of Paul to settle
himself at Ephesus? Had he not then a certain flock, and was assigned to a
certain place? And did he not there remain (even by this learned man's own
confession) till in the later Epistle. S. Paul again sent for him, and
appointed an-other to supply his absence? And therefore, although an
Evangelist, yet a Bishop. And why not an Evangelist and a Bishop: as well as an
Apostle and a Bishop, as S. James was? Yea, if an Evangelist, then a Bishop.
Zuinglius in his book of a preachers office, says on this wise, upon the
chief place Ephesians. 4. so earnestly urged by all our Brethren. Zuinglius in
Ecclesiast.
Paul in this his distribution of offices, mentions Evangelists in the
third place, whom he says to be no less ordained of Christ, than are those
other. But the office of an Evangelist differs no whit at all, from that
office that is committed to a prophet, if so be that we take a Prophet (as
right now was fayde) for a watch man, which rooteth up that which is evil,
and planteth that which is good. The office of an Evangelist, the same that a
Bishop.
Neither is also an Euangeliste any other than a Bishop, or than he is whom he
call a Pastor, as we may certainly gather out of S. Paul's words, (in which
calling upon his Timothy) he says: But watch thou in all things, hard^n thy
self in afflictions, do thoroughly the work of an Evangelist, make thy
ministry approved to the full. 2. Tim. 4. But Timothy at that time when
Paul wrote these things to him, performed the office of a Bishop: where-upon
it is evident, that according to the opinion of Paul the office of a Bishop
and of an Evangelist is all one. Which thing every man may easily gather by the
words also of Paul going before. About the beginning of the same Chapter, he
writes thus: Preach the word, urge it in season and out of season Reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all lenity and doctrine. What shall we call this any thing
else, than to be the office of a Bishop of a Prophet and of a Pastor? What can
be plainer than these words of Zuinglius? Neither are these (as Megander in
his commentary on the Ephesians says) vain and frivolous reasons, but
weighty reasons.

But had we no other reason than out of Calvin, with the assertion of this our
Learned brethrens discourse, saying: a Pastor is all one and the same that is a
Bishop: Imposition of hands.
yet (say they) Timothy had the office of an Elder. And Timothy ( says
Calvin on, 1. Tim. 4. verse, 14.) was a Pastor, yea, the holie-Ghost ( says
he) had destinated by Oracle Timothy to be chosen into the order of Pastors:
Ergo, Timothy even by the appointment of the holy Ghost was a Bishop.

Now if Timothy were a Bishop: then also by Epiphanius reason out of S. Paul
( which holds for any thing by this most Reverend and learned man alleged
against his reason) he was a Superior also of other Pastors. Yea, as Calvin
says upon these words to Timothy: Let no man despise thy youth, but be an
example of the faithful in word, etc. as though he said, see that in
gravity of manners thou gettest to thy self so much reverence, Timothies
excelling the other Pastors in Ephesus not only in example of life, but in
superior dignity and authority and that continuing al his abode among them
that thy youthful age, which otherwise is wont to be subject to contempt,
diminishe no-whitte of thy authority. Whereupon we acknowledge that Timothy
was yet a young man, who notwith-standing did far excel many Pastors.

Which excellency being not only of gravity in virtue, but also of
authority; which both S. Paul's words give, as Epiphanius reasons, and this
most Reverend and learned man, himself liberally confesses, that Timothy
being a man endued with so many, and so great gifts, remaining at Ephesus,
did govern all things by his direction: How does not this ne^essarilie
follow hereupon, that one Pastor and the same a Bishop had a superior
authority in the Apostle time, and by the Apostles authority, appointed there
for a time, over other Pastors, and even of the same degree that they were of
in respect, (as Calvin says) of Pastorship, which is the point in question,
and yet in dignity and authority above them? Neither here suffices this
poor shift, to say he was so appointed there for a time; sith this time is
not of any present assembly, but of a long continuance, and whether any
assemble were holden, yea or no.

Now that this most reverend and learned man has held Epiphanius thus short,
as though he would yield somewhat more unto him of his free courtesy, he
says:

The most reverend.
But let us grant Epiphanius more than this, that Timothy had the authority
of the laying on of hands out of these words of the Apostle, Lay not hands
suddenly upon any. Let us grant this too, that these duties belonged to the
governors: yet we deny, that Timothy could have had any authority
therefore, over the Elders of Ephesus, except he had been an Evangelist.

Bridges
These grauntes come in so freshly, one on another neck, as though greater
and greater matters were granted, then was of fine force before confessed.
This most reuerends lieralitie i^ (...)
Whereas indeed, either less and less is granted then was before, and much
of that pulled back: or else in conclusion, comes all to the former stop,
wiping all away as before, with the name and title of Evangelist. Before at
length, he confessed: that Timothy governed all things by his direction, as
one in degree above the Elders. And is this now more, that he had the
authority of laying on of hands? This is but one thing, and before we had all
things governed by his direction. And how then comes in this grant upon the
other: Imposition of hands.
But let us grant Epiphanius more than this, that he did govern all things
by his direction? Or rather, might he not much better have said, Let us deny
that which we have granted him, or, in all things grant him less? But
more, or less: how come in these things as graunts, from this most Reverend
and learned man? As though it lay in his free choice and liberal grant: when
it comes out of these words of the Apostle, Lay not hands suddenly upon
any. For, if it come not out of these words; how dare he grant it out of
them? Will he grant an untruth? And if the words enforce it, then gramercie
Paul's words, and not his grant: for he grants nothing more, then he is
driven unto. But there is here yet another grant, that perhaps is more free and
worth the taking at his hands, where he says, Let us grant this too, that
these duties belonged to the Governors. What duties ( trow we) are those he
speaks of? For he named but one ceremony, of the laying on of hands. And who
are these governors that (he says) this belonged unto? For if he mean by
governors ( as do our Brethren the Learned discoursers) for the segniorie of
Elders, being not Pastors: then have we spunne a fair threade, and gotten a
goodly catch of all these graunts. But if he mean by the Governors, the
Pastors that had a superiority in governing their fellow Brethren Pastors,
that the imposition of hands pertayneth only or chiefly unto them, as he
grants here, it did to Timothy: then I grant indeed it is a further
grant, Timothie^ superiority in impositio^ of hands.
then was his last grant, and I ta^t it thankefully at his hands. And,
though it be not so much, as was the last grant before granted, that all
things were governed by his direction: yet will it be enough, even by that one
thing, at least to infer a superiority of a Pastor, to have been then in
use among the Pastors.

But now upon both these liberal grauntes, ( least they should seem too
prodigal a gift,) comes in a restraint. Still the old shift of Evangelist
helps all.


Yet we deny that Timothy could have had any authority therefore, over the
Elders of Ephesus, except he had been an Evangelist.

Here is again our old exception. So that, if Timothy were not an
Evangelist, our grauntes are revoked and all is dashed, then had he no
authority over the Elders of Ephesus. Nay, that is more hard against him,
he could not have had any over them, except he had been an Evangelist. But,
he had it; Ergo, he was an Evangelist. Or, The name of eldership.
he was an Evangelist, Ergo, he had it. But, if now all lie upon this point:
we have said somewhat unto it already, and these words of Paul carry some
probability that Paul bids him fulfill the work of an Evangelist. But that
inferres not any necessity, that he was an Evangelist. We are bidden all of
us, His Euangelistship doubtful, and not necessary in that matter.
in many places to fulfill the work of God. But every kind of fulfilling
the works that God bids us do, argues not that we be God. But, were he an
Evangelist, or were he not; how hanges this exception with these grauntes?
For, if the laying on of hands belong to the Governors: And Timothy had the
authority of laying on of hands belonging to him, out of these words of the
Apostle, lay not hands suddenly upon any: how then, had not Timothy
authority of that, that belonged to the Governors? And so, in that point, he
had a superiority over them. Except he shall yet reply, that they had this
superiority as well as he. And what need had he then herein, to be an
Evangelist, more than they? So that, it being granted, that he had so much as
the residue had not; it follows of necessity, were he Evangelist, or were
he not, they must needs confess by the virtue of these words of Saint
Paul, lay not hands suddenly upon any, that he had a superior authority,
and this shift of being Evangelist will not yet bear out the matter. But if
this will not serve, well fare an other.

The most reverend.
For Paul himself 1. Tim. 4.14. does show sufficiently, that the laying on of
the hands, was done, in the name of the Eldership it self, not by the
authority of any superior.

True it is, that Paul uses there the name of the Eldership it self. But
does this impugn, that he which was the person that laid his hands on him
which was ordained Pastor, Bridges
had in that action no superior authority over him? Was not this action a
solemn kind of blessing, and the party laying on his hands, not only
presents him to God, but represents God, Imposition of hands pertained to
a superior.
signifying that God receaueth him, both into his protection, and into that
especial function? And the minister thereof in so doing, pronounces the
blessing of God upon him, and prays for him, and receives him, in the name
of God and offers him to God as a minister consecrated to him. Which reverent
ceremony is yet used in the ordeyning of ministers. And does not this rule of
Paul hold herein. Hebr. 7.7. out of doubt, that which is less is blessed of
that which is greater? So that, if this action pertayned unto one more than to
the residue: no doubt it betokened in him a great authority in the same. But
Beza denies that it was one man's action, and says that the hands were laid
on him, by the Ephesine Elders. And on this word (...), that is, the order of
the Elders: by the which name ( says he) it is probable, that the company of
all those are signified, which labored in the word, in the Church of Ephesus.
Act. 20. d. 17. f. 28. But, because Beza here makes this but probable, and
that there is no necessity so to think: Laying on of hands.
we may rather herein follow Calvin, Bezaes Master, who says on the same
place, 1. Tim. 4. 14. It was an usual and solemn thing to the Apostles,
Calvin in 1. Tim. 4.14.
to ordain ministers by laying on of hands. And indeed of this custom, and
of the original and signification thereof, I have somewhat touched before, and
the residue we may fetch out of my institution. Presbyterium, priest-hoode (or
Eldership). They that think this name to be here collectiue, put for the
college of Priests (or Elders) do in my judgment, think well. Howbeit, all
things considered* I confess, that the other sense does not fit it amiss,
that it should be the name of the office. He put the ceremony for the act it
self of the ordeyning. So then, the sense is, that Timothy, when as he was
called into the ministry, by the voice of the Prophets, and then ordained by
the solemn custom: was withal furnished with the grace of the holy Ghost,
to execute his function, etc. But, because this is spoken so darkely, that we
see not yet, on which sense he resolves; and that he refers us to his
Institutions: let us see there, what he determines on it. In his Institutions,
Calvin. Institut. cap. 8. sect. 50.
cap. 8. sect. 50. The rite of ordayning does remain, to the which in the
calling we have given the last place. It is certain the Apostles used no other
ceremony, than the laying on of hands, when they admitted any to the
ministry. I suppose this rite or ceremony flowed, from the custom of the
Hebrews, who by the laying on of hands, as it were represented to God, the
thing that they would have to be blessed and consecrated. So Jacob, when he
would bless Ephraim and Manasses, The ancient custom of laying o^ of hands.
laid his hands upon their heads, which thing our Lord followed, when he
prayed upon the infantes. In the same signification, (as I suppose) did the
Jews by the prescription of the law, lay their hands upon their sacrifices.
Wherefore, the Apostles by the laying on of hands, did signify, that they
presented him to God, whom they did enter into the ministry. Albeit, they
used it also upon them, to whom they conferred the visible graces of the
spirit. Howsoever it were, this was a solemn rite, so often as they called
any man into the Ecclesiastical ministry. Thus did they consecrate Pastors
and Doctors: thus Deacons. And although there remain no certain commandment,
concerning laying on of hands: yet because we see, it was in perpetual use
with the Apostles, that, The force among us of this ancient ceremony.
so precise observation of them, ought to be unto us, in steed of a
commandment. And verily, it is profitable that by such a sign, both the
ministry should be commended to the people; and also that he which is ordained
should be admonished, that now he is not his own man, but is addicted into a
service unto God, and to his Church. Moreover, it shall not be a void sign,
if it shall be restored into his right original. For, if the spirit of God
has ordained in the Church nothing in vain, we shall perceive that this
ceremony, Laying on of hands.
sith that it came from him, is not unprofitable, so it be not turned into a
superstitious abuse. Lastly, we must hold this, that the whole multitude
laid not their hands on the ministers, The Pastors hands alone
but the Pastors alone. Not-with-standing, it is uncertain whether more of
them, did always lay on their hands, yea or no. Verily, it is evident, that
in the Deacons, in Paul, and Barnabas, and in a few others, that was done.
But in an-other place Paul himself mentions, that he, and not other more,
laid his hands on Timothy. I admonish thee (says he) that thou stir up
the grace which is in thee, by the laying on of my hands. For that which is
said in the other Epistle, of the laying on of hands, of the Eldership, I do
not so take it, as though Paul spoke, of the college of the Elders: but by
this name, I understand the very ordeyning it self: as though he should say,
see that the grace be not frustrate, which by the laying on of hands thou have
received, when I created thee a Priest or Elder.

And in Caluines commentary on the said place, 2. Tim. 1. verse, 6. his
words are these: Calvin in 2. Tim. 1.6.
There is no doubt, but Timothy was wished for, with the common wishes of the
Church, and not elected by the private will or choice of Paul alone. But it
is not absurd, that Paul ascribes the election privately to himself, of the
which he was the chiefest author. Although, here he treats rather of the
ordeyning, than of the election of him, that is to wit, of the solemn custom
of instituting of him. Furthermore, it is not clearly apparent, whether that,
when any was to be consecrated a Minister, all were wont to lay their hands
upon his head: Caluines judgment for the laying on of hands by one only,
against the judgment of this most reverend man.
or else, one only, in the place and name of all: but the conjecture enclineth
rather to this, that there was one only that laid on his hands. Concerning
that which appertains to the ceremony, the Apostles borrowed it of the
ancient custom of their Nation, or rather retained it while it was yet in
use. For this is a part of the comeliness, that Paul other where commends.
Although it may be doubted, whether this present laying on of hands, may be
referred to the ordeyning. Because at that time the graces of the spirit, of
which he discourses Roman. 12. and 1. Cor. 13. were by laying on of hands,
The laying on of hands was the ordeining.
given also to many others, that were not ordained Pastors. But I easily
gather out of the former Epistle, that Paul here treats of the office of a
Pastor. For this place agrees with that. neglect not the grace which is given
to thee, The Eldership is the office of the Pastor.
with the laying on of the hands of the Eldership.

Thus thoroughly, we see Caluines judgment, that this laying on of hands was a
solemn kind of ceremony, used in the ordeyning of ministers, to present them
to God, and in the name of God, to bless and consecrate them. Epiphanius
argument.
Which action was done more commonly by one man only, being a more
principal person than all the residue, (as was Paul and other the Apostles)
than by the hands of all or many Pastors, joined with him, al-beit, it were
by their consentes and voices, and in the name of all the Church or Elders.
Not, that every minister had equal authority, in the action: For, although
the whole may well be said, to have a greater authority, than any peculier
part: yet it follows not, but that there may be difference of authority,
and some higher and some lower, in the comparison of the several and
particular parts one with an-other, and one minister superior in dignity to
another. As, Paul superior in this action unto Timothy, and Timothy unto
other Pastors. And although of Paul it might be said, he was an Apostle: yet
in Timothy, here is no other respect had, but that he was a Priest or
Pastoral Elder, as Calvin expoundes Paul's words, when I created thee a
Priest or Elder. And this office of Priest-hoode or Eldership, and not the
College or Consistory of the Elders, draws nearer to the Apostles meaning.

And thus much for this most reverend and learned man's confutation of
Epiphanius arguments out of the Scripture.

Now ( says he) the reasons of the same Epiphanius are these. Bishops (says
he) begette the Fathers of the Church, but Elders the sons, The most
reverend.
in as much as Bishops and not Elders ordained Bishops. But what is this else,
then to ask to have that which is in question: For it may be and ought to be
answered, that the Bishops took that authority upon them, without warrant of
the word of God, and that the rule is false, which concerning this matter,
does attribute it to the Apostles, which may be showed by the ordeyning of
Timothy by the Eldership.

It seems, that this Learned man, accounts all the reasons which he has
already alleged out of Epiphanius, to be no reasons. Else, Bridges
how says he here? Now, the reasons of the same Epiphanius are these, etc.
But how then said he before, The most reuerends contradiction to himself.
that Epiphanius does bring forth three reasons: two as it were out of Gods
word, etc. and when he has alleged them in the order before said, (the first
place is, 1. Tim. 5.1. etc. another place is out of the same Epistle, etc.) and
traueiled as we have heard to confute them; then (as though all this while, he
had yet alleged or confuted no reason) he comes in saying: Now, the reasons
of the same Epiphanius are these, etc. What reason is in this dealing,
especially of such a most reverend and learned man?

But if these following, are his only reasons: good reason he should report
them right, and not make them other than they be.

Bishops (says he) beget the Fathers of the Church, Epiph words and reasons
misreported*
but Elders the sons, in as much as Bishops and not Elders ordained Bishops.

Does Epiphanius reason thus? Or, to this purpose? His words are these. To say
that a Bishop and a Priest (or Elder) are equal, how is it possible? The
words of Epiph.
For, the order of Bishops is the begetter of the Fathers, for, it begets
the Fathers of the Church. But, the order of Priests or Elders is not able to
beget the Fathers: it begets the sons of the Church, by the regeneration
of the washing, but not the Fathers or the Doctors. And how was it possible
for a Priest or Elder to obtain, not having the laying on of hands to elect?
Or, to say that he is equal with a Bishop? The plain meaning of these words.
The plain meaning here of Epiphanius is this: the Bishops beget, that is,
ordain Pastors and ministers of the word and Sacraments, which Pastors or
Ministers, he calls Fathers or Doctors of the Church. But these Pastors or
Ministers, whom he calls Fathers or Doctors, being no Bishops, do not again
beget, that is, ordain, ( or make) other Fathers or Doctors, but do only
(says he) begette the sons of the Church, that is, the faithful people, by
preaching the word and baptizing of them: the Bishops therefore having a
further authority, to wit, of making ministers, then have the ministers whom
they make: how i^ the Bishops and the ministers authority equal? This is
indeed the tru^ meaning of Epiphanius his reason. He that can do more: has
more power, than he which only can do less. But the Bishop can do more than
the Priest or Elder can do, for the Bishop can make Priests and Elders which
the Priests or Elders can not do. Therefore the bishop has more power than
the Priest o^ Elder that is no Bishop. This being in effect the argument of
Epiphanius: this Learned man turned all to this, that Epiphanius should say:
The most reuerends mistaking of Epiphanius words.
Bishops beget the Fathers of the Church, but Elders the sons, in as much as
Bishops and not Elders ordained Bishops. As though he spoke only of ordayning
Bishops; or, by Fathers meant only bishops; and by sons, Priests or Elders
of the Church. Whereas, Epiphanius confesses: bishops, and Priests or
Elders, both of them to be Fathers and Doctors of the Church. But in this
behalf of ordayning any of these Fathers, either Bishops or Priests; the
Bishops had a prerogative above the Priests, and so, their authority is
notequall. This is the very argument and reason that Epiphanius makes. Now,
Ep^ph does not demand but prove that that is in question.
what says our most Reverend and learned man to this argument?

But what is this else, ( says he) then to ask to have that which is in
question?

And why so? Epiphanius here asks nothing. The question here i^ this. The
ground of Epiph. argument.
Whether Bishops and Priests be in dignity and authority equal and all one?
Epiphanius proves they be not, by this argument: They that be equal and all
one in dignity and authority: the one can do in all things as much as the
other, and not one more than the other. But the Bishops can make Bishops and
Priests, The most reverendes answer.
which the Priests themselves can not do: therefore, Bishops and Priests are
not equal and all one. That the B. can, or the Priest can not do this, which
is here avouched; this is not the question, but dependes upon it, or else, he
could make indeed no reason. If now, this assertion be untrue; improve it,
and never say; what is this else, than to ask to have that which is in
question. But, go to now. What reason has this Learned man to improve it?

For it may be, and ought to be answered, that the Bishops took that
authority upon them, without warrant of the word of God.

I think it may be indeed thus answered, of a man, The most reuerends
irreverent and untrue answer.
that would irreverently sclaunder he cares not whom, and answer contrary
to all truth and learning: but, that it ought to be answered so, of any man,
and especially, of a most Reverend and Learned man: be it spoken with
reverence, I think the clean contrary.

Did not this most reverend and learned man himself grant before, The most
reuerends former grant ouerthrows this answer.
but even on the other side the lease, that Timothy had the authority of the
laying on of hands? And what here was that, but ordeyning Bishops and Pastors?
Except therefore, all those proves be improoued, that infer Timothy was B.
of Ephesus: and this of Timothy conferred with James and Simeon after him at
Jerusalem, and Titus in Creta: it is apparent, that Bishops took not that
authority upon them, without warrant of the word of God. But thi^, that he
says, it may be, The most reverend.
and ought to be answered, stays not here, for he adds:

And that the rule is false, which concerning this matter does attribute it to
the Apostles.

Here is a rule indeed, for this matter, of ordeyning ministers. Did not the
Apostles take upon them the authority to ordain Bishops and Elders? Does not
S. Paul confess, that he took that authority on him? Bridges.
The most reuerendes far more irreverent deni^ng the manifest scripture. And is
Gods word it self also, become a false rule, which is the rule of truth, that
attributes this matter to the Apostles? What could the open adversaries of the
word of God, have spoken worse against the word of God? And how now shall this
be showed, that the word of God does not attribute this to the Apostles?

Which may be showed ( says he) by the ordeyning of Timothy by the
Eldership. The most reverend,


And have we not heard even by Calvin, the matter clearly and at large
showed, that not only the ordeyning of Timothy was done by Paul alone: but
also that it was the common use to be done by Paul alone? And that this
word (...), Eldershippe, Bridges.
signifies in that place, not the College, Consistory, or company of
Elders, but the office of the Elders. Yea Beza also yields so far thereunto.

Ordeyning and electing
So that, the ordeyning of Timothy shows, not by the Eldership* that the
rule is false: but that the rule is true which concerning this matter, ( that
is, the ordeyning of Elders, by the laying on of hands) does attribute it to
the Apostles. Sith now, none of all these fetches will serve; have we any
more shifts left to help the matter?

Again for as much as election is the chief ground of Church offices, The
most reverend.
which depends of the voices of the whole company, and not of the laying on
of hands, which made not Bishops, but sent the^ into their possession after
they had made them: we may more truly affirm with the Apostle, that the holy
Ghost by the voices of the children themselves, made the Fathers, and not the
Bishops.

Here is yet one or two devises more together. And first, sith the ordeining
of Bishops and Pastors of the Church, Bridges.
is so manifest a prerogative of the Bishops: The most Rev. flees from the
ordeining to the elect^ng.
to eleuate the same, and to withdraw us from it, to the election of them,
which he calls the chief ground of Church offices; I can not tell, what he
may gather ofthese words, the chief ground: but I take not election to be
the chief point, to prove the prerogative of superior dignity and
authority. For, as there is a difference between these two, (as is confessed
al^eadie by Calvin): so, though the election proceed from other grounds, as
from the causes, why the party is to be elected, and so, tend more to his
commendation that is elected, or their profit for whose sake he is elected:
The grounds and causes of the election.
yet is the ordeyning and giving him the office that he is elected unto, many
times both the greater dignity and authority to the giver, and the surer
state unto the taker. Although, no certain rule can be made hereof. For
many a mean man may give possession of a thing, who not-withstanding has not
the gift thereof, nor any voice in electing him thereto.

And again, many a one may give a voice in the election, which has not yet
so great dignity and authority, When the people elected, yet were they
neither superior, nor equal to the Pastors.
as solemnly to inuest the party elected, in the office and possession of the
same. For, if election ( as here is said) depends on the voices of the
whole company, as, when the people had the election of their Bishop: and it
was said, Qui praefecturus est omnibus, ab omnibus eligatur: He that must
rule all, must be elected of all: shall we now say, that every one among
the people, that had a voice in election of the Bishop; had a superior, or had
but an equal dignity and authority, with him that consecrated and ordained
him Bishop? And is the action of consecrating and ordeyning by laying on of
hands, ( being indeed an higher action than giving a voice in the election,
yea, than is the whole election) so far debased under election, and election
so advanced over it, that it is heer^ said, it made not Bishops, but sent
them into their possession, after they had made them, meaning the people that
elected them? And is the electing then to be a B. the making of a Bishop? And
is the ordaining of a B, and the laying on of hands upon him and the solemn
action which the Apostles used, and whereof Paul gave such a charge and
prerogative to Tim. and to Titus, but the sending them into their possession,
which other had given them? And did not the Apostles, nor Titus, nor Timothy,
but the people make them? Did the people then make Bishops? And had the
Apostles less authority in making Bishops, than had the people? And what
mean these speeches, that the election depends on the voices of the whole
company? What is here meant by the company? Are not the people, of the
company, as well as the Clergy? And must it needs be the whole company? May
not mayor pars, or senior, or sanior: the greater, the senior, the sounder part
serve: but that it must depend on the voices of the whole company, Neither
di^ the election depend on the voices of the whol^ company.
or else, it is no election? indeed election depends not upon the laying on
of hands: but rather the laying on of hands upon election. But yet is not
this true, that is here said: The laying on of hands, which made not Bishops,
but sent them in to their possession after they had made them? For, of the
twain, rather, the laying on of hands does make them: and not send them, but
set them in the possession of their office, by making of them officers. Whereas
the election ( whosoever elected them) did but elect or chose them before, to
be afterward made, by laying the hands upon the^. But now, be the election of
never so many, and of the whole company; may there not be such a difference
also of superior dignity and authority even in the electors, difference of
dignity and authority even in the elections.
that perhaps a few, yea, some one may carry a greater stroke, than many
among them, or than all the residue, and have (as they say) a voice negative,
A negative voice in election.
to counterpeyse all their voices affirmative? When Paul had Titus to ordain
or make Priests or Elders in every City in Creta: He seems ( says
Calvin thereupon) to permit too much unto Titus, while he biddes him make
ministers over all the Churches. For this should be in a manner a regal power.

And furthemore, by this means, the right of electing is taken away from
every Church, and the judgment from the college of the Pastors. But this had
been, to profane all the holy administration of the Church. But the answer
is easy. It is not permitted unto the will of Titus, that he alone might do
all things, and put into the Churcher what Bishops it pleased him: but only,
that he should govern the elections, How Titus moderated the electio^s.
as a Moderator, according as it is necessary. This kind of speech is common
enough. So the Consul, or the Regent in the time of vacancie, or the Dictator,
is said to create Consulles. For that, Interrex.
he held the sessions or meetinges, in which they were to be chosen. So also
speaks Luke of Paul and Barnabas, in the Act. 14.13. not that they only, as
at their commandment, set Pastors over the Churches, neither allowed nor
know (...) ^^cause they ordained fit men, Superiority in the election.
which were chosen or desired of the people. We earne indeed of this place,
that there was not the^ such equality among the ministers of the Church, but
that some one man was above them, Caluines clear confession against the
ministers equali^ie in the time of the Apostles.
in authority and in Counsel: but this was nothing to that tyrannical and
profane custom of collations, which reigns in the Popedom. For the manner
of the Apostles was far different.

Whereby it is apparent, that there was not such equality in the minis^erie
in the Apostles days, and in the primitive Church, as is pretended, but that
as some one, was the principal doer, in the making and consecrating of the
Pastors and Fathers of the Church: A principal governor in the elections and
what authority Calvin says he had.
so also, some one was the principal governor even in the election. Which,
though he used no tyranny, force, self-will, nor absolute power therein, as
the Pope used: yet was it comparable to a Consulles, to a Regentes, yea to a
Dictators authority in some respects also, in the electing or creating of a
Consul. But at least, he was above them, both in Counsel and in authority.

And therefore this conclusion which comes in with the other shift, under the
name of the holie-Ghoste, saying: We may more truly affirm with the Apostle,
that the holie-Ghoste by the voices of the children themselves, made the
fathers, and not the Bishops: Is but a blase to dasell men's eyes withal, if
not also, a dangerous sin (were it wittingly committed, as I hope it is not)
against the work of the holy Ghost. Besides the injury here offered to the
Apostle Paul and to Timothy and Titus that had and used this authority. True
it is, the Apostle says: Act. 20. ver. 28. that the holie-Ghost made them. And
true it is also, that the children may have, and had their voices toward the
making of them: but does this follow, that Paul made none? Or, that Timothy
and Titus ( being Bishops, as is proved) made none: which is here so
peremtorily concluded saying: and not the Bishops? If they made none, they
brake Paul's commandment. If they made any, and were Bishops: then Bishops
made the^, although the holy Ghost made them to. Because, they were not made
without the holy Ghost: because, they were made of the Bishops in such godly
order, as the holie-Ghoste did allow of: and because, they were men enspired
with the holy Ghost, and furnished with his gifts, to do their duties. And
such men, because the godly people wished for, ( as Calvin says, they did
wish for Timothy) or gave their assents and voices of approbation of the
Apostles election and ordeyning of Tim. and Titus, and also approved both Tim.
and Titus his election and ordeining of other godly and learned Pastors over
them: therefore, howsoever the holy Ghost by the voices of the children, made
the fathers; the holy Ghost, as ye principal author, and the sanctifier of the^
by his invisible or (if visible) miraculous operation in them: and the
children, Our Breath. joining with Aerius.
by wishing and approving, either by voices, or holding up their hands, at the
nam^ng of them: yet, since for the outward form of them, the Government of
the elections, lay in Timothy and Titus; and (as Calvin says) in some one
man, as a moderator, as a Consul, as a Regent in an interim, and as a
Dictator, though, not like a tyrant and a Pope; and since also after the
election done, the laying on of hands, which was the consecrating, ordeyning,
or making, belonged also most commonly ( as Calvin says) to one only, as
here to Timothy and Titus Bishops: It may well therefore, and truly be said
and justified, without injury to the fact, of the holy Ghost, yea, to the
glory of the holy Ghost, and without detrime^t to the children, or prejudice to
the whole company: that the B. made the Pastors or Fathers of the Church, and
still may make them, for any thing here alleged to the contrary.

Another of his reasons is, (says this most reverend and learned man, The most
reverend.
against Ephipanius) a deprauing of places alleged out of Paul, that the
Church being new borne, Bishops could not be so established every where at the
first, as it is to be seen in the election of Deacons. Who^ yet can Epiphanius
persuade, that it was for want of fit men only, that there were many Bishops
in every Church?

And is there yet behind another of Epiphanius his reasons, Bridges.
and that of places alleged out of Paul? Then was there more the^ 3. reasons;
yea, more then two (as it were) out of the word of God. So truly, this
Learned man, told us before, that Epiphanius did bring forth 3. reasons to
the contrary, two (as it were) out of the word of God. But, what places
alleged out of Paul, has Epiph. here depraved? Aerius indeed depraved 2.
places alleged out of Paul. Whereof Epiph. says: But his trifling and
emulation has deceived the fore-saide Aerius. But he alleges for his error,
and the error of the^ that hear him, that which the Apostle writes to the
Priests and Deacons, and writes not to the B. and that he says unto a B.
despise not the gift that is in thee, which thou have received by the hands of
the Eldership. And again in an other place, Our Breath. allegations of the same
places against the B. that A^rius alleged.
he writes to the Bishops and Deacons. Wherefore (says he) a B. and a Priest
or Elder is all one. And these places here alleged out of Paul by this
Aerius, are now also for the self same purpose, alleged likewise by our
Brethren, in their Learned discourse, as we have heard at large discussed: but
what says Epiphanius heereunto?

And he knew not (says Epiphanius) being ignorant of the consequence of the
truth, and had not read the most profounde histories, that the holy Apostle
when as the preaching was new, wrote according to the matter sprunge up,
even as he had it. For, where Bishops were already ordained, he wrote to
Bishops and to Deacons. For, Epiph. reason.
the Apostles could not ordeyne all things by and by. Of Priests (or Elders)
and Deacons there was need. For by these two the Ecclesiastical affairs may
be accomplished. But where there was not found any worthy of the office of
a Bishop: the place remained without a Bishop: but where there was need, and
there were men worthy the office of a Bishop: there Bishops were ordained. But
when there was no multitude, there was not found among them those that should
be made Priests or Elders, and they were content with a Bishop alone,
ordained in the place. But it is not possible for a bishop to be without a
Deaco^. And the holy Apostle put to this care that there should be Deacons to
the Bishop for the ministry. Thus did the Church receive the fillinges up of
the dispensation: thus were the places at that time. For every thing had not
all at the first beginning: but in process of time, those things were gotten,
which were requisite for the perfection of things necessary.

Thus truly and gravely did Epiphanius answer these allegations of Aerius.
And what deprauing of places alleged out of Paul is here? Epiphanius
depraved not the Apostles places.
Was not this apparent, in the Deacons, which at the first, were not any
especial office, till on occasion growing afterward? And does not this stand
with good reason, that (the Church being, as it were, new and green among
the Gentiles) Bishops could not every where at the first, be so established?
And do we not read, how in some Churches sometimes are mentioned only
Apostles and Elders, Act. 15. for Ecclesiastical functions? All offices of the
ministry not at the first in all places.
And in Antioche, Act. 21. Besides Paul and Barnabas, who were also Apostles,
are mentioned only, Prophets and Doctors, which Paul and Barnabas Act. 14.
made also in the Churches, only Priests or Elders, without mention of
Deacons. So that all were not made in every place at once, and at the first:
or at least, all are not expressed that were made, as Act. 15. and as to Titus
in Creta, Paul mentions not that he should make Deacons, but Priests and
Elders only, using that name indifferently for Bishops. So that (where the
name is not expressed) might not Epiphanius well avouch, The good reason of
Epiph. answer.
that this makes nothing against the state in general of the office, in that
place not expressed? For, perhaps, it was not yet established there, as
afterward it was. And does not Saint Ambrose confess as much, and more than
this, even upon the place of Ephesians. 4. so much urged? Ambrose in Ephesians. 4.
He gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, etc. Applying them to the use
of the Church after the Apostles times, saying: the Apostles are the Bishops,
the Prophets are the expounders of the scriptures. Although among the very
beginninges, there were Prophets such as Agabus, and the four Virgins
prophesying, as it is contained in the Acts of the Apostles.

Howe-beit, for to commend the principles of the Faith: Difference of orders
at the first.
the Interpreters are now called Prophets. The Evangelists are the Deacons,
such as was Philip. Although they be not Priests: yet may they preach the
Gospel, but without a chair, even as Stephen and Philip mentioned. The
Pastors may be the Readers, who with their reading, fatten the people that
hear them, because man lives not in bread only, but in every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. But the Masters are the exorcistes,
because they appease and correct the disturbers or else those that were wont to
instruct and train up with readinges, Imbuere l^cti onibus.
those infantes that were to be instructed As is the manner of the Jews, whose
tradition made a passage unto us, which is by negligence worn out. Among
these, after the Bishop he is understood to be more, who for the hidden sense
of the Scriptures opened, is said to prophecy: especially, because he draws
out the words of the hope to come. Which order may now be that, that is of
the Priest hoode or the Eldership. For all the orders are in a bishop, All the
orders are in the Bishop.
because first he is a Priest, that is to say, the Prince or chief of the
Priests, and he is a Prophet, and an Evangelist, and the other offices of the
Church are to be fulfilled in the ministry of the faithful. Notwithstanding,
after that in all places, the Churches were constituted, and offices ordained,
the matter was composed otherwise than it began. For at the first all did
teach, and all did baptize, what days or times soever there was occasion. For
neither Philip sought time or day, The difference of the orders at the first.
wherein he should baptize the Eunuche, nor interposed any fasting. Neither
Paul and Silas differred the time, that they might baptize the chief man under
the tribune, (or the keeper of the prison) with all his. Neither had Peter
Deacons, nor sought the day when he baptized Cornelius with all his house,
neither he himself (did it, Optionem carcevis.
) but he bad the brethren that went with him to Cornelius from Ioppe. For as
yet besides the seven there was no Deacon ordained. As therefore, the people
increased and multiplied, it was granted to them all at the beginning; both to
preach the Gospel, and to baptize, and to expound the scriptures in the
Church. But when as the Church had compassed about all places: conuenticles
were appointed, and rectors and other offices were ordained in the Churches.
That none of the Clergy durst (which was not ordained) to presume upon him, the
office that he knew, was not committed or granted unto him. And the Church
began to be governed by another order and providence because, that if all might
do the same things, it should be unreasonable, and it would be thought a
common and most vile thing. From hence therefore it is, whereupon neither
Deacons now do preach among the people, neither the Clerks or the Layitie
do baptize. Why the Deacons, the Cle^kes, and the layetie do not now baptize.
Neither are the faithful baptized whatsoever day they list, except they be
sick.

The originals of primacies.
The writings therefore of the Apostle in all points agree not, with the
ordinance that now is in the Church. For because that these things were
written even in the very beginnings, for he calls also Timothy, that was of
him created a Priest or Elder, a B. because Priests or Elders were at the first
called Bishops, that the one giving place, the follower should succeed him. To
conclude, in Egypt the Priests (or Elders) do Consigna^t. Ambroses ^easons
why the primacies and government were committed to one.
ensign them, if the B. be not present. But because the Priests (or Elders)
following, began to be found unworthy to hold primacies or chief
gouernements, the reason was altered, the Council providing therefore, it was
constituted by the judgment of many Priests, that not the order, but the
deserte, should create the Bishop, least that an unworthy one should rashly
usurp, and be an offense to many. Thus does this most Reverend and learned
Father S. Ambrose write also, even as much or more than Epiphanius does, on
these words alleged by the Apostle. The most reverend.


But now says our most Reverend and learned man: whom yet can Epiphanius
persuade, that it was for want of fit men only, that there were many Bishops
in every Church?

Does Epiphanius go about to persuade any heereunto? Or had he any cause to
persuade this unto them? Bridges.
Which if he would have gone about to persuade, The most reuerends deprauing
of Epiph.
he should have contraried his own speech, that said, there were some places,
where there was no Bishop. This therefore, is rather a deprauing of that which
Epiphanius does allege against Aerius: then that Epiphanius used any
deprauing of places alleged by Aerius out of Paul.

Now, to conclude with Epiphanius, ( for he lets slip all his argument,
that by comparison he makes from the examples of so many things in the old
Testament, that at the first were not ordained) he says, for that which he
calls, the 3. reason, out of the history of those times: For that which not
only Hierome, The most reverend,
but Epiphanius against the Miletians also reports concerning them of
Alexandria: that is, Alexandria never had two Bishops, as the other Cities,
upon what ground the men of Alexandria did it, and followed not the examples of
other Churches, let them see to it.

Bridges.
Nay, let this our most Reverend and Learned man himself see to it, if it
please him. If not: let us see to it a little better. For he settes it here
down in such sort, that the reader (not perusing the histories for this
matter) would think, that all other Churches had two Bishops at once, faue
only Alexandria. Whereas (except it were Jerusalem, that so had by a rare
occasion, Al Churches as well as Al^xandria had but one B. at once, ex^ept upon
some rare occasion.
as is declared: or that upon the absence, age, or infirmity of the Bishop,
an other helper to him were chosen, which was called Coepiscopus) not only
Alexander, but all other Churches in Christendom, Superiority of Bishops.
whereof any record makes mention (I speak within the bounds of my search for
it) have even from the Apostles times, ( if they were so ancient) usually
continued under the ecclesiastical government of one Bishop, as by their
successions (set down by Irenaeus, Eusebius, Theodorete, Socrates, Sozomene,
Hierome, and others, does appear. Yea, by Epiphanius him self, wheresoever he
reckons any bishop, or succession of bishops, ( except where there were some
sects in any City that had several bishops of their own factions) he
mentions still but one bishop over the true believing Christians in one City:
And in this sort he reckons up the bishops of Jerusalem. Lib. 2. Tom. 2.
writing against the Manichaeans, saying: The generation of the apostles has
passed from Peter (I say) even to Paul, and to John, who also was a great
while in the world, even until the times of Traiane. James also is past, the
first bishop in Jerusalem, surnamed the brother of the Lord, but the son of
Joseph, begotten on her that was his own proper Wife, with the residue of his
brethren, with whom was conversant the Lord Jesus Christ, borne according to
the flesh of the euer-virgine Mary, who in the order of brethren got this, that
he was called their brother. There have passed also out of the same his seat,
all the saints, and with them Symeon, the sons of his Uncle, the son of
Cleophas the brother of Joseph: Whose times consequently and according to the
row, from James the bishop. I have under joined the bishops by succession in
Jerusalem, and with them every king, even until the time of the foresaid
Aurelian and Probus, wherein this Manes was known, being a man of Persia, which
begat this strange doctrine into the world: and thus it is, 1. James, (who
with a piece of wood suffered martyrdom,) until Nero. 2. Simeon, who was
crucified under Traiane. 3. Jude, and so forsoothe, until he come to Hymenaeus
the 37. bishop of Jerusalem under Aurelian. In sum, from the assumption of
Christ until Manes, and Aurelian and Probus Kings, are 276 years according to
some chronicles: according to others, 246. etc. And as of this, so of any other
Church that he names (as he does an infinite number other, on diverse occasions)
of one church he ever names but one bishop: so that the church of Alexandria,
and all other churches, for any thing here spoken by Epiphanius, or any where
else, may well enough justify their having ordinarily but one bishop at one
time, Were the B. more then one, yet had they authority over other priests,
though some churches (which Epiphanius words here do seem to note) now and
then upon some extraordinary occasion, might have had two bishops at once. But
were there one or two, they always had superior dignity and authority over all
the residue of the Priests or Elders in their churches. And in the same
treaty, where Epiphanius notes the order of Jerusalem, he tells also of a
disputation holden between Triphon a Priest and the Heretic Manes at
Caschara in Mesopotamia, Whereat the bishop being present, when he would have
helped the priest Manes said unto the Bishop: suffer me to dispute against
Triphon, for thy dignity (by reason of the bishops office) exceeds me.
Whereby it appears that then also in Mesopotamia, there was a great
difference in the dignity and state of a Priest and of a bishop. And because
this most reverend and learned man alleges Epiphanius against the Meletians:
this also appears no less, The most reuerendes alleging Meletius shows a
lamentable pattern of these contentions.
if not so much more, eue^ in that treatise of Epiphanius. Besides that, in the
story by him there recorded of the sect that sprang from this Meletius, we may
see a lively, (if it may not rather be called a deadly, verily a doleful)
pattern of this Schism, now occasioned by our Brethren.

There is a certain company ( says Epiph. lib. 2. to. 2. haer. 68.) in the
coast of Aegipt, from Meletius a certain B. in Thebaida, of the Catholic
Church, and of the right faith (for his faith was not changed at any time from
the holy catholic church) this Meletius was of one time with the foresaid
Hierax, and afterward did succeed him. He was also of one time with the holy
Peter bishop of Alexandria, and all these were in the time of the persecution,
which was made in the time of Dioclesian and Maximian* A schism and sect made
in the church, not for religion but for discipline.
But the cause of Meletius was in this manner: he made a sect, but he departed
not from the faith. This man in the time of the persecution, together with
Peter the holy Bishop and martyr, and with other martyrs, was taken of those
that were sent of the King, to wite, of the Dukes or captains of Alexandria
and of Aegipt at that time: The President of Thebaida was Cultianus, and
Hierocles of Alexandria, and Meletius was deteyned in prison together with the
foresaid martyrs, and with Peter the Archb. of Alexandria. But Meletius seemed
also to excel among the bishops of Egypt, as he that had the second place
after Peter in the Archbishopricke, as it were, for because of helping him,
being under him, and under him taking heed unto the ecclesiastical affairs:
for this is the custom, that the bishop of Alexandria, has the ecclesiastical
administration of all Egypt, and of Thebais, and of Mareota, and of Lybia, and
of Ammoniaca, and of Maroeotis, and of Pentapolis. Now, when as al these
captives lived in prison, to the end they should be martyred, and had
remained shut up along time: albeit others before the^ being delivered had
suffered the testimony of Martyrdom, and had obtained the honor of the
reward, and were laid asleep: but these as the princes and greater were
reserved till afterward: The repentance of the^ had fallen in the persecution,
desiring to be received into me^cy.
when as some had indeed sustained martyrdom, but other some had fallen away
from their martyrdom, and had committed the wicked worship of Idolles, and
being compelled had also sacrificed: they indeed which fell and sacrificed and
transgressed, came to the Confessors and to the martyrs, that by repentance
they might obtain mercy, being partly soldiers, partly Clearkes of diverse
callings, partly Priests, and Deacons, The scisme of the Meletians
and others. A commotion was made among the Martyrs, and no vulgar tumult:
when as some said, those that once were fallen, and that had renied, and aboade
not in their fortitude, neither had striued, ought not to be made worthy of
repentance, least that those also, which yet remained, should care the less
for rebuke and punishment, by reason of such pardon to soon given unto them,
and should so transgress and fall to the denial of God, and to the wicked
work of Graecisme. And this in deed was very agreeable to reason, that was
spoken of these Confessors. And they that so said, were Meletius and Peleus,
and certain other martyrs more, and Confessors together with them. The B.
Mel. zeal and severity in rejecting them*
They therefore declaringe their zeal to God, spoke these things, and they
pronounced, that the persecution beeinge ended, place to repentance should
long time after, be granted to these foresaid parties, in the time of peace
being made, if so be in-deede they do repent them, and declare the fruit of
their repentance. Notwithstanding, not that every one should be received
into his proper calling: but after a space of time should be gathered into the
Church, and into the community, and into the fellowshippe, but not into their
callinges: And this proceeded of the love of the truth, and was full of zeal.
But the most holy Peter, endued with mercy, and being as it were the father of
them all, entreated and besought them, saying: let us receive those that are
repentaunt, and let us appoint them a penance, that they may sit with other
at the church, and let us not cast them off, nor their calling, The Archb.
P^ter^ mercy to admit them.
as the fame is that is come unto us: least peradventure, those that once were
of the devil shattered and broosed unto confusion, through imbecility and
infirmity, should also by reason of delaying the time, be clean subverted and
not healed, as it is written, The lame ought not be overthrown but rather to
be cured, and in deed the speech of Peter was for mercy and humanity, but the
speech of Meletius for the truth and zeal. Hereupon, for the face (or show) of
the argument, which seemed in both of them to be godly, a sect or scisme was
made: these affirming this thing, and those that thing which was the other. But
when the Archbishop Peter saw, that Meletius with his company, being too much
moved with a godly zeal, resisted his counsel of humanity: Peter lift up a
veyle, and spreading abroad his cloak, to wit, a sheet or covering, in the
prison, made an outcry, they that think with me (says he) let them draw to
me: and they that cleave to Meletius opinion, let them go to Meletius: and the
multitude of the B. and of the monks, The greater part went to Mele^ius*
and of the Preests and of the other orders parted to Meletius very few B. at
all, and a few other turned to Peter the archb. and after that these made
their prayers by themselves, and also those by them selves, yea and they
performed also their other sacrifices either of them seperately by themselves.
But it happened that Peter suffered martyrdom, and that blessed man departed,
leaving Alexander his successor in Alexandria, Peter suffers martyrdom.
Meletius is exiled:
for he succeeded in the throne after the foresaid Peter: But Meletius and
many other, were sent into exile, being banished into the Phenecan mines, and
then after that, those which followed were Confessors with Meletius, and
Meletius himself in his travail in prisonment, passing through every region
and every place, did constitute Clearks, and bishops, and priests, and Deacons,
and did build up Churches to himself, neither those communicated with them,
nor they with those: and every of them wrote in his own Church, those that
succeeded Peter, Meletius makes B. priests, and deacons, and erects churches
against his Archb.
having the ancient Churches: The Catholic Church: but those that cleaued to
Meletius: the Martyrs Church. Whereupon also in Eleutheropolis, and in Gaza,
and Aelia, when the same Meletius came thither, he elected many in this manner,
and it happened that he spent much time in the foresaid mines. But in the mean
season the Confessors were set at liberty from the mines. Those also that were
of Peter's part: for many yet were alive that were followers of Meletius, and
neither had they any community one with another in the mines, or made their
prayers together. But it fell out, that Meletius yet for a while lived in the
world, yea, that he flourished under Alexander Peter's successor, and was in
friendship with him, and took heed to the affairs of the Church, and of the
faith. For he oftentimes said, I have had nothing diverse and alterated. This
Meletius being in Alexandria and tarying there for a time, having his
communion with his company by himself, found out Arius, and brought him
before Alexander, because he had found Arius in his declarations to have passed
the bounds of the faith. For he was a priest or Elder in Baucalide, a Church so
called in Alexandria, for there a priest or elder was appointed for every day,
for there were many Churches, but now there are more, and a Church was
delivered unto him, howbeit there was another with him: but for what cause this
was done, we shall declare exactly in his place, when need thereunto shall be.
etc. But now when the blessed Alexander in Alexandria, after the death of the
foresaid Meletius the Confessor, having taken a zeal against the sect and
discord of the Church, began to seem to trouble in all places, those that were
left of Meletius, that had private community among themselves, and to restrain
and compel them, that they should not dissent from the Church: but they
being not willing, moved troubles and stirred up tumults: and when they were
so pressed and restrained of the blessed Alexander: certain of the princes
among them, and those that held the chief places both in godliness and also
in life, assembled and went unto their company, for because of communing
together, to the end to obtain, both that they might offer and have communion
privately, and not be impeached, but there was one Paphnutius, a great man, an
Anchoret, who also was the son of a woman that had made the confession, yea,
he himself also had in a certain sort, atteyned to the Confession: and John
their bishop being also him self a most reverend man, and Callinicus bishop in
Pelusium, and certain other that did this thing: who indeed going forth,
being brought unto the king, were repulsed and rejected. For those that were
in the palace, hearing of the name of the Meletians, and being ignorant what
such a kind of name should be, suffered not them to speak with the king. And
herein it happened, that Paphnutius and John and the residue, consumed much time
in the parts of Constantinople and Nicomedia: What means they made to have
access to the Emperor Constantinus Magnus.
But then they grew in friendship with Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia, and
declared their cause to him, for they knew that he had free liberty of speech
with the king Constantine, and they besought him, that by him they might be
made known unto the king: Bu^ he, after he had promised that he would bring
them to the knowledge of the king, and would procure the matter that they
desired, requires again of them this petition, that they should receive
Arius with them into their society, to wit, him that faynedly and by a
mockery had made his repentance, and they promised that they would receive
him. Whereupon Eusebius presents them unto the king, and opens to the king
their cause, and it was granted to the Meletians, that from that time forth,
they should have their communion by them selves, and be hindered by none. And
would to God, these Meletians who showed forth the extremest justice of
truth, had rather had communion with those, The Meletians co^pact to join
Arius with them, that without the Archb. let, they might have their communion
by them selves.
that fell after their repentance made, than to have it with Arius and his
sectaries. For, it happened to them, according to the proverb, that fleeing
the smoke, they fell in the fire. For, neither could Arius have had his
state, nor his liberty of speech, but by this manner of occasion. Which ill
conjunction has happened to them, even until this day. For they which in times
past lived purely, and were most just, and in faith Meletians, are
intermingled with the disciples of Arius, being in these times removed from the
faith. And although some of them abide in the true faith: nevertheless, they
are not estranged from foul vnclea^nesse, by reason of the society with Arius,
and the Arians. But the conjunction of Meletius and of the Arians, had the
original on the foresaid occasion.

Thus much at large, and word for word, (upon the occassion of this our most
reverend and learned man's observation, of that Epiphanius reports against the
Meletians, concerning them of Alexandria,) I thought good (though it be long)
to set down out of him: to the end, we might more throghly see, what these
(not Miletians, but) Meletians were, in many points not much unlike our
brethren. At the first, concerning doctrine, Pure in the faith of Christ, which
I hope also our brethren yet be, and as sound in the substance of Christian
religion (I trust) as either these Meletians were, or we are: but they were so
severe in certain points, of their pretended Discipline, howbeit, admitting
the superior dignity and authority of bishops over Priests or Pastoral elders,
and of Archbishops over Bishops, even in the heat of their sorest persecution,
before the time of Constantine the great. As also at the beginning, did our
brethren with us, though they dissented in diverse other points of Discipline.
yet, they still acknowledged, as did the Meletians both the Bishops and
Archbishops superior dignities and authorities, which these our brethren now
reject, and against whom, they have made such a schism of the Church of God,
that we may even look upon, and lament, the like tragical division among us,
that for too rigorous discipline fell out among them. In so much, that although
both of us profess the faith of Christ aright: yet will not now our brethren
join in public prayers with us, but separate them selves asunder, and (as
these men did) make private assemblies and orders among themselves in their
public prayers and ministration of Sacraments, and make bishops, Ministers and
Deacons of their own several churches. But what the issue was of these
Meletians, we have heard, and may fear and in part already do feel, among
our selves. God be merciful to us both and give us grace in time to foresee and
take heed, that the public adversaries of the gospel, or any other old or new
fangled heretical sectaries, neither of the Anabapt. nor other like, have their
finger in this pie. And that this great zeal to obtain the having of these
separate conuenticles, discipline, ministry, communion, and prayers. etc. do
not join with them against us their brethren, least in the end, their former
synceritie of faith and life be stained by them. On this occasion, two bishops
together ( but the one of this faction) might spring up in one City. But the
faithful in Alexandria, ( where from this sprang) still acknowledged but one,
and the same there and then an Archb. and the B. in all that Province and every
where else, to be superior in dignity and authority, to al other preests or
pastoral elders.

Howbeit, Socrates li. 1. ca. 3. faith further of this Meletius, that he
himself had bin before deprived of his bishopric, Socrates. lib. 1. cap. 5.
by the Archb. Peter, for y^ same fault, wherein Mel. showed such rigor against
other: whereby this division grew, not only between the right believing
Christians, and the heretics: but also among the faithful themselves.
Whereupon (says Socrates) great tumults was raised every where. For ye mightsee,
not only the governors of the churches, vexing one another with contumelious
terms: but also the multitude of the people to be distracted into 2. parts:
whereof the one inclined to these men's opinion, the other to theirs: insomuch
that the matter fell out to that mischief and shameful state: that the christian
religion was even on the very theaters mocked at, Meletius.
with the derision of all men. As for those that dwelt at Alexandria they
contended of the chiefest points of our religion youthfully, and not without
tauntings. They sent their legates to the other B. of every province: but these
dividing their selves on either party, raised up the like contention. Meletius
deprived of his bishopric.
Yea the Meletians were intermingled with the Arians, who not long before were
severed from the church. But of what sort these also were, I think it meet to
be declared. Meletius a B, of a certain city in Egypt, was deprived of his
episcopal office, by Peter B. of Alexandria, (who in the reign of Dioclesian
died by martyrdom,) both for many other causes and chiefly for that in the
time of persecution, he had denied the faith and had offered unto Idols: who
when he was deprived, and had very many that cleaued unto his faction. he gave
himself to be the ringleader of that heresy unto the^, which from that time
even till this day, are in Egypt called the Meletians. And when he could
allege no just excuse or cause, why he separated himself from the church: he
said that he had only in a term, an injury offered him. And he began to
revile Peter with raylings, and to deface him with reproaches. And as soon as
Peter had by martyrdom (in the rage of persecution) suffered death: he turned
his reproaches upon Achillas that succeeded Peter in the bishopric, and
afterward a fresh against Alexander: who after the death of Achillas, obtained
the degree of that dignity. And while these were thus occupied in this strife
and dissention^ in the mean time was holden the quest, concerning Arius, whom
Mel. with those that were of his side assisted, and conspired with Arius
against the B. Thus says Socrates also of this scisme. Theoderetus does tell,
li. 5. cap. 3. of another Meletius afterward in Gratians time, that when in
Antiochia the chiefest city in the orient, the professors of the apostolical
opinions were also divided into 2. parts: and the one part (straight ways
after the practices attempted against Eustathius the great) detesting the Arian
wickedness and making their assemblies among themselves, had Paulinus to be
their B: the other part, after the creation of Eusebius. being with the notable
Meletius, divided from the wicked, and being exercised among those dangers
that we have mentioned, were governed by the doctrine of the most wise Mel.
Besides these a third head gave it self to the faction of Apollinaris a
Laodicean: who putting on the person of godliness* when he was reputed, as
though he would maintain the apostolical opinions: not long after he showed
himself to be an enemy of them, etc. But the Duke Sapores being entered into
Antioche, when the law of the emperor was set forth, Paulinus affirmed that
he was of the parts of Damasus. Apollinaris also (who covered his disease)
affirmed the same. As for holy Meletius maintained quietness, Flauia^u^ a
pri^st and afterward a bishop.
nor lapped him self in their contentions: but the most wise Flauianus,
beeinge as yet a Preeste (or Elder) first turninge to Paulinus, in the
hearing of the Duke, did say: if you (my friend) rejoice, in the community of
Damasus: see that you prove the conjunction of your opinions For he in the
confession of one essence, preaches manifestly three persons of the Trinity.
But you contrariwise take away the trinity of the persons. Wherefore, teach us
the consent of your opinions and then possess the Churches, as the law
commands. With which confutation, when he had stopped his mouth: he said,
that he marvelled at Apollinaris, that so impudently resisted the truth, when
as he knew well enough, that the famous Damasus avouched, that God the word
did take upon him our whole nature: to whom he always taught the contrary:
For (says he) thou depriuest our minds of salvation, which accusation if it
be false, then deny thou now this impe of thy newfanglenesse, and receive the
doctrine of Damasus, and obtain the divine Churches. Thus did the most wise
Flauian allay their boldness, by the truth of his speech But Meletius of all
men the mildest, sweetly and gently calling Paulinus, said* because the
Lord of this flock has set me also over the custody of the sheep, and
other are committed unto thee: since there is a community of godliness among the
sheep: Meletius offer to part the bishopric between them and to govern
together for a full union.
let us freendly join our foldes, and let go the contention of Mastership, and
attend in common to the sheep, that go in common in the pastures. But if the
seat itself do stop the concord, I also will endeavor to remove this
contention. Let us set (I pray you) in the seat, the book of the divine
gospel, and let us either of us sit together on either side it. And if so be
that I shall dye before thee: be thou (O friend) alone the Sheep master. But
if this shall happen to thee before me: then will I to my ability, take upon me
the care of the flock. When as Paulinus allowed not these his sweet and gentle
speeches: the Duke deciding the cause, commended the Churches to Meletius the
great. But Paulinus retained the mastership (or remained bishop) of these
Sheep, that had long before divided themselves.

Here again is another notable story of another Meletius, where more in one
city took upon them, according to their factions, to be bishops: and what
offer was made to appease the strife, of two at one time to have ruled
together, until the decease of the one or the other, and how in the end it was
determined unto one.

Thus much to this most reverend and learned man's aunsweres to Epiphanius, for
the superiority of one bishop, in one city. The residue of his arguments,
because they are cheefely on the sentences taken from Jerome, Chrysostom,
Theophilact, and Theodorete, whose sentences we have before at large perused: I
will here for this time, pass them over, save that which he says of Cyprian,
as yet untouched. The most reverend.


And whereas Cyprian ( says he) not in one place calls the bishops
successors of the Apostles, whose authority is from God: Cyprian.
and if we take it so, as though by the very commandment of God, these
Bishops are the same, that in time past were the Apostles: the thing it self
does confute that, seeing there was always a certain portion assigned to
every Bishop. But the Apostles, by the direction of the spirit of God, though
not confusedly, did exercise their Ministry, throughout the whole world.

The meaning of Cyprian is plain without cauiling, as the like saying of many
other the ancient fathers, that bishops are the successors of the Apostles,
because they succeeded both in the places and Churches by the Apostles fownded:
and in the chiefest dignity of the Churches orders, as in their times, the
function of the Apostles was. As the Magdeburge^ses note Cent. 3. cap. 6. tit.
de ratione gubernandi. page 150.

The first and cheifest authority belonged to the Bishops, whom also Cyprian
lib. 3. Epistola, 14. calls Praepositors, placed over the residue, who in
government sustained the chiefest part of the Ecclesiastical administration.
After them, the next in dignity, belonged to the Priests or Elders, and the
third to the Deacons. And that Bishops were then above the Priests or
Pastoral Elders, is apparent by Cyprians own words. I have long held my
patience (most dear brethren) as though our bashful silence should help to
quietness. But when immoderate and abrupt presumption, by the rashness thereof;
shall attempt to disturb the honor of the Martyrs, and shamefastness of the
Confessors, and tranquillity of the whole people, I must no longer hold my
peace. For, what danger of the offense of the Lord ought we not to fear, The
Bishop over the Priests by the Gospel and the Lords judgment.
when as some of the Priests (or Elders) neither mindful of the Gospel, nor
of their place, no nor thinking of the Lords judgments to come, neither that
now, the Bishop is placed over them: do with contumely and contempt of him that
is placed over them, claim the whole to themselves, which thing was never done
at all under the ancestors: Yea and (would to God) that casting flat down
the salvation of our brethren, they would not challenge all things to them
selves. I can dissemble and bear the reproaches of our Bishoprike, as I have
still dissembled and borne them. But now there is no place of dissembling, when
as our brotherhoode is deceived by some of you: who, while without means of
restoring the salvation, they desire to be plausible, they rather hinder such
as are fallen. etc.

Whereby as it plainly appears, that the Pastoral Elders were inferior to
bishops: so even then, there were of the Clergy, some Priests or Elders, that
envied and slaundered this their B. Superiority, and would have had the
dealing, as far forth. as they in restoring the poenitents, and in all things,
equal authority to the bishops.

Peter and Paul.
Which thing (by Cyprians judgment how plausible a show of reformation soever
it had, was very offensive unto God, and never before attempted of the
Ministers. A plausible show of reformation but offensive to God
And so consequently, this superioritye of Bish. placed over the Priests or
Pastoral Elders, had continued even from the Apostles times. And thus might
they well of him be called the successors of the apostles. Not, that Cyprian
meant, that there was no difference between the Bishops and the Apostles.

And therefore, this is a manifest mistaking to say: If we take it so, as
though by the very commandment of God, The most reverend.
these Bishops are the same that in times past the Apostles, the thing it self
does refute that seeing there was always a certain portion assigned to every
Bishop. But the Apostles, by the direction of the spirit of God, though not
confusedlye, did exercise their Ministerye throughout the whole world,

Bridges.
Although herein and in other points more, the Apostles were distinguished
from and above Bishops: yet might they also be Bishops well enough. For, as
this Learned man says: they did it not confusedlye: so their charge to go
into all the world, and preach the Gospel unto all nations, was not so, that
every one of them should travel over all the world, and preach unto al
nations: But that by the world ( being name^ per fynecdochen the whole for the
parts,) and that among them all, some here and some there, by the direction
indeed, of the spirit of GOD, they dispersed themselves at length in diverse
parts of the world. And there also diverse of them, did settle themselves, so
long as they lived, as is recorded in the most credible histories of their
travels. And some tarried still at Jerusalem, as James, and after him Symeon. Of
which James it, is not only in all the most ancient and not suspected
records, constantlye and expressly avouched, that he was the Bishop of
Jerusalem: but even Iunius himself, (as precise otherwise as any of our Learned
Brethren, and no less Learned,) in his book of Notes upon the Epistle of
Jude, fol. 5. confesses, saying:

Fowrthlie, he is called Judas the brother of James, not only in this
salutation: Ionius referring him se^fe for James B of Jerusalem.
but also Luc. 6.16. and Act. 1.13. Because the name of James was most famous
among all men: as he that most of all was the Governor of the Church of
Jerusalem. Who was called the brother of the Lord, who was accounted just,
who was surnamed Cholih-ham: or, as it is commonly written Oblias, by the
sentence of al me^, that is to say (...), the bulwark, (or compassing about)
of the people in righteousness, as Clemens does interpret it, or (...), the
wall of the people, as Epiphanius expounds it. As though he contained the
people, and environed them with defense round about, by the puritye of his
doctrine, and by the holiness and righteousness of his manners. For Moses
Exodus 32.35. affirms, Bishops the Apostles successor.
that on the contrary, the people by ungodliness and impurenesse are made
naked. Of these things* we have most plentiful witnesses. Peter Act. 12 17,
Luke, Act. 15. and 21. Paul, Gal. 2.9. Joseph lib. 20. (...) in his history of
Antiquities. Clement and Eusebius lib. 2. of his Ecclesisiasticall history,
cap. 23. which three last testimonies as we have already perused, do confirm
that James was the very bishop of Jerusalem.

But ( says this most reverend and Learned man) if this be true, The most
reverend,
there should have been more Bishops in the Church of Rome it self: namely
Peter and Paul, which yet afterward was counted peculier to one.

And must this needs follow, Bridges.
that if bishops were the successors of the Apostles. Peter and Paul must
needs have been bishops of Rome? Peter and Paul not B of Rome.
Such lose conclusions indeed the Papists make. And why not at other places
so well as at Rome, where more than one of the Apostles were together? as at
Samaria, and especially at Antiochia. But though bishops succeeded the Apostles
in some things, yet it follows not, that they succeeded them in their
Apostleship? And some of the Apostles were bishops also, as some were both
Evangelists and Prophets, even in the most proper signification of those
functions. Yet for all that, were they Apostles still. But who makes Peter and
Paul bishop of Rome, because they were both at Rome? As for Paul, it is
apparent he was there, and continued also there in teaching 2. year at once
together* and yet we say not, he was Bishop there, nor Peter neither. And yet
had they been both Bishops there also, and at one time, why might they not for
all that, have afterward had but one Bishop at once, and that one, The most
reverend.
successor well enough unto them both? but he replyeth.

And surely, there can-not be more, the chief in one and the same company at
one time.

And cannot two be chief together, in respect of other inferior to them both,
though in one and the same company? Bridges
There were 2. Consuls at Rome, both chief alike together at one time, Both
su^erior government and supreme too, may be in more then one over the residue.
over all the other Senators, their-selues being of the same order and company
of Senators. There have been two or three Emperors also of Rome, who were all
of one and the same company, and parted the Empire among them at one time, and
all had chief authority together, over all the civil state of Rome. and might
it not be so in a Bishops office, yea two or three together, upon some
extra-ordinary occasion, and yet all alike superior to all the other Pastors in
that Church or Diocese? The question of equality, is of quality, not of
quantity: the number does not appeach the superiority

The most reverend.
And ( says he) whereas the name of bishop, is said of the Apostleship, Act.
1.20. it makes nothing to the matter, except a man by like reason, would have
the Deacons to have been Apostles, because Paul calls his Apostleship a
Deaconship or Ministry.

Indeed, if we would have Bishops to be Apostles also, then he said something
to the matter, Bridges
that Deacons should have been Apostles; because Paul calls his Apostleship
a Deaconship or Ministry, understanding the name of Deacon, in his usual and
proper signification. But Paul does not so call himself a Deacon; and yet now
and then, he exercised the proper office of a Deacon. Yea, all the Apostles
did so, until (Acts 6.) they made a peculier office of the Deaconship. It
follows not, that because some Apostl. were Bishops: all Bish. must be Apost.
Howbeit not so, that they excluded themselves, or other Pastors, that they
might never jointly exercise also, a Deacons office. So might an Apostle be a
Deacon, though a Deacon might not be an Apostle. As the higher office might
include the lower, though the lower include not the higher. And so the Apostles
might be Bishops, although the Bishops succeeding them, might not be Apostles.
But, though their Apostleship it self Act. 1. be called a Bishoprike
improperly: what hinders this in them, that the name and office of Bishop in
his proper sense, might not be compatible, though not al one with the name and
office of their Apostleship also? And yet, if it could not neither,
notwithstanding, since that the Apostles made Bishops, and made them in the
highest degree, of the Ministers ordinary and perpetual orders; as the
Apostles were for their extraordinary time the highest: so might they well of
Cyprian be called the successors of the Apostles. so not only Ciprian, but
(besides the ancient Fathers already cited,) S. Augustine calls the
Apostles, Bishops: and Bishops the Apostles successors. Tom. 4. de quaesti. ex
nouo Testam. quaest. 97.

For ( says he) no man is ignorant that our Savior instituted Bishops for the
Churches. August Tom. de q^est ex nouo Testam. questione 97. Aug. tom. 8. in
Psalm. 44.
For even he him self before he ascended, laying his hand on his Apostles,
ordained them Bishops. And more at large, Tom. 8. on the 44. psalm: that they
succeeded the Apostles. In steed of thy Fathers, are Sons borne unto thee.
The Apostles have begotten thee. They them selves were sent, they their selves
preached, even the fathers theirselues: but could not they be always bodily
present with us? If one of them said, I desire to be loosed, and to be with
Christ: much more is it the best. It is necessary to tarry in the flesh, for
you. Thus indeed he said, but how long could he tarry here? Could he
until this time? Could he for ever heere-after? Is then the Church desolate
by their departure? God forbid.

In steed of thy Fathers, Sons are borne unto thee. What means it, In
steed of thy fathers, sons are borne unto thee. The fathers, the Apostles
were sent. In steed of the Apostles, (or for the Apostles) sons are borne unto
thee, there are ordained bishops. Augustine
For from whence are the bishops borne, that are at this day throughout all
the world? The Bishop in steed of the Apost.
The Church herself calls them Fathers, she her self begat them, and she
her self placed them in the seats of their Fathers. Therefore, thou think
not thy self desolate, because thou see not Peter, because thou see not
Paul, by whom thou art borne: a Fatherhood is grown to thee of thine own
Children. In steed of thy Fathers are children born unto thee, whom thou
shall make Princes in all lands.

What can be playner spoken then these sayings of S. Augustine, both that the
Apostles were also Bishops, and that (as Cyprian said,) bishops are the
successors of the Apostles?

As for that which is here added of Hieromes former sentence, though I have
sufficientlye and at large discussed the same: yet, sith this most reverend
and Learned man also, has somewhat more to say thereto: let us likewise hear
it. The most reverend,


But we are ( says he) to look into that also, that Jerome might seem to
be of the mind, that this kind of Bishop began then, when as Schisms arose up
in the Church.

Very true, even so says Hierome, and (as we have noted) it follows thereon,
that this kind of bishop began, even in the Apostles times. Bridges.
And what here can this most reverend and learned man, or any other say, to
deny this conclusion, except he will deny Hieromes saying? If he will deny
it: why does he bring it for him? Well, what of that, there is no remedy, he
will deny it flat. yea, he suspects, whether Jerome were of that mind. The
most reverend.


But we are ( says he) to look into that also, that Jerome might seem to be
of that mind, that this kind of Bish. began then, when as schisms arose up in
the Churches.

Nay, never say (for shame) he might seem to be of that mind, Bridges
For if a man's mind may be known by his speech, he speaks it plain, and
names what kinds of schisms they were, when the people said, I hold of
Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas. So that he plainly thought, Ieromes mind is
most apparent that the pecullarizing of the name and office of B. ^as in the
apostles time.
it was in the Apostles times. Yea, and he plainly so auowched, in the sentence
also before alleged out of Jerome, by this Learned man himself: For at
Alexandria ( says Hierome) from the time of Mark the Euangeliste, till the
time of Heraclea and Dionisius Bishops: The Elders placed one in a high
degree or place, chosen by themselves, whom they called, the Bishop. So
that, this was the plain mind of Jerome, ( sith that diverse of the Apostles
suruiued Saint Mark) that the original of this kind of Bishops, began in
the Apostles days.

That this is not so ( says he) we may gather out of Paul himself, who, of
purpose writing to the Corinthians about the same matter, Hierome.
does not only pass over this remedy: The most reverend.
but also as fore-seing such a matter, does in the title of the Epistle, join
unto himself Sosthenes, to teach by his example, how carefully this Primacy
is to be avoided in the Assemblies of the Church, who (as it is evident, were
not only the first in Order next unto Christ, but also highest in degree,)
did execute their ministry in common.

Here Jerome is flatly challenged for an untruth. And what proof against
Jerome that this is not so? Bridges
Forsooth, we may gather it. And is this all, Jerome challenged of untruth.
it may be gathered? Shall we infer a necessity, on a probability? Well, what
may we gather out of Paul himself? Because he wrote of purpose against
schisms, and passes over this remedy: Ergo: This was never used at all for
any remedy against schisms in the Apostles times.

Let us see the goodness of this argument by the like. S. Paul wrote of
purpose, The f^iuolousnesse of the most rev. argum.
against our natural corruption, whereby we and our infantes are all borne in
sin. Against which the sacrament of our regeneration is a remedy: But S.
Paul passes over the baptizing of Infantes: Ergo: it was not a remedy in S.
Paul's time,

S. Paul also in the same Epistle that he speaks of schisms, writes of
purpose, against whoredom, whereof divorce is a remedy: but he passes over
the remedy of divorce, in the cause of whoredom. Ergo; there was then in that
case, no use at all thereof. Saint Paul writes of purpose against the abuse
of the Lords supper, with their drunkenness, surfeiting, and making no
difference of it from other meat, whereof it is also a remedy, to have only
the elements of bread and wine, and to remove all other meat at such times
as it is ministered: but S. Paul passes over the forbidding of those (...) (or
love Feasts) which were used to be made when they came thereto: Ergo: The Lords
supper was never used only with bread and Wine in the Apostles times, but
always with another supper joined thereto.

On this fashion, we might reason of many more things, But one for all Saint
Paul writing of purpose against the same matter, to wit, against the
Corinthians schisms, does pass over this remedy, the aequalitye of all
pastors in the Church: Ergo: In S. Paul's time the pastors were not all equal.
If it be replied. But yet these things are written of, in other places, either
by S. Paul, or by some other: so yt those remedies notwithstanding, remain
entier, although they be not there touched: And does not this fully answer
this most reverend and Learned man, if this superiority among pastors, be
showed in other places: as in 2. Gal. and in the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus? etc. Yea, what if in the self same place, the Apostle writing of purpose
to the Corinthians about the same matter, do sufficiently and plainly gather
the superiority among the pastors? Does not S. Paul name himself, besides
Apollo and Cephas, on whose names the Corinthians pre^ended their schisms? And
were not all these three, Elders, for all (...) were Apostles? Were not Paul
and Apollo, of the same function that was Peter? Who (as this Learned man by
and by his self confesses) called himself fellow Elder: Ergo: an Elder. And
was this S. Paul's purpose, in writing of purpose against this schism), that
where the Corinthians thought too much of these three Pastors, and made
schisms about their affections to them, that for remedy hereof, they should
so abase their estimation of them, that they should count them but aequall to
al other, and all other pastors ( set aside their Apostleship) to be aequall,
and all one in dignitye and authority with them? Differ^nce of the persons
dignity and authority in the aequality both of Apostleship and, Eldersh.
No, howsoever the order and function of the Apostleship, was all one and
aequall in all the Apostles, and the Elder-shippe among the Elders: yet neither
as Apostles, nor yet as Elders, the persons were of like gifts, nor of like
dignitye, and authority, in all places and respects among them. Which
superior degrees and estimation, Saint Paul appproueth and allows: and
neither to the Corinthians, nor any where else, directly nor indirectly does
improve the same. The most reverend.


But ( says this our reverend and Learned man) that S. Paul fore-seing such a
matter, does in the title of the Epistle join to himself Sosthenes?

And did Saint Paul and Sosthenes, execute their Ministry in common as
aequals: Bridges.
because he joined him to himself in the title of his Epistle, and in his
salutations? He joined Timothy unto himself, in his other Epistle to the
Corinthians: and besides Timothy, Siluanus in both his Epistles to the
Thessalonians: Does he therefore execute his ministry with them in common,
and as his aequals? and how then does this Learned man himself even here
confess of the Apostles: ( who it is evident, were not only the first in
order next unto Christ, but also highest in degree.) if these men whom in
these salutations S. Paul joins unto himself, did execute their Ministerye
in common: and therein were aequall unto him?

These things hang not together. Whatsoever S. Paul in joining Sosthenes unto
himself in his salutations did sore-see: this Learned man fore-sawe not, no,
nor after-saw his apparent contradictions to him self: and much less saw he,
what S. Paul fore-sawe herein, clean different from that that he imagines.
The most reuer^nd.


Wherefore ( says he) no not the same Paul alone would excommunicate the
incestuous persons, by his Apostolical authority, but by the authority of
the whole Eldershippe: Neither does Peter doubt to call himself fellow Elder.
Paul and So^henes.


Neither does this debar, but that still even in excommunication S. Paul
had a superior authority over the whole Eldershippe, Bridges.
even as Calvin himself confesses on that place, 1. Cor. 5, 4. S. Paul's
author. superior in exco^munic. Caluinon 1. Cor. 5.^.
We must note ( says he) that Paul though he were an Apostle, does not
excommunicate after his own lust alone, but participate counsel with the
church, that the matter may be done by a common authority: he verilye goes
before them, and shows the way. but in that he joins associates with him,
he signifies enough, that it is not the private power of one man.

To the which Marlorate adds, and that as out of Calvin also: first upon
these words, I have already decreed, for I have also ( says he) already
judged and pronounced the sentence which you ought to follow. Marlorate on 1.
Cor. 5.
And again, as out of Martyr. Verily, the Apostle goes before other in
judging, which also it beseems those that in the Church are the greater, to
the intent that the vnskilfuller people, may be in judgment directed by their
voice going before. And further, as out of Calvin he says:

The ancient Church had an order of Priesthood or Eldershippe: whereof the
Apostle mentions. 1. Tim. 5. c. 17. and these Priests or Elders were of two
sorts. For, certain of them both taught and administered the Sacraments; yea
rather, together with the Bishop, did govern the Church, because the Bishop was
of the same order that they were of. Neither behaved he himself otherwise
toward them, than the Consul of Rome toward the Senators.

Whereby it plainly appears, that the Apostle, whether he joined unto him (
after he had fore-iudged and decreed the same) the whole Church of Corinth, If
the priests or Elders minist. of the word and Sacram. did then together with
the B. govern the Chapter then were B distinct from Elders of the word and
sacraments
or the Seniory, ( of what sort of Elders soever they understand it) to
denounce in their assembly, the sentence already decreed of excommunication:
yet notwithstanding was Paul their far superior: Yea, that every Bishop in
his Diocese, joining with his seignorye, being of such Priests or Elders as
are of the order that the Bishop himself is of; nevertheless, still he
remains their superior, not only in other points of dignitye, but even in
the voices that they all jointly assembled give, in denouncing the party to
be excommunicate, with their assents, whom the Bishop before has pronounced
judged and decreed so to be.

And that he is as a Consul toward the Senators, to wit, of a far higher
authority than any one, or than all his Brethren in the Senate. And that
this was the order in the ancient Church of the Eldership, whereof the Apostle
makes mention in the 1. to Timothy, 5. c. 17.

All which if it be true, A privy custom.
that Marlorate ( as out of Calvin) does here avowe: then is it plain, that
in the Apostles times, there were Bishops of the same order, that the other
Priests or pastoral elders were, who both taught and administered the
Sacraments, and though with the Bishop, they did govern the Church together:
yet had he a far superior dignity, then any one, or then all they had, as a
Consul among and yet above his Senators. Which is the very principal point in
question. And how is not then this Bishop, that here in contempt is called the
Bishop of Man, the Bishop of God also? As for excommunication, we will refer
to his proper place. And for Peter's calling of himself a fellow Elder,
because our Brethren, the Learned Discoursers, discourse better on it, I will
likewise refer it, to their further calling on the same.

The residue here noted by this Learned man, for Ieromes sentence, is already
answered, save that he adds this:

And whereas he says in the same place, The most reverend.
that it was decreed throughout all the word: we are to understand it no
otherwise, than of a privy custom, brought in by little and little.

How privy it was, and by little and little brought in, the Reader may
understand by that we have showed already: Bridges
that it began in the Apostles times, the apostles not unwitting thereof: but
willing the same: yea, some of the chief apostles themselves parties: Open to
all the world in the most famous Churches, Jerusalem, Antioche, Alexandria,
Ephesus, Rome, and all Creta over: spread from these places, throughout all
Christendom: begun in the age of the apostles, and so continued in the
Primitive Church, and held in reverence among all these ancient reverend holy,
and learned fathers, confessors, and Martyrs, before the errors, superstitions,
pride and tyranny of Antichriste began: recorded and testified by so many and
so credible witnesses: confessed and granted unto even by the most reverend
and best learned men indeed of our own times: yea, by these our brethren
themselves that do impugn it, and yet in effect do thus confirm it: and
shall we now dare to call this a priuye custom brought in by little and
little? But what dare not this man from beyond the Seas ( under the name of
most reverend and learned) presume to conclude, that dare fold up all this
matter thus?

And whatsoever is found in Ignatius or other ancient Writers, when the
Bishop of Satan was not yet found out touching the authority of the Bishops or
overseers (as Iustine speaks) is to be understood of this kind of Bishop.
The most reverend,


Thus does this most reverend and Learned man, shake off all these ancient
writers, and holy fathers. Ignatius here named, Bridges.
immediatlye succeeding the Apostles, and living in Antiochia, before the
destruction of Jerusalem* not only in S. John's and Simeons days: but while
many other of the Apostles and Disciples lived, as Eusebius in his Chronicle
witnesses. Yea, though Beza also allow the title and office in Timothy, that
Iustine ascribes to bishops: What of all this? Whatsoever Iustine speaks;
yea, whatsoever is found in Ignatius, or other auucient writers whosoever they
be, whatsoever they speak or write, never so-good, never so holy, never so
true, what though it were, when the bishop of Satan was not yet found out; if
it once be towching the authority of bishops and Ouer-seers, it is all to be
rejected with this contumely: It is to be understood of this kind of
bishop, which is called. The bishop of Man, that is to say, brought into
the Church, by the alone wisdom of man, besides the express word of God.
Thus does this most Reverend and Learned man from beyond the Seas, in a round
conclusion, give his judgment of them, and so he leaves them.

Let us now therefore leave him also, to return a Gods blessing beyond the
Seas, from whence he came, and with all due reverence taking our leave of him,
in expectation of other reverend and learned Fathers, Judgments from beyond
the Seas also:

Let us now for the present, return home to our Brethren where we left them in
their Learned Discourse of Ecclesiastical government.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIFTH BOOK, PROCEEding still further on the Pastors.
THis book treats specially on the Judgments of other reverend and godly
learned men, from beyond the seas also, in the late reformed Churches
concerning this superior authority and dignity of one pastor in a city; or
Diocese or Province over his brethren and fellow pastors. Which one was called
in a city, or diocese, bishop. in a province Archb. To the proof whereof
are, alleged upon our brethrens allegation of Titus. What superior authority
he had over all the pastors of Creta: with the judgments of Bullinger,
Calvin, Aretius Hemingius, Herebrande with the orders of other reformed
Churches for their Superintendents special and general. The B. and Archb. of
the fathers and other canons of the ancient churches regiment approved by
Calvin in Geneua, with the approbation of Ieromes sentence, and that this
order was in the Apost. times, and not contrary to the Apostolical Doctrine:
with Caluines epistles to diverse B. and Archb. and to the King of Polonia,
approouing this superior authority: and his general rules for all popish B.
converted to the gospel. The judgment of Zanchius and Bucer for those old
orders, specially of bishops and Archb. and for the old clericall discipline
and regimente due unto them: of the objections to the contrary out of Peter,
and of the Titles proper to Christ: and whether the name Archb. be co^petent
to any Minist. and of Peter's Title of fellow Elder: and of Christ's prohibitions
of Titles and rule, and of his example of washing his Disc. feet, etc. and of
humility and Lordship: of bishops holding temporalities and royalties: and of
obedience unto them in the same, and of Diotrephes. with caueats for the
Ministers lawful authority: and against unlawful liberty by aequality: lastly
of Bezaes judgment on these matters, for the Apostles and the ancient orders:
and of the renewing those orders in the state of Geneua.

Titus authority.
The Learned Discourse.
IN the same manner of speaking, he describes the qualities of those, which
were to be chosen Bishops and Deacons. Page 24.
Likewise unto Titus. 1.5. 1. Tim. 3.2.8 Ti^. 1.5.6.7.
He calls them elders, and immediately after, describing the qualities of
such, as were meet to be ordained elders, he calls them bishops: saying For
this cause did I leave thee in Creta, that thou should continue, to redress
the things that remain: and that thou should ordeyne elders in every City,
if any be unreprovable: the husband of one wife, having faithful children:
which are not accused of riot, nor are disobedient. For a bishop or ouerseer
must be unreprovable, as the steward of God, not froward. etc.

COncerning, the communicating of these names, Pastors, Bridges.
Priests, or elders, and bishops, indifferently, or the being of the office
all one and the same, until further order in the Apostles times were taken: we
have at large before declared. But as for the matter, that among these Pastors,
Elders or bishops, some one Pastor, elder or bishop, had a superior government
over many of the residue in the same order: as we have plainly proved it by
Saint Paul, through-out all the same his Epistle to Timothy here alleged,
and also out of the other Epistle unto him: so, for this Epistle likewise unto
Titus. 1.5. Which Epistle appears to be so late written by Saint Paul, that
there is no such journey, or aboade, in any such place mentioned, in all those
iourneyes which Saint Luke so diligently in the Acts records: and therefore
it should rather seem, to be written after that time.

Bullinger, in his Preface on this Epistle to Titus says: when it was written,
either before or after the Apostle was taken, it is not evident enough. The
time when the Epistle to Titus was written.
Theophilacte thinks it written before his bonds, and before the later to
Timothy were published. Certainly, he that will search it more diligently,
shall not want conjectures, whereby it may be gathered that it was written,
after that by the sentence of Caesar, he was at Rome acquitted.

But were it written then, or after, or before, or as Chytreus also in his
Onomastichon gathers: Chytraeus in Onomasticho.
yet makes it no less, if not much more, unto this purpose, that even at that
time, while the name of Priest or Elder and Bishop was yet used in common:
notwithstanding there was, yea, and that no small difference, among these
Priests or elders and Bishops, in the degree of superior government: which is
apparent by the text it self, wherein Saint Paul gives Titus being a
priest, or elder, or pastor, or Bishop, a great deal more authority and
superior dignity, then ordinarilye appertayned to every Priest or elder or
Pastor or Bishop, or by what name soever they were termed. Which Calvin
himself upon these words, For this cause have I l^ft thee in Creta, etc. does
note saying: This beginning does clearly show, Cal^in 1. Ti^.
that Titus is not so much admonished for his own sake, as commended unto
others) least any should hinder him, the Apostle commits unto him, his
own turns. Wherefore it behooves, that he be acknowledged of all men, for
the Apostles Vicar, and be reuerentlye received. For sith that no certain
station was assigned to the Apostles, but an office enjoined to them, of
spreading the Gospel through-out all the world: whereas therefore they
trauayled out of one city into another, they used to substitute fit men in
their place, by whose labor that which they began, should be finished.
Praedicas.
So Paul boasts that he founded the Church of Corinth, but other were the
master workman which ought to build thereupon, that is, to further the
building. This indeed belongs to all Pastors. ^or, the Churches shall
always have need of encreasinges, and of furderaunce, so long as the world
endures. But beyond the ordinary office of pastors, a care of ordeyning the
Church was committed to Titus, for pastors are wont to be placed over
Churches, that be already ordained, and formed in a certain manner: But Titus
sustained a certain burden more, that it is wit, to give a form to
churches not yet orderly framed, that he might establishe a certain manner of
policy together with Discipline. Thus has Titus being an E^der, or pastor
or bishop a Superior authority given him above other Elders, pastors or
bishops, were they then distinguished or all one. As for the office of Titus,
it is divided ( says Aretius) in two parts, the one is parted into correcting
the other into ordeyning. These two we have in the Apostles proposition: That
thou might correct the other things, and Town by Town ordeyne Elders.
That therefore, should be (...), Correction, but this (...), Ordination.
Aretiu^ in tit.
Correction conteyneth all that, that is vicious in the manners of men, and
ought to be and may be amended, according to the rule of Gods Law. In which
part the Apostle had in-deede corrected many things, but not all, nor the
whole. Hereupon was the precept of the amendment of the residue. etc Whereby
we are admonished, that always and every where, we have need of amending.

Moreover, that there can be no vigilance so great of Godly Ministers,
that can in the hearers correct vices to the full, but that still that saying
of the Apostle is to be often repeated, Correct the other things. etc.

The other office of Titus, is to ordeine Priests or Elders Town by Town.
This is called (...) the ordination of Ministers: a place most ample and
needful to be known. It is wont here to be enquired, who ought to
ordeine and then who are to be ordained. Concerning the former, the Apostle in
this place attributes this to Titus alone: Titu^ ordained Elders alone.
for there were no other in Creta that regarded this matter, or that could
have performed it: and all the Magistrates were as yet heathen, and Titus was
most rightly enstructed of the Apostle, and endued with gifts of the holy
ghost. At this day there is another reason, we have faithful Magistrates and
Christian people: And therefore the force of the election pertayneth not to the
only Ministers, although here it appertain to Titus alone. And therefore our
Churches. ( He speaks of the territory belonging to the Lords of Berne in
Heluetia) do keep this manner, that the Ministers do indeed elect,
notwithstanding, they offer the^ to the Senate ( as if we should present the
election to the Queens Majesty, and to the Counsel) Which either allows or
disaloweth all the election, according as they understand the matter.
Oftentimes also the consent of the whole Church is sought, over whom the
Minister is to be preferred. Thus says Aretius not only of their order in
ordeyning Ministers, both different from this example of Titus, and from the
rules prescribed by these our Learned discoursers: but also to show, that
Titus had there and then, the whole and only government of these things.

Neither avails that, which Calvin answers to his own objection: which
though we have noted once before, in aunswering the most reverend and
learned man, when he urged Election as the chief ground of Church offices,
Caluines obi^ction and answer for Titus authority in electing and ordeining
Pastors.
which depends on the voices of the whole company: Yet once more, (if it be
pardonable) let us again consider his objection, and his answer: But he
seems ( says Calvin) to permit too much to Titus, while he commands
him to set Ministers over all the Churches. For this were almost a Kinglike
power: and moreover by these means, is taken away from every Church the right
of electing, and the judgment from the college of the Pastors: but this were
to profane all the holy administration of the Church. But the answer ( says
Calvin) heereunto is easy. Not that it is permitted to the will of Titus, that
he might do all things alone, and place bishops over the Churches whom he
pleased: but only he commands him to govern the elections, as a moderator,
even as it is necessary. This is a speech common enough: so is the Consul, or
he that supplieth the place of the King in the vacancy, or the dictator, said
to have created the Consulles, Inequality of Ministers.
because he held the court where they were to be elected. And so says Luke of
Paul and Barnabas in the Acts: not that they alone did prefer, as at their
commandment, the Pastors of the Church, either tried or known: but because
they ordained fit men which were elected or desired of the people.

I omit here, in this matter (concerning Titus ordeining Ministers,) the
contradiction of these two so notable learned men Calvin and Aretius: the one
says, the ordeining and the election of them pertayned to him alone: the other
says, not to him alone, the one says, they were elected or desired of the
people: the other says, none regarded this or could do it: and yet both of
these (thus varying) excellent men. But to reconcile them both as well as we
may, yea, to yield to Calvin as the senior, and the more renouned, and the
nerer favoring these our brethrens Discourses, and being him self the chief
Pastor even in Geneua, whereunto they would nearer leuel our Ecclesiastical
government: let Caluines own conclusion answer his own self, and our
brethrens pretended equality of their Pastors. Indeed ( says Calvin) We
learn out of this place, Caluine^ conclusion that the ministers were not al
equal in authority in the Apostles times.
that there was not then such equality among the Ministers of the Church, but
that some one was above them in authority and in counsel. Howbeit, this is
nothing to the tyrannical and profane manner of Collations which reigns in
popery: for the manner of the apostles was very far different. What can be
playner said, then this conclusion of Calvin, that there was not then such
equalitye among the ministers of the Church, but that some one was above them,
not only in Counsel but also in authority?

Neither is this confessed of Titus only, but of the whole state of the
Ministry then, to wit in the Apostles times, and for all the continuance of
the Ministry after them, that there should not be among the Ministers of the
churches (and by Ministers there, he speaks of Pastors) such an equality as
our Brethren here pretend, but that some one, both in Counsel and also in
authority, should be a Governor and Ruler* fet over above his brethren and
fellow Ministers: and by what name could they or can we call him better, then
a Bishop?

The ancient Fathers therefore, having by continual succession received this
Title, for a Superior in authority and counsel, among the Ministers of the
Church, as not equal, (...), by a kind of prehemito call him a Bishop: The
ancient fathers acknowledging Titus to be B. of Creta.
and finding Titus to have such Superiority committed unto him, over a whole
Isle, having an hundredth Cities or good Towns therein; do call him Bishop of
Creta. Titus ( says Hierome) the Bishop of Creta. In which Isle and the
Islandes lying thereaboutes, he preached the Gospel of Christ, and there
died.

Titus authority
Hemingius a famous and yet living learned man, writing upon this Epistle of
Paul to Titus, in the sum of the first Chapter, says on this wise: The
sum of the first Chapter is, that a Bishop ought Town by Town, to ordain
Ministers of blameless life, and of sound doctrine. Whereby he may stop the
seducers mouths, and blame such as teach perverse things, Titus a B. and his
authority a pattern to al other B.
that they may at length become sound and repent. In which words, he
signifies, that both Titus was a bishop, and that generally all such as are
Bishops have a Superiority over Pastors and Ministers, both to ordeine them,
and to correct them. And upon these words, For this cause I left thee in
Creta, etc. He says: Having finished the Preface and salutation, he treats
of well ordeyning those things, that were of Paul omitted, by reason of his
sudaine departure, and of ordeining bishops in every Town. Because he
would not have a want of government in the Church, but that all might be
done in order and decentlye, he would that some man notable in life and
Doctrine, should be the governor to ordeyne the Ministers, and to dispose
all things rightly in the Church, which should take heed that no heresies
should arise: The popes superiority not established by this superiority of a
bishop.
Which (to conclude) should study that all things should be done orderly,
neither yet hereupon, is the primacy of the Pope, nor their tyrannical (...),
or freedom of living after their own laws, and jurisdiction of the papists,
which they challenge to themselves, established. For they serve not our Lord
Jesus Christ, but endeavor them selves with all their might, to extinguish the
light of the gospel, that by the goodness of God is kindled. Albeit they are
greatly defeated of their opinion: for the blood of the martyrs is as it were
the best oil, for it causes that the light of the gospel being kindled, does
burn the more. That thou may correct the things that are desired: that is,
that thou shouldeste rightlye dispose those things, that are desired in the
ecclesiastical ordination. For Paul as it seems having laid the
foundation, went unto some other place, as he that was the Apostle and
Doctoure, not of one Nation, but of the Gentiles, leaving in the mean season,
among the Cretensians, Titus, which should set in order those things, that
he him self in so short a time had not furnished. Note, that the office of a
Bishop in general, is to dispose rightly all things in the Church. And
that thou should in every Town ordeyne Priests or Elders. And the cheifest
part of the Episcopal office is to ordeyn fit Ministers of the word. etc.

Neither only does Hemingius write thus, on the occasion of these words of
the Apostle to Titus, then the which, we need no playner testimony: but also
upon the fourth of the Ephesians, concerning Pastors ( under which name our
Brethren would shelter Priests or Elders, and bishops, not only to be
always equal, Ecclesiastical promotion.
but all one and the same. Hemingius says, Pastors were those, whom at this
day we call Parochos, Parish Priests, these were placed over certain
Churches, that by preaching, by administering the Sacraments, and by a certain
holy Discipline, they might govern them. These are not for a time, but their
office is necessary in the Church, even until the Judgment.

Doctors are these, whom the Church in times past called Catechizers: whose
office was to prescribe the form of Doctrine, and to deliver the foundations
of the Doctrine, which the Pastors afterward should follow. Such as at
this day, teach the youth Religion in the schools. These have regard that
the true interpretation, and a just measure of teaching, be retained in the
Church. Howbeit notwithstanding in the time of the Apostles, the manner of
promoting as it is now in use, was not yet received. Nevertheless we must
understand, that the godly governors of the Churches, and of the schools,
ordained the degrees of promotions, upon good and profitable counsayl, both
that the arrogaunte should not usurp to themselves this Title of honor,
without the Judgment of the Church: and also that such as were fit men,
might be acknowledged by the public testimony, and be had in price.
Neither this contrary to the dignity of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, which is
commends order and comeliness to the Church: it leaves unto her the right
of ordeyning the customs, which seem to make for order and decency. Wherefore
there is no cause, that we should regard these speeches, of the proud
spirits of such as contemn these Ecclesiastical degrees: if so be, that
they unto whom such degrees are collated, shall remember, that they are not
the badges of the contempt of others, or of arrogaunte Supereminency: but
rather, the public Testimonies of the duty, that they owe to the Church, and
whereunto (as it were with a public Sacrament) they be bound.

But perhaps the adversaries object, that the Church may not know Pomp:
but should have the trial of Faith, and of holy life, of prayer, and the
laying on of hands. I answer: it is nothing unfitting for Christians, to
bestow or collate the Testimonies of learning and honestye, upon those that
are godly and learned men, that the Church may know, unto whom she might
safely commend the government and the care of Doctrine. Neither hinders it,
that such promotions have now of long time been abused: so that, the
defilings of them being wiped away, we may retain the things that to the
Churches and to the Schools are profitable. Inequality of d^gnity.
Again they make exception, and say, that the Lord prohibited to be called
Rabbi, and Masters on the earth, because one is Master. I answer the same L.
says, we must not call father on the earth: who notwithstanding in his Law
commands the parents to be honored. Wherefore, that forbidding is not to
be understood of the appellation or naminge, but of another matter besides,
that the circumstaunce of the place does sufficiently convince, what is the
meaning of that forbidding. For he adds: He that is greatest of you shall be
your minister. Christ forbids the superiority or the title thereof, but the
ambition and abuse of it.
Again, he that exalts himself shall be humbled, The Lord therefore would
not, that the appellation of Father, or of Master, or of Doctoure should be
taken away: but the arrogant trust therein. He would not have that we
should like of our selves, if we seem to excel in any gifts. He would
have us that we should not arrogantlye prefer our selves before others,
but rather that he which is the greatest, should make him self the Minister
unto all. He would not have us devise any new Doctrine, but that in matters
of salvation, we should follow our only Master Jesus Christ. But, as for
that they urge the saying of the Apostle James, who says, My Brethren, be
ye not many masters. knowinge that ye shall receive the greater judgment: It
is easily refelled. For James in his forbiddinge, sets down this reason.
For we slip all of us in many things. The sense therefore of this forbidding
is, that we would not be rough controllers of other men's manners.

Thus says this excellent learned man Hemingius, Hemingius
of these degrees and Titles of Schools and Ecclesiastical promotions, and in
his Sintagma. Syntagma
Tit. De gubernatione ecclesiae Sect. 12. ^it. or arg. Bern. Eccle.
He descends further unto the particular Titles and degrees, which these our
brethren especially do forbid: saying, Moreover, sith that the Kingdom of
Christ is governed by the word and spirit of Christ the Monark, there are
therein two kinds of men, that is to wit, the setters forth of the word,
and the hearers of them: who no otherwise than the Fathers and the Sons, The
spi^ituall jurisdiction all one but the degrees of dignity not equal.
reverence and worship the one the other. And although the spiritual
jurisdiction of these setters forth of the word (of which jurisdiction we
shall speak afterward) be all one: notwithstanding the Degrees of dignity
be not equal, and that partly by the Law of GOD, and partly by the
approbation of the Church. For as Christ ascendinge from on high gave Gifts
to men, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Doctors and Pastors: So gave he
unto his Church power to edification. By this power the Church ordeyneth
Ministers for her profit, that all things might be done orderly, to the
increasing of the body of Christ. Hereupon the pure Church following the
times of the Apostles, did ordeyne some Patriarchs, some Bishops, some Bishops
Coadiutors, who^ Iustine the Martyr calls (...), whom we call Prepositors,
some Pastors and Catechisers. The reformed Churches, after the darkness
driven away, which the Pope brought into the Church, The degrees that the
reformed churches do acknowledge
are content with fewer degrees, least by little and little, the matter might
pass into a tyranny. They have Bishops, Doctors, Pastors, and Ministers
inferior unto Pastors, whom by a fond term, they call Chapleyns. Among
these, he that excels in the excellency of gifts, in the greatness of
labors, and in the degree of calling, is preferred before other in dignity.
Not indeed that he should exercise a dominion upon other, but that he should
rule other in wisdom and Counsel: so be, that he shall show the reason of
his Counsel drawn out of the word of God, and out of the lawful ordinance of
the Church. For when Christ only in his kingdom is (...), free from
rendering any account: it is fit that they which be subjects to him, should
render a reckoning of their doings. Thus reverently writes this Reverend and
learned man Hemingius, on these titles and difference of dignities, in the
offices and promotions of the pure and primitive Church, succeeding the time of
the Apostles, and of the reformed Churches in these days.

Unto whom also accords Herbrandus, a famous Protestant writer, now living,
though differing from us in the controversy of the sacrament, who in Compendio
Theologiae, loco de ministerio. Herbrandus in comp. Theol. lo, d^ minist.
Upon this question whether there are, or ought to be, degrees among the
Ministers of the Church? Yea, ( says he) for God himself made and ordained
these degrees, with different gifts. Ephesians. 4. He gave some Apostles, but
some Prophets, but some Evangelists, but some Pastors, and Doctors, to the
filling up of the Saints, into the work of the Ministry, to the building
of the body of Christ. Also Paul names Bishops, Priests or Elders, and
Deacons. Moreover, by reason of order, for good order or discipline sake, and
to preserve consent, concord and unanimity, let some be superior unto other.
Least there should be (...), a dissolute state without government in the
Church, orders were ordained among the ministers by a profitable Counsel. As
among us, Superintendents special and Superintendents general over Pastors.
( meaning the German reformed Churches) are Subdeacons, Deacons, Pastors,
Super-intendentes special, over whom do rule Super-intendentes general. (
as we use the names of Bishops, and Archbishops, after the old and usual
name) Unto these, other chief and choice men, (as well Ecclesiastical as
Polyticall, adjoined) do make the chief Senate of the Church. But this
primacie is not of power, that for his higher degree, a greater authority,
license and power should be granted to any man, of decreeing any thing,
Caluines judgment of Bishops.
or of commanding in the Church, or of ordeyning at his pleasure, or of
determining in the controversies of Religion: for here as much preuayleth, and
ought to prevail, the sentence of the lowest, as of the highest, which rests
on better and firmer testimonies of the holy Scripture, and of arguments
brought from thence, in what place or degree soever any man be placed. But it
is a Primacie of order, in the residue of the government and polycie of the
Church.

Thus says Herebrande of the German Churches. But if now, for admitting a
bishop and distinguishing him from Priest or Elder: for allowing Subdeacons,
which we do not: for having Super-intendents special and general: and for
making this distinction for primacie of power and order in this sense, that
this power of order, is of a standing and continuing degree of dignity,
superior to Elder or Pastor: if for these points, Herebrande and all those
reformed Churches in this matter be rejected: let us then come even to Calvin
himself, who does yet more reverently write of these titles and dignities of
order, where they are not retained, then these our Brethren do among us, be
they never so godly used.

For, Calvin in his Institutions, cap. 8. de Fide. sect. 51. ^aluin. Ins^it.
ca. 8. sect. 51.
Hitherto ( says he) we have treated of the order of governing the Church, as
out of the pure word of God it is delivered unto us, and of the ministeries
as they are ordained of Christ. Now, to the end that all things may be
made manifest more clearly and more familiarlye, and may also be better fixed
in our minds: it shall be profitable to recognize the form of the ancient
Church in those things, which shall represent unto us before our eyes, The
Canons of the ancient B. how little they varied from gods word.
a certain Image of the equal divine Institution. For, although the Bishops
of those times have set forth many Canons, wherein they might seem to
express more then were expressed in the holie-scriptures: they composed
notwithstanding all their whole domestical administration, with such
heedefulnesse, to that only level of the word of God: that you may easily
see, they had in this part, almost nothing varying from Gods word. Yea, if
any thing might be wished for in their ordinances, not-with-standing, because
they endeavored with a sincere study, to conserve the institution of the
Lord, and swarued not much from the same: it shall very much avail, here
briefly to collecte what manner of observation they had. According as we have
declared, three kinds of Ministers to be commended unto us in the scripture:
so, whatsoever Ministers the ancient Church of God had, she distinguished the^
into three orders. For out of the orders of Priests or Elders, partly were
chosen Pastors and Doctors: the other part governed the censure or controlement
of manners, and corrections. The care of the poor and dispensation of the
Alms was committed to the Deacons, as for the readers and Acolytes, were no
names of offices that were certain. But those who^ they called Clerks, they
acquainted the^ with certain exercises to serve the Church, whereby they might
better understand whereunto they were appointed, and in time, might come the
more ready prepared to their office, as I shall anon more at large declare.
And so Jerome, when as he set down 5. orders, he reckons up Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, the faithful, and those that learn the Catechism: to the
residue of the Clergy, and to the Monks he attributes no proper place.
Caluines confession of the primative churches order for superiority of B.
They therefore called all them Priests or Elders, to who^ the office of
teaching was enjoined. They elected one out of the number in every City, to
whom especially they gave the title of Bishop, least that by reason of
equality (as it is wont to come to pass) discord should spring up.
How-beit, the Bishop was not so superior in Honor and dignity, that he had
dominion over his Colleagues: but what parts the Consul has in the Senate, to
propounde the businesses, to demand the opinions to go before, or govern
the other in Counseling, admonishing, exhorting, to rule all the whole action
by his authority, and to put in execution that which by the common counsel
shall be decreed: that office did the Bishop sustain in the assembly of the
Priests or Elders. And that this for the necessity of the times, was with
consent of men brought in, the auncientes themselves confess it. So Hierome on
the Epistle to Titus. A Priest or Elder (says he) was the same that a Bishop,
and before that by the instinction of the Deuell, factions began to be made
in religion, and that it was said among the people, I hold of Paul, I of
Cephas: the Churches were governed by the common Counsel of the Priests or
Elders. Afterward, that the seeds of dissension might be pulled up, all the
carfulness was surrendered unto one man. As therefore the Priests or Elders
know, that of the custom of the Church, they are subjected to him that
rules over them: so let Bishops know, that rather by custom, than by the
verity of the Lords disposing, they are greater than the Priests or Elders,
and they ought to rule the Church in common. Howbeit, he teaches in another
place, The auncientnesse of this institution from S. Marks time.
how ancient an Institution it was. For he says, at Alexandria, from Mark
the Evangelist until Heraclas and Dionisius Priests or Elders, they always
placed in a higher degree, one that was chosen from among themselves, whom
they called the Bishop. Every City therefore had their College of Priests
or Elders, which were Pastors and Doctors. For all of them exercised also among
the people, the office of teaching, exhorting and correcting* which Paul
enioyneth unto Bishops. ( and here by the way, note, that then, which was yet
in the Apostles times, the Doctors as well as the Pastors, Calvin.
had the exercise of exhorting and correcting as well as of teaching.
Limitation of Regions to the cities whence the Priests should be taken.
) And to the end they might leave seed after them, they traveled in
enstructing the younger sort, that had enrolled their names into the sacred
soldage. Unto every City was attributed a certain Region, which from thence
should take their Priests or Elders. And it should be reckoned as it were unto
the body of that Chapter Every one of the Colleges (as I have said) only for
because of policy and of conseruing peace, was under one bishop. Who, so
excelled the other in dignity, that he was subjected to the assembly of the
brethren. But if the field or territory, which was under his bishoprike, were
more than that it might suffice for the bishop, every where to do his office:
there were certain Priests or Elders assigned in certain places through that
field, who in meaner affairs did serve his turns. Those they called
Chorepiscopos, Bishops deputies, ( or as we call them bishops suffraganes)
because they represented the bishop through out that province.

The fathers in co^posing all this form of government by the only rule of Gods
word though it be not expressed therein.
In which words Calvin plainly confesses, that although all these degrees
of dignity be not expressed in express words in the Scripture: yet the
Fathers had such a care to compose all their form of government by the only
rule of Gods word, that almost nothing is different from Gods word. And that
bishops were but one ordinarily in one City, who had Regions, and Provinces,
and many Priests or Elders, yea, Colleges of Elders of Priests, under them:
and that some of their Provinces were so large, that they had deputies or
suffraganes also to supply their tournes. Which withal infers that this
their dignity over these persons, could not be only for the present time of
this or that action or assembly, but was still standing and continual, even
as those Regions and Provinces allotted to them and as were the numbers of
Pastors and Colleges of Priests or Elders in every City (as are our
Cathedral Churches) likewise abiding and continuing. And this dignity of one
B. above the Priests or Elders, arose not of any ambitious aspiring: but of
very necessity to avoid it. And that of the equality of Priests or Elders,
dissentions and sects would spring. And that this dignity is so ancient, that
it was used in Alexandria a most famous Church, even from Saint Marks time.
Who, as Eusebius in his Chronicle notes, died four or five years before
either Peter or Paul, and while many of the Apostles and Disciples were yet
living. For, to reject that which Eusebius speaks of Peter ( or rather which
is manifestly foysted into his Chronicle) that he was Christianorum Pontifex
primus, Eusebius chronicle corrupted and not agreing to his eccl. hist.
the first or chief Bishop of the Christians, and that when he had founded the
Church of Antioch, he went to Rome, where preaching the Gospel, he continued
25. years Bishop of that City: because this agrees not with the holy
Scripture, no, nor yet with that which Eusebius cites, concerning Peter out of
Dionisius Bishop of Corinth, Li. 2. Hist. Eccl. cap. 25. as is afore-saide, is
therefore worthy to be repulsed: The credit of Eusebius report and proof in
his eccl. hist.
yet this which Eusebius has both in his chronicle and in his Eccl. history,
of Annianus or^^yned the first Bishop of Alexandria after Mark the Evangelist:
and of, Euodius ordained the first bishop of Antioche, another more famous
Church, the 45. year of the L. that is, the 12. year after the Lords
ascension: and that James the brother of the Lord was ordained of the Apostles
the first Bishop of Jerusalem, the most famous Church of all in those days,
and that in the very year of Christ's ascension: how soever the Scripture
express it not, or that Jerome say it was done by consent of me^, or custom
of the Church, and not of the verity of the Lords dispensation; yet sith this
consent is of so many and so holy men, and this custom so ancient and of
these so notable Churches in the Apostles days: if this order had been any
breach of the verity of the Lords dispensation, The Apostl^ not improuing,
but approving these orders
or of any perpetual order set down and commanded by the Apostles; or not
good and necessary, but dangerous and hurtful to the Churches of Christ, by
them both before and after planted: or had been any direct occasion to the
tyranny of Antichriste: no doubt they should have known it, and foreknowen
the event, and would never have permitted, but impugned, and expressly written
against the same. Therefore, we must either set on a bold face, to deny this
ancient original of it, which Calvin dare not do, but in this reverent
manner acknowledges and yields unto it: or else we must needs grant, that
this superiority of one Priest or Elder over the residue, to whom more
especially this title of Bishop should appertain, is a godly and necessary
order for the Churches government, and Apostolical: as approved even by the
Apostles. We grant that bishops since that time have encroched, especially the
Popish Bishops, and most of all the Pope. But what is that to our Bishops? Let
our Brethren yield the^ that, which here and in many other places Calvin
grants that the Bishop should have a continuing superior dignity, whether
the assembly hold or no: that in the assembly of the Priests or Pastoral
Elders, he should so be subject, that notwithstanding, he should rule all the
action, and be toward them as a Dictator, or but as Viceroy, or but as a
Consul toward his Senate, may rather, not so much by many parts: for, our
Bishops take not upon them, any such superiority over their Clergy, but far
inferior to all these examples: let them either therefore reject Calvin too:
or else, with what face can they deny, this lower and more moderate
superiority, than Calvin thus commends to be exercised over their fellow
Ministers by our Bishops? Caluines judgment of the titles of B. and Archb. and
their superior auth.


But that we may see, not only Caluines judgment, for the beginning of these
superior dignities, in the primitive Church: but also what he will allow or
disallowe, in the reformed Bishops of our times, both for the remaynder of
their Titles of Bishops, and of reteyning their superior dignities with the
same: as he writes any Epistles to Archb. or Bishops, professing the gospel,
he both calls them Reverend Fathers, and Archb. and Bishops of such and such
places, and inciteth them to remember the place that they be called unto. And
the like titles also unto such persons, uses Beza himself, (I hope with good
conscience, and thinking as he speaks.) Epist. 295.


When Calvin writes to the Bishop of London (Epist. 295.) to wit, unto
Grindall, he not only saluteth him by that name: but he acknowledges also his
superior authority over all the Pastors there inhabiting: Although ( says
he) most Renowned man, and Reverend Lord, you expecte not till I give you
thanks, Calvin acknowledges London and diverse other places to appertain to
the Bishoprike of one.
for that duty of godliness which you have performed unto the Church of
Christ: neuer-thelesse for that care that you have vouchsafed to take of our
countriemen, which inhabit in the chiefest City of your Bishoprike, that not
only by the benefit of the Queen, they might have liberty given them of
inuocating God purely, but also from hence to call for a Pastor: except I
should confess my self bounden unto you: I were to be condemned both of
folly and inhumanitie. And sith you have not disdeyned voluntarily to
request and exhort me, to provide a fit Pastor to be chosen for them: there
is no need that I should commend them to your trust and protection, for whose
health I see you are so careful. And verily, as ye have hitherto testified
your rare and singular study of godliness, in so liberally helping them: so
shall it now pertain to your constancy to maintain your good deed even to
the end. Thus does Calvin acknowledge the Bishops authority, and so
commends unto him Galasius the French Churches Pastor in his Diocese. True
it is that in the same Epistle he afterward has these words also: It
greeueth me greatly, that all the Churches of the kingdom are not so
composed, as all good men would wish, or at the beginning they hoped for. But
an vnweriable endeavor is needful to overcome all stoppes. But it is now
expedient and very needful that the Queen do know, that you so willingly
forgo, yea reject from you, what soever sauoreth of earthly Lordship, that you
may have the lawful authority, and that, that God has given, to exercise the
spiritual office. This shall be the true height and excellency thereof. Calvin
still acknowlegdeth the name of L. in a Bishop.
Then shall it hold the highest degree under Christ the head, if it stretch out
the hand unto lawful Pastors, to execute those parts that are enjoined to you.
In which words (if we shall mark the^ well) he still allows the B. a
superior authority over other Pastors, who^ they ordeyne, and join
assistance unto them. And he yields in these titles. Reverend Domine, and
^bseruande Domine, the name of Lord, (except we translate it, Sir) still unto
them. But, for the matter, he still acknowledges a superior authority to be
in them. And as he does this to the Bishop of our countries: so to the Bishops
in other countries, such as professed the Gospel. Caluines reverend style.
As Epist. 272. he not only for fashion sake uses this style (which if it
were unlawful he ought not to flatter him withal) John Calvin to the
illustrious and Reverend Lord, James Ithaue Bishop of Vladislauia, worthy of
me to be reverenced for his excellent virtues: but when he comes to the matter:
he says: Epist. 272.
This is my reason and matter of writing, that the light of the Gospel being
now risen up among you, since that God has opened your eyes that you are
thoroughly awakened, for, I hear that you have not only tasted the true
doctrine of godliness, but that you are endued with that knowledge thereof, that
shakes off all pretext of error and ignorance. But you for your prudence are
not ignorant, how intolerable the profaning is of the heavenly grace, when as
of set pupose we stiffle it. And although this bright dignity in the stage of
the world, does procure an applause (or rejoicing) unto you: notwithstanding
you must diligently take heed, that the deceitefull flatteries do not smooth
you: by the which snares, satan at this day draws many into a deadly
Labyrinthe. So it comes to pass, that they which exercise their cunning to
seek shifts, at length when they see their coulors vanish away, they openly
oppose themselves against God, yea rather they, breakefoorth into manifest
fury. Of this matter there are extant (no doubt) before your eyes too many
examples. While some violently with sword and fire assay to extinguish the
heavenly doctrine. Other, that they may safely lie drowned in their filthes, do
not only make much of their sloth: but after the fashion of beasts, astonish
their consciences. From this pestiferous infection of the Epicures: whosoever
(being in his delights) does not earnestly and attentively take heed to
himself: it can hardly be brought to pass, but that he shall wax profane,
and casting aside the fear of God, hurl himself into the same wantonness
with them. What therefore ought you to do? Discordes are hot among you: the
one part desires the intier worship of God to be restored: the other part
stiffly defends the wicked superstitions. For you to stand in the middle,
whom God (as it were with his hand reached out) calls to the protection of
his cause: it is shame and wickedness. Think what place you occupy, and what
a charge is imposed upon you. Add this, that the enemies of godliness, while
in their clutterie darkness, He exhorts the B. to be^hinke him of h^s place
and charge*
they can not abide the small sparks of your godliness: they (as it were)
thrust you out of their faction, which you voluntarily should have fled from.
Pardon me of your courtesy, if in one word. I be more sharp (because that to
profit you, I must speak freelye that I think): when you shall come to the
heavenly judgment seat, the offense of betraying can not be washed away,
except in time you with-drawe your self from that band, that openly
conspireth to oppress the name of Christ. But if now it be grievous to you
to be diminished, that Christ may increase in you: think on Moses example,
which under obscure shadows, did yet not doubt, to prefer the rebuke of
Christ, before the delights and riches of the Egyptians. But although
peradventure I have been more bold with your Excellency, then was meet:
not-withstanding (sith my purpose was, to regard your saluotion) I hope my
liberty shall not be odiousto you, etc. Fare you well, most excellent man,
illustrious and Reverend Lord: etc.

But here again, least we might think, he goes about to persuade him to
leave his B. as a dignity that he could not lawefully retain with the
profession of the gospel (which was not his drift, but to have himretain still
his place and dignity, so far as he might do it, without houering between
the Papists and the Epicures: and thereto, he wills him to think on the
place he occupied, and what charge was laid upon him: and yet, to renounce it,
rather than to join with those enemies of the Gospel) to show this better,
Calvin sets down more fully in his Epistle to the King of that country of
Polonia, Caluini Epist. 190. ad Regem Poloniae.
( Epist. 190.) what manner of superior dignity and authority, he not only
allows to remain in a Bishop: but also in an Archb. so little shunneth he,
or disaloweth, either the name or the office of them.

To conclude, ( says he) only ambition and pride has forged that Primacie
that the Romanistes oppose unto us. Caluines allowanc^ of an Archb. and B.
under him.
The ancient Church indeed did institute Patriarchies, and did appoint also
to every of the Prouin^^^ ^ertaine Primacies, that the Bishops by this bond of
concord, might (...) better knitte together among themselves. Even as, if so
be, at this day in the most noble kingdom of Polonia, one Archbishop were over
the residue. Not, that he should ouerrule the residue, or snatching the right
(or Law) from them, arrogate it unto himself: but that, for because of
order, he should in the Synodes hold the first place, and nourish an holy
unity among his colleagues and brethren. And furthermore, there should be
either Provincial, or City Bishops, which peculierly should give attendance
to the conseruing of order. Even as nature suggesteth this unto us, that out of
al Colleges, one ought to be chosen, up on whom the chiefest care should lie.
But it is one thing to bear a moderate Honor, to wit, so far as the faculty
(or power) of man extends it self; another to comprehend the whole compass
of the world in a government unmeasurable. Thus does Calvin most clearly
(though he condemn the Popes usurpation) approve both the superiority of
Pastorship, not only in Bishops over Cities and Provinces, where many Pastors
be: but also of Archb. and of one Archb. the chief and primate of a mighty
kingdom, more th^n five times as big as England, to be over all the
residue. And this being well used, (without offering injury to the right of
other bishops under him:) he thinks to be both good and necessary. So far
off is he (as our Brethren here do) from condemning the very name of
Archbishops. No, he allows both the office and the name, even here in
England also: as appears by his letter unto the Archb. of Canterbury Epist.
127. Epist. 127.
Caluinus Cranmero Archiepisc. Cantuariensi salutem:

When as at this time it was not to be hoped, which was most to be wished,
that every one of the chiefest teachers, out of diverse Churches, which have
embraced the pure doctrine of the Gospel, should come together, and out of
the pure word of God should set forth to the posterity, a certain and clear
confession, of every one of the capital points at this day in controversy:
I do greatly commend (right Reverend Lord) the counsel which you have
begun, that the English men might ripely establish religion among them, that
the minds of the people should not stick longer in suspense, while things
are uncertain, or less orderly composed, than were meet. To which purpose,
The place and office of an Archb. enjoined by God.
it behooves all those that have the government there, to apply in common
their studies: notwithstanding so, that the chiefest parts be yours. You see
what this place requires, or rather, what God according to the reason of the
office which he has enjoined unto you does by his right require of you. The
chiefest auth. Eccl. in an Archb.
In you is the chiefest authority which the nobleness of honor does not more
procure unto you, than the opinion long since conceived of your prudence and
integrity, etc. Thus does Calvin where he still calls upon, for increase
and speed of further, and full reformation) acknowledge both his title of
Archbishop, and his office of Primacie, with the honor and authority
thereof, above all other in the Churches ministry, to be good and lawful.

And to show further, how he allows the general practice of Episcopal
authority, where, when, and whosoever Bishop should receive the Gospel:
whether he should give over, or reteyne still a Superior authority in his
Diocese, over the other Pastors in the same: he has fully decided this
Question, Epist. 373. Si Episcopus vel curatus ad Ecclesiam se aediunxerit. If
a Bishop or a Curate shall adioyne himself unto the Church: Calvin answers
on this wise.

Being asked my sentence or opinion, concerning Bishops, Curates, and others of
like degree, or whom they call Graduates, Caluines resolution how B. converted
to the Gospel, should behave themselves.
if that the Lord should vouchsafe any of them his grace, that they would
adioyne themselves unto the Church; how must they behave themselves toward
them, etc. Here, after his excuse for brevity, by reason of his rewme, he
says: If therefore it shall happen that in Popery, any to whom the cure of
souls shall have been committed, that is to wit, a Bishop or a Curate, shall
receive the grace of the Lord, so that he profess the pure doctrine of the
Gospel: if he shall be found not to be so fit for the office of a Pastor, nor
to be endewed with that knowledge and dexterity that is requisite: he should
altogether do very rashly, if he would intermitte himself into so great a
matter. The fruit therefore, of his conversion shall consist in that, if so be
he discharge himself of all cure, and do so acknowledge that gross abuse,
that he did bear before a void title without matter, and thereuppon give
place to a fit successor, that may lawefully be instituted, it shall suffice
for him, if he hold the place of a sheep in the Lords fold. But if so be,
that any such one shall be endewed with learning and dexterity, yea and
with affection to teach also heere-after: let him first of all make a
confession of his faith, and holily testify that he cleaves fast unto the
pure and sincere Religion; and furthermore, that he acknowledge that his
vocation, to have been joined with mere abuse: and that he desire a new
approbation: and namely, that he profess, that to be frustrate that he was
instituted before by the Popes authority: and withal, that he renownce all
means unlawful, and repugnant to the order which the Lord Jesus has ordained
in his Church.

These things praemised: I see not what should let, that he may not be
admitted to the office of a Pastor, so that he promise, and do in very deed
perform that faith, which is required to the executing of the office: and
especially that he join himself, with the company of the Ministers that
purelie teach the word, and submit himself to the Discipline and polycie
which has place among them. As for the memory of his former life, let that
remain buried, neither let any thing be imputed unto him that then was
committed, only that he be admonished of the performing of his duty
hereafter lawefully. If that Canon of Paul be objected, wherein is delivered
that a Bishop must be vnreprooue-able: I answer, here is not dealt with (in my
judgment) concerning a simple and absolute election, but concerning the
approbation and restitution to a certain office, because of the corruption
passing between, etc.

Here, after he has proved that point, he comes to the conclusion, saying:
These things being presupposed, the parts shall be of such a Bishop as
this, How a converted Bish. shall retain his jurisdiction and superior
authority.
to do his endeavor so far as in him shall lie, that all the Churches which
appertain unto his Bishopric, shall be repurged from all errors and worships
of Idolles, while he himself shall by his example go before all the Curates
of his Dioc^sse, and shall induce them to admit the reformation, unto the
which by the word of GOD we are invited, and the which shall wholely
answer, both to the state and to the use of the primitive Church. As for
that which appertains to those goods, which are called temporalties, whether
they consist in Jurisdiction, or in annual rent; although the original of them
sprange out of that corruption, that is by no means to be borne, with the
pure simplicity of the spiritual ministry: notwithstanding, so long as
things remain thus confessed, the possession after a sort of suffering them,
may be left unto them: So be, that exhortation be given unto them, that they
look to it, how they dispose those things, which they shall have known to
be dedicated unto God, both that they profane not things consecrated to god,
and also that they conteyne themselves in the modesty which may beseem true
Bishops, etc.

Thus, by Caluines plain opinion, for a reformed Bishop to have a Diocese,
and government therein of Curates and Pastors under him, is not contrary to
the state and use of the primitive Church, nor to the reformation unto the
which by the word of God we are invited, nor any unlawful means, or
repugnant to the order which the Lord Jesus has ordained in his Church, but
may answer wholely thereunto. And so that Bishops do these things, both
for themselves, and for their office, and for their Diocese, and for their
goods and temporalties and jurisdictions, that Calvin here would have them
do: though he do but tolerate the dispensation of their temporalties: etc.
yet he manifestly allows them to remain Bishops still, and to retain their
Diocesses, and to go before or guide the Curates and Pastors, and all the
Churches appertayning to their Bishoprics. And he sees no let, but they may
so continue.

Thus says Calvin of these Protestant and Reformed Bishops. But above all
other Reverend and Learned men's judgments, from beyond the seas in any
reformed Churches, that notable and godly Learned man Zanchius, who is also
yet living, has most pythily to this point (me thinks, be it spoken
without contempt of any other) set down his grave judgment on these matters.
In his last book of the confession of his faith concerning Christian Religion:
Zanchius in confess. Christ. relig.
Who first in the 24. Chapter, in the title of the Militant Church, the 6.
Aphorism or distinction being this: From what kind of succession of Bishops
can it be showed, that any Church is Apostolical? To which he answers: We do
so acknowledge, that from the perpetual succession of B. in any Church, How
far succession of Bishops holds.
not what kind of succession soever, but that which has adjoined therewith, a
continuance of the Apostolical doctrine, may rightly be showed to be an
Apostolical Church. Such an one, as in the old time was the Church of
Rome, and the succession of the Bishops thereof, until the time of Irenaeus,
of Tertullian, and of Cyprian, and of certain others. In so much that not
unworthily, Zanchius.
those fathers were wont to appeal and cite the Heretics of their time, unto
that Church, and to other men like to them, etc.

But in all these Fathers times, and many other like to them ( as we have
showed) this perpetual succession of Bishops, Bish: auth. agreeable to the
Apostles doctrine.
was of such as were superior in dignity, to the residue of the Pastors in
those Churches: Therefore, this continuance of superiority in Bishops, and
such titles of dignity in the Ministry, is not repugnant to the
Apostolical Church, nor to the Apostolical doctrine.

Now, this Zanchius may the better be allowed of these our Brethren, for that
in some of the fore-saide points, he favors in some part their opinion:
Wherein Zanchius favors our Brethrens opinion.
as, for their Elders that were not Pastors, cap. 25. Aphorism. 7. For their
division of Doctors distinct from Pastors. And for the name and order of
Elders, to be used in the Scripture as all one with Bishops and Catechizers:
Aphorism. 9. Which thing also we grant as before is noted, the substance of
the order to be all one, and the difference only to be in the degree of
dignity and authority. And also for Doctors to teach only, but not with
such teaching, but that they did withal exhort, as he shows after:
Aphorism. 10. yet notwithstanding ( says he) we do not in the mean season
disallowe the Fathers, Approbatio^ of orders multiplied.
for that according to the diverse manner, both of dispensing the word, and
of Governing the Church, they multiplied the orders of the Ministers: when as
that thing was free for them, even as also it is for us. And when as it is
apparent, that that was done of them for causes which were honest, pertaining,
according to that time, to order, to comeliness, and to the edification of the
Church.

Aphorism the 11. Aphorism. 11.
The confirmation of the same sentence, with the explication of certain
Ecclesiastical orders in the primitive Church.

For we know that our God is the God of order, not of confusion, and that the
Church is kept by order, and lost (...), by lack of order. For which cause he
has instituted many also and diverse orders of ministers, not only in times
past in Israel, but also after-wardes, in the Church, gathered together of the
Jews and of the Gentiles: and also for the same cause, he has left it free
unto the Churches, that they might add more orders or not add them, so that
the same may be done to aedification. Whereas therefore, (when all the
Ministers of the word were called equally both Pastors, and also Bishops, and
also Priests or Elders, The original of one to be superior and B.
) and whereas they were of equal authority; one afterward began to be
preferred above all his Colleagues, howbeit not as their Lord, but as the
Rector in the university above his other Colleagues: and to this man in
principal, the care of the whole Church was committed: whereupon, and by a
certain kind of Excellency, he alone was accustomed to be called by the
name of bishop and Pastor, the residue of his fellow Ministers being contented
with the name of Priests or Elders, in so much, that in every City there began
to be one only Bishop, and many Priests or Elders. This thing we judge cannot
be dissalowed. Of which matter, the declaration and the sentence of Jerome both
otherwhere, and also in the epistle to Euagrius, and in the commentaries of the
Epistle to Titus chap. 1. is of us approved. Who says, all this came rather of
custom, than of the verity of the Lords disposing: that the plants of
dissensions and of schisms, might be taken away. Verily by this reason, those
things also that were ordained concerning Archbishops, yea, and of the 4.
Patriarchs, even before the Nicene Council it self, The same reason that
served for B. serves for Archb.
we think may be excused and defended: although that all things in success
of time afterward, were drawn away unto the greatest tyranny and ambition:
which is the cause why that the nearer we approach in those orders to the
Apostolical simplicity, so much the more is it also of us allowed. And we
judge, that every where they should endeavor to approach thereto.

Now when Zanchius has added certain other Aphorisms, concerning the Church
and the lawful Ministers thereof: he sets down (Aphorism. 20.) their
authority, saying: We believe also, Whereto and how far the ministers auth.
stretches.
that great authority is of Christ given unto the lawful Ministers, to wit,
to perform those things whereunto also they are called: to preach the
Gospel: to interpret the holy scriptures according to the analogy of the
faith: to catechize: to teach the people what is the will of God: to reprove
and rebuke as well the great as the small: to remitte or reteyne sins
ministerially, to bind the impenitent and to loose the repentant: to
administer also the Sacraments, which Christ instituted, and according to his
manner delivered: to exercise Discipline after the prescription of Christ, and
also by the expounding of the Apostles: to conclude, to all those things also
which though they be not expressed in the holy scriptures, notwithstanding do
appertain to order, and to comeliness, and make to edification, but not to
destruction, according to the general rule delivered of the Apostle, That all
things ought to be done in order, decently, and to aedification. For neither
do we believe, 1. Cor. 14.40.
that any authority is given to the ministers, that ought to be stretched
beyond the bounds of Gods word, or unto any other end, than to the
aedification of the Church. And therefore, we utterly deny, that any Bishop,
How far it is debatted.
yea, or that all of them together, have authority of ordeyning any thing
contrary to the scriptures: of adding any thing unto them, or of taking any
thing from them: of making new articles of the faith: of instituting new
Sacraments: of bringing into the Church new worships: of setting forth laws
that should bind the consciences, and that should be made equal in authority
to the law of God: or of having dominion in the Church and consciences of the
faithful: of forbidding those things that God has granted, and would have
to be free. Or finally of commanding any thing that is without the word of
God, as though it were necessary to salvation: sith that it can not truly be
said, that indeed the whole Church has not this authority.

Having thus in every particular, set down and limited the authority of the
lawefull Ministers of the Church, according to the word of God: he proceeds
(Aphorism 21.) unto this: Aphor. 21.
that the politic authority of Bishops which also are Princes, is not to be
denied, for any thing before restrained.

That B. may have also political au^horitie.
In the mean season we deny not, that Bishops which with-all are also Princes,
besides the authority Ecclesiastical, should also have their laws politic
and powers seculer, yea even as the rest of Princes have: the right of the
commanding seculer things, the right of the sword: some of them the right of
Electing and confirming kings, and Emperors: and of ordeyning and
administering other politic things: and of compelling the people subject unto
them to yield them obedience: and there-upon, we confess, that unto their
politic commandments, which without the transgression of Gods law may be
kept, their subjects ought to obey, not only for fear, but also for
conscience. Romans 13.5.
For we know, that all power is of God, and who-so-euer resists, resists
the ordinance of God. Romans 13.1.2.
And that moreover, kings are to be honored, and we ought to be subject to
Princes and Lords in all fear, not only to those that are courteous and
modest, 1. Pet. 2.17.
but also to the froward and wicked.

To conclude, when he comes to Ecclesiast. Discipline, which (Aphorism 36.)
he deuideth into popular and clericall: in the 3. part of the clericall
discipline, (Aphorism 38.) he says: The third is, that they should promise
peculiar obedience in things that are honest, Obedience to Metropolitan.
unto their Bishop, and to the Metropolitan of the Bishops.

Now although by all these Aphorisms, of this excellent Learned man, and
great light of our age, Zanchius, it is most apparent what his Judgment is, of
the superiority of Bishops, and with what reasons he proves and confirms
the same, to be in all points agreeable to Gods word. Yet, for the further
confirmation of these things, and to satisfy all such as should, or did
mislike any thing contained in them: let us also not think it tedious, to
peruse certain other observations, that he has lastly adjoined to these
Aphorisms, in the foresaid confession of the faith, with the preface of his
reasons for the same.

The observations of the same Zanchius, upon his confession.
Neither few nor light are the causes, with the which I was drawn, Zanchius
confirmation of his confession in these things.
that I had leauer add these observations to my confession, apart by the^
selves, than to alter any thing therein. There are not a few unto whom it is
known, on what occasion, at what time, by whose commandment, in whose name,
and to what ends, I being indeed unwilling and compelled, wrote the sum of
the Christian Religion. Upon what occasion Zanchius set out these observations.
But although each man sees* that this confession was never (as it was hoped
for) set forth in their name, for whose cause it was written: notwithstanding
how this was done, and upon what causes it was done, all men do not clearly
understand: while many men marvel at the doing, but are ignorant of the
true causes of the matter. Hereupon how diverse suspicions might have happened
unto many: how diverse judgments might have been made, both of me and of
the confession it self, I will not say of private persons, but also of the
very Churches: to conclude, how diverse and sinister reports, might have
been scattered among the common people: what one is he among men that does not
know? It behooves me therefore, before I shall die, to stop the sinister
and naughty supitions, judgments, reports, concerning my doctrine. Which
thing I judged, could of me be done by no better mean, than if I should
provide, that both my confession, even as it was of me written, should be set
forth severally by it self: and also severally by themselves, my observations
thereon, by the which, if any things were dark, they might be made plain: if
any things were doubtful, they might be confirmed: and that I should leave the
judgment of the whole business, unto the whole true Catholic Church. Moreover
I thought, that to remove false suspicions out of men's minds, (if any were
conceived) I should do no little good, if, what judgments were made of
learned men, concerning the confession: I should eue^ by their own letters
make them known to all the godly: especially sith that also out of the same,
every man might easily understand, for what causes the confession was not set
forth, in that manner that it was purposed. A certain great man wrote unto
me of that matter, in these words:

Concerning that which you write of your confession, A Noble man's letter to
Zanchius on this matter.
it was read over of me, and of N. and of others, with great pleasure. Which
both was written most learnedly, and with a most excellent Method. And if so
be, you except that, which in the end you add, concerning Archb. and the
Hierarchy, it liked me exceedingly well. But when we did deliberate with our
brethren N.N. the which are here, concerning the way and manner of entering
into a concord, among all the Churches of our confession: they with one consent
did judge: that this was both the only, and the safest, and the reddiest way:
that the co^fessio^s of faith already received and set forth, by the Churches
of every Province should be composed and compacted into one harmony; because
they are all of them, one most like another, so far as appertains (...), to
the substance of faith, and that their confession was refused of none of the
Churches. This their counsel, when they proved it by many reasons, we have
written thereof unto you, and to the Reverend brethren N.N. and to other
Churches neighbors to us, who all of them greatly like the self same counsel.

These things, out of the letters of that great man. To the same opinion
almost, we might produce out of other men's letters also, writing of the same
matter. But sith it is not necessary, for brevity sake we omit them.

Zanchius now, being thus moved by these considerations, to justify all
these his former Aphorisms, in these points aforesaid, sets down among
other, these observations following.

Upon the 25. Chap. Aphorism. 10. and 11.
When I wrote this confession of faith, I wrote all things of a good
conscience: and as I believed, so I spoke also freely, as the holy scripture
teaches us to do. The orders not striving with the scripture.
But, my faith first of all and simply, does rely on the word of God; after
which, somewhat also on the common consent of the whole ancient Catholic
Church: so be, that the same consent, strive not with the holy scriptures.
For I believe that those things which were of the holy Fathers, being
gathered together in the name of the Lord, determined and received with a
common consent of them all, without any contradiction of the holy scriptures:
that those things (albeit they be not of the same authority with the holy
Scriptures) are also of the holy Ghost. Hereupon it comes to pass that those
things that are of this sort: neither would I, neither dare I with a good
conscience disallowe them. But what is more certain out of the stories, out of
the Counselles, and out of the writings of all the Fathers, than those orders
of Ministers, of the which we have spoken, to have been ordained in the
Church, and received by the common consent of the Christian common weal? But
who am I, that I should disalow, that which the whole Church has allowed? No,
neither all the learned men of our time durst disallowe. For why, they knew
that both these things were lawefull unto the Church, and that all those
things proceeded and were ordained, both of godliness, and to good ends, for
the edification of the elected.

Bucers opinion.
And for the cause of confirming this matter: I thought good here to inserte
such things as Martine Bucer of godly memory, a man most famous for
singular godliness and learning, has left written upon the Epistle to the
Ephesians.

As for the administration of the word when it is done by the reading and
reciting of the divine scriptures, finally, Bucer.
by the interpretation and explication of the same, and by exhortations taken
from thence, and also by repetition, and by the Catechism, which is performed
by mutual questions, and aunsweres, of him that is the Catechiser, and of the
party that is catechized, and by holy conferences and debatings of the harder
Questions of our religion: How the Ecclesiastical functions are to be multied.
according to this manifold dispensation of wholesome doctrine, the gifts or
offices of this function are also multiplied. For whatsoever belonged to the
most perfect manner of teaching, that (in the administration of the doctrine
of salvation) is to be applied with most great study: because that, since thou
art a man the knowledge of seeing God, or living according unto God, which (as
of al other it is most divine, so also most difficult) ought to be set forth:
they, now that teach arts diligently, contained, in some certain books, (as,
if a man would purpose out of Euclide, to teach the Mathematicalles) first of
all, they will read and recite the book proposed: and straight ways they will
expound the particular words that are not commonly know, (as every Art has
his proper words and names) and then, if any collection or argument be more
breefely made, they expound it, by resolving the parts thereof, and make it
clear by many examples: out of the general precepts, they teach
particulers, and they do inform them how far forth they stretch. This it is
(properlye) to teach: But he that is indeed a sure or faithful Doctor, is
not content to teach these things, although by a faithful deliverance of
the Doctrine: but also he repeateth it, The manes of the D. reaching. D.
exhortors and applier^.
and exacteth the things that he taught, and offers him self ready to his
scholars, that they might demand a plain explication, of those matters
whereof they doubt. Moreover he propounds the things that he has taught,
to be discussed in public disputations, that there might no doubt at all
remain. Besides these things, he makes oftentimes exhortations, to profit
them well in the Doctrine proposed ( Here again, the Doctor not only teaches
but also exhorts.) And he adds dissuasions from those things whereby they
might be hindered, and also admonitions, and reprehentions, and general
rebukinges. Last of all such a master marketh diligently, what may profit
every one of his scholars. And if he shall mark any to be slack in learning,
he both corrects him privily, and admonishes him of his duty. If he
perceive any to go lustily forward in learning, he often times calls him,
commends him, and enflameth him, that he might follow his study more and
more. Christ the Lord him self did also keep all these seven manners of
teaching. In the synagogue at Nazareth, he read the 61. Chapter of Esaias, and
interpeted it. Luc. 4. in the mount, he expounded the commandments of God.
Math. 5. and taught every where, and exhorted, and reprehended, and rebuked out
of the word of God. He answered also unto all both good and bad that asked him
questions, and on the other side he demanded Questions, as Math 22. He often
catechized the Disciples, he himself was also present at the catechizing.
Luke. 2. Since therefore the ministry of teaching requires a work so manifold:
there are also many orders of Ministers deputed unto this Ministry. And first
of all, Readers whose office was in a pulpit, a place somewhat higher, to
recite the divine scriptures. But this recital of the divine scriptures was
ordained to this purpose, Readers office.
that both the tongue and the manner of speaking of the scripture, and the
whole scripture it self might be made more known and familiar to the people.
For, within a year, they recited all the holy books unto the people. When as
those that opened the scriptures, could not by expounding, finish but some
part of the scriptures, and that no great part, neither in one year. While in
the mean season, by the only reciting of the divine books unto the people,
the knowledge of all the points of our salvation was meruelously confirmed: for
they are oftentimes in every one of the holy books repeated, and are by diverse
and other names expounded: so that always the people out of the lesson
following, should learn many things, which they could not as yet plainly
perceive by the former lesson: and by that work, was the peoples judgment
confirmed, concerning all our Religion, as also concerning the expositions of
the scriptures, Curats.
and concerning all doctrine that was brought forth before them, either by the
lawful Curates and Doctors, or else by others.

For these causes, this office also of reciting simply the divine scriptures
unto the people, was in the ancient Churches, highly esteemed. Neither were
any chosen to this ministry, but such as were commended for their singular
godliness, the which both we may understand by other monumentes of the
auncientes, and also is perceived cheefely by one Epistle or twain, of Saint
Cyprian, as out of the fifth Epistle, in the second book, concerning Aurelius,
that was ordained a reader: Singers of the psalms and Hymns.
And Epistle 22. in the third book, concerning Saturus: And in the fourth
book, concerning Celerinus Celestine. To these readers, were afterward
adjoined Psalterists, who had the governing of the Psalms and hymmes that were
to be sung.

Concerning the Scriptures to be read, (the Lord be thanked) it is well
ordered in the English Churches, so that there might be fit readers, which
should add thereto a gravity and religiousnesse, worthy of the divine
mysteries that were recited in the holy Lessons. Let it therefore be pondered
diligently, whose mouth they represent themselves to be, which in the sacred
assembles read the divine books unto the people: that is to wit, they
represent the mouth of God almighty: then, of what moment, of what dignity, the
matters are, that are recited, which are the words and precepts of life
eternal: last of all, to what manner of men, and to what purpose, the readers
of the holy scriptures ought to serve. For they ought to minister unto the
sons of God, for whose salvation, the first begotten son of God shed his
own blood: by the which things the same salvation may more and more be
made open, and be thoroughly performed unto them. Which things if a man with
a true faith consider with him self: what gravity, decency, religion, can be
yielded in any action, that such a reader should ouerslippe? The pronu^tiation
of the readers.
But they which exercise this function, ought always to have that in the sight
of their mind, that those things which are read before them, ought
effectually to serve to the edification of faith in the hearers: the which also
shall then at the length be brought to pass, when as both those things are
well understood, and also are received as the words of God. But unto both of
these, a most clear, well spoken, religious pronunciation, is required.
Whereupon is gathered, that they are not the Ministers of Christ, which do so
recite the divine scriptures, as though that were the only thing which should
be required, that the shortest leisure that can be, may be spent in such kind
of recital.

Now, there is another office, Interpreter^
the interpretation of the Doctrine that is to be dispensed, that this to wite,
a more simple explication of words and sentences. This ministry did the
bishops execute, and the priests or Elders. Notwithstanding sometimes they
admitted unto this function, out of the order of Deacons, and of Subdeacons,
yea, and sometime of the layty, such as they found to be by the holy Ghost
made fit, profitable to exercise the same. So Origene being also a lay man,
was called to this office, in the Church of Cesarea of Palestine, by Alexander
bishop of Hilta, and by Thertistus bishop of the same Church of Cesarea.
Euelpis also, by Neonus bishop of the Larandians, and Paulinus bishop by
Celsus bishop of Iconium: and Theodorus by Atticus bishop of the Sinadians.
These things are read in Eusebius in the sixth book, the tenth Chapter of his
Ecclesiastical history. And out of the Epistle of those two bishops, Alexander
of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus of Cesarea, bishops in Palestine, to Demetrius
bishop of Alexandria, who reprehended the fact of these two bishops, concerning
Origene, as though it were a thing never heard off, for a layman, while
bishops were present, to speak in the Church unto the people.

But these B. manifestly affirm, that this was not true, but that the holy
Bishops were accustomed to exhort them, whom among the laytye they knew to be
fit, that they would bring forth some profit unto the people, of
interpreting the scripture:, and in teaching: and that they would exercise this
ministry, even while they their-selues also were present. And the second, and
so the third part of the Ministry, to wit, interpretation and Doctrine, the
bishops and the priests did administer it cheefely by themselves.
Notwithstanding both out of the inferior orders, and also out of the lay
persons, if they had noted any to be fit for this office, they adjoined them to
be ioint-laborers with the^. After the same manner, did the bishops and the
priests administer also the fourth part of delivering the doctrine, the which
is, out of the divine books (being expounded) to exhort unto the duties of
Godliness, to dissuade from sins, and from all things that may, on any part,
slacken or hinder the course of a godly and holy life, to reprehende and chide
those that sin, to comfort the penitent: although the bishops the priests or
elders chiefly did perform this function, because that it required so much the
great authority. 1. Tim. 5. The fifth part, the Catechismes, they commended now
to the priests, now to the Deacons, now to the ministers of the inferior
orders, How the B, and the priests also did these things.
even as every one appeared more apt unto this kind of teaching. And so, was
Origene the Catechizer at Alexandria. The sixth book of the Ecclesiastical
history of Eusebius of Caesarea. Chap. 13. and 20. Also the sixth part, the holy
disputations, they yielded to every one that was more apt thereto, although for
the most part, the bishops their selves governed them. The seventh part,
private calling upon admonition, the bishops also studied to do it by
themselves. Howbeit, they always exhort edeuery one of the priests or elders,
and the greater of the inferior orders to do the same. 1. These. 5. Therefore,
the readers ought to exercise the ministry of the Doctrine, by reciting the
divine scriptures, but the bishops by interpreting and by teaching, by
exhorting, by disputing, and by private calling upon, and moreover both by
reading, and by catechizing, if that peculier readers and catechisers want.
Furthermore they committed the catechismes to certain Prieests and Deacons, or
else, to those also that were chosen thereunto, out of the inferior orders. As
also they admitted out of those, unto the offices of interpreting, and of
teaching, and of disputing, whomesoeuer they found apt for these offices, in
what order soever they were of the holy ministry, yet also (as it is said)
out of the laity. But in these offices, that thing is diligently to be
marked, that the holy ghost did in-deede so disperse unto them that were his
men, these gifts of teaching: that unto one he would give the gift and
singular faculty, of interpreting and making plain the scriptures, unto whom
notwithstanding he gives not with the like dexterity, and with so happy
success, to teach and confirm the points of our religion, out of the divine
scriptures, or also luckely to defend them in disputing. But to another he
gives a peculier and notable faculty of exhorting the brethren out of the
scriptures, of admonishinge, of reprehending, and also of catechizing, and of
private calling upon; unto whom notwithstanding, he gives not, to excel in
other gifts of teaching. This variety of the gifts of the holy Ghost, we
daily find by trial in those, that do publicly teach the people of Christ,
which are Christ's true Churches, and suffer themselves to be altogether ruled
by the holy Ghost. These Churches do religiously note, what spiritual
faculties are given to each one in the Church, and do so much as lies in
them, apply every man to that point, that appertains to his function.
Wherefore unto the particular parts of teaching, they give particular
ministers, if so be, they find among the men that appertain unto them, those
that are of the Lord singularly made and furnished to the particular office of
teaching. But because it is necessary for the salvation of Gods people, that no
part of the teaching (which I have reckoned to be 7 parts) be utterly
ouer-passed in any Church: every one of the Ministers, yea, and of the layty
also, in what place soever he be placed in the Church, ought to exercise (so
far forth as he is able) all these parts of teachinge, both of reading,
and of interpreting, and of teaching, and of exhorting, and of Catechizing, and
of disputing, and of calling upon: See how far our learned Brethren differ
from this grave judgment of Bucer and Zanchius for the exercise of these
offices) Yea every one ought to take upon him to him self, How every minister
according to his gift may do these things.
so many of these functions that are to be administered, and so much part of
every one of them, as unto how many, and to how much part of every one, he
shall perceive himself to be furnished of the holy ghost. Let the example of
an house orderly appointed and distributed, be considered: wherein the Father
of the householde about other businesses, the Mother of the household about
other the sons and the Daughters about other, the Man-seruauntes and the
Mayde-seruaunts about other. Here while all are present and in health, every
one in-deede goes about his own office: but if any of the Family be absent,
or be not in good health, and there happen a necessity of some service: each
one so runs to help that necessity, that often times the men go about the
women's offices, and the Women the Offices of the men, the Masters the offices
of the servants, and the servant the offices of the Masters.

Now as Zanchius alleges this out of Bucer, concerning the several and
mutual use of the Ecclesiastical offices, in so many points different from
these our Learned brethren, and that in the allowance of the church of England:
so he proceeds Concerning also the Clericall Discipline:

The third part of the Clericall Discipline, is a peculier subjection: Wherein
the Clearkes that are of inferior degree and Ministry, do submit themselves
to them, which in order and Ministry are superior. The Lord has taught us
this part of discipline, both by his example, who ordained his Disciples, that
should become the Doctors or Teachers of Gods elected, throughout all the
world, by a peculier mastershippe unto this office, and by a certain
Domestical Discipline: whom the apostles imitating, every one of them also
had his Disciples, the which he would frame to exercise orderly the holy
Ministry.

For, every more difficult function of life, requires also a peculiar and
perpetual doctrine, Institution and custody: as we may see in the studies of
philosophy, and in the military institution. Which Lycurgus thoroughly weighing,
did so ordeyne the common weal of the Lacedaemonians (as Xenophon witnesses)
that no order in the common weal, should be without his proper office of a
master. And Plato also in his Laws and common weal requires, Magisterio.
that nothing at all should be among the Citizens, (...), unkept. Hereupon
also our Lord when as he would have those who are his to be so set together*
one with another, and to cleave together: he verily puts every one of those
that are his, under others of whom, as it were of members that are of more
ample and larger spreadinge power and efficacye, he should be kept, moved,
and ruled. The same thing has the holy Ghost commanded, Be ye subject one
to another in the fear of God, Ephesians. 5.

The holy Fathers therefore in the old time, considering these things, have
described the same in the order of the Clergy, that all the other Clearks
should with a singular care be kept and governed of the Presbyter or
Eldershippe: but among the Priests or Elders, the bishop, as a Consul among
the secretaries of the commonweal: ( according to the often alleged example
of Calvin) So he should bear the cheeefest care and custody both of the
whole Church, The authority of a B. among the pri^stes.
and also singulerly of the universal order of the Cleargye. But unto every
more frequented Church, they ordained bishops: and to every one of such
Churches, they commended the Churches nearer adjoining, that were in the lesser
Towns or Villages, and to this purpose, they willed the Priests and Curates
of the same Churches (whom they called Chorepiscop^s, Bishops Chorall) each
one of them to hearken to the bishop, that was nearer to them, and to the
Presbytery or Eldership. Which Priests or Elders, those B being the more
chief, called oftentimes together with all their Clergy, and furnished them in
knowledge and diligence of their functions. But whereas the Lord would, that
they which are men appertayning to him, should mutually embrace one another,
and sustayn care one of another, as far and as largely as they are able (for
all Christians are one body) the holy fathers have ordained, that the bishops
of every province (for now all the territories subject to the Romans were
distributed into Provinces,) should assemble themselves together with the
priests or Elders, so often as the need of the churches required the same:
but for certaynty twice in the year, and should enquire of the doctrine and
discipline of Christ, how the same in all the particular Churches was
administered, and did flourish. And where they had found, that sin was, they
should correct it and such things as they had known to be well they should
confirm them and advance them. But, Metrop. B. over the other. Bish.
that these Synodes should rightly and orderly be administered, they willed,
that both for the calling and moderating of them, the Metropolitans should be
the rulers of them, that is the bishops of every Metropolitan City: for so the
cheifest city in every province was called, where the Pretory or palace of the
cheifest president was. And thereupon unto these Metropolitan bishops, they
enjoined a certain care and heedefulnesse of all the Churches throughout their
province: that if so be they understood of any thing, that were not so well
ordained or done, either of the ministers of the Churches, or of the common
people, they should in time admonish them thereof: The bishops peculier
jurisdiction
and if they could not amend the same by their admonitions, that to correct it,
they should call together a synod of the B. for no judgment was granted unto
them, which by their own proper authority, they might exercise in the
Churches, that had bishops themselves of their own: for all the judgment both
over the people and over the Clergy, appertayned to their own bishop, and to
the priest or Elder of every church, and as for the B. the synodes judged them.
And thereupon when as the B. were to be ordained unto the churches: it was
appointed that they should come together to the same church, with all the B. of
their Province (if that with the profit of the churches it might be done,) if
not, with some of them, Howbeit, not with fewer then two or three of them.
Which bishops should govern the election of the bishop, Elections of bishops.
if it were yet to be made: and being made, they should examine it, and most
severely make inquiry of him that is elected, and search out all his life, and
his ability for the Episcopal office, and then at length initiate him into the
episcopal function. All which things were instituted and were in force unto
this end, that there might be among the churches and in the Ministers thereof,
so great a knowledge as by any means was possible, and a mutual care: and to
debar and expel all offenses of Doctrine and of manners, and to sustain,
advance and make more effectual the edification of faith and life, worthy of
Christ the Lord: insomuch, that if so be any had ceased from their duetye or
office, the other bishops should give assistance, yea, to the exco^municating
and casting him out of the Episcopal office. Let those things be considered,
that Saint Cyprian wrote to Stephanus bishop of Rome, concerning Martian bish.
of Arles, who fell into the Nouatians sect. The first book, Epist. 13. and
also those things that he wrote in the third Epistle, the first book,
concerning a certain portion of the Flock distributed to every one of the B.
and the things that he has in his Preface, Quae prefatus enim.
and in the counsel of Carthage, as he writes to Quirinus.

Furthermore, when as all the world was replenished with Churches, and that the
Metropolitanes also had need of their own particular cure, for neither (as
there began to be very many) were all of them wise or watchful enough, (for
always in all orders of men, few are excellent) the care of some of the
provinces, was committed to certain Bishops of the chief Churches: as to the
Roman, to the Constantinopolitane, to the Antiochian and to the Alexandrine,
and afterward to the Caesarien of Cappadocia, and to certain other, even as
(the Churches of Christ's faithful people being multiplied) the necessity
seemed to requre. Primats.
Notwithstanding, unto these Primate bishops (whom afterward they called
Patriarckes) there was no right at all over these other bishops or Churches,
then that I have said, was unto every Metropolitan, Patriarchs.
over the Churches and bishops of his province. Every one unto his own portion
of Churches, ought a singular care and heedefulnesse, and also to admonish the
bishops in time, if any had aught offended or slacked in his office. And if by
admonishing he had profited nothing, to adhibite the authority of a Council.
Among these the first place was yielded to the Romayne, both for the reverence
of S. Peter, and also for the majesty of the City. By which reason the fathers
afterward ensuing, gave the second place to the Constantinopolitane, as to the
other Rome, and to the bishop of the seat of the Empire: whereas the
Antiochian had before that, obtained the second place among these Patriarckes.

But as the nature of man defiled with ambition, labors always more, that
he might rule far and wide, then that he might rule well: these Patriarckes on
the occasion of this general care of the Churches to the^ committed, drew unto
them, first, the ordeyning of the bishops that were nearer to them: And by that
ordeining, snatched by little and little, and confirmed some jurisdiction over
such bishops and their churches. Which evil when now it glimpsed forth, began
to become a grievous contention, concerning a general empire over all the
Churches. Which indeed first of all John a certain bishop of Constantinople,
under the Emperor Mauritius, attempted to take upon him. Of which contention
very many Epistles* among the Epistles of S. Gregory, lib. 5.6.7. are extant.
At the length under Phocas, the Romayne obtained this Title of the universal
Bishop. Which title by little and little, Zanchius.
the bishops of this sea, began more to abuse: until upon occasion, first by
the division of the Empire under Charles the great, afterward by the
discordes of Princes and nations: whereby they brake the power of the Emperor
of the West, and of other kings: They have lift up themselves, into that
Antichristian power, whereof now they vaunt; having first oppressed the power
of the Bishops, and then also, of the kings and Emperoures. Thus therefore has
Satan overthrown, all the healthful obedience and government of the clerical
order. The clericall order of government and obedience broken by Antichr.
For the Roman Antichriste has taken an immediate Empire unto himself, over
all the Clergy, and also over the Laity: and has dissolved the custody of the
Bishops, when they were good, and their care toward those that were commended
to their trust. But because it is altogether necessary, that every of the
Clerks, should have their proper keepers and carers for them: the power and
authority, as of Bishops, so also of Archdeacons, and of all other, by what
means soever they be esteemed, unto whom any portion of keeping and governing
the Clergy is committed, is to be restoared: and also their vigilance, and
heedfull regard or correction, least any should be at all in this order,
(...), unkept. Thus far Bucer, not only faithfully reciting, but also
praising the custom of the ancient church in diverse orders of Ecclesiastical
functions to be ordained, of the which we have before spoken.

Moreover, I ought also to have had consideration of those churches which
although they have embraced the Gospel; notwithwanding both in matter and in
name, they have retained their Bishops and Archbish. Besides that in the
Churches also of the Protestants, there want not in very deed Bishops and
Archbishops: The names of Arch. and Bish. better then Superintendentes.
whom (having changed their good Greek names, into evil Latin names,) they
call Superindentes, and general Superindentes: but where also, they neither
obtain these old good Greek names, neither these new evil Latin names:
even there notwithstanding some principals or chief are wont to be, unto
whom almost all the authority, does belong. Poynting out, as it should seem to
Geneua, etc. The controversy therefore should have been of names: but whenas
we agree concerning the matters; what do we brawle concerning the names? In the
mean season, even as I have not dissallowed the Fathers, in that matter,
whereupon the quaestion is: Prima^ij.
so can I not, but love our men's zeal. Who have therefore hated the names,
because they fear, least with the names, the old ambition also and the
tyranny, with the ruin and desolation of the Churches, might be called again.

Thus reverently writes Zanchius, of these Ecclesiastical orders, and of this
superiority of Bishops, and Archbishops: yea and of the Patriarchs also,
before the pride and tyranny of Antichriste came: and that it came not by these
orders and dignities, but by the ambitious breaking and violating of them: and
he neither disalloweth, but highly commends these Fathers, and these orders
and dignities, as good and necessary, and nothing prejudicial to the word of
God: nor condemns the zeal of these our brethren, though he show withal,
that albeit they shun and hate the name of Bishop and Archbishop: yet they
have the matter, and retain still such principal or chief ministers among
them, to whom almost all the authority does belong. Now as he has thus at
large defended and confirmed his 10. and 11. Aphorisms: so coming to the 12.
he proceeds against the ambition and tyranny of the Pope, to show that none
of al these orders and dignities, no not of the Patriarchs, were any occasion
thereunto saying: For neither Christ ordained such an head: neither the
ancient Fathers would admit it, because it was not expedient for the Church.
But they were contented with 4. Patriarks, The authority of arch. against
Antichrists tyranny.
the Romain, the Co^stantinopolitane, the Alexandrine, and the Antiochien: who
all of them should be of equal authority and power, and each one should be
content with his own bowndes, even as it was defyned in the Nicene Council,
and confirmed in others: and that, not without great and weighty causes. Of the
which, this in my judgment is not the last, to wit, least the doors should
be opened unto tyranny in the Church: but rather, that if one should dare to
attempt any thing, contrary to the sownde doctrine of Christ, and contrary to
the liberty of the Church. The other Arch-bish. being of no less authority
with their bishops, might oppose themselves and dawnt his boldness, and break
his tyranny. The Church in respect of Christ, is a kingdom. In respect of
men, that are in the same, and either do rule, or be ruled; it is a government
of the best persons.

This is Zanchius grave judgment, even of these Patriarchs, that if they had
been kept as they ought to have been, and according to the good purpose of
their institution: they were so little occasions to any popish pride or tyranny,
The original of Patriar^es for general counsels.
that they were the most especial suppression of it, and of al errors and
factions in the Church, and that it impeacheth nothing Christ's kingdom, And
what has Zanchius said herein, (save for the bare title of Hierarchy) that
Calvin himself does not anow? who says: Institut. Chr. cap. 8. de Fide.
Sect. 54.

But that all the particular Provinces, had one Archbishop among the Bishops:
and that in the Nicene Council, Patriarks were ordained, that in order and
dignity should be superior to the Archbishop; that thing appertayned to the
conservation of discipline. Albeit, in this disputation it can not be
ouerpassed, that these degrees therefore, were chieflye instituted for this
cause, that if any thing should happen in any Church, which could not be well
dispatched of a few: it should be referred to a provincial Synod. If the
greatness and difficulty of the cause, required also a greater discussing,
that Patriarchs were adhibited together with the Sinodes: from the which there
should be no appeal, but a general Council. The government being thus
constituted, some called it an Hierarchy, an holy government, or sacred
principalitye, The name of Hier^^ch^
by a name (as seems to me) improper verily, unused in the Scriptures. For
the holy Ghost would take heed, least any should dream of principaiity or
Domination, when as the government of the Church is treated upon. Howbeit, if
omitting the name, we shall look into the matter: we shall find that the old
Bishops would not faigneanother form of governing the Church, different from
that which the Lord by his word prescribed. Thus also does Calvin his self
confess, besides that which he before confessed. And what should we then (as
Zanchius said) brawle about the name: the matter whereof is thus, of al these
so excellent learneed men, both the ancient Fathers, and also the late, or yet
lyving most famous^ writers, approved, practiced, and confirmed? and yet what
signifies this name Hierarchy in effect also, which Calvin only here
misliketh, but an holy principality or sacred government, not different from
this name Ecclesiastical regiment: which title our brethren here allow, and so
often in this their Learned discourse of Eccl. government? Let us now therefore
return to proceed on their learned Discourse.

Finally S. Peter chap. 5.1. the place before alleged, comprehends all the
three names, of Elders, Pastors, and Bishops. The Elders (says he) which are
amongst you, I beseech. The name of Pastor, The learned discourse, Page 27 and
28.
is understood by relation of the names of feeding, and the flock, which he
uses also by the name of Archipoimen, which signifies the chief of Pastors,
which is our Savior Christ. The name of Bishop, or Overseers, is included in
the word (...), which signifies them, which do carefully exercise the office
of Bishops or Overseers. His exhortation is this. The Elders which are amongst
you, I beseech, which am also a fellow Elder, 1. Pet. 5.1. 1, Pe^. 5.1.2.3.4.
and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a pertaker of the glory
that shall be revealed: Feed the flock of God which is committed unto you, so
much as in you lies, carefully ouerseeing, not by constraint, but willingly:
Not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: Not as exercising Lordship over the
haeritage, but that you may be examples to the flock. And when the chief
Pastor shall appear, you shall receive an incorruptible crown of glory. S.
Peter in this place reproves three notable vices, which do great hurt among
the Minist. of the Church, if they be not taken heed of: slothfulness in
teaching: covetousness of lucre: and ambitious desire of exercising Lordship:
exhorting them to painful diligence, because they were B. or Overseers: to a
ready care because they were Past. and therefore should labor for love of the
flock, and not for lucre like hirelings; to humility, because their chief
dignity in that they were Elders, (...) excel in godliness, Titles of
Arch-bish. etc.
that they might be an example to the flock, which cannot be, except they
submit themselves and their lives, to the common rule of other men: which, most
excellent virtues if they embrace, they should be sure to be plentifully
rewarded by him, who only deserves to be called the chief of all Elders,
Pastors, and Bishops: to whom only, these honorable names of Archipresbyter,
Archiepiscopus. and Archipoimen, and such like, do properly agree. For, as the
Apostle, calls our savior Christ in this place, the chief Pastor; so in the
second chap. the 25. verse, 1. Pe^, 2.25.
he calls him both the Pastor and Bishop of our souls. Wherefore, as he
only is our chief Pastor, or Archipoimen, so is he also our only Archbishop.
And that the name of Archipresbyter, or chief of Elders; pertayneth to no
mortal man, may be seen by this place, where S. Pet. that excellent and high
Apost. who if any man could, might as well as any have challe^ged that name,
durst not call himself other then (...) a fellow Elder: no, not when he fought
authority to himself, by that name to be bold, to exhort the Elders of the
Church. But least any should think we stay only in names and terms,
which are not so greatly material, let him consider, that S, Peter expressly
forbids the Elders to exercise Lordship over their several congregations,
how much more over their fellow Elders.

Here are cited two testimonies out of the Apostle S. Peter: The former 1. Pet
5. v. 1.2.3. and 4. Out of which, our Brethren first do gather, that Peter
exhorting the Ministers of the Church, Bridges
comprehends all the three names, S. Peter's testimonies of these titles. Names
included.
Elders, Pastors, and Bishops, indifferently. Elders, plainly: Pastor,
understood by relation, of the names of feeding, and the flock, and by the
name of Archipoimen, which signifies the chief of Pastors, which is our
savior Christ: and the name of Bishops or Ouerseeers is included in the word
(...) which signifies the^, which do carefully exercise the office of Bishops,
or overseers.

Now although we may most easily grant all this, as nothing prejudicial to
the question: Yet see, what slender arguments these are, yt because a name may
be included; or by relation of some sense may be understood: therefore, the
name of Bishop in this or that place so included, must always be as ordinary
and proper a name, as is the name of Priest or Elder, by the which he is
expressly termed. We deny not (as we have often before showed) but that both
the terms, and the offices also that the terms purporte, were then for a
while used indifferently: but whether the usage of them afterward, and that,
in the Apost. times, more properly to one among the Pastors or Elders of the
Churches, were vsedwell, and is to be continually retained; that is here the
question. S. Peter calls (and that expressly) al Christians (...) a holy
sacerdotal Priesthood as also S. John calls the^, 1. Pet. 2. Apocal. 1.
Kings and Sacerdotal Priists. in expres terms, and not inclusiuely: (...)
And many other terms by relation of understanding, Titles of ^ and Elders.
may be very aptly applied to many men; and yet we may not these-vppon make
proper names of them. Every Ouerseer is not a Bishop, Proper and improper names.
nor every Shephearde a Pastor: nor every Elder a Minister of Gods word. The
name of Elder is used of S. Peter, even immediately after this allegation
cited, not for a Minister of the word of God, ver, 5. as Beza notes. Here the
reason of the Antithesis requires, that we should take this name concerning
age, and not concerning dignity. But if it be to be taken in the first verse,
as Beza takes it, saying, The name of Priest or Elder is general,
comprehending all them that are (as I may term them) of the Senate
Ecclesiastical; vulgarly, Seniors: how then do our Brethren here say, that
S. Peter there comprehends all the three names, of Elders, Pastors, and
Bishops: and so restrain it only unto those, that are Teachers and Ministers
of Gods word? How necessary Bish. superiority is, by our Brethrens own
collection.


Concerning the collectio^ that our brethren gather out of S. Peter's words ver.
1.2.3. and 4* That he reprooueth three notable vices, slothfulness in
teaching: covetousness of lucre: and ambitious desire of exercising Lordship:
and that if these three be not taken heed unto, they do great hurt among the
Ministers of the Church: All this again, we confess is true. And even
because these three must be taken heed unto: we therefore, with all the
foresaid holy fathers, and godly Learned men, do think it very convenient and
needful, that there should be amongst the Elders, Pastors and Bishops, some
superiors to call upon them, as Peter did, and to Ouersee, that such as are
slothful in teaching, Sloth,
should be orderlye caused to be diligent in teaching, so much as in them
lies. And such as are covetous of lucre, should be taken heed unto:
Covetousness.
and either removed, or so reformed, that both in taking and in spending the
goods of the Church, they should so behave themselves, as the laws of God,
and the godly ordinances of the Church and realm, has in that behalf
provided. And that those which forgetting their calling, Pride.
are puffed up with any ambitious desire of exercising Lordshippe, should be
repressed: and if they have any such title or office, should exercise their
Lordship in humility, without ambition or pride.

But this simply debarreth not, the exercise of all kind of Lordship in any
competent dignity, reverent title of honor, and superior authority, which is
the question; but rather confirms it so to be exercised, with painful
diligence and ready care, without slothfulness: with hospitality, and love
of the flock, without covetousness of lucre: with modeste humility without
ambitious desire of exercising Lordship. We allow here this collection out of
Peter, that he eahorteth them to painful diligence, because ^hey were B, or
Overseers: to a ready care, because they were Pastors: and therefore should
labor for love of the flock, and not for lucre, like hyrelings: to modest
humility, Submissio.
because their chief dignity, in that they were Elders, was to excel in
godliness, that they might be an example to the flock. All this likewise is
true, their excellency in godliness, is above all the excellency in any
dignity or Ecclesiastical honor, that they can be exalted unto: but that that
follows; which can-not be except they submit themselves and their lives to
the common rule of other men: is somewhat darkely and straungely spoken. For if
our brethren mean by this submission of themselves and their lives, to the
common rule of other men, that they should have no superior Ecclesiastical
authority over other men, but that all other men were aequal and alike in all
Ecclesiastical government unto them: or rather, that the overseers of other
men, should in their rule and oversight, be under and inferior to the rule:
and that also, to the common rule of other men* this were a manifest absurdity
in all reason, and a plain contradiction to it self.

Neither did Peter or any of the Apostles so submit themselves: neither were
Timothy or Titus bidden by S. Paul so to submit themselves; neither does Peter
here, or any where else, will any Bish. Pastors or Elders, so to do. But, Neither
Peter nor Paul require such submission.
for all their humulity of mind, and dilig^nce of body, in teaching, etc.
nevertheless, to ouersee, to command, to rebuke, to rule and govern other
men, Ministers and all, according to their place of calling, and authority of
God committed unto them. And they that thus do, and embrace withal, these most
excellent virtues: they should be sure to be plentifully rewarded by him who
only ( as here is truly said) deserves to be called the chief of all Elders,
Pastors, and Bishops. Neither is there any, (at least that I know, or I think,
that our Brethren can name) except that man of sin the Pope, which claims any
such title, to be called, the chief of al Elders, Pastors, and Bishops: sure I
am, none deserves so to be called. As for any of our Archbishops, whose
dignitye, as it conteyneth no such absolute, either power or title: so it
stretches nothing near to all, or to half, or to a quarter, and but scarce
to a handful, in comparison of all Elders Pastors and Bishops: and is bownded
only to this little corner and portion of the Church, in the realm of
England: both they and all we still acknowledging this, that our Lord Jesus
Christ only deserves to be called, How these ^^tles agree only to ^ Christ.
and only is indeed, the chief of all Elders, Pastors and B. as here is
said. And also, if these words following, be likewise so absolutely and
generally understood, To whom only these honorable names of Archipresbyter,
Archiepiscopus, Archipoimen, and such like, do properly agree: we agree also,
that they agree only ( in that proper sense) to him. As Christ ( in an absolute
understanding of good,) says: Luc. 18. None is good but only God. And as S
Paul says to the Romans 16. namely to Timothy. 1. Tim, ^.^7. To the King
eternal, immortal, invisible, and wise only, be honor and glory for ever and
ever. And 1. Tim. 6.15-and 16. speaking of the coming of the coming of our L
Jesus Christ: whom in his times, he that blessed one, Titles proper to Chr.
and only Prince, King of kings, and Lord of lord, shall show: who only has
immortality, etc. And as the same our savior Christ wills us, not to be
called father or Master: For we have one Father and Master, which is in
heaven: to whom only these honorable titles do (indeed) properly agree:
speaking properlye, of proper agreement, in the fowrth and highest manner of
propriety. How diuer^ of these titles are from Christ, communicated to man.
But if we make al these honorab. titles, so properly to agree unto Christ,
that none of them may be understood, included, or communicated, to any of ye
Eccl. Political, nor oeconomicall Ministers of Christ: so that none at al may
be called either good, or King, or Prince, or Wise, or Father, or Master, by
participation of any portion of the goodness, power, wisdom, fatherhoode,
Maistershippe, etc. of God, as offices, gifts, or graces imparted to us: while
we should hypocritically, or zealously pretend to honor him, and to seek his
only glory: we should both unthankfully (indeed) not acknowledge his goodness
and gracious gifts, which recommende to us the more glory in him: and
disobedientlie dishonor him in his ordinances, and higher powers, that he has
placed over us.

But where now does God, (in this, or any other express, or inclusiue place of
all the Scripture) challenge to himself all these honorable names to agree
only and properly unto him? The honorable name that Saint Peter only. Here
ascribes to Christ, is (...) chief or principal pastor. Which Title I never
heard of any other, that it was given unto, or taken upon him. As for
Archipresbytor a principal priest or elder ( which term it is not in use with
us, nor Archpriest, Archipoimen and archpriest
as our adversaries call it) because in the office of Priesthood, Eldership, or
Pastorship, we acknowledge all to have one office under the high-pastor of our
souls, and ancient of days Jesus Christ. Only, since that the name
Archbishop, signifiing a chief or principal ouer-seer, is no where in the
Scrip. properly, nor not properly applied unto him, shall we dare to say, as
we may of some other peculiar titles and names of God, Jehovah, Omnipotent,
etc. ( when as God now and then of his goodness vouchsafes to co^municat to
some his especial Minist. so honorab. names, belonging to himself, Adonai,
Ellohim, and the name of the Lords Christ, or anointed, etc.) that these hon.
names Archipresbyter, and Archiepis. do so only and properly agree unto Jesus
Christ, that none other, in no other conditional sense, may be called by them?
I think this can not well be proved by scripture, nor any reason or argument
will infer it.

If we think this word (...) that is, Prince, by contraction prefixed, and in
corporate to the other words, (...), and (...) do so advance the sense thereof,
yt they become not co^petible to mortal men: especially being applied to the
ordering and governing of the church: are not those names and offi^es being
simply taken without this composition serving to build the Chapter as S. Paul
says Ephesians. 4. even on the place, (...)
that our Brethren do allege for pastors and Doctors: that they are all given
to the work of the Ministry unto the edifiing or building of the body of
Christ, etc. So that indeed, al these offices that Christ ordained, are but
builders of this mystical temple, until we all come to the unity of faith,
and of the knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure
of the age of the fullness of Christ: And who is the principal builder of this
Temple? but even he that said of the Temple of his own natural body, to
the which his mystical body is compared: Thes^name^ and offices given to the
building of the Church.
Destroy this Temple, and in three days, I will build it up again. Io.
6.21. Wheruppon (says S. Paul Heb. 9.1. etc.) holy brethren, pertakers of
the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and heade-Priest of our confession
Jesus. who is faithful to him that has preferred him, even as Moses also in
all his house. For he was counted worthy of greater glory than Moses: how
much greater honor than the house, he has that made it. For every house is
builded of some man, but he that created all things is God. And verily, Moses
was faithful in all his house. as a servant, in witness of those things,
that were to be spoken. But Christ is in his house as a Son, which house
are we, if we keep firm and sure the confidence and glory of hope, unto
the ending.

Here are these honorable names, attributed both unto Christ, and unto Moses:
that as Christ was the builder of the spiritual house or temple of God* so
was Moses. Christ as the son and owner, Moses, but as a servant in Gods
house. and yet comes in S. Paul, 1. Cor. 3. v. 9.10. Ye are the building of
God, according to the grace of God that is given to me, I as a wise (...)
Arch-builder, (or chief builder) which we commonly tra^slatea Master builder,
have laid the foundation, and another builds upon it?

What? durst S. Paul say of himself he was, (...) which term principally, is
proper unto Christ? For the word signifies, such principallitie and chief
degree: applied by S. Paul unto himself, and that in the cheifest work of
Gods Church, the building of it: the work that conteyneth all Ecclesiastical
offices, and whereto all do tend: and that without any derogation to Jesus
Christ. Although Christ absolutely, simply and above all, be the only and
proper (...) of all this mystical building. And is this honorable name Elder,
of such honorable Eldershippe, and prerogative above builder, or of any such
peculiar application to God the Father, or to Christ the son, that it is
only and properlye applied to him? Indeed, Christ is called, the old or
ancient of days, not the elder, except with addition: our Elder Brother:
otherwise, this honorable name is not so proper only to Christ, to be
called Presbyter, as to be called Sacerdos. And therefore is less injurious,
yea* no injury at all, to the peculiar, or to any other honorable name, of our
savior Jesus Christ* to be called Archipresbyter. And yet, if Presbyter had
been any name of Christ, seeing that (...) and (...) sacerdos, and Pontifex:
and yet admitted a mortal man to be so much: Man being but the figure called
(...).
his figure even of his Sacrifice, that one above all the other sacrificing
priests, was called also, fummus sacerdos, or Pontifex Maximus. the highest
sacred Minister, or sacrificing priest, and chiefest Bishop, without any
derogation to Christ's honor: yea, it rather served, to his honor: how much
more then in this title Presbyter and Archipresbyter, being names not so proper
to him, may a mortal man without any dishonor to his prerogative, reverently
be called Archipresbyter?

If it be said, the highe-prieste was so called, because he prefigured
Christ: True it is, But, since our Brethren confess, that those offices and
callings, were likewise also for good order of discipline among them; although
that priesthood both in him, and in all other of that order of Aaron and Leui,
be accomplished in Christ, and so abolished: yet, as the degrees of order and
differences of Ministers among them ( by our Brethrens own confession) was the
sign also of the differences among us: So, why not withal, of the differences
of degrees and dignities in the same. And sith our brethren allege heereunto,
the Synagogues among the Jews, and their order theerein and that they had
(...), chief governors or princes of the Synagogues, which order of dignity,
was not abolished by Christ: and some good christians were such among the
Jews, not dissalowed but commended by S. Luke, The name of (...)among the
Christian Jews.
even by that name, Act. 18. ver. 8. And Crispus (...)* the Arch-gouernour of
the Sinagogue believed with all his house. And although Paul after ward 1.
Cor. 1.14. mencioning this Crispus, term him not there, the Arch-gouernour of
the Jews sinagogue: yet as it further appears Act. 18. ver. 17. by
Sosthenes, who was long before a faithful Christian, and as diverse allege out
of Eusebius lib. 1. cap. 13. he was also one of the 72 Disciples chosen of
Christ. So S. Luke calls him (...) the Arch ruler or principal of the
sinagogue: continuing well enough the name and office of his dignity, with the
sincerity of Christ's religion, any order then to the contrary notwithstanding.

But if our brethren ask us, what we say to the other honorable name
Archiepiscopus: indeed, we need say the less to this of Archipresbyter,
Archdeaco^*
Arch-prieste, or Arch elder, retayning no such name among us, as we have of
Archdeacon, and Archbishop: but because the name of Deacon is a name much
less proper unto Christ: Archdeacon may be afforded with our brethrens less
suspicion, of touching Christ's glory and prheminence. Deacon signifiing but
Minister; Arch-deac, Bisho^*
can signify but a chief or principal Minister: and therefore may be
suffered with less envy: and we have heard Zanchius and Bucers allowance of
it. As for the name of By. being a name of dignity and (being well used) as S.
Paul says, deserving double honor, Arch-bish.
it is not only a name pertaining to Christ, which is called the Bish. of our
souls. but also communicated by his Apostles unto mortal men. And though the
name of Archb. signify a principal ouerseer in his dignity; and being simply
and absolutely understood of Christ above all other: is in very deed only the
true archbishop: yet since the Scripture expresses no where this name, either
peculiarly or at all unto him: and since so many holy fathers, of so great
antiquity, both in their several writings, and with so many universal
consents, even in the best allowed both general and provincial Counsels, The
name and office well used according to the obseruatio^s of S. Peter.
upon so grounded reasons, to so good and necessary purposes, and in such
lawful cases: but yet, with such conditions and bowndes (as is aforesaid) did
ordain, receive, and continue the same: and since that also, such notable
Protestants of our own age, in the Churches reformed, Luther, Melancthon,
Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bullinger, Peter, Martyr, Gualter, Hemingius,
Zanchius, yea, and Calvin himself (as we have heard) allows the
institution and practice thereof: I see not, how our learned brethren
discoursers can rightly find any at all of these vices, that Peter here
reproves, as doing great hurt among the Ministers of the Church, to be
directly contained in this honorable name of Archb. but yt it may be well used
with paineful diligence, ready care, and with modest humility, to the great
benefit among the Ministers of the Church, and to the suppressing of all
these foresaid, three notable, and many other as notable vices, factions and
schisines, disorders and consusions, errors and heresies, when any such begin
to spring and break out, among the ministers of the Church, to suppress them
by the godly industry and necessary authority of the Bish. and Archb.
jurisdictions.

But our brethren here do make these reasons: and first for Archbishop: For,
How far we yield to our brethrens argument for these terms how far we deny
it.
as the Apostle calls our Savior Christ in this place, the chief pastor, so
in the 2. chap. v. 25. ^e calls him both the Pastor and Bishop of our souls.
Wherefore as he only is our chief Pastor or Archipoimen: so is he also our
only Archbishop. This argument were to some purpose if we simply denied Christ
to be our Archbishop, or to be our only Archbishop in that sense, that is
equivalent there to Arch-pastor. For as our brethren here theirselues
confess, it is to be understood of him, who only deserves to be called. the
chief of all Elders, pastors, and Bishops: In whech sense we not only
acknowledge him to be the only Archpastor, but to be the only Arch-elder ( if
we may so term him, because he is our elder brother) or rather Archpriest
betokening the chief dignity of that his office, and also to be the only
Archbishop. But since we, nor any good Protestant, nor any of the ancient
Fathers, understand Archbishop in that sense: Therefore, this argument a
comparati^, and of the similitude of the one term to the other, is disparatum
and much unlike. The one is a plain term expressly ascribed in the Scripture
unto Christ, and not the other: and therefore, Archpriest
if our brethrens arguments from the express scriptures be good, then have we
better liberty, to deny their reasons goodness, for this term. Yea if this
reason be of good consequence, as the Apostle calls our Savior Christ in
this place the chief Pastor: so in the 2. chap. the 25. verse, he calls him
both the Pastor and Bishop of our souls. If these places follow thus, as the
one, so the other: why may we not better conclude thus? But these honorable
names, the Pastor and Bishop of our souls, are not so absolutely in all senses
proper only unto Christ, but that under Christ in some good and true senses,
they are also competible, to other men. Therefore, these terms of Pastor, but
more especially of Archbishop, which in no place is ascribed to Christ, are
not so absolutely in all senses proper only unto Christ, but that under Christ
in some good and true senses, they are also competible to other me^. So that if
we consider their own argument better, it makes not so much with them, as
against them.

Now as they reason thus on these two terms Arch-pastor, and Archbishop; so
again for the third term, Archipresbyter, they like wise say: And that the
name Archipresbyter or chief of Elders, The learned disc Page 27
pertayneth to no mortal man, may be seen by this place, where S. Peter that
excellent and high Apostle, who if any man could, might as-well as any, have
challenged that name, durst not call himself other then (...), a fellow
Elder, no; not when he sought authority to himself, by that name to be
bold, to exhort the Elders of the Church.

No man ( as I said before) among us in England, Bridges
has any such name, as Archipresbyter, Archpriest, or chief of Elders, and
therefore it is needelesse to challenge the discipline of the Church of
England for that, which (all England seeeth) we have not. But if our brethren
think, The name of Archp^. not in use among us.
with an awke stroke, through the sides of this title of Arch-prieste, to
wound the title of Archbishop, inferring thus: If the name of Archbishop be
allowable, which is the higher title, Our bretherens argum.
then much more is the name of Arche-presbyter, allowable, which is the
lower: But that it is not allowable: therefore, much less the greater of
Archbishop.

The Mayor of this argument being distinguished, the defect thereof, forthwith
appears. True it is, that where they use the title of Archprieste, they use
it as inferior both to Archbishop, and to Bishop. Our use of the name
Archbishop
because they take it only as a chief or principal person, among a number
of those that are but mere Priests or Elders, without any Episcopal
superiority. And so likewise Archdeacon, as a chief or principal person,
among a number of other Deacons. And thus also use we the honorable name of
Archb for a chief or principal person among the Bishops, that is to wit, one,
to whom among some other of the same order and Ministry, a certain superior
dignity above some the residue of his fellows, is attributed. In which sense
also, this name Archpriest, or Arch-elder, though we use it not, might of
others (as is aforesaid) be used well enough. But bicaus the name Priest, Why
we use not the name Archpriest.
or pastoral Elder, has a nearer reference to the office, which is al one and
the same, both in the him, and in By. and Archbish. And the name of Bish.
signifies not a several office of the Ministry, but a superior degree of
dignity and authority, in the selfsame order of the Ministry that the Priest
or pastoral Elder is in, as S. Aug. to. 4. in his questions ex vtroque mixtim.
quaest. 101. says. Quid est enim Episcopus, nisi primus Presbyter, hoc est,
summus sacerdos? For what is a Bishop, but the chief Priest or Elder, that
is to say, the highest sacred Minister? and this he speaks even of that place
of S. Paul ^. Tim. 3. where the priest or Elder is called a Bishop. so that the
bishop: yea, and the Archbishop, are still but Priests or Elders, in respect
of the order and office of the Ministry.

Although therefore the name of Bishop, being an honorable name, howbeit, but a
name of degree in the office of dignity and auth. and thereby may as well admit
the name of a superior among themselves: as also over the residue of the
Ministers: yet, since the name of Pastor, Priest, or Pastoral elder, continues
still both in the Bishop, and in the archbishop, being not so apt to admit
such a superior title of dignity among the Pastors, priests or pastoral Elders,
which are titles common to them al, and signifting rather the substance of the
office, than any quality of degree therein: and substantia non dicitur,
secundum magis and minus. Which reason, though it suffices us to use the title
of the one, and not of the other, because Archpriest, which indeed is lesser
in respect of degeee, is the greater, or at least, in both is al one, in
respect of the office or order of the Ministry, and therefore we use it not:
yet, (for any thing here alleged by our brethren) not only we might use it,
but even the Papists might still use the title of Archprieste, as they do,
understanding not the name Priest for sacrificer. For, where our brethren say,
that the name of Archipresbyter or chief of Elders, parteyneth to no mortal
man: neither they, nor any other (except the Pope himself, who said also, he
was the B. of Bishops,) did so use the ^earme Archipresbyter, How the name of
Arch Priest and Archbishop are allowable.
in this sense, thus indefinitely and in general spoken, as chief of Elders:
but as a chief person in some subalternall respects, among a certain number
and appointed company of his brethren, Priests or Elders. And so it may well
appertain to a mortal man, yea, to a man framed after our brethrens own
devising: to be a chief man among his brethren Elders for a time, or for an
action in the assembly of them. Yea, in this restrainte, they admit the name
of Archbishop also. And if (as they say) Episcopus and Presbyter be all one:
then in that sense, admitting Archbishop, Peter prince of the Apost.
how far will they differ from admitting also the title of Archipresbyter? but
now let us see their argument against this title, that is here alleged out
of Peter.

The argument is this. If any man could; Our bretherens argument from S. Peter.
S. Peter that excellent and high Apostle, might as well as any, have
challenged that name, Arch-elder.

But, S. Peter durst not call himself other than (...), a fellow Elder, no
not when he sought authority to himself, by that name to be bold to exhort
the Elders of the Church:

Ergo: No mortal man) that is an Elder, can or ought to dare, to challenge
that name Archipresbyter, or to call himself, other then (...),

Concerning here our brethrens Mayor in this argument, we gladlye allow it,
both that S. Peter was so excellent and high an Apostle: and also that if any (
mere) mortal man could, he might as well as any, How S. Pete^ excelled among
the Apost. and whether in dignity.
have challenged that name. But, by the way, (because of these words more than
I looked for) had S. Peter ( in any respect) any superiority above his fellow
Apostles? Did he then excel the residue in any dignity? or were not the
residue as high as he, but that he by an excellency, is here said to be
high, more than all they? Were not our brethren afraid, least by these
speeches, they might seem to confirm the Papists opinion, that S. Peter was
the head of the Apostles? yea, diverse of the Fathers call S. Peter the Prince
of the Apostles, as does Origin in his 17. homily upon Luke: and Cyprian lib.
1. Epist. 3. lib. 4. Epist. 9. that Peter was the foundation of the church: and
yet does neither Origene allow any primacy of the B. of Rome, or of the
church of Rome from Peter.

And Cyprian De simplicitate Praelatorum says: The Lord speaks unto Peter,
I (says he) say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock, I will
build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not overcome it. I will give to
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and the things that thou shall bind
upon the earth, shall be bound also in heaven: Pare^^.
And to the same party after his resurrection, he says; Feed my sheep. And
although (after his resurrection) he gave his power alike even or aequall to
all the Apostles, and say, As the Father sent me, so send I you also: receive
ye the holy Ghost, If ye shall remit sins unto any, they shall be remitted unto
him: if you shall hold them, they shall be holden: Notwithstanding, that he
might make unity manifest, he by his authority did dispose the original of the
same unity, beginning from one. Certeinlye, this were the other Apostles also
that Peter was, endewed with like consorte both of honor and power, but the
beginning comes from unity, that the Church might be declared to be one.

So then, though the honor and power, in respect of their office of
Apostleship, were aequall in them all, and of like consort: yet in this
respect, yt in all numbers and orders, there must ever be a beginning from
one; therein was Peter in the Apostles company, the first and cheifest: And so
is he called of the Evangelist Mat. 10.1, by the name of first. Neither is he
set down first, for order only: but also for some other preeminence depe^dant
thereon. And therefore, we may safely gather that Christ made a special choice
of these 3. Apostles, Peter, James, and John, more than of all the residue.
Whereupon it should seem that these 3. were as S. Paul notes Gal. 2.
esteemed as pillars, and seemed great among the^. And though James had the
prerogative of being made the B. of Jerusalem, and not Peter: yet (as it is
very well said here by our brethren) in respect of the fellowship of the Ap.
Peter and not James was that excellent and high Apostle, that excelled and
surmounted all his fellows, as ringleader, and though not as head; yet
oftentimes as mouth of all the residue. And could there be these differences
and degrees of excellency, height, and greatness, in this one fellowship of the
Apostles (the honor and power of like consort in the office of the Apostleship
still remaining) and may there not be so, And even in like manner may a Arch.
^xcel a bish.
among the Elders, and yet, one to be B. and among the Bishops, and yet, one be
Archb. without the impeachement of the honor and of the power of like consort,
in the office of Eldership, and Bishoprike. If one among them (notwithstanding
the equality of their Apostleship) was, and might be rightly called: that
excellent and high Apostle: why may not one likewise among the Elders) not
withstanding the equality of their Eldership) be indeed, and so be called,
that excellent and high Elder; and one B. among the B. that excellent and high
Bishop.

But, let this go, as a escape by the way: yea, let S. Peter be never so
excellent and high an Apostle: yet (say our brethren) he durst not call
himself other than (...), fellow Elder.

No? durst h^ not so? how then durst he, even at the first dashe, and the very
first words of his Epistle, call him self, Peter the Apostle of Jesus
Christ. lo, here he called himself other then (...), a fellow Elder.

Yea, but (say they) he durst not, when he sought authority to himself, by
that name to be bold, to exhort the Elders of the Church: even then durst he
not call himself other than (...).

What? and did S. Peter then seek authority to himself? or, if he did it, did
he seek it by that name? was not the name of the Apostle, of more antiquity
than Praesbyter was? or, then (...) was? yea or then (...) had been, if he had
used it? or, did he not rather then, set aside his authority, and set aside
the name of apostle, and descend down to their own name and order, unto whom
he wrote? being but in respect of their Ministers, Priests or Elders, and
abasing him self, to insinuate and persuade them the rather, as though that
excellent and high apost. had been but their fellow, in that office of
Priesthood or Eldership, though in his apostleship far above them.

And therefore (be it spoken under correction) this seems not to be so well
avouched of our brethren: Peter forbids Lordship.
that S. Peter durst not call himself other than (...), a fellow Elder: no,
not when he sought authority to himself by that name, to be bold to exhort
the Elders of the Church, Peter both durst and did call himself other then
(...).
For, S. Peter, could, and durst, if he would have done it And he did it, when
he would use his authority, But here it should seem, he used or sought it
not, but set it aside, and used this lower term, in his modest humility to
the which he exhorted them. And yet, this no white hindered his superior dignity
and office of apostleship far above them.

But wherefore is this word fellow Elder, here so urged, that S. Peter where
he sought authority to himself, durst use no other name? does this word fellow
Elder infer, that all that are fellows even in the very Eldership, must be
in all respects fellow and fellow like, and all of such equality, that no
superior dignity may be admitted in this fellowship? S. Paul also calls
diverse persons his fellow laborers in the Gospel, and his fellow servant:
yea, he mencioneth his yoake-fellowe, which is, of diverse, expounded for his
wife: yea, he calls all the sons of God, fellow heirs with Christ: and is
there no difference of dignities in these fellowships? In the Court, the best
noble man in England, will many times call those that are of far inferior
offices, and yet her Majesty's sworn men in her most honorable household, their
fellows: shall we say they durst not call themselves other than their
fellows? or that they are all alike and aequall. But if this fellowship that
Peter speaks of be in the Eldership: then by the way, we have here to note,
that S. Peter was both an apostle: and an elder. But our brether^n say, an
elder is all one with a B. therefore the name and office of a B. was not so
separated, but that even the Apostles also both might be and were their selves
Bishops. The learned Dis. Page 27. and 28.


But least ( say our Brethren) any man should think, we stay only in names and
terms, which are not so greatly material: let him consider that Saint Peter
expressly forbids the Elders, to exercise Lordship over theirseueral
co^gregatio^s, how much more over their fellow Elders.

If our brethren would not, that any man should think they stay only in
names and terms: Bridges.
and if names and terms are not so greatly material: I marvel they make so
much adoo about them, or rather, as it seems (for any thing here alleged)
stay ( if not only) yet most upon them? the thing indeed that S. Peter
here expressly forbids, Our breth^e^ st^y on names*
is to exer-Lordship. So that Saint Peter's forbidding, is not for any name or
term, but for exercise of Lordship. Neither do we deny, but that which the
Apostle Saint peter forbibdeth the Elders, should be still forbidden them.

And with our brethren, allowing Caluines and Bezaes interpretation, (since from
Calvin, they seem to have taken all these their observations, on the foresaid
place of Peter, though somewhat altering both Caluines words and sense herein)
that the word Clergy signifies not the whole order of the Ministers, but the
particular Churches, and the universal body of the Chapter ( that is, all the
congregation, being the L. inheritance and allotment), as well as the
Ministers: Does S. Peter then forbid, that any one Elder should have and
exercise any superior government over the clergy, understanding the clergy in
this sense? If he does not, but allows it, and his self practiced it; then,
howsoever the name both of governing, and of clergy may be abused; ye matter is
clear, that one Priest or Elder, among the residue, may have a lawful
superior auth. and government over the clergy; ( that is) over all the
universal body of the Church, in every particular or several cogregation: and
so not only over the people, but also over the whole order of Minist.

For the matter that is here forbidden the Elders, is not to be (...), which
simply is governing and exercising a lawful authority: but rather manifestly he
does infer it, saying: (...), neither as misruling of the clergy. On which
word says Calvin: Because with the Grecians, the proposition (...) for the
most part is taken in evil part: Peter here reproves a preposterous Lordship:
Calvin,
such as theirs, who not considering with the^selus, that they are the Minist.
of Christ and of the church do covet somewhat more. What Lordship Peter
^eproueth.
Erasmus notes on it: No^ domina^tes more Regum: Not ruling after the manner
of Kings: or Non Dominio prementes, Not pressing the^ with Dominion (or
Lordship:) so that here is nothing at al spoken against any unlawful
superiority, that any elders may exercise over the clergy. For otherwise he
should permit no government at all unto them over the congregation, or of one
at any time in a synod. And therefore these words of Saint Peter must needs
be understood either of too excelling, or of too tyrannical government, and so
Calvin concludes thus: For God delivers not a kingdom to the Pastors, but
only enioyenth them a care, so that theright in the mean time remains entier
to himself, and so says Beza: he shows that not a kingdom, but a care is
committed to them. So that this Lordship that Saint Peter expreslie forbids,
is only against their exercise of a kinglike, or of a tyrannical Lordship, and
not against any moderate Lordship and superior authority over the clergy.
But to prove this further and better (as they think) our brethren ascend from
Saint Peter unto Christ, saying.

Which thing also our Savior Christ precisely forbids, when there was a
contention among his apo. about the primacy. The Kings of the nations have
dominion over them, and they that bear rule over them are called gracious
Lords or beneficial, but you shall not be so. Also Mat. 20.25. and Mar.
10.41, Upon the ambitious request of the sons of Zebedy, and the disdain of
the other against the^. The princes of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them
and they that be great, exercise authority over them, but it shall not be so
amongst you, but who so will be great amongst you, let him be your Minister,
and he that will be first among you, let him be your servant. the same thing
he taught by his example, How Christ forbids greater.
when he washed his Disciples feet, and commanded them to show the like
humility one toward another, which were all brethren, which he their Lord and
Master showed toward them. Also Math, 23.8. etc. He forbids all ambitious
titles of Rabbi, Master, Father. etc, The reason he adds, John. 13.13.
for you are all brethren. For these names agree properly to God and Christ.
Math. 23.8.
For the greatest dignity of an Ecclesiastical person is a Ministerye, and not
a Lordship.

These places having been before by other so often alleged, and so fully
answered, need the less discussing. The words indeed of our savior Christ
cited by S. Luke. 22.25. might seem at the first show to forbid all
government, because he says (...), they rule or govern them: But being larger
and more plainly expounded, both not only, by S. Mat. 20.25, but also by S.
Mark 10.41, who both of them expressly use the same word that S. Peter does
(...), they do plainly show, that it should be understood in the same sense.
And therefore this is here of our Brethren rightlyer said than they were
aware of: Which thing also our savior Christ precisely forbids, when etc.
So that, as S. Peter simplye forbids not in the Ministry, all Superiority
of government and reverend Title of honor: but only such as either is proper
unto Kings, or abused by tyrants and ambitious men: so the same thing being
forbidden precisely by our savior Christ also: if we will be rightly precise
herein, we ought not to stretch these words further, than Savior Christ and S.
Peter do.

And as indeed, it is good to note, what here our savior Christ precisely
forbids: so let us precisely note withal, what here precisely he allows.
For whereas both in Mat. and Mark he says, (...) but he that wilbee among
you made greote, which the old tranflation calls greater, And again, (...),
be and be made first or chief: Luke says, (...): and again, (...), But he
that is greate^t among you, and he that is Prince or governor. Here all these
titles are both preciselye expressed. The first among them, that is to say
among the ministers of the word, and sacraments, and not only the first in
order of number, but in the quality and degree of dignity: first, that is,
great, greater, and greatest among them. Yea in precise words, the prince or
governor of the^. And all this, with this condition, is expressly and precisely
allowed of our savior Christ, that is to say, so yt the same person be the
Minister or the servant of the^ al.

If our brethren say: how can the same person be both greatest and least, How
Christ expoundes his own wo^des.
governor and servant all at once? although these may agree well together, in
diverse respects: yet, to urge even the precise words of our Savior Christ,
Christ expressly does expound himself. For that which is said before ^e should
be, Luke 22. says, (...) as though he were one that served: that is to say,
he should in his greater dignity or government of them, behave himself in
lowlines and humility, Titles of Masters and fathers
as if he were the servant and the least among them, And this well accords to
S. Peter's former sentence, exhorting the Elders, among other virtues, to modest
humility. But our brethren perhaps, Our Br. example flat against the^.
would not have these express words thus precisely urged, and yet, see how
they make it more plain, even by the very example that they bring (as they
think) against it.

The same thing ( say they) he taught by his example, when he washed his
apostles feet, and commanded the^ to show the like humility one to another,
which were al brethren, which he their Lord and master showed to them.

And was this example indeed, the teaching of the same thing? What then, if he
for all this great humility, yea, and that, commanding them to show the like
humility, did notwithstanding, retein still a superiority of lordship and
mastership over them, that both our brethren confess, saying, which he their
Lord and M. showed toward the^. and when Christ had showed the^ this example,
Humility debarreth not superiority of office.
he himself said: Understand ye that I have done unto you? ye call me master and
Lord, and ye say well, for so I am. If now, he taught them by his doctrine the
same thing, in the foresaid places, Mat. 20. Mar. 10. and Luc. 22. that he
taught them here by his example: then do not those places precisely forbid,
every Mastership and Lordship, or superiorship of authority and title of
dignity and honor, among the ministers of the word and sacraments. Neither does
Mastersh. or Lordsh. or superior authority and title thereof among the^ ( being
so far as we acknowledge the^, inferior to our Savior Christ's) any whit impugn
the disciples, or any godly Prelates humility, or their humility impugn their
Mastership, Lordship, or superior authority and title, as it did not in this
example of Christ* nor in other humble both Princes and Prelates, as
Constantine, Theodosius, etc. Ambrose, Augustine, etc. that with the Apostles
followed this example. And to the same effect writes both Ierom, Augustine,
and diverse others: Superiority therefore, in the godly governors, civil or
ec-clesiastical, may ioin with the true humility well enough.

As for that place. Mat. 23.8. etc. where (they say) Christ forbids al
ambitious titles of Rabbi, Master, Father, etc. Shall we condemn al these titles
for ambitious? Rabbi, among us is not in use, but among the Jews, and a
reverend name, signifiing al one with Master, great, or excellent, or one
instead of many: and given also to Christ, and accepted of him: and since,
ascribed without offense, to many notable, christian and godly Jews, besides
the wicked and erroneous Rabbines. As for the titles of May. and father, as
they are usual among us: so they are not ambitious: and if any ambitiously
desire them, the ambition is in the man, not in the title. Neither does Chr.
simply forbid these titles, but the ambition to obtain them. For although in
precise words he say, (...): But be ye not called Rabbi: Nevertheless, the
meaning thereof is so plain, that not only the old vulgar translation does well
expound it, Vos aute nolite vocari Rabbi: but will not ye to be called Rabbi.
as who should say, Have ye no inordinate will or desire so to be called: But
that also even Beza himself says, (...) id est, ne amb^atis hunc honorem:
neque enim vetat Christus, etc. Be ye not called, that is to say do not ye
ambitiously desire (or sue for) this honor. Beza annot. in Mat. 1.
For Christ forbids not, that we should give to the Magist. and to Masters
their honor but he condemns ambition, as August, declares in the Sermon of
the Lords words, out of Mat. 11. as Erasinus has noted. Or else, by these
titles Master or Father in this place, he means them not in such senses, as
we commonly use to call them: but for such as are Doctors or Masters in
teaching and giving praeceptes, and so are the very words, (...) Be ye not
called Doctors: as who say Be ye not called Doctors of any doctrine of your
selves, and precepts of your devising, nor be ye called fathers, as authors and
originals of doctrine and religion, for that only appertains to God. Both
which expositions as the text yields them apparently, so the most and best of
all the interpreters old and new, agree upon them.

Neither does the reason that he adds, For you are all Br. ( meaning, both by
creation and regeneration, under God our cheef Master and father) take away the
lawful use of this title Mast. and Father among men: or the being, either of
Mast. in their subalternall degrees, either of Father in nature* in years or
in dignity, either ecclesiastical or political. Yea, our brethren theirselues
(if they have children) can be content they call them Father, and they call one
another Master, for all these words. Ephesians. 5 5. 1. Tim 5.21.


And therefore this is not so truly inferred: For these names agree properly
to God and Christ: except they mean this properly not very properly, neither in
this speech of God and Christ, ( for though S paul in a few places, speak thus
distinctly, God and Christ: yet might we more properly use S. Paul's plainer
speeches: and since Christ also is God and man, to have said, God the father
and Christ) Neither: do these titles Father and master, agree so properly to
God the Father and to Christ. For both Christ is called more properly of the
twain, the son than the father, And God the father of whom is all fatherhood
in heaven and earth, though he be properly called God the father, and our
heavenly father: The name of Father not proper to Ch^iste.
yet he is not properly called father, in the proper sense. For when we say
a thing is prop^r to one, we commonly exclude the propriety of the same from
all but him. But God that vouchsafes (as I have said already) to communicate
higher and more proper names of his than Master or Father, allows so
generally the use of these names, Master and Father, both to good and bad,
nor debarreth them from any his ministers: that I see not how* in any sense
that we do use them, they can be aptly said to agree properly to ^od and
Christ, which if it were true, then our use of these names Master or Father,
were not only improper, but plain blasphemy.

As for that that is added here, as a reason hereof: for, the greatest
dignity of an Eccl. person, B. temporalties.
is a ministry and not a Lordship: is a very improper illation on the
premises. Howbeit, it may be well granted without prejudice. And may as well
be said, of any civil, as of any Ecclesiastical person, that his greatest
dignity is a Ministry and not a Lordship. For in that he is Gods Minister,
it surmounteth the greatest worldly dignity he can attain unto, The dignity
of being Gods minister.
al were he King or Keyser never so great. And this also is in very deed, the
greatest dignity in every Eccl. person, ( above any degree of external
dignity, which for order sake he is promoted unto) that he is Gods Minister:
as S. Paul said, let a man so esteem us as the ministers of Christ, and
stewardes of the mysteries of God, 1. Co. 4.1. And in this respect, not the
greatest prince in the world, if he fear God, but (be ^he Priest never so
poor, or low of degree) he humbly acknowledges this poor Minister of Gods
word and Sacraments, in his Ministration, to be of far greater dignity,
than is all his Civil power and external Majesty. But the question is not
here so properly, which is the greatest dignity of an Ecclesiastical person:
whether a Ministry, or a Lordship? meaning by Ministry, the Ecclesiastical
function, by Lordship, either a Title or an estate of some external superior
government: as whether these twain may be competible. Which point though
Calvin on the foresaid sentence of our Savior Christ, Math. 20. resolve it,
for a Civil Princes or temporal Lords part, that in cases of urgent
necessity he that has the Lordshippe of a Village or a city, Brentus
resolution for Ministers that they may be magistrates.
may exercise the office of teaching: and the same he showed in his foresaid
Epistle to the king of Polonia: and on the other part, Brentius, on the
foresaid example likewise resolves this point, for him that is a Minister of
the Word, that he in diverse respects also, may withal hold, as the possession
of external goods, so an external Lordship or principality: Yet, since that
the most famous Zanchius, has even as it were the other day, besides his
former confession, on this though not directly on neither of these points, yet
added in his appendix. Cap. 25. Aphoris. 21. His observations also hereupon: I
will only here set down that which he says, whereby we may see how much
more any Lordships, that any of our bishops or arch-B. have, are allowable and
our Brethren should gladlier yield unto them.

There are two far different questions, ( says Zanchius) whether it be
lawful for bishops to be princes also, and for Princes to be bishops, retaying
their principalities: And whether they which already are both B. and princes,
besides their authority Ecclesiastical, may also have rightes or laws
politic over Citizens being subjects unto them: and thereupon whether the
subjects ought to obey them as princes, yea, or no. In my Aphorism, I spoke
nothing at all of the former question, because it was not necessary: but only
of the later. But who does not plainly see, that it is made manifest by the
testimonies of me brought forth, that, by what right and by what wrong they
were created princes, Diotrepher.
they must wholly obey them. For why should not they that are subjects to the
B. of Mentz, Coleine, and Triers, being princes of the Empire and withal Archb.
obey them in things that fight nothing at all with Christian godliness?
Certesse, it were the part of seditious men, not to obey them. But if they must
obey these: why must not they also that live under his gouernmente, obey the
bishop of Rome, in the same things, and for the same cause? For of all
these, the reason is the same or all one. Of the former question (as I said
bfore) I disputed nothing, nor yet now also, in this my brief confession, The
former question diputable on both parts.
have I determined to dispute. When as I know, that all are not of one opinion,
and many things may be spoken on both parts. That place Math. 20. ( Ye know
that the princes of the Gentiles or of the nations do rule over them, and the
great men exercise power over them but ye shall not so:) Some interpreting it
one way, and of the only apostles and Ministers of the word: others, another
way, of all the Disciples of Christ and Christians.

Thus says the renomned Zanchius of these matters. And if so worthy and great
learned man, and most earnest protestant, even where he forbeareth the
disputing of this former question, (which would God he had discussed (but as I
say) on the second question, he write thus, of so Great estates and
principalities, being joined with the ecclesiastical ministry, yea, by what
right or wrong soever they be joined, yet that they must be obeyed, and that
they play the parts of fedicious men that obey them not, in things not
repugnant unto Godliness: May not we, (that by many degrees comes nothing
near to such principalities, as Zanchias speaks of,) justify the superiority
and Lordship of bishops and Archb. among us, which they hold under our most
gracious sovereign, but as Degrees of dignity for order sake, and using the
same with ready care, painful diligence, and modest humility, and
acknowledging also their greatest dignity, to be their Ecclesiastical
Ministry, and not their external Lordshippe? But for the further conferming
thereof: our Brethren have yet one argument more, from the apostle S. John,
saying.

Saint John also in his third Epistle sharplye reprooueth Diot^ephes, The L.D
Page 29.
because he was (...), one that desired the primacy, in the Church. 1. John.
9.


This example also of reproouing this ambitious Diotrephes, Our brethrens
^xample noth^ng t^ the qu^stion.
is well alleged against the inordinate desire of primacy in the Church, such
as Diotrephes had: but is nothing to the question in hand, whether any Primacy
in any particular Churches among the Ministers of the word, may be lawfully
exercised: yea, or no: if it be not desired, but imposed on them or desired,
in a more lawful manner then this Diotrephes did. Our Brethren here translate
it not very precisely but to their advantage, one that desired the primacy of
the Church: where as the Apostles words are (...), one loving the primacy of
them. Expressly noting his ambition, that his love was all set, not on them, but
on the primacy of them. If our brethren then conclude that the primacy, if it
might not be loved, must needs be unlawful: may we not as well conclude thus,
Diotrephes examples makes more to prove that there was then a superiority,
then that there was none.
There is nothing more wicked then to love money. Eccl. 10. And therefore Money
must needs be unlawful? Or rather, does not this prove the more, that there
is a lawfulness of the thing, yea, and a lawful love of it also, because the
fault was neither in the thing it self, nor simply in the love, but in the
inordinate or immoderate love thereof. Whether this Diotrephes were a Minister
of the word of God, or no: that is not apparent. If he were not, it is the
further from the Question. But if he were, as it is not unlikely, then it
argues, that even in the apostles times there were Degrees of dignity in the
Ministry, whereby some were Superior to the residue of their fellow-brethren
in the Church, and some were chief also among them. For, Ignoti nulla cupido.
If there had bin no such Primacy, there had been etc. But to be in Love with
these dignities, and so to desire them ambitiously, or to usurp them
tyrannously, as saint John says, that this Diotrephes did (, who would not
receive, no, not S. John himself that was far in dignity his Superior, nor
would entertain the Brethren, and forbad other that would receive them, and
cast them out of the Church: this insolency, tyranny, and ambition, condemned
in him, or in any other like him, is nothing at all against this lawful
superiority or primacy yt is allowed among us, yea, rather, it confirms the
same. Howbeit, it is a good example ( we confess) for all Prelates of the
Church, to take heed of the like vices, in their Ecclesiastical government.

Now, when with all these testimonies and examples, our Brethren have made
this Learned Discourse, against this Superiority of Bishops over their Brethren
Pastors: least it might be thought, they had too much abased the bishops
authority: they make exception and say.

Howbeit, in this case we must take heed, that we spoil not the Ministers of
the Church of all their lawful authority. The learned Dis. Page 29.


This is a good caveat, if it had come in time. But although we commonly say,
When the steed is stolen shut the stable door: yet better late then never. For
if all these things that our brethren have avouched, were admitted: Bridges.
a great part of it, though not al their lawful authority should be spoiled
But, if we must take heed heeeunto, it is good yet taking heed in time. For,
these reasons have so forestalled, a number of our brethren, that it is more
than high time, it were taken heed unto.

And yet, if we would take good heed indeed, and not be carried away with
shows and glorious pretenses of Zeal and Reformation, so far, that we take
no heed to discern between the matter of Religion, and the form of
Discipline: between things commanded and commended: between Ius and factum, the
fact done, and the right of the thing to be done: Lawful authority.
between Rules and examples: between things expressed and things inferred:
between the use of things and the abuse of them: if we would take heed to the
ancient records of unsuspected Chronicles, to the grave testimonies of the
ancient holy fathers, to the continual (even from the apostles times) and
universal practice of all the whole and all the parts of the Church of Christ,
until our own age: and if now (after the general corruptions of the papists,)
we would take heed to the sound and mature, judgment and consent of the
best Learned godliest and most reverend, renounned Protestants: and most of
al, if we would take heed to the testimonies and examples cited out of Gods
most holy word, and not shuffle them over, and loosely apply them: if we would
(I say) take more diligent heed to all these things: we should neither spoil
the Ministers of the Church of all, or of any their lawful authority, nor
entangle our selves with these unnecessary troubles and divisions that we make
But our brethren though thus late, howbeit now at length, willing us in this
case, to take heed, that we spoil not the Ministers of the Church, of all
their lawful authority, as though they were content we should take no great
heed though they were spoiled of some of their lawful authority: do add this
reason.

For although these testimonies of scripture, directly condemn the authority of
one pastor above another: The L. Disc. Page 29 and 30.
yet neither do they set every pastor at liberty by himself, to do what they
list without controlme^t: nor yet do take away the lawful authority he has
over his flock: but that imperious and pompeous dominion, which is meet for
civil magistrates, and great potentates to exercise in worldly affayes:
otherwise (in respect of their lawful authority) they are called by the apostle
in his epistle to the Hebr. Guides, such as are appointed to ouersee the
flock, and unto them submission and obedience is commanded, in the same chap.
verse. 11.

Whether these testimonies of scripture, that have bin alleged, directly
condemn the authority one pastor above another, yea, or no: Bridges.
I refer it to the better taking heed of al these testimonies, and on that
which has on either side bin said thereon. Direct condemnation should have bin
uttered in some express words. But as yet, there has passed no such direct
sentence, nor direct implication of any condemnation thereof at al, but rathen
the clean contrary. But our brethren presupposing this condemnation, Our
brethren presup^ose of dir^ct condemnation.
and yet again doubting the objection of another no less inconvenience tha^
the spoil of all the lawful authority, thinking to prevent this also, do say.

Yet neither do they set every pastor at liberty by himself to do what they
list, without controlment.

How far off (must we imagine) would they be set, from such a liberty, every
pastor by himself to do what they list without controlme^t? when as no one
among the^ has any authority over another, but every one of the^ is equal, and
in all respects fellow and fellow like unto another, hayl fellow well met, Beza.
without any one among them any whit superior over them? are they not then the
nearer, What liberty this equality would breed
to do even what they list? at least, may they not do so, for any one among
them that can let them? who although he do control them, has he any
authority to control them? And, except they have the greater grace of God, so
to stay themselves, that (as it is said, 1. Tim. 1. There is no law given to
the righteous:) they need no law nor governor over them.

But if the apostles ( as we have heard Caluines confession) were not with out
one of their company to be a superior among them: may we not well think, that
other pastors have as much and far more need, to have one pastor also among
them to be their superior? Yea, and it were but as Beza says in his
confession, cap, 5. De eccl. upon this article, 29. That there ought to be
some order appointed in the college of the Pastors.

Although ( says he) the authority of the pastors among themselves be equal,
as it is one function, Notwithstanding it is necessary, that al companies
should be governed in some certain order. Therefore we see, that at Jerusalem
in the college of the Apostles, Peter went before the residue. Howbeit, it
comes not to pass hereupon, which some strive for, to wit, that the
apostleship of P^ter, is to be distinguished from the office of his colleagues,
as though he had bin a prince over the apostles, or as the head of the church.
For he went before his colleagues, only, for because of order, and that in the
common assembly, so often as need required. And that it was so, it is manifest
of that, that being before the Church reprehe^ded, by those that were of the
circumcision: he yields a reason of his legacy that he had traveled in: and is
at Antioch openly by Paul reproved Neither shall any, no, not the lightest
testimony in all that whole history be found, out of which this primacy may be
gathered. But on the contrary, the whole order of the history conuinceth, that
the vocation of the Apostles was even, and the function equal.

Here B^Za makes among the Apostles, and all Pastors, both an equality and an
inequality. In respect of the function and apostleship or pastorship, al are
even and equal. Peter's apostleship is not distinguished or different from the
apostleship of the residue, as though he were their prince or head: this Primacy
or any the lightest testimony thereof is not to be found. Yea, in this respect,
he suffers himself to be reproved, both of his equals and inferiors. But in
respect of order they are again unequal, and the same Peter so much superior,
that he goes before the^ al. And hereupon he sets down for all pastors a
general rule: that although in respect of the function or office of the
pastorship, al pastors beeuen and equal: yet in respect of their company, and
of some certain order, it is necessary that they should all of them be
governed, and so some one or few among them, must of very necessity be their
superiors. But let Bez^ proceed.

Therefore we acknowledge that it is necessary, that there should be some one
among the Breath. which should assemble together the college: which should show
the^ of the businesses, which should send his colleges to gather the voices, to
conclude, which should when need shall be, write and speak in the colleges name.
Such an one was he in the ancient church, Priests in the primitive church.
who^ Iustine calls (...), that is, the bishop: they call him now in some
places the deane of the company, which has a yearly office, to wit, where
the Chuches are distributed into companies: otherwhere, they call him a
Super-intendent, to avoid I suppose, the envy of the Episcopal tyranny. But
we are not ignorant, how many things were ordained by the auncientes,
concerning the seats of Bishops, of Metropolitanes, and of Patriarks, and that
of the best zeal, and that with the limits of each one determined, and having
a certain authority attributed to them. Yet nevertheless, Superintendent.
because that horrible tyranny which springing from these beginnings (as
Hierome rightly judged, and is manifest by all the whole history of those
times) did undo or leese the universal Church, and almost that alone hinders
at this day the renewing thereof: we rest our selves in the order and custom
of the Apostles, whom it appears sufficiently to have chosen by their common
consent, in the procuring of their businesses, Metropolitan.
them that they judged to be most fit, according as necessity did require,
and even in such sort, that the power of those men should be temporary, (or
continuing but for a time) and should be defined or bounded, and that the
Churches among themselves should yield reverence one to another of duty, but
not of a certain royal Empire, to wit, when as they sought this only thing,
that they might mutually one help an other, in the increasing of the glory of
God. So far is it off, that it should be lawefull for any man, to attempt
aught of his own will, or that any should say, that he ought to be judged of
no man although he drew all men hedlong into hell, as that Roman Antichrist
not only said, but also left it written, that a perpetual monument of the
Roman Apostacy might remain. And that these things were thus practiced of
the Apostles, may to every man be manifest out of the history of Matthias, and
the Deacons election, and also out of that, that Simon and John are sent of the
residue of the Apostles unto Samaria, and Barnabas, Judas, and Silas unto
Antioche: yea, and that out of all the Synod holden at Jerusalem, and out of
those things which in many places are written of Paul.

If there were no more granted, but this that here Beza yields unto: it were
enough sufficiently and directly, to condemn the assertion of our Brethren,
denying the authority of one Pastor above another. For here is some authority
plainly granted, yea, and thought necessary, of one above another; both
among the Apostles and among the Pastors. Howbeit, (by the way, and once
again) I marvel no less than before I did, Bezaeswro^g ascribing that to the
occasion of the Popes tyranny, that was the chiefest stop thereof.
at this so reverend and godly learned Father M. Beza, that he would not only
(as before) affirm, that from these beginninges of the order among the
ancients as well for Bishops as Metropolitanes and Patriarks, that horrible
tyranny, which he after speaks of, did spring: but that he appealeth also to
the whole history of those times. Whereas, he is not ignorant, ( as he says
he is not) or if he be, he and all the world may most easily know, by marking
better the hystories of those times, that those orders ( as he also confesses
them to have been ordained even of the best zeal, and that also they were
bounden with limits, and with a certain authority attributed unto the^, and
so were not universal, nor of any absolute and indefinite authority) were the
very stop and abbridging of that horrible tyranny. Which tyranny could
never take place, so long as those ancient orders continued inuiolate. And
therefore, this is a manifest injury to those orders, were they good, or were
they bad: to say, that that horrible tyranny sprange of those beginninges, by
which it was repressed and kept back: as may appear both in Cyprians times,
and by that council of Aphrike, wherein S. Augustine himself was present.

And as for that which Beza cites hereunto of Hierome on Titus: is the thing
that here I most do wonder at, that such an excellent man, so constantly
avouches this ancient Father, even to the clean contrary, both of that he
evidently means, and most plainly speaks. Does Jerome say or mean, that
that horrible tyranny sprang of the ancient Fathers constitutions of Bishops,
Metropolitanes, and Patriarchs? Says he not rather that the ancient Fathers
constitutions of Bishops ( of whom only he there speaks) were made to stop
scismes and divisions in the Church? And if they stopped factions and scismes
then: are they become almost the only stop or hindrance of renewing the Church
now? Surely, then some other thing does stop the right course of the^: which
stop being taken away, and they restored to their first institution, ordained
by the best zeal of the ancients, with their old certain authority
attributed unto them, and their bounds limited as they were before that stop
came: what lets, but that as they were ordained of the best zeal, As Beza
confesses the old orders were made of the best (that is, according to
knowledge) so they may be renewed with best effect.
so they may be renewed and continue with the best effect? And what is the
greatest stop of them, but even that horrible tyranny of that Roman Antichrist
here mentioned? That brake these bounds, and usurped a clean contrary
authority, that is to say, unbounded, absolute and universal. And thinking it
was lawful for him, to do what he list without controlement, vaunted ye he
must be judged of none, although he drew all to hell hedlong. Remove this
stop, and expel this horrible tyranny of that Roman Antichrist, or if there be
any other tyranny or abuses proved that remain, remove them: and then may
these ordinances of the ancients remain well enough. Neither will they become
any stop or hindraunce to the renewing of the Church, but be one of the
greatest furderances thereunto. Geneua.


Church of Geneua will not admit all those orders of the auncientes, for
Bishops, Metropolitanes and Patriarchs: The orders that we acknowledge are no
hinderance, but furtherance to the churches reformation.
we also admit not that Patriarch of the West, because he is become that
Antichrist, and deuourer of all his fellows by that horrible tyranny, but
allow only Bishops and Metropolitanes or Arch-bishoppes, as of more
ancient time, before that horrible tyranny did begin. As for the name of
Bishops, we find it expressly in the Scriptures, and therefore we avoid it
not, for any Episcopal tyranny, or rather tyranny not Episcopal, wherewith
the name has been abused. No more than we should avoid the names of Doctors,
Elders, Governors, Deacons, which our Brethren use: though, none of them all,
but have been abused; or of Kings, Princes, Lords, Masters, Fathers; or of
Gospel, Church, Sacraments, Praying, Preaching, Fasting, Excommunicating,
etc. All which names, and a number more, have been no less Hypocritically, at
least, shamefully abused: yea, the name of Jesus, of Christ, and of God: that
for the abuses of a name, otherwise good and lawefull, we should clean leave
all use thereof, Old offices renewed to have their old names.
and devise for Bishop, a new or an unusual name of Superattendent. Let new
laws and offices have new names a Gods name, but let old names being
renewed to their old state, stand as before they stood. And since both the
matter of the name Metropolitan, and also the name it self is found (as we
have already seen) to have been extant without any tyranny or abuse: yea,
the matter and name of Bishops from the very Apostles times: we need never
change the names, nor be ashamed of the^, nor fear by reason of the^, the
stoppage of renewing the Churches state. Nay, we have felt, if we would, as we
should, dutifully acknowledge it, that the renewing of the Church has been with
us (God be praised) mightily furthered by them. And although that worthy City
and Church of Geneua, have found that the Bishop there being a Papist, and an
open enemy of the Gospel, devoted to Antichrist, has bin a stop and
hindrance to the renewing of the Church among them, insomuch that God has there
renewed his Church without him (to God also be praises for it): yet what hinders
this, but that, if their B. had reformed himself to ye rule of the Gospel, he
might have kept his Bishopric welinough? And the Church of Geneua and all the
Ministers and Pastors therein, not only might, but ought to have acknowledged
him, to be their Bishop and Superior, even by Calnines own prescription to
other Churches, where the Bishops would receive the Gospel, as is already
declared. And so should Calvin himself and Beza also, (and I believe would,
if they would have been Pastors there) have acknowledged the Bishop of Geneua
their Superior.

But God disposing it otherwise, by the default and tyranny of the Bishop: We
envy not the state of Geneua nor they ought to prescribe unto us.
if they now acknowledge themselves, to rest in any order and custom of the
Apostles, and can so do; it is well done (and again God be praised for it)
we envy not them, nor disturb their rest in the same order and custom of
the Apostles whosoever: neither can they, nor do therein prescribe to us.

And yet, if it were the order and custom of the Apostles, that they rest in,
The Apostles orders.
we have plainly and at large seem, that the order and custom of the
Apostles, both among themselves and in other Churches, permitted Bishops and
the Superiority of the same: and that not so temporary, as, standing for an
only present assemble, which perhaps might not hold out an hour or two: nor,
for a day, a week, a month, or a year: but as standerds and continuers in
the same. Yea, Zuinglius, that says a Bishop and a Priest or Elder were once
all one: yet, in his book de Ratione and Officio Concionandi, Zuinglius de
officio concionandi.
or Ecclesiastes, The Preacher, he says: Again Act. 21. Luke writes thus:
The next day we that were with Paul came to Caesarea, and entering into the
house of Philip the Evangelist, which was one of the seven, we aboade with him.
This man had four daughters, Virgins prophesying. In which place, first we
have to note that thing, that this Philip of the Church of Caesarea the
Evangelist, was a Bishop or a Pastor. Neither is he of Luke called an Apostle,
Howbeit, he was one of the seven, which were ordained Deacons, as the same
party showed before cap. 6. That thing also withal ought to be noted, that
they laid down the name of the Apostles, The Apostles when they settled
themselves became Bishops.
so soon as being fixed to any one Church, they had the continual cure
thereof, that is to wit, when as either being hindered by age, or else afflicted
with diseases, with the troubles of peregrinations, and with dangers, they were
not able to suffice any longer. For then were they not any longer named
Apostles, but Bishops. But we may bring forth S. James (whom for his age, we
call James the less) an example, or rather a witness of this thing. For
Hierome, and withal all the ancient Fathers, do name this man Bishop of
Jerusalem, for no other cause, than that he had placed his seat, fixed in
that City. For when as before (as also the other Apostles, being given to
peregrinations) he had taught the faith each where all over the countries: he
was at the length by the Apostles themseles, ordained to be the party, that as
a certain diligent watchman, should take upon him the cure of the Church of
Jerusalem. The same thing we may say of John the Evangelist and Disciple of
Christ. S. John B. of Ephesus after Tim.
For when as he (having been cast forth to diverse dangers) had long time
administered the function Apostolical: at length being made the Bishop of the
Ephesians, he departed out of this life in that ^itie, in the 68. year after
the ascension of the Lord.

Now then, some of the Apostles being on this wise Bishops in such places,
and so, as our Brethren call them Pastors: shall we think, Primate.
that the other Pastors in those Cities did not still acknowledge a Superior
dignity unto them, and that for a longer time, ^ take it the Pastors be not
all of like auth. in Geneua.
than for the occasion of some present action or assembly? Yea, have all the
Pastors alike even, and as full authority equal in Geneua it self, as that
most excellent instrument of God Master Calvin, or the most worthy Master
Beza, yet living? Indeed I can not precisely tell; but I think not so, nor it
seems so, and in my simple opinion (be it spoken with due honor reserved to
every godly and Learned minister there, be they never so equal and all one, in
respect of the same function and Ministry) it were not meet it should so
be. Or if it be so, yet, were it not so good, no not for them: as if that (I
speak of Beza in Geneua) or some other excellent man were appointed, to have a
continuing and standing moderate office, over all the residue of his fellow
brethren there in the ministry, to ouer-see and govern them, assigned unto
him, and to exercise the same with painful care, ready diligence, and modest
humility, so long as he is able to discharge the same. And so indeed, it
should draw nearer to the order and custom of the Apostles. And yet, if their
order and custom had admitted such a temporary superior among them, as had
served only the tournes but of temporary occasions: yet, thereby also for that
time and occasion, one Pastor had had the authority over another: yea, over
all the other in the company. And how then do our Brethren here affirm, that
these testimonies of scripture directly condemn the authority of one Pastor
above another?

As for the testimonies that Beza alleges, even of the very first of them
concerning the election of Matthias, Act. 1. Calvin upon these words, ver.
16. The scripture must have been fulfilled, says: Because Peter makes the
speech; the Papists make him the head of the whole Church. As though none may
speak in the assembly of the godly, but forthwith he must be made a Pope. We
grant indeed, that as it is necessary some one in every assembly, must hold
the Primacie or be the chief: so the Apostles yielded this honor unto Peter.
But what is this to a Popedom? So that here, though that horrible tyranny of
the Pope be not inferred, which the Papists on every inkling greedily gather:
yet, Calvin not only confesses plainly, both in Peter a certain honor of
Primacie yielded unto him: but also confesses it necessary for every
assembly of the faithful to have such a Primate. The like he says of the
other example. Act. 6. Of the sending of Simon and John unto Samaria. How Peter
excelled any one, and was inferior to the whole.
Concerning that Luke ( says he) declares, that Peter was sent of the
residue: hereupon it may be gatherad, that he exercised not an Empire over his
Colleagues, but did so excel among them, that notwithstanding, he was under the
body and obeyed it. So that, his autho^itie excelled any and every one of his
fellows in particular: but in respect of the whole body and corporation of
them, he was not so much as fellow but inferior. As for the last testimony
cited here by Beza Act. 15. what Calvin has said already thereon, even for
the standing Bishoprike of James at Jerusalem, and how therein he excelled the
residue of the Apostles: we have at large heard before.

Now where our Brethren add, that yet they take not away the lawefull
authority he has over his flock: but that Imperious and Pompeous dominion,
which is meet for civil Magistrates, and great Potentates to exercise in
worldly affairs: even as Beza said, it was not of any kingly Empire or royal
commandment, and yet, was it a reverence given of duty: and as Calvin
said, it was not a Papacy nor Empire over his Colleagues, and yet, he did
excel among them, and he^d a Primacie over them, and the other yielded an
honor to him: so, these our Brethrens sayings may be well allowed. Our Arch.
and Bishops state far from Imperious and Pompeous dominion.
And I think, no Bishop or Archbishop in England does desire any other,
then such limited authority of their office, as may well agree with these
moderations, and rather stand with humility, modesty, and diligent oversight
of good order: than to aspire to any such royal Empire, or to exercise any
Imperious and Pompeous Dominion. And save for the name sake of Lord, that for
a little more reverence ( God wotte) they are honored with all: (if I should
not rather say, for some others, a great deal more envied for that they have
not;) our Bishops have been meetely well shriuen for such matters.

The learned disc. Page 29. and 30. Bridges.
This Pompeous and Imperious dominion being thus exemted: otherwise ( say our
Brethren) in respect of their lawefull authority, they are called by the
Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews, Guides, such as are appointed to
ouersee the flock with authority, and unto them submission and obedience is
commanded in the same chapter, ver. 17.

If this name (...), (used in that Chap. by S. Paul) which not only signifies
a guide, but a Captain going before all the residue with government and
principality, may enclude a lawful authority and commandment of submission
and obedience, without Imperious and Pompeous dominion: our Prelates (I hope)
will desire no more, nor so much neither, in all lawful respects, as may in this
word (...), be well contained. But if here in the word flock, whereof the B.
is guide, they include not the whole congregation, and so with all, the
inferior Ministers and Pastors in the same, as well as the other people: then
is not this alleged to the purpose, whether any one Pastor may have Superior
authority over another, and be (...) of the residue, and then it is but a
flock here to allege it. But, i^ it be understood of the whole particular
Church: then indeed it is alleged to the present purpose: but it proves, that
(the Imperious and Pompeous dominion excepted) one may have authority over
another. (...).


Other names are applied to them in the Scripture, but they be for the most
part more general, The learned disc. Page 30.
pertaining to all kind of teachers in the Church of God, both in the time of
the law and of the Gospel, as Seers, Prophets, watchmen, Angels, Laborers,
Builders, Stewards, and such like: all which with many other, serve to express
some part of their office, as their knowledge, their diligence, their
authority, their faithfulness, their discretion: also the necessity of the^,
the commodity that comes by them.

Concerning these Titles, as not in controversy, I pass them over. Bridges.


The argument of the 6. Book.
THE 6. Book is of the Pastors or Bishops office. For the limiting of him to
one only congregation. Whether the Pastor may have Curates or Substitutes under
him to supply his absence. Whether all ministers are to be utterly expelled, be
they never so Learned or diligent, if they have not the gift of preaching, and
cannot confute the gaine-sayers. Of ministers that are altogether unskillful,
and of their remoouing. Whether all be eternally condemned, that do not by
hearing ^f preaching become faithful. Of the lack^ of preaching, and of the
impossibility to furnish every congregation with preachers. Of t^^ hindrances
hereof, and the endeavors to help it, and of our Bre^^rens praeposterous means.
Of the state of the French Churches ^or abundance of Preachers. Of pluralities
and non residencies. Of reading a praescribed form of prayers, Psalms, and
chapters. Of the students discouragement for the ill bestowing of livings. Of
the want of lyuings able to maintain Learned Preachers. Of spoiling the
ministers maintenance, under pretense of better providing for the^, and of
these spoilers and mockers of God and man. Of their maintenance in the french
churches without such helps as we have. Of the Prophets se^te^ces applied to
our unskillful Pastors and reading ministers. Of the use of godly learned
homilies, and whether they may be effectual in the hearers. Of the Pastors
duty. What Ministers our Br^impugne and we defend. Of our Ministers exercises.
Of three remedies that our Brethren set down, to help the necessities for
lack of liuinges: of restoring the Sacrilege of Abbeys, of dividing
superfluities of some places, and of a 3. namelesse and general remedy. Of
the remedies to supply the want of Learned men: by eneoragers, by overseers in
the universities, by tourning out droanes and unprofitable heads of colleges,
by placing new governors, by erecting new Doctors in as many places as may be,
by compulsion, and by prayer. Of the corruption of our state. Of our Brethrens
dispensation, till all these things can be brought to pass. Of our Brethrens
hope to effect all these things, and in how short time, and of their
encouragement hereunto. Of their commending her Majesty's most honorable and
glorious reign. And of their promise to ieopard their lives for the success,
and of their mourning, threatening, and protestation, if all these things
(according to these their devised means) be not speedily (...) practice.

The learned Dis. Page 30. and 31.
BUT concerning the names of Pastors, as they are a special office in the
Church, this may suffice. But for as much as we have undertaken so to describe
a Pastor and his office, as all other offices of the Church, may be described
therewith: we must not stay only in the name, bu^ set forth also the whole
substance of the person. For which intent it shall be necessary for us to
consider a Pastor or Bishop two ways, in the proper function of his
ministry, and in government with his Elders: by which we shall understand
how this ministry ought to be reformed and restored among us. As touching his
office, something has been said before generally, under the description of
his several names. But now more particulerly we must examine what belongs to
his charge.

Bridges.
OUr Brethren presupposing they have in this their Learned Disc. sufficiently
proved, that the name^ of Pastor and Bishop must always be taken
synonymically, as diverse words signifying but one thing: and that there may be
no such dignity accessorie to the office, as whereby one Pastor or Bishop may
have authority over another: do now procee^ to their platform of
prescribing laws, Prescribing law.
concerning these Pastors and Bishops office, and the reformation that they
would propose unto them. Whereof I marvel not a little, at our Brethrens over
boldness in these things, (and craving pardon of my term, least I also be
thought ouerbold with them, and I would gladly use a mylder term for their
sakes, if the matter could permit it) that they dare take upon them to set
down laws and orders, Our Breath. prescription of laws with out auth.
of refourming and restoring these offices of the ministry ( imagining they
stand now deformed, yea, lost) they being as I take them to be (for they are
namelesse) but private persons: except they allege that they be ministers:
but, whether authorized or exauthorated, yea, or no, I know not. If they be,
exauthorate, then are they still as mere private, being deprived of the
public personage and action that they had, if they be not, then do they
contrary to the state of their own calling, exercising the office of that
ministry, which their selves profess to be deformed and lost. And how
soever the title of their Learned Discourse pretendes in the froont, only a
brief and plain declaration, concerning the desires of all those faithful
Ministers, which do seek for the Discipline and reformation of the Church of
England: where is pretended nothing but a declaring of the desires that they
seek: yet, in the seeking, they desire it in such a peremptory fashion, that
we find their desires to be a plain charge and prescription, which is both
above any authority that they have so to do: and, were the matters that they
would have reformed and restored better than they be, yet, this manner that
they use is nught, and a dangerous president. If they pretend the example of
the Prophets and Apostles: did they cast forth their writings in this manner?
And yet should our Brethren offer a manifest injury, to those holy
extraordinary examples. Except they could either prove themselves to be such
Prophets and Apostles, as they were: or to urge no other things, than they
commanded to be perpetually kept, and so being deformed or lost, to be
reformed or restored. Otherwise, me thinks this dealing (considering their
persons, and the matters and their manner of them) is plus satis pro imperio,
even while they speak against imperious dealing, and may better be called a
prescript commandment of their discipline and reformation, then a Learned
discourse upon it. But to come to these rules.

The Pastor must be limited to one only congregation of such competent number,
as he (if he be but one) or if they be two, The learned disc. Page 31.32. and
33.
may be sufficient to the instruction of all and every member of the same
Church. And first he may no more lawefully have charge of two or 3. Churches,
then he can be possibly in diverse places. No more then a shepherd of who^ he
takes his name, may have the leading of sundry flocks in diverse places;
neither may he be absent from his charge, with better reason then a shephearde
from his flock. One Pastor one congregation.
As for substitutes or hyrelinges, will not be allowed in this case: for
Pastors are substitutes of God, and have an office of credit committed unto
them, therefore by no good reason may they make any substitutes in their place,
or commit their charge unto another. The law of man grounded upon good reason,
allows not substitutes of substituts: nor committing over of an office of
credit in temporal matters. How shall God almighty then take it in good part,
when the flock of Christ which he has purchased with his own blood, shall be so
greatly neglected, to the endangering of their everlasting salvation? 1. P^^. 5.
Therefore the ordinance of God is, that the Pastor should attend unto his
peculier flock. That Elders should be ordained in every City Town or other
places. Tit. 1.5.
Titus. 1.5. and Acts 14.23. Act. 14.23.
The Apostles ordained Elders in every church, of Derbe, Lystra, Iconium, and
Tichia, and all the congregations about.

Bridges.
Our Brethren here setting down their principles, for the Bishops and the
Pastors office, which they make all one; (underhand thereby to overthrow the
most of all the livings and jurisdictions of the Bishops) first set down this
rule, Our Breath rule and the drift thereof.
The Pastor must be limited to one only congregation. I would feign know
(especally, understanding the name of Pastors, as all one with Bishops) where
this rule is made such a necessary and perpetual principle, in all the
scripture? We find the manifest contrary, both in Timothy and in Titus, who
were Bishops, as we have proved: The contrary examples in Tim and Titus whom
they confess to b^ pastors
and so, by Caluines and others plain confessions, and by our Brethrens own
consequence, they were Pastors. But more congregations than one only were
committed to their charges: how therefore is this a true principle, that a
Pastor must be limited to one only congregation? If our Brethren, to avoid
the force of this argument, think to escape, in saying, that here they mean
not such Proestotes, and higher Pastors which had superior authority over
other Pastors, as Timothy and Titus had: do they not here then confess
withal the principal point in question, and that which is with might and maine
stood most upon, that no pastor has superior authority over an other, but all
are equal? Grant this, that they being Pastors, had a superior authority and
charge, over mo congregations at once then one only: and then this rule of our
Brethren, here (being understood of Pastors having less charge and
authority, being not Bishops, Proestotes or other Prelates of higher calling)
may more easily be granted, to have but one only congregation limited to them.

If our Brethren say, that charge over more congregations was not committed to
Timothy and Titus, in respect of their pastorship: although that shift be
already sufficiently prevented: yet, what helps it here to uphold this rule?
Since Titus was Bishop of all Creta, where many congregations were, that had
several Pastors. Absence of Pastors.
And Bishop ( they say) and pastor are all one: or, were they not all one, were
he as a B. or as they say an Evangelist or what they will; yet still withal he
was a pastor ( as Calvin confesses) of all those several congregations. And
this being granted, at least proved, for these pastors that have any other
superior authority annexed to their pastorship, that they be not subject to
this rule: As our Brethren would have 2. Pastors over one greater congregation,
so may one Pastor be over two lesser.
then follows it not of any necessity on this broken rule, that al other
pastors are simply so tied thereto, that they must always be limited to one
only congregation. For, as it is here of our Breath. said, that two may be
admitted to one congregation, according to the competency of the number: so, if
the number be less, why may not 2. small congregatio^s, being nearer together,
be limited likewise to one pastor, in want of such sufficient and learned
pastors, as our Brethren afterward cry upon, and complain of the rarenes of
them? Or* if 2. Pastors be limited to one, or to more congregations, as occasion
and necessity may require: why may they not be one over and under another,
according to the more or less worthiness of the pastors? So that between them
both, or more, or fewer, sufficient instruction and oversight of al and every
number of the same Church be provided for. Our Breath. uniting of more
congregations into one, is all one in effect ^ith having mo several, if that
mo several be not better.
And if our Brethren may have authority ( without authority) to unite 2. or 3.
lesser and nearer congregations into one, which they also appoint to be done,
for the greater confluence of the people, and the better maintenance of the
Pastors: comes it not in effect all to one reckoning? and has not one still more
congregations than one? although all are made but one congregation, being thus
united: but that now his co^gregations are more distant a sunder, which he had
rather (if he could conveniently, both ^or his peoples profit, and his own
ease) were nearer combinded or united. Albeit, as we see some conueniences,
that might make such unions in the smaller congregations to be wished; so, as
many and as great inconveniences on the other side, both in the country
Villages, that might more often and with more danger be left all desolate; and
even in the nearer and more frequent congregations in Towns and Cities) make
these unions again to be so feared, especially in contagious times, that it
were better one learned pastor had 2. or 3. congregations, with his ministers
to ouer-see them under him severally, then two or three congregations to be
united into one; and have one, or two, or three pastors jointly and equally, (
but in one place and assembly) for to guide them.

But to leave the scanning of these things, to those that have better
experience and more skill, than I profess, or our Brethren seem to have, for
all their Learned discourse hereon, and to those that have more authority than
we both: from this let us comr to an other principle, that our Brethren as a
correlatiue set down hereupon, who to confirm that they have said, do further
say.

And first, he may no more lawfully have charge of 2. or 3. Churches then he
can possibly be in diverse places. Our Breath. second rule. The Pastors being in
diverse places.


And is not this possible for him well enough, to be in diverse places?
Therefore, for any thing here alleged to the contrary, he might have 2. or 3.
Churches, possibly and lawefully well enough. If they say, it is not
possible, to be in diverse places always, and together at once, that is
another matter. And sooth indeed it is plain impossible.

A Pastors ab^ence on diue^se occasions being supplied by another.
But is this required, with such absolute necessity, in every Pastor? may not
sickness, prisonment, banishment, suit of law, attendance on the Princes
commandment, repair to provincial, national, or oecuimenicall Synodes, and
a number of such like occasions, make a Pastor be in other places, other
whiles, than where he is Pastor? And yet, be Pastor there still in virtue of
his office, though not in action of his person, while he is thus absent. If our
Brethren say, this absence is not ordinary, but rather his spirit and heart
is present with them, for all the inuoluntarie detention of his body: what
does that help the matter? None permitted to be absent but on special
consideration and provision.
Since we plainly see hereby, that he may on so many-folde occasions
(remaining notwithstanding a true and faithful Pastor) be both possibly and
lawefully in other places? Neither are any permitted to be at any time absent
ordinarile, except upon lawefull and expedient considerations, and necessary
provisions of supply. If our Brethren reply, that even because there may fall
out such extraordinary occasions of the Pastors absence, they would therefore
rather of the twain, that there should be more Pastors in one place, than to
have but one Pastor in more places, because the one in such cases may supply
the others absence: although we must not so much always attend what we
would have, as what we may have, and what every congregation may sustain:
yet, is not this again in effect all one, as when the Pastor finds at his
charges, and is so bound by law to do, (if upon any consideration he
himself be licensed to be absent) his lawefull and sufficient Substitute, to
the instruction of all and every member of the same Church, in the time of
his absence? And is not this the nearer way, to bring two Pastors also to one
congregation, yea, even in those that are the lesser congregations?

And yet, were there two or more Pastor in every congregation: if each Pastors
continual presence, Our B^eth. urging their rule so strictly, fall from one
impossibility to another.
must be still, with all and every member of the same Church: what one Pastor
can there be, that shall always be still present with every one, but be
absent from some, while he is present with other? Yea if as S. Paul calls
diverse families, diverse churches, Romans 16.5.1. Cor. 16.19. Colloss. 4.15. and
Philem. ver. 21. If he go but as S. Paul said he did at Ephesus Act. 20.
ver. 20. from one house to another: how might not this be spoken against any
that should do ye like: yt he may no more lawfully have charge of two or three
Churches, that is, Substitutes
two or three families, than he can be possible in diverse places? But if he
may be possibly well enough in diverse places, though not at once but at
diverse times: then as the diverse places be nearer or easier to be looked
unto: so the charge of two or three Churches, as to the state (having
authority to provide therefore) shall be thought convenient, may lawfully
enough be of him sustained. But to enforce this unlawfulness and
impossibility further, they add this similitude.

No more than a shepherd of whom he takes his name, Our bretherens similitude
of a shepherd. Genesis ^0.
may have the leading of sundry flocks in diverse places: neither may he be
absent from his charge, with better reason that a shepherd from his flock.

Although this similitude be too preciselie here by our brethren urged in this
pount: yet to join with them therein, why may not also the very shepherds
of the brute beasts, have the leading of sundry flocks in diverse places? Had
not Jacob, so, both of Labans flocks of sheep, and of his own? which flocks
went not always together. And how much easier may he be a ringleader or chief
maister-shepheard, having other inferior shepherds under him, to lead the
diverse flocks, whereof he has taken charge upon him, and though al have
charge also and be shepherds of the same function that he is: yet, as he may
have a greter skill, so he may have a greater dignity, both over diverse flocks
of sheep, and over the diverse and particular shepherds of the^. Yea, and for
the absence of the shepherd, was not David appointed by his father to keep
his sheep? A shepherds absence supplied.
And yet he was both called from the^ to be anointed of Samuel: and he
remained shepherd still, even after he was made Saul's Esquire: as it is said,
1. Sam. 17.
1. Sam. 17.15. David went and returned from Saul, that he might feed his
Fathers flock in Bethlehem. And when he was there, his father sent him with
victuals, and gifts to his Brethren, and to their Captain in the army. And
says the text. verse 20. So David rose up early in the morning, and left the
sheep with a keeper. Montanus translates it, Et reliquit pecus super
custodientem. Says Vatablus, Iuxta custodem. 1. commendauit gregem custodi. As
is the vulgar, he commended the sheep to a keeper. The 72. (...). Tremelius
says, deserto grege penes custodem. So that, David here being his Fathers
shephearde, did appoint a substitute shepherd in his absence. And though his
Brethren vpbrayded him (as our Brethren here do us) and said, verse, 28. Why
came thou down hither? David defends his abse^ce against his brethre^s
accusations.
With whom have thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? etc. Yet David
justly defendes himself, and said: What have I now done? Is there not a
cause? So that having a cause, he iustifies his absence, and atchiued thereby a
work no less necessary, and far more beneficial to Gods Church, while his
substitute attended in his sheep.

But (say our Brethren) As for substitutes or hyrelinges, will not be allowed
in this case: for Pastors are substitutes of God, and have an office of credit
committed unto the^. Therefore by no good reason may they make any substitutes
in their place, or commit their charge unto another.

This reason not only touches Eccl. Pastors, but civil Princes, that are
called Substitutes of God, Princes called Pastors.
and Pastors also of their people, not only of Homer, but in the scripture. 3.
Reg. 22. Micheas prophesying of Achabs death though a wicked king: says, I
saw all Israel scattered on the mountains as sheep that had no Pastor. And
Esa. 44.28. the Lord himself says to Cyrus, Thou art my Pastor and he shall
perform all my desire. And the Prophet in the Psalm. 78. ver. 70. etc. He
chose David also his servant and took him from the sheep foldes, even from
behind the ewes with young brought he him to feed his people in Jacob, and
his inheritance in Israel. So he fed them according to the simplicity of
his heart, and guided them by the discretion of his hands.

How our brethrens rules reach unto and overthrow Princes estates.
Princes then being Pastors, our Brethren say; Pastors are Substitutes of God,
and have an office of credit committed unto them. Shall we therefore thus
conclude here, with our Brethrens consequence? Therefore, by no good reason may
they make any substitutes in their place, or commit their charge unto
another? Might not David substitute his deputies both in the teritories he
conquered from other Princes out of the bounds of Israel, and make Substitutes
and Liefetenants of his own Cities and Castles? Princes being political
Pastors may have substitutes.
Might not Iosaphat make Zebadiah a ruler of the house of Judah for all the
kings affairs? 2. Chron. 19. v. 11. might not Pharao make Joseph his
substitute over all Egypt? might not Ahasuerus make Mardocheus his
Substitute? And Darius, Daniel? And Artaxerxes, Nehemias? does the holy Ghost
improve this order of substitutio^ under the Emperor. Luke 3. v. 1. Now in the
fifth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being Governor of
Judea, and Herod tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip, tetrarch of
Iturea, and of the country of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the Tetrarch of
Abilene? Did Christ deny Pilates authority to be lawful, because he was the
debitie or substitute of Tiberius? or S. Paul not acknowledge Faelix and
Festus substitutes of Nero, and governors of those parties in his absence? And
is not this also the doctrine of S. Peter, 1. Pet. 2. ver. 13. and 14. Submit
your selves unto all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
unto the king, as unto the superior: or unto Governors as unto them tha^ are
sent of him?

And are not al these again both the kings substitutes, and the kings
themselves the substitutes of God, as Iosaphat said unto his Judges, that he
set through out the land in every City, 2. Chron. 19.6. Take heed what ye
do, for ye execute not the judgments of man, but of the Lord? And S. Paul
speaking of the Magistrate, Romans 13. ver. 1.4. and 5. says: There is no power
but of God, etc. He is the minister of God, etc. they are Gods ministers etc.
and how his ministers, but as substitutes? may they therefore make no
substituts under them, nor commit their charge unto another? This doctrine of
our Breath. is very dangerous, and touches not only Eccl. Pastors, and Bish.
and all appropriations to the Prince, or to who^ soever: but also touches so
near, or rather cutteth clean off, all Princes holding of diverse realms,
dominions, and signiories, by what right of conquest, gift, inheritance, or any
other never so good title, they enjoy the same. Yea, and all nobles, or any
other private persons, offices and livings; that as they are all of them, what
soever they have, and whosoever they be, but substitutes of God, and have
offices of credit committed unto them: So if they have any more offices or
livings than one, and in one place: they must clean forsake them and give the^
all up. And why? forsooth, because they are but substitutes of God, and can not
make any substitute in their place. Now although this doctrine be so dangerous
and absurd; notwithstanding, our Brethren to confirm it do proceed.

The law of man grounded upon good reason, The learned disc. Page 32.
allows not substitutes of substitutes, nor committing over of an office of
credit in te^porall matters. How shall God almighty then take it in good
part, when the flock of Christ, which he has purchased with his own blood,
shall be so greatly neglected, to the endangering of their everlasting salvation.

Since I profess not the study of the law of man, Bridges.
I refer the discussing of the same, to the learned professors of it. But it
being grounded ( as our Breath. say) upon good reason, and but the law of man,
The law both of god and man allows sufficient substitutes.
and speaking but of the substitutes of man, it seems no good reason, it
should overrule those, that by the law of God, are the substitutes of God, of
who^ our Breath before spoke. And although I gladly yield unto this rule of the
law of man, being grounded upon good reason: yet in my simple reason, it should
seem not to be so absolute a law, and so general a rule, but that it may,
both by the law of man it self, grounded upon as good reason as it, and by the
law of God, whereunto all the grounds of good reason give place, admit many
exceptions that control it. For, although in the Court of Delegates it might
have some place, How substitutes may substitute substitutes.
and yet in some cases delegates ( ye are but substitutes of the Prince) do
substitute delegates and other substitutes as commissioners under them, to
search out matters and circumstances, and to call before them and examine such
persons and factes, as they their selves being absent, can not inquire upon.
But what touches this the Prince himself that makes these delegates, and yet
himself is but a delegate under God? This rule of the law of man, Nemo potest
glady putestate^ sibi datam, vel cuiuslibet alterius coertionis, ad aliu^
transfer: C. L. c. de eius cu^mand^est Iu^isd.
No man can pass over to another the power of the sword, that is, the
authority of putting to death, or of any other punishment: was an ancient rule
among the Romans, tendering the liberty and life of man: and yet al kings, and
Princes, to who^ God has given the power of the sword, though their selves be
but the substituts of God, they make other their substitutes in this power: and
thereby the judges even as substitutes of substitutes, do punish offenders, and
(if Justice so require) even by death. Yea, and their substitutes also under
them, do execute the sentence of those substitutes. And has not also the law
of man such an express exception: C. de in. a iudice^st extra dele. super
quorum.
Vicarius Vicarium constituere non potest, ficut nec delegatus delegatum, nisi
datus esset a principe? He that is a Vicar or a Deputy of another, cannot
appoint another Vicar or Deputy, as neither can a Delegate appoint another
Delegate, except he be given of the Prince. Pa. in. d. C. Bariold.
So that, by the Prince he may. And therefore, it is also said in the Law of
man, quando committitur, aliquid alicui subdelegato, cum authoritate
subdelegandi, tune potest subdelegare, alias non. When an other thing is
committed to any under Deligate or substitute, with an authority of
substituting an other under him: the^ may he substitute such a substitute, or
else not.

And this again, is a common rule of the law of man, and grounded also upon
good reason: Potest quis per aliu^, quod potest facere per seipsum. That which
a man can do by himself, the same he can do by an other in his name. True it
is, in some cases, and good reason to, he that is a substitute, without the
will of him that did substitute him, B.l. 1. vsus de procucat. c. per qui^
pe^sonis agere poss.
especially where the Substituter or giver of an office of credit, does so
restrain the substitute or receauer of the office, that he only must do it by
himself there this our brethre^s rule does hold. Yea, so says the Canon Law
of the Pope: Quando Tapa delegat causam: Dicendo, praecipimus vel mandamus per
vos, etc. Tunc non potest subdelegare. C.s. pro debilitate eod. tit. C. quantum
is aui. de offileg.
Similiter quando alicui magnum ministerium committitur, in quo industria
personae eligitur, vel vt negotium personaliter exequatur, nis^ de consensu
partium. And yet, in offices of credit committed to any, in temporal
matters, his own personal execution is in certain cases forborne also, and
(except in rigor of law,) is in good reason, dispensed with: as in sickness,
imprisonment, or the Princes service, or such necessary and lawefull detentions
of his person, a lawull substitute may by good law and reason, or by the
Lords accepting, and by the consentes of the parties, be allowed and serve as
well and better now and then the turn, than if the principal substitute
were himself present. And withal if his absence, ( by reason of his presence
in some other place) may do more good: then the law helps him with another
gentle rule, of that famous Lawyer Vlpian: Absentiam eius qui Reip. causa
abest, neque ei, neque alij damnosa esse debet. The absence of him that is
absent for the cause of the commonweal, ought neither to be prejudicial to
himself, nor to another.

Now, if these favorable mitigations will not serve (as I being no lawyer will
not gladly contend for them): Let us then come to the inference of our
Brethrens argument, that they gather upon this law of man.

How shall God then take it in good part ( say our Brethren) when the flock of
Christ* which he has purchased with his own blood, shall be so greatly
neglected, to the endangering of their everlasting salvation.

We grant it were a dreadful thing, neither would God take it in good part,
that any such negligent substitutes should be allowed. But if this allowance of
sufficient substitutes in the foresaid cases, be not done to the neglecting of
the flock of Christ, but to the avoiding thereof and of this danger: then (we
hope) God takes it not in ill part. So that, this must first be better proved,
that all the ordeyning of substitutes, specially of such sufficient subisttutes,
as are in all respects, as foroth Pastors, as the other pastors are that
substitute them, is to neglect the flock: or else, both for the antecedent and
for the consequent, this is (God wot) a very slender argument. Their resolution
hereon, and their proofs annexed are these.

Therefore the ordinance of God is, that the Pastor should attend unto his
peculier flock. The learned disc. Page 32.33.
That Elders should be ordained in every city Town or other places. Titus.
1.5. and Acts 14.23. The Apostles ordained Elders in every church, of Derbe,
Lystra, Iconium, and Tichia, and all the congregations about.

Although this citing of the text, Act. 14.23. be a very gross error, yet
passing that over: this conclusion is more tolerable then the premises,
Bridges.
and I yield thereto. But that this attendance should be with such a personal
continuance, that it may admit no supply of substitute: is not as yet proved
nor (I think) will be, by these places, but rather the clean contrary. For
although in either of them, mention is made of ordeininge Priests or pastoral
elders in every church, Town or City: yet whether there were more than one in
every place, or that one might substitute another in his absence, there is made
no express mention: only, if we may measure the one place by the other, (as I
see not why we may not, and our brethren ioin them both alike) then in none of
those churches the Pastor was so tied tied to his continual aboade, but that
on good occasion he might be absent, having another sufficient substitute to
supply the place. For, as Calvin says, upon the Preface of the epistle to
Titus, That because (no doubt) he was of some contemned, as though he had
been, but as Any one of the common sort of pastors: and it may be also, that
complaints flewe about on him, took upon him more than was meet, that he
received not pastors except allowed his judgment etc. Paul puts upon him
his own person as well in creating Ministers, as in the whole administratition
of the Church. And in the Epistle to Titus 1.5. the place here quoted: For
Paul testifies that he assigned his own turns unto him, wherefore it is
meet that he should be of all ackowledged, as the Vicar ( which is all oue
with substitute) of the Apostle, and reverently received. so that besides the
proof of his superiority, being chief pastor there, were he Evangelist, ( as
Calvin says) or whatsoever he were besides: as he called also Paul him
self, not only the pastor of that Isle, but the Apostle of the Gentiles: so
it appears also hereby, that substitutes were allowable even of the
Apostles, for all they were them selves Gods immediate substitutes, in which
respect soever we consider them, either as pastors, Euaungelistes or Apostles.
And Calvin draws this to a general rule, saying: Moreover it is a notable
point, to note the modesty of Paul, which gladly does suffer that to be made
up of another, which he himself begun. And that when as in-dede, Titus was
far inferior unto him, he refuses not to have him, (...), the corrector,
that should lay the last hand to his work. Thus ought the godly Doctors to
be affected, that every man draw not all ambitiouslye to himself, but
earnestly help the one the other: and that with how much greater success
each one shall have labored, the residue should rather rejoice with him then
envy him. Neither only does Calvin thus apply to all pastors, this example
of Paul's substitution of Titus: but likewise Bullinger, upon saint Paul's
words, in the end of his Epistle to Titus, Chapter 3. verse. 12. When I shall
send Arteams or Tichicus unto thee, do thy diligence to come unto me to
Nicopolis, for I have dtermined to winter there. He calls ( says Bullinger)
Titus unto him to Epirus. Bullinger in Tit.
Howbeit there is also another Nicopolis in Thracia, another in Cilitia and
pontus. But he would not have him go from Creta, before that he had
substituted either Tichicus or Artemas, to wit, that the people of Creta, which
of late believed, should not be destitute of the care of a faithful
Bishop. For it is a great wickedness to spoil the Churches of their
pastors, except ye shall substitute other more faithful. Not meaning that
Titus was less faithful than Tichicus or Artemas, but that they being his
substitutes, did faithfully supply Titus absence. Thus do we see in this one
example, not only the absence of the Bishop or Pastor upon convenient occasion
to be allowed of the apostle: but also the allowance of a faithful substitute,
in the absence of the Bishop and pastor.

Secondly, the office of pastors is, not only to teach the same truth in
their several Flocks, The L. Disc. Page 33. and 30.
but also to apply it to the time and persons, of whom they have charge, with
exhortation and reprehension: with consolation of the afflicted, and threatening
of the obstinate. etc.

This in few words is set forth by saint Paul speaking of the diverse
gifts of God in his Church, he says: whether it be he that teaches in
his doctrine, To. 12.7.8.
or he that exhorts, in his exhortation. The Doctor therefore teaches
without exhortation. The pastor teaches and exhorts withal. More at large,
he sets forth the same office in his exhortation unto the pastors of
Ephesus, Acts. 20.
willing them to follow his example, who supplied that office, until they were
able to succeed in his place. Also very breefely, and yet fully, he
describes the same unto Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.16.17.
showing first that all his foundation must be out of the scriptures, which
were sufficient for all parts of his charge, and then most earnestly
commands him to practice the same withal diligence, his words are these.
Al scripture is inspired of God, 2. Tim. 3.16.
and prositable for Doctrine, for exhortation, for reformation, and for
enstruction, which is in righteousness, that the man of GOD may be prepared to
al good works: therefore I charge thee before God, and before the Lord Jesus
Christ, which shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and in his
kingdom, preach the word, be instant in season and out of season, improoue,
rebuke, exhort withal long suffering and doctrine.

Nothing of all this is in controversy, understanding teaching according to
the measure of every pastors gift: save this sentence, Bridges.
that the Doctor teaches without exhortation: which we have before at large
confuted.

The first part therefore, and the cheifest of a pastors office or duetye is to
feed with wholesome Doctrine the flock that is committed to his charge and
therefore saint Paul describing what manner of men are meet for that charge
unto Timothy requires that a Bishop or Pastor be apt or able able to
teach: The learned disc. Page 34.35.
For if a man have never so much knowledge, and be not apt or able to teach,
he ought by no means to be admitted unto this vocation. And unto Titus
writing, Chapter 1. the first verse 9. he requires that he be such a one,
as holds fast the faithful word according to doctrine, that he also may
be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and improoue them that say
against it. Weereupon it follows necessarily, that whosoever is him felfe
ignorant in the knowledge of Gods word, and therefore unable either to
exhort with wholesome doctrine, or to confute them that gainsay it, is
altogether unmeet for the office of a pastor or Bishop.

Albeit, we might here inquyre, how it was said before, First, he may no more
lawfully have charge of 2. or three Churches, etc. and then: Bridges
Secondly, the office of pastors is not only to teach, etc. And now to
conclude upon this second saying: The first part therefore, and the chiefest of
a pastors office, is to feed with wholesome doctrine: Notwithstanding not to
stand on such reckonings (though we with they had reckoned more orderly, for
our Brethrens sake, professing over the head of every page* A Learned Disc. as
also for the vnlearneds better perceauing their lear. discourse thereon) to
come to the material point here required: Pastors ability.
that the Bishop or the Pastor should be apt and able to teach, to exhort, and
to confute, Diversity in the gifts of God, and measure of the^.
etc. This we yield unto, considering withal the diversities of men's gifts,
even in the Ministry, how some have ten talents committed unto them, some
five, some two, and some but one: so that all emploie them after their ability
to the Lords advantage, we hope the Lord will not condemn, but commend the
poor travail of that servant, so that he have not hid his one talent in the
napkin. And admitting also that which Saint Paul says 1. Cor. 12. ver. 7.
etc. so often by our brethren otherwise remembered, The manifestation of the
spirit is given to every one to profit, to this man is given by the spirit the
word of wisedo^me, to another is given the word of knowledge according to the
same spirit, to another faith in the same spirit, to another the gift of
healing in the same spirit, to another faculties of powers, to another
prophesies, to another discerning of spirits, to another the kinds of tongues,
to another the interpretation of tongues: and all these things works even the
self same spirit, distributing to every man severally even as he will. and
ver. 28. etc. And God has ordained some in the Church, as first Apostles,
secondly Prophets, thirdly teachers, then them that do miracles, after that
the gifts of healing, helpers, governors, diversities of tongues. Are all
Apostles, are all Prophets? are all teachers? are all workers of miracles? have
all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?
Neither also forgetting that place, Rom, 12. that our brethren themselves
(entering into this matter on the other side of the leaf, put us in mind of)
Seeing then we have gifts that are diverse, according to the grace that is
given unto us, whether we have prophecy, let us prophecy according to the
proportion of faith: or an office, on the office: or he that teaches in
teaching: or he that exhorts, in exhortation: he that distributeth, with
simplicity: he that rules, with diligence: he that shows mercy, with
cheerfulness. All which places duly considered and conferred, that though
these offices be not so distinguished, but that one may have mo of them, as we
have already proved against our brethrens too precise seuering of them before,
which now in the Pastor they would join together, for many of them, and that
of necessity: yet hereby we may plainly see, there is no such necessity of
the conjunction of these several gifts in all Pastors, but although some have
them all, some are not so furnished, but that notwithstanding they want some of
these gifts, by our brethren here so necessarily required: All Ministers are
not utterly to be rejected that want some gifts though requisite.
yet are they not to be clean excluded out of the Ministry. And how do our
brethren here then say? If a man have never so much knowledge, and be not apt
or able to teach ( meaning by teaching, not only such teaching as they
ascribe only to Doctors, but also public preaching, which contains both
teaching and exhortation, as they said eue^ in their last Section, the Pastor
teaches and exhorts with all, Ministers not preachers.
except he can teach thus) he ought by no means to be admitted into this
vocation. And yet, if he could do this, and were not able to confute them that
gainsay the wholesome doctrine, he is altogether unmeet for the office of a
pastor or Bishop. This were very hard to be urged, with such a peremptory
necessity. Which if it were: perchance many of these our Learned brethen
Discoursers theirselues might fail, especially in this last point, being not
able what soever they persuade themselves) to defend these their own desires,
and to confute us iheir Brethren, (whom they take in hand to confute: not of
any unwholesome Doctrine, which they confess that we profess so well as they,
and as for those whom they should rather confute indeed, as the papists,
the Anabaptists, the Arians, the libertines, the brethren of Love, and such
like mainteining not wholesome doctrine, it would not only appose them, but
many other (yea, otherwise good preachers) to confute them in such order, as
the Apostle there requires. In the famous Nicene Counsel were assembled many
notable learned Bishops and Elders, A simple man confuting a Philosopher.
and yet when it came to disputation: one simple ancient father, who was no
preacher neither, did more good in confuting a sophistical and wrangling
Philosopher, even by the plain recital of the only Creed: than all the the
eloquent and Learned bishops were able to do. For, as the Arian philosopher
said: while they striued with words he had words enough for them all. But when
virtue came, words, gave place to virtue. If it be said, this fact was not of
a Pastor, but of a lay Confessor, as Socrates mentions Hist. Tripart. lib. 2.
cap. 3. Which notwithstanding in Sozomenus, seems another like fact, to be
done by a Priest or Elder, being also a Confessor, to defend ye other preests
his fellows, whom another philosopher insulted upon: yet, even in the next
Chapter, Sozomenus mentions a Confutation also not much unlike, between a
pagane phisosopher, and Alexander Bishop of Constantinople. For when di^tra of
the philosophers desired to dispute before the Emperor, with the bishop: and he
being inexpert in such exercise of words etc. Notwithstanding took upon him
the conflict by the commandment of the Emperor, When all the philosophers
would speak, he required them to appoint out one, whom they would choose, and
commanded the other to hold their peace, and mark what should be spoken of
them twain. Whereupon one of them undertaking the dealing of the whole
disputation: the blessed Alexander says unto the philosopher: in the name of
Jesus Christ, I command thee that thou speak not: and as soon as he had said
the word, the deed was performed: For suddenly so soon as he heard the speech:
his mouth being closed up he became speechelesse. This bishop was of great
virtue of life, and had the gift ( as it appeared) of miracles. He could not
dispute and confute the gainsayer of wholesome doctrine, yet could he stop
their mouths pretily well. But if our brethren had been there, if they durst
not speak, for fear their mouths had been stopped likewise, yet, they would
after have said of him that being unable to confute, he was altogether unmeet
for the office of a Pastor or a bishop. But those that would say so of such a
man, were meet enough to have their mouths also if not by miracle, yet by
authority to be stopped, rather than to open them thus at randon, against many
good, plain, and simple pastors, who though they have not the gift of GOD with
any audacitye and grace, of utterance in the pulpit make a plausible sermon to
the people: yet in private admonition, in sound knowledge, in sincere and
constant profession of the truth, can teach and persuade with their example,
and confute more effectually by their life, (though otherwise, in public
action they can do little without their book: and yet shall some of these
perhaps, do more good among the people) than some other eloquent and famous
Preacher or Disputer, or Confuter shall be able to do. I grant these high and
most excellent gifts are to be honored with duble honor, but the other are not
so far to be despised, as to be called altogether unmeet, for the office of a
pastor or bishop. Howbeit, (I confess) if any be altogether ignorant of the
knowledge of Gods word, the same is also altogether unmeet for the office of a
pastor or bishop. The learned discourse, Page 35 and 36.
Hereupon our brethren set down their resolution, saying:

Wherefore if we ever mind such a reformation, as God shall thereby be
glorified, and his Church edified, we must utterly remove all the unlearned
pastors, as men by no means to be tolerated to have any charge over the Lords
flock: and also provide that hereafter none be received into that office,
but such as are sufficient for their knowledge and ability in teaching, to take
so weighty a charge in hand.

What a great unthankfulness is this, to say, If ever we mind sucha
reformation, Bridges.
as God shall thereby be glorified and his church edified? As who should say,
it was never yet hitherto, in all this Reformation of the Church, either
endeavored, or so much as minded. And is all this that has been done, nothing
to the glorifying of God, nor to the edifying of his Church? or has it so
fallen out, that both God has been glorified thereby, and his Church edified,
and yet was never minded? with charity to our brethren beit spoken this their
censure is too too uncharitable, both of her May. and, her May. Brothers,
and Fathers minds, and reformation: with all their godly Counsels endeavors,
and all their learned bishops and preachers travels, to these especial
purposes, that God might be glorified and his Church edified: and too
injurious even to the Glory that God has already gotten, and the edification
that the Church, ( namely of England) has enjoyed, and other Chuhches that
have in part felt, no small comfort and edification thereby: Gods name be more
and more glorified and praised for it.

But now, imagining (if we may so harden our hearts, and benumbe our senses,
as not to feel nor acknowledge these good blessings of God) that Gods glory
and his Churches edification was never yet set forth among us, nor so much
as minded: what is the thing they would have us do?

If ever we mind such a reformation as God shall thereby be glorified and his
Church edified: we must utterly ( forsooth) remove all the unlearned pastors,
as men by no means to be tolerated to have any charge over the Lords flock,
and also provide that hereafter none be received into that office, but such as
are sufficient for their knowledge and ability in teaching, to take so weighty
a charge in hand.

Concerning the provision for hereafter, it is very good counsel. But for
those that are in office already (only for that they cannot publikly preach and
exhort and confute, though otherwise they have never so much knowledge) there
is no remedy, but that they must every one be removed, and that utterly
removed, and that by no means to be tolerated, no not to have any charge,
though it be not, the pastoral charge, no not to be a Deacon, nor a Reader,
nor yet a Dore-keeper over the Lords flock: this is a hard censure. Indeed,
nothing so hard, as one of them (with more eager zeal than the most of the
residue) wrote of late in his answer against M. C. for joining with the
English Churches, saying: Wherefore I would say, there were holiness in the
dumb Ministerye, Harrison against Ca^twright. page 23.
( for that is their usual and mildest term they afforde the Ministers that
are not public preachers) if all the dumb Ministers were hanged up in the
Churches, and public assemblies, An uncharitable speech and bloody sentence.
for a warning and terror to the rest, that are ready to enter such a
function: then indeed, there were a holy sign and remembrance of judgment
against such wretches: but other holiness have they none in them.

This judgment is far more rigorous and extreme, than this of our Learned
brethren Discoursers. Yea, by this bloody sentence, some of our brethren
perhaps their-selues, that are more Zealous than learned, or more Learned then
able with any gift of persuasion to make any public exhortation and
confutation, might be called into danger, How quickly this might reuerse on
our brethren.
not now of their livings, but of their lives, and although they would tell a
fair tale, to save their lives, and would rather preach such slender stuff
God wotte as they had: yet, if they were unlearned, they must be counted dumb
dogs, they must trusse also, the cord would not suffer them to utter it. So
soon might this Judgment be reuersed on some of their own wel-willers, who
spare not to cast forth such uncharitable and bitter speeches, saying, of the
poor Ministers of Christ: we say not but that that our dumb Ministers may be
heard, for if standing on the galowes to be executed, they say would come
down, I know we may hear them.

Do these speeches savor of Christian charity? If not, rather of the spirit
of those cried Crucifige, Crucifige, and having crucified Christ, so these
speak of hanging up his poor Ministers. And as they in scorn bad him come
down from the cross: so these speaking of hearing his Ministers, do say,
they may indeed be heard, when they say they would come down from the
Gallows. Yet, well fare these our Brethren the Learned Discoursers, that are
somewhat more pitiful to the poor unlearned pastors, Our brethren the Learned
Discoursers mildensse.
not to hang them up by the neck, as Thieves and Robbers, Traitors and
Rebels, ( for so they commonly call them) for a warning and terror: but to
turn them out to shake their ears, and beg their Bread, with their wives and
children like wretches, Roagues, and Vagaboundes. Yea, they are fair dealt
with that they have their lives. And this is the mylder sort of these our
Brethren. And until the poor Ministers that be not Learned preachers, be at
least thus gently handled: we shall never mind such a reformation, as God
shall thereby be glorified, and his Church edefied.

Alas poor souls, which heretofore, even for their zeal of Gods word, ( though
not al, yet many of them) in time of so great necessity, when the tyranny of
Antichriste had wasted and taken away so many Learned pastors, The state of the
Minist. that are not preachers.
and when the popish massing sacrifices were also removed: then these good
Zealous men, being of some readier skill and ability, than were the most part
of the residue in those days, did forsake their former trades, whereby before
they honestly lived, which if they had continued might yet thereby have
maintained themselves: and with hatred and hazard of their lives, (the most
part being then aduersaies of the truth in many places) have wholly dedicated
them selves to the Ministry of Gods word and Sacraments: being also
lawfully, both by the best pastors then of the church of England, yea, and many
of them assent, desire, and election of by their brethren Protestants, with
testification of their good conversation: albeit not so Learned nor trained in
schools, as godly zealous: nor able to preach, to expound, to exhort, to
confute learnedly in public auditory though otherwise sufficient to give godly
counsel, admonition, and instruction in all private: though in the open
Congregation not daring (knowing their own simplicity) to hazard themselves
further then the distinct reading of the scriptures, with such fruitful
Interpretations and Homelies, as by authority are approved and assigned, with
the public form of common prayer prescribed, and the reverent administration
of Christ's sacraments: and have now in the continual exercise of these
things, besides their private studies above this twenty, yea, some above
thirty years, spent all their time: and now in their old age, should be
utterly removed, and by no means tolerated to have any charge over the
Lords flock, nor any other provision so much as spoken of for their mainnance:
though not called in question, whether they would be hanged, or no: Me thinks,
these things if they were a little better considered and digested, should it
least more move the bowels of mercy, yea the remorse of conscience and
thankfulness, in our learned brethren, than to deal so extremely with them.
It may be, that a number of such withal, are crept into the Ministry,
altogether so ignorant, and perhaps so criminous and offensive, who might
worthily sustain so sharp a judgment, Not all to be condemned alike.
that it were better they were utterly removed, than by any means to be
tolerated, to have any charge of the Lords flock. For such I plead not. But
no reason, that their causes of entering into, and continuing in the Ministry,
being so different, they should pass al alike so hard a censure. But what
reason induces our brethren heereunto.

What man, having but one hundredth sheep, would make such a man a shepherd
or Ouerseer over them, as were a natural Idiote, The learned Dis. Page 36.
or otherwise altogether unskillful or unable too perform the things that
belong to a shepherd? if no man have so little care of brute beasts: what
brutish negligence is it, to commit the people of God, redeemed with the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, to such unskillful and vnsufficie^t Pastors,
as neither themselves know the way of salvation, neither are able to lead
other unto it, whereof they are so clean ignorant themselves.

If our brethren meant only of such persons as they now speak of, Bridges
it were more than a brutish negligence in very deed, to commit the people of
god, to such unskillful and insufficient Pastors.. But before, they spoke of
such, as had never so much knowledge: and now they come in with natural
Idiotes, with altogether unskillful, unable and insufficient Pastors: and such,
as neither themselves know the way of salvation, neither are able to lead
other unto it, whereof they are ignorant themselves. Is there no difference
between these and those that are both wise, godly, and learned; and diligent
to lead the people of God, both by counsel, instruction and example: though
they have not the gift of open preaching, public exhorting of the people, and
effectual confuting of the gainesayer. These are those, that we would have
more fauorablye dealt withal. As for the other natural Idiotes, and altogether
unskillful, unable, and insufficient Pastors: we plead not for any tolleration
of the^. And we hope there be not many such hope-losts, that these words
should thus in general, be lauashly cast forth, to the blemish, suspicion and
slander of the Ministers. But our brethren yet think harder of the matter,
and (as it were) even in pronouncing the sentence of eternal condemnation on
many whole Churches in the realm, they say. The learned disc Page 36.


If there be no way of salvation, but by faith; and none can believe but such
as hear the word of God preached: O Lord, how miserable is the state of many
flocks in this land, Salvation depends not on faith.
who either seldom or never hear the word of God truly preached, and
therefore know not how to believe, that they might be saved.

I marvel now less, if our learned Brethren be so hard hearted against all
those learned or unlearned, if they be not preaching pastors, as to thrust
them clean out of all the Ministry: Bridges.
since that in this their too earnest zeal, they thrust withal so many
flocks in this land, and in many other lands, clean out both of the state of
salvation, and also of the means to be saved. For first, lo here what a
number at a clap, by this thunderclap of theirs, are flatly pronounced to be
perpetually damned, whom we charitablie hope, Our breath. inconsiderat
co^demning of all that have not faith.
and verily believe, to be as safely saved as our selves. If there be no
way of salvation but by faith, how well might we then cry out indeed, O
Lord how miserable is the state of all our infants, dying not only before,
but also after Baptism in their infancy. The Papists as they pronounce that
none are saved, but only such as are baptized: so, for Faith likewise, they
hold this opinion, that there is no way of salvation but by faith, albeit,
adding other things thereto, and seeing their infantes not capable of Faith,
they affirm that they are saved, not by their own faith, but by the Churches
faith, and by the faith of their Godfathers or Godmothers, How the infantes of
the faithful are s^ued.
( as we call them) that in baptizing undertake and answer for them.

Luther and diverse other following him, perceiving the grosenesse of this
error, (upon which sundry inconveniences depend) to be saved by the faith, not
of himself, but of other: affirm that our infants have their selves the
substance of faith, although it be not able in act to show it self: and that
(as Saint Paul says out of Abakuk, ca. 2. The just lives by his own faith,
they are likewise saved and justified by their own faith.

But Calvin seeing further into this matter, and that this properly and in
very deed is not faith, which requires both an intellectual knowledge, and
an actual assured persuasion and confidence on the truth of Gods promises, and
covenant in the mercies and merits of Christ Jesus, which act of the mind
infantes have not; and considering that salvation properly depends not on
the act or on the habit of our faith, but on Gods eternal election, and the
performance of his promise: and that faith being the gift of God, is indeed
the only means, and way of salvation, to those that are capable to
understand, and by believing the same, apply the promise of Christ his
merits, and salvation to themselves, but unto those that are not yet grown to
this capacity their natural defect or rather vnripenesse, makes not the
promise of God frustrate, nor defeateth the election, that was before the
children were borne, yea, ere the foundations of the world were laid,
purposed in Gods eternal decree, and this foundation is sure, God knows who are
his: Calvin therefore wills us, Infants salvation.
not to apply these sentences of Christ ( that recommend faith unto us) unto
the infants: but unto those that are grown to capacity by the gift of God in
them, to understand and apprehend the same. And for the infants of us which
are faithful, and so included in the covenant betwixt GOD and his people,
admitting our infants to receive the Sacrament of regeneration, because though
they be not capable of knowledge and faith, yet are they capable of the thing
signified, and of the favor of God the Father, and of the grace of Christ the
son, The infants of the faithful that die before baptism..
and of the inspiration of the holy Ghost; yea, although they die before they
receive the outward sign, yet, not to presume to judge them clean debarred
and bereft of these inward graces, but to rely upon the promise of the
covenant, that he will not only be our God and so our savior, that have
faith in him: but the God and savior of our seed also, although yet they have
not faith in him, and that we and our seed shall be his people. Neither only
in an outward sanctification, whereby as the root, so the branches are holy:
but by the inward sanctification, and by salvation, so far as accords with
his eternal election in Christ Jesus.

So then, except this which our Brethren here say, If there be no way of
salvation but by faith, be restrained to such only as are both of years, and
of discretion also to understand (at the least in some measure) and by faith,
to apply the word of God unto them: we should find a manifest error, and too
hard a judgment contained in this sentence, that there is no way of salvation
but by faith. Secondly, here follows upon this, an assumption far more
hard and peremptory, concerning the word of God, than this former proposition,
concerning faith in him. And none ( say our Bre.) can believe but such as hear
the word of God preached. Indeed the ordinary means to faith, is the word of
God, which in the mean while debarreth not any extraordinary means, for God
freely to instill his spirit, and to give his gift of faith by inspiration, as
Calvin says on the 14. verse, Romans 10. upon these words: How shall they
believe in him on whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
preacher? He placed here no other word than that which is preached; because
this is the ordinary means, that the Lord has ordained, of dispensing the
same. If any do further contend thereon, that God cannot instill into men,
the knowledge of him by other means, than by the instrument of preaching: we
deny that is was the Apostles mind, who only looked on the otdinarie
dispensation of GOD, but would not prescribe a law unto his grace.

So that, again we see, that this saying of our Brethren here, is
prejudicial, not only unto men's faith, but unto Gods grace, thus flatly to
affirm, that none can believe but such a^ hear the word of God preached. But
all this for faith and preaching, our brethren think to warrant out of Beza in
his Confession cap. 4. Artic. 35. The means to faith.
where he says: thirdly since that wihout faith, entrance to Christ and life
aeternall is open to none: and the preaching of the word, is the ordinary
instrument of the holy Ghost, to engender faith in us: it follows, that the
preaching of the word, and the same effectual, is to be required in all of ripe
years, to this purpose, that they may be saved: except, when it has pleased
God extraordinarily to work in their hearts. If our brethren had kept
themselves within the modest compass of these bounds, as Beza does, for faith
in them of ripe years, and with preaching as an ordinary instrument of God,
and gone no further: this had been allowable.

But now, what mean our brethren here by preaching? can no private, nor
public reading of the word of God; with never so diligent marking and
conferring of the same; and with reading also and conferring the sound,
learned, plain, and godly expositions, interpretations, Sermons and
commentaries of the word of God: nor no reading of sincere common places,
gathered out of Gods word: nor no private conference with godly and learned
men, upon doubts and scruples; nor in catechizing, or exercise of Doctors,
which our brethren say page 17. must teach only true doctrine, and confute all
haeresies, and false opinions by the word of God, concerning all articles and
principles of Christian religion, without applying their teaching to any
particular state of time, of persons, or of places: and must not exhort, as
preachers must: who still intermix exhortation, reprehension, consolation, and
application with their doctrine: and can none come to believe by none of al
these means, nor by them altogether, except preaching be continuallye
adjoined to them? or do our brethren understand preaching also in all these
means? for they are both ordinary means in their kinds, so well as
preaching, and very effectual means, whereby oftentimes, and namely in want
of preaching, God works mightily in the instilling, and the increasing of
knowledge and Faith in his elected.

Now upon these two erroneous (by their leave be it spoken, for a brother may
err, but not persist therein) and too austere premises, our brethren make
their sharp conclusion, with a shrill and miserable exclamation, crying out:

O Lord how miserable is the state of many flocks in this land, who either
seeldome or never hear the word of God truly preached.

More seeldome perhaps, then were to be wished: but never to hear the word of
God preached, or to hear it falsely preached, and not truly when it is
preached, I hope there are not many flocks in this land, or rather, but very
few, if any at all: yea, I believe, no not one, but that has heard the word
of God, although the seeldomer, yet truly and plainlye preached among them.

But what is meant here by these words truly preached? Preaching
they spoke before of the word of God preached: and now they come in with
truly preached. Belike, if it be not preached in such manner and form, or
with the auouching of such points as these, that our brethren desire and
contend for, and use most to preach upon; it is not truly preached. Preaching
truly.
And in that sense, they may peradventure say some what more truly, that in
many flocks of this land, it is seeldome or never heard. Although (I am
afraid) it be in too many flocks in this land, on that fashion, by some of
our brethren, both too often, and also too untruly preached. Which makes
indeed a miserable state in many flocks of this land, and has bredde and
still breeds a most miserable, lamentable, and horrible schism in many
flocks of this land, and more miserable is like to breed, if such preaching
should not be restrained.

But what a foul sclau^der is this (and that for such to make, as in the
preching of the Gospel, The church and realm of England^ fowly sclau^dered.
profess to be our brethren) not only for the ministry of this land, but
also for the flocks and people of the same: that they seeldome or never have
the word of God truly preached, and therefore know not how to believe, that
they might be saved. As though they were all infidels, Turks, Saracens, or
some wild savage people: or at the least, worse then the Papists, of all
whom. I dare not hazard so far as to say, that they, neither believe in God,
nor know how to believe, and not only stand as damned creatures, but as those
that are destitute of all means, whereby they might be saved. This is too
heavy censure of our brethren. But now that they have thus passed their
sentence, least we should appeal from it as unjust, unmerciful and
untrue, or but answer any thing against it: they prevent that which they
imagine, we will answer thereunto, and reply before hand to our imagined
answer saying.

But here it will be answered, The learned Dis. Page 37. Bridges.
that as it is a thing greatly to be desired; so is it altogether impossible,
to provide the church of so many learned Pastors, as should take charge of
every several congregation.

And have we no other answer to make unto our brethren but this? what a
strange foading of themselves is this, and condemning of others, to imagine
also, that we must answer this and that, even as they conceive in their
fancies, The answer of impossibility of providing learned preachers for
every Church.
and would have us frame our answers to their objections and surmises? Has
any of us, or have I answered thus (except by way of debating) to any of their
like accusations aforesaid? And yet, I hope, I have answered truly and
sufficiently, for any thing yet alleged by our Learned Brethren, what show
soever it carry of learning, when it is not answered. Albeit our brethren have
been by other (if answer would serve) thoroughly answered. Neither should
they now by me have been at all answered, save upon urgent provocation
thereunto. But let us now see, this our presupposed answer, wherewith
theirselues in ^ur names, Impossibility of learned Pastors
do answer themselves.

As it is a thing greatly to be desired: so is it altogether impossible, to
provide the Church of so many learned Pastors, as should take charge of every
several congregation. In what sense impossible is understood.


Since they will needs have this to be our answer: let it stand in gods name
for our answer, so it be mollified in these words, altogether impossible:
which is as much to say, as absolutely impossible. And who ca^ say so, since,
nothing is impossible unto God? who can make the stones to cry, and of them
make children unto Abraham: and since that which is impossible to man, is
possible to God, etc. But according to the state of things either as they are,
or as they may conuenientlye be helped, one thing considered with an other:
might we not well auowe, this answer, that unto man it is impossible,
specially understanding impossibility, ( as it is oftentimes understood, for
such a difficulty, to bring to pass, as we could not well, see how it should
be done, without as great, or greater dangers to ensue.

The learned discourse. Page 37. Bridges
But heereto we reply, ( say our brethren) that it is a thing necessarilye
required at our hands, by God almighty, and therefore we must object no
impossibility, especially when our own negligence is the cause of all the
difficulty, or if you will so call it, impossibility.

Albeit, we might not amiss enquire of our brethren, what they means by these
Learned Pastors: and with what necessity God requires that al Pastors should
be such learned Pastors,: notwithstanding, for any thing here replied on our
supposed answer, are there not some things that are necessarily required at
our hands by God Almighty, that we must needs confess, are even altogether
and absolutely on our parts impossible? as the perfect obedience of Gods law.
And yet, especially our negligence, in our first parents fall, and our own
sins in us, are the cause of our not difficulty, but mere impossibility to
do those things, that Almighty God necessarily requires at our hands. Except
we should say with the Papists, that we can fulfill Gods law, or else with them,
accuse God of injustice, if he should require at our hands an impossibility.
And that therefore, we must object no impossibility, for we reply, it is a
thing necessarily required at our hands by God almighty. If our brethren say
that therein God helps us another way: so may he do here also, though the
Minister be not all thing so learned a Pastor, as God necessarily requires at
his hands that he should be

The learned discourse, Page 37. Bridges.
We confess ( say our brethren) it will be hard at first, but we must do our
endeavor, and commit the success unto God, and there is no doubt, but in time
it will grow to an happy end.

This confession is very true, it will be hard at the first. And we assent,
that we must do our endeavor, so far forth as we conveniently may but not to
the injury, and much less to the undoing, Endeavor to help it*
of any never so simple and poor a Minister, if he be virtuous and diligent to
his power in his function; and so commit the success unto God. To whom, if
our brethren would indeed commit it, they would omit these unnecessary
contentions, nor so urge their desires of reforming discipline,, nor publish
these devises and platformes of Ecclesiastical government, entituling them
solemnelye, Learned discourses, prescribing more than is lawful for private
men to do; at leastwise, they would never so far proceed in them, with
such-vnbrotherlike iuuectiues against the public Magistrates and Ministers
learned and unlearned: but desire those things that they think are amiss,
and would wish reformed, in a more Christian, charitable, and good subiectlike
manner, than they do: and the^ there is no doubt, but that whatsoever were
indeed to be reformed, though it be hard at the first, yet by this softness,
in time it would at last grow to an happy end. For, as the Proverb is, A good
beginning makes a good ending, But such a preposterous and violent beginning,
continuing and increasing, as hitherto our brethren have used for these
matters, and do use, not only breeds a present disturbance and continual
schism: but also boadeth a doubtful suspicion (without gods merciful help) of
a tragical and unhappy ending.

But when ( say they) we shall be altogether careless, The learned discourse.
page 37. and 38.
as we have been long time: and that is worse, not acknowledging any default
in this behalf, (as there be that do not;) and that is most of all,
maintayning such lettes and hindrances, as be continual nurseries of
ignorance and ignorant Pastors: we may be ashamed to allege that difficulty,
for which none are to be blamed, but we our selves.

To be careless in so careful matters, is a great default. But we must take
heed on the other side, of too much curiositye and of rashness, Bridges
both in thrusting our selves (beeyond our calling) into actions of pretensed
reformation: and also take heed, whom thus at randone and in these general
speeches, we accuse to have been so long time careless. For, as this
carfulness principally pertayneth to those, that by authority are called to
the charge and care thereof: so her Majesty, with her honorable counsel, and
the godly learned-Praelates, have not only had great care in this behalf: but
with careful trauayles, have much endeavored, Our bretherens sturres have
hindered these cares.
that these troubles might be happilye ended. But evermore hitherto unhappily,
these our Brethrens intempestiue sturres, have bredde such lettes and
hinderaunces heereunto: that they are now further off, and call more and higher
points in question: than they did about Caps and Surplesses at the beginning.

And these contentions, being more earnestly trauersed between the learned,
have given advantage to embolden the common aduersarye of us both: and withal
have occasioned the more unlearned in the Ministerye, to be less taken heed
unto, Carefulnes
than otherwise more easily they might have been.

Which nevertheless we complain not upon, as Adam did on Eve, to post all
the fault unto our brethren, and not acknowledge any default herein among our
selves: but noting the same, (with duetifull submission to their authority) we
wish that some even of our Bishops, had been so careful in this long time,
that they had not admitted some, though prettilye learned, yet too headstrong
and newfangled Ministers, that since they have entered into the Ministry,
forgetting the calling of them, by whom they were called, (if they have any
calling in the Ministry) forgetting the oath of their Canonical obedience to
their Bishops, and of their loyal obedience to their prince, have, and do
make, all, or the most part of all these sturres. But their carelessness in
admitting such, has been since meetlie well punished, by these their
disobedient and unthankful children And some also they have admitted into this
function, too unlearned, ( we confess,) and unworthy Ministers and so are not
altogther clear of maintayning the continual nurseries of ignorance and
ignorant Pastors: Yet neither have they been maintained, How their
carelessness has been punished.
but greatly rebuked, for their so careless doings: and thereupon laws and
provisions have been made, and stand in force, to repress such unlearned
Ministers, and the makers of them. And though we acknowledge, that we may be
well ashamed ( and sorry, in respect of the defaultes of some) to allege that
difficultye for the which we our selves are to be blamed: yet, since our
brethren also do here confess with us the difficultye, that it will be hard
at the first, and are themselves also in no small part a cause thereof, and of
greater letts and hinderaunces to a happy end, of these untimely brawles and
troubles: Let them take part of this blame and shame with us, and either of us,
so soon, and as much as we may, carefully endeavor to amend it.

We may ( say they) be ashamed, now that our Church has had rest and peace,
The learned discourse. Page 38.
with free preaching of the Gospel these 25. or 26. years, under the
protection of our most gracious Queen, to be so unfurnished with learned
Pastors* as we are: whereas, if that diligence had been used of all parts, as
might and should have been employed of all them that unfeignedly seek the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, almost in half the time, this
necessity might have been well supplied,

If our Church have had rest and peace, with free preaching of the Gospel,
Bridges
these 25. or 26, years, and now since also, this 27. this 28. and upward,
under the protection of our most gracious Queen: how much are we bound with
all thankfulness, first to Almightye God, and after, unto our most gracious
Queen, to re-acknowledge the same. And how may they be ashamed then, that
(where we have had such rest and peace with free preaching of the Gospel, by
this protection, all this while, from the disturbance of our foreign enemies,
have at home continuallye not ceased to disturb this rest and peace, with
these contentions and divisions: and defaming the cheifest preachers, in this
realm, have therebye not a little hindered the free preaching of the Gospel?
and how again, may they yet be more ashamed, that being not content to live in
this rest and peace of our Church, nor with the free preaching of the gospel,
although they themselves acknowledge it, yet they exclaim (contrary to that
their selves do here acknowle^^e) that they have no rest, nor peace, nor the
free preaching of the gospel, but call the state of our church, a deformed
state and deface it with far worse contumelies: and so both disturb the
preaching, of the gospel, ( which otherwise, their selves confess, is
preached freely,) and grieve her Majesty: Yea, some of them in their
Pamphlets also, break forth into very disloyal speeches, which I now
forbear to name, but all of them, disobey her May. laws, and yet here
confess her to be a most gracious Queen, and that they enjoy al these
excellent benefits under her Majesty's protection. Surely, if we were so
unfurnished of learned Pastors, as they exclaim, which notwithstanding is
nothing so much, (God be praised for it) as they to make it seem more odious,
The gospel freely preached.
pretend it is: for (if we be so unfurnished of learned Pastors, how is the
gospel freely preached?) and yet we wish, we were still better and better
furnished than we be, and our Prelates put to their helping hands, as they may
thereto: yet, if we were worse furnished then we are, (considering these
benefits,) it might be some what better borne withal: than that the lack of
the greater learning in some of our Pastors, should be thus vpbrayded to the
whole state.

But now, if there be any thing to be helped herein: is this a reason, to
alter the Ecclesiastical government, and to punish the Learned pastors, and
all the Bishops, because of some unlearned Pastors among them And admit, that
diligence has not been used of all parts, that might and should have been
employed of all them that unfeignedly seek the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness.

Must all these parts that seek unfeignedly the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, though not with employing that diligence therein, that they
should have done, be therefore deposed of al their authority? yea, and that
there must be no such authority at all, but all Pastors in authority must be
aequall? Is this the readiest way to make more Learned Pastors, or not rather
to make fewer than there be: if not, to make them all the more unlearned? and
is this our learned brethrens unfeigned seeking the kingdom of God and his
righteousness?

And we have yet, to thank God for this, that although that diligence had not
been used of all parts, that might and should have been employed of all them
that seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; yet since it is granted
and cannot be denied, Pr^posterous means.
that they seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness: though not with
that diligence, that they might and should have done: This lack of diligence
is far better, at least wise, less evil in all those parts, than is the
double diligence of these our brethren, that employ themselves and seek by all
means, to deface the learned Pastors ( which God be praised are not a few) by
the remainder of the vnlearneder sort; and would clean overthrow, not only
them that be diligent or negligent in authority, but the authority it self,
under complaint of lack of diligence in all parts that have the authority.
And this diligence indeed of our brethren has been such an hinderaunce to a
great many, that might and would have proved learned Pastors, that they have
clean diuerted their studies, and professions from the Ministry, on this
offense; or else, in half, yea in a quarter of all this time, this necessity
might have been well supplied. But our Brethren, to turn us from the
consideration of these hinderaunces, do draw us another way, and say:

If we seek experience, what diligent and careful provision is able to do
with the blessing of God: The learned disc. Page 38.
look to our neihhbours and brethren in Christ, of France, who although they
never enjoyed one day of such peace, as we have done so many years,: yet how
plentifullye are they furnished with all kinds of Ecclesiastical Ministers,
and namelye with godly and learned Pastors, it would reioise any Christian heart
to behold in them, and lament to see the lack in us.

Yet once again, we must seek experience from our neighbors and brethren in
Christ of France: when as these our brethren their selves confess, Bridges.
that at home, for the free preaching of the Gospel, we are and have been
all the reign of our most gracious Queen, in far happier case than they:
Comparion of our neighbors churches in France and our.
and con^^sse withal, that herein they never enjoined, no, not one day of
such peace, as we have done so many years, And yet cannot our brethren be
thankful, for all this; except we also, be as plentifully furnished with all
kind of Ecclesiastical Ministers, and namelye, with godly and Learned
Pastors, as they be. What they mean by their plentiful furniture of all kind
of Ecclesiastical Ministers, they do not tell us, and therefore it makes the
less matter. As for these specified, namelye godly and learned Pastors: albeit
we were not so well furnished as they for our parts: though our hearts rejoice to
behold this plentiful furniture in them; yet is there no cause, that either
they, or we should lament this want in us. Notwithstanding, what wants, we
both acknowledge and lament; and wish and endeavor to supply: that our and
their joy might be full both in them and us. It is much hindered in France, by
the open hostility of the public adversaries of the Gospel; and with us, by
our brethrens unnecessary molestations, which are both lamentable to any true
Christian heart to think on, The french Churches.
and do much hinder the plentiful furniture of godly and learned Pastors among
us*

And although (to make the comparison more odious against the state of our
Ecclesiastical Ministers) our Brethren set a better face upon the matter, for
our neighbors and brethren in Christ of France: how plentifully they are
furnished with all kind of Ministers: and namelye, with godly and Learned
Pastors, that it would rejoice any Christian heart, to behold it in them:
though the hearing of it, is a joyful hearing, to every Christian heart: yet I
doubt me, we may rather wish it were so, than that in very deed, there is
such great furniture of learned Pastors, as is here pretended. And that also
we should quickly behold in them, if they might have (were it the good will of
God) as God be praised for it, we have and enjoy, such peace and rest with
free preaching of the Gospel, under the protection also of their Kings and
Magistrates: It would then manifestly appear, that they are not so
plentifully furnished, and that they never had in all their Civil wars, any
such great numbers of Learned Pastors: and so much the fewer, for that many of
their small many, have been either so slain and martyred at home, or dispersed
abroad, and fled into other nations: that (I suppose) if all the remnants of
them were assembled and viewed, they should be found not half a quarter
able, except God (as he is able, who spoke the word, and great was the
multitude of the preachers) raise up a great multitude of more learned Pastors,
to furnishe that great and populous realm, and all the several congregations in
the same.

And yet, now as they are, in these troublesome times of persecution, it may
be, that in some few places of safest refuge, there may well be, in respect of
their assemblies, some congregations among them, in France, in England, in
Germany, and in other places, whether they are fledd for refuge, as to a
Sanctuarye which God in exile has provided for them, as (God be praised)
England is for many nations, in which they may easily have plentiful furniture
of godly and learned Pastors. Which, as it proceeds from the gracious
providence of God, to confirm his afflicted people, in such times of greater
trial and necessity: so, though it lamente our hearts to see their dangers,
and we pray for them with all our hearts, that they might enjoy also such rest
of body, and peace of conscience, with the free preaching of the Gospel, as we
enjoy: in the mean time it not a little reioiceth our hearts to behold such
surniture of learned Pastors, as god of his great goodness has given unto them
for their strengthening. And yet should both they and we, and all Christian
hearts redouble our rejoicing, if they might enjoy these blessings of peace and
rest, with the free preaching of the gospel, as we do: though as many several
co^gregatio^s in France, were no better furnished with learned though otherwise
godly Pastors, than are among us: and (I think) they would not repent them of
such a bargen.

Acknowledging defect.
But as for those ( say our brethren) that acknowledge no defect in our Church,
through the great multitude of ignorant Pastors: we had rather at this time
pray to God to lighten their blindness, The learned discourse. page 39.
Bridges
then by any long discourse, to discover their palpable darkness.

For such great multitude of ignorant pastors ( understanding them as is
before described) I hope there be not. That there is no defect in the Church,
through those ignorant pastors that be: I know of none, but do acknowledge it
with great grief, and many godly Praelates and other in authority, employ
their great diligence, to the help and redress thereof: so far, as by any
lawful meenes they may: And if any do otherwise: we pray God also with our
brethren, to lighten their blindness, and to change their hearts, and a Gods
name, even by as long discourse, as our Brethren will, and do, (though they say
they will not,) discover their palpable darkness, Discovering the same or any
other defect in them, not as Cham did, when he saw his Fathers nakedness, but
so far forth, as they always remember, that Charitas operit multitudinem
peccatorum. Charity covers a multitude of sins.

Which if they would indeed perform, they would not make the matter worse
than it is, and amplify it by so great multitudes, and aggrauate it by calling
such multitudes, not only ignorant persons, but Idiotes, Idols, and a great
many fouler and unfitter terms; and not only bestow such terms on them,
but as many, if not worse, on the best learned and chiefest in authority,
under her Majesty, the Fathers, Bishops, and Archbishops. in the Clergy. and
must all these be condemned of blindesse, and papable darkness? And when thus
they have poured forth all that they can imagine, and a great deal more than
they can prove, or though they could prove, were convenient (and it were but
for their own modestitie) to have discovered: and to discover it in such a
gybing and scornful manner, and in such eagre moodes and vnreuerent terms,
and to defile with such speeches, not only that that might be wished better,
but withal, that that is not only tolerable but also commendable in them:
and then to come in with their frumpe and say, they will rather pray for them:
than discover them: me thinks their prayer would be more effectual, if their
long or short discoursing, though it were less learned, were more temperate.
But now that our Brethren rather list to pray to God: they make their petition,
saying:

Would to God there were not more difficultye in reforming them that maintain
such inconveniences, The learned disc. Page 39. and 40.
as except they be taken away: we shall never be disburdened of the cankers of
the Church, those unlearned ministers. For while Non-residentes, and
pluralities be retained we shall never want unlearned Curates, that for small
stipendes, will supply the absence of Pluralities, and Non-residentes: which
gross corruptions of pastoral office, as they may have some honest pretense,
Pluralities
so can they have no better pretense, neither are they retained with a better
conscience, then the Priests in our savior Christ's time, suffered the
exchau^gers of money, Grasiers, and Pulterers to make a burse or shambles, and
a poultrie: yea, a den of thieves of the temple of God, which was appointed
to be a house of prayer to all nations. Mat. 21.12. Mark. 11.15 Joan. 2.14.

This prayer expresses more fervor, than knowledge, or at least, Bridges.
their acknowledging of that duetifull obedience and charity, that were rather
to be wished, our brethren had alayed the intemperance of their zeal withal.
As not only in wishing them reformed: but that there were not more difficulty
in reforming them, that maintain such or any other inconveniences in the
Church. It is an old saying and of great consideration, Better to suffer a
mischief than an inconvenience. and worse is it, Our bretherens dangerous and
slau^derous speches ynder color of prayer.
to maintain it, than to suffer it. And how much the more, so much the worse.
If then, such things as here be noted, are such inconveniences: how is not
this too unadvisedly cast forth, in form of a prayer to God, that they must
be reformed, and yet cannot but with more difficultye be reformed, that
maintain them? Does not this too near touch principally her Majesty, whom in
the page before (more duetifully) they acknowledged to be our most gracious
Queen: and many civil Magistrates, besides those Ecclesiastical Praelates,
that have to do in these matters: yea, the statute, and whole state that do
maintain them?

Besides that, every poor Curate which lives under any Pastor, if he be not
himself so learned as the Pastor is; he is here called by this mylde term,
a cankre of the Church. If a cankred Papist, or a cankred haeritike ( for the
Apostle says so, of haerisie and false doctrine, that it eats like a
cankre,) had so called our protestant Ministers, I would have said, he had
spoken like himself. But it is a far unlike and unseemly speech, for
Protestant Minist. to bestow upon their brethren Minist. in the Gospel.

True it is, that by the Non residence of some Pastors, and the pluralities
granted unto them, some Curates and Ministers of lesser gifts are maintained:
and (as I take it) reason too. For, as we have showed out of Calvin) the
gifts of the Pastors being not alike, there may well be difference in them,
both of superiority, and of maintenance. Which may accord also well enough with
the saying of the Apost. The Elders that govern well, especially in the work
of the word, are worthy of double honor. And therefore, if some more Learned
pastors having also a greater gift of the spirit of government, have more
parcels of the Church of god to govern, than other have, and thereupon are
permitted (in consideration of their greater labors in the word) to do good in
more places: and for their better provision, to have other besides them, and in
their absences to attend continuallye to those congregations, Reading.
while their more fruitful travails are other where employed: if these also
by order of law, and by authority of Magistracy be provided for: What is
aimed at under pretense of inueighing against pluralities and non residents.
and yet, cannot be permitted but by the law and magistrate, so that it is
not free to every one that list, but to choice and more able men, and only
to so good purposes, and always with sufficient provisions for every place
and person so permitted: Is it lawful for every or any private subject on
this public fashion to exclaim against it, and also to inueigh against the
Magistrates for maintaining of it?

But there is a mystery in this thing, more than every body weeneth,
Pluralities and non residents are pretended, which if they be abused, are not
so maintained, but that upon proof thereof, they are punishable, or to be
restrained or revoked: but other matters are shot at, to wit, the livings of
the Bishops, of the Colleges, or of any that have any portions of the
Church, impropriated and allotted unto them. Howbeit our Brethren fail herein
of their chief purpose, for, if all these were taken away; yet may the power
and superior authority remain, though weakened, when the living is gone, and
so al Pastors, notwithstanding al these byouse devises are not equal.

As for that our Brethren add, of the pretense of these things, which they
call gross corruptions of Pastoral office; to omit the reconciliation of these
sayings, Our breath. contradiction and slanderous accusation.
that as they may have some honest pretense, so they can have no better
pretense, than had the exchangers of money, the grasiers and poulterers, to
make a burse or shambles, or a poultrie, yea, a den of thieves of the Temple of
God, which were indeed no honest pretenses at al: This is also too rough a
censure of our Brethren, so flatly to condemn all the Magistrates and
Ministers in the Church of GOD, which (in manner aforsayd) permit these things,
to have no better pretense nor conscience, than these deadly enemies of Christ
had. The Texts alleged out of Matthew, Mark, and John, stand only on a
rank for a bare show, and prove nothing at all, that these matters have no
better pretense and conscience, than those gross corruptions of those wicked
Jews had.

And is this now, that which our Brethren meant, when they said even the last
sentence before, they would rather pray to GOD to lighten their hearts, than
by any long discourse, to discover their palpable darkness? Indeed Breuis
oration penetrat coelum? But this short Prayer pearceth beyond all Gods forboad,
and this short discourse, Si breuis grauis, it were better be longer and be
leuis Howbeit, the burden of it, is but a faburthen of a foul mouth, and of
an heavy irksome slander, unfit for our learned Brethren to have uttered. And
yet not content therewith, our brethren proceed and say.

But especially while the whole office of a Pastor, Prescribed form.
shall be thought to consist in reading only a prescript number of Psalms
and Chapters of the Scriptures, with other appointed forms of prayer: The
learned disc page 36.
and that he may be allowed as a sufficient Pastor which does the things,
which a child of ten years old may do as well as he, so long shall we
never lack unlearned pastors, ignorant and ungodly people, simonicall and
sacrilegious patrones: so long the building of Gods Church shall go but
slowly forward. Besides other superstitious fantasies, mayntained in the
peoples hearts, which for shortness we omit to speak of.

Of what estimation reading has been accounted in the ancient and primitive
Church, Bridges.
and the office of readers both of the Psalms and Chapters of the Scriptures:
we have already declared out of Zanchius, Readers.
citing Bucer at large for the same. And how ancient and allowable, appointed
forms of Prayer have been in the Church of God, among all the holy Fathers,
and are yet even in those reformed Churches, that are most now commended unto
us of our Breath? yea, their selves also have in print set down unto us
appointed forms of Prayer: though with what warrant and authority they may
prescribe and appoint forms of prayer to their Prince, and to the whole Church
of England, and reject that which is by lawful authority of the Prince, With
what authority our breath. can set out a prescribed form of their own making,
and reject that that is done by authority.
and of all the states of the Realm and Church of England already appointed:
I do not yet know, and feign would I learn, how they are able to justify
these doings: and how their own prescribing unto others, their appointed
forms of prayer and ministration of the Sacraments, ( they having no
sufficient authority thereunto) does not much more confute themselves, that
control other for prescribing appointed forms of Prayer unto them.

As for that they say, the whole office of a pastor shall be thought to
consist in reading these things: I know none that says or thinks so: or that
he may be allowed as a sufficient pastor, A Pastors office consists not all
in reading.
which does the things which a child of ten years old may do as well as
he. Who allows such a one for a sufficient Pastor? And what are those things
which a child of ten years old may do as well as he? May a child of ten
years old minister the Sacrament of Baptism and the Lords supper, or
pronounce the public absolution to the people? But they mean perhaps that
such a child may read the appointed forms of prayers, Psalms, and Chapters
of the Scriptures, as well as he? May he so, in the public Congregation, and
have no lawful calling thereunto? And yet, may he do it as well as he that
is lawfully called? If they mean only, in the respect of his reading: I
easily grant it them, that any private man, woman, or child, although
younger than ten years old, Reading.
if his sight be quick and his voice clear, and he be well enured to reading,
may both read as well, and far better, than many an old Doctor, yea, than
the most zealous and best learned Pastor in the world, when his tongue
foltreth, or his eyes wax dim, or age or other debility does so weaken him,
that he cannot so loud, so clean and reddily read, as a child or a woman
may do. But the holy ancient Fathers, did not therefore contemn the office of
Readers. No, they considered the person, whom for their calling and office,
they represented, and permitted neither child, woman, nor any man never so
prompt a Reader, Readers.
in such public and autentike manner to read these things, but only those
men that were lawfullye called and authorized thereunto: and did greatly
reverence and esteem this office of Readers, although they were not yet made
Pastors, but were Readers only. And shall we now contemn them, and condemn
them, when these Readers are Pastors also? and say that such a Pastor reading,
does the things which a child of ten years old may do as well as he? And
yet, it follows not, if there were some such Pastors whom a child did
excel, and that if any such upon some especial consideration were born
withal, we shall never lack unlearned Pastors; ignorant and ungodly people,
simonicall and sacrilegious Patrones, The sequel of our brethrens devises.
etc. Whereas, me thinks, (and I speak it bonafide, and I hope, bona cum
venia,) that rather of the twain, if these our brethrens devises should take
place; we should have more co^te^pt of learning, and greater number of
unlearned Pastors: and so more ignorant and ungodly, and contentious people;
more simonicall and sacrilegious patrones, ( if any patrones at all should be
allowed) more slow forwardness of the building of Gods church, beside other
many more new superstitious fantasies, which for shortness we omit to speak of:
than either now there is, or ever was, or ever would be, by any direct occasion
of reading, a prescript number of psalms and chapters of the Scriptures, with
other appointed forms of prayer, as now we have. But our brethren supposing,
they have here so full confuted this public reading, of prescribed forms of
prayer, psalms and chapters, that we our selves would seek to have it, yet
for a while, at least to be tolerated: they would cut of this also, and say:

What though some say: formal reading might be borne withal for ^ time, The
learned disc page 40. and 41.
until the Church might be provided of sufficient pastors, which yet is not
granted; shall it therefore continue always to the perpetual decay of
knowledge, and hurt of the Church of God?

Who are those some that so say, that formal reading might be borne withal
for a time, until, etc: And what is here meant, by formal reading? If it be a
comely and reverent form of reading a prescript number of Psalms and
Chapters of the Scriptures, Bridges.
with other appointed forms of prayer before mentioned: Why should any say
it might be borne withal for a time, A prescribed form.
until the Church might be provided of sufficient pastors? as though the
reading of these things, should no longer be suffered, but that afterward,
those that should be thought to be sufficient pastors, should have no
appointed forms of Prayer at all, nor any number at all of Psalms, or
chapters of the scriptures prescribed unto them, but that every sufficient
pastor, might be free, to vary in his forms of prayer, and number of Psalms,
and chapters of the scripture at his pleasure. What sufficiency shall be
appointed for such Pastors, is not here set down. For my part, I think there
is no sufficiency in a Pastor to be counted a sufficient privilege, so
clearly to acquit him, but that, although he may now and then leave out, or
add, or alter some part of the prescribed and appointed form, upon occasion
at his discretion, yet were it not convenient, (were he never so sufficient
learned) that there should be no form at all appointed. For we must not
only consider the sufficiency of the Pastor, The danger of having no prescript
form.
but withal the sufficiency or insufficiency of the people, and the order and
comeliness of the Church. Which is best observed, especially in these
licentious and perilous times, full of errors and corruptions, not when we
are most at liberty, but when Orders appointed do restraiue us.

But these our Brethren, the Learned discoursers, reiecte all such forms of
prayer, and say: What though some say, formal reading might be borne withal
for a time, until the Church might be provided of sufficient Pastors? which is
not yet granted. No is? who are they, that have of late set forth this
Pamphlet, entitled, A book of the form of common prayer, and ministration of
the sacraments, The form that our brethren their-selues do prescribe
etc. agreeable to Gods word, and the use of the reformed Churches? Is not
formal reading, and numbers of Psalms, and chapters of the scripture, here
prescribed? And if this book of the form of common prayer, be agreeable to
Gods word and the use of the reformed Churches: how is this our brethrens
Learned Discourse, which they call a brief and plain declaration, concerning
the desires of all those faithful ministers, that have and do seek for the
reformation of the Church of England, agreeable to Gods word, and to the use
of the reformed Churches? and how do these our Brethren here affirm, that if
this formal reading should continue always, it should redounde to the
perpetual decay of knowledge, and hurt of the Church of God? which (as Bucer
says) is to the great increase of knowledge and manifold benefit of the
Church of God. God.

What greater discouragement is there unto Students, then to see the rewards
of learning, The learned Dis. Page 41.
bestowed as commonly upon the ignorant as upon the Learned? What
encouragement is it to idleness and slothfulness, in them that be already in
that vocation, to be^old them that take no pain, Students discouraged.
to live in wealth and ease, without punishment of their negligence?

And with what necessary consequence does this hang, upon the continuance of an
appointed form of prayer, Bridges.
Psalms, and Chapters? May not the rewards of learning be bestowed upon
Students, and yet formal reading of these things still continue? yea, may
not Students employ their time more continually in their studies, and have the
more leisure to study better about the exposition of the Scriptures, when the
public form of prayer is already appointed and prescribed unto them? True it
is, that this is a great discouragement unto Students, to see the rewards of
Learning, as commonly bestowed upon the ignorant as upon the learned: But
would not evil Patrones do so more then they do, except the superior
authority of the Bishops did not restrain them? and if it were so that all
were equal, and the bestowing of the rewards of Learning, Liuinges ill
bestowed would be worse bestowed if B. were not.
lay in the election of the unlearned and vulgar people: would not the same
discouragement as commonly, or more commonly fall out then? And is this the
way to encourage Students, under pretense that the rewards of learning are
not so well bestowed, to spoil and pull down Bishoprikes, Colleages,
Cathedral Churches, Glebes and Tithes, etc. And to take all this clean away,
both from the unlearned and learned too? And are these men now so careful, of
the great discouragement of Students, to see the rewards of Learning as
commonly bestowed upon the ignorant as upon the learned? It is a good hearing,
that they are so careful for the matter: but it is a shrewde suspicion, that
if they be not so well bestowed now, if it came to some of their bestowing,
they should (forsooth) be fair and well bestowed.

If any that take no pain, live in wealth and ease, which I think be very
few, among the Ministers in these our days, and therefore may be of Students
beholden with less discouragement, or any envious eyes and that such escape
without punishment of their negligence, The vocations undermined by the persons
default.
to the encouragement unto Idleness and slouthfulnes, in them that be already
in that vocation, what are these personal defaultes of them which be in that
vocation, to the vocation it self? yea rather, do not these quarelles picked
at their negligence, Idleness and slothfulness, ( while there are other that
are not negligent, Idle nor slothful, and yet no learned preachers, but
travel in their vocation, bestowing that one small talent that God has lent
them, to the vttermoste extent thereof and to the Lords advantage) confirm and
the more approve that vocation? And may not those that are, negligent, idle,
and slothful, be punished well enough, and that more orderly punished, and
made to take pains: the state of the Ecclesiastical government standing as it
does? is there no punishment with our brethren, but either hanging up, or
turning out: yea, Maintenance of living.
and clean ouerturning too, of all that vocation, and of all the
Ecclesiastical government?

But here again ( say our brethren,) it will be objected, because there are
not livings able to maintain al learned Pastors, The learned discourse, Page
41.
we must be enforced to admit many ignorant Ministers. But again we answer,
it is our part, no only to provide learned pastors: but also livings
sufficient to maintain them, upon the necessity of Gods commandment. Let him
that is enstructed in the word (says S. Paul) minister to him that does
instruct him in all good things. Be not deceived for God is not mocked. By
which saying the Apostle confuteth all vain excuses, Gal. 6.6. 1. Cor. 9.6.
Gal. 6.6.7.
which many are wont to allege, why they would contribute nothing to the
maintenance of their pastors: All which he affirms to be vain, because they
have to do with God and not with men only. For here is not regarded the
living of a man, but how much they esteem Christ and the gospel of God.
Therefore except we will mock God to his face, let us object nothing to
testify such shameful ingratitude, that we would doubt, how they should be
provided of bodily food, of whom we receive the food of our souls. As
though we could not aforde them an earthly recompense, of whom we receive
heavenly benefits. If nothing had bin before time allotted, toward the living
of the pastors: yet were we bound in pain of damnation, to provide sufficient
for them: and now there is somewhat toward a living, where there is least, and
in all places sufficient, if it were well disposed, why should we object
necessity through lack of livings, to retain Idols in stead of true Pastors?

How true this objection is, Bridges.
( considering not only the employing unto other profane uses, Lack of
sufficient maintenance in every congregation.
the living that has been dedicated thereunto but also the very poverty of
many Parishes themselves, to find such maintenance in every Church or
several Congregation throughout the Realm, as might encourage students and
learned Pastors:) may plainly to any that indifferently would weigh these
considerations, be soon apparent.

Neither yet follows it hereupon, that we must be enforced to admit many or
any ignorant Ministers, though some not so learned Ministers, as might deserve
the greater rewards of learning. Our brethren answer hereunto, It is our part
not only to provide learned Pastors: but also livings to maintain the^, upon
the necessity of Gods commandment. This is true, where sufficient livings are
not already provided for them, there it is our part, so far forth to provide
for them, as we conveniently are able. Saint Paul wrote to them that had
Pastors, and were of good ability to maintain them. And it is likely (as
Calvin notes thereon, from whence our brethren seem to take this
observation) that the Doctors and Ministers of the word were even then
neglected, when there was yet no certain portions allotted unto them, but the
Pastors lived on the peoples benevolence and contributions.

If this devotion waxed so cold then, that S. Paul was feign to call upon them
and command them, in the primitive age and prime of the Church, the Apostles
yet living: how much more had we need in this last and corrupt age, (when so
many are given to the spoil of all things allotted to the Ministry, by these
new fangled devices, and by overthrowing the authority, and taking a way the
liuinges of the bishops, and other the best learned preachers in the
Ministry,) to take heed, least while we would seem to plead for the
maintenance of the Ministers living, we give no occasion to the quite
overthrow and spoiling of them.

And if any (as indeed many) testify such shameful ingratitude, by their vain
excuses such as Hierome, ( on this precept of thapostle) reckons up: as our
brethren rightly say thereon: they do but mock God to his face. Even such are
many of those (although there be also many other better disposed) that cry
out so fast of unlearned Ministers, Many that are most earnest in these things
have gotten a good portion of these livings already.
and have already licked up a good portion of the livings, that were dedicated
to the maintenance of the best learned and cheifest in the Ministry. And by
these our Brethrens devises and exclamations, do even gape for the swallowing
of the residue. But since (as it is confessed here) such provision has bin
allotted for the living of the pastors, and yet, after all that is already gone,
there is somewhat remaining toward a living, where there is least, and in all
places sufficient, if it were well disposed: Why should we not rather seek
godly and lawful means, that such a sufficiency might be well disposed,
than to overthrow all that is already well disposed, under pretense that we
retain certain Idolles in steed of true pastors? as though none could be
true pastors, but learned men: and all pastors that are not learned, ( nay
though never so well learned, if not learned preachers, exxhorters and
Confuters of the gayn-sayers,) are but Idolles and untrue pastors.

This Discourse of our Brethren, may perhaps (because they would so seem to
favor learned men) be called learned in their own opinions: but we have not
so learned Christ, thus to condemn our poor brethren Ministers, only for
lack of learning: if otherwise, being not ignorant of their office, they be
diligent and faithful to their ability. O that our learned brethren would
remember well this saying, Scientia inflat, charitas aedificat. And that while
they speak against these Mockers of God, they would bethink themselves, what
God and man may think of this their strange dealing: to pretend, men are bound
upon necessity of Gods co^mmandement, Mockery of God and man
and in pain of damnation, to provide sufficient living to maintain learned
pastors, even where nothing has bin before time allotted, and yet, to take
from them that which is allotted, and to bereue them of their authority, and to
do this to yt best learned, under a shadow of doing it only to the unlearned:
what a mockery is this, Spoylers and Mockers.
both of God and man unto their faces? If our Brethrens complaint be here
true, that many are wont to allege vain excuses why they would contribute
nothing to the maintenance of their Pastors, and that is more shameful
ingratitude, which we see find by proof that many would take away that which is
already allotted, and make a mock of this, which our Brethren here, as it
seems in good sadness tell them, that they have to do with God, etc. and
that they mock God, although in the end they shall find, that though the
latin be false, the sense is true, Qui mockat mockabitur, or as David says,
Psalm 2. He that dwells in the Heavens shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord
shall have them in derision, and shall charge them with it, when full heavily
they shall abye, and bewayl their mocking and their spoiling: and will now our
Brethren (that complain of these mockers and these spoylers) be mocked also of
them, and give occasion to their spoiling.

Is it not yet better to stand as it does in the mean season, though all have
not share and share alike in the rewards of learning, (as their gifts and
charges are not alike) than (attempting thus with our Brethren, to alter and
turquish all, upon hope of equal division,) to open a gappe to these Mockers
and Cormorantes, clapping our Brethren on the back, and encouraging them to
enueigh against the Bishops, and to make odious the cheifest and best Learned
Pastors: to complain and cry out upon the uneven and ill bestowing and
disposing of the ecclesiastical livings: and to pretend more equal
distribution of them: and when al is first dissolved, and taken away from those
that have them: then in come these hoouering puttocks, to seize in their
claws, and carry clean away all the remainder from both the parties
striving. And when all is gone: then after come our Brethren, and burden their
consciences for these mocks and spoils, and exhort and charge them on pain of
damnation to allotte some sufficient stipendes to their Ministers, Is not this
another plain mockery?

God help the poor pastors and students, be they unlearned, The great
spoils that learned men complain on, that are made under pretense of
reformation.
or never so learned, if it should ever come to these new allotments and
disposinges, what should be thought sufficient for them Other Realms have
felt the lamentable experience, and (what face soever our Brethren haere set on
the matter,) we read of their best best learned pastors complaints in their
works, of this shameful ungratefulness, of them, that under pretense of
avoiding popish pride and tyranny, have spoiled them, both of their sufficient
maintenance of living* and of the lawful authority of their
ecclesiastiasticall government. But our brethren turn us from the
consideration of the Learned Pastors complaints of this ungratefulness, in
diverse parts of Germany, Denmark, Scotland, etc. and would have us look
again on the persecuted Churches in France, saying.

The french Churches.
Look once again into France (for examples move much) and behold the Churches
there impouerished, and spoiled with long wars, persecution and unquietness.
The learned disc. Page 43.
They have neither Bishoprics, Deanries, prebends nor benefices to bestow on
their pastors, and yet Minister unto them all things necessary for an honest
sober life, and shall we that have all this while lived in peace, and
prosperity, under a godly and religious Princess, having all these helps,
think it is impossible, by disposition of Godly and wise governors, to
appoint a sufficient portion, for so many learned pastors as are necessary for
our Churches?

We must once again look into France, and behold the Churches there
impouerished, Bridges
and spoiled with long wars, persecution and unquietness. And who have thus
spoiled them? have not the adversaries of the gospel? and they again have met
with them, and meetely well spoiled the other. But they have neither
Bishoprics, Deanries, Prebendes, nor benefices to bestow on their pastors.
Have they not? the more pity, if it pleased God: it were better for them, and
they had them, so they bestowed them better than they be bestowed. But (say
they) these Churches have none of all these helps to bestow, and yet Minister
unto them all things necessary for an honest sober life. But I ask, if they
had that they have not, Byshoprickes, Deanries, Prebendes and benefices, to
bestow on their pastors: should they not bestow them? and if they did bestow
them on their pastors, were it not better both for their pastors and for them
too? And shall we then, who. (God be praised for it, and continue it) living
in peace and prosperity, under a godly and religious Princess, and having all
these helps, to bestow on our pastors, not bestow them on them, but go about
to take them from them? yea, to pull the^ all clean down? If examples move: let
them move us, rather to be thankful in this point unto God, and not to move
such unquietness among our selves, being with out wars, as shall impouerish and
spoil as much, as can the open adversary of the gospel with his persecution.
And if we will not mock her Majesty to her face also, but mean sooth as we say,
that we that have all this while lived in peace and prosperity, Who mock her
Majesty if they obey not.
under a godly and religious princess, having all these helps: why obey we
not this godly and religious princes laws of ecclesiastical government, but
exclaim on them as ungodly and vnreligious? is that a godly and religious
prince, that sets forth and maintains ungodly and vnreligious laws, and
that in the Ecclesiastical government of the Church, which is no less matter
than the civil government of the realm? How do these things hang together?
yea, how do not our brethren (in these words) so inta^gle themselves, that
either they show plainly, they mock her Majesty to her face: or else bewray
them, selves that these their doings are the parts neither of godly nor
religious subjects. Which when they shall consider better: I hope, this
confession of her Majesty, being truly spoken, and truly meant, will somewhat
better move them to their duties. Bish. Dea^ries. etc. helps.
And since that they confess withal, we live in peace and prosperity under a
godly and religious princess: why should our brethren show this shameful
ingratitude, both to her Majesty, and to God the cheesest author whence this
peace and prosperity, springs, to disturb this peace, and hinder this
prosperity, more than all the adversaries of the Gospel, either do, or can do?
and seeing they theirselues do here acknowledge, that Bishoprics, Deanries,
Prebends and benefices, be al of them helps: why do they impugn them, as
hindrances unto Gods church, and to the pastors of it? as for the appointing of
a sufficient portion, by the disposition of Godly and wise governors, for so
many learned pastors as are necessary for our Churches. If they want any
provision, not provided for by the Laws of the Church and realm now in force:
no man (that I know) thinks it either impossible, or not needful to be
provided for. But this may be sufficiently provided for well enough, without
the overthrow of the Bishops or Archb. superiority over his brethren pastors,
or without the spoil of theirs, or any others livings, and especially, without
the setting up of these old pretended* but indeed, new devised forms of
Ecclesiastical government.

There is none excuse therefore to be admitted, but that we must endeavor to the
vttermoste of our power, that every several congregation, church or parish be
provided of a learned pastor. The L. Disc. Page 43 44, 45, 46.
For unskillful sheepeheards have bin too long thrust upon us, to the great
dishonor of God, and defacing of the Gospel of Christ. We have hitherto taken
upon us without warrant of Gods word, to allow such for pastors of men's
souls, whom no careful owner of cattle, would make ouerseer of his sheep
bodies. Which thing almighty God has always detested, and fignified his
misliking by diverse testimonies, both of the old and new testament. Therefore
he says by the prophet Esaias, complaining of the unlearned pastors of Israel,
which was the only cause of their affliction and miseries. Their watchmen are
all blind, they have no knowledge, they can-not bark, they lie and sleep and
delight in sleeping, and these greedy Dogs can never have enough, and these
shepheardes cannot understand, Esai. 56.10.11.12.
for they all look to their own way, every one for his advantage, and for his
own purpose. Come, I will bring Wine, and we will fill our selves with strong
drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.

If the prophet had lived in these our days might he not have spoken the
same more truly of many Shires in ENGLAND? We see therefore that blind
Watch men, and ignorant dumb dogs, and idle greedy curres, and unlearned
Shepheardes, that serve for nothing, but to fill their own purses, or their
paunches, by the testimony of God his spirit, are denied to be meet Pastors
of the people of God. The Prophet Ezechiel also enueigheth at large, against
the vnfeeding shepheardes of Israel: K^sk^lfull Pastors.
saying, ( VVoe be unto the shepheardes of Israel which feed themselves:
should not the shepherd feed the flock: Ye eat the fat, Ezech. 34.2.3.4.
and you clothe you with the w^olle: ye kill them that are fed, but ye^e de
not the Sheep. The weak have ye not strengthened, the sick have ye not
healed, neither have ye bound up the broken, nor brought again that which
was driven aw^y, neither have ye sought that which was lost. etc. throughout
the whole chapter. When feeding of Gods sheep is a matter of so great
importance, and consists of so many parts, which the prophet has here
described, how should we admit them whom God rejects? Which being
ignorant and unlearned know nothing at all, and therefore nothing can do
that appertains to this charge, or any part thereof: undoubtedly the
reteyning of such, is a manifest token of the vengeance of God against us, for
so he threatens by the prophet Zach. his words are these. And the Lord said
unto me: take to thee ye^ the Instruments of a foolish Sephear^e. For lo, I
will raise up a Shephearde in the Land, which shall not look for the thing
that is lost, nor seek the tender lambs, nor heal that is hurt: Zach.
11.16.17.
nor feed that which stands up, but he shall eat the flesh of the fat and
tear their Hooues in pieces. O Idol Shephearde that leaves the Flock, the
Sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be
clean dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.

Here first where our Brethren conclude on their former premises, that there
is none excuse, Bridges.
etc. We grant as before, that all vain excuses are insufficient, and that we
must do our endeavor to the uttermost of our power, so it be done without
violence or injury to any man. But that every several congregation, Church or
Parish must be provided of a learned pastor, Providing of learned men.
meaning such a learned pastor, as should need no appointed form of prayer:
etc is not so necessary. Howbeit, as learned a man were to be wished and
provided for, as may conuenientlye be gotten.

And if Unskillful shepheardes have been too long thrust upon us, is there no
remedy, but we must thrust out the most skilful, for the vnskilfuls sake? But
what do our Brethren mean by this saying, that we have hitherto taken upon
us, without warrant of Gods word, to allow such for Pastors of men's souls,
whom no careful owner of Cattle would make ouerseer of his Sheep bodies?
And can they warrant this out of Gods word, that we should only allow such
for Pastors of men's souls, whom a careful owner of Cattle would make
ouerseer of his Sheep bodies? Verilye by this accusation they might thrust
out a great many not only unlearned, but also the most Learned and
skilfullest Pastors of men's souls, that for any skill at all, and perhaps
also for any abilitye of their bodies, no careful owner of Cattle would
make ouer-seer of his sheep bodies. The Prophets wrested.
But if our Brethren say, they mean not so, though they say so, but only yt
we allow such for Pastors of men's souls, as are more unskillful of the food
of men's souls, than are such, as for their unskillfulness to ouersee the
bodies of his sheep, no owner of cattle would allow for bodily shepherds:
as (I hope) there be none, or not many, so unskillful: so, if there be any,
they are not allowed, much less thrust upon us, but rather instructed, or
punished, or removed, at least wise on proof they are remoueable.

As for these sentences, which our brethren here cite against unskillful
pastors, were not only spoken against the wicked and Idolatrous Priests in
those Prophets days: but also against their wicked Kings, Princes, and
Magistrates, as Calvin observes, saying on the same 10. verse, Esaias. 56. Our
brethrens too lavish application of the prophecy of Esaie.
Moreover, by the name of watchmen, he not only understands the Prophets,
unto whom the function of teaching was enjoined, but also the Judges, the
Governors, and Kings, who ought to have administered all things orderly, etc
The applying therefore of this sentence unto our state now, may infer a very
dangerous and not subiectlike conclusion, and if our brethren will needs
understand it of the only Ecclesiastical pastors, as that of Ezechiel and of
Zachary: yet why should they not rather apply it (as Calvin does that of
Zachary) unto the Popish pastors, that resemble these against who^ the
Prophets inueigh? Albeit Tremelius and other refer these sayings of Zachary
to the Magistrate also But take it for the Ecclesiastical pastors. If any of
the pastors in these or any other Prophets days, had dilige^tlie (at their
due times assigned unto them) read in their public Congregations, the only
law and the Prophets, and administered the Sacraments and rites then appointed,
though they had not with any interpretations at large expounded the same, nor
given any persuasible exhortation to the people: yea, though they were not of
sufficient learning so to do, but were able only to show the brief and
simple meaning of those mysteries: yet, would not, nor could these Prophets
have applied these inuectiues, to any such true and diligent, though not
learned nor preaching pastors. And much less can our brethren or any other,
direct them against our Christian and godly protestant Ministers of the
Gospel, though they be no learned preachers, interpreters, nor exhorters: if
they diligently read the only word of God unto the people, and sincerely
administer the Sacraments, and where a doubt is in any principle of our
religion, can only in brief declare the same though they be neither learned
otherwise, nor able to preach, exhort, persuade, nor apply in public action.
So that, these sentences of the Prophets* are a great deal both too
unadvisedly, and too uncharitably of our brethren hated and wrested against
all those Ministers of the Gospel, that are no preachers.

Howbeit, if there be any such among the Ministers of the Gospel, that may be
rightly compared unto these, The Proph wrested.
against whom the Prophets cry: we confess it is not fit such should be
maintained, neither does any law now in force maintain them, neither think
I, that this which here confidentlie, our Brethren by way of a question do
auowe, is true: that if the Prophet had lived in these our days, might he not
have spoken the same more truly of many shieres in England? If the Prophets
had lived in our days, they would not have spoken as our breath.
No verily (GOD be praised for it) could he. For what many shieres can our
Breath. name in England, whereof it may be truly said, their watchmen are all
blind, and cannot bark, etc?

What an hard speech is this from our Brethren, to publish and denounce,
though (thanks be to GOD) not against all shieres, yet against many shieres
in England? But I verily hope, that if it should be tried, it cannot be
verified of any one shiere in England. And yet, if in any or many shieres,
there be any such (as we grant there be too many, if there be any) to
still I stand to my tackeling on this point, be they many, or in many
shieres; they may be all well, yea, better reformed ( without this new
alteration of our Brethrens Ecclesiastical government) by the Bishops and
Archbishoppes, superior authority over them. For, howsoever by abuse,
negligence, or corruption, any such blind watchmen, and ignorant dumb
dogs, and idle greedy curres, and unlearned shepheardes, that serve for
nothing but to fill their paunches, may here and there creep in: yet are none
such by the Ecclesiastical state of government allowed, but as they are found
criminous herein, so they are either deprived or corrected.

And as for this sentence of Ezechiel, is so directly spoken against those
Pastors, that wilfully suffered all the people to run into open Idolatry,
that except we should withal, burden all the Realm to be open Idolaters,
and the whole Clergy wilfully to neglect it, and that they are neither
willing nor able to speak ought against it: (although withal we grant, it
comprehend all those that are semblable in ignorance, negligence,
covetousness, and voluptuousness, without any regard of GODS people) it
cannot thus largely and at randon be applied to our whole state, neither
against those that are learned, painful, and faithful preachers, of which
sort (God be praised, and increase them) we are not unfurnished, neither
against those their Curates in their absences and under them, Ezechiels
sentence abused* and the whole clergy learned and unlearned sla^dered
such as, although they be not able to preach, yet they teach truly and
diligently to their ability, and frame their lives according thereunto. As
for such other as here are named, I think it would be over hard for our
Brethren, to find out such to be maintained, which being ignorant and
unlearned, know nothing at all, and therefore nothing can do, that
appertains to his charge, or any part thereof. Reading Ministers.
Neither does the sentence alleged out of Zachary, touch our poor
Ministers. Who though they be not so learned, that they can with any
edification preach, Zacharies sentence wrested against the Ministers of the
Gospel, though not preachers.
as we use the name of Preachers, especially as our Brethren here pretend to
understand the word: yet if they read and set forth the word of God with all
their diligence faithfully, they are so acquitted from this censure of the
Prophet Zachary, that Calvin writing at large upon the same, compares them
only to the Popish Pastors, not unto any Ministers of the Gospel.

Now seeing ( say our Brethren) we are taught by these words of the Lord
God, The learned Dis. Page 47.
that it is a great and horrible plague to have the Church of God encombered
with such foolish and Idol shepheardes: let us study to remove such plagues
from the flock of Christ, whose arms are clean dried up, that they have no
force, and their eyes utterly darkened, that they have no skill, so that they
are not able to perform those duties which pertain to a wise and faithful
shephearde, except we will betraie the sheep of Christ, into the mouths of
ravenous wolves, 1. Pet. 18.
and especially into the teeth of that great ramping lion the devil, who
never cease going about to seek whom he may devour for his pray. For
what do these reading Ministers differ from those Idol shepherds, which God
in his vengeance threatens to send, for the ingratitude of the people?

What we are taught by these words of the Lord God, in these foresaid
sentences of the Prophets: we have before sufficiently seen, Bridges.
that they touch not any godly and diligent Ministers of the word and
Sacraments of Christ, although they be not learned Preachers. We grant, it is
a great and horrible plague to have the Church of God encumbered with such
foolish and Idol shepheardes, as Zachary describes: and to study to remove
such plagues from the flock of Christ, whose arms are clean dried up, that
they have no force, and their eyes utterly darkened that they have no skill,
etc. It is good council. But to demand heereon: What do these reading
Ministers differ from those Idol shepheardes, which GOD in his vengeance
threatens to send, for the ingratitude of the people? Is a question with
another demand to be assoyled. What they mean by these reading Ministers?
For, albeit this is most untrue, What our breath. mean by reading Ministers.
that those Idol shepheardes of whom the Prophet speaks, were reading
Ministers, but rather they are called Idol shepheardes, for that they were not
reading Ministers, but dumb and silent Ministers, like to Idolles, that had
mouths and ^pake not. Yet, if they mean by reading Ministers, such among us,
as can do nothing else but only read: although sometime in the ancient
Church, there has also been a great use of such reading Ministers,
Homelies.
whose office was only, or most especially to read, and great account made
thereof, and served for good and excellent purposes, as out of Za^chius and
Bucer is declared: yet notwithstanding, if these reading Ministers perched into
higher places of the Ministry than they should, (as coming some what near
to the touch of these terms) they might perhaps better deserve to be removed.
But if they simply mean all reading Ministers, whereas the most part are able
to give good counsel, instruction, admonition, and exhortation in private
conference, besides their public formal reading, though they have no
dexterity in public preaching: yea, there is none so learned a preacher in
this land, or in any other Church, but it may beseem him well enough to read
the public form of common prayer in the Church; and to read the Chapters and
Psalms appointed, and so, all sorts of Ecclesiastical persons, being
comprised in this term, Reading Ministers: it were ouerhard to remove all,
and to condemn all reading Ministers for Idol shepherds.

It will be answered (no doubt) that to supply their ignorance, there are
added to their appointed service, The learned disc. Page 48.
many godly and learned Homelies, which if they read with their service,
there is not so great need of preaching and interpretation of the Scriptures.

And if this be answered, for any thing that is here replied, the answer
might satisfy any reasonable man, that were not too litigious and importune.
Bridges.
Why may not many godly and learned Homelies be added, to supply their
ignorance that are not learned pastors? Is not an Homely a sermon also? And if
they be godly, and learned, and many such Sermons, although they be but read
plainly and distinctlie upon the book, and not conned or spoken without the
book: may it not be safely said (at least thus much) that where they are
orderly and often read, there is not so great need of other preaching, and of
other interpretation of the Scriptures? When as indeed, the reading of the^
(being read as they ought to be) is also a kind of preaching, and oftentimes no
unfruitful interpreting of the Scriptures. But now, what do our brethren
here reply unto the answer of this supply?

We will derogate nothing here from the dignity of those Homelies: we will
not accuse here the insensible reading of unlearned Ministers, The learned
discourse, Page 48.
neither yet the vnreuerent contempt of the ignorant hearers: but which all
godly and wise men must needs confess, those exhortations that are not
applied to the proper circumstances of times, places, persons, and occasions,
are of small power to persuade any man, and least of all the ignorant people.

Bridges
What our brethren here do mean, in saying, we will derogate nothing here
from the dignity of those Homelies: Homelies.
it is uncertain, because that this restraint here, seems to infer, that
some where else they will derogate from the dignity of them. Which if they do:
we must answer it then, and take this in ye mean season that is granted
here. And yet here let us friendly forewarne our brethren, to remember what
they have granted here, least they derogate there, from that which they have
acknowledged here, that those Homilies are godly and learned Homilies, yea,
Our breath. derogation from Hom. though godly and learned.
let them take heed that even here they control not themselves, for if they
will here derogate nothing from the dignity of them: how then will they not
allow them to be read? Is it no derogation to the dignity of the^, to
prohibit the reading of them? And since they here confess them to be both
godly and learned, why may not such profit be reaped by them, that they may be
a good and necessary supply, when other kind of preaching wants? As for
the insensible reading of unlearned Ministers, may both here and any where
else be worthelie misliked, and also the vnreuerent contempt of the ignorant
hearers.

But what is this against the godly and learned Homelies, when they are
sensibly read, and when they are reverently heard, and not contemned, and
when the ignorant hearers attain to knowledge, by the hearing and marking of
them? But whatsoever they will derogate other where, or contrary themselves
there or here: What a dangerous saying is this that follows, as a reason
here of the^ alleged? But, that which all godly and wise men must needs
confess, those exhortations that are not applied to the proper circumstances
of times, places, persons, and occasions, are of small power to persuade any
man, What can our bre say worse to the derogation of godly learned Homilies.
and least of all the ignorant people? For these general speeches take not
only away the benefit, that many to their comfort and increase of knowledge
feel, by the reading and hearing of many godly and learned Homilies: but also
of all other writers and Fathers Commentaries, Common places, Apologies,
Confutations, Treatises, Sermons, Postills, Homilies, or whatsoever never so
godly and learned discourses, yea, it would make the holy Scripture it self,
which is the power of God to salvation to all them that believe it. Romans 1.
which is quick and forcible, and more pearcing than a two edged sword,
reaching even to the parting of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints
and marow, and a separater of the thoughts and intentions of the heart. Heb. 4.
to be of small power. And what are any godly and learned Homelies, but
written Sermons, expositions, and preachings of Gods word, to make the same
more plain, and so to persuade more effectually the ignorant hearers?

But, The smaller power ma^e yet help somewhat (...) want of the greate^.
be it that godly and learned Homilies are but of small power to persuade any
man: yet if they be of some power, though the smaller; then may they be added
as some supply, though the smaller: when the greater supply of godly and
learned preaching is not always so ready: albeit that many godly and learned
Homilies, are not so destitute neither of application, to diverse proper
circumstances, of times, places, persons, and occasions, The force of godly
learned Homilies to the godly disposed.
but that the diligent hearer and marker may perceive him self sufficiently,
and often times with more moderation, and no less pithilie to be touched and
moved, than perhaps with many more vehement and less considerate exhortations
or reprehensions of diverse, yea, and that very godly and learned preachers.

Let long experience, the mistres of fools, teach us, if knowledge the
instructor of wise men cannot move us. The learned disc. Page 48. and 49.
How many Papists converted? How many ignorant instructed? How many wicked
reformed, are ye able to show by this ignorant and unlearned Ministry, with all the helps of reading, of formal Prayers, Homilies, without preaching and
applying the Scriptures to the proper circumstances before rehearsed?

If long experience be the mistres of fools: whose mistres is late and short
Experience? Bridges
And why then do our Brethren cry so fast, to have us look upon and follow
the late experience, Experience.
and that in other Countries, as a rule for us and all to imitate? The question
here demanded how many Papists converted, etc? is very captions. As though we
allowed of ignorant and unlearned Ministers, or allowed of such reading of
formal prayers and Homilies, as never has the helps of preaching, or
applying the Scriptures to the proper circumstances before rehearsed. How far
we allow of Homilies.
Whereas we hope* there is no Congregation so utterly destitute of preaching,
albeit, that the Homilies their selves (being as is confessed) both godly and
learned, be both a preaching and an applying of the Scriptures, and may be well
used of any never so godly and learned a Minister, and much more the less
learned that he is.

And no doubt, though we name not particular persons, which we might well do,
and I for my part, and that in open disputation of this matter, with some not
of the meanest of our Breath. and that before ye Mayor the^, and chiefest of the
City, have heard diverse godly, zealous, and worshipful, seriously
acknowledge great fruit by the hearing of Homilies, yea, and some that have
plainly confessed of themselves, that before being very ignorant Papists,
though they have not only ben converted by the hearing of the godly and
learned Homilies, nor only by hearing preachers, nor only by reading the
Scriptures, nor only by prayer to God, who only opens, molliffeth,
lightneth, and conuerteth the heart: but that God has done it sometimes by all
these means together, and sometimes by one, and sometimes by another, with
conference, disputing, and other godly means: yet among all, they have openly
professed, that God has converted the^ from their Papistrie, and instructed
the^ from their ignorance, and reformed the^ from their wickedness, not a little
but very much, by the often reading and hearing of printed sermons or Homelies
of our own Countrymen, and of other nations: as of Calvin, Bullinger,
Gualter, Hemingius, and diverse others: and whether this be true or no, whereas
our Breath* demand, how many we are able to show: let every man show himself
as he has found, I appeal to every man's conscience, for his own experience
in this point: and I doubt not, but (if they will not unthankfully hide it)
many thousands in this land would rise up, and with heart and mouth confess,
that they have found no small comfort and edification, by the reading and
hearing of such godly and learned Homilies or Sermons, as in our English
tongue are set forth.

Again, who sees not, but he that is so blind that will see nothing, that
these parts of a true pastors duty, The learned discourse. page 49.
which both the prophets Ezech. and Zac. rehearse, namely, to strengthen the
weak, to heal the sick, to bind the broken, to seek the lost, to bring home
that is carried away, to cherish the yo^g la^bs, to feed the strong sheep, etc.
cannot be performed of any man by such means as these, but only by such a one
as is a godly and learned shepherd.

I grant these duties cannot be performed by such means as these, of any man
that is altogether ignorant and utterly unlearned, Bridges
such as our breath have heretofore described. But I deny this, that these
duties can be performed only by such an one, as is a godly and learned
shepherd, in such sense, that he may not withal use these means.

Wherefore, these poor helps of prescript form of reading of prayers, of
homelies, and such like, The learned discourse. Page 49. and 50.
when they are alleged to maintain the ignorance of unskillful pastors, are
called no beteer by the judgment of God, but the instruments of foolish and
Idol shepherds, which have a certain pretense of pastoral office, but in
effect are altogether unmeet for the same: eue^ as Idols and Idiots are good
for nothing, but able to do much hurt, concerning who^, our savior Christ
pronounces this fearful sentence: If the blind lead the blind they shall both
fall into the pit. Mat 15.14.
How long therefore shall we suffer the blind to lead the blind, to the
destruction of both? Let us therefore now at length remove these blind guides,
and place in their steads faithful overseers, that may lead the flock of
Christ into the way of salvation.

How is now the promise kept which our breath. made so late before, Bridges.
that they would derogate nothing here from the dignity of those Homilies,
which themselves confess to be both godly and learned? And yet here eue^ the
very next page* both Homilies generally, and also the prescript form of
reading of prayers, and such like, are not only conte^ptuously called pore
helps, but are in reproach termed the instruments of foolish and Idol
shepherds, and yt is worst of all, they say they are called no better by the
judgment of God. The Jews used a prescript form of prayers and written
Sermons.
But do they find this judgment or calling of God out of Zach. or Ezech. or
any other of the Prophets? Do any of the^ call a prescript form of godly
prayers, or of godly and learned Homilies or sermons by these terms? Had not
the Jews a prescript form of all their sacrifices, and of many prayers and
Psalms, composed, digested, and prescribed to the children of Corath, and to
other Priests and Levites? The true use of Homilies.
And had they not also many Serm^ns written by Moses, and by the other
prophets, which they often used on the Saboth days, and other feasts to read
in the congregations publicly, without any alteration of them, or the
addition so much as of any exposition or exhortation gathered on them? And did
they not in so doing, even all these things that here are mentioned,
notwithstanding all things were prescribed unto them? And yet were they no
Idiots nor Idols, nor the blind leaders of the blind, nor these sentences of
Christ nor of these Prophets were applied unto them, nor the following of the
prescribed service, are of them called the Instruments of foolish and Idol
shepherds. Or, what godly and learned Commentary expounds these words of
the Prophet, for the prescript form of prayer and Homelies?

Calvin on these words of Zachary, chap. 11. verse. 15. Calvin on Zachary
chap. 11.15.
Take to thee the instrument of a foolish shepherd, says on this wise: The
Prophet here teaches, that whereas God has cast off the care of the people:
there shall be some vain show of government, but out of which it may easily
be gathered, that God exercises no more the office of the Pastor: as though he
should say, the people should be so forsaken, that notwithstanding they should
think themselves yet for a while to be, and to remain under the safeguard of
God: Even as we do see in Popery those proud boastings to fly about, the
church to be never forsaken of God. Although therefore the truth of God has
hitherto been overwhelmed: notwithstanding it was the true Church, which was
stuffed with wicked superstitions. Even as therefore the Papists boast and are
contented with a title only: so we know the Jews pretended their
privileges, and these also were their weapons, when they would coape and
conflict with the Apostles. What? are not we the inheritance of God? Has he
not promised, that there should be a perpetual sanctuary to himself among us?
Is not the sacerdotall unction a certain and infallible sign of his grace?
Even as therefore the Jews puffed out those foolish boastings against the
Apostles: so also at this day the Papists do shroude all their shames, under
the title of the Church. This now does Zachary understand, when he says,
that by the commandment of God, he took the vessel or instrument of a folish
pastor or shepherd. (...) signifies unto the Hebrews any instrument, we
expound it a broken bag. But that is to much wrested. I doubt not therefore,
but that by the instrument of the pastor, Zachary understands the Ensigns
or notable marks, out of the which it might be gathered there was yet some
pastor, but in the mean season he calls him a foolish pastor, that we may
know, he was but a void or a deceitful visard. The name therefore of pastor
is here placed by granting to it, as the Scripture often speaks, and at this
day we also grant now and then to the Papists, the name of the Church, and also
we grant to their horned or mitred Bishops the name of Pastors.

Thus does Calvin apply this saying to the Papists ( as the most part both of
old and new interpreters, apply the Pastor here mentioned to Antichrist) and
the instrument of this foolish shepherd to the title of the Church. But none
that I read of, to the prescript form of godly prayers or to the reading of
godly and learned homilies.

If our Brethren say, that these things are not of themselves called the
instruments of foolish Pastors, but when they are alleged to maintain the
ignorance of unskillful Pastors: although, this be not true altogether neither;
yet, were it true, when these things are so alleged: as the scripture in some
sense, The scriptur wrested is not the scripture which in his true sense is
gods holy word.
when it is wrested and alleged to maintain that, which it is not spoken of,
nor appliable unto, is called a dead letter, or rather not the Scripture at
all, and so may be called in such a wrested and false sense, the instrument of
an Heretical Pastor, and of the Devil himself, or by any worse name: and yet
used and applied in his true sense, (in which only it is indeed the
Scripture,) it is the holy word of God: as also we may say the like of the
sacrifices, and other ceremonies of Gods law among the Jews, The use and
abuse of the sacrifices.
when they were used in their kinds, and referred as types and figures to
Jesus Christ, they were the holy ordinances of the Lord: but being drawn
from Christ, whom they prefigured, to maintain the error of op^^ operatum,
as though they had virtue and grace in themselves, to forgive the sins of
those that made the sacrifices, or of those to whom they applied them: they
are then called beggarly elements, and as it were the offering up of dogs,
which God detesteth: so, if we should commend the reading of prescript form,
of holy and devout prayers, or of godly and learned homilies, The abuse in
reading prayers and homilies lets not but that there is a good use of them.
to maintain the ignorance of unskillful Pastors: then indeed it might well
be said, that the holiness, and devotion of those prayers, turns to sin
and superstition; the godliness and learnednesse of those homilies, might well
be said, by the judgment of GOD to be no better than instruments of foolish
Pastors, though in these places cited, God call them not so. But, since we
allege not, nor use any prescript reading, or form of prayer and homelies, to
maintain the ignorance of unskillful Pastors, but contrariwise, to instruct
both them and all others that here the same, and so to bring them out of
ignorance to godly and learned knowledge: these odious and contemptuous terms,
can by no right be justly applied unto them. And as for the suffering of any
blind guydes to lead the blind: If they be such blind ones indeed as
Christ speaks of, Blind guid^.
it were not convenient they should be suffered. And if our Brethren would
leave these unnecessary striuings with such guydes as be not blind, but see
as well, or better than theirselues, those blind guydes where any be, might be
better and more orderly removed, Politic shifts.
and other faithful overseers placed in their steed.

The learned disc. page 50. and 51.
The ministers of the Church are the salt of the earth. If the salt be
unsavory, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It is good for nothing but to be
cast out and trooden down of men's feet. Let us not therefore seek politic
shifts to maintain the unsavory salt, which our Savior Christ pronounces
to be good for nothing but to be cast out. By these and many other testimonies
of the scripture, Mat. 5.13.
it is as clear as the son at noone days, that it is the office and duty
of a Pastor, both to be able and willing to teach his flock, and that no
ignorant and unlearned person is to be admitted to that charge, or retained, if
he be crept in, no more than a blind man is to be suffered in an office, which
must be executed only with the sight: or a dumb dog to give warning which
can not bark; or an Idol to have the place of a man, or a fool of a wise man,
or a wolf of a shepherd, or darkness in steed of light, or salt that is
unsavory to season withal.

We grant, no politic shifts should be fought nor used, neither (hope we) any
are sought or used, Bridges.
at least, our Brethren have not yet proved any to be sought or used by the
state of the Ecclesiastical government, Our form of prayers and homilies no
politic shift to maintain unlearned Pastors.
to maintayn such Ministers, as may rightly be compared unto these terms.
Neither are godly and learned Homilies, nor the prescribed form of godly
prayers, any politic shifts to maintain them. If they were: our Brethren
theirselues might be burdened, to seek also such politic shifts, that do
likewise prescribe a form of public prayer. Such Ministers as are here
described, blind, fools, Idiots, Idols, dumb dogs, wolves, darkness,
salt unsavory, ignorant and unlearned persons; where any upon just trial are
found and convicted so to be, and of whom is no hope that they may become able
and willing to teach their flock, it had been better (we confess) they had
not been admitted to that charge, or being crept in, are not to be retained.
Notwithstanding, all such may orderly be removed, and yet the prescript form
of common prayer, and of godly and learned homilies, and the superior
authority of Bishops and Archb. with the other discipline and government of
the Church of England already established, may continue well enough in force,
without these byous, odious and impertinent quarrels, of mainteyning any such
unlearned ministers.

But while we entreat of teaching, to be the duty of a Pastor, we do not only
mean public preaching when the congregation is assembled: The learned disc.
Page 51.52.53.
but also private exhortation, reprehension, consolation, of every particular
person within his charge, so often as need shall require. And that this is
also the duty of a faithful Bishop, S. Paul testifies, setting before the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus the example of his diligence, which he would
have them to follow. The Pastors private duty.
You know (says he) from the first day that I came into Asia, after what
manner I have been with you at all seasons. Serving the Lord with all
modesty, etc. And how I kept back nothing that was profitable, but have
showed you, and taught you, Act. 20.8.19. and 20.
both openly and throughout every house. By which is manifest that the Pastor
must not only teach al his flock openly, but also he must instruct every
family privately, wheresoever he shall see it to be needful or expedient.
Which duty cannot be accomplished by a reading Minister. Also in the 26. ver.
of the same chap. he commends unto the Elders, a general care of the whole
flock. Take heed to your selves (says he) and to the whole flock. Act.
20.26.
Which care cannot be well, or at all undertaken, except they be diligent to
teach, both all and every one of their flock, as need shall require. Which
thing also he wills them once again to observe in his example, verse, 31.
saying: Therefore watch ye, remembering that by the space of three years, I
ceased not night and day, exhorting every one of you. By these testimonies,
Act. 20.31.
it is evident to see, what diligence the holy Ghost requires of Pastors in
teaching, both publicly and privately, as well generally all their flock, as
particulerly every one of them. He therefore that is unapt, to execute this part
of a Pastors duty, is altogether unmeet, to whom governance of the flock of
God, should be committed.

All this, with these three sentences of S. Paul, ( as our Breath, here say) are
especially referred to private exhortation, reprehension, and co^solatio^.
Bridges.
And we grannt this particular and private teaching, to be a part of a Pastors
duty, The Pastor^ private duty.
and that he which is (altogether) unapt to execute this part of a Pastors
duty, is altogether unmeet, to whom governance of the flock of God should be
committed. But again we say, that he which is apt to execute this part of a
Pastors duty* and is diligent to teach al and every one privately wheresoever
he shall see it needful and expedient, is not altogether unmeet, to whom the
governance of the flock of God should be committed. Since there are many, both
godly and learned Pastors, that can do, and do to their habilities execute and
accomplish these duties, and yet have not the gift of public preaching: and
therefore, for their open actions, why may they not the better and oftener, use
the reading of the prescribed form of common prayer, and other godly and
learned homilies, in the public assemblies of the flock and congregation?

In temporal affairs, The learned disc. page 53.
no man will commit the least charge that can be, to such persons as he
knows to be altogether unmeet, or unable to answer unto the charge: and
shall we continue as we have done hitherto, to put the^ in trust with the
gretest charge that can be, the salvation of so many thousand souls, redeemed
with the blood of Christ, who^ we know certainly to be able to do, no part of
a Pastors duty sufficiently? God forbid that we should still continue, so
lightly to esteem so weighty a matter, Unable Ministers.
as though we accounted the blood of Christ, by which we are sanctified, to be
profane, and would contumeliously withstand the spirit of God.

Bridges
Our Brethren are all in extremes, as though we allowed the committing this
office of Pastorship, to those that are altogether unmeet, and to such whom we
know certainly to be able to do no part of a Pastors duty sufficiently, Our
Breath. impugn one and we defend another.
which to do is a great and just offense. But we defend one, and they impugn
another. Albeit, under the quarrel against that other, they mean to wring out
indeed, both the one and the other, and not only the mere insufficient
Pastor, but the most sufficient. As for us, we only speak in defense, and
that but by the way of tolleration for a time, of such as are not altogether
unmeet, What Ministers we defend and how fa^^e forth.
but willing and able to do some part, or the more part, and that
sufficiently of a Pastors office, though not all, or all, though not in such
sort, as other better learned, that can publicly interpret and apply the
scriptures, to the circumstances of times, places, persons, occasions, and in
public preaching have the gift, learnedly and effectually to exhort, to
comfort, to admonish, to reprehende the hearers, and to confute the
gainesayers: although, they be yet able to do these things better in private.
And in public they follow the forms set down and appointed, of godly and
learned homilies.

Not, but that we heartily wish as well as they, that all Pastors could as
freely and learnedly preach, as can the best; at least, better than they now
can. And the godly Bishops and Prelates do (I hope) endeavor themselves in
their charges, to exercise the Pastors thereunto. Neither do we allow, that
the Pastoral charge should be committed unto any, that in any respect is
insufficient. But if it were before committed unto them, except they be
altogether unmeet, and no hope of any sufficiency in them; we think not,
that by and by they must be thrust out by head and shoulders. But that they
may be permitted to do what they can do, and be trained up with such
exercises of learning, as whereby they may wax more able. And in the mean
time, godly and learned Preachers to travel the oftener in such places, The
exercise of our Minist^rs.
the better to supply that which wants, and hereafter not to commit the
charge but to such only, as shall be more sufficient to discharge it. And
this not only we like and agree unto; but I trust, yea, I know in many
places, (so far as conveniently may be done) it is with all diligence and
care already provided for, and may well be done, the Ecclesiastical
government of the Church of England, notwithstanding standing a^ it does.

The learned disc Page 54.
But necessity (you will answer) has no law. This necessity we have
answered before, to consist in two points. In lack of lyuings, and lack of
learned men. The first we have showed ought to be no let, no not of an hour,
if the other want could so soon be supplied. Learned me^ and maintenance.
And both must of necessity be provided for in time, or else we testify
before God and his holy Angels, that they which neglect or withstand this
provision, shall be guilty of the blood of al the^, which perish through the
default of teaching, in the whole realm.

This is a good answer ( being understood in his right sense) that here
again we are presupposed to make, necessity has no law. Bridges.
Our Brethren answer hereunto, Two necessities, lack of living and lack of
learned men.
by distinction of the things wherein this necessity does consist, to wite,
in these 2. points, in lack of liuinges, and lack of learned men. Well then,
our Brethren here grant (when they can thus properly distinguish the same)
that there is a necessity in this matter. But, to the first they answer,
that they have showed it ought to be no let, no not of an hour. Now verily,
then it is a gentle necessity, that so soon can dispatch so great a matter.
But, for the other necessity of learned men, they confess it to be harder,
saying: if the other want could so soon be supplied. If then a longer time
must of necessity be required, for the supply of learned men, how then should
all these Pastors that are not learned men be forthwith turned out, and no
longer at all be retained? Should the Churches lie utterly vacant, until these
learned me^ might be gotten? And should we supply this want with a greater
want, yt is, with none at all in the mean time, neither learned nor unlearned?

But have our brethren espied it out now at length, For the time to supplye
these necessities is contrary to that they said before.
that both these necessities, yea that of livings as well as yt of learned men,
must of necessity be provided for in time? This is an other song than our
Breath. sang before, that the one must be done out of hand and suffered no
longer: and the other ought to be no let no not an hour: but (as better
advised) they now begin to see, that soft fire makes sweet malte, and in
space will come grace. It must have time, or ever that these necessities ca^ be
provided for, and perchance a longer time than an hour, to provide for the
easier of both these necessities.

But howsoever they lengthen or shorten the time of this provision: I would
wish our breath. here advise themselves, Our Breath. protestation
how they protest before god and his Angels, such solemn testifications, as
here they make, of the^ that neglect or withstand this provision. For, if they
mean, this provision, that they immediately set down: it is a very dangerous
provision, in diverse respects, not only against meaner persons: but also
against greater personages and states, than I would wish our Breath.
Protestants: yea, then beseems lowly subjects, or charitable Christians, to
have dealt in: least (though they have no ill meaning) they give occasion of
further suspision. And though they say, they mean generally any godly and
convenient provision: as I hope there is no godly Magistrate or Prelate, that
neglects or withstandeth the same: so I admonish our Brethren once again, to
take heed of such dreadful protestations. Provisions for maintenance.
Least, while so importunately they urge for necessary, this unnecessary
provision that they set down, and other their platformes and modilles of
Ecclesiastical regiment: they do not their selves neglect and withstand,
such godly provisions of the Prince, and of those that have authority
hereunto under God and her Majesty, whereby these necessities might have been
long ere now, much better than they are, provided for. And let the^ withal
take no less heed, least this provision of theirs that follows, would not,
while they think to mende the matter, make it far worse, both for the
necessity and want of lyuinges, and also of learned men. Which, whether it
will or no, let us see and consider these provisions of theirs, to supply and
take away these two necessities.

The learned disc Page 54.
The lack of lyuinges may be supplied, either by restoring the sacrileges of
Abbyes, as Impropriations of benefices, etc. or by dividing the superfluities
of some places that have too much, unto the^ that have too little, or by any
other godly means, that may be thought meet to those godly and wise
governors, that by duty ought and by authority may do it.

Bridges
To supply the lack of lyuings, our Brethren do here set down a threefolde
provision. First, by restoring the sacrileges of Abbyes, as impropriations of
benefices, A threefold provision.
etc. Nay, soft (good Brethren) let us pause awhile on this, for (me thinks)
the very name of the Abbyes ( the Abbyes provisions being so great and rich)
seems to promise great matters. And there were no more but this poor help to
restore the sacrileges of Abbyes, meaning their lands and goods: the
necessity of the poor Pastors lyuinges, would be helped well enough, I
warrant you. All the other provisions might surcease. But I pray you, if we
should go no further but to this: call ye me this a provision of an hours
warning? They were a longer while ere they were set up. And as it is a true
saying of old, Facilius est destruere quam construere, W^ may quicklier pull
down with one hand, This restoring requires a longer time tha^ is here set
down.
than we can easily build again with both. They were quickly down, and yet
in longer while than an hour, or a day, or a year: and trow you they would
be all so soon restored?

But I hope, ye wotte well what ye mean. For ye say not, all the lands and
goods of Abbyes should be restored: but, by restoring the sacrileges of Abbyes,
as impropriations of benefices, etc.

And I pray you, what mean you by these words, the sacrileges of Abbyes? What
our Breath. me^n by the sacrilege of Abbyes.
do ye not mean the taking away from them their lands and goods? If ye so
do: call ye that sacrilege? which is the worst kind and highest degree of
theft, when they rob such things as are consecrated to holy uses. But I
hope our Brethren think not so well of those dens of thaenes, the cages of
vncleaunesse, and nurseries of superstition, Abbeys sacrilege.
the chief pillars and mayntenance of the Pope his errors, pride and
tyranny; that their lands and goods as impropriations, The taking away their
lands and goods was no sacrilege.
etc. were dedicated to such holy uses, that the taking of those goods from
them, might be rightly called sacrilege, even as though it had been the
robbery of Gods temple among the Jews, or of the Church among us: I think
our Brethren have not so good an opinion of those Abbyes, nor so ill an opinion
of the parties, that took those lands and goods from the Abbyes.

For if they account the taking away of those impropriations, etc. from the
Abbyes to be sacrilege: then what do they account the takers away of them? And
who were they that took away these goods and lands from the Abbyes, and
dissolved the Abbyes themselves? Not only the most renowned Prince of happy
memory King Henry the eight: but all the whole state and persons in the
Realm. Which gave them to the King, and the King to diverse Nobles and
subjects, as he pleased. If our Brethren should call all these Church robbers
(which the name sacrilege betokens) because they dissolved, took and gave
them away by law* and that by the highest order of law in all this land, no
doubt upon no less deliberation of all the states of the Realm, than it was
the just punishment of almighty God upon those Abbyes, and one of the greatest
shatterings of Antichrists kingdom in this land: to call now these doings
sacrilege, were nothing so dutiful and considerate a speech, as our Brethren
in a matter so important should have used. If our Brethrens drift be, that they
would have all the Abbye lands and goods restored: how their goods can
possibly be restored, I can not see; The Abbye lands and go^eds can not be
well restored.
their riches and Jewels being no small part thereof, so dispersed and
consumed, as few men alive can tell where almost any relictes of them
remain. And their houses for the most part left desolate like Jerusalem,
scarce one stone standing on another; or rather like Babylon, for owls and
infamous birds and beasts to nest in. As for their lands and revenues might
better be restored.

But from whom again should they be taken? And from how high, and some from
how low personages in this land? And how many should thereby even utterly
be undone? And would not this also ask time to be considered? Or by what name
shall we term the taking them away once again, from them that now enjoy
them? Or by what right and law should they be taken from them, and given to the
supply of the poor Pastors? I grant, no small part of them might perhaps,
have been better employed: as some part (God be praised) was. But that is
past and gone, and done by order and law, and done even by Gods justice and
great providence, whosoever looks deeply into the doing of it But howsoever
it was done; how it now should be undone, and all restored and that to the
Pastors: Restoring Abbye lands.
would ask (I think) a greater deliberation, a longer time, and a work of
more weight and difficulty than we all do ween, or we are able to forecast
would follow and perchance would fall out x. ways worse, than this one would
ever be able to counterpeise.

But if now our Brethren say, that they understand not by the sacrileges of
Abbyes, If they mean the lands and goods that the Abbyes got sacrilegrously
they can not be restored.
that which was taken away from them: but rather that which the Abbeys took
from others, namely the Pastors livings: whereupon they say: as impropriations
of benefices, etc. what does this etc. mean, but the lands and goods that
the Abbeys had? And for my part, I had rather indeed understand the words of
our Brethren in this sense, that the Abbyes committed sacrilege, in taking
impropriations of benefices. Although we must offer no injury no not to the
Devil himself. Neither can we so call it sacrilege of the Abbeys, when they
received the same by law and order, and with all the parties consents that
were the owners, or that had any title or right therein. But does not this come
in effect all to one reckoning, to rob Peter and pay Powle? What a number
should be robbed of their right, and many, of the best or most part of their
liuinges; and some, of all the liuinges that they have; if the only
impropriations of benefices, without this etc. belonging to Abbyes, ( some
Abbie having little else) should be restored for the supply of Pastors? Which to
be done without the owners good wills, that peradventure also bought it with
their money, or by exchange with the Prince for other lands, by what title
should we term this restoring? And to tarry till the owners were willing to
restore it, and yet good men and earnest Protestants, and many also no small
favorites of our Breath. I think it would ask a longer time then an hour, to
deliberate thereon, and perchance clean alienate them from favoring these
devises of our brethren, except they can find out some other provision for
their Pastors.

But, if this will be no better liked: our Brethren have another way to the
wood. The 2. provision by dividing of superfluities.
Or by dividing the superfluities of some places that have too much unto them
that have too little.

Yea forsooth, this indeed comes nearer to the touch, and is more plausible of
the twain, if there be any more stakes to be divided. What talk ye of
restoring that that is past? Let us fall to dividing of that that remains.
Many will like far better of this devise than of the former. For why, they
may perhaps in this division, come by a share for their part, if they have
ought to do therein. He is an ill cook that can not lick his own fingers,
What places have super^^uities.
if this division once come to fingering. But our Brethren would divide, but
only the superfluities of some places that have too much. And is there any
places that have yet such superfluities, and too much? I doubt me, if they be
well examined, they will be found to ouerflowe with a small superfluity ( God
wotte) if not rather th^se places that are envied most, Dividing superfluities.
or suspected to have such superfluity and too much: have that co^pete^cy that
may defray their necessary charge, and maintain (not with superfluity, but with
sufficiency) the decency of their places and callings.

O Brethren, let us take beede of Judas example, and not think such abundance
superfluity or too much, when it ouerfloweth (if it ouerfloweth at all) so
far as stretches to the help and comfort of those that have to little. For
if any do abuse their superfluity, The true use of abundance.
( have they any) or their sufficiency, to their own excess, either in
sparing or in spending, and follow not the Apostles example, which knew How
to abound and how to want, Philipians. 4. nor regard his rule prescribed to
the Corinthians, Let your abundance supply their defect that their abundance
might supply your defect that there might be equality, 2. Cor. 8.14*
which (as Calvin says thereon) may be made of a mutual collation by a fit
proportion, notwithstanding some possess more and some less, and the gifts
be unequally distributed: If (I say) they that possess more keep not this
rule: the fault is personal, not real, rather the man's, than the matters. And
if one do ill, he may be amended, or removed, The ma^ner^ quarreled at for
the Manors.
and another may do more good, the living standing intyere as it did, yea,
though it were superfluous indeed, and though our brethren think it too much,
yet of twain, better too much than too little, Beatius est dare quam accip^re,
as the Lord said: And, si honores mutent mores: mutent mores and honores. If
honors change manners: let manners change honors, and not envy the manors
for the manners.

And what is meant here by these glaunsing speeches the Superfluities of some
places to have too much? Are not Bishoprikes, Colleges, Cathedral Churches,
and Hospitalles, here aimed at? as though these places had too much, and
superfluity of livings, which they would have either clean taken away, or
pared and circumcised of some of their livings, lands and manors as too much,
what place^ they mean have too much.
or do they mean it of the places and Lordships of the temporaltie? that they
nor any estate should have any livings, that might to our brethren be thought
superfluous and too much, but that a division must be made also thereof among
these Pastors, that have (as they say) too little. Nay, if these words should
be understood of such division: they would and that not unworthily be liked as
ill and worse than were the former, of restoring the sacriledges of Abbyes as
impropriations of benefices etc. Whereby not only Bishoprikes, Colleges, These
speeches ieopardous to the whole state.
Cathedral churches, and Hospitalles, but all the estates, even the highest
and all in civil policy (under pr^tence of reforming the Church and dividing
the Church livings) might be called in the compass of this new division, and
as superfluous be meetely well rebated. But, if this be ieoperdous even to the
whole state, besides manifest injuries offered, not only to many worshipful,
yea, The third Provision.
to all the nobles, and (that is most injurious) to her most excellent Majesty,
by whom under almighty God, we enjoy, be it much or little, all the livings we
have: and therefore the devise of this division may not be attempted, without
the incurring greater inconuenience^ than our brethren would shun: Then last of
al, and in general for all, this must serve the turn. Or by any other godly
means, The third provision.
that may be thought meet, to these godly and wise governors that by duty
ought, and by authority may do it.

This provision was well reserved to the last cast, and when all fayles, may
well serve to help at a pinch, in steed of all other devises. If it will be
no butter, make it cheeze. If it will not sadge by one mean, then try it by
any other means. Nay (say our Brethren) not so, but by any other godly means.
And what godly means is that? has it no name, but any other? shall we depend,
we can not tell upon what?

Any other godly means ( say they) that may be thought meet to these, etc.

What? and shall it be arbitrary, that they shall think meet? and who be they
that thus shall think meet, we cannot tell what?

Who? These godly and wise governors.

These: which be these?

These that by duty ought, and by authority may do it.

But still I desire that we might know by some more plain description of what
state or condition these should be: For this is still Ignotum per ignotius. Ye
tell us of governors, and these governors, and godly governors, and wise
governors, that by duty ought and by authority may do it. And we are never the
wiser, who they are, nor what office they have, nor of what vocation they be:
whether they be governors, that are so called in this Learned Discourse of
Ecclesiastical government: or whether ye mean any other civil Magistrates. For
it may be easily ghessed, ye mean not the Bishops and Prelates: nor ye mean
(as it should appear by these words) the Queens Majesty. And who then should
these godly and wise governors be, that by duty ought, and by authority may do
it, without the license of their sovereign? I see no godly no wise governor,
that may or ought, or (I think) will intermeddle in such restorings, divisions,
or provisions, as here in a general name, of I wot not what godly means, nor
how, nor when, nor to whom, nor to how many of them, it may, or it may not be
thought meet. Is not this a Learned discourse, that our brethren have here
devised, for the reforming, helping, supplying, restoring, providing, and
dividing of these livings? The learned Dis. Page 54.55.56.
and thus they conclude this 1. point, concerning the livings of the Pastors.
Let us now see how they devise to help the other point, for the want of learned
men.

The lack of learned preachers must be so far forth supplied, as it may
presently, by encouraging and exhorting so many as are able, to take that
charge in hand, Remedy for learned Pastors.
by ouerseeing the readers and scholars in Divinity in the universities, to
do duties, the one in teaching purely, the other in learning diligently: by
thrusting out these unprofitable heads of Colleges, and other drone Bees,
which either are unable or unwilling to set forward the study of divinity in
their several houses, and placing diligent and learned governors and students
in their places, and by other good means reforming universities, by erecting
of Doctors and teachers, in as many places as may be: by compelling the
unlearned Ministers, in whom is any towardness, to become scholars in
Divinity, with some allowance of living if they be willing to study, or else to
send them from whence they came, to get their liuinges with sweat of their
brows: and especially considering the greatness of the harvest and fewness
of the Laborers, by praying earnestly the Lord of the Harvest in this great
necessity of ours, to thrust forth Laborers into his Harvest. And in the mean
time till God shall bless us with a sufficient number of Learned pastors, to
take some extraordinary and temporal order for ouerseeing the Churches, that
although they can-not be all sufficientlye instructed and governed: yet so
many shall not be altogether destitute, of all knowledge and spiritual
government, as there are now in this most corrupt state of the Church, in
which we have hitherto continued.

If the lack of learned Preachers, must so far forth be supplied, Bridges.
as it may presently: then must not all the pastors that are not learned
Preachers be presently displaced. Which is flat contrary to that which before
so earnestly was urged, that they must no longer be retained. But now when our
brethren come more advisedly to consider and set down before themselves, their
own devises, that they would have for remedies: they begin to find and confess
that, which before they saw not and impugned. The first means that is here set
down, is by encouraging and exhorting so many as are aable, to take that charge
in hand. This is good counsel, adding fitness to ability: for many are able,
that for diverse respects it were not fit, they should take that charge in hand.
The first ^emedy of ^ncouragement.
But since encouragement and exhortation is so good means to fit and able
persons thereunto: would to God our brethren themselves, would follow this
their own good counsel: and not by these unnecessary disturba^ces, discourage
and dehort many not only fit and able to take that charge in hand: but that
have taken it in hand, and have both courageously themselves laid hand to
this plowe, and have encouraged others, and their hearts are now so
discouraged, their hands so weakened and fallen down, yea, they have so fallen
away, and pulled away their hands from the Plough and tylth of Gods field:
that withal they have discouraged many other, which are either become of
ecclesiastical mere seculer, Demas reliquit nos and secutus est presens
saeculu^ or they are beco^e Newtralles in religion: Ouerseeing Students.
yea, some are become plain apostataes to the open adversaries of the Gospel.
Who only are much encouraged hereby, exhorting themselves and others to gape
for the spoils of us both, while we thus contend and strive one with
another, and all they hold close together against us.

If therefore our Brethren will exhort and encourage other indeed, let them
first leave off these innouations, and especially these eager contentions for
them, and join together with their Sovereign Prince, with the Magistrates and
prelates, with the laws established, like good subjects, and with us their
Brethren brotherlike, in defense and aduauncing the Ecclesiastical state of
regiment that we live under: and if we find or think ought to be amiss,
seek the reforming of it in such humble, charitable, and modest manner, as
beseems our calling, without such scisme and, breach of Gods and the Princes
peace therefore, and so shall we discourage and daunt our adversaries,
confirm our selves, and withal encourage and exhort more effectually, so many
as shall be able and meet to take that charge in hand.

The second means is: By ouerseeing the readers and scollers in diuinitye in
the universities, The second remedy of ouerseeing Students to do their
duties.
to do their duties, the one in teaching purely, the other in learning
diligently.

This also is a good counsel. But who shall be these Overseers of these
Readers in Divinity to teach purely? if they be all equal? how shall this be
without a superior authority to ouersee them so to do, and continually to
ouersee that it so continue? Does not this imply a continuing superiority? and
of what function shall this continuing superior be? shall he be a Doctor or a
Pastor? Because our brethren so necessarily would have these offices always
distinguished, and used by distinct and several persons. Shall the Pastor
ouersee the Teacher and that in teaching, which is made the proper function of
the Doctor? But how then was the Doctors office before, Page. 13. made the
chief and principal office that is in the Church? or if the Teacher or Doctor
shall ouersee the Pastors, Why is not the name of ouerseer which is the English
of the name Bishop, that our brethren always make all one with pastor, as well
compe^tible to the Office of the Teacher or Doctor?

And again why do our Brethren here restaine the office of the Readers in
divinity, Why they restrain the ouerseer to the universities.
and of those that should purely teach, to the universities? Whereas before it
was avouched. page 15. that Doctors and Teachers should be appointed in every
Congregation: yea, anon after, among these means here devised, they would
have Doctors and Teachers erected in as many places as may be. But here they
mention only the Universities. But now if this be a means ( as in deed it is
a very good means) to the supply of learned preachers: by ouerseeing the
readers and scholars in Divinity, in the Universities to do their duties,
New Doctors.
the one in Teaching purely, the other in learning diligently: so (God be
praised) the universities are not destitute either of teachers to teach
purely, either of scholars to be learned diligently, either of overseers, both
Bish. Chancellors, Vicechancelors, heads of houses, Deans in houses, to ouersee
these things done accordingly, if we could be content and thankful for it.

The third means is, The third means by thrusting out. etc.
by thrusting out these unprofitable heads of Colleges and other droane bees,
which either are unable or unwilling, to set forward the study of Divinity, in
their several houses, and placing diligent and learned governors in their
places.

God save all: here is toward again, another courteous intertainment of Tom
Drum, by the head and shoulders to thrust out ( not now any unlearned
Ministers) but the heads of Colleges, and other ( we know not who) under the
title of Drone Bees: and yet some affirm yt a Drone Be, may be a better head
of a hiue of Bees, at least wise, may do better service in the hiue, than a
Waspe, or than some stinging Bees may. I pray God this desire of thrusting out
of the heads of Colleages, spring not from the private quarrelles of some
angry waspes, or of some busy Bees. These heads of Colleages are pretended to
be unprofitable: perchance in this sense, that they are not for their
profit. But who are these unprofitable heads of Colleages? For else these
words might seem not so much to note some, as to give a gleeke to all that
are the heads of Colleages, Vnprofitaheads of Colleges.
to be unprofitable. But for a show of restraint, that they mean not all but
some, here is added, which are either unable or unwilling to set forward the
study of Divinity in their several houses. And what mean our brethren by
this? that the heads of all the Colleages and houses, should be theirselues
professors of divinity? but what if their places, and their whole foundation in
their several houses, do altogether or for the most part, require both and in
themselves, in the Fellows and Scholars of that house, another function and
profession, either of Law or Physic? How shall they then set forward the
study of Divinity in their several houses? shall they break their statutes and
foundations, to set it forward? or what is meant by this setting forwa^de? I
hope there is none suffered that sets it backwarde, but so forward as they
may, and as the foundations of their several Houses will permit. And if any
do otherwise, and be found culpable: This provision already provided for.
there are already such provisions, both of the private statutes of their
several houses, and of the public Laws of the Universities, and of the
Diocese, and of the whole Realm: that such heads of Colleages as can be
lawfully proved to be unprofitable, and other Drone Bees, are already
sufficiently provided for. They may well be reformed or displaced the state of
both the universities and of all the Church of England, intierly standing as it
does. As for the placing of other diligent and learned governors and students
in their places: Expulsion.
Soft a while the old must first be convicted, and be orderly removed, or ever
these new other governors that would be, be they never so diligent or learned
can be admitted governors in their places. Otherwise, their diligence might be
thought suspicious, for all their learning, if they have not learned to tarry
till they be lawfully called to be governors.

The 4. means general.
The fourth means is this, And by other good means reforming universities.
This is general and uncertain, as before was our brethrens conclusion of
their means, for the supply of livings.

Neither are the Universities ( thanks be to God) destitute of many good means
already provided, for the reforming of such things as are amiss among them.
Although our brethren seem here to go a great deal further, Bees better than
waspes in hiues.
than to Readers, and to heads of colleges, or to abhor Drone bees in several
houses. For in saying they would have by some other good means the Universities
reformed: What do they else but plainly infer, that the whole state of both
the Universities should be new formed, and as it were made again,
Unprofitable heads of Colleges.
according to the regiment of their platformes: as though they were altogether
corrupted and out of order. And thus under pretense of the unlearned Ministers:
all the Learned men in the Realm, yea the nurseries of learning, and all the
foundations of their several Colleages and Houses, with the whole corporations
of both the Universities, must be altered and come under the reformation of
this our Brethrens Learned Discourse of Ecclesiastical government.

And yet our Brethr. not thus contented, add a fifth byon^ means, which would
not only undermine the Universities: but under a show of increasing the number
of Learned men, would both discourage the best learned in the land and hazard
all the land: to be pestered, with a far greater number of unlearned pastors
tha^ there are. For what mean our brethr. by this mean?

By erecting of Doctors and teachers in as many places as may be. Would they
have more Universities erected in as many places as may be? or would they have
Doctors erected without the erection of the Universities? and that (as they
said before, Page 15.) Doctors and Teachers should be appointed in every
Congregation? would they now have that every Congregations should have
authority to erect Doctors and Teachers? Be thinks, it is another matter to
erect one to be a Doctor or Teacher, and being already so erected, to be
appointed or allowed a place where to teach and exercise the function of his
Doctorship. I hold well with it that he might be appointed or assigned to
teach, in as many places and congregations as may be. The provision already
provided.
And this yet is spoken with more circumspectio^, tha^ to have such Doctors and
Teachers in every Congregation.

But herein this again is far worse, that these doctors and teachers should be
erected and created, or entitled doctors, in respect of this office of
professing the teaching of Divinity, but only in those places, where he
should be thoroughly trained up in a convenient time of years, and tried with
the exercises and disputatio^s of the schools, Young Doctors.
by the learned and already approved doctors in thevniuersities, professing the
study of divinity. Nor any to be admitted at all for readers and teachers in
divinity, except the learned prelates, B. and overseers of those places, where
he should be appointed to teach had found him sufficient thereunto, least a young
scholar should be erected, as Paul forbad 1. Timoth. 3.6. 1. Tim. 3.^
Whereon says Beza, who^ our Geneua Bibles note does follow: Le^aste even in
that that he is lift up into that degree, he take occasion of pride, that may
overthrow him, and so he fall in the same condemnation, that the devil
himself did. And Call. says: because many then were brought to the faith that
were of excellent wit and learning, S. Paul forbids such to be admitted to
the office of a B. so soon as they have yielded their name to Christ. The too
much boldness and over feruency of young scholars.
For he shows how much danger there is in that matter. For certain it is,
that for the most part, they are puffed up and full of ostentation: and so it
shalcome to pass, that their arrogance and ambition shall overthrow them
headlong. That which Paul says, we find by experience, for the young scholars
are not only fervent to wax bold, but also are swollen up with a fond
confidence, as though they could fly clean through the clouds. And therefore
not without cause they are kept back from the honor of a Bishops office, until
that in success of time, the haughtines of their wit be tamed.

And the like may we well say for this office of doctorship, that none are to
be admitted into this office, and adorned with this especial title of Doctor:
but those that upon experience grown in continuance of time and approved trial
of their exercises requisite by order thereunto, are by the judgment of the best
learned in that profession in the University authorized and entitled by that
degree, to be a Doctor or professor in divinity. The way to all bold
licentiousnes ignorance and innouations
And bring once these orders of the Universities degrees into contempt it will
fall out to be the apparent discouragement of the learned, from the study and
profession of divinity, besides the endaungering of the whole or chiefest
state of the Universities: and encouragement and giving license to every fresh
wit or rash head or ever he be half ripe, (and had more need to learn,) to
intrude and erect himself to teach, Quicquid in buccam veneri^, and to call
himself, or to be erected a Doctor, when, God wot, he deserves not among those
yt be learned indeed, (or if he should be well apposed in the universities,) the
name scarce of a scholar. Is not this the way to all licenciousnesse, for who
is so bold as blind baiard?) and to open the gappe to all errors, tumultes,
innouations and under pretense of learning, and of exclaiming against the
unlearned, to overthrow those learned that we have, yea, with all the very
nurseries and storehouses of all good learning, and to encumber us with 20.
unlearned, busy new erected Doctors, teachers and preachers, for any one
unlearned that now for lack of preaching, our brethren complain upon?

Prayer.
The sixth means is: by compelling the unlearned Ministers, in whom is any
towardness to become scholars in divinity, The sixth m^an^s compulsion
with some allowance of living if they be willing to study, or else to send
them from whence they came to get their liuinges with the sweat of their
brows.

This counsel is not to be misliked, if the compelling ( here mentioned) be
not violent. The former part already is in practice, for the vnlearneder sort
of the Ministers, in whom there is any towardness to become scholars in
divinity, How far forth this already is in practice.
which are compelled so to employ themselves in the study thereof, that they
may become the more learned, and have exercises and visitations of set
purpose to the same end: and being willing to study, have some allowance of
living, in the cures where they serve, and do the best service that they can.

As for the other, such as have not any towardness, nor any willingness to
learn, of which sort (if there be any) I hope there is but very few, and
wish there were none at al: except age or infirmity move some compassion, to
releive them with alms, they are well worthy so to get their living with the
sweat of their brows, and so do get it, for any that (I think) will give
them any allowance of living, being neither able nor willing, to do any
service in their Churches. Except some here and there may have some living
already of his own. And yet, if his living be ecclesiastical: he is
depriuable, or shall be driven to find another, both able and willing, by the
eccl. laws now in force: which if they be not executed accordingly, never
blame the law but convince the officer to be blame worthy, which should
better look unto it.

The last means, is this: And especially by considering the greatness of the
harvest, The last means prayer.
and fewness of the laborers, by praying earnestly the Lord of the harvest
in this great necessity of ours, to thrust forth laborers into his harvest.

This is the very best means of all the other, and deserve the first place,
except it be reserved to the last, as to the chiefest, when all other means
fail, then to fall to prayer unto almighty God, to help the matter. This
remedy which christ teaches Mat. 9. is not now first to be put in practice,
Math. 9.
but has been and is of all the faithful proved by experience long since,
to be a good and most effectual means, God be praised for it, and give us
grace, not to strive against the blessing of God. For, this is great vnthank
fullness to all those Laborers whom God has now this good while, since the
shining of this day star, and revealing of the Gospel, thrust forth into
his Harvest among us, Prayer is best means
Our Brethren beginning now to call in question not only our actions but all
our Function, and disdayning the Labors, even of those that died in the burden
of this Labor,, begin so fast to call for other fresh workmen, and order all
the work in a new fashion, and urge it with such a hot and contentious zeal,
that the old and best laborers, yet living, are more then half discouraged.
And, but that they look up to the Lord of the Harvest, which thrust them
forth, their hearts should fail them. And many other toward Laborers, that
on the Lords calling, were but late entered into this Harvest, begin to stand
in a mammering, and draw back, except a number of these our too forward
brethren. And therefore indeed, we had need on all hands, without ceasing:
and most earnestly to pray to God, to thrust forth more laborers into his
harvest, and to comfort them that be thrust in by him: least both Laborers and
harvest, and all, wax thinner and more backwarde than it does. Pray, Pray.
Now upon all these foresaid means, our brethren make their conclusion, saying.

And in the mean time till God shall bless us with a sufficient number of
learned Pastors, The learned Dis. Page 56.
to take some extraordinary and temporal order for ouer-seeing the Churches,
that although they cannot be all sufficiently enstructed and governed: yet so
many shall not be altogether destitute of all knowledge and spiritual
government, as there are now in this most corrupt state of the Church, in
which we have hitherto continued.

These are very hard speeches against the present state of the Church of
England, and in truth by no means justifiable: Bridges.
that it is a most corrupt state of the Church, and so has hitherto
continued. A soul defamation of the churches estate.
For if it be now in a most corrupt state, then was it not more corrupt in the
time of all the popish superstitions. If we now, (as our brethren in their
Preface to this Learned discourse confess) maintain the true and holy faith,
and have the Gospel freely preached, as in this learned discourse they also
grant: are we so corrupt as when manifest errors in doctrine and faith were
maintained, Our brethrens con^radiction and absurdities in this slander.
and the preaching of the Gospel suppressed and persecuted? And yet we debar
them not altogether of the title of the Church, though a Church exceeding much
corrupted. Or does the most corruption of the Church, lie in matters (or rather
in forms) of discipline? Admitting we have a discipline that were corrupted:
notwithstanding, professing the holy truth in all points of faith and
doctrine. The Saxon Churches have in some points the like discipline, to that
our brethren contend for, and yet in some material points of the Lords
supper, they hold as gross, if not far grosser errors, and corruption, than
do the Papists: Our brethrens too great unthankfulness.
And is our state ( being in that and all other points of doctrine most
sincere) more corrupt than theirs? Which I speak not as insulting upon them,
but with pity and reverence: but only to note our brethrens unthankful not
acknowledging, of our exceeding, more sincere, and far better estate than
theirs, and many others, as the Grecians, Armenians, Indians, Aethiopians,
etc. which are yet acknowledged to be the the Churches of Christ, albeit all
differ in discipline, and are not free from errors even in doctrine,
Dispensation for a time.
which God be praised we are, by our breath. own confession.

But why do our Brethren thus exclaim on the estate of our Church as a most
corrupt state? For whose cause our breath. raise this slander.
Forsooth because (as they say and do imagine) there are many that are
altogether destitute of all knowledge and spiritual government. If they mean
Papists, and wicked worldlings, where are not some, and that too many
intermingled in the Church of GOD? And so, there may be many, (we grant,
lamenting it,) among us but not of us. And the more (I fear) by reason of
these garboyles among our selves. But if they be the children of God, and the
true Church indeed, and have years of understanding, I hope, nay I am sure,
there is none, no not one such, as is altogether destitute of all knowledge and
spiritual government, set a side natural Idiotes, which are as infants, and
without discretion. Nay, not the most of the worldly hypocrites, are
altogether destitute of all knowledge of God, (and of his word) and of all
parts of spiritual government, although they know not all points, or many
points not so exactlie, as other do, or as their selves should do. I speak
not this to defend any man's default and corruption in these things: but to
show, that this is a great deal more aggrauated, than either needs, or is
true, or than our Brethren have any just cause to accuse so hainouslie, the
whole state of the Church of England, to be a most corrupted state.

But see now, how our malecontented Brethren, finding such a grievous fault,
of this most corrupt state of the Church, though they might have all these
means, that they have here devised to reform the same, granted unto them:
yet are they feign in the end to confess, that this their Learned discourse of
Ecclesiastical government cannot take place, but that they must take some
extraordinary and temporal order, The mani^est inconveniences that our breath.
run into by these devises.
for ouerseeing of the Churches, in the mean time, until GOD shall bless us,
with a sufficient number of learned pastors.

So that, they cannot for all these means, helps, provisions, supplies,
desires, or any other thing that they are able with all their learned heads
consulting together, imagine how their Ecclesiastical regiment should be set
up. And yet, we must first down out of hand and away with that
Ecclesiastical regiment that we have, cre ever not only theyrs shall come in
place, but or ever we have or can yet devise, how we shall deal in the mean
time, till GOD shall bless us with a sufficient number of learned pastors.
Which when this till, and this sufficient number will be filled up, Our breath.
allowance of tolleration for a ^^ne.
to our Brethrens contentation: is not here limited by them, nor we are able
to conjecture.

But could not our Brethren have forseene this before, which here now, (after
all their debating and devising,) they begin to see, Imagination
and are driven to confess? And how then must all Pastors that be not learned
preachers, be presently turned out and no longer retained? Or if they may
lawfully for a time ( which with all when it shall stint, is uncertain)
continue still and be retained: how then are these things either true,
Whether our breath. can dispense for a time with things contrary to Gods
commandment*
or tolerable in them? Shall we tolerate such notorious and most corrupt
wickedness as they cry out upon, till God shall bless us with a sufficient
number of learned pastors? And till GOD shall thus bless us, what
extraordinary and temporal order of overseers of the Churches will God
bless: if he have flatly forbidden all other, than that only order which
our Brethren pretend, that God so straightly has commanded? Or what
extraordinary or temporal order can, or dare any, or all the Church avouch,
or presume to take upon them, to appoint or tolerate any time?

If the overseers that our Brethren urge, and the orders of Ecclesiastical
government which they set down, be of GOD commanded, for ordinary and
perpetual to all ages and Churches: either they would have us wilfully to
transgress Gods commandment, without any special warrant, on presumption
of their dispensation for a time, or else, they must needs grant (and that is
indeed the very truth, which they dare not for shame openly confess,
although of fine force they are constrained to yield to it in the end, and in
a byous manner to acknowledge it) that the Ecclesiastical government and order
for ouerseeing the Churches, which they pretend: is not of any necessity by
GOD commanded, nor any perpetual order to all ages and Churches, by Christ
and his Apostles prescribed. Which if it be not, then our Churches state is not
so corrupt as they exclaim.

Nay, let them look then unto it, how truly they avouch it so to be, and
make such a contentious rupture in the Church for it. If it be, how can they
here give any extraordinary and temporal order, warrant or plakarde, for
any mean time, to the contrary? So that both ways, our Brethren apparantlie
go about herein, both to abuse themselves and us.

But now, thinking that by this Interim, wrought by all these foresaid means,
they should effect many and mighty matters: our Brethren waxing bold,
proceed to answer even to any man's thoughts, that should doubt so much
as any difficulty in bringing about these things.

If any man ( say they) think this is ouerhard to be brought to pass, let
him consider that there was never work of more difficulty, The learned Dis.
Page 56.
than to build up the Church of God, so that the necessity and commodity of
the work should cause us to stay nothing at the difficulty thereof, for with
our faithful endeavor, we shall not want the mighty assistance of God, who
will bless our godly labors, with greater success than we can look for.

How hard many of these things are, we have heard already, and easily may
conjecture. Bridges
Yea, how dangerous and unnecessary some of them be, and how some of them are
already in experience. What our brethren would have us beforehand to imagine.
But now to our better encouragement, to give the onset on all these means;
we must imagine, that they are the building up of the Church of God, than the
which nothing is more necessary or commodious: and therefore nothing should
cause us to stay at the difficulty thereof. Verily Fortis imaginatio can do
much, as we see in our Brethren that imagine these presupposals, and thereon
dare adventure to enterprise never so difficult attemptes, to atchieue this
their strong imagination. But godly and stayed men must not run on such
headstrong fantasies, but upon assured grounds. Now, when we should come to
the groundwork of this building, Why we dare not hazard on this
imagination.
and find that, which our Brethren imagine, has no better foundation on Gods
word, for the building up of such a frame, as they, and not the word of God
prescribes: and withal, that this their modill which they have complotted, is
the manifest scattering and pulling down of that which in the Church of God is
already builded: and for the chiefest part, is not so necessary, and in some
points most dangerous, besides the difficulty to bring the same to pass: no
marvel though so many stay, and dare not hazard to build on this platform,
and in this manner as our Brethren call upon us. For as Saint Paul says Gal.
2.18. If I build again the things which I have pulled down, I make my self a
tra^sgressor: so If I pull down the things that I have builded ( if they be well
builded up) I make my self also another tra^sgressor. And since we have alredie
builded on the only foundation Jesus Christ, and God has already blessed our
building: if now any other will build thereon, and turquise our building:
except he can bring better proofs that we build amiss, and that God allows
not, nor likes our building: and show, that not only we may more easily,
and also with more beauty and profit, build after another order that he will
teach us, but that we must and are bound to build on that fashion: he presumes
too far, and offers us wrong, and may do more hurt and hinderaunce to the
building of the Church of GOD, than ever (for all his zeal) he shall do
good, or be able to further the same, except to put it further off, than
already it is.

But ( say our Brethren) with our faithful endeavor we shall not want the
mighty assistance of God, who will bless our godly labors, with greater
success than we can look for. Our encouragement in Gods blessing against all
the^e temptations


Very true, in all faithful endeauours, grounded on a good matter, and
proceeding by a good order, GOD will bless our godly labors, and his name
be blessed for it, so he has done, notwithstanding all the stops both of our
foraine enemies, Presum tuous offer.
and of our own brethrens domestical impediments, we have not wanted the
mighty assistaunce of God, blessing our godly labors, and that with greater
success, than they acknowledge or wish, or we have deserved, or in these
troubles we could have looked for. So that in this behalf we may well recomfort
our selue^ with that saying of the 124. Psalm: If the Lord had not been on our
side (may Israel now say) if the Lord had not been on our side, when men
rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was
kindled against us. And in the 127. following: Except the Lord build their
house, the labor is in vain that build it. And since God has thus blessed
our handie works, even beyond all that we looked for, ( for although we
might well look for no less, of the professed adversaries of the Gospel, yet
who would have looked for such unthankfulness to God, and such hinderance of
the work of God, among our selves at our Brethrens hands, the professors with
us of Christ's Gospel?) Shall we now also look for new devises, and with them
contemn and alter all that the Lord has alredie so mightily blessed? and
look for him also to bless the labors of our hands, in the contrary to
that we have begun to labor, and wherein we have so prosperously proceeded,
and which God has already blessed, with such mighty assistance and success?
But now our Brethren supposing these things might be well compassed, most
confidenilie they auowe and say:

If God therefore will grant that these and such like means may take place,
by the high authority of our dread Sovereign, The learned Dis. Page 56. and
57.
the Queens Majesty, and continue this comfortable peace, which we inioie,
under her most gracious government, we dare ieopard our lives, that in less
than half the time, that is already properouslie passed, of her Majesty's
most honorable and glorious reign, the necessity of learned Pastors shall
be so well supplied, as we shall have no great cause to complain for lack of
them, if we may use like diligence to continue them: if not, we will spend the
rest of our life in mourning, and expectation of the heavy vengeance of GOD,
which must needs fall upon us for this manifest contempt of his express
commandment, and neglect of increasing the glorious kingdom of our savior
Christ. Act 20.26.27.
In the mean time we may boldly say with the Apostle, Act. 20. We testify
unto you this day, that we are clean from the blood of you all, for we have
not failed to show you the whole council of God concerning the regiment of his
Church.

For some of these and such like means, it has pleased God already to
grant, that they may and do take place, and would take more place, Bridges.
were it not for their importune hindering (as I said before) not so much of
the open adversaries of the Gospel, as of our own Brethren that favor and
profess it, and yet preposterouslie do stop the course thereof. The will and
grant of god
As for some of these means here devised, it has pleased God in his great
wisdom not to grant them. Her M^iesties government commended.
And therefore when we see the will and grant of God already, it were fitter
we applied our w^lls to his, than to wish hi^ (contrary to his ordinance) to
become appliable unto our wills And where our Brethren would have God grant
these their petit^ons to take place, by the high authority of our dread
Sovereign the Queens Majesty, Our breath. te^tation to God* and disobedience
to her Majesty.
since we manifestly see that by her Majesty's high authority, GOD has
granted such good success to his Gospel, and repaired his Church, by such
lawful means of discipline, as God has both allowed and blessed: which
withal, is by her Majesty's high authority established and confirmed amongst
us: what a tentation is this to God, not to be content, but to crave that he
would grant other new means? And what obedience is this to her Majesty's high
authority? If her Majesty herein have any authority at all, why do not we
obey it? If her Majesty's authority here be high, What our b^eth grant in
words and deny in facts
why do we abase and bring it low? If she be our dread Sovereign: why
dread we not thus to overthwart al her laws and ordinances, and without all
dread to contemn them, and to cast forth such contumelious and slanderous
speeches, on all the state of the Church, to be most corrupt? If her Majesty
be the Sovereign, that is* the Supreme governor under Christ, of this portion
of the Church: How does not this defamatio^ more blemish her Majesty's
government, tha^ al these fair speeches can suffer to salve it? And how call
they her Majesty Sovereign, and not acknowledge her sovereignty or
supremacy? And if we enjoy this comfortable peace under her most gracious
government: why do not we continue it, and be thankful to God and to her
Majesty for it? Why disturb we it, and make it uncomfortable? To conclude,
if it be a most gracious government, how is the state of the Church being
governed under her Majesty, most corrupted? Can most gracious and most corrupt
agree together? What fellowship has righteousness, (says Saint Paul, 2.
Cor. 6.14.) with unrighteousness? and what communion has ^ight with
darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? Or has her Majesty no
government at all over the Church, but only over the Realm and civil
policy?

Are these terms then given her as a mere civil Prince? or is her Majesty
acknowledged indeed, the supreme governor in all Ecclesiastical causes, in
the Church of England? If she be: how does she look unto her government in
the Church of England, the state of the Church standing most corrupt? These
things hang together like Germans lips. Who sees not that they speak
clean contradictions in this stammering? While they would thus play on both
hands, and give only these fair titles to her Majesty for fashion sake,
Our breath. co^tradictio^^ of her M^iesties government.
and to avoid suspicion, or to win favor: but if in very deed they meant
as they say they would never thus impugn the established government, orders,
laws, and proceedings of her Majesty.

They confess that under her most gracious government the time has already
prosperously passed: and yet they infer under hand, Her Majesty's government
defamed.
that it has passed so vnprosperouslie, that in less than half the time,
they dare ieopard their lives, if they might have their devises brought to
pass, that the necessity of learned Preachers shall be so well supplied, as
we shall have no great cause to complain for lack of them. And yet withal
they say, her Majesty's reign is most honorable and glorious. Which if it
be: then have they no cause to complain. But they complain of these things
with great outcries, and say they have great cause to complain, as though her
Majesty's reign were so dishonorable and ignominious, that it nothing tended
the honor and glory of God, which (they say) they only seek in this their
Ecclesiastical regiment.

So that in commending her Majesty's most honorable and glorious reign, what
mean they but of such an external honor and glory of the world, as little
or naught respects the honor and glory of the Lord. This is not well done
of our Brethren, thus to slander her Majesty's government, and the whole state
of the Church of England, under these fair and coulourable speeches: least our
Breath. might seem in any show, to come near to those dissembling hypocrites,
whom David so grieuouslie complains on, Psalm. 54. saying: If mine enemy had
defamed me, I could have borne it, and if mine adversary had exalted himself
against me, I would have hidden me from him. But it was thou O man, even my
companion, my guide, and my familiar, which did eat sweet meat together
with m^, yea, w^ walled together in the house of God as companions. And shall
it be said of those, that not only live in one Realm, and are or should be
governed by one law, under one most gracious Sovereign: yea, her Majesty,
and we and all, under one Jesus Christ, in profession of our religion, and of
one Church of God, that we deal thus one against another, and that as David
there saich verse. 21. The words of his mouth were softer than butter, and yet
war in his heart: his words ^ere more gentle than oil, and yet they were
swoordes? Now as these things beseem not the ^hildren of God: so is not this
commendable in our Brethren, that (to set the better face of zeal upon these
foresaid speeches, thus tempered with no less gall than honey, they offer
thus freshlie to ieopard their lives, that this which they promise and imagine,
shall be done in less than half the time, that is already passed. Well may
our Brethren blemish the time that is already passed, as not very
prosperously passed, though for a show they say so: but to determine, De
futur^ contingenti, Our breath. aduenterous p^o^ise for the time of furnishing
learned ^a^ors.
for that which may hap to come to pass hereafter, and to prescribe it a
time: ( save that they presume of her Majesty's clemency not to take the
advantage of the forfaiture) they might peradventure hazard too far their
best joints, if their hap were not better in this bargaynes event, than
either their learning or their wisdom in the bargens making. A bold promise.
But what good luck so ever would betide them, to have their desires granted,
or their hope and promise come to pass: yet their words savor so
suspitiouslie, that for all this they would not hold themselves fully
satisfied. For when they say, The necessity of learned Pastors shall be so
well supplied, as we shall have no no great cause to complain for lack of
them: Our breath. restra^nt of their promise and ex^^ptions.
they seem in these words that they would still have some cause, though it
were not great, to complain even for lack of them, when they had them. And
as for other matters they would st^ll pretend as great cause or greater to
complain, as much as they did before. And so after all these things were
granted to the^, we might be little or never a whit the more eased of their
complaining. For the nature of some, is never to be contented, even when they
have the thing they would, yet still Plus vltra, itch and ease cannot please.
And this our Bre. seem to insinuate before hand by indenture, saying: If we
may use like diligence continue the^. Under which doubtful exception, we shall
ever hang in a continual suspense, of as great complaining and contending as
before.

But now, if our Breath. cannot have all these means that they have her^
devised, What our breath w^l do if these things cannot be granted.
granted unto them, what then will they do? If not, we will spend the rest of
our life in mourning. See here, what a strange qualme is suddenly come over
the stomach of our Brethren. Right now, so full and pregnant in diuising
provisions, divisions, supplies, erecting, correcting, placing, displacing, and
many other means: which don, they fall to chierful encoraging to give the onset,
imagining facility, and expecting to overcome all difficulty, promising good
success, and Gods blessing and theirs to be with them, setting a time, yea,
offering to ieopard their lives on the bargen: in the mean season, using all
allurementes, extolling the Queens Majesty for her high authority, her
dread Sovereignty, the inioying by her a comfortable peace, her most gracious
government, her most honorable and glorious r^igne, with the time that is
already prosperously passed. Whose heart, would not all these things rejoice
and inflame? and now on a sudden, or ever the sentence come to his full
breathing periode, if they cannot have their wills in all these things: this
sentence is cut off, Totnam is turned French, and all this fair weather is
clean ouercast, with such a black cloud and terrible threats of storms;
that these our Brethren will not now pout for anger, like a sulleine shrew, but
they will become mourners: yea, they vow here, that they will spend the rest
of their life in mourning, and take no comfort in all these blessings of God,
nor in any her Majesty's never so high authority, nor in her most gracious
government, nor in her most honorable and glorious reign, nor in any of the
time that is already prosperously passed: but even as though some cruel
tyrant, some Heathen or Popish persecuter did oppress the Church and them: Our
breath. mourning.
as though Herod had killed all the children in Bethleem and the coasts round
about, and Ieremies Prophecy were yet to be fulfilled, A voice was heard in
Rama, mourning, and weeping, and great lamentation. Rachel weeping for her
children and would not be comforted, because they were not: even so our
Brethren promise, not only to mourn for the time passed ( though they
confess it passed prosperously:) or for the present time, which they
infamouslie call a state of the Church most corrupt: but as though it were in
a desperate state, and past al hope, if all these their devised means take not
place: as though they would never hereafter take comfort any more, so long as
they lived, they here solemnly pronounce, that they will spend the rest of
their life in mourning.

Phie, phie, Brethren, even for very shame of the world, besides the offense
of God, that ever such speeches should have passed your pen, (for I hope you
never speak the^ with your mouths, nor let the^ sink at least into your
hearts) does such waywardness become such learned discoursers? And I beseech
you Brethren, even in the consolations of Jesus Christ, ( if ye speak from the
heart and in good sadness, and not rather by some rhetorical amplification,
more to move your readers, than your selves are moved) that ye would be better
advised, and eat this word; How unseemly these passions are for so learned
discourses.
that you would repent and revoke this too too passionate and hasty promise,
which sauoureth more of Jonas or Esdras impatiencie in their mourning, ( to
think no worse thereof) than of such stayed men as you would seem to be. If
you cannot herein have your desires: possess your souls with patience, and
comfort your selves in Christ, as all good Christians, and all true subjects,
and all wise men ought to do. But what is the cause, that our Bre. thus in
their have, do promise to spend the rest of this lives in mourning, if they
want these things? Do the fear any danger? Yea, say they: An expectation of
the heavy vengeance of God, which must needs fall upon us, for this manifest
contempt of his express commandment, and neglect of increasing the glorious
kingdom of our savior Christ.

This were (we confess) an horrible crime, and it is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God, if his wrath be kindeled, Our breath.
threate of Gods wrat^.
and go from him, we having heaped wrath unto our selves against the day of
wrath. And as Saint Paul says, Heb, 10.26.27. If we sin willingly after
that we have received the knowledge of the truth, the^^ remains no more
sacrifice for sins, but a fearful expectation of judgment and violent
fire, which shall devour the adversaries. But, as when he spoke before, cha. 6
of the like dreadful expectation: he added this comfort, verse 9. But beloved,
we have persuaded our solues better things of you, and such as accompany
salu^ti^n, though we thus speak: even so, both we are persuaded better of our
Breath. than that they will spend the rest of their lives in mourning, and
expectation of the heavy vengeance of God. and I hope they are persuaded
better of us also. For although we humbly acknowledge that by our manifold
sins, Bretherensch eat.
if God should enter into judgment with us, neither we, nor they, nor any
flesh could sustain it: Our confesion and comfort.
yet by unfeigned repentance and assured faith, flying unto the throne of grace,
our only mediator and savior Jesus Christ, we firmly hope (and hope shall
not confound us) that God the Father for Christ's sake, will divert this heavy
vengeance, both from our brethren and from us.

But they threaten, that it must needs fall upon us, for this manifest
contempt of his express commandment, and neglect of the increasing of the
glorious kingdom of our savior Christ. How we are all too negligent.
God forbid that wilfully we should do either of these things, and God be
merciful to us all, we must needs confess (and voluntarily we do it,) with
hearty sorrowfulness and deprecation, that there is in us a neglect in some
respects, of increasing the glorious kingdom of our savior Christ, in that
neither we, nor they nor any the best of us all, do our duty, with so much
diligence and endeavor as we should do God forgive us that is past, and amend
as for that is to come, to be more able and diligent than we be. But that this
neglect is in respect of this, that knowing these means by our Brethren here
set down, and all their platform in this their Learned Discourse of
Ecclesiastical government, to be the increasing of the glorious kingdom of our
savior Christ, How our breath. and we should think of these things and one of
another.
and wil^u^lie and wittinglie contemn it, or neglect it: I hope none of us
does so; and if we could see any substantial grounded reasons of our Breath.
to move us thereunto, we pray God, ( and hope God would hear our prayers,)
that we might forsake all worldly livings, yea, life and all, rather than we
should not join with the^. And brotherly charity moves me to think so of
them likewise, that they do not strive against their consciences* or have no
conscience in that they should, but that they make conscience of that which
they should not, and rather mistake, than of purpose they would wittinglie
misleade themselves or others.

Howbeit herein they are in the greater fault, that take on them to control
and teach, Our bre^h. great defalt herein.
the teachers and all, and do misteach us, and tell us Gods word teaches that
which it does not teach, and terrify us with the expection of the heavy
vengeance of God, for this manifest contempt of his express commandment: and
yet for these devises and Learned Discourse of Ecclesiastical government, and
discipline, which they so much pretend and urge: they have not hitherto nor
h^ere do nor (I believe ever can) show and prove in express words, any
express commandment of our savior Christ, or any necessary consequence to
infer it, which if we might once see, and then should make a manifest contempt,
or any contempt at all thereof, then should we have right good cause to
tremble and quake, to mourn, and expect the heavy vengeance of God, except
God in the infinite treasury of his mercies* surmounting all his works, and
al our sins, Our hope and conscience.
did give us his comfort, and forgive us our sins, through our Lord and
only savior Jesus Christ. But until this express commandment, or any
other necessarily inferred, for this Ecclesiastical government, that our
breath. in this Learned Discourse prescribe, be showed and made manifest: I hope
that in the testimony of a good conscience, being justified by faith, we may
have peace with God, by our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have aceesse by faith
into this grace (or favor) ^herin we stand, and glory in the hope of the
glory of the sons of God. Rom, 5. And as this is the anchor of our hope, so
(good Breath.) once again in the fear of God, I exhort you to take heed, how
ye preten^ Christ's express commandment so peremptorily, and cannot show it,
and to consider with what boldness ye may take upon you that sentence of S.
Paul, saying:

In the mean time we may boldly say with the Apostle, Act. 20. We testify
unto you this day, that we are cl^a^e from the blood of you al for we have not
failed to show you the whole counsel of God, concerning the regiment of his
Church. And dare ye indeed, this boldly usurp upon you these words of the
Apostle, and add withal unto them, as a distinct part of the sentence, and
that in the same several Charecter, as the very express words of the
Apostle, which were neither his words nor yet his meaning, Our br^th. oue^bold
^dding to gods word.
for any thing that can be necessarily gathered on those words of the
Apostle, these words of your own more superfluous addition, concerning the
regiment of the Church* But see how affection many times may carry wise and
learned men away. But if this platform be either council or commandment,
either expressed, or of necessity implied: Show it (as Saint Paul says, that
he showed all the council of God) and straight we yield. Or else give us leave
in the name and peace of God, and in the freedom of the Gospel, with a safe
conscience to dessent from it.

The Argument of the 7. book.
THE 7. Book concerns the ministration of the Sacraments, and first whether
they may he ministered by a Minister that is no Preacher, and without a Sermon
at the ministration of them. Whether this be always in Baptism any necessary
part contained in the institution of it. Whether the Apostles or other
Preachers were always their selves the baptizers of such as they converted.
How near our Breath. assertions herein drawn to the positions of the
Anabaptists. Whether the Lords supper may not be truly administered though by no
preacher, or if by a preacher, yet not preaching at the ministration thereof.
Whether Christ preached at the ministration of it. Whether preaching were
always necessary in Circumcision and the Pascall lamb. What the word showing
forth the Lords death infers, and that all the communicants are such
preachers. Whether the Homilies and exhortations in the book prescribed, set
not fully forth the Lords death. What was the practice for this point in the
Apostles times, and in the Primitive Church. Whether the word that is joined
to the element to make a Sacrament, is to be necessarily understood of
preaching. Whether our forms praescribed in the Sacraments, join the word and
the element sufficiently or no. Whether the Papists though they wanted the
true Supper of the Lord, had not true Baptism for all their corruption of the
same. How many kinds of preaching Calvin makes, and what kind is necessary
in the Lords Supper. What words by Calvin, Musculus, Beza, Olleuian
Hellopaeus, etc. make a true and perfect Cosecration. Whether in the reformed
Churches of Heluetia, etc, they are preachers only that minister the
Sacraments. How the seal and writing are to be joined always together, and we
so have them. To whom pertayneth the ministration of the Sacra.
Whether our Breath. prohibit none to preach whom they prohibit not to
minister the Sacraments. Whether we infer women's Baptism, and whether
Baptism on occasion of necessity may be ministered in private places, and
whether there be any necessity at all of Baptism, and of the dangerous
positions, contradictions, inconveniences, and absurdities of our Breath. in
these matters: especially of this their Canon, where there is no minister of
the word, there ought to be no minister of the Sacraments. What is principal,
what necessary in the Sacraments, of the affinity, conjunction, and
separation of preaching and administering the Sacraments.

Hitherto ( say our Brethren) we have somewhat at large set forth, The learned
disc. page 58. and 59.
the principal part of a Pastors office, which is to preach the word of God,
and to instruct the people committed to his charge in the same. Here follows
now in the second part of his duti, which confisteth in right administration of
the Sacraments of God. For seeing it has pleased God to add such outward
signs to be helps of our infirmity, as seals for confirmation of his
promises, uttered by his word, Romans 4.11. Romans 4.11.
He has appointed Ministers of the same, to deliver them unto his people.
Matthew. 28.19. Luke. 22.19. Mat. 28.19. Luc. 22 19.
For no man may take upon him any office in the Church, but he that is called
of God, as was Aaron, Heb. 3 4. Heb. 3.4.
Seeing therefore that God has given some to be Pastors in the Church, Ephesians.
4.11. Ephesians 4.11.
And it is the duty of Pastors to feed the flock of God committed to their
charge, with all manner of spiritual pasture of their souls appointed by God.
1. Cor. 4.1. And that the Sacraments are a part of this spiritual food, it is
manifest that it belongs to the duty of Pastors, to administer the holy
Sacraments: and that the Sacraments appertain to the doctrine and word of
God, it is evident that whom God has instituted to be the Minister of the
word, him also he has made to be the minister of the Sacraments: and as the
Sacraments are compared by the holy Ghost unto seals: and the word or promise
of GOD unto writings: so it appears to him to deliver the soul, which
delivers the writings. For as the soul has always relation unto the
writings: so have the Sacraments unto the word of GOD. By this it appears,
that as it is the duty of every pastor to administer the Sacraments of
Christ: so this office appertains to none, but to those which are Ministers
of the word.

To whom pertains the ministration of the Sacraments.
AS all the residue here set down depends on thi^ conclusion to all which
we gladly yield and confirm the same: so this being evident, that whom GOD
has instituted to be Minister of the word, him also he has made to be
Ministsr of the Sacraments: it follows evidently on good and necessary
consequence, By our brethrens own conclusion the Doct. may minister the
Sacraments and of consequence exhort and apply.
that the Doctors so well as the Pastors, being of God instituted to be
Ministers of the word: that them also has he made to be Ministers of the
Sacraments. Which Sacraments (as our Brethren rightly say) appertain to the
doctrine and word of God, and are a part of this spiritual food. This
spiritual food then appertaining to the doctrine and word of God, belonging
properly to the Doctors: and it is the duty of Pastors to feed the flock of
God committed to their charge, with all manner spiritual pasture of their
souls appointed by God: How then are not the Doctors even by Gods appointment
pastors also? according as Saint Paul says even in this place, (Ephe 4.11.)
before discussed.

But not as our Brethren here clip the sentence, saying thus, Seeing therefore
God has given some to be Pastors in his Church: The Doct. are Pastors.
for though the Apostle spoke before distinctlie, that he gave some to be
Apostles, some to be Prophets, other to be Evangelists: yet when he comes to
the mentioning of Pastors, he says; Other to be pastors and doctors. Knitting
them jointly both together, as appertaining both of them alike and together,
unto the ordinary Minister of the word. Which though our brethren will not
confess in plain terms: yet see here, when they come to the discussing of
the office, will they, or nill they, they are driven to yield thereto; that the
Doctor and Pastors office do concur, and that not only the Pastor is a
Doctor or Teacher: but the Doctor or Teacher is a Pastor.

And yet further to ouerturne their own devises, they add: and as the
Sacraments are compared by the holy Ghost unto seals, and the word or
promise of God unto writings: It perteyneth to him to deliver the seal which
delivers the writing: but the Doct. deliver the writing: ergo.
so it appertains unto him to deliver the seal, which delivers the
writings. But the Doctor delivers the writings, so well as does the Pastor:
therefore the Doctor must deliver the seals, so well as the Pastor. For ( say
our Breath.) as the seal has alwaie relation unto the writings: so have the
Sacraments unto the word of God. And heerevpon they make this conclusion: By
this it appears that as it is the duty of every Pastor to administer the
Sacraments of Christ: So this office appertains to none but to those, which
are the Ministers of the word. Although this conclusion concerning the matter
be true in part and we gladly grant it, yet is it not the right and full
conclusion following on the premises, except it infer Doctors so well as
Pastors, or by the name of Pastors comprehend Doctors. For the Doctor is a
Minister of the word, and a deliverer of the writings, so well as the Pastor,
The ministration of the Sacraments.
and therefore they should have more fully and directly concluded, if they
had said; That as it is the duty of every Pastor and Doctor, to administer
the Sacraments of Christ: so this office appertains to none but to those
which are the Ministers of the word. But now, the ministration of the
Sacraments requires withal, not only the Ministry of that part of the word,
which only and barelie teaches the doctrine and institution of the
Sacraments: but also and no less, that part of doctrine which exhorts to
repentance and newness of life, in the ministration of Baptism: and in the
supper of the Lord, exhorting the communicants to a preparing to judge
themselves, to be in love and charity, and to the worthy receiving of the
same, and also in dehorting and rebuking the wicked and unworthy approchers
thereunto, it appears therefore by these premises, that not only the
pastors may teach the doctrine, besides their exhorting: but also that the
doctors or teachers may and must exhort and dehort, persuade and dissuade,
rebuke, comfort, and apply; so well as the pastors. Which is quite and clean
contrary to our brethrens former principles.

Our savior Christ authorizing his Apostles to baptize al nations, says: The
learned disc Page 59. and 60.
Go ye forth and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
the son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things that I
have commanded you. Likewise to the same effect, Go ye forth into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature, he that shall believe and is
baptized, shall be saved, etc. Also instituting his holy supper, he said:
Math. 28.19 Mark. 16.15 Luc. 22.19. 1, Cor. 11.26.
Do this in remembrance of me. Which remembrance S. Paul declares, that it
ought to be celebrated by preaching of the Lords death. So often (says he)
as you shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, you shall show forth
the Lords death until he come. By these testimonies it is evident, that the
administration of the Sacraments ought be committed to none, but unto such as
are Preachers of the word, that are able to teach them that they baptize, that
are able to prech the mystery of Christ's death to them whom they do deliver the
ward sign thereof.

We wish and endeavor (so far as conveniently may be brought to pass)
that all were Preachers which may administer the Sacraments, Bridges
and in some respect they are Preachers. How the form of mi^istring the
Sacraments prescribed, is not altogether destitute of preaching.
While by the authority of their office they do publikelie pronounce in the
administration of the Sacraments, that godly form of doctrine annexed, which
plainly sets out all the institution, nature, use, ends and fruits of
those holy mysteries, with godly and pithie exhortations, dehortations, and
applications, joined thereunto. Besides diverse notable Homilies and famous
sermons, by which they may (as they see occasion) edify the congregation at
the participating of the Sacraments.

But if so be that our Brethren will needs here understand by preaching,
Sacr.ministered by no Preacher.
the free exposition of the word, and teaching the doctrine of the Sacraments,
with such exhortation to repentance, and particular application to the
audience, or to the co^municants, as to the learned Preacher himself shall be
thought most convenient: then must either the Doctor, ( being a Minister of the
word, and so of the Sacraments) be such a Preacher also, which our Brethren
deny, or else it must needs fall out (the Doctor being a Minister of the word,
and so of the Sacraments, by our Brethrens last confession) that he may
administer the Sacraments, which in the foresaid sense, is not only not a
Preacher, but which cannot be a Preacher, by their own positions, so long as
he continues in the distinct office of a Doctor or teacher, so that their
selves are indeed further off in this matter, than we are.

No distinction in the bap^izer of teaching and preaching.
As for these sentences of our savior Christ, and of Saint Paul, that here (to
confirm their sayings) they allege: I marvel not a little, of their
vnaduis^d handling of them. For, to begin with these two former in Matthew and
Mark concerning Baptism: if our Brethren urge these words so preciselie, that
they should enforce always preaching, at the very instant of baptizing: they
should extort more out of the words, than either they express or infer. Our
savior Christ indeed, bids them go and teach all nations: and tells
them also what they shall teach. And Mark calls this teaching, preaching.
Teaching or preaching not always done at the time of baptizing.
So that here was yet no distinction of the teacher from the preacher. Their
teaching was preaching, and their preaching was teaching. Though, as they had
herein a special gift: so had they also a special office of teaching or
preaching to all nations, but that their teaching or preaching ( were it all
one or distinct) was always joined together with their baptizing, and both
done at one time, and so commanded to be jointly done: how will our Brethren
prove it on these sentences? The text rather gives, that their preaching should
go before in a several action, to those that were of understanding; and so to
continue preaching or teaching, til the unbelieving people did believe: and then
after yt preaching to add the other action of baptizing, as a seal to
confirm the^ in the former. And not that these words, Go ye forth and teach
all Nations, b^ptising them, etc. should be done, the one while the other is a
doing. For, although our Brethren translate these words thus to the advantage,
He that shall believe and is baptized, etc. as though he were baptized, even
at the present instant, when he believes, which is, at the preaching: yet is
not this indeed so well translated, but rather, He that shall believe, and
shall be baptized; The one action following the other, yea, many times, in
several both times and places, The preaching and the baptizing not alwaie^ by
the self same person
without any prejudice either to the validity of these actions, or to the
precept of our savior Christ to do them. Neither follows it, yt by these
words we must understand, both these actions to be always done by one and the
self same person. S. Paul converted many by his preaching, which became
believers, as appears Acts 18.8. Baptising without preaching.
But Crispus the prince of the Synagogue believed in the Lord withal his
houshoulde, and many of the Corinthians heering it believed and were baptized.
And the Lord comforting Paul said, Paul a great while at Corinth, where many
were baptized, and yet not by him.
he had much people in the City. So he continued there a year and six
Months, and taught the Word of God among them. And yet Saint Paul writing
afterward unto them, says. 1. Corinthians. 1.14. etc. I thank God that I
baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius, least any should say, that I
baptized into mine own name. I baptized also the house of Stephanas.
furthermore know I not, whether I baptized any other, for Christ sent sent me
not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel.

Whereby it is most apparent, that he all that while being there and then the
only preacher, and so many being converted and baptized, and so few
baptized by him, and none might baptize but a Minister of the word: there were
other Minister of the word being not Preachers which did baptize them. And
this (among other his notes on these words of Paul, Christ sent me not to
baptize, but, etc.) does Calvin plainly confess, saying: Caluines plain
confession that many under Paul being ministers of the word, baptized that
were not preachers.
neither therefore does Paul make this comparison, to detract any thing from
it, ( he speaks of the virtue of Baptism) sed quia paucorum esset docere,
pluribus autem baptiZare datum foret: Deinde cum multi simul doceri possent,
baptismus aute^ non nisi singulis posset conferri, etc But when it apperained
to few men to teach, (or) when as few men had the gift of teaching, and it
was given unto many to baptize: Moreover, when as many could be taught
altogether, but baptism could not be conferred but to every one in order:
Paul that excelled in the faculty of teaching, pursued the work that was more
necessary unto him: to others he left that, which they were more commodiously
to perform. Yea, if the Readers shall weigh all the circumstaunces more
nearly: they shall see, there is under it a privy frumpe, with the which they
are pleasantly nipped, which of another man's labor (under pretense of a
ceremony) do hunt after a small glory. The Labors of Paul in building that
Church, were incredible. After him came these delicate masters, which by the
sprinkling of the Water, drew Disciples unto their sect, Paul therefore
yielding them to the Title of the honor, testifies that he is content with the
burden.

Whereby it is evident, that although such evil Ministers abused this order, to
seek their own glory, yet, that this order was used even then among the Godly
and faithful ministers, that some were preachers and did not baptize except
seldom, and few, on especial occasions: and some did baptize that were no
preachers, and yet were well allowed so to do. Beside many other, who though
they were preachers, and also did often times baptize, yet joined they not
these two always together in one action, and often used the help of others,
Baptizing without preaching.
which at the same time did not preach. When Peter at one sermon Act. 2.
converted so many, he counseled them to be baptized, and ( says the text,
ver. 41. They that gladly received his word were baptized, The baptising of
3000 Acts. 2.
and the same day there were added to the Church, about 3000. souls. Is it
likely, that Peter did baptize every one of these, and al of them him self
that day? or rather that the other Apostles and Disciples though they all at
the same time preached not, did help S. Peter to baptize them. Neither is it
likely, that they were baptized at the present action of the sermon, nor in
that place where the sermon was, as it is thought in mount Sion, but that they
went unto some other place in or near the City, The baptizing of the
Samaritans. Acts. 8.
more convenient for baptizing such a multitude. And although Philip were
himself (Acts 8.) both the preacher, and the baptizer, yet can we not
conceive, how he alone should baptize such a mighty number of Samaritans, at
the same instant, that he preached to them: but that first by preaching and
miracles following, he did convert them, and then as he had leisure
afterward, did baptize them. And when Peter Acts 10. had Preached to
Cornelius, and to all his houshoulde, and to all that were assembled with him,
The baptizing of Cornelius and his household. Act. 10
when he saw how the holy Ghost fell on them that heard the word: He said,
Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have
received the holy Ghost as well as we? So he commanded them to be baptized
in the name of the Lord. Upon which words Calvin says: It was not
necessary that Baptism should be administered by the hand of Peter, even as
Paul also, 1. Cor. 1.14. testifies, that he baptized few at Corinth, for
other ministers might take upon them those parts.

How do not these examples even of the primitine Church, clean ouerturne our
brethrens principles, that every Minister of the Word and sacraments that
baptizeth, must not only himself be a preacher: but that he must also
preach, at the action of his baptizing, or else, he breaks our Savior
Christ's institution? although, this withal by the way, is to be noted, that
Baptism ( as Calvin and other do well observe against the Anabaptists,) was
not here first instituted, though it be here alleged: nor, who only
should baptize: nor* who should be baptized: as the Anabaptists do
imagine, and hereupon do urge principally these two places: And, save that we
hope better of our Brethren the compilers of this Learned Di^course, that they
be not of this erroneous opinion, Otherwise, their precize urging of these
words, might strengthen the Anabaptists to do the like, and breed
suspicion on themselves: especially, in applying these words in this sort,
unto our state of the church now. That by these Testimonies is it evident,
that the administration of the Sacraments ought to be committed to none, but
unto such, as are preachers of the Word, that are able to teach them that
they baptize. How are our Ministers, Baptizing
( were they never so Learned preachers,) able so to do? sith all those whom
we ordinarily baptize, are late borne Infantes. Are any, yea, the best learned
of our Brethren themselves, (not considering what they do, but what they are
able to d^) able to teach these Infantes? How are they able to teach them, A
dangerous and impossible position of our brethren.
that are not able to learn of them? Except they would not have Baptism
administered unto Infants, until they be able to learn, that that is taught them
in the Sacraments. Which is the plain assertion of the Anabaptists.

I trust our Brethren be not of this opinion, for then farewell all our
brotherhoode, if they go about under colors of Ecclesiastical government, to
shove in Anabaptisme among us. And yet (I may say to you) this hangs
shrewdly together, conferred with that we heard before, Page 9. about the
Civil Magistrate and Christian princes. Where they said, the Church of God
was perfect in all her regiment, before there was any Christian Prince: yea,
the Church of God may stand, and does stand at this day, in most blessed
Estate, where the Civil Magistrates are not the greatest favorers. These were
perilous speeches, and the very speeches of the Anabaptists against Christian
Magistrates. And again, Page 36. our brethren contending for preachers, used
these words: If there be no way of salvation but by faith: and none can
believe but such as here the word of God preached: Which are again the very
assertitions of the Anabaptists. These speeches savor to strongly of the
Anabaptists argument^.


I speak not this as accusing our Brethren, nor yet, will I excuse their
compiler of this Learned Discourse of Ecclesiastical government, whosoever he
were, or were it (as it pretendes) the desires of them all. Because, if they
be not of the Anabaptists opinion, yet these speeches savor to stronglye of
them.

Howbeit, I had rather ascribe them, only unto such inconsiderate
earnestness, as (to defend their positions,) care not from whom soever they
borrowe any thing, that may serve their turn: than, that I think they hold,
or will mayntaine (when they shall better advise them) these gross and
dangerous errors besides this danger, that these propositions of our
brethren, (Baptism ought to be administered of none but a Preacher, and that
this office pertayns to none else, and that there must be a preaching at the
ministration of it, and other like speeches, By these positio^s our baptizme
and our brethrens is called in question.
) may cause such a scruple to arise, as might call in question (even as the
Anabaptists do) whether the most and best part in the Realm, yea, and
perhaps the most and best of our Brethren their-selues, be as yet truly
baptized, yea, or no. But I trust our Brethren will not, nor dare say so, that
it is no true Baptism, if it be not a^ministred by a Preacher that preaches
at the action of the Baptism. Neither do our brethren so say directly, but
only, yt the administration of the Sacraments ought to be committed, but to
such as are preachers of the word, that are able to teach them that they
baptize. Thechildren are not to be debarred for the ministers in ability of
preaching.
Albeit, that to be able is one thing, and to be driven necessarilye to do the
action that they are able to do, is another, yet (as I said before) we must
take heed of these speeches, sith, they be not able, nor all the world is
able ( respecting the time of that action) to teach them that are not yet able
to learn. Neither must they be put back, for this inhability. Because they
have another and better Charter for them, than all the ministers ability of
teaching, although that were able and capable of learning.

But if they mean not so, (as I charitably would conster their words, to any
gentler sense, to save them from this suspicion:) then this ability to teach,
in respect of the infantes that are baptized, is not necessary in the
baptiser, in that manner of teaching, that is to say, public preaching, to
be at that instant put in practice. Except only in respect of the
congregation which as they are already taught and grounded in that matter, so
though it be convenient, that at the action of baptising any infant, the
Doctrine of that action, and the exhortations thereunto partaining, should be
set forth: so is it not necessary, especially having so plain godly and
learned a form thereof prescribed, and used accordingly, and homelyes also (as
further occasion may serve) provided, and the people already not ignorant of
the action: that it should be always administered by a Preacher, which both
should be able, and after his ability should preach a sermon, on that matter
at the action doing: or else, the children are not baptized as they ought to
be, or the people not sufficiently enstructed.

The ministration of the supper may be truly administered though not by a
preacher.
Now, as we see this, both for our, and for the primitive use, of the
administration of baptism, which I hope may suffice those that are not
contentious: so, to come to that our Brethren adioyne hereto, of the other
sacrament of the Lords supper. Which indeed requires an earnest and grave
admonition and exhortation, besides a plain and clear declaration, of the
holy mysteries in this sacrament, to be joined with the administration of it,
for the instruction and edification of the receivers and participants of the
same: which thing, that in every place where and whenever, it might be done:
and that without any sophistication of false doctrine or any such clogge: or
va^iety of ceremonies, as might breed disturbance or offense: and that thereby
the Lords death might be frutefully showed forth until his coming: there is
already (as our brethren know, and are not able to sinde fault fault with any
thing therein) a godly and learned form of administering the communion
prescribed and established. besides Godly and learned Homilies in that behalf
provided, to be publicly and reverently read, in eueryeneuer so simple and
rural a Congregation, to expound the matter andedify the people when there is
no other preaching, at the receiving of the sacrament. And yet we wish (as well
as our brethren do) if it were Gods will, The Lords Supper.
that every place were so furnished, that so often as this Sacrament is
administered, there were a Sermon preached before the receiving of it: but that
there ought of nenessitye, such a Preacher to the be only Minister of this
Sacrament, and then and there to Preac^ thereon, or else it is not at all, or
not rightly administered: that is the point we stand upon.

Our Brethren do first urge the instiution, and allege out of Luke, 22.19.
our savior Christ's own words.

Also instituting his holy Supper, he said: Do this in remembrance of me.
Here is indeed the very Institution of Christ, The observation of Christ's
Institution.
and a straight commandment, Do this, to wit, that that he there did. And
also this commandment stretches to the principal end of the doing. Do
this in remembrance of me. So that, if this which Christ here did
institute, be not done, or be not done in remembrance of him: it is a manifest
breach of Christ's commandment. But can not this be done that Christ did,
and commanded to be done, and be also done in his remembrance: but that the
Minister which is the Doer, must needs preach a sermon at the doing of it?
yea, if we should go thus exactly to work, can our Brethren prove that
Christ himself the chief of all Preachers, and instructor of this holy
Sacrament, either at the doing of the action, or immediately before the doing
of it, preached unto the participants any sermon concerning this matter?
Whether Christ himself preached a sermon at the very time of the first
institution of the sacrament.
It appears rather the contrary, both by the conference of the Textes, and by
the best, (if not all the) Commentaries that we read, that he made no Sermon
thereon, at or presently before the Instituting and celebrating of it.

As for that large and most heavenly sermon, which is contained in the
13.14.15.16. and 17. Chapters of the Gospel by Saint John, and the other
speeches mentioned in the other Evangelists, it is evident enough in the Text
that they were spoken after this mystical Supper, and after the grace or Hymme
was said. Although some think otherwise of that, which John notes in the
former part of the 13 Chapter: how after the Paschall supper was done, (and
that also was done without any preaching, albeit not without a showing forth,
what that Paschall Lamb did signify,) that then Christ arose and washed his
Disciples feet. The celebrating of the paschall la^b^ had no preaching though
teaching at it.
Which done, and sitting down again, he began to show them the meaning of
his doing. Nothing pertaining to the Mystery of this Sacrament, as we have
seen already, by our Brethr. collection on the same. Page 28. Christ now on
this washing, taking occasion to mention who among them was unclean: enters
into the deciphering of Judas treason, which was not yet any part of his new
Sacramental Supper that he instituted. For he gave not that Bread, neither
at that time, nor in such order, nor to such end, nor by such Soppes, as the
Papists used at their mass, masking at liker to a Iudasses sop, fit for such
as may well therein be called treachers, that would presume to sacrifice Christ
again. Whereas Christ in his mystical supper, The sop giuento Judas was not
the sacramental bread.
gave the bread by it self, and the Wine by it self. So that this might well
be, that Judas having his sop and possessed with the devil, departing
immediately, was gone before this holy supper began, as also it may appear by
Matthew and Mark, that this should be done before he instituted this sacrament.
Howbeit, Luke places it otherwise, which if (as he says) it were done after:
then, is it yet more evident he had no sermon at all, before he instituted this
sacrament.

But, be all this before, (as I have said) yet is here nothing appertayning to
the exposition, exhortation or participation of this mystery. So then, if our
brethren will so precisely urge the words of Christ, do this in remembrance
of me: We may safely gather, that if the same thing be done that Christ did,
that is to say, in such an holy and reverend manner as Christ's example and
the holiness of these mysteries teach us, those that be his lawful ministers
of his word and sacraments, do before theassembly of the faithful people
take the bread, and when they have given thanks, break it, and give it unto
the faithful, disposed to receive it: saying, take and ea^e: this is the body
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for you, do this in remembrance of
him: or other such words to this effect, as we use in the administration of the
Lords supper: saying, the body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for
thee, preserve thy body and soul into everlasting life: and take and eat this
in remembrance that Christ died for thee, and feed on him in thy heart by
faith with thanksgiving: And likewise do and say, in the like manner (as
Christ did, and said) with the Cup: to the which also accord the words in our
Communion book: and do all this to the end and purpose that Christ ordained
the same: The true administration of the Lords supper.
shall we dare to say, that if moreover a sermon be not preached hereupon,
that now this sacrament is not administered as it ought to be? have we not that
which both Christ did, and that he did bid us do, and in his remembrance
also, as he did bid us?

No (say our Brethren) for this remembrance, Saint Paul declares, that it
ought to be celebrated by preaching of the Lords death. yea? does he so? and
where has he these words? so often (says he) as you shall eat of this
bread, and drink this Cup, you shall show forth the Lords death until he
come. And is here this word, preaching of the Lords death? If it be: how
chance our Brethren, in citing the very words of the Text it self, dare not
so traslate it? No, they did better than so, keeping in the text, the proper
signification of the word (...)* you shall show forth, or ye do show forth, or,
show ye forth the Lords death etc. True it is, there is a more excellency
comprised in this compound, (...), than if he had symply said, (...), show
ye: and therefore our Brethen do well translate it, you shall show forth.
And in a sort, this may be called preaching. And Musculus note thereon is very
good, wherein also he uses this note preaching, in an improper sense, saying:
Musculus. in 1. Cor. 11.
Neither must this be ouerpassed that he simply says not (...), that is, you
do declare, but (...), that is, you do cheefely or most of all declare. For
(...) in this composition, has a force of a signification to be bent thereto.
The Apostle delivered unto them, not any light memory of the Lords death, in
three our four words by the way and slightly: but in great earnest, and
public showing forth, to be performed and to be preached out, as of a
benefit incomparable and to be astonished at.

So that here is a kind of preaching in an inproper understanding comprehended,
as Calvin also calls it, saying. Now Paul adioyneth, what manner of memory
should be celebrated: to wit, with giving of thanks. Calvin in 1. Cor. 11.
Not that the whole memory consists, in the confession of the mouth. For this
is the cheifest thing, that the virtue of the death of Christ, should be
sealed up in our consciences. Howbeit, this knowledge ought to kindle us unto
the confession of praise: that we should preach before men, that which we
think within before God. The supper therefore is, (that I may so speak) a
certain memorial, which ought perpetually to endure in the Church, until the
last coming of Christ: instituted unto this end, that Christ might admonish
us of the benefit of his death, and that we might recognize the same before
men. Whereupon also it has the name of the Euchariste. Therefore, How we
should preach Christ at the Communion.
that thou may orderly celebrate the supper, thou shall remember, that of
thee is required the profession of thy faith. Hereupon it appears, how
impudently they mock God, that boaste they have in their mass any kind of
Supper. For what is the Mass (for I speak not of the papists, but of the
Pseudo-Nichodemites,) he means those that openly come to Mass for fear of
persecution, and think it is enough that they secretelye come also to the
Communion and to the gospel, as Nichodemus came to Christ by night for fear of
the Jews) that it is stuffed with detestable superstitions: they feign by the
external gesture, that they allow them. What kind a preaching of the death
of Christ is this? Do they not rather forswear the same? So that, this
preaching which here Calvin speaks of, is not that which is proper to a
preacher, and whereof Christ said before to his Disciples (as our Brethren
therein used the word rightly,) Mark 16.15. (...), Go ye forth into the whole
world, and preach the Gospel. But it is such an improper kind of peaching, as
belongs in general to all men.

And therefore it is far better, simply to use Paul's word, who says not,
neither was it his meaning, ye shall preach the Lords death: but ye shall
s^ewe forth the Lords death, till his coming. Who are these that he says
should show it forth? Does he speak here unto Preachers? or not rather to
all the Corinthians men and Women, that should be communicante^ of these
Mysteries. So often as you, who are these you? You that shall eat of this
Bread, and drink of this Cup. And what shall these do? You shall show
forth the Lords death until his coming. If now, he meant Preaching by this
showing forth: then must all the people men and Women be Preachers, that be
no Ministers of the Word and Sacraments. So that hereby we may most
plainly see, how our Brethren, to thrust in a necessity of preaching, to be
always had at the administration of this Sacrament, spare not to wrest and
abuse saint Paul's words to a necessary importing of that, which by no direct
sense, they can be drawn unto. Bullinger breefely, and as it were in a word,
tells us in his marginall note thereon, what this showing forth means:
Bullingerus in 1. Cor. 11.
Annunciare mortem Domini, est laudare and gratias agere domino. To show
forth the Lords death, is to praise and give thanks unto the Lord. Whereupon
it is called, Eucharistia a Thanksgiving.

Musculus ( me thinks) very well Parapharastically settes out, the full
meaning of these words. This Institution of the Lords Supper being received
of the Lord himself* have I delivered unto you. Whereupon ye may perceive,
Musculus in 1. Cor. 11.
that ye eat not a Supper private of every one of you, but a common and a
mystical Supper, instituted unto the memory of our common redeemer, and this
can ye not be ignorant of. For, so often as ye eat this bread, and drink
of this Cup, you being thus of me trained up, do show forth and preach
the death of the Lord, whereof ye are partakers, not some only seperately,
but all in common. Whereupon ye might enough have been admonished, with what
faith and with what concord communicating, ye ought to eat this Supper in
the memory of his death. This I take to be the right sense: although the
vulga^e translation have these words in the future tence, after this manner.
For so often as ye shall eat this Bread, and shall drink of this cup, ye
shall show forth the Lords death, until he come. Erasmus translateth it even
as we read and do expound it. There are that read the word (...) in the
Imparatiue mood, Do ye show forth. But this little word, (...) that is, for,
being causall (or importing a cause) favors not that sense. They, do judge
that the Apostle in these words expounded, (and withal commanded,) how the
Corinthians ought to celebrate the remembrance of the Lord, that is to wit,
so, that as often as they should eat this Bread and drink of this Cup,
they should show forth his death. As though he desired also this thing to
have bin in them, because that in this mystical and memorial supper, they did
not set forth the Lords death. Even as we see the sacrificers to celebrate
their Masses, that they make altogether no showing of the Lords death. For
those things that separately (or by themselves) they say; cannot be accounted
for this showing forth. For they say the^ both being turned away from the
people, and in a tongue unknown to the Church, and under such a silence, that
they can not be perceived, no not of those that know the latin tongue.

This is a manifest breach of Christ's institution, and of the Apostles
interpretation. If the Lords supper were so administered in any place with us:
we did not keep Christ's institution, nor did it in his remembrance, The right
and godly manner of our administration of the sacrament.
nor showed forth his death, as these Corinthians and these Papists did not.
But with us (God be praised for it) it is never administered by any so simple a
minister, but though he be not able himself to preach, nor there be any other
preacher present: yet the very form which the Communion book prescribes
unto him, is so plainly and pithily set down, to express all the institution,
the use, the fruits, and the ends thereof; with the duty of the worthy
receauers, with the danger to the unworthy; so dreadfully terrifying these,
and so comfortably animating the other; and in all points so lively showing
forth the death and passion of our Savior Jesus Christ: that no man can
justly say, but that as Christ bids, Do this in remembrance of me, we do
the same thing in remembrance of him: and as S. Paul expounds this
remembrance, to be the showing forth of the Lords death, so the Lords death
is showed forth, both by the action of the minister, and with all by the
action of the faithful people. And so well showed forth, that if the only
form of our Communion book be of the minister duly observed, and of the
participantes religiously considered: they shall (no doubt) though there be no
other sermon preached, both truly and worthily participate the holy
communicating of the Lords body and his blood. Our homilies and exhortations
at the ministration of the L. supper.
And yet commonly at the receiving of these blessed mysteries, if there be no
sermon preached: there are other both godly and learned homilies appointed to
be read, which are sermons also, and serve especially for that purpose, if the
people be negligent in communicating, or criminous in life, or unskillful in the
understanding of the necessary points belonging to these mysteries: to
encourage, to persuade, and to enstructe them. Neither yet have we these, as so
content herewith, but that we think it also very expedient (if it may be had)
that at this action, (beside the form prescribed) a godly learned preacher
were also the shewer forth of the Lords death, and of the other mysteries
contained in this sacrament. But this so strict necessity of our Brethren, we
see is evidently here confuted, and namely that they say: by these testimonies
it is evident, that the administration of the sacraments, What our Breath. mean
by ability to teach and to preach.
ought to be committed to none, but unto such as are preachers of the word,
that are able to teach them that they baptize, that are able to preach the
mysteries of Christ's death to them, to whom they do deliver the outward
sign thereof.

But by the way, what mean they by these words, able to teach, speaking of
Baptism: and able to preach, speaking of the Lord supper? Is the former
ability to teach, an ability of the Doctors? Who (they say) cannot exhort,
nor apply, etc. which are especial points requisite in a preacher. If it be:
then, here is ministering of the sacrament without preaching. Except they will
say, the Doctors can not minister the sacraments. But then again must they
revoke these words on the other side of the leaf, page 59. It is evident,
that whom God has instituted to be minister of the word, him also he has
made to be minister of the sacraments. These euidencies agree not well
together. Especially this other for the preacher, expounding this showing
forth the Lords death, for preaching. For by this construction of our
Brethren, (as we have already seen) all the people should be Preachers. Where
before they said, and that more truly, page 58. no man may take upon him any
office in the Church, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. Hebr. 3.4. If
they say, they mean not here preaching in his proper sense, and as it is a
function peculiar to the minister of the word and sacraments: why then do
they bring it in? Or for what preaching all this while do they plead, and
allege these testimonies? For such as all the people may do, and must do as
well as they? But because in all these speeches, they drive it still to this,
that he should be able: what mean they hereby? One that can preach, The
preaching of a sermon no necessary part of the sacrament.
if need so require, but nevertheless he always does not? For it follows
not, a posse ad esse. If they mean so: then may the sacrament be administered,
as with a Sermon; so without a Sermon. Neither is the preaching a sermon, any
part of the sacraments substance, nor any accident thereunto of mere
necessity, though of the more conueniencie: but the remembrance and showing
forth the Lords death, is one of the chiefest, and the most substantial part
of this sacrament: therefore the remembrance and showing forth of the Lords
death, and the preaching of a sermon, are not all one. Yea, to come to the
abuses that Saint Paul reprehendeth in the Corinthians, The abuses of the
Lords supper, that S. Paul reproved in the Corinth.
to whom he wrote these words, by our Brethren cited. For, as we have heard
out of Musculus, that in these words he spoke, as though he desired these
things in them, because they did not show forth the Lords death, in this
mystical and memorial supper.

Now, although it follow not: they had no preaching ( understanding preaching
in his proper sense) at the administration of the Lords supper, therefore they
had no remembrance or showing forth of the Lords death: because, non sequitur
a specie ad genus negative: yet this follows necessarily, a genere ad
species: they had no remembrance nor showing forth of the Lords death, at the
administration of the Lords supper: therefore they had no preaching thereat.
And yet, had they preaching often at other comminges together, whereof Saint
Paul treats afterward, chap. 12. and 14. But Saint Paul reproouing their
abuses, and here reckoning them up particulerly, that they had dissensions,
and were not in charity when thy came together, to this action: ver. 18. that
they took their own suppers before: ver. 21. that one came hungry, another
came dronken: ver. 21. that they showed not forth the Lords death: ver. 26.
that they examined not themselves: ver. 28. that they discerned not the Lords
body: ver. 29. that upon the examination of themselves, they judged not
themselves: ver. 31. that they tarried not one for another: ver. 33. to
conclude, and that which summarily he put first of al, ver. 20. that when they
came together into one place, they made such a super of it, as whereof the
Apostle says, this is not to ea^e the Lords supper: S. Paul now reckoning up
all these faults among them, at the administration of th^s sacrament: and this
being (as our Breath. say) so necessary a matter: is there any probability,
but that he also particularly would have reproved them for this, that they had
no sermon preached among them at this action? Which in all these corruptions
had been very needful, and might have refrayned them from these abuses, if
their preachers had not also been corrupted, as it likely that they were,
which suffered among them such foul abuses. No probability that S. paul
thought preaching at the communion, to be so absolutely necessary as our Breath.
urge it.
But if preaching had been so necessary at that instant, no doubt he would
have touched the neglect of that also, especially mentioning the showing forth
of the Lords death, to be principally required at their eating and drinking in
the Lords supper. But the faults of their preachers, and of their preaching,
he mentions still in other places, and not in this treatise of the
Sacrament, nor in any place burdens them herewith: and therefore it is not
like, that he thought preaching to be always so necessary at the celebration
of these mysteries.

But not to look on their abuses, but on the order and use of the Apostles
themselves, and of all the faithful at Jerusalem, and that even presently
after they had received the holy Ghost, Act. 2.42. And they continued (says
Luke) in the Apostles doctrine, and communion (or fellowship) and breaking of
bread, and prayer: of which breaking of bread, The use and practice of the
Apostles in the communion. Act. 2.42.
says the Geneua note, which was the ministration of the Lords supper.
Calvin giving a reason hereof says: Why I had rather that the breaking of
bread in this place, should be interpreted for the Lords supper: this is the
reason. Because, Luke mentions those things, The Geneua note.
wherein tho public state of the Church is contained. Yea rather, he
expresses here four notes, Caluinus in Act. 2.
whereby the true and natural face of the Church may be judged. Do we
therefore seek the face of the Church of Christ? The image thereof is here
lively pictured unto us. And indeed he begins with doctrine, which is as it
were the soul of the Church.

Neither names he every doctrine, but the Apostles doctrine, that is, that
which the son of God delivered by their hands. Wheresoever therefore, 1.
doctrine.
the pure voice of the Gospel sounds thoroughly, where me^ abide in the
profession of thereof, where they exercise themselves in the ordinary hearing
of it: there undoubtedly is the Church. Now as doctrine is the first note: 2.
the communion or brotherly love.
so the text places their communion (or fellowship) next in order. Which (says
the Geneua note) stands in brotherly love and liberality. In communicating
this member ( says Calvin) and the last ( meaning prayer) flow from the
first, as fruits or effects. For doctrine is the bond of brotherly
communicating, 3. the sacrament.
and also opens unto us a gate to God, 4. prayer.
that he may of us be called upon. But the supper approaches to the doctrine,
in steed of confirmation. Wherefore Luke reckons not up four, rashly; when
as he will describe unto us a state of the Church orderly instituted. And it
behooves us to put our endeavor unto this order, if we desire to be truly
accounted the Church before God and his Angels, not to boast only before men of
a void name thereof.

Now if we must not only keep these four, but also have so great a
consideration to the order of the^, insomuch that Marlorate adds to these
words of Calvin: Marloratus in Act. 2.
For the Iustitiaries of works do inuert this order, and gather thus of the
later: good works are to be done, and then righteousness will follow, O
blindness worthy of great judgment. For how can works be good without faith
gooing before? Without which, whatsoever is done, is sin. Romans 14. d. 23. If
then such a straight respect is to be had, of the orderly placing these four
notes: and this communicating of fellowship consisting in alms, brotherly
love, and works of mercy, come between the hearing and believing of the
doctrine, and the breaking of the bread, that is, the communicating of the
Lords supper: it argues, that although preaching the doctrine have gone
before: yet the sacraments are not so immediately joined, especially to the
preaching of the doctrine, but that other godly exercises might go between
them. Not that any of these notes was altogether destitute of any of the other:
the supper of the Lord had evermore doctrine joined with it, but not always
preaching of the doctrine. And so it had both union in fellowship, and prayers:
but yet, might all these be also publicly exercised, though at that instant
of the doing of them, the supper of the Lord were not administered.

Now this being the manner in the Apostles days, that although they had many
times sermons at the administration of the supper: Act. 20.^ c* 7. and 11.
as Act. 20. ver. 7. and 11. at that solemn confluence, where S. Paul
preached until midnight: and yet (as these were several actions) see, how
even by the providence of God, (albeit, no doubt, to confirm the doctrine
preached, and to be a warning to the negligent hearers) when they had minded
presently upon the sermon, to have proceeded to the supper of the Lord: The
primitive church
what an occasion senered the conjunction of these two actions, by the young
man's fall out of a window, from the third lofte, that was taken up dead.
Whereupon Paul being the Preacher, descended down, and laid himself upon
him, and embraced him saying: trouble not your selves, for his life is in him.
So when Paul was come up again, and had broken bread and eaten; he communed a
long while till the dawning of the day, and so departed. Now as they had these
sermons sometimes preached at the celebrating of the Lords supper, ( howbeit
here this interruption divided these actions some space of time, and yet this
is that only place that brings them nearest together) so if they had not a
sermon preached thereat, notwithstanding they no more discontinued the
administration of this Sacrament, than they did the public exercises of their
prayers, or than they did absteyne from baptizing, as we have already at
large proved.

And even so, that this custom did thus continue in ye primitive Church: The
practice of the primitive Church.
not only their (...), that is, their love feasts, which they made at this
supper, do declare: whereof diverse authors, especially Tertullian and
Justinius Martyr do make mention: but also the whole order thereof is by
Justinius fully described, both of this sacrament administered with a Sermon,
Justinius Martyr in defens. pro Christ. ad Antoninum Pium.
and without it. In the Apology that he made for the Christians, unto the
Emperor Antoninus Pius, he has these words: we bring him that is thus
washed ( meaning baptized) and instructed, unto those whom we call Brethren,
where the assemblyes are made, that we might pray as well for our selves, as
for those that are newly illumined. That they may be found by true doctrine
and good works, to be worthy obseruers and keepers of the commandments,
and that we may obtain eternal salvation. After the prayer we salute one
another with a mutual kiss. After which, the bread, and the cup alayed with
water is brought unto the chiefest brother, as Gelenius translates it, but in
Iustine himself (...) And here is our (...) over those Brethren, which
brethren are not only the faithful people, but also the ministers as is
before by Beza confessed. Which being of him received he offreth up praise and
thanks giving unto the father of all, by the name of the son and of the holy
Ghost, and so for a certain while he does celebrate the Euchariste. After the
prayers and the Euchariste, all the whole assembly sings together, Amen. And
the word in the Hebrew tongue signifies the same that does, Sobeit, (or let
it be done). The thanks giving of the Prelate, and the well wishing of all the
people, being accomplished: those whom we call the Deacons give a part of the
bread and of the cup alayed, unto every one of them that are present, over
whom the thanks giving was made, Justinius Martyr.
and they suffer them also to carry it to those that were absent. And this
food is among us called the Eucharist: to the which none is admitted, but he
that believes the doctrine to be true, being washed with the washing for the
remission of sins, and living according as Christ has taught. For we receive
not these things as a common bread and a common cup: but even as by the
word of God being made flesh, Jesus Christ our Savior had flesh and blood
for our salvation: so also by the word of prayer and the thanks giving we
have learned, the food (being of him sanctified, which being changed,
nourishes our flesh and) blood to be the flesh and blood of the same Jesus
Christ that was incarnate. For the Apostles in their writings that are called
the Gospels, have delivered forth, that Jesus thus commanded them: having
taken bread, and thanks being given, he said: do this in the memory of me.
This is my body. Likewise, having taken the cup, and having given thanks, he
said: This is my blood, and did communicate it only unto them.

The ministration of the L. supper without a sermon.
In these words we plainly see, all the manner of the primitive Church, in
the days of Iustine the Martyr, about the hundred year after Christ's
ascension. Concerning the administration of the Lords supper, without any
sermon preached thereat. But it follows even anon after, of the
administration also of the same, with a Sermon or an Exhortation made at the
participation thereof, saying: On the sunday are made assemblies, of those that
are of the City, and of those that are of the Country, where the writings of
the Apostles and Prophets are read before: the reader then ceasing, he that is
placed our them makes an exhortation, The supper of the Lord ministered with a
sermon.
provoking them to the imitation of the things that are honest. After this we
all arise and offer up prayers, which being finished, there is brought (as I
said) bread, wine and water. Then he that is placed over the^, so much as he
is able, offreth up prayers and thanksgiuings, but the people sings Amen.
Thereupon those things that are consecrated, are distributed unto every one,
and sent unto the absent by the Deacons. The rich if it please them, contribute
every one according to his will. The collections are laid up with him that is
placed over them: he succoureth the fatherless and widows, and those that
want by reason of sickness or other necessity, those also that are prisoners
and traveling strangers, and in sum, he is made the prouider of all the
needy. But these assemblies we make upon the sunday, etc.

Thus do we see at large the order of the primitive Church, for the
celebration of the Lords supper, both without, and also with a Sermon or an
Exhortation at the same. If our Brethren reject their orders, because of some
additions that they used, or that the words of Iustine might see me
suspicious, to savor of the Popish error of transubstantiation: not only the
Magdeburgenses do clear the words of Iustine from that error: but Iustine
clears him self, both from that, and from the error of consubstantiation or
carnal presence in the Sacrament. Iustines words maintain neither
transubstantiation nor consubstantiation.
For the former, say the Magdeburgenses, ( who not withstanding maintain the
latter:) The devise of transubstantiation was also unknown unto the Church of
this age. For although Iustine say: Which being changed nourishes our flesh,
and blood: notwithstanding he only looks unto, and drives it to that that
he may discern (or sever) this bread and this cup, unto the which comes
this word of Christ, from other usual meats and drinks, with which our
bodies are nourished. And as for consubstantiation, this his sentence makes
less: referring all the consecration, to the spiritual and thankful
remembrance of the death of Christ, as he also does, disputing with Tripho the
Jew, saying: Justinius in dialogo cum Triphone Iudeo impress. paris. 1565. fol.
42.
this also ye know, that the solemn oblation of the two goats in the time of
the fast, was not suffered to be done otherwhere the^ at Jerusalem. As neither
the oblation of the meal (or flower) which was wont after the custom to be
offered, for the^ that were cleansed from the leprosy, signifying figuratively
the bread of the Eucharist: which for the memory of his passion cleansing the
souls of men from all sin, our L. Jesus Christ has delivered to the^ that
come after: to the intent that in the mean time, we should give thanks unto
God, both for the world created for man, with other things that are contained
therein, and also for the redemption wherewith he delivered us from sins, the
principalities and powers being universally vanquished, according to the divine
counsel.

Thus does Iustine acquit himself sufficiently of those errors. As for the
water mingled with the wine, The occasion of mingling water with the wine in
the sacram.
and the sending these sacramental signs unto the absent, whereof afterward
came great corruption and superstitions: we say (as Aretius does) thereon.
Concerning the reason of the mingling wine and water, it seems unto me
probable, because that making the supper of the Lord in a common banquet, they
also drank more largely, not sipping, as at this day it is the manner. And
therefore, Aretius in probl. ^om. 2. tit. de fract, panis.
that the wine by it self being strong, should the less hinder them; water
was put unto it. Which we see also at this day to be done in common banquetes,
that the noble wines are mingled. The place 1. Cor. 11. makes me thus to
think; where manifestly he teaches, that the abuse of the Lords house
began even then to take hold, insomuch that many were drunk in that love
feast. Thus says Aretius for the original of the water mingled with the
wine. And as for the sending to the absent, he says: Fourthly, a portion of
the supper was also sent to them that were absent, the which was done without
superstition, a token of friendship, and of union in doctrine and in their
whole profession, even as we have rehearsed before out of Eusebius, that it
was done at Rome, The Heluetian order.
neither is here any mention made of any merit, or of any passeport exhibited
to those that were about to die.

To conclude (says Aretius on this practice of the primitive Church next
after the Apostles) hereunto came mutual exhortations, to concord and
constancy in faith and profession, that this might be a certain stipulation
and obligation, Aretius description of ministering the Lords supper in the
reformed Churches of Heluetia.
that they should be constant in Christianity, whatsoever fortune at the
length should happen unto them. These things in our action may almost all of
them be declared. First in the public assembly, which is a show of a public
banquet. Then the like oblation is of us observed, the words of the
institution are recited, and to God the father is pronounced praise and glory.
The mingling of wine and water, we have not: for it is no part of the
institution, neither have our wines need of mingling, as the oriental wines
have, neither do we drink freely, as then they did. All that are present if
they list do communicate, and both the kinds are delivered unto all. It is
not sent unto those that are absent, because superstition has corrupted that
custom: they sent it then to those that were whole, and unto strangers, that
came not into the assembly: at this day only to those that are ready to dye,
and that for a certain lucre and advantage; yea, add this unto it, with a
vain persuasion of a kind of necessary passeport. A collection is made for
the poor, and every one gives as much as he will, save that our folks will
give too too little. The action is not mute (or dombe) but the hystory of the
passion is recited. Private voices (or the speeches of private persons) come
not hereunto, Kneeling at the communion not offensive.
for because of moderate or comely order. They approach ( he speaks of the order
in his country at Bernes) and it is received of them standing, for the
Paschall Lamb was eaten of them that stood: howbeit neither makes it any
matter, whether the communicantes stand or sit. ( nor yet if they kneel, as
is the order of our Church.) This briefly ( says Aretius) is our action not
unlike Iustines.

By which description of Iustine and conference of ours, and of the Heluetians
order of administering the supper of the Lord; we most plainly perceive our
Brethrens no small error in this, that not content with all these things in
the supper of the Lord, if a Preacher make not a sermon also at the
ministration of the same: The learned disc. page 60. and 61.
they not only count it not sufficiently done, but they frustrate and euacuate
all the action. Hereupon our Brethren make this conclusion saying:

How intolerable an abuse then is it of the sacraments of the Lord, to
commit the administration of them to those men, that are not able to expound
the mystery of them.

Bridges.
This conclusion stands all on that word able, which we have sufficiently (I
hope) answered before, save that here in this conclusion, it is more
ambigiously referred to expounding, than in the premises. Ability of
expounding.
For by the ability to expound the mystery of the sacraments, may be meant,
either the preaching ( which notwithstanding is to be wished, that every
Minister were able so to expound the mystery of them, Ability to expound the
mysterys of the sacram.
if it pleased God so to grant it although always they so did not:) or else,
their ability of discrete setting forth those expositions of these
sacraments, that are prescribed in the public form of their ministration: or
other godly expositions of other learned me^, authorized to be read at ye same
times, the ministers themselves being, though not able with any commendable
gift of public eloquence, to treat at large upon them, and so expound the
mystery of them: yet able well enough to show unto the people, or to any that
ask them, plainly and briefly the sum and principal content of the
mystery of them. In which sort (I trust) the simplest minister of them all, is
able to expound the mystery of them: or else no Bishop or ordinary would
permit him, to serve any never so small a cure, Unable ministers not allowed.
or any other would allow him any stipende at all thereunto, if he be
con^icted of such inhabilitie. So that this intolerable abuse, either is not
in use at all, or at least, in any Minister not allowed, by any law or
constitution now in force, but that such unable Ministers may be removed, and
other more able placed, although they cannot expound the mystery of the same by
public preaching. But now let our Brethren proceed to their further
arguments and proves on this matter.

And seeing the elements of the world, The learned disc. page 61.
of which the outward part of the sacraments is taken, be dead and beggarly of
themselves, except they be animated and enriched with the promise and word of
God, which is the life of the sacraments: what can it be better then sacrilege,
to separate the ministration of preaching of the word from the sacraments?

If the elements of the world, Bridges.
be separated from the promise and word of God, and opposed against it: these
terms, dead and beggarly, might better sit the^. And so S. Paul called the
ceremonies and sacraments of the old law, How the elements are dead and
beggarly.
elements of the world, and not after Christ, Coll. 2.8. and so Calvin
expou^ds those words saying: But what calls he the elements of the world?
No dout but ceremonies. Caluinus in Coll. 2.
For straight after in place of example he brings in one kind, to wit,
Circumcision. And also Gal. 49. S. Paul calls the ceremonies of the Jews,
weak and beggarly elements. Caluinus in Gal. 4.
The which he does ( says Calvin) because he co^sidereth them without Christ,
yea rather against Christ. For to the fathers, they were not only healthful
exercises and helps of godliness, but also effectual instruments of grace. But
their whole force was in Christ, and in the institution of God. But the false
Apostles neglecting the promises, would oppose them against Christ, as though
Christ alone sufficed not. No marvel therefore if Paul repute the^ trifles and
things of no value. Now, if the outward sign or element in the sacrament, be
thus used among us, A general preaching.
that is to say, be destitute of the word, of the institution, of the promise,
of the remembrance of Christ: yea, of Christ himself, and be opposed against
Christ: then are these speeches of worldly, dead and beggarly elements well
alleged, and truly applied against our sacraments.

For, true it is, that Saint Augustine, tractatu in Ioh. 80. Aug. tractat. in
Ioh. 80.
says: You are now clean for the word that I spoke unto you. why says he
not, Ye are clean for the baptism with the which ye are washed. But says:
for the word which I have spoken unto you? But that also in the water, the
word cleanses. Take away the word, and what is water, but water? The word
comes to the element, and it is made a sacrament; yea, as it were, even a
visible word. For verily, he said this also, when he washed the Disciples
feet: He that is washed, The ioining of the word to the elemens.
needs not, save that he wash his feet, but is clean throughout. From
whence comes this so great a virtue to the water, that it touches the body,
and washes the heart; except, that the word do it, not because it is spoken,
but because it is believed? For in the word it self also, the sound passing
is one thing, and the virtue remaining is another thing. This is the word of
faith the which we preach (says the Apostle) because, Romans 10.
if thou shall confess in thy mouth that Jesus is the Lord, and shall believe
in thy heart, that God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be safe. For
with the heart it is believed unto righteousness, Act. 15.
but with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Whereupon we read in
the Acts of the Apostles; clensing their hearts by faith. And the blessed
Peter in his Epistle says: So has baptism also made you safe, ^. Pet. 3.
not the putting off the filth of the flesh, but the interrogation of a good
conscience. This is the word of faith that we prech. With the which (out of
doubt) baptism is also consecrated, that it may be able for to cleanse. For
Christ being the vine with us; with the father being the husbandman: loved his
Church and gave himself for it. Read the Apostle, and see what he adioyneth:
that he might sanctify it, (says he) clensing the same with the washing of
water in the word. This word of faith avails in the Church of God so much,
that by the same it cleanses the believer, the offerer, the blesser, the
dipper, yea the infant, being so little a one, although he be not yet able,
with the heart to believe to righteousnesses, and with the mouth to confess
to salvation. This is done altogether by the word whereof the Lord says:
Ye are now cleansed for the word that I have spoken unto you.

I thought it not amiss to set down at large the whole sentence, not only
for the notablenesse thereof, The word pre^ching at the face. comprehends the
action of all the people.
touching other matters: but for fear of cauilling: least, our Brethren might
say, I left out the word preached, here twice named. But that we should
plainly see, he speaks here of preaching it, in such sense, as although it
comprehend the proper action of the preacher, yet withal we see it stretches
to the public confession of all Christians. The word abused.
And the word that here most especially he speaks of that the Disciples were
cleansed for ( or through) the word that Christ spoke unto them: although this
sentence of Christ, Io. 15.3. be a part of that notable sermon, that he had
after his sacramental supper: yet these words that he makes relation unto,
supposing they were spoken before the supper) were no preaching, nor any part
of preaching, The words that Christ spoke in that action were not preaching.
but spoken by Christ unto Peter, when he came to him among the residue, to
wash his feet, as appears in the story hereof, Ioh. 13.5. etc. After that
he powered water into a basyne, and began to wash the Disciples feet, and to
wipe them with the towell wherewith he was gyrte: then came he to Simon Peter,
who said to him, Lord do thou wash my feet? Jesus answered and said
unto him, what I do, thou know not now, but thou shall know it hereafter.
Peter said unto him, thou shall never wash my feet. Jesus answered him, if I
wash thee not, thou shall have no part with me. Simon Peter said unto him,
Lord not my feet only, but also the hand and the head. Ies^^ said unto
him, he that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet, but is clean
every whitte. And ye are clean, but not all. Shall we now say here, that
Christ made a Sermon? Indeed, if our Brethren mean the preaching of the word
in this sense, that it is preaching, though only it be thus briefly spoken by
the Minister, to the end the people may better understand and believe the
word: in that sense I hold well, that in the Lords supper the word of God
concerning the death of the L. should always be so preached. As Oleuianus also
says on these words, Oleuianus in Romans 10.8.
Romans 10.8. This is the word of faith, the which we preach.

Note a difference between the true word of God, which is preached to this end,
that faith and conversion may be in the heart: and the magical word, which is
pronounced upon the things, that it might work something In visua.
on the things that are set (or grafted,) or else, that a power should be
ascribed to the syllables. Example, the gospel of John is the word that we
preach. In the beginning was the word (says John;) he teaches to trust in
Christ the true God, he teaches that all things are made by him. The end is,
that I should believe, not that I should drive away tempests. The whole Mass
is magical, although they recite the Gospel, and mutter it upon the host:
because it is not the word of faith, that is preached. If it be not preached,
that it may be understood; or that virtue be ascribed to the syllables, the
which resideth in God alone, so that, it is due to him alone: and this is
Magical. So, The Papists magical abuse of the word.
they that say when the words are pronounced over the bread, then it is the
body: it is Magical. Christ pronounced not the words over the bread, but
preached his death at the table to his Disciples, with the words and with the
tokens, and that they might understand, to what end those tokens were
instituted. In baptism the Papists, use much Magike. Out of the 7. of Mark
they say, The word rightly used.
Ephata, that is, be opened, as Christ (said) unto the deaf man. And by the
virtue of words, they will include the holy Ghost into the water. Al these
things are not the word of faith that we preach. Paul knows no other word of
faith, tha^ preching not murmured. Here lights the absolution, Auss. an
Boden, even from the very bothome (or from the messengers) made upon the head,
by the virtue of the words, Act. 10. to him give all the Prophets witness. etc.
Peter muttreth not words upon the heads of every one of the^, but preaches of
Christ the promise of the Gospel, confirmed by the testimony of all the
Prophets: and the holy Ghost fell upon the hearers. Thus says Oleuian.

So that, preaching being understood in this general sense, as not only it may
signify such a solemn sermon as Peter there made, Act. 10. but also as may
comprehend the words of our Savior Christ at the table, when he instituted
his mystical supper: If the word want his preaching in this manner in our
administration of the sacraments, then indeed our brethren might have some
cause to say, that we maintain the elements of the world, and dead and beggarly
elements: yea, that although we have the word, it were but a magical murmuring
of it. The sacrame^tall signs having the word so uttered by the ministers as
it may be understood, are not beggarly elements.
But becomes it our Breath. to bestow these speeches upon the outward signs
of the sacraments, when they are animated and enriched with the word of God,
in such order as Christ instituted the^, and the Apostles practiced the^? Is
this to separate either the word, or preaching of the word from the sacraments?

But our Breath. only understand by preaching, such a further exposition and
exhortation upon this matter, as the learned Minister shall at his discretion,
amplify and set forth the same with all. And can our Breath. prove that this
manner of preaching the word, is either any such substantial part of the
sacraments, or any such inseparable accident thereunto, that except it also be
annexed, The life of the sacr. li^th not in the manner of preching the word.
the life that animateth the elements, and the treasure that enricheth them,
which is the promise and word of God, is separated from them? Is not in
baptism the word of God it self, being not magically murmured, but clearly
and with understanding spoken, and conceived with understanding and believing
of the hearer (if he have capacity to hear and understand and believe, yea,
though he have not, (as infantes have not) this life and riches of the eleme^t,
understanding the word as it is joined with the spirit, that animateth and
enricheth the word, whereby the word becomes effectual, to animate and enrich
the element, without ascribing virtue to the bare word? Is it not the^ of
sufficient virtue to baptize and cleanse the infant, when besides the element of
water, these words, In the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy
Ghost, that Christ has comanded those to use, which are his ministers
appointed thereunto, besides ye promise there declared of washing away our
sins, of newnes of life, and that we shall be saved: which promise, where Gods
spirit works by his word, is annexed to the element, Our forms of sacram.
is not all this sufficient and effectual to baptize an infant, except a
sermon also hereof be made at his baptism? Nay, though he that were to be
baptized were of ripe years, to hear, Baptism may be ministered with out a
sermon.
understand, and believe all these things, yet sith that he is not to be on a
sudden baptized, before he be catechized in a sufficient understanding and
believing, both of all the mysteries of that sacrament, and of all the
necessary articles of our Christian faith: shall we say that even then when
such a one should come to be baptized, he must have also a sermon made unto
him, at the celebrating of this sacrament, or else the element of water is but
a worldly, a dead, a beggarly element, and the word never so plainly
pronounced, is but a magical murmuring?

And what if there be yet besides all this, a godly and learned form also, most
plainly expressing all the points contained in that mystery, and that all
the covenant betwixt God and us, be so fully expressed, that the best preacher
in the world cannot in effect say more, and all this so clereset out, that all
of understanding may understand it: shall it yet be said, How clearly the
word is set forth in our form of baptism.
that the element is here dead, and beggarly, and separated from his life and
spiritual riches? And all this have we, besides godly and learned homilies,
and many other sermons set out for that purpose, and yet all this will not
serve our Breath* without a sermon preached at that instant.

And for the supper of the L. have not we likewise most pithie and godly
exhortations, before we approach unto it, with prayers and thanksgiving, and
public confessions, and the whole institution also laid forth before us, when
we come thereto? And the words of Christ not used with a magical murmuring,
nor any such virtue ascribed to the words, How fully the word and all the
myst^rie of Ch^ists death and our union with him is set forth in our form of
the communion.
but all to Christ the instituter, and to the virtue of his death and passion,
whom, and whose passion we record, and take the elements with the word in
remembrance of him, and of his body given for us, and of his blood shed for us,
and show forth his death by this action, feeding by faith in our hearts, on his
flesh and blood, as effectually and truly, in spiritual manner, as our bodies
feed on those bodily elements: and that hereunto these elements are
consecrated as holy and lively signs and pledges, to confirm our faith,
relyinand at (...) the promise of the same our Savior, that by eating his
flesh and drin^^ng his blood we shall have life everlasting. And all this is
clearly set out eue^ as it is contained in the scripture, and gathered
together in so excellent disposed a form, as all the world cannot amend, nor
is inferior to any of our Brethrens forms. Yea, (all things considered) our
form is far more convenient for us than is any of theirs, to inflame and
confirm our faithes in our Savior Christ, and in the merits of his passion,
to make us repentant of our sins, to comfort us in the forgiveness of them, to
knit us in love and charity all to God, in a communion with Christ our head
and in the communion of saints one to another, to provoke us to lead a new
life, and to offer up to God a spiritual sacrifice of our souls and bodies,
Sacrilege.
besides that of our lips by praising and glorifying God, for all these
benefits sealed up thus unto us in these mysteries of our Savior Christ, and
withal unfolded unto us, by this so clear setting out of all these things,
that every co^municant may understand them, and be moved by them.

Our Breath. intemperate speeches against our forms of minis^ting the sacram.
And can now our Breath. say, (if they will say the truth) that here wants the
promise and word of God, and that it is separated and not set forth? that
here is but a dead, and beggarly element? that here is but a part, and that
but the outward part of the sacrament, and so no sacrament; as the body of a
man without the soul, which animateth and gives life to the body, is not a
man but a dead corpse? And dare our Brethren (beyond all this) be thus bold to
demand, what can it be better than sacrilege? For if it be no better than
sacrilege; then is it no sacrament at all. We dare not burden the Papists so
far, for their baptizing, notwithstanding all their incantations,
superstitious toys, and material additions to the element of water, besides
their dangerous errors about baptism that the baptism which their Popish
and Idolatrous sacrificers ministered; no, what heretic soever he were, so long
as he and they observe the form and matter of baptism, by our Savior Christ
prescribed: we dare not say, they are not baptized at all, and take upon us to
baptize them again, nor I think our Brethr. dare attempt it or avouch it. And
can they auow these speeches then of our baptizing now, that keeps the mere
and simple institution of Christ, without any of those corruptions? How far
more modestly writes Calvin in his 265. Caluinus in Epist. 265.
Epistle Rogant quidam, etc. There are certain that inquire, if it were
lawefull for the Apostles at the hour of prayer, to ascend into the temple:
and moreover for Paul to perform the solemn rite of sanctification: why may
not we also intermingle prayers with the Papists? We must first hold this,
that the prayers which were in use among the Jews, were pure, and formed to
the laws prescription. Neither yet (if the Papists did conceive a pure form
of praying) would I make any religion to enter with the^ into the ^e^ple. But
nder became not them to join themselves, unto their assembly that had
^de^^fied Christ: I answer, a godly and holy action is not corrupted by the
vice of the men. As I am wont to say, that If all the Angels were present at
the Mass, they are not able with their holiness to cleanse the filthiness
thereof. Nor yet again, are all the devils able with their presence to bring to
pass, that the holy supper when it is celebrated according to the institution
of Christ, should not reteyne the purity thereof. Since therefore we have the
very institution of Christ both in his supper and in our baptism, so clearly
set forth as we have seen; shall the ministers insufficiency to preach the
things ye he (after so good a form prescribed both to him and us) declares,
be such a pollution, that these holy sacraments should be defiled thereby, and
be counted or called beggarly elements? No necessity of preaching at baptism.
Is it lawful for Calvin to say of the Jews ceremonies, that though without
or against Christ they were weak and beggarly elements: yet having the promise
adjoined and referred to Christ, they were to the fathers not only healthful
exercises and helps of godliness, Caluinus in Gal. 4.^.
but also effectual instruments of grace? And are ours being done according to
Christ's institution, and with Christ, and for Christ, of less force now than
theirs then? For as for theirs, How the Papists committed s^crilege in the L.
supper.
neither circumcision nor the. Pascall Lamb, had always a sermon preached at
the ministration of the^. And shall we then say, that if ours want a sermon at
the ministration of them, ours are less effectual than were their sacraments?
Indeed we dare burden the Papists with the term of sacrilege (by Gelasius
their own Popes mouth) for subtracting the L. cup: and burden the^ again so
far as all these terms amount unto, for their so transforming of the L.
supper: that they made no supper of the L. at al ther^of, nor any sacrament but
a mere sacrilege, and an Idolatrous sacrifice of their own making. Both
wresting the word into an absurd and monstrous sense yea, into a sense clean
contrary to any sacramental sense, taking clean away the element And so (as
we have heard out of Augustine) they ouerthrewe the nature of a sacrament. For
(as he says add the word to the element, and it is made a sacrament: so take
the element from the word, and it is made no sacrament. But can our Breath. say
as much of us, that as the Papists take the element from the word, when they
bring in transubstantiation: so, we take the word from the element, when we
ever have the word and the eleme^t joined together, though in their sense, it
be not always preached? And yet it is always so at large expounded, How
sermons are very profitable at the sacrament.
yt I see not what a learned preacher can say more, concerning the matter and
substance of the sacrament, or any thing necessary for the worthy receivers,
save either to their further exhortation, upon some especial occasion, or to
their further resolution, if any doubt arise about the true understanding of it.

And to these purposes, sermons we grant are very profitable, or some homilies
read to the same purpose. But to say (as our Breath. do) that except the
sacraments be administered, by one that is is able to prech, and at the same
time do preach a sermon, besides all these things aforesaid, or else the
element is but worldly, dead and beggarly, and is separated from the word, and
no better than sacrilege: these are very presumptuous, dangerous and erroneous
speeches, and indeed not tolerable, being such as necessarily implie, that
the most part of us, and peradventure of themselves also, are not as yet any
whit more baptized, than in the Popish time we celebrated the Lords supper,
that is to say in plain English, not at all. Which how near it would draw
to any true baptism, let the reader and their selves consider. Our Brethrens
argument is this:

To separate the elements in the ministration of the sacr^mentes, from the
promise and word of God, which is the life and riches to animate and enrich
the sacrament, is but to give us worldly, dead, and beggarly elements, and is
nothing else but sacrilege:

But, to separate the ministration of preaching of the word from the
sacraments, is to separate the element in the ministratio^ of the sacraments
from the promise and word of God, which is the life and riches to animate and
enrich the sacrament: therefore, it is but to give dead and beggarly elements
and nothing else but sacrilege, to separate the preaching of the word from the
sacraments. The minor of this argument, as we have seen (understanding
preaching as they understand it) is apparent false, for although it be true in
the supper of the L. where the participants have discretion, understanding
preaching, so ye the word and promise of God be taught and set forth in any
such sort, as the congregation may be edified in the understanding and
believing of these mysteries: Nevertheless we can not grant thereto so
absolutely for baptism. Which it may be fully received (for the truth and
substance thereof) by the infants that want discretion to understand the
mystery of it in what language soever it be spoken. So that either our Brethren
must both deny themselves to be as yet baptized, and yield to the anabaptists
in repelling infantes: or deny this argument. Albeit restrayning the argument
to the other sacrament: we gladly yield and subscribe to that part of the
argument, as having always both the word, and ministration of preaching of the
word, when soever the sacraments are with us administered. And so far
forth, we conster and allow of that order, which Calvin himself prescribes
in his institutions, Calvin in instit cap. 18. sect. 34.
concerning the Lords supper. cap. 18. sect. 34. saying: Hitherto we have have
reasoned how it serves to our faith toward God. But when the Lord in this
sacrament reuoketh into our memory so great a bounty of his goodness as we
have declared, and stirs us up to acknowledge the same: he warns us with
all, that we should not be unthankful to his liberality so plentifully
powered forth, but that rather we should with praises wherewith it is meet,
preach the same, and celebrate it with thanksgiving. Therefore when he
delivered the institution of this sacrament to his Apostles, he taught them
that they should do it in memory of him, which Paul interprets, to show
forth the Lords death, ( here again is that interpretation, whereof our
Breath. spoke before) but that publicly, and all of them together with one
voice openly to confess, that all our trust of life and salvation is placed in
the death of the Lord, that we should glorify him with our confession, and
should exhort others by our example to give him glory. Here again appears,
whether the scope of the sacrament aymeth, to wite, that it might exercise us
in the memory of the death of Christ. For, that we be bidden to show forth
the death of the Lord, until his coming to iudege: is no other thing, but
that we should preach with the confession of the mouth, Four kinds of preaching.
that which in the sacrament our faith acknowledges, that is to wit, the death
of Christ to be our life. This is the second use of the sacrament which
appertains to external confession.

Here is in one sense (as we have also showed before, and that out of Calvin) a
general preaching at the ministration of this Sacrament. And this preaching,
our brethren can not deny, but we have. Now for the other kinds also of
preaching more peculier to the Minister, Calvin proceeds. Thirdly, The
diverse kinds of preaching in the Lords supper.
and that in the steed of an exhortation unto us the Lord (him self) would
be. Than the which (exhortation) none could more vehemently animate and
enflambe us, both unto purity and holiness of life, and also to charity, peace
and consent. For the Lord does so communicate there his body unto us, it is
altogether one with us, and we with him. etc. Here again he makes another
kind of preaching, which he says is the Lord himself, in steed of a most
effectual exhortation, to wit, the communicating of his body unto us. And
this preaching again (God be praised) we have in the Ministration of this
sacrament. Now hereupon he comes to the third kind of preaching at this
sacrament, and says: Sect. 36. From hence is best of al confirmed, that which
otherwher I said: that the right administration of the sacrament is contained
i^ the word. For what profit soever comes into us out of the supper,
requires the word. Whether we are to be confirmed in faith, The papists mute
actions in the Lords supper.
or to be exercised in Confession, or to be stirred up to our duty: there is
need of preaching. Nothing therefore can be done more preposterous in the
Lords supper, then if it be turned into a mute (or dumb) action, the which
thing was done under the tyranny of the Pope. For they would have all the force
of the consecration, to hang upon the (sacerdotall) Priests intention: as
though this appertayned nothing to the people, to whom this mystery ought
most of all to have been laid open. And hereupon was this error bred, that
they marked not those promises, wherewith the consecration is made, not to be
directed to the elements themselves, but unto those that do receive them
truly. Christ speaks not unto the bread, that it should be made his body:
What is the preaching of the words of Christ.
but he bids his Disciples, eat: and to them he promises the
communicating of his body and his blood. Neither does Paul teach another
order, then that together with the bread and the Cup, the promises should
be offered to the faithful. Thus certainly it is. Here it becomes not us
to immagine any magical incantation, that it might be enough to have murmured
up the words, as though they were heard of the elements: but we should
understand those words to be a lively preaching, that edifieth the herers
that pierseth into their minds that is imprinted and sits in their hearts,
that may bring forth an efficacy, Caluines order in the Lords supper.
in the fulfilling of that that it promises. By these reasons it is evident,
that the reserving (or laying up) of the sacrament, which some urge to be
extraordinarily distributed to the sick, is unprofitable. For either they
shall receive it, without reciting of the institution of Christ, or else the
Minister shall join together with the sign, the true explication of the
mystery. In silence is an abuse and vice. If the promises be rehearsed, and
the mystery declared, so that those that are to receive shall receive it with
fruit, there is, no doubt, but that this is a true consecration. Thus says
Calvin of this third kind of preaching. Now if this be as he says, a true
consecration, where the words are not muttered to the element, but spoken to
the Communicants, and the mystery laid forth before them, and the promises
recited: and that we must understand those words of Christ, The sacrament
ministered according to our form has a true consecration.
to be such a lively edifying and effectual kind of preaching: all which are
so clearly set forth whenever this sacrament is of any Minister with us
celebrated: can our brethren say, that here wants the ministration of
preaching the word, so much as is necessary and sufficient, to make a true
consecration of the sacrament?

True it is, that when Calvin comes to the full conclusion of this treatise, he
reckons up a fourth kind of preaching, sect. 70. Concluding thus.

So far as pertains to the holy supper, it might thus most decently be
administered, if that most often, and at the least every week it were set
forth unto the Church. But the beginning should be made with public prayers,
after which a sermon should be had: than the Minister (the bread and wine being
set forth on the table) should reherce the institution of the supper. Then
should he declare the promises which are left unto us in the same. And withal
he should excommunicate all those that by the Lords forbidding are put back.
The form that Calvin prescribes with a fourth kind of preaching.
Afterward prayer should be made that with what benignity the Lord has given
unto us this holy nourishment, he would also enstruct and frame us, with faith
and thankfulness of mind to receive the same. And since that we be not of our
selves he would of his mercy make us worthy of such a banquet. But here either
the psalms should be song, or somewhat read, and the faithful should
communicate of this holy food in such order as is seemly, the ministers
breaking the bread and delivering it unto the people. The Lords supper being
done, an exhortation should be had for sincere faith, etc. Thus does Calvin
write of all the order that he would have observed, in the administration of the
Lords supper. Nowbeit, he prescribes it not to any Church, but only says it
might be thus administered most decently. And although he mention that a
sermon should be had, before it, and an exhortation after it (seeming to make
some difference between them) yet whether such a sermon or exhortation may be
had, as if a preacher want, may be of the Minister red unto the people, of
another making: that he does not express. Nor yet, whether the preacher or
reader of the same, Musc. for the M. of the Sacrment, that are not preachers.
must always be the party that ministers the sacrament, So, here is also
nothing set down, but that we already have in use (his words being thus
understood) except the excommunicating of all those, that by the Lords
forbidding are put back. Neither do we think it necessary, that either
excommunication should be then used, or that all those should be
excommunicated, that by the Lords forbidding are put back, from this supper.
For so every one that is not in charity with his neighbors, should forthwith be
excommunicate. But since Calvin, so modestly in these things, only tells,
what he thinks might be a most comely manner of the administration,
preiudicating no other reformed churches: let Geneua ( with good leave of us,)
follow this order. And let us in Gods name, follow our Communion Book, which
(me thinks) both contains the most and cheifest of all these things, and in
a far more decent order for our state.

Yea, the book of the orders of Geneua makes the Deacons also ministers of
the cup and why not as well of the Bread and of all both parts as well as of
one? and yet they will not permit them to be Preachers.

Musc. in his common places, De coena domini: upon this title, by whom the
Supper of the L. should be administered ( with the like modestly that Calvin)
says on this wise. I know that this is the custom in some churches, that the
ministers of the word exercise the place of the prophets and doctors: and in
the mean time, they leave the administration of the sacraments, to the parish
preests and curates of the people (as they term them) with the deacons.
Notwithstanding, The reformed Churches wherein the Minist. that are not
preachers do minister the sacraments.
that custom ought not to preiudicate other churches in which the dispensers
of the sacraments, are the same that are the dispe^sers of the word, so that,
they execute both the parts of the ministry. Otherwise, it should be
convenient, that according to the saying of the apostles, act. 6 they should
apply themselves to prayers and administering doctrine, leaving the ministry
of the tables. Seeing that many mo may be had that can dispense the sacraments,
than those which can rightly cut sound doctrine in the church. By which
testimony of Musc and by the very order prescribed even in Geneua. It plainly
appears, yt not only in these reformed Churches, many are admitted to
minister the Sacr. that are not able to preach: but that also, this was the use
of the primitive Church in the apostles times. Many can minister the Sacrament
that cannot preach.
Which ouerthrows all that our breath* have hereon alleged. Neither helps it
to say, that yet still this takes not away, but that there should be preaching
used at the administration of the sacrament, though the minister of the
sacrament be no preacher. For our breath. said, the administration of the
sacraments ought to be committed to none, but unto such as are preachers of
the word. etc. page 60. But for this that they say here also, It is no better
then sacrilege to separate the ministratio^ of preaching of the word from the
sacraments, so hard a speech following:

Musculus, for the points requisite in the sacrament.
Musculus proceeding with the minister of this Sacrament though he be no
preacher of the word, yet he requires in him such a competency, as has a
triple respect, both to the person that he sustaineth, and of the matter that
he administreth, and of the people to whom he communicates.

After he has showed for the first part how he should be no lewd person, but
sober and virtuous: coming to the second respect in him, he says:
Furthermore, he ministers it competently, if he have a consideration of
those things which he dispenses, and do worthily frame himself unto them.
He dispenses the communicating of the body and blood of Christ. The bread
which we break (says the Apostle) Is it not the communicating of the body of
the Lord? And the Cup of the blessing over which we bless, is it not the
communicating of the blood of the Lord? 1. Cor. 10. Thus therefore shall he
competently administer this sacrament, that it may be a communicating, not that
it should be a holy private thing. He dispenses the remembrance of the Lord,
or (as Augustine in a certain place speaks) the sacrament of memory. This
shall he do competently, if he shall adioin unto the mystical communicating,
What kind of preaching Musculus requires in the L. Supper.
the showing forth of the L. death, according to the word of the Apostle, who
says: so often as ye eat this bread and drink of the Cup, ye show forth
the Lords death till he come, For so did he ordain this custom in the
Church of the Corinthians. It is not fit that it should be a dumb
communicating. Either let some thing be read before the people, or be sung,
concerning the historye of the death of the Lord, as it is begun to be done,
in very many churches in our age. He dispenses the Euchariste: he Euchariste,
is a giving of thanks and a sacrifice of praise. Let him therefore have a
care, that this holy communion may be closed up with public giving of thanks.
He dispenses the love feast, that is, the banquet of brotherly love. It is
meet therefore that a clear exercise of Christian love and mutual
communicating should be adhibited. Unto the which he ought not only with
exhortations in the act it self to enstruct and accustom them, but also with
constitutions of a certain order. These are the principal things, of which
the dispenser of the Lords table, ought cheefely to have a care and
consideration, whereby he may apply himself competently unto this sacrament.

The third respect is of the people communicating, which the more simple and
ruder they are, so much the simplier must the minister speak of the mystery of
the Lords supper, that he may apply himself to their capacity. But he must
by all means take heed of those two vices, that entrap the people, to wit,
superstition and contempt. Superstition, least the people worship and adore
that for the thing it self, that is the sign thereof: contempt, least they
stick only in the bread and Wine, The seal and the writing joined.
not discerning the body and blood of the Lord, and therefore contemn it,
understanding nothing beyond the iugdement of the eyes, because by sight and
taste they perceive it to be bread and Wine. Such a point did Augustine give
warning of, in his book of Catechizing the rude, in the ninth chapter, where
he says thus: Concerning the sacrament that they shall receive, it suffices
for those that are more prudent, to hear what that thing signifies: but with
the duller sort, it must with more words and similitudes be treated upon,
least they contemn that which they see. These things wrote he. To conclude he
must take heed that he swerue not either to the Corinthians, or to the
papists, in this cause of the Lords Supper. And to the intent that the people
not only with the hand and mouth, but with faith and heart may receive that
which is given, let him declare all things that are to be spoken, in the
vulgar and usual tongue, not only the exhortations, but also the words of
the Lords institution, the Prayers also and the thanksgiving, whereby the
people may understand all, and in their heart assent thereto, according to the
Apostles admonition, 1. Cor. 14.

Thus we see how although the Minister be no preacher, but being a discreet
and virtuous man in all these foresaid respects, and observe these
exhortations, which are both plentifully set out in Homilies, and in the
Communion Book it self, and the other things here noted, in such order as
the communicantes may understand and believe the same: although there be no
other sermon preached, yet is the Sacrament truly and effectually administered.
Neither can these things with the residue that he sets down, be
understood, for the only action of a Preacher: confessing and allowing, that
many Ministers not Preachers, may minister this Sacrament, and yet in every
one that ministers the same al these things are requisite. For what is
plainer than this argument, out of Musculus sayings? Musculus thinks and
proves, that it is not necessary, that every one which administreth the
Sacraments should be a Preacher, and preach at the ministration of them:

But Musculus thinks, and proves it necessary, The effect of Musculus
argument.
that all things ought to be done by the minister, at the Ministration of
them, which here he reckons up.

Therefore Musculus thinks and proves that all these things might be done
of one that is no preacher and without a sermon then preached of these matters.
If our Brethren will deny the mayor, (for the minor, I think they will not) I
refer them to Musculus and his reason, out of, Acts 6. and to the reformed
Churches that he means. It suffices for us to prove both by him and by
Calvin, that, as we have always soon kinds and that effectual, of
preaching the Lords death at the Ministration of the Lords supper: Ministers
forbidden to preach.
so, though we have not always ye kind of preaching, which our Br. urge
unnecessarily, as mere necessary, and we grant also to be convenient, and
wish it could in every place be had: yet wanting this manner of Preaching, and
having all the other: we may boldly and safely auowe, that it is a
consecration, as Call. calls it a right administration of the Sacrament, as we
use it, But say our Brethren:

The learned Dis. Page 61.
And forasmuch as the spirit of God compares the sacraments to seals, that
are added for confirmation of writings: we know well, that a word or writing
may be auaylable without a seal, but never a seal without a writing.

How can this be rightly alleged against us, that have both the seal and the
writing joined together: Bridges.
but rather make for us against our Brethren? For, if this confirmation of
writings by the seal added thereunto, and this auaileablenesse of the seal
joined to the writing, be of the spirit of God: Since we have both of them in
the Sacraments, jointly together, and use the seal never without that word
or writing, that Gods penmen by the inspiration of his holy spirit did set
down in authentical record of writing: We have both the seal and the writing
joined in our form of sacrament.
How can our Brethren maintain their sayings, that we sacrilegiousely
separate and pull the writing from the seal, or the seal from the writing, and
give a dead, beggarly, and worldly Element or bare seal, that is not
auaylable, but against Christ's institution, and against Gods spirit? Surely,
in this and such like slanders our Brethren do not a little sin, even
against the spirit of God in them, and against their own spirits and
knowledges: that know well enough, and can not be ignorant, but that we
join always the writing to the seal, whenever we deliver the seal: and
that in as ample manner, as the writing is left written unto us. Neither do we
deliver only the writing with the seal, and read the whole writing at the
delivery: but read it in such plain and clear manner, that every one which
receives the same, may well perceive the content of the writing, the validity
of the seal, and all the mystery, purport and effect of the whole deed. Only
this, no large voluntary Discourse, is at every time of the delivery made
thereupon. And is this so necessary also in all deeds written, sealed and
delivered, and withal breefely and plainly declared, in whose name and act,
and to what use and end, it is so passed, that there must be always besides all this, a large treatize uttered by the deliverer to the receiver, or else the
deed is not an autenticall deed nor auailable? our brethrens fallation is to
open a secundum q^id ad simpliciter. We have not the writing preached at the
action (in such manner as they would have it preached): therefore we have not the
writing in this action, but the seal without the writing. The learned disc.
Page 61.
Hereupon our brethren again conclude.

Therefore in this behalf we have had great default, so long time to commit
the administration of the sacraments to those men, who not only have been
known to be unable, but also have been forbidden to preach the word.

We do not excuse the default of any, that have admitted any such into the
Ministry, Bridges
that have been known to be unable to administer the sacraments. Neither
defend we any such unable Ministers, or would have them them to be allowed or
tolerated. Let such (being known) a Gods name, be orderly removed and
provided for. But we stand now upon the absolute necessity of this ability,
that our brethren urge to be in every Minister, to whom the administration of
the sacraments may be committed: What ministers herein we defend and defend
not.
that he must needs be withal a Learned Preacher of the Word. Which though
we also like off, so far as stretches to conueniencie: yet we dare not, nor
can admit this absolute necessity, understanding preaching as is aforesaid.
But see here, on whom most of all, our Brethrens accusation of this so great
default will light. They do well before hand to enclude themselves in the
number, saying: in this behalf we have had great default. for although they
mean nothing less in this (we) that here they speak of, than to charge
themselves, with any part of this default, but with a mannerly term, reach
at others: yet how will they acquit themselves hereof? For if, we have had
great default in this behalf, to commit the administration of the sacraments
to those men, that are known to be unable to preach the word: understanding
preaching in that sense, that our brethren here do, for free, extemporary, or
premeditate exhortation, Our brethr. accusation lights. on their own selves.
admonition, application: etc. How do not they incur the same default? except
they will deny Doctors or Teachers to be Ministers of the Word, and so (by
their own confession) Ministers also of the Sacraments, and yet, by their
former principles, they permit them not to exhort, admonish nor apply, etc.
Which things are most necessary unto preaching, namely, to that preaching, that
is used at the administration of the Sacraments. If they say these Doctors
notwithstanding, be not unable: for they can do it, though they may not do it,
What booteth this shift? for if they may not: then in all right, which is as
good as in all might, they be unabled to preach and yet not unabled to
minister the sacraments. Either therefore, let our Brethren deny that they may
minister the sacraments: or deny this to be so great a default, that a
sacrament may be administered without this manner of preaching Or else, whether
shall we be found more faulty, that suffer Ministers to administer the
sacraments, that are unable to preach at the administration of them, wishing
not withstanding they were able, and helping their vnabily what we can, and
provide as many able as we may: or they, which do unable many Ministers that
are able, and say, they can do it, but they must not. And so, both commit a
great default herein, and quite and clean ouerturne themselves, and all
their own principalities on this matter. And see again, how this in the nicke
comes in, Baptizme by Women.
that they add of our forbidding to preach. Does not this also, most of al,
even in this point fouch themselves in not permitting Doctors and teachers to
exhort and apply? is not this al one as if they forbad them preaching? as for
our forbidding, it is not so absolute, nor so peremptory, but, either it is,
because they have not the gift of public exhortation and application, etc.
Which if they had, and would use the same, as they should accordingly, none of
us would forbid them. And yet may they notwithstanding be Ministers of the
Word: else, how should even our Brethrens Doctors be Ministers of it? Or,
perhaps, they are forbidden, The force of the sacrament and substance thereof
depends not upon the ministers not preaching.
because of some defect in the parties life, or some other occasion, that might
make him offensive for that action, for a time to be stayed, and yet that
Minister so farre-foorth, on some good consideration, being forbidden to
preach, may notwithstanding be not forbidden, to continue the other parts of
his function, both to set forth the public form of prayer, and to read the
Lessons appointed out of the Scripture, and to administer the Sacraments to
the people. And this is as true a saying, as it is old, Vim sacramenti non
tollit vita ministri. God forbid, that the sacrament which such a Minister does
administer, should so depend upon him, or his life or preaching; that when he
upon infirmity, or default, or prohibition, or any other occasion cease to
preach: then the sacrament that he administreth should be thought not to be
effectual. Which to affirm, is a perilous error, and infers many dangers
and absurdities But now, besides this quarrel of not being preachers: our
Brethren draw this matter of the sacraments to other points and say.

And that which is more strange, to be suffered in this clear light of the
Gospel, The learned disc. page 61. and 62.
to permit the ministration of baptizme not only to ignorant men, but also to
Women which have no voice to speak in the Congregation, 1. Cor. 14.34. and 1.
Tim. 2.11. and that in private places, 1. Cor. 13 34 1. Tim. 2.11
but in case (they say) of necessity, as though there were such necessitye of
the outward sign, when it can-not be ministered according to the institution
of Christ, which is nothing else but to affirm with the papists, that
sacraments confer grace of the work wrought: and that the sacrament of
Baptism, is a sacrament of such necessity, that whosoever is not dipped in
Water, must be eternally condemned. Which heretical opinion, as we have
hissed out of our profession and preaching, so is it a great shame for us to
maintain by such corrupt usage of Christ's holy sacraments.

Bridges
Concerning the permitting the administration of Baptism (in this light of the
Gospel) to Women. Baptising by women.
( Be it spoken with the reverence of our Brethren) it is most untrue. When
as it is not only given customably in the open charge of every visitation,
whether any such thing be done by them, as in the time of the popish darkness
was used: but also if any such thing have happened and be found out, the parties
that so have done, Baptism, in private places.
are openly punished for the same. And how then is not this more strange, that
our Breath. dare say, it is suffered and permitted unto women: concerning Women's
having no voice to speak in the Congregation: Women's speaking in the
Congregation.
I hope our Brethren will not stretch it further, than saint Paul meant it, nor
urge it as Sanders and the papists do, which were not only against the
scripture, but against the state.

As for baptising in private places: though ordinarily, the open church and
place appointed in the church, ( as is the public font) be the most fit place
for such public actions: yet, where a sufficient congregation is present and
upon some extraordinary occasion, if the sacraments be orderly administered,
according to the godly form by the Church prescribed: shall we say this is
not a true sacrament, or not to be permitted, or corruptly administered and
received? if a Christian be sick, and by reason of his infirmity may not, or
dare not go abroad, may he not be permitted to receive by the ministration of
the minister the holy Communion in his house, with some of his family or
neighbors participants with him? and if this may be done in the Lords supper,
may it not be done as well in baptism, concerning the substance of the same,
and also for all points of decency: thereto belonging, having a sufficient
Congregation present, so that the Church be sufficiently certified of the
orderly doing thereof? What place shall we call that, where the Eunuche was
baptized by Philip? The Eunuchs baptism. Acts. 8.
For although it was by the common high way, yet in respect of the public
places ordinarily accustomed for such solemn and sacred actions, it was but a
private place. And in what place did Saint Peter command Cornelius to be
baptized, with all the residue, on whom the holy ghost did come? Cornelius
Baptism Acts. 10.
is it not most likely, that it was done in his private house? and likewise
Saint Paul's baptizing the keeper of the prison and his family, Act. 16. It
seems it was done either in his house, or in the Prison. If our Brethren say,
that there was some necessity or occasion so to do: whereas now, there is no
such necessity nor occasion, we having this clear light of the Gospel, and
a public place appointed for public actions. We praise God for it, and
acknowledge it withal thankfulness, that we have now this clear light of the
gospel. And having this, our brethren have no such cause to grudge and
complain for these other matters as they do. But had not S. Peter and S. Paul
the clear light of the gospel too, when thy baptized in private places? but
whatsoever particular necessity of circumstance and occasion drove them, The
clear light of the Gospel debarreth not al particular necessities of occasion
in that clear light of the Gospel so to baptize those parties, they knew
that the difference of the place public or private, infringed not the virtue
of the action. For the action is still of one and the same virtue, though upon
an extraordinary occasion, it be done for place, for time and diverse other
manners of circumstances, extraordinarily. In which points, there may be also
some ordinary differences, of one Church from another, without preiudicating
one another, or any prejudice to the sacraments, or to the receivers of them.
As for us, who have a comely and very good ordinary form prescribed unto the
Church of England, nor diuersityes of circumstances preiudicate the substance
or virtue of the sacrament.
we allow not that the sacraments ordinarily (and without necessity or
conueniency of some important extraordinary occasion) should be administered but
in the ordinary and public place, and time, and manner by the book appointed,
and by the laws of our Church prescribed, and indeed should not otherwise be
permitted. And much less, that the breach hereof should openly, (besides the
private practices in private houses) both in the pulpit, and in books printed
be maintained and defended: which is more strange, than in this clear light of
the gospel an extraordinary circumstance or occasion to be suffered or
permitted to be done. And which is yet more strange), that they which do all
these things, contrary to all Law and order, would for very shame open their
mouths and say, that baptism is permitted to be administered in private places:
their-selues both in private places and in strange manners many times
administering both these sacraments. But our brethen presuppose, that in our
suffering of baptism, to be now and then extraordinarily administered, though
by a lawful Minister, and by the order appointed yet being done in a private
place: that we permit it only for the necessity of baptism. Wherein although
they threape more kindness on us, than need: when other occasions may be and
are alleged by us, then only the necessity of baptism: For although in the
book, the title be this. Of them that are baptized in private houses in time of
necessity: yet afterward says the book: and also they shall warn them, that
without great cause and necessity, they baptize not children at home in their
house. And when great need shall compel the^ so to do, that they minister it
on this fashion, etc. But go to, let us say, as they would only have us say:
that if it be permitted of us to be administered in any private place, it is
only, but in case of necessity what say they hereto?

Necessity of baptism.
As though (say they) there were such necessity of the outward sign when it
cannot be ministered according to the Institution of Christ.

What do our breath here mean? that there is no necessity at al of baptism
although there be no such necessity? is there no necessity, of consequence of
condition, nor of conueniency: as well as absolute, simple, and inevitable
necessity? If generally there were no necessity at all of baptizing: then it
were free: whether we would be baptized or no: But it is not free: Christ did
institute baptism under flat commandment: therefore, N^cessity of
^^rcu^ncisio^
there is a necessity, and an important necessity of it. Did not baptism
succeed circumcision? as Paul clearly sets out, Col. ^.11. and 12. In whom
also ye are circ^mcised (says he) etc. And was there no necessity at al of
circumcision? we grant this necssity was not so absolute, that it reached to
them before their time assigned: no, nor yet after, was it so absolute
necessity, Necessity of baptism
that it reached to them while they traveled in the wilderness, God
dispe^sing, (for other manifold necessities) in that long journey, with the
necessity of that Sacrament. And yet Gods commandment remaining entire: and
they with such a necessity seuerly bound, that they should not contemn on
their parts, the obedience and execution of it.

And therefore says Zanchius in this very well, in his confession of
Christian Religion, concerning Baptism, Capite decimo quinto, Aphor. 5. We
believe that baptism is altogether necessary in the Church, as a sacrament
instituted of Christ, and which the Church can so little want, that where it is
not, (when it may be had, there we may not acknowledge the Church of Christ.
Howbeit we think it neede-full unto salvation in this wise: that
notwithstanding, if any for the defaulte of the Minister, but not through
contempt, depart this life not sprincled with the water: we believe not that he
is therefore damned, and wrapped in eternal destruction. For the children of
the faithful are therefore saved, because they are in the covenant: but they
that be of ripe years, because they believe in Christ with a true faith,
which verilye cannot suffer the contempt of Christ's commandment.

Gellius Snecanus whom we have before often and at large cited, (that we might
see how our brethren answer themselves) in his method of baptism, the sixth
part, says: The sixth circcumstaunce remains, when baptism should be
administered, Here we must note, although the time be free: yet by Gods threate.
Genesis 17. (where the neglect of circumcision is esteemed the violating of Gods
covenant) it consequently follows, that fit occasion being offered, baptism
ought forth with to be administered. Whereunto exhorts us the danger that was
imminent on Moses, by the delay of Circumcision in his child. The same do the
examples of the godly teach, those that were Act. 2. baptized of Peter, Act. 8.
of Philip. Act. 16. of Paul. Here is to be reprehended, Gellius Snecanus in
method^ baptis. part. 6.
the abuse of many, and cheefely of great men in this our age, deferring
baptizme unto some months, I know not for what causes* etc. The examples of
the ancients sheltereth, neither these lingerers, neither the Anabaptists, as
it shall be noted in his place. Thus writes Gell. on this necessity. And eue^
immediately he proceeds to the lawful manner of administering baptizm, which
because it comes next to hand, I will also here set down. Let us come at
length, ( says he) unto the lawful manner. Here is required that baptism
should be administered entirely with all his parts, according to the
circumstances of the Institution, and of the administration. The form
baptizing s^t down by Snecanus.
In the administration therefore of baptism, let the sum of the doctrine,
concerning the covenant and imputation of faith, co^prehending as well the
children as the parents, be repeated. To these let there be added an
explication, of the general commandment of baptizing all nations, and of the
final causes of baptism, instituted according to the sum and order of a
method. For the signs of their own nature signify nothing, but by the
institution of God. Therefore it is necessary that all things be referred to the
will of God, which is made manifest in the holy scriptures. Afterward, let the
examples of circumcision, and of the baptism of the Israelites. etc. come
hereto. Finally, let all this doctrine be concluded with the invocation of the
name of God. Thus writes he also of the full manner and form that he would
have observed in the sacrament. And is not the form that is prescribed unto
us, in effect the same. Hellopaeus, agreeinge hereunto, both for the necessity
of this sacrament, ( so far forth as we do urge the same) and for the places,
Hellopaeus, de sacrame^tis. cap. de bapt. page 120.
circumstances and order, that here we stand upon: For the necessity, in his
5. chapter, concerning the efficacy of baptism, whether it wash away sins,
or confer grace: Among other things after his proofs, page 120. he says:
Neither must we think Baptism to be absolutely necessary to salvation.
Nevertheless, me thinks I hear the papists, and some other, who
notwithstanding will not seem to be Papists, arise against me, affirming
that baptism is so much necessary, that they teach, except this sacrament be
adjoined, they cannot attain unto salvation, no not by faith. But we also
verily do confess that by the ordinance of God, the sacrament of baptism is a
certain thing correquisite to salvation. Neither can it be omitted, without
sacrilege. Yea, rather, if it be omitted by contempt, this should be a deadly
heinous offense, except upon earnest repentance following. Howbeit, to say it
is so necessary, that if any be excluded by necessity, whereby he cannot use
it* that he should be in danger of his salvation, we affirm it to be a
manifest error. Neither say we, it is the depriving of the sacrament, but it is
the contempt, that is the deadly thing.

And again Cap 8. page 155. he brings in these words against the Papists,
Cap. 8. page 155.
that our brethren iuiuriously object to us. And after he has alleged his
reasons against Women and lay persons administering baptism, whose doing we
allow not, neither yet does our book allow it, for any such persons to have
done it. How far women's extraordinary bap^^sme. De post facto i^ i^proued.
Though if it be done, and be done in such order, that they observed (both for
the matter and the form) the element of Water, and the words that Christ
assigns to be used, with other godly prayers at the doing: the Book ( to
anoyde all cauilles of Anabaptists) only approves the substance of the
baptism, when it is done: but not such persons to have done it. Who,
(notwithstanding any thing in the book) are worthily punished for their so
doing.

But ( says Hellopaeus) these things (say the defenders of this error,) ought
to be understood of the ordinary ministry. But they treat of the case of
necessity least that any should depart this life not baptized.

for, they thought by this means, Circumstances in baptism.
to succor the salvation of those that should be baptized in the danger of
death, least being prevented by death without baptism, they should make
wrack of their salvation, but we have taught Cap. 5. that this is no danger,
neither that baptism is of an absolute necessity of salvation, so that contempt
be away, Because the covenant of God apprehended by faith, is firm by it self
and effectual to salvation, although the seal, (without the fault of him that
wants it,) come not thereto. So that in all this, he excepteth only the
opinion of absolute necessity, not of all necessity. As for the place of
baptising (whereof our Brethren spoke last) besides the other circumst aunces,
yea, for all the order also and that with a sermon preached at the ministration
of this sacrament: in the conclusion of the self same Chapter, Page. 171, he
says: It remains that we discuss the other circumstaunces, where, and
when, and how, baptism ought to be conferred, we answer, that thing is
cheefely to be required, that, as all other things, so principally the
administration of the baptism, should be done decently and in order as for the
place, although that it be not necessary: yet it is most convenient, that it
should be public, as the temple, Cap. 8.171.
or any place appointed to the public Ministry. And as concerning the time,
it is meet (if it may so be done) that it should be at an hour appointed, and
that such an hour, wherein the Church is full of people. First, that very
many may profit in the enarration of this sacrament. Then, that their faith
may be kindled to embrace the grace of god, when as they see the infants
approach unto the same covenant, that God has made with their fathers. Besides
that it is convenient, to commend unto God with the public prayers the
salvation of the Infant. To conclude, God is to be celebrated with
thankesgiuings. But with what manner, baptizme ought to be conferred, is not
obscure to see. This thing must principally be observed, that certain
ceremonies are necessary, but certain are free: In the which we ought
diligently to look, what is expedient, and what convenient for the regard of
the times and places. The form of baptizing allowed by He^lopeus.
But we have rehearsed before those toyish additions, salt, oil, tapers.
Howsoever it be, the dipping, or sprinkling, the washing, the explication of
the sacrament it self, are parts necessary. But that all may be done
decently, they may proceed in this order: First, let the Infant that is to be
baptized be offered unto the public assembly, where the whole Church being
witness and looker on, offers unto God with their Prayers their tender
Brother. Secondly, let the minister recite the confession of the faith, that it
may be known with what doctrine, he which is baptized, shall be enstructed
hereafter. Thirdly, let the institution and promises of b^ptism be showed, and
that in the vulgar tongue, that of the Church it may be understood. Fourthly,
let the Infant be baptized, in the name of the father, and of the Son, and of
the holy ghost. It makes no matter, be he dipped either once or twice or
thrice, or sprinkled with water. Although in the old time, he was wholly dipped.
Which also the word baptism (that is, a washing) signifies. But herein the
custom may vary, according to the diversity of regio^s, and the tenderness or
firmnes of the infants body. Fifthly, to conclude, godly prayers being made the
infant being commended to God, may be sent home. This is a true manner of
administering baptism. Baptism effectual and formal enough with out a sermon
Now then, if this be a true manner of administering baptism: Here being no
sermon prescribed, but all this may be done well enough, without a sermon: and
our book prscribeth as much as all this comes too, and more: how have not we
baptizme truly ministered? I know, that after this, he presently finds fault,
with demanding of the child, whether it believes, and renounceth Satan, the
World, and the flesh: As our Brethren also pick a quarrel thereat. But since
he confesses, it was was taken from the custom of the ancients, when they
demanded these things worthily, of those that were of ripe years: The custom
of answering in the childs name.
though he say, it was ill translated to the demanding it also of the
Infants: for, to what purpose should those that be ignorant be asked, and
other folks answer the demaundes? I like not of Hellopaeus misliking this
custom so long as he knows, or may easily do, that it is but spoken by
stipulation, and to bind the Godfathers etc. the more sole^nly to see that the
child, in whose name they answer should afterward perform those things. So
that this is but a comely order, at which (understanding the meaning,) no good
man ought to take offense. Yea, (in my opinion,) if this order were altered, we
should seem to open a shrewde gap unto the Anabaptists, that none were then
baptized but such only as were of ripe years and could answer for them
selves to these demaundes But since it is evident that they baptized Infantes,
and that they used this form in baptizing of them (as in Augustine is most
apparent) we can not think that this custom was translated only from the
baptizing of them that were of riper years, but were they ripe or unripe, it
was the usual order of baptizing al, in the ancient and primitive Church. And
therefore, containing nothing contrary to the Institution of baptizme, but all
for it: and being done only by the way of stipulation, one in the name of
another, (which withal more lively answers, ^o the nature of a covenant)
and being of so great antiquity: though we grant it is not necessary to be
retained: no more is it necessary to be removed. But all this is nothing to the
absolute necessity of a sermon, or of the public place, whereof is now the
question. Hellopaeus making the public place not of necessity, albeit for the
ordinary course, most convenient: neither for sermon, mencioning any at all:
and therefore, (otherwise than for convenient) it is plain, that he takes it
not to be of such necessity.

And afterward in the next treatise of the Lords supper, he do h notably also
ha^dling the consecration. cap. 4. pa. 209. where he says: The words of
consecration.
Yet there remains one question. For we say, that the bread and the Wine is
sanctified of the Min. so far forth, as he is the legate or interpreter of Gods
will, and the word of Gods institution, is as it were a certain mean to be
adhibited unto this consecration. Even so Aug. said well: let the word come unto
the element, and it is made a sacrament, that is to say, by the commining
between of the word, the thing (otherwise by his nature appointed to a common
use) is made a Sacrament. This therefore we will have to be understood by the
term of consecration. Otherwise, even as Aug. says of the water of Bapt. take
the word from the baptism, and what is the water, but water: So, if thou
take away the word from the bread and the wine, What is the word added to the
element to make the sacrament in the L. Supper.
it shall be nothing but bread and wine. Now therefore, we must search out, what
and what manner a word, that word is. For some take this word to strictly: and
some more at large than is meet. They (take it) strictly, which ouerpassing as
well the former as the later words of the institution, have delivered that in
these 4. words, This is my body, again, this is my blood, the consecration is
made: as though by a certain divine virtue ingrafted in those words, the
substance of bread and wine were changed: striking out the other words, to wit,
Take ye, eat ye, drink ye al of you, as superfluous, so far as to the force of
transubstantiation does pertain (which they do) to this purpose, that they
might not be compelled to confess, that the supper is common unto all, and
moreover that they might not subscribe unto this rule that nothing has a
reason of a sacrament, without the use by God instituted. Howbeit, other do
join the thanksgiving and the prayers, as though they also with the word of
the institution, did make the sacrament, that is, did profit the consecration.
And indeed this is true, that all this rite (or ceremony) is furnished with a
solemn thanksgiving and prayers, especially concerning the sending of the
son, and of the purging of our sins made by him. And the very words also
of the institution, are so to be rehearsed, that both they should begin at
thanksgiving and prayer, and also should end in the same, The only words of
the Institution do make consecration.
even as Christ the Lord having given thanks, said, this is my body: and the
supper being ended, an himme being sung, he went forth. Moreover we have
showed, that the sanctification should be made with thanksgiving. In the mean
time we must know, that the only words of the Institution, and those entire,
do perfect the consecration. Which being whole recited in the lawful use, in
which thanks being given and prayers being recited, all things are done: of
the eleme^t is made the sacrament. For of this word said Irenaeus: when the Cup
mixed, and the bread broken, receives the word of God: the Eucharist of the
body and blood of our Lord is made. But, that he understands the only words
of the Institution, appears by that which he sets under it, that the
earthly bread takes the calling of God. For it is the calling of God, when
God calls the bread his body.

After the same manner Theodoretus, in Atrepo, ( that is, in his Dialogue
called immutable) he teaches, that our savior did honor (or commend) ^he
visible signs, with the appellatio^ (or calling) of his body and bloud^: ^ot
that they ha^ the same (appellation or calling) of nature, but allonely of
grace. For so he says, (...), (not changing the nature, but adding grace
unto nature). Now, we understand, which, and what manner words, are the
words of the Consecration, to wit, those same that are (the words) of the
Institution. But they again are of two parts. For some of them are the words
of the Evangelists, of which sort are these. Our lord Jesus Christ in the
same night that he^ was betrayed took bread, and said: likewise he took the
Cup after supper. Which are wo^des of the institution.
But some of the words are Christ's own words, as are, This is ^y body that
is given for you, take ye, eat ye: this is my blood, etc Drink ye all of
this: do this in remembrance of me. Those words (to wit, the
Euaungelistes) as Ambrose witnesses, lib. 4. cap. 5. De sacrament^, are not
only recited as historical: but do admonish as well the Ministers as the
Communicantes, what Christ did, what again he bad both of them to do. But
these words serve to the consecration. Now, howsoever this alone do thoroughly
accomplish the consecration: notwithstanding, if the other ( to wit the
Evangelists words before rehearsed) be either omitted, yea or indeed
recited hystorically: (albeit the things are in very deed done, which Christ
did, and would have to be done) the consecration is not made at all, but
either it is an historical explication of the Mystery: or rather, it is a play
and jest. And thus far concerning the consecration. Which words of
Hellopaeus, if we shall well consider: we shall see withal most apparently,
that howsoever the preaching of a sermon may do much good* for the further
opening of these mysteries, and moving of the hearers and participantes: yet
is it not any^ substa^tial part of the sacrament, or inseparable accident,
absolutely necessary thereunto, and as it is thus of the Lords supper: so for
the material and formal parts, which are the Element and Word of Baptizme.

To the same effect says Beza in his Conf. cap. 4. Arti. 41. This change
depends not of the recital of any words, as the sophisters and deceivers
deliver forth, but of the ordinance of God, comprehended in his word. The
word therefore, that is, the very institution of Christ, as it is of the
Evangelists and Paul expounded, is as it were the very life of the
sacramental signs, because (as in the word is declared unto us) the water the
Bread and the Wine, are made sacraments, that is, true signs and seals of
those things, which in the Word are promised to us, and are truly signified
by the same.

And again, We call the sign of baptism, ( says Beza, cap. 4. artic. 47.)
first of all Water: then, the substanciall ceremonies prescribed in the word.
Beza for the form and effect of Bapt.
To the which (we think it wickedness) to add any thing or to take from it:
that is to say, the sprinkling of the water, the stay under the water, and the
coming forth out of the water, etc. We call the word in baptism, the
ordinance of Jesus Christ, joined with the promise of eternal life, whereof
this is the form: Baptize ye in the name of the father, of the son, and of
the holy Ghost: whosoever shall believe and be baptized shall be saved. If then
in these 2. parts, the whole substance of baptism consist: how are not they
baptized, where these 2. parts are, although no sermon be preached at the
action? Albeit I know not how to reconcile Beza his words, for this material
part: for joining all these three actions together with the element of water:
sprinkling of the water: an abode or stay under the water: and the coming
forth out of the water: Bezaes opinion of holding the infant under the water.
and that in none of these ought must be added nor diminished, but that he will
think it wickedness. For we rather think, be the child dipped in the water,
and that without any aboade or stay therein, and much less to be held any
while under it, which might breed danger to tender infantes, or be it but
only sprinkled with water cast upon it: it suffices for the action of the
material part. But howsoever we may conster to the best those words of Beza;
in that (which though he make it no absolute necessity of infantes baptism,
in respect of their salvation to depend thereon: yet in reasoning for it, he
makes some necessity of it; yea, he goes so far. Articl. 49. that baptism
cannot be reiterated: that (me thinks, and let other judge thereon) he clean
overthrows this our Brethrens principle, that none can minister sacraments
but preachers of the word. We have said ( says Beza) that Baptism is the
sacrament of our engrafting into Christ and his Church: neither depends the
efficacy of baptism on the person of the baptizer. But now, Baptism true
Baptism wit^out a ^erm^o^
whosoever is once truly given to Christ, although now and then he turn out
of the way: yet, may he never be cast clean out. And therefore it is enough
that he was once received. By no means assent we unto them, which rebaptize
those that were baptized of Heretics, or of other impure ministers. Neither yet
do we doubt, but that in the Papisticall Church, the baptism remains true,
although it be administered of ministers nothing fit, and be defiled with
infinite pollutions. For because it pleased the mercy of God, even within
Popery, to preserve the relikes of his Church, so long, until he erected it up
again; therefore would he not that Satan should be able utterly therein, to
overthrow baptism, whereby all the elected are joined together in a society.
If then this baptism of Heretics and Papists, were so sowly polluted, where
not only no preaching was: besides that, no part of the institution, of the
mystery, of the use, of the ends, thereof were so declared, that the
congregation understood it: and yet, all this notwithstanding, it was true
baptism, and they were so fully baptized, The truth of Bapt. for all the abuses.
that it were a dangerous heresy to go about to rebaptize us, though they that
did baptize us were Idolatrous Priests, and Antichrists chapleynes: and can it
now be said, that the administration of baptism among us, who^ our Breath.
confess to be a true Church of Christ, we having nothing for the material
part, How true and lawful we may better think our Bap^isme is.
but the only and mere element of water that Christ ordained, with the which
we sprinkle the infant, if he be not dipped into it; and using not only the
words of Christ's institution, with the promise annexed, besides prayers and
thanksgiving, with a plain and full declaration of all the institution, the
causes, the use, the ends, the effects of this mystery, set forth to the
people assembled, that they withal may in their mother tongue, perceive the
whole content of all this action: that if all this be not administered by such a
minister, as is withal a preacher, and that he also preach at the
administration thereof, and that also in the public and ordinary place
appointed, and in no private place: or else all this is but a worldly, dead,
and beggarly element, a seal without the writing, and so nothing available,
and nothing better than sacrilege? Bezaes saying confutes our Learned
discoursers.
Durst Beza have said so much, of the very Papists for this sacrament? Yea,
although a midwife, or a lay man (as often times then it happened) did administer
the same? Or would he, or would our Brethren for that default, rebaptize them?
Or count them not baptized at all, that are so extraordinarily, yea, and
disorderly baptized? Is the only lack of the persons lawefull vocation, yea,
the lack of sufficiency in his vocation, a greater pollution, yea, and clean
disanulling of the sacrament, more than all these corruptions of the Papists,
or than the insufficiency or unlawfulness of their calling? And yet theirs
must be true and very baptism; ours is not. And why so? Have we any like or
worse pollution? No. Have we any such insufficient and unlawful ministry?
No. What then? Though it be not so insufficient and unlawful as theirs, yet is
it insufficient and unlawful. Our Brethr. more allow of the Papists
ministration of the sacraments than of the Protestants that are not precher^.
And why? Forsooth, The administration of the sacraments ought to be committed
to none, but unto such as are preachers of the word. page 60. But what mean
our Brethren by this word ought? An absolute necessity? Or a convenient
duty? Saint Paul prescribing the conditions of a Bishop, says: a Bishop
ought to be unreprovable, the husband of one wife, watching, sober, modeste,
harbourous, apt to teach, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy
lucre, but gentle, not covetous, one that can rule his own house; having
children under obedience withal honesty. What does Saint Paul mean here,
in all these and other properties, that he says a Bishop ought to have such an
absolute necessity? that if he want any of these properties, he is by and by
no Bishop at all, nor has any lawful function? And if he minister the
sacraments, they are no sacraments? Are all these properties of the substance
of his office? If they say, though all be not, yet this is; to be apt or able
to teach, Necessity of Bapt.
and to exhort with wholesome doctrine. Indeed, if he had no aptnes nor ability
at all, that were very hard. And yet most of the Popish Bishops and Priests
were such, and their baptizing still true baptism. And shall ours be said, to
be no baptism at al, if the minister of (absolute necessity) be not such a
learned preacher, as can freely and at large, by his own discourse, expound
unto the people, the mystery of the sacraments? Have we not already heard
how Musculus avouches, that in many reformed Churches, there are many that
can minister the supper of the L. and few that can preach the word of the Lord?
Baptism has more need to be received, and less need of a sermon to the
receiver of it.
And that it is not necessary, that the Preacher should be the minister of that
sacrament? And is it otherwise in this sacrament of baptism: which both has
the less need of the twain, to have a sermon preached thereat, and yet
withal of the twain, has a greater necessity of receiving thereof, than of
the L. supper? But if now, as we have seen for that sacrament, that it may be
ministered orderly enough by those that are no preachers: and yet none can
orderly minister the sacraments, but he that is a minister of the word: does
not this consequence then follow of necessity, that some may be ministers of
the word, that are not preachers of the word? Which clean ouerturneth all
our Brethrens process of this necessity, that they must needs be Preachers.

But our Breath. challenge us here for this, that where we will make no necessity
of Preachers, to be the ministers of baptism; notwithstanding, of baptism it
self we make a necessity. But both ways they do us manifest wrong. For,
neither we deny all kind of preaching, nor all kind of necessity in the
minister for preaching at baptism, or at the Lords supper; but only this
absolute simple and inevitable necessity, granting a necessity of
conueniencie. Neither do we urge this absolute, Whatnecessitie we deny or
grant in the sacrament.
simple and inevitable necessity, of any of both the sacraments themselves.
Save in general, that they must needs be had in the Church ( as Zanchius
said) not only as necessary tokens and demonstrances of the true Churches,
but also as Gods seals ordained for the confirmation of our faith, and such
parts of his covenant with us and ours with him, as the whole Church is bound
to have and use. But when it comes to the particular use and application, we do
not so necessarily tie the^ to this or yt person of or in the Church, that if
they have the^ not, be it not by their own default, the want of the^ may
endanger their salvation: the virtue whereof depends not upon any sacrament, or
is included in it. Neither acknowledge we any necessity of it, but such only
as is agreeable to Christ's institution. And therefore, when we say baptism
maybe ministered in private places for necessity: and our breath. reply, as
though there were such necessity of the outward sign, when it cannot be
ministered according to the institution of Christ: etc. This reply is not to the
matter in hand. For that necessity that is of the institution of Christ, is a
mere and absolute necessity, Christ's in situation.
and of the substantial parts of the sacraments, either for the matter or
form of them, whosoever shall minister or receive them, Wh^t is and is not
necessarily contained in Christ's institution of the sacr.
and when, and where soever they shall be received. But th^s prescribes not
any time when, nor any place where, they shall be necessarily received. No nor
the parties that shall receive, nor yet the parties that shall only minister
them. Howbeit, our question is now here, not so much for the persons that shall
minister them, for we yield, that none orderly ought so to do, but he that is
lawfully called thereunto. Neither permit we, but forbid all other, and
punish them, if any be found so to have offended: nor yet for the person to be
baptized, whatsoever necessity lies on him to have it: but on the place. For,
although it must needs be done in some place, or not done at all, and the most
necessary ( respecting conueniencie) is the pubike place, to wite, the temple:
yet this being none of the parts of the sacrament, nor this or that place,
public or private, but an accident perteyning to circumstance: why should
exception be made of this, that because it is done in a private place, and that
for necessity of conueniencie, that there can be no such necessity of the
outward sign, when it can not be ministered according to the institution of
Christ? Did Christ mention place in his institution? Or rather does he not
include al convenient places without exception, when he says: go ye into all
the world to baptize, etc. and did they it not both in the open rivers, and in
private houses? And where, and when, and how was the Lords supper instituted,
if we should urge the institution on that fashion? Let our Brethren prove that
the public place, and that the preaching of a sermon by a preacher (
understanding the word as they conster it) is a material part, and of the
substance of the sacrament by Christ's institution: and straight will I yield
unto our Brethren, that no kind of necessity in the world, may alter it. But
good Brethren take good advice, how ye enter into the maintenance of that
point. Which if it be true, then the sacraments without a sermon preached, are
not only corruptly ministered or received, but not ministered nor received at
all, wanting the substantial parts that make a sacrament. And so it might be
further called in question, whether we or they, be as yet baptized at all, yea
or no. The dangerous sequel of our Breath. assertion.
But I am most assured that we be, notwithstanding (as Beza says) all the
pollutions of the Pope. And if those, I mean not his tromperies and trash that
he added, but his suppressinges of the declaring the very institution of
Baptism, besides his manifold and horrible errors of doctrine concerning
Baptism, that then blinded both the people and the minister, were not yet able
to make baptism ineffectual: shall we now say or think, and beat this
scruple into the peoples heads, that all these superstitions and errors being
removed* and having Gods pure word and promise, joined to the simple element
ordained of Christ; and having withal the whole nature of the sacrament so
fully and clearly set out, The Popish corruptions
that all the people may perceive it; and receive great edification by it; and
a lawefull minister do it; and all the congregation join their prayers and
thanksgiving to it; and perhaps also some godly and learned homily, or
exhortation, or sermon written and set out, by some learned preacher, read
unto the people at that time: tush tush, what talk ye of all this? If if it be
not done only in public place appointed, that is to wit, the Church or
Temple: if it be not ministered only by a preacher: yea, and if he preach not a
sermon at the ministration of it: al is corrupt and unavailable. All is
nothing else but a worldly, a dead, a beggarly element, a seal without a
writing. A separation of the ministration of preaching the word, from the
sacraments, and what can it be better than sacrilege?

Thus do our Brethren shake al off, and make our sacraments as ill: yea, worse
than the very Papists; yea, to be none at all, and so to be no Church: not
where preaching is not, but where it is not joined to the sacraments.

As for Beza his words from whence our Brethren seem to have borrowed theirs:
if they had retained the same moderation of speech, that Beza does, we would
have joined with them. For, we say herein as he does. Therefore the necessity
of receiving the sacraments, Beza in confess. Christ. cap. 4. (...) 35.
reaches not so far forth, that without exception every one that has not
obtained them, is clean fallen from salvation: but thus far forth only,
that he which shall have despised them, sith that he declares himself to be
an infidel, is guilty of eternal death, except he shall have acknowledged it
and repented him of it. Well therefore does Bernard testify: not the
depriving, but the contempt condemns. But he cannot be thought to have
contemned the sacraments, that could not so receive them as they were ordained
of the Lord. And God forbid that we should imagine any cases of necessity, in
which we might violate the ordinance of the Lord. As indeed they do (as
verily unto me it seems) which transfer (or assign over) the ministry of
baptizing unto women, or to any other private persons. And they that without
the public assembly and times not prescribed of the Church, do administer
the Lords supper. So that here he allows a necessity of baptism, but not
any such as were against the Lords ordinance. And he speaks of them that
transfer and assign over the ministry of baptism to women or private
persons, Our Breath. use the sacr. without the pub. assemb. and times prescribed
of the Church.
as for the other of place and time he restayneth to the supper of the Lord,
not to baptism. From the two former for the acknowledgement of any such fact
to be orderly done (God be praised) we are free. From the later, both for the
Lords supper, and for baptism too; let our Brethren look to it, that are
deeper in that matter than are we. But when all is done, Bezaes modesty.
this modesty of Beza is commendable, that he does not clean annihilate and
make no sacramental act at all of these doings, as our Brethren do: Bezaes
modesty.
but only says, they violate the ordinance of the Lord. For (as we have
showed) he says all the Papists pollutions ( of the which these were some, and
that our Brethren I think will grant) were not able to take away the virtue
of baptism, and make it frustrate and ineffectual.

And therefore our Brethr. ouer-reached, and abuse us, in laying the error of
the Papists, mainteyning an absolute necessity of the sacrament, unto our
charge, and to say the necessity that we stand on, is nothing else, but to
affirm with the Papists, that sacraments confer grace of the work wrought:
and that the sacrament of Baptism is a sacrament of such necessity, that
whosoever is not dipped in water must be eternally condemned. Which heretical
opinion, as we have hissed out in our profession and preaching, so is it a
great shame for us, to maintain by such corrupt usage of Christ's holy
sacraments. This opinion of the Papists, as they now obstinately maintain
the same, is (I grant) heretical. And yet, neither was this (besides al other
that they maintained, even concerning baptism) able to take away the virtue of
it, but that all the Papists had true baptism, whosoever he or she were yt
baptized the^.

But, do we maintain this, or any other of their erroneous or heretical
opinions? No. I hope, our Brethren do include us, in the number of this (we)
as well as themselves, Our Brethr. contradiction.
when they say: which heretical opinion, as we have hissed out in our
profession and preaching. And how then, do we maintain or affirm that, which
is nothing else, but to affirm with the Papists this heretical opinion? Do
we maintain and affirm that, which we have hissed out? Or do we hiss out
that which we maintain and affirm? How do these things hang together? But
they say, we maintain it by such corrupt usage of Christ's holy sacraments.

What corrupt usage have they proved, or are ever able to prove that we
maintain in Christ's holy sacraments, either the one or the other, contrary
to that, which in our profession and preaching we have hissed out? For if we
maintain it, we profess it. But, if our Brethren accuse us so sharply, of so
great a shame, as in our profession and preaching to hiss out this heretical
opinion; and yet charge us that we maintain it, by such corrupt usage of
Christ's holy sacraments: because only we affirm, there may be some
necessary usage of these holy sacraments: although (following the ordinary
form in our book set down) they be extraordinarily now and then used in
private places, in cases of necessity, professing and preaching, that we
understand no absolute necessity, but conditional, and of conuenience: how
shall then our Brethren not incur a greater shame, that hiss not out in
their profession and preaching, but affirm and maintain such necessity of a
preacher, to be the only minister of the sacraments, and of preaching at the
ministration of them: Our Breath. dangerous positions.
that if there be not this preacher and preaching; they make it not only a
corrupt usage of Christ's holy sacraments, but no sacraments at all? shall we
say, this is nothing else but to affirm with the Papists, that the preacher
and his preaching conferreth grace of the work wrought? And that this
preaching is of such necessity, that whosoever hears not a sermon when he
receaues the sacrament, must be eternally condemned, as receiving it unworthily
to his condemnation? Our Brethr. absurdities in this assertion.
And yet he receaueth no sacrament at al. And that this necessity of a
preaching is as necessary to Bapt. as ever the Papists thought baptism it
self to be to the infant? And that the want of this necessity, does more
frustrate and void all the whole substance and virtue of the sacrament: than
all their corrupt abusages, pollutions, and heretical opinions of Christ's
holy sacraments, was ever able to do. What a greater shame is the
maintenance of this opinion? Which if it should be mainteyned obstinately, (as
I hope our Breath. will not): surely, it were as ill or worse, than the other,
and in very sooth, no better than an heretical opinion. But our Breath. may
err, and so may we. Let us both learn in modesty to say with Augustine, as
I said before, Errare possum, hereticus esse nolo. Err I may, but (God
willing) I will not be an heretic. But now for the final conclusion of this
matter, say our Brethren.

Let us therefore retain this principle, The learned Dis. Page 62. and 63.
that the administration of the sacraments, is a part of the Pastors duty: for
although the office of preaching be more excellent, than of ministration of the
sacraments, as S. Paul speaks comparatively. Christ sent me not to Baptize
to preach. 1. Cor. 1.17. 1. Cor. 1.17.
Yet they are of such affinity, that the accessorie can not be separated from
the principal thereof. For where is no preacher of the word, rhere ought to
be no minister of the sacraments.

This principle, Bridges.
that the administration of the sacraments is a part of the Pastors duty: is a
true principle, and safely to be mainteyned. But, as that which went before,
was not to be maintained without great shame and danger: so not only this
necessary conclusion made hereon, is no less shamfull dangerous and
erroneous to be maintained, tha^ the other: Our Brethr. most dangerous
conclusion.
where there is no precher of the word: there ought to be no minister of the
sacraments. For, if this Canon of our Breath. should be put in execution at this
present, throughout all England, and much more throughout all Christendom:
Baptism might be a long while clean exiled, Baptism banished throughout the
most part of Christendom.
from the most part of a number of Christian Realms and Churches, that yet
amiddes all their corrupt vsages, reteyne the virtue of baptism, as Beza
says. But to look to our own estate; which have none of those or any other
corruptions remaining, but as sincere a form, concerning the very
administration of the sacraments, as any of all our Brethren in any reformed
Church set down, No preacher, no sacrament.
full of exhortations, admonitions, consolations, instructions, and
declarations of all the mystery, with prayers and thankesgiuinges: yea, and
often with godly and learned homilies, and other excellent treatises and
sermons, to be reverently read, that the people may understand them, and may
be much edified by them: yet, until they have a preacher come among the^, and
he also must be their own Pastor, or else again they break their own rules:
and he then and there make a sermon to them, at the ministration of the
sacraments, or else as good away as there, What a state our Breath. under
pretense of making it better. would bring us unto.
yea, as good no preacher at all, as not preach at all: and he must preach also
of that matter, or else it is not to that purpose: all which things if they be
not done: then God be with you, for any sacraments that may be administered.
None must be baptized there, nor any never so godly disposed, and desirous to
come to the Lords table, shall find any crome of comfort to refresh his hungry
soul there. Though also the minister would never so feign baptize the poor
infantes of the faithful parents, and break the Lords bread, and deliver
the Lords cup unto other hunger-starued and thirsty souls; no, they must be
packing and go home again empty, no sacraments shall there be ministered.
Per quam regulam? What a rule is there here, why the poor and faithful people
should be thus debarred of these holy sacraments? For-sooth, our Brethren have
set down a rule, and a final conclusion, that ouer-ruleth and knitteth up all
this case. Ye can have no sacraments at all. And why I pray you? It is a plain
case, there is no minister to administer them. No? That there is, The duty of a
good Curate that is no preacher
we have a minister ready to do it. What? Is he a preacher? No, but he is an
honest, virtuous, sober, and painful man in his function: and he is a good
scholar too, and studious, and can read (and so he does) very fair, that
all the parish may plainly understand him: and he catechiseth our children
diligently, and we sit by and here it, to our great comfort and edification:
and he can and does give us also in private ( as he sees cause) very good
counsel when we come unto him, and he comes to us when we are sick, and
makes very good exhortations, in private, and if need be admonishes us in
secret, yea and openly also, of our faults; and calls upon us often to come
to the divine service, and to hear him read the homilies, and other good
sermons, and to receive these holy sacraments that we would now have. Tush, a
point for all this. Is he a preacher? No. He has no gift at all to edify us
that ways, as you mean preaching. Why, then we have a flat rule, that he ought
to minister no sacraments. For, where is no preacher of the word; there ought
to be no minister of the sacraments.

The inconvenience of our Brethr. rule.
Would not this rule make a fair rule, if things were ouer-ruled on this
fashion? But how long now shall the people be thus debarred? Till we can get
preachers for every several congregation? But that our Brethren have examined
already, and found, and confessed, No preacher no sacrament.
that it can not be done presently, and it will not be done in haste, to
furnish so many places; no, though we should clean disfurnish the nurseries of
all our preachers. Nor every one is to be allowed a Preacher that has learning
enough, and utterance and audacitie, except he have the grace of God enough
also, to be as S. Paul calls him, (...), one that divides aright the word of
truth. So ye many should not be admitted to be prechers, that in their own
opinions, and in many others among our Brethren, are holden for ioly and
plausible preachers. And how then should all those places do, till preachers
were provided for them?

Our Brethren told us before of a help, page 56. when they had willed us to
pray to the Lord of the harvest, to thrust forth laborers into his harvest:
yet doubting least they should not have the^ by and by thrust in, Our Brethr.
extraordinary order till all places ca^ be furnished with preachers.
they said: and in the mean time, till God bless us with a sufficient number
of learned Pastors, to take some extraordinary and te^porall order, for
ouer-seeing the Churches, that although they cannot be al sufficiently
instructed and governed, etc. And what now? Is this one of these extraordinary
and temporal orders, that shall be taken in the mean time; that there shall be
no sacraments, at all administered to the poor people in all those places? That
were a handsome extraordinary order, with all my heart. It were pity such a
te^porall order in the mean time, till preachers could be gotten to be in every
several congregation, should have any temporal continuance of so long time.
Yet, better is half a loase tha^ no bread. Yea, we may have the whole lose well
enough, as unprovided as we be, and cut aright also, though not with so fine a
knife as has a learned preacher. But this heavenly bread of the Lords table,
he may the casilier break and deliver, being broken before hand to his hand.
And especially minister the sacrament of baptism, if he be a minister at all:
of which sacrament, there is somewhat more necessity ( though not absolute)
than of the L. supper. But for every congregation to tarry till they have a
preacher of their own, to do these things unto them, besides the injury
offered, not so much to the present ministers, as to the people, not only for
the present state, The dangers flowing from this rule.
but we can not tell for how long time to come, so to be debarred: would not
this go near to bring in Anabaptistrie? Either by keeping back the infants
from baptism, till they had a preacher to be their Pastor, under pretense of
no such necessity, as may endaunger their salvation, because they have not a
preacher to baptize them, and so to tarry til they can answer for themselves as
the Anabaptists say they ought to do, and admit none other; yea, and perhaps
they may so stay from baptism longer, as a thing at al not so necessary: or
else, to haste^ all places furniture with this necessity of preachers, more
then of baptism, and so to shooue in a number of bold unlearned me^. taking
upon the^ to be preachers: which may breed as dangerous a point as the other.
Principal and accessorie.
And when all this is done, for such an absolute necessity of preachers; will
not this heretical opinion of the Papists, go near to creep in after, of
opus operatum, while we stand so necessarily on opus operantis, pressing so
hard on this new coined Canon? For, where there is no preacher of the word,
there ought to be no minister of the sacraments.

But our Brethren say, they are of such affinity (preaching and the
ministration of the sacraments) that the accessorie cannot be separated from
the principal thereof.

Preaching is not the principal thing, but accessory to the sacram.
Which is here the accessorie, which the principal? For they name it not* but
think, that it is so apparent, that it must go away without touch of breast,
that the preaching is the principal, and the administration of the sacraments
is the accessorie. But by their leave, we must withal consider this, that
although it may be well said, when the one of these is compared to the other;
the office of preaching is the more excellent, than the office of ministration
of the sacraments; yet when it comes to the ministration of the sacraments,
then is the word and promise thereof, including the matter promised, which is
called res sacramenti, What is the principal thing in the sacrament.
the thing of the sacrament, that is, Christ himself, and his death set
forth, and our uniting unto him, the principal and most excellent thing in
that action: and the preaching or making a sermon more at large thereupon, is
but an accessorie thing unto the sacrament: and so accessorie, that although,
if the preaching be there it is so much the better set forth: yet, whether the
preaching be there or no, (so be it have at other times so effectually gone
before, that the congregation be not ignorant of the state of these mysteries)
if the only word and promise be there, (according to the institution thereof)
joined to the outward sign or element: there is a full and perfect sacrament,
( as we have seen in Beza and Hellopaeus) both administered by the minister,
though he be no preacher: and received of the faithful Christian, if it be the
Lords supper: and of the Christians child, if it be the sacrament of baptism.
So that, the comparison is not here between these two offices, which office
is the more principal of the twain. For we confess, that in many
considerations, the preaching of the word is far above the ministration of
the sacraments: and yet in some respects, the sacrament it self is more
principal than is the preaching of it. As in Baptism, to incorporate the
infant into the Church of Christ, which infant is not properly as yet
faithful, though he be the seed of the faithful, and have (as Beza calls
it) the seed of faith, but not faith in him. And in the Lords supper, to
comfirme the faithful in the faith, that they have long already before
conceived by the word, and yet perhaps also not by the word preached, as
our Brethren understand the preaching of it. But, vnd^rstande it how they
will: here preaching is in these respects, but accessory to the sacrament, and
the sacrament principal to the preaching. And in this consideration, Beza even
in the next words to that which I cited out of him last, proceeds saying:

Fourthly, Beza in confess. cap. 4. art. 35.
whereas the simple preaching of the word does strike one only of those our
five senses: but the sacraments besides, do run into our eyes, and also
stir up our other senses, and they are so administered with ceremonies of
greater moment adhibited: it may easily be understood how much the use of
them helps our faith, The commendation of the sacram.
as those that bring us even as it were unto the thing present, as though now
we felt Christ himself after a certain manner in our hands, and saw him with
our eyes, and perceived him with the whole body. So far is it therefore that
we should despise the sacraments, that contrariwise we should confess, the use
and profits of them can not be enough commended and praised according to their
dignity.

And although S. Paul, as our Brethren here say, speak comparatively: Christ
sent me not to baptize, but to preach, 1. Cor. 1.17. yet this comparison of
Saint Paul was not in comparing the dignities of these offices, but only in
comparison of his own especial vocation; and of all other places, is quite
contrary to our Brethren, as we have partly seen already: but since our
Brethren so solemnly auowe it, let us once again hear Calvin on that
saying. Calminus in 1. Cor. 1.17.
Notwithstanding ( says he) here are two things to be observed. Whereof the
one is, that the Apostle does not not here deny, but that he had the
commandment of baptizing (for these pertayneth to all the Apostles, Go ye,
baptize ye; and he had done rashly even in baptizing one, except he had been
furnished with the commandment) but only to show what was the chiefest thing
in his vocation. But the second is, that the dignity or fruit of the
sacrament is not here abased, as some do think. For neither is the question
here of the virtue of baptism, neither did Paul purpose in this comparison to
withdraw any thing therfrom: but whereas it pertayned to few to tech, but it
was given to many to baptize: Moreover, whereas many could be taught all at
once, but baptism could not be conferred but to every one of them in order:
Paul that excelled in the faculty of teaching, followed the work that was more
necessary unto him. He left that unto other, which they could perform more
commodiously.

What can be plainer spoken tha^ this against our Breath. yt they are deceived,
which think Paul made here a comparison, between the dignity of preching, and
the dignity of the ministratio^ of the sacraments? For Paul's comparison is but
in co^paring himself and his peculier vocation with others. Howbeit he frames
his comparison so, that he plainly shows, both yt some might minister the
sacraments that were not preachers: and that the gift of preaching was given to
few, in comparison of the multitude of those, that being no preachers, The
separation of the sacr. and preaching.
yet a lawefull function was given to them to minister the sacraments. Which
being granted: let the other go which way it shall, in the comparison of these
offices, which is principal, and which is accessory. For the sacraments being
principal in the foresaid consideration, and preaching being but accessory
unto them: as preaching may be effectual without them, where they cannot be
had: so they become not ineffectual, although that at the ministration of
the^, among those that by former preaching at other times, are already
faithful; and to their children, though they as yet have not faith, and though
there be no preaching at that action. And whereas in other respects again, the
function of preaching is of such dignity, that the ministration of the
sacraments is but accessorie in comparison thereof: so the ministration of the
sacraments may be a function common unto many, and therefore lawfully of them
used, although they have not the gift of preaching, which is a more rare gift
and given to fewer. And therefore, principal and accessorie which of the^
soever be, in their several respects and considerations; and though also they
be both of such affinity, that they may well often times meet, help, and
confirm on an other: yet (being of so near affinity) the banes may lawfully
be forbidden, if our Brethren shall so ask them, that like man and wife they
may never but by the death of them be separate. But, as preaching may well be
separated from the administration of the sacraments; How the administration of
the sacr. and preaching may be joined and separated.
so the administration of the sacraments may well now and the^ be separated
also, both in time and place from the preaching of the word, without any
derogation of the dignities, or dissolutio^ of the affinity, in which these
two offices, the preaching of the word and the administration of the
sacraments, are lynked and joined together, but not inseparably. Thus it was
both in the two principal sacraments of the old law, circumcision and the
Paschall Lamb: and thus, as we see it amongst us now; so was it even in the
purest time of the Gospel among the Apostles, as this very instant that our
Brethren their selves here out of Paul allege, does clearly testify, to wit,
that these 2. offices, as they may excellently be joined together: so they may
often time be well separated.

But a question by the way, and so an end hereof. Are these two, preaching and
ministration of the sacraments several offices? How our Breath own positions
ouerth^owe themselves.
For else, how hang these words together? For although the office of preaching
be more excellent, than of ministration of the sacraments, as S. Paul speaks
comparatively: if then they be different Ecclesiastical offices; and that so
distinct, that Saint Paul speaks comparatively of these two offices; and in
that comparison, separateth the one from the other: then, although they be of
never so near affinity, which soever be principal or which accessory: if
this with all be true, that one office requires one officer; and that, to put
2. offices to one officer were confusion; and every officer may fully
disch^^ge his own office, without the intermedling with any other office: why
may there not then be a minister of the sacraments, distinct and several
from a preacher, and minister the sacraments to the faithful people, though
he preach not being a several distinct office from preaching; as well as a
preacher distinct from a minister of the sacraments, and preach the word to
the faithful people, though he minister not the sacraments unto them? But I
will not so straightly press our Brethren. These two offices may be well and
better in one officer, even as may the doctor and the Pastor: and yet they may
be separated well enough in some. So that hereby, with the residue aforesaid:
I conclude, that this conclusion of our Brethren, is not a true, but a most
untrue (be it spoken with due reverence) and a most dangerous conclusion. That
where there is no preacher of the word; there ought to be no minister of the
Sacraments.

The argument of the 8. Book.
THE 8. Book consists of the Pastors duty in public prayers. First whether
all public prayer ought only to be such, as is all conceived and uttered by
the minister and not to follow any ordinary prescribed form: with a view of
the Jews public prayers before Christ's coming: The order of the Church in
the Apostles times, and in the primitive age, with the times next succeeding,
and of the orders of the reformed Churches. Whether the people might not join
altogether their voices in some of the public prayers with the Pastors, to
avoid confusion but only to close with him in their consent, by aunswering
Amen: with another like view of the order in the old and new Testament, for
the peoples voices without confusion: and of the primitive and ancient
Churches order therein. Whether any several prayers may now and then be used
in public congregations with a like perusal thereof in the old and new
Testament. Of the abuses that our Brethren complain upon, for long prescribed
forms of public prayers, the ministers ill pronouncing, the peoples not
attending, the insensible reading, the ministers unfit place, screenes,
Roodlofts, organe loftes, chauntrey chapels, high pewes, opinion of well
serving God. walking and talking in the Church, gathering money for the poor,
private prayer and reading, neglect of preaching by reason of praying, the
establishment of both, comparison of our public prayers to the Popish service,
of the services giving place to a sermon, and whether public prayer may be
made without a sermon preached thereat, with another view of the use throughout
the scripture and in the primitive Church. Whether we contemn or thrust out
preching for praying or no. Whether morning and evening prayer may be song in
the churches. Of the order in Cathedral and collegiate churches, and men's
delight to come and hear the service there, being moved thereto by the Organes
and music, and their departing at the sermon. Our Brethrens comparison of our
publik prayers to the Mass, as a gentle beast that byteth not, and of the
nature and effects of our publ. prayer. Our Brethr. prayer that all forms of
prayer might be abolished to bring in preaching. The peoples singing of Psalm.
al at once. The Pastors duty in joining al ways these 3. preaching, ministering
the sacraments and praying, the ancient custom of his giving the blessing at
marriages.

FVrthermore it appertains to the duty of the Pastor to make prayers, as
Act. 16.16. not only private as all men are bound to do, Act. 16.16.
The learned Dis. Page 63. and 64.
but also publ. prayers in the name of the whole church, Act. 6.4. 1. Tim. 2.1.
being the mouth thereof. Act. 6.4.
1. Tim. ^. ^*
For whereas the spirit of God, commands all things to be done in decent and
comely order, and forbids all confusion and disorder: as it were great
confusion and vncomlines, for every man to make his several prayers in the
public assemblies: so is it orderly for one to pronounce the prayer in the
name of the rest, and the rest to pray with him in silence, and to answer
Amen. 1 Cor. 14.16.
It is also decent that he which is the shepherd, should go before the sheep
in prayer, 1. Cor. 14.40.
and the sheep follow him, in lifting up of their hearts in mutual consent.
Moreover, for as much as preaching and administration of the sacraments, ought
not to be used without publik prayers; as it is the Pastors office to preach
and minister the sacraments: so is it his duty also to go before his flock in
publ. prayers. But here we have to observe 2. things. The first that as it
pertains to the Pastor to conceive publ. prayers: so it is the duty of the
whole Church: in the name of the whole Church, to join in heart with the
Pastor in the same prayers, that they knowing and understanding what he has
prayed, may at the end give their consent by aunswering Amen. 1. Cor. 14.16.


ALthough these quotatio^s of our Breath. Act. 16. v. 16. Act. 6 v. 4. 1. Tim.
2. v. 1. do not prove that this especially appertains to the duty of the
Pastor, Bridges.
to make the public prayers in the name of the whole Church: yet we gladly
confess it. And many other more proper places, and examples prove it, and our
Pastors use it. So that herein we agree: save for 3. great and material points
here touched together: For the only Pastors co^ceiuing of all the prayers, and
so rejecting all prescribed forms: For prohibiting the people to join all
their voices together in any prayers, except only in aunswering Amen: And for
their so utter forbidding of all several prayers in public assemblies. All
which points require a further declaration.

And first for these words, of making prayers, being vndrstoode (as we
commonly use the phrase) only for praying, The Jews public prayers.
or, pouring forth our prayers unto God: as we allow that sense, so we
grant, it is the Pastors duty to make prayers, not only private, as all men
are bound to do: but also to make the public prayers, and that in the name of
the whole Church, he being in some respects, the mouth thereof. But, if by
making prayers, they understand him to be such a maker of them, that he may
not pronounce any prayers, which by any other are already made to his hand,
and he by public authority prescribed, to make those public prayers, that is,
publicly to pronounce or say them, in the name of the whole Church: but only
such prayers, as he his own self, either has before hand made and conned by
roate, or such as without any premeditation or committing to memory, he does
in his head conceive, even as he utters them with his mouth, and so at that
instant make them: this we utterly deny. And, not to suspect here without good
cause, that our Breath. understand this term, of making public prayers in this
sense: not only their words here following do plainly expound their meaning:
when they say, It apperteyneth to the Pastor to conceive public prayers: and
it is a common phrase among our Brethren, that such and such a one is an
excellent conceauer, meaning that he can make godly prayers: but also, that
they can not away with formal reading ( as in contempt they call it) and a
prescribed form of prayer.

A p^escribed form of prayers and divine service among the Jews before
Christ's coming.
But, to confute this, and to prove that a prescribed form of the divine
service, for the public prayers, besides the reading of the scriptures in
appointed courses and orders, is a thing lawefull and profitable: First, the
Jews had the same before, and in, and after Christ's time, not only as
perteyning to the ceremonial, but to the moral law, for the obedience of the
first table, perteyning to the worship of God. Numb. 6.22. etc. Numb. 6.22.
etc.
The Lord spoke to Moses saying, speak unto Aaron and to his sons saying,
thus shall ye bless the children of Israel, and say unto them, the Lord
bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be
merciful unto thee, the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee
peace, etc. And although they had many of their public prayers, being mixed
with hymns and thankesgiuings, not only said but song also: yet were they
such, not only as their selves made or conceived ( were they never so learned
men): but such as either Moses, or Samuel, or David, or Esdras, or some other
Prophet, especially appointed thereunto by God, had drawn out, and prescribed
unto them. As may appear 1. Chron. 9. where after he had showed, ver. 22. etc.
how David and Samuel the feer had established the porters and other officers,
ver. 33. he says: And these are the singers, 1. Chron. 9.33.
the chief fathers in the Levites, which d^elt in the chambers, and had none
other charge. 1. Chron. 16.4. and 7.
For they had to do in that business day and night. And speaking of David, (
who made the most part of the Psalms) in the 16. Chapter, ver. 4. And he
appointed certain of the levites to minister before the Ark of the Lord, and
rehearse, and thank, and praise the Lord God of Israel. And verse 7. Then at
that time David did appoint, at the beginning, to give thanks to the Lord* By
the hand of Asaph and his brethren. Whereon says the Geneua note, The Geneua
note.
David gave them this psalm to praise the Lord signifying that in all our
enterprises, the name of God ought to be praised and called upon. psalm. 105.
1. Chr. 21.2


Thus do our brethren apply these doings of David unto our estate. And in the
25 chapter, ver 2. He mencioneth those that were under the hand of Asaph,
which sang prophesies by the commission of the king. Thus did Asaph then set
forth the public prayers, endited, and prescribed by David. Although he as
diverse think, conceived and made many psalms and Prayers, and prescribed, then
to others. Likewise 2. chron. 29. verse. 27. And Ezekiah commanded to offer
the burnt offering upon the Alter, and when the burnt offering began, the song
of the Lord began, with the trumpets, and the instruments of David king of
Israel and all the congregation worshipped singing a song, etc.

All which orders and forms of public prayer at the Divine service, though
the Jews afterward corrupted, Esdras after the captivity recollected, and set
again in order. Which though they were eftsoons corrupted and intermingled,
especially with the Pharisees traditions: yet til, and in the time of Christ,
they had at the divine service, the ordinary courses of reading the Law and
Prophets, as appears by S. Luke. 4. verse. 16.17. etc. Where the book of the
Prophet Esaias was delivered to Christ. And by that saying in the person of
Abraham to the rich glutton they have Moses and the prophets, let the^ hear
them. Luke. 16.29. Which Paul testifies in his sermon to the Antiochians.
Acts. 13.27. For the inhabitants of Jerusalem and their rulers because they
knew him not, nor yet the words of the prophets which are read every saboth
day. etc. And that this was the ancient order, James the bishop of Jerusalem,
in the determination of that famous assembly holden by the Apostles, Act. 15.
ver. 20. says: For Moses of old time has in every city, them that preach
him, sith that he is read in the synagogues every sabbath day. And here
also is the public reading called a preaching. With which exercises, they
especially adjoined the reading also of the Psalms, The Jews order in the
Apostles time.
and other solemn public prayers of the Scripture. For which principal cause,
Christ says of the Temple, Math. 21.13. It is written, mine house shall be
called the house of prayer. etc. And Act. 3. Peter and John went up together
into the Temple at the ninth hour of prayer. Which orders were of Christ so
little improoued, that not only as Luke declares cap. 11.1. that one of the
Disciples said unto him: Master teach us to pray, as John also taught his
disciples: desiring that they might have some prescribed form of prayer set
down unto them: The public prayers in the Apostles times.
but that also John baptist had taught some form to his Disciples. Which
request, Christ did so little mislike that he himself also taught his
Disciples among other precepts, a prescribed form of prayer, which the
Evangelists wrotte, and all Christians do use, as the Lords prescription.
Which is a strong warrant unto us, that so long as all forms of prayers are
according to that platform of prayer: they may most safely be prescribed. For
it serves not only for private, but for public prayer.

Now, although besides this only form of prayer prescribed by Christ, The
Christians order in the Apostles time.
we find no form set out, that the apostles, or the primitive church
immediately after them, did use, or prescribe to be used: because they having
that full measure of the spirit of God, namely the Apostles, Evangelists,
Prophets, Bishops, Pastors and Elders, yea the most of all the faithful
people in these days: so that they might well make and conceive their public
prayers before the Congregation, even as the spirit of God, suggested in their
heart, and gave them utterance in their mouths: yet because, that in the
public assemblies, the Apostles prescribed the written scriptures to be read
as Col. 4. ver. 16. Col. 4.16:
And when this epistle is read of you, cause that it be read in the church of
the Laodiceans also, and that ye likewise read the Epistle writ^en from
Laodicea: and as they used that, so (no doubt) did they use to read in their
public assemblies the residue of the Scripture: both of the old and new
testament, as in the chap before, ver. 16. Paul charged the^: Let the word of
Christ dwell in you plent^ously in all wisdom: teaching and admonishing one
another in Psalms, and himnes, and spiritual songs, singing wiih grace in your
hearts to the lord: and likewise, Ephesians. 5.19. Ephesians. 5.19.
Speaking unto your selves in psalms, and himmes and spiritual songs, singing
and making melody to the lord in your hearts: since therefore they used to speak
and to sing these prayers and praises of God in their public ( not only
banquets, as some expound it) but also assemblies of their divine service: as
appears plain by S. Paul's teaching the Corinthians the use of these psalms
and prayers, 1. Cor. 14.26. 1. Cor. 14.26.
What is to be done then brethren, when ye come together, according as every
one of you has a Psalm, or has doctrine, or has a tongue, or has revelation,
or has interpretation, let al things be done unto edifying: It follows
hereupon, that howsoever the Corinthians abused this order of their public
prayers and psalms, every man to sing or say his own psalm or prayer in
strange languages, breeding confusion and no edifying: yet that in the godly
use thereof, they used some prescribed form, as of the Scriptures which they
red or interprepated, so of the psalms, hymns, or prayers that they said or
sung, besides the Lords prayer, and were not the makers and conceiuers of all
the public prayers that they uttered.

Plinius secundus having examined certain of the revolted Christians, that
were brought before him, what the manner of the Christians was in their
assemblies, because they were accused of high crimes, The primitive Church.
and such numbers murdered: writes to the emperor Traiane, that their manner was
this, that on a day appointed, they used to come together before the day
light, Carmenque Christo quasi deo dicere secum inuicem, and to say among
themselves a verse or a prescript prayer unto Christ as unto God, and to bind
themselves with a sacrament, (or oath) not unto any mischievous deed, but that
they should neither commit theft, nor robbery, nor adultery, that they should
not break their faith, that being called upon, they should not deny the pledge
committed unto them: which things being done it was their manner to depart.
Wherebye it plainly appears, The order of the divine service in the primitive
Church
that both their custom was, not always to have a sermon at the receiving of
the sacrament, which it should seem Pliny aims at: and yet that in their
public prayers, they used some ordinary prescribed form among them.
Tertullian in the end of his book De velandis virginib, has these words: How
great chasticement shall those virgins deserve, which among the Psalms, or in
any mention of God, continue uncovered? do they not worthily, yea, and that in
the prayer, lay gently a welt, a hair or any thread upon their brain, and imagine
they are covered? By which saying, (though in mocking of those women) again it
appears, that not only the men, but women, and maide^s, and all, did say or
sing psalms, and were present at some form and order of public prayers. Which,
though he set not down the form, yet the chief points he reckons up, in his
apology against the Gentiles, ca. 39. where defending the assemblies of the
Christians, against the slanders of the heathen, he says: I will now my self
set forth the businesses of the Christian faction, that as I have refuted the
ill things, ( to wit, the things that the heathen slaundred them withal,) I
may show the good things. We are a body of the conscience of religion, and
of the truth of discipline, and of the covenant of hope. We come together
into an assembly or congregation, that praying unto God, V^ ad Deu^ quasi fact^
praecationi^. amb^sanu^ or^anie^*
we might by prayers make suit for deeds (or good works). This violence is
acceptable to God. We pray also for the Emperors, for their Ministers, and
powers, for the state of the World, for the quiet of the affairs, for the
prolonging of their end. We are gathered together to the commemoration (or
rehearsing) of the divine scriptures, If that the quality of the present ^imes
do enforce as either to give forewarning, or to reacknowledge them. Verily
with holy voices (or sayings) we feed our faith, we erect our hope, we fix
our trust. Notwithstanding we thicken (or close fast) with inculcations (or
often repeating) the Discipline of our teachers. There, also, are exhortations,
chastisements, and the divine censure, she means Excommunication.

And before, cap. 30. Cap. 30.
The Christians looking thither, (to wit, up to God in heaven) with their hands
cast abroad, because they are vnhurtful: with their head bare, because we blush
not* to conclude, without an admonisher, because we pray from the heart: we are
all always praying, for all the Emperors that they may have a long life, a
safe Empire, a sound house, strong armies, a faithful senate, a godly people, a
quiet world, and what soever are the desires of man* and of Caesar. etc.

Whereby we may well perceive, that they had both in behavior, and in matter,
some certain usual forms of public prayers. Especially by that he says,
Justin mar^. in oratione ad Antoninum pium*
they needed no admonitor of them. Which seems to cut of this, that all their
prayers depended on the pastors conceiving. Which also we may well gather, of
that we heard before out of Iustine, how they brought him that was baptized
unto the Brethren, where the assemblies were. That we might pray ( say they) as
well for our selves, as for those that are newely illumined, whereby we might
be found through true Doctrine and good works, worthy obseruers and keepers
of the commandments, that we may obtain eternal salvation. Such were the
ordinary forms of public prayers in the most ancient Churches.

Bullinger upon 1, Tim. 2.1. Concerning the ancient form of public prayer
writes on this wise. Bull. 1. Tim. 2
And least in this matter I should dissemble any thing, the Ecclesiastical
assemblies before a 1000 years ago, were on this manner. The people flocked
together into the holy house to the intent to worship God. But while they were
entering into the Church, certain psalms in some Churches were sung of those
that were already come: in other, The ancient form of public prayers before a
1000 (...) agone.
they were only recited until the whole assembly was fully come together. And
this beginning of the Divine service they called the Introit of entering. Now,
when the Church wa^ come together, all of the^ cried with one consent
K^riele-eison, Lord have mercy. To the which was added of some, the hymn which
is called the Angels, whose beginning, Glory be to God on high.

This hymn perteyneth to gratulation or to deprecation. This being ended, some
minister of the Church recited the Collect, the same was a kind of prayer,
wherein the desires of the whole Church, and their necessities collected
together, were recited unto God. Then was there red beforehand of the more
learned Deacons, some place either of the prophetical books, or of the
apostolical Epistles, chosen out according to the consideration of the time,
of the place, or of the people. This being finished, the Bishop assembled into
a higher place by steps, to preach the Gospel of Christ. The people in the
mean while, with a song conceived, called upon the grace of the holy ghost,
which (of those steps) begun to be called the Graduell. But here the
Bishop did read the Gospel before with great authority, and then interpreted
the same: at the end of the holy sermon, he recited the Creed that they
called the Apostles, or else the Nicene, or that which secondly was made. The
age succeeding the primitive Church.
Moreover he invited the whole Church unto mercy, that every man according to
their abilities, should put somewhat into the poore-mens box. That portion of
the holy (sermon) they called the offertory. And Pontius Paulinus teaches,
that a table was wont to beset in the Church, for the refection of the poor,
which also they called the Lords Table, and placed of the Lord, In this
manner (I say) with these ceremonies and rites, did the ancient exercise their
prayers and sound doctrine. How beit, this custom was not by all points
common to all. For some began the holy assembly not with the psalms but with
the crying together, Kyrie^leison. They that so did, had not in use either the
Angels hymn, or the collects, or the Graduels verse. To this again other sung
the Alleluiah of the Hebrews: as in another place Jerome shows. Among some,
the bishop himself without all these things, both begins with the sacred
sermon, and public prayers added thereunto, and dismisseth the assembly. But
no Church was compelled to swear into the rites and ordinances of another, so
be, that the prayers, and the holy sermons were entire, and exercised holily
and always the best being contented with most few, employed the cheifest
parts to doctrine, and to prayers.

Moreover in the mystical supper, The manner of their ministering the Lords
supper.
this rite was observed well near of all Churches. The priest came forth into
the assembly. The mystical table stood in the sight of the people, furnished
with bread and Wine. He standing at this table, blessed the people saying, The
lord be with you, and the people answered, and with thy spirit: Then he
stirring up the people unto the most high matters and preparing the minds of
every one of them cried, Lift up your hearts: the people answered, we have
them (lifted up) unto the Lord. For, Cyprian in his sermon of the Lords
prayer, says: Therefore the priest also making a praeface before the prayer,
prepares the minds of the brethren, saying: Lift up your hearts, while the
people answers, We have them (lift up) unto the Lord. That they might be
admonished, how they ought to think on nothing, but on the Lord, Thus says
Cyprian. Cyprian.
After this the priest moving them to thanksgiving, says, Let us give thanks
unto the Lord our God. The people answered, it is meet and right (we should so
do,) here said the priest, It is very meet and just, right and healthful,
that we should at all times, and every where, give thanks unto thee O L. the
Lord, the holy father almighty eternal God through Jesus Christ our Lord For
almost all these things does Aug. also in his book De bono Perseuerantiae,
mention, cap. 13, saying: That therefore which is said in the sacraments of the
faithful, that we should have our hearts lift up to the Lord: Augustine.
it is the gift of the Lord. Of which gift they are of the Priest admonished,
to give thanks to our God, unto whom after this speech, this is said. And they
answer, It is meet and just, etc. But after these words the priest said,
who the day before he suffered took the bread, gave thanks, brake it, and
gave it to his Disciples, saying, take, eat, this is my body which is given
for you. and the residue which are read in the Gospel. These things with great
religion being accomplished, the Lords prayer was said. Which also Jerome
testifies in his 3. book against the Pelagians. But also it is vulgarly
received, Hierome.
that the apostles did consecrate (.i. celebrate the mistical supper) at the
prayers only of the L. prayer, after the L. prayer the people received the holy
mysteries, and by the communion of the sacraments of the body and blood of the
Lord, they grew together into one mystical body, whereof Christ is the head.
To conclude, al these things being orderly accomplished after this manner, How
near our form comes to this ancient form.
the assembly was dismissed. Thus writes Bullinger, not to confirm, but to
confute the Popish Mass thereby. And is not here a plain prescribed form of
the divine service, both for the manner of their public prayers, and of the
administration of the holy communion: yea, almost even the very self same
form of order and words, that our book prescribes unto us? and although some
Churches differed, yet, every Church kept always some one certain form or
other, which every Minister might not alter, at his pleasure.

The reformed Churches form and order.
But because after these times, corruptions began to alter these ancient and
holy prescribed forms, of public prayer and of the sacraments: Let us now
come even to our days. What Church reformed is there now, where they have not
some form of public prayers prescribed and ordinary among them? and yet if
there were nothing else, but our Brethrens own book set out, called, the book
of the form of common prayers, administration of the sacraments, etc, agreeable
to Gods word, and the use of the reformed Churches: It is enough sufficiently
to prove this point, that there ought to be a prescribed and ordinary form of
divine service, and public prayers, and not that the pastor should be the only
maker and conceiuer of the public prayers, and the people only to approve
them and say Amen, to such prayers, as the pastor at that instant makes or
conceiueth. Which conceptions of our brethren, if they were suffered: great
inconvenience might grow thereon. For either the people, which perhaps
understood not his terms and phrases, should rather stand marking and weying
his words (if they did so much as mark them: The inconveniences of the pastors
only conceiving of publ^ke prayers.
) and houer in suspense of any as^ent, til they understood the full drift of
them: than have themselves any devotion, all the mean time unto God, so much as
in heart and silence to ioin with him, till it come to the parts of closing up
their Amen, unto that, wherein their hearts were not in full assent before joined
unto him. Which when they have marked attentively and understood, yea, and
finally assented (with their Amen never so frankly) may rather in the end be
called an a^sent unto him, then any public or private prayer unto God with
him. So that, that which they say here of public prayer, as it pertains to
the pastor to conceive public prayers: The peoples speeches.
so it is the duty of the whole church in the name of the whole church, to
join in heart with the pastor in the same prayers, that they knowing and
understanding what he has prayed may in the end give their consent by
answering, Amen: This (I say) bangeth not together, for any prayer wherein they
ioyn with him, for their assent comes not jointly with his prayer, but in the
end, when all is done, then they join with him, not in praying, but in liking
or consenting to his prayer: and so, it is not their prayer, nor properly
public prayer.

Besides also the danger even in this assenting, and saying may times Amen,
they can scarce on a sudden tell to what. And perhaps, now and then (God wot)
to frivolous petitions. If not in some places under holy terms, glorious
speeches, strange phrases, and long circumstances, when any pastor were not in
all points sound, (as now and then it happens) they might so color perilous
opinions: that the people not perceiving it, but thinking all is well, might
say Amen to that, which if they knew, they would openly protest that they
detest it. And therefore to avoid al those inconveniences they have a public
form of public prayers, by those that are sound and godly persons, drawn forth
and collected, perused, approved, and ratified, by the supreme authority of the
Prince, and of all the states of the realm and Church of England: prescribed
to all the ministers to use, for the public order of the divine service: Which
prayers are so plain, so short, so pithy* so sound and effectual: that the
people not only most easily may understand them: but in continuance, be so
well acquainted with them, that they may assure themselves, they be good
prayers, and such as if they shall heartily power forth to God, they may
safely reckon, that they are acceptable to him, as tending to his glory, and to
their benefit: And so indeed he may go before them and with them too, in such
safe and orderly sort that when the pastor pronounces these known, allowed and
ordinary public prayers in the name of the rest, and of the whole Church: the
rest and the whole Church, may safely both in silence pray with him, and openly
also; besides their answering Amen, in the end unto his prayers.

But this is the second thing that here they would have forbidden, to wit, that
the people should not ioin with the pastor in the saying or pronouncing of any
public prayer, but only to pray with him in silence, and in the end to
answer Amen, For, say they, as it were a great confusion and vncomelines for
every man to make his several prayers in the public assemblies: so is it
orderly, for one to pronounce the prayer, in the name of the rest, and the rest
to pray with him in silence and to answer Amen.

That this is well done, we do not deny: no more the^ we do, that a learned
pastor, may now and then also make and conceive some public prayers. But,
without prejudice or derogation to the ordinary usage of them, that are all
ready made to his hands, and conceived by others, and prescribed by order unto
him: but that he only should so say them all alone: this is too precise a
prescription, and too vnnec^ssary a fear of confusion and disorder. The people
may join their voices with the Minister in some public prayers and are not
tied only to silence save in saying Amen.
For, as it is appointed with us, they may say many things altogether, with or
after the Pastor orderly well enough, without any confusion or disturbance. And
where ^o our brethren find any perpetual rule, prohibiting the poople to
join their voices altogether, so that disorder and confusion be avoided? We
find indeed the like order that our brethren here prescribe unto us,
appo^nted to the Levites. Deuteronomy. 27.14. etc. The Levites ^hal stand and say unto
all the men of Israel, with a loud voice Cursed be the man that shall make any
carved or molten Image, etc. and so proceeds with 12. solemn curses, and at
the end of every curse is added this precept, And all the People shall say,
AMEN. But was this rule so precise, that the congregation might never speak
more or other words altogether at once, for fear of confusion and disorder?

Did not the people speak orderly enough, Exodus 19.7. Exodus 19.7.
When Moses called for the Elders of them, and proposed unto them all these
things which the Lord commanded him. And the people answered altogether,
and said: all that the Lord has commanded, we will do. And in the next
Chapter, ver. 18. etc. And all the people saw the thunders, and the
lightninges, and the sound of the trompet, and the mountains smoking: And
when the people saw it, they fled and stood a far of: and said unto Mos^s,
Talk thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God talk with us, Exodus
20.18. etc.
least we die: Which words Moses in Deuteronomy repeateth more fully, saying:
Deuteronomy. 5.23, etc. Deuteronomy. 5.23. etc.
When ye heard the voice out of the midst of the darkness (for the mountain
did burn with fire) the^ ye came to me all the chief of your tribes and
your elders, and ye said, behold the Lord our God has showed us his glory
and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the
fire, we have seen this day that God does talk with man, and he lives. Now
therefore why should we dye? For this great fire will consume us, if we hear
the voice of our Lord God any more, we shall die. For what flesh was there
ever, that heard the voice of the living God, speaking out of the midst of
the fire, as we have, and lived? Go thou near, and here all that the Lord
God says, and declare thou unto us, all that the Lord God says unto thee,
and we will hear it and do it. Here was a large speech of all these Elders
of the people And could they speak all this without disorder or confusion?
What said he to this? Then the Lord (says Moses) heard the voice of your
words, when ye spoke unto me, and the Lord said unto me, I have heard the
voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken unto thee. They have
well said, all that they have spoken. He did not vpbraide them with confusion.

Likewise, when Iosuah gave his charge unto all those Israelites, that
possessed the other side of Jordan, Josh. 1.16*17: and 18. They answered
Iosuah, saying: All that thou haste commanded us we will do, The peoples
prayer
and whether soever thou sendest us we will go. As we obeyed Moses in all
things, so shall we obey thee, only, thy Lord thy God be with thee, as he was
with Moses: whosoever shall rebel against thy commandment, and will not obey
thy words in all that thou commaundest him, let him be put to death. Only,
be strong and of good courage.

Was here any disorder and confusion in these the peoples speeches? When
Iosuah before his death, had made his exhortation, and given his charge unto
all the tribes of Israel assembled before him, Iosuah 24. verse 16. etc. The
people answered and said, God forbid that we should forsake the Lord to
serve other Gods, for the Lord our God he brought us and our Fathers, out of
the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage, and he did those great
miracles in our sight, and preserved us all the way that we went, and among all
the people through whom we came, and the Lord did cast out before us all the
people, even the Ammorites: which dwelt in the land, therefore will we also
serve the lord, for he is our God. etc. Was this also a disordered and
confused noise and yet the speech of all the people? For, we read not here of
any speaker in their names, nor any necessity drives, so to imagine. If it
be replied, these were not public prayers. What of that? were they not the
public speeches of the Congregation? and could these public speeches of all
or many, without confusion be orderly uttered, The public prayers, psalms
and responses may be said of all the people together.
which perhaps were not before premeditated: and can not much better without
any disorder or confusion, some such public prayers, Psalms, or short
responses, as they are often acquainted withal, or, as their books lead
them, if they can read, or, as their Pastor says before them in brief
sentences?

But, for public prayers too: how often is it mentioned in the book of the
Judges, that the children of Israel, when they were oppressed of their enemies,
They cried unto the lord? Iud. 3. ver. 9. and 15. Iud. 4 verse 3. Iud. 6.
verse. 6. and 7. Were these cries, no prayers? or were these prayers, not as
well public as private? Or did God refuse to hear them, as a confused noise?
or rather, did he not like these cries as a sweet harmony, and sent them
helpers? But, that their cries were not lamentations only, but confession of
their sins and prayers it appears. Iud. 10. verse 10. Then the children of
Israel cried unto the lord, saying: we hau^ sinned against thee, even because
we have forsaken our own God, and have served Baalim. And when God laid
before them, how often he had delivered them, and bad them, Go and try unto
the God; which ye have chosen, let them save you in the time of your
tribulation. ver. 14. and 15. The Children of Israel said unto the lord, we
have sinned, do thou unto us whatsoever please thee:only, we pray thee to
deliver us this day. Which public prayers of them* with the deeds following
in putting away their Idols, were such orderly and effectual prayers, that
God raised them up another helper.

Likewise, Iud. ^1.2. When they had almost destroyed the tribe of Benjamin for
their wickedness The people came unto the house of God, and abode there til
even, before God, and lifting up their voices and wept with great lamentatio^,
and said, O Lord God of Israel why is this com to pass in Israel, that this
day one tribe of Israel should want. Again, when Samuel, had showed the
people their sin in asking to have a king, 1. Sam. 12.19.
1. Sam, 12. And the Lord had sent thunder according to Samuels saying, ver.
19. All the people said unto Samuel, pray for thy servants unto the L. t^y God,
that we die not, for we have sinned in asking us a king, besides all our other
sins. And how often does David in his Psalms, stir up all the people, not
only to sing, but also to confess their sins, and to call upon and to praise
his name, and to declare his works in the Congregation, and in these actions
to join all their voices together? and would he not exhort them, if it were a
disorder and confusion?

When Solomon made his prayer in the temple which he had new builded, Solomon's
prayer.
and besought God to hear the prayers that should be made in the same, among
other things he says. 1. kin. 8.37. etc. When there shall be famine in the land,
when there shall be p^stilence, when there shall be blasting mild^we,
Grasshopper, 1. King. ^.37.
or Caterpiller, when their enemies shall besiege them in the Cities of the
land, or any plague, or any sickness: then, what prayer and supplication
soever shall be made of any man, or of al thy people Israel, when every one
shall know the plague of his own heart, and stretche forth his hands in this
house: hear thou him in Heaven. etc. Wherein he speaks not only of the
private prayer of any man, but of the public prayer made by all the people.
Hear thou then in heaven their prayer and their supplication, and judge their
cause. If they sin against thee, for there is no man that sins not) and
thou be angry with them, and deliver them unto the enemies, so that they carry
them away prisoners, into the l^nde of the enemies either far or near, yet
if they turn again which their heart in the land to the which they be
carried away Captives and return and pray unto thee, in the land of them that
carried them away Captives, saying, We have sinned, we have transgressed,
and have done wickedlie. etc. Then hear thou their prayers, and their
supplication in Heaven thy dwelling place, and judge their cause, and be
merciful unto the people that have sinned against thee, etc. For they be thy
people and thine inheritance, which thou broughtest out of Egypt, from the
midst of the iron furnace. Let thine eyes be open unto the prayer of thy
servant, and unto the Prayer of thy people Israel, to hearken unto them in all
that they call for unto thee. etc. So that he speaks not here of any one
man, praying in the name of the people: but both of every one whosoever, and
jointly of all the peoples prayers unto God. Which if they had not used so to
pray, or he had thought GOD would have accounted those public prayers that
all the people jointly withal their voices made, a disordered and confused
noise: The peoples voices in public prayer.
he would never have made this solemn prayer for them.

What confusion and disorder of voices was this, at the prayer of Elias. 1.
Reg. 18. verse 39. All the people when they saw the fire to fall from heaven,
and consume the burnt offering, fell on their faces and said, 1. Kin. 18.39.
the Lord is God, the Lord is God. It may be thought, that at the reedifying
of the Temple, in this number of voices, there was then some confusion of them.

For when as in the first of Esdras, the third chap. verse 1. it is said,
that, the people assembles themselves as one man unto Jerusalem, 1. Esdras.
31. etc.
It follows verse 10. etc. And when the builders laid the foundation of the
Temple of the Lord, they appointed the Priests in their apparel with
Trumpettes, and the levites the sons of Asaph with Cimballes, to praise the
lord after the ordina^^e of David king of Israel. Thus they sang when they
gave praise and when they gave (...) unto the lord. For he is good, for his
mercy endures ever toward Israel. Where withal we see, the former point,
of the prescribed form of Prayers. And all the people showted with a great
showte, when they praised the Lord, because the foundation of the house of the
lord was laid. And many also of the Prie^^es and levites, and the chief of
the Fathers and ancient m^^, which had seen the first house, when the
foundation of this house was laid before their eyes, wept with loud voice.
And many sho^ted loud, for joy: so that the people could not discern the
sound of the shout for joy, from the noise of the weeping of the people. F^r
the people s^owted ^ith a loud cry, and the noise was heard far off. Here
indeed was some confusion of voices, because some of them shouted, and some
wept, and some of them praised to GOD, and some sang his praises, and some
blewe the Trumpettes: and yet GOD accepted this confusion, as a most sweet
conceit and harmonye.

In the tenth Chapter, Es^ras. 10.1. etc.
after the Prayer of Esdras in the name of himself, and of al the people,
verse 1. VVhiles Esdras prayed thus, and confessed himself weeping, an^
falling down before the House of GOD: there assembled unto him of Israel, a
very ^reat congregation of Men and Women, and child^en, for the people wept
with a great lamentation. Then Shecaniah the son of Iehiel, one of the sons
of Elam, answered and said to Esdras: we have trespassed against God. etc.

Here one speaks in the name of all the people: but in the next assembly, it
follows after, When Esdras had exhorted the people: all the Congregation
answered (Uerse 12.) and said with a loud voice: So will we do according so
thy Words unto us, but thee People are many, Vers^ 12. and^
and it is raynye weather, and we are not able to stand without, neither it
is the work of one Day or two, for we are many that have greatly offended
in this thing. Mary voices joined in the new Testament
Let our rulers therefore. etc. And in the 8. Chapter of Nehemias, he says,
verse 1. And all the people assembled themselves together, in the street that
was before the Water gate, and they spoke unto Esdras the scribe, that he
should bring the book of the l^we of Moses, which the Lord had commanded to
Israel. Nehemiah. 8.1. etc.
And Esdras the priest brought the law before the congregation ^^th of men
and Women, and of all that could hear and understand it, in the first day of
the seventh month. And he red therein in the street that was before the
watergate, from the morning until the Midday, before men and women and them
that understood it, and the cares of all the people hearkened unto the book
of the law. And Esdras the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood, which he had
made for the preaching.

Here again is the plain reading of the Scripture, so that the people may
understand it, called Preaching. And Esdras opened the book before all the
people, for he was above all the people, and when he opened it, all the people
stood up, and Esdras praised the Lord the great God. And all the people
answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting up their hands, and they bowed themselves,
and worshipped the Lord with their faces toward the ground. And here is even
that our bre. speak of, where the minister praises God ( which is a part of
prayer) and the people hearken and answer, Amen. But yet immediately it
follows, that this reading was not done all by one, but a great many Levites
are reckoned up, which caused the people to understand the Law, and they
read in the book of the Law of God, distinctly, and gave the sense, and
caused them to understand the reading. And also the notable prayer, that
follows in the next Chapter, was pronounced upon stairs not by one, but by
eight or nine of the Levites pronouncing the same before the people.

Thus we see at large in all these ages, the manner of the Church of God in
their co^gregations and public Prayers, both for the Levites parts, and for
the peoples, how they joined their voices together, not only in saying Amen:
but in their petitions, Confessions, and thanks-giuinges. And this was counted
no disorder nor confusion, but used of all Godly men, and always acceptable
unto God. And so, as we may further perceive by the Apocrypha, and other
histories of their public prayers, thus practiced and continued till Christ's
coming: Neither was this done so much in respect of the ceremonial, as of
the moral Law of God among them.

But to confirm all this, with the practice approved of Christ in the New
testament: The voices of many without confusion, in the new Test^ment. Luke.
2.13.
read we not, Luke 2. verse. 13. Even presently after the birth of our Savior
Christ, that when one ^ngel of the Lord had declared unto the Shepheardes, the
joyful tidings of his birth: And straight ways says Luke) There was with the
Angel a multitude of heavenly soldiers, pra^sing GOD, and saying: Glory be
to GOD on high, and in earth peace, and toward men good will: and was here
also confusion and disorder, in the multitude of the voices of the Angels that
said these things.

And likewise, when Jesus a little before his death, came riding to Jerusalem,
Mat. 21. ver. 9. etc, The people that went before, Math. ^1.9.
and they also that followed, cried, saying; Hosana, the son of David,
blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord. Hosanna, thou which art in
the highest. And when he was come to Jerusalem all the City was moved, saying
who is this? and the people said, this is Jesus the Prophet of Nazareth in
Galily. True it is, that there were some, that thought this a disorder and
confused noise. For it follows, verse. 15, etc. Verse. 1^.
But when the chief priests and scribes saw the maruels that he did, and the
children crying in the Temple, and saying, Hosanna, the son of David, they
disdained and said to him, hear thou what these say? and Jesus said unto
them, yea, did ye never read, by the mouth of babes and sucklinges, thou
haste made perfect thy praise? Does Christ here forbid them to cry out these
public prayers, as a confusion and disorder?

And what was the manner of the Apostles prayers, concerning this point? Act.
1.14. Luke says: They all continued with one accord, in prayer and
supplication, with the Women, and Marie the mother of Jesus, Act. 1.14.
and with his brethren. In-deede here is not mentioned, that all their voices
were joined together, but one accord: which rather signifies the consent of
their hearts, then the consent of their voices. But very well does Calvin note
hereon, saying: So far as respects the concord of their minds, it is
opposed to the dispearsing of them, Caluinus in Act. 1.
which the fear had brought. Howbeit withal, generally we may gather
hereupon, how necessary it is in praying. Which Christ comma^deth, every one
to pray for the whole body and in common, as though it were in the person of
all: Our father, Give us. etc. Mat. 6.9. Whence comes this unity of the
tongs but of one spirit? Wherefore Paul Romans 15.6. When he would deliver to
the Jews and Gentiles, a rule of praying well, remoueth far off all
dissembling. That we might glorify God (says he) with one mouth. And verily
that God may of us be called upon a Father, it behooves us to be brethren, and
to consent brethen-like. But to show this more plain, Luke declares Act.
4.23, and 24. How that after Peter and John, Ac^. 12.5.
as soon as they were let go, came to their fellows, and showed all that the
high priests and elders had said unto them, when they heard it, they lift up
their voices to God with one accord, and said, O Lord, etc. And though their
prayers be not also described, Act. 12. 5. When Peter was kept in prison: yet
in that he says: But earnest prayer was made of the Church to God for him: we
may easily conjecture, that it was not made only with their assent, but with
all their voices in their so earnest prayer for him.

Chrysostom. time.
And although the visions in the Revelation that Saint John saw and heard, be
referred to further mysteries: yet the analogy that is proportionable between
the signs of things, and the things themselves, manifestly proves, that
the multitude of voices joined together in public prayers, was not then,
either of God or man accounted, a disorder or confusion in the Church. Apocal.
4. verse 8. etc. Apocal. 4.8. etc.
And he four Beasts had ech^ one of them six wings about him, and they were
full of eyes within, and they ceased not day nor night, saying: Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God almighty, which was and which is, and which is to come. And
when those beasts gave glory, and honor, and thanks to him that sat on the
throne, and worshipped him that lives for ever and ever, the 24. elders fell
down before him that satte on the throne, and worshipped him that lives for
evermore, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying: thou art worthy O
lord, to receive glory and honor, and power, for thou haste created all
things, and for thy wills sake, they are and have been created.

And in the next Chapter, verse 8. The four and twenty Elders fell down before
the lamb, having every one Harpes and golden Viols full of Odors, which are
the prayers of Saints, and sung a new song, saying: Thou art worthy, etc. And
also verse 11. Then I beheld, and I heard the voice of many Angels round
about the Throne, and about the Beasts and the elders, and there were
thousand thousands, saying with alowde voice: VVorthie is the lamb that was
killed to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor,
and glory, and praise: and all the creatures which are in Heaven, and under the
earth, and in the Sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying praise and
honor, and glory, and power, be unto him, that sits upon the Throne, and
unto the lamb for evermore. And the four Beasts said Amen. etc. The
Revelation has many more of these visions. All which, though they have a
mystical understanding, yet if those mysteries had been figured by things
disordered and confused, it had both been a discredit to the entendement of
them, neither could Saint John have well perceived and understood them.

But that this was the practice of the primitive and ancient Church
succeeding, Iusti^^^ in ^ras. ad An^^ninu^ poi^o.
it may appear by Iustine, in the foresaid Apology. But how we have
dedicated our selves to God (says he) being renewed by Christ, we will
now declare, least we might seem to dissemble any thing maliciously: So many
as being persuaded do believe these things to be true that we do teach, and do
promise to live after the same manner: before all things they learn with
prayers and fastinges, to ask of God forgiveness of their fore-passed sins,
we ioining together with them the prayers, and the fastings. So that all these
that were converted from idolatry, and were to be baptized, with the Ministers
that did baptize them, joined, as their fastings, so their prayers altogether,
and then within a little after, follows that which we have already cited of
their public prayers, when they are brought to the assembly of the faithful,
to join also with them in the Communion. After which public prayers, when
they had saluted one another with a mutual kiss, and that the chiefest of the
brethren, was (with his prayers and thanksgiving) consecrating to God the
mysteries of the Lords supper: after the prayers ( says he) and the Eucharist
(or thanksgiving) all the company singet^ Amen. Here is again the chief
Elders prayers and thanksgiving by him self, and all the companies Amen. But
as he declares afterward, before these prayers and thanks-giuings, that this
chief person makes alone, which is the consecration of the bread and Wine,
to the which the people sings, ^men: When the Exhortation to prepare
themselves, to come worthily to this Table was finished: After this ( says
he) we arise all of us together, and offer our prayers: which done, the bread
and wine etc. ( as is aforesaid) is brought forth. So that, here are some
prayers made of all the people together, with the Minister, and some prayers
only made by the mouth of the Minister in the name of the whole Church, as our^
brethren say, and the whole Church joining in heart with the People in the same
prayers, and praying with him in silence, in the end they gave their consent
thereto, by aunswering Amen.

Cyprian Ser. 6. De Orat. Dominica. says, We say not, Cyprianus in sermon. 6. de
oratione dominica.
My father which art in heaven: neither, Give to me this day my bread: neither
does every one desire that sins should be only forgiven to him: or desires for
him self alone that he should not be led into tentation, and should be delivered
from evil. It is a public and common prayer unto us. And when we pray, we pray
not for one, but for all people, because we being the whole people are one
thing. The God of all peace and master of concord, that taught unity, would
thus have one to pray for all. Even as he him self did bear all in one. This
Law did the three Children keep, being enclosed in the furnace of fire.
Agreeing in prayer, and concording in consent of spirit. Which thing the faith
of the divine scripture declares, and when it teaches how such prayed, it
gives an example which we in prayers ought to follow, that we might be
such as they were. Then says (the scripture) they there did sing an hymn, as
it were with one mouth, and did bless the Lord: They spoke as it were with
one mouth, The joint praising and praying to God, of all at once.
and Christ had not yet taught them to pray and therefore to them that prayed,
their speech was able to obtain and effectual: because the quiet and simple,
and spiritual prayer was acceptable to the Lord. Thus says Cyprian of the
prayers wherein all the people joined their voices publicly together: and that
the Apostle followed this manner, he cites Acts 1. as is aforesaid.

So that this prayer with one mouth in the name of all, was not so, that one
only spoke it, and the other only gave the Amen and consent thereto: but they
all spoke it with such a concord, as though it had been spoken with one
mouth, which was spoken with the mouth of every one of them. Even as every
one says the Lords prayer in the name of al, and not on^ alone says it for
them all. And yet in those public prayers which the pastor speaks only in
all the peoples name, The peoples responses to the Minister.
the people now and then did give their responses in their courses, as if may
appear by that which Ciprian afterward says. But when we stand to prayer
(most dearly beloved brethren) we ought to watch, and be intentive to the
prayers with all our heart. All worldly and carnal cogitation must go from us:
Neither must the mind think then of any other thing, than of that only
which it prays. Therefore the Priest also giving forth a preface before the
prayer, prepares the breath. minds, in saying: Lift up your hearts, and when the
people answers, We have them (lifted up) unto the Lord, they may be
admonished, that they ought to think on no other thing, but on the Lord. So yt
the people said not only, Amen: but had other aunsweres also unto the Minister,
as may appear further in the Letanies and Liturges of the ancient Churches.
And to show, how far the people joined their voices with the Minister, even
long after, when the Ministers had gotten a great part of the prayers to their
own pronouncing in Chrysostomes time, but yet before the blasphemies,
Idolatries, and superstitions of the Mass began, or the praying in a tongue
unknown to the people, or in secret muttering that all the people, hard not: it
is worthy the observing to this purpose, that which Chrysostom. writes upon the
last verse of the 8. chap. of the ^. epist. of S. Paul to the Cor. Homil. 18.
Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. 8. Homilt. 8.
Wherefore, show ye toward them and before the churches, the proof of your
love, and of the reioising that we have of you. Now (says he) receive ye them
even as indeed ye love us: Declare ye, how we not simply nor rashly do
rejoice in you. This shall ye do, if ye shall show forth your love toward
them. And afterward he makes his speech more dreadful saying: In the sight of
the churches, for the glory (says he) of the churches, for their honor: for
if ye shall honor the^, ye shall honor the churches that sent them For it shall
not be only their honor, but also theirs that sent them and chose them: and
before all, it shall be to Gods glory For when we shall honor them that
minister unto him: the glory stretches to him. For the community of the
churches: but this also shall be no small thing for great is the power of a
synod, that is, of the churches. The prayer of them loosed Peter from his
bonds, opened the mouth of Paul. Their suffrage or voice not a little
beautifieth those, that shall attain to the spiritual principalities. And for
this cause, he that shall give orders, calls then for the Churches prayers.
And they give their sentences and give their cry thereto. Which thing, they
that are to enter into the Ministerye do know. For it is not lawful to them,
that are not entered into the ministry, to disclose all things. But there is
that thing, wherein the Priest differs nothing from him that is under him.
As when the dreadful mysteries are to be partaked, for we are all holden a
like worthy to partake them. Not as it was in the old law, the priest did eat
a part, and the people a part, and it was not lawful for the people to be
partaker of those things, whereof the Priest was partaker. Howbeit, now it is
not so, but one body is brought forth unto all, and one cup. Yea, and in the
prayers a man shall see, that he offers together with them the full cup,
both for those that are possessed with unclean spirits, and also for those
that are the penitentes. For the prayers are made in common both of the Priest
and of them. And all of them say one prayer, a prayer full of mercy. Again,
when we have shut out from the Priests circuites, those that can not be
partakers of the holy table, another prayer is to be made, and we all lie upon
the ground alike, and we arise all alike. Again, when the peace is to be
communicated, we salute one another all alike. And again, even in the same most
dreadful mysteries, the Priest prays for the people, and the people prays
for the Priest. For when they say; and with thy spirit: it is nothing else
than this, those things that are of the Euchariste, that is to wit, of the
giving of thanks, are all of them common. For neither he gives thanks alone,
but also all the people. For, having before their voice, and then, they being
gathered together, that this thing might worthily and justly be done, he
begins the Euchariste* (or thanksgiving). And what marueilest thou if the
people speak, with the Priest? Whereas in deed they sound out those holy
hymns in common, even with the very Cherubines and supernall powers. These
things verily are spoken of us, that all those also which are governed, might
be sober, to the end we might learn, that we are all one body. Only having
among us so much difference, as members have from members. And that we should
not cast al upon the Priests, but that we also even as for a body that is
common, should thus bear the charge of the universal Church etc.

By these words it manifestly appears, that the Pastor in the administration
of the divine service, said not all the public prayers alone, The people
joined with the Ministers in many public prayers.
though in the name of the whole Church, and the rest joining in heart with
him in silence, to avoid confusion and disorder, aunswering him only with
Amen; but that they had many responses, and many whole prayers, that they
prayed all together in common even in the same manner as he did, without any
disorder or confusion.

Thus we see, both that in the whole tenure of all the scripture, and in the
practice of the primitive and the ancient Church succeeding, they stood not
thus precisely, as, neither for the prescription of the form of public
prayers, so, neitther for the manner of the utterance of them; but that often
they joined all their voices with the minister, Several prayers in publ.
assemblies.
or followed him, or answered him with many more words than with a bare Amen,
which gives nothing but (as our Brethren confess) a silent consent unto him,
which is rather an approbation of his prayers for them, than properly any
prayers of theirs joined with him.

How far several prayers in public assemblies may be used of the people.
The third thing, that I would have here further considered in this matter of
public prayer, is, that our Brethren say: it were a great confusion and
uncomeliness for every man to make his several prayers in the public
assemblies. Indeed if every man did make his several prayers, in the public
assemblies, at such times as the public prayers are openly made by the
minister in the name of the whole Church, and did neither openly pray with
him, nor in silence give assent unto him, so be they could hear him: I
confess, it were great confusion and uncomeliness. But, if the ministers
voice were so low either by nature or infirmity, that in a great assembly
all could not well hear him, and yet, it were confusion and uncomeliness, to
perch themselves higher than their calling would withal tolerate, that they
might hear him better: or perhaps the same defect might be in their own not
so quick hearing: then, if any such persons were borne withal, to give
themselves to their several prayers, even while the public prayers were in
saying, so it were done without disturbaunce, or offense to the public
assembly: there might be no confusion nor uncomeliness in so doing. But our
Brethren urge this point so precisely, that without any consideration of the
persons infirmities, or any mention of the time, they would have no several
prayers at all in the public assemblies. Which is too straight and too nice a
point to stand upon.

Was not that a public assembly, when all the children of Israel were by the
read sea, and Pharao with his host followed upon them, and the Children of
Israel cried unto the Lord; and when Moses had comforted them; though we
read not of any one word that he spoke to God: yet, the Lord said unto him,
Exodus 14.15. Exodus 14.15.
Wherefore cryest thou unto me? Was not this a several prayer in the public
assembly? And how often times does Moses make several prayers in the public
assemblies? Moses prayers.
For what is several prayer, but either prayer for some several persons, or
matters that are not public: or that the party which prays makes not
jointly with the assembly but by himself, without the assemblies joining with
him, either in the words of the prayer, or in the saying of Amen unto him? And
may no such prayers be made in public assemblies? Was not the place where the
Arc was placed, and where the Priests were attendant on the offringes, and
afterward the temple, the place of the public assemblies, and therefore
called the house of prayer? And yet, did not God appoint the Levites, that when
any several person came to offer, or to pray to God for his several estate,
Several prayers.
that not only the party himself might make his several prayers, even as he
gave his several oblations for his several trespasses, or several
necessities, or several benefits: and that the Priest also should make
several prayers and oblations for him, besides the public prayers, although
it were even in the public assembly? 1. Sam. ^.11. etc.


Did not Annah make her several prayers, when with her husband she went up
yearly to the house of the Lord? And she vow^d a v^we, and said, The prayers
of Annah.
O Lord of Hosts, if thou will look on the trouble of thine handmaide, and
rememb^r me, and not forget thy handmayd, but give unto thy handmayde a man
child: then I will give him unto the Lord all the days of his life, and
there shall no razer come upon his head, and she continued praying before the
Lord. Eli marked her mouth, for Annah spoke in her heart, her lips did
move only, therefore Eli thought that she had been dronken. And Eli said
unto her, how long will thou be dronken? Put away thy drunkenness from
thee? Then Annah answered and said, nay, (my Lord) but I am a woman troubled
in spirit: I have dronken neither wine nor strong drink, but have powered out
my soul before the Lord. Count not thy handmayde for a wicked woman, for of
the abundaunce of my complaynt and my grief have I spoken hitherto. Then Eli
answered and said, Go in peace, the God of Israel grant thy petition that
thou have asked of him. 1. Sam. 1.11. etc. By which it appears, that the
godly in their afflictions made sometimes their several prayers even in the
public assembly of the high Priest and other Priests and Levites assistant
about him, besides the other people assembled in the Lords house. And for that
notable prayer which at the presenting of her son Samuel, she openly made,
and is set down in the Chapter following, though it comprehend also some
general matters: yet was it but her several prayer, in the public assembly
of the Priests and people.

And are not many of David's Psalms several prayers, Dauid^ Psalms.
co^teining his several dangers, helps, and thankesgiuings? And yet as he
made some of those several prayers in publ. assemblies, so though he set them
forth to be used publicly, in the public assemblies: yet not so, but that
eue^ in those assemblies, any several person might use and apply the same, to
his several and like occasions. And that notable prayer of Solomon, which
though it were openly made, Salomons prayer.
and some part thereof for the public state of the Church, and for their
public prayers, yet, was the same both his several prayer: and he prays for
the acceptance of any such also as should make their several prayers in the
public assembly of the Priests and people in the temple.

And as the godly mentioned in the old Testament, used thus not only to make
their public, but their several prayers also, in the public assemblies: so in
the new Testament likewise. Luke 1. ver. 8. Luke 1.8. etc.
etc. speaking of Zachary John Baptistes father: And it came to pass (says
the Evangelist) as he executed the priests office before God, as his course
came in order according to the custom of the Priests office, his lotte was to
burn incense. When he went into the temple of the Lord, Zacharies prayers.
and the whole multitude of the people were without in prayer, while the
incense was burning, then appeared unto him an Angel of the Lord, etc. But
the Angel said unto him fear not Zacharias, for thy prayer is heard, and
thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a son, etc. What prayer this was that the
assembly of the people made without, while the Priest was burning of the
sacrifice within, the Evangelist notes not. But I take it, that every one of
them all that while, did make in the public assembly his several prayers. But
for the prayers that Zachary made, it appears even by the Angels words unto
him, that although for the contents of them, some part were public, as by
the law he was bound to pray for the people: yet some part of them was
several for himself, and for the obteyning of a child. But for the action
and manner, it is most apparent (whatsoever other prayers he made besides, in
the hearing of the public assembly) the prayer that he made, when he went
into that holy sanctuary, or, as other take it, into the temple, where they
burnt the incense, to wite, the second division of the temple where the
morning and evening sacrifice was offered, was a several prayer: for the
people might not enter there, nor join with him, but tarried without in the
great base Court of the Temple, called the porch of Solomon, because there
Solomon made his prayer afore-sayde.

Marlorate out of Calvin notes upon these words of the Angel, Thy prayer is
heard: Marlorate Calvin and Bucer on Luke 1.
it may seem that Zachary did evil, and contrary to the manner of his
office, if entering into the sanctuary in the name of the whole people, he
prayed for the obteyning of a child, as a private man. For the Priest having
put on a public person, as one forgetful of him self, ought to conceive
prayers for the common health of the Church. If we shall say there is no
absurdity therein, because Zachary having accomplished the chief part of his
praying, did in the second place think of himself privately: it shall not
be an unfit solution. And this answers Caluines other answer, that he
might have so done, at other times. For, I like as well of his former solution,
both being not unfit, and serving directly to this purpose; and namely,
Marlorate confirming the same out of the scripture, and Bucers testimony,
saying: For the high Priest, when he entered into the holy of holyes, is said
Leuit. 16. d. 17. to have prayed for him self, and for his own house, and for
the universal assembly of Israel. The words of Moses in Leuiticus, are
these. And there shall be no man in the tabernacle of the congregation, when he
goes in to make an atonement in the holy place, until he come out, and have
made an atonement for himself, and for his household, and for all the
congregation of Israel.

And whatsoever we shall account of Simeons hymn in the Temple, Simeons
prayer. Luke 2.
what shall we say to that which is said of Anna the Prophetess? Luke 2. ver.
37. Annaes prayer Luke 2.
And she was a widdowe about 84. years, and went not out of the temple, but
served God with fastings and prayers night and day. What were those Prayers
that she continually did there make? Were they public prayers, or were they
several? Or, were there no public assemblies in the temple all that while? If
we desire Christ's confirmation of all this: first, what shall we think of
that parable that he sets forth, Luke 18. ver. 10. etc. Two men went up
into the Temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, and the other a Publican. The
Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself: The Pharisees and Publicans
prayer Luke. 18.
O God I thank thee, that I am not as other men, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this Publicane. I fast twice in the week, I give tithe
of all that ever I possess. What? and shall we allege this, to prove several
prayer to be allowed of Christ in public assemblies? Yea verily, why not?
Does Christ condemn him, because in that place of the public assembly he made
his private and several prayer? No. For then he had condemned the publicane
too. For it follows: but the Publicane standing a far off, and would not so
much as lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote his breast and said: O God be
merciful unto me a sinner. Was not here also another several prayer, and that
in the public assembly, as much as the other? And yet says Christ ( setting
down his resolution of them both) I tell you, this man (to wit, the Publicane)
departed to his house justified, rather than the other. And what is Christ's
reason? For every man that exalts himself shall be brought low, and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted. So that although Christ, in the 6. of
Matthewe. ver. 5. and 6. do forbid us to do as the Pharisees did: and when
thou prayest, be not as the Hypocrites, Math. 6.
for they love to stand and pray in the synagogues, and in the corners of the
streets, because they would be seen of men: verily I say unto you, they have
their reward. But when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and when thou
have shut thy door, pray unto thy father which is in secret, and thy father
which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly: yet, does not Christ here
either condemn public prayers, or any private and several prayers in public
assemblies: but condemns the pride and vain glory, that the Pharisees and
such hypocrites had. Otherwise, both this parable, yea, and this place does
manifestly confirm and approve such several and private prayers, as are not
only made in private and several places, but in public assemblies. Calvin.
in Mat. 6.


Calvin upon these words of Christ, says: we are bidden in many places, to
pray or give thanks to God in the solemn assembly, and confluence of men, and
before all the people, and that both because of testifying our faith or
thankefulnes, and also to incite other by our example to do the same. Neither
does Christ withdraw us from that study, but only warns to have God
before our eyes, so often as we prepare our selves to prayer. And therefore
these words, enter into thy chamber, are not to be urged, as though he bad
to flee from men, and that he denied we should pray rightly, except witnesses
were removed: for he speaks comparatively, signifying that we must rather
seek a secret place, then covet that the multitude of men should behold us
praying. For God would have those that are his, by all means to flee
ostentation. If thou shall from thy heart shun this, and that in praying it
shall suffice thee only to please God, thou have rightly prayed in thy
chamber, although thou shall have prayed in the greatest assembly of men.

Musculus upon the same precept of Christ, says on this wise: First in that
they prayed in the synagogues, it had not by and by the note of hypocrisy.
Musc. in Mat. 6.
For the Apostles also and the other faithful prayed in their assemblies: and
the Temple of Jerusalem was erected principally to this purpose, that it
should be the house of prayer. Therefore he says not simply: for they pray in
the synagoges: but (...) they love to pray in the synagoges For in secret they
will not pray. For we must not think that they prayed so in the synagogues, as
for the most part the godly do; to wit, simply, silently, without ostentation:
but this they regarded that they might pray more manifestly and with a clear
voice and in opener places.

In this manner then does Christ approve secret several prayer, although it
be made in public assemblies. Yea, Christ himself gave often example hereof.
I speak not of many persons, that in public assemblies he suffered and
^llowed, Christ's own several pra^ers in publ. assemblies.
that for many seueuerall occasions made their several prayers to him in
public assemblies: but of his own several prayers not only in places
severed from all company, but in most public assemblies, as Matt. 11.25. Math.
11.25.
At the same time Jesus aunswer^d and said, I give thee thanks, O Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these ^hinges from the wi^e,
and from men of understanding: and have opened them unto babes. It is so O
Father, because thy go^d pleasure was such. Likewise when he fed that great
and public assembly with five loaves and two fishes. Matt. 14.19. when he
looked up to heaven, M^t. 14.19
and blessed (or gave thanks) was not this done with some several prayer
which is not expressed? When Christ raised Lazarus in a public assembly,
Saint John cap. 11. ver. 41. etc. says: Ioh. 11.41.
And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee, because thou
have heard me. I know that thou hear me always, but because of the people
that stand by, I said it, that they may believe that thou have sent me.

Moreover, when he rode unto the Temple with a great assembly of people about
him, and that certain Grecians desired to see him, anon after, John 12. ver.
27. he prayed and says, Ioh. 12.27.
Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father save me from this
hour, but therefore came I unto this hour. Father glorify thy name. Yea, the
whole 17. Chapter following, Ioh. 17.
what is it else, but that several and most singular prayer, that Christ
makes unto his father, in the assembly of his Disciples, partly for
himself, though most especially for them and all his elected? Last of all, his
several prayer even on the cross, not only praying for his enemies: Father
forgive the^ they know not what they do, Luke 23.34. but also when he cried
with a loud voice saying: Luke. 23.34.36.
Eli, Eli, Lama sabachthani, that is my God, my God, why had thou forsaken me.
Mat. 27.46. and Luke 23.46. when also he cried with a loud voice and said,
Mat. 27.46.
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit.

And as Stephen did consummate his Martyrdom, Stephens prayers.
imitating his Master Christ with the like several prayer: The Apostles
prayers.
so the Apostles frequented the Temple, the synagogues, and other places, where
the people were assembled to make these their several and public prayers, and
to hear the law read, taking often occasion thereby, to preach the gospel
unto them. And by S. Paul's often protestations of making his prayers, S.
Paul's prayers.
Romans 1. ver. 9. God is my witness whom I serve in spirit in the Gospel of
his son, that without ceasing I make mention of you, always in my prayers,
etc. and to the Phil. cap. 1.3. I thank my God having you in perfect memory,
always in my prayers for all you, praying with gladness* and to the Colloss.
cap. 1. ver. 3. We give thanks to God even the father of our L. Jesus Christ,
always praying for you and to the These. 1. Epist. cap. 1. ver. 2. We give God
thanks always for you, making mention ^f you in our prayers without ceasing,
etc. Now S. Paul frequenting wheresoever he came the public assemblies, of the
faithful: it argues, that either in all places he made some solemn mention
of all these several Churches, which has no likelihoode: or else, that in
those public assemblies of public prayers, he made some secret and several
prayers in his mind or memory for them

Eusebius out of Clements sermons, S. James his prayers.
records of James the brother of the Lord, that he gave himself to such
continual prayer in the Temple, that his knees with kneeling grew to be as
hard as Camels knees, Eccl. Hist. Lib. 2. cap. 23. which were it true: Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 23.
it plainly argues, that for all the often and public assemblies there made,
he ceased not (as before we heard of the holy widdowe Anna) to continue often
his several prayers in the public assemblies.

All which premises well considered: we can not justly call it confusion and
uncomeliness, How and when several prayers are not to be made.
if several prayers be now and then made, of some, though not of every man,
in the time and place of the public assemblies. If our Brethren had said,
that they may not be made, at or during the time of uttering the public
prayers, by all those that may well hear them: this saying had been
allowable. And yet, Abuses in the divine service.
to make no short and earnest, secret and several prayers, petitions or
wishes of the heart, or thanks giving to God at all, while pawses fall out
between the making open confessions, the pouring forth public prayers, How
several prayer may be made.
the reading of the Psalms, the hearing of the Lessons, the rendering of
thanks and praises, the marking of the sermons, and the celebrating of the
sacraments: that between these distinct actions the people may make no
several prayers, nor any private motions of their hearts secretly to God,
all only because of the public assembly then present: were to bind the
peoples conscience too too strictly, without any prohibition of the Lord: yea,
rather having all these examples, as a warrant in such cases, to the contrary,
where neither the public prayers, nor the public hearing of the word, nor
the public assemblies, nor any man's several or public edification, is
disturbed any ways or hindered. These three points being thus far forth, and
not otherwise, to be granted unto our Brethren: let us now proceed to the
other matters that they find fault withal.

The learned Dis. Page 64.65.66.
Wherein ( say they) there is great abuse in our Churches. For as though it were
not enough to keep out preaching by long prescribed forms of prayers: these
prayers are so pronounced by the Minister, that a great number, and some not of
the worst disposed people, think it pertayneth not to them, to give ear or
consent of mind unto them. We speak not here of such insensible readers,
whose voice either can not be heard, or else can not be understood, whereof
there be great numbers: nor of the unfit place prescribed for the Ministers
standing at prayers in the east end of the house, when the simple people shall
stand often times 40. or 50. yeardes off in the west end: or of the confusion
of voices whilst all speak at once: besides screenes of Roode loftes, Organ
loftes, Idol cages, otherwise called Chauntrie chappelles, and high pewes
between them. Which although they do manifestly hinder edification, yet may
they not be removed in many places, for defacing the beauty of the material
houses, whereas S. Paul so much esteems the building of Gods spiritual
house, that he commands the glorious gifts of the holy Ghost to cease in the
congregation, ^ Cor. 14.28
when they do not help to edification. But we speak of this that a great
multitude think they have well served God: if they have been present at
common prayers, or any part of them, as they were wont to think in Popery,
although they be never so vainly occupied in the Church, some in walking, some
in talking, in gathering of money, not only for the poor, but for other
contributions, etc. And they that think they do best, are occupied in their
private prayers, or in reading of books, while their minister pronounces
public prayers.

Bridges.
Our Brethren do here sharply challenge the Church of England for many great
abuses, Long prescribed form of prayers.
by reason of our divine service and publ. prayers Howbeit, thanks be to God,
first and in general for all these great abuses here reckoned up, we may
safely affirm, that there is, no, not one of them, Our Brethr. complaint of
diverse great abuses.
which can justly and directly be ascribed to the order in the communion book,
for the form of publik prayer prescribed: but may well enough be helped and
redressed, both the Eccl. state of government, and the appointed order of the
divine service remaining still in force, any thing here found fault with to
the contrary notwithstanding.

They pretend first, Long prescribed form of prayers.
that we keep out preaching by long prescribed forms of prayer. For the
auowing of prescribing forms of prayer, till our Brethren have somewhat more
to allege to debar it, than hitherto they have brought forth: or till they
can infringe those proves that we see it sufficiently warranted by; yea, til
they can show with what good reason and authority, their selves being without
authority, can set out a book prescribing forms of common prayer, and yet
the whole estate of the church of England can not so do: I trust that may
suffice for that point, which we have already spoken thereon. And as for long
prescribed forms of prayer, they have as long prescribed forms, as our book
prescribes in any part of the common prayer to be used, yea, by many odds far
longer. Have we any of al our publ. prayers prescribed in our communion book,
that is but a quarter so long as some of the prayers are that they have
prescribed in their book of common prayer, being some of them above 200. lines
a piece. And how can our Breath. then for very shame, find fault with our long
prescribed form of prayer? Neither is this true, that preaching is kept out by
long prescribed forms of prayer. All the forms of prayer that are prescribed
in any part of our ordinary divine service, may be soberly and with decent
pawses uttered forth, either for the ministers or for the peoples part, in the
space of little more than one hour, yea, the lessons, and all the rest of the
divine service, within one hour and a half, eue^ where the service is longest
in saying, though also much and solemn ^inging do protract it. And yet are
provisions of purpose made, for contracting some parts thereof, at the
ministers discretion, for the longer continuance of the sermons, or of the
reading of the Homilies: so that, this is but a picked quarrel, and yet not
true.

They complain further, that these prayers are so pronounced by the minister,
that a great number, and some not the worst disposed people, Default in
pronouncing of the prayers.
think it pertains not to the^ to give ear or consent of mind unto the^.
What kind of pronouncing this so pronounced, should be, our Breath. pronounce it
not. And therefore, till ye abuse be playner pronounced of our Breath. we can
neither denownce what fault it is, nor find in whom it lies: whether in the
pronouncer, or in the hearer, nor how to help it, that we might renounce it,
till we know better what they mean.

Ill pronouncing and reading.
If they mean, that the m^nister so pronounces the prayers that they can not
be understood: ^hey make that to be another fault, severed and excepted from
this, saying afterward: we speak not here of such insensible readers, whose
voice either cannot be heard, or else can non be understood. But then, the
fault is in the pronouncer of the prayers, not in the prayers so pronounced.
And if the minister do not his diligence so to pronounce them, as he ought to
do: yet, must they do their diligence so to mark them, as well as they may.
For, howsoever he pronounce them, yet cannot they rightly think that the
prayers pertain not to them. Which if they do, though our Brethren say, they
be some not of the worst disposed ( in which words, who^ they aim at, is as
darkly pronounced as the other:) I am sure, they be not of the best disposed,
and indeed too badde disposed, that so think. And not only the ministers
that so pronounce, but also those not of the worst disposed that so think, the
one, for his pronouncing, if he pronounce not well that which is good: and the
other, for his lewd opinion, in thinking those good prayers pertain not to
him, are both faulty, and punishable. And I pray God, none of our Brethren
their selves, being (I grant) not of the worste disposed, think it pertayneth
not to them, to give ear or consent unto them. For, what can we think that
they think better of them, that thus write against them, and would have the^
clean taken away? Though here (for fashion sake) they find such fault, that
they are not so pronounced as they should be, which is indeed to allow them,
if they were well pronounced. Whereas their drift is quite contrary, that they
should neither so, nor so, be pronounced at all.

Their next complaint is this: We will not here speak of such insensible
readers, Insensible readers.
whose voice either can not be heard, or else cannot be understood, whereof
there be great numbers.

Of this they say, they will not here speak. And why will they not here speak
of it? I hope, it be not, because they like it. Or, do they reserve it to
another place? Or, do they count it so trifling a thing, that it is not worth
the speaking of? Or, do they count it a fault, and would conceal it, or, not
have it looked unto and punished? Or, do they speak it Rhetorically, they will
not speak of it, but they do? And good reason too, that they or any other,
wheresoever such insensible readers are, both lawefully may, and dutifully
should, both speak and complain of them: If they will speak and complain,
as they ought to do, not by the way of public defamation: for, that (eue^
where the matter is true) is sclanderous: but by orderly presentment and humble
petition, unto those that have authority to ouersee, that no such insensible
readers be permitted. Neither does any law (now in force) allow of them. And
therefore, I do the hardlier believe, that (which is here avouched) there be
great numbers of the^. But if any such here and there be, especially, if it be
by sickness, The Ministers place.
or any such accidental infirmity growing on them, (as from which, even the
best of our Brethr. are not free): yea, be it that such an ignorant Pastor were
in some odd corner crept in, as could not sensibly read the public prayers:
yet, what lets this, why there might not be provision made, upon orderly
complaint and proof before the ordinary, to place other sensible readers,
that both can be heard and understood, and the people devoutly moved to join
in prayers with them.

Nor yet (say our Brethren they will speak) of the unfit place prescribed
for the ministers, standing at prayer in the East end of the house, The place
of the minister
while the simple people shall stand often times, 40. or 50. yeardes off, in
the west end.

This complaint for the standing of the Minister, in the most fit and
convenient place of the Church, need the less indeed to be spoken of, by our
Brethren, since other having authority thereunto, have before them both spoken
and considered thereupon. And where (upon view) it has been found, that the
Minister stood not in a fit place: another fitter place has by authority
been appointed for him. As it is apparent in most places, s^ue where the
Ministers voice may be heard and understood easily enough, o^ those that list
to listen thereunto, except any be thicker of hearing, and those may draw
nearer if they please, or by the license of the parish, so far as the
decency of their calling does permit. And it were fitter of the twain, that
such did rather remove themselves to hear better, than that the Minister
unnecessarily for every ones private occasion, (which may otherwise be helped)
should remove from his place appointed.

Besides this, our Brethren say, they will not speak, of the confusion of
voices, while all speak at once: Al speaking at once.


This also they spoke of before, more than needed, as we have heard; and
therefore (I grant) it might now the better, have not again been spoken of
at all But speak thereof, (and tell us they will not speak of it) as often as
they will: as we allow of no confusion, so if all the congregation speak at
once, and do it orderly: for my part, I dare not call it a confusion. But
call it what they please; so long as God likes of it, (as we have seen) me
thinks no good man should mislike it. And why may not all speak at once: as
well as all sing at once without confusion? And if they all speak at once:
how do they speak (speaking in their mother tongue) and not understand what
they speak? And if they all understand: where is become our insensible
reading? So that, it is not heard nor understood, when they speak it, with, or
after the Minister, all at once? If this deserves to be called confusion: it
is a good confusion, and no hindrance but furtherance to aedification.

Chauntrie chapels. etc.
Besides ( say our Breath.) that they will not speak of Scrines of Roodloftes,
Organe loftes, Idol cages, otherwise called Chauntry Chapels, and high pewes
between the^: Screenes, of Roodloftes, Organlofts, Idol cages, high pewes.
which although they do manifestly hinder aedification, yet may they not be
removed in many places, for defacing the beauty of the material houses.

Though, they will not speak of these things, yet have we both spoken of them,
and those that have authority thereunto, have caused these things to be
surueyed: and where any such things, as do manifestly hinder aedification, have
been found: I doubt not, but they have been removed. At the least, I am
sure, if any yet continue, and can be proved to be such manifest hindrances to
aedification: they may at all times be altered or removed. Yea, laws and
orders are set out for that purpose. This therefore is not well said of our
Brethren, that none of these things may be removed in many places, for
defacing the beauty of the material houses. For, although these words implie
their grant, that in some places, these things are removed: yet if those
many places, wherein (they say) they may not be removed, should be well
examined: I think, there should not be found very many: but contrary, very
few; yea (I believe,) no, not one place in all England, where for this
reason, of the beauty of the material house, these things stand, being
found such manifest hindrances to aedification, but that they are either so
removed or altered, that they be neither manifest, nor not manifest hindrances
to aedification.

But what mean they here, by the standing of Chauntrie Chappelles, which they
call Idol cages? Idol cages.
Except they would not only deface, but also pull down the material parts of
the Churches, if not the whole Churches by the same reason? For, they may as
well bestow that term, on all the Churches: which in the Popish Idolatrous
times, and some of the^ perhaps before in the time of the Pagans, were fraught
with Idols, which now (God be praised) are clean removed. And yet the Churches
or chapels stand, and may well serve to good uses, without any hindrance at al
to aedification.

But our Brethren go further, Pewes and all if they be high pewes, Pewes.
must be removed. If they say not all, but only those that are between them,
to wit, between the ministers voice and the peoples hearing: we grant, that
if they take away the hearing of the ministers voice, they may be amended. But
where shall we find in a Church such pewes as are compassed in so high, and
specially coming between the standing of the Minister and of the people, that
they take away his voice from their hearing?

And much less do the Rood-loftes, Roodloftes.
if any upon any considerations be left standing; as for the most part, they
be removed already, having only a decent and small partition, between the
queere and the body of the Church, whereby, the Ecclesiastical persons, Pewes
and Roodloftes.
( as it was in the ancient Church before the time of the Popish
superstitions) were severed from the residue of the people, and yet with such a
partition as lets not the peoples either hearing or seeing. Yea the Rood
loft it self, when it stood up whole, was so high, that it commonly hindered,
neither the sight nor the voice of the minister.

And least of all the Chapels, were they chauntry chapels, Country
Chappelles.
or other Which were not between the people and the ministers: but in side
Isles, and out parts of the walls, and as it were buttresses of the Churches,
and therefore less hindrances to the peoples aedification, the Idolatry and
superstition of them, being (as, thanks be to God it is) clean removed.

And all other manifest hindrances to aedification, were they never so much a
beauty to the material house of the Temple, The beauty of the material and
spiritual building.
they have been defaced, yea and removed, in respect of the building and the
beautifying of Gods spiritual house. And therefore, this is not charitably,
nor truly spoken of our Brethren in this matter: that such things as
manifestly hinder edification, may not be removed in many places, for defacing
the beauty of the material houses. And yet I hope, that where the building
and beauty of the spiritual houses, is still preferred: they would not have
the beauty or the building of the material houses, being the houses of
prayer, to be unnecessarily defaced, and much less pulled down and removed.

But, if this be now to be observed of us, that our Brethren say here, S. Paul
commanded the glorious gifts of the holy ghost to cease in the congregation,
when they do not help to aedification: then by their leave, some of these our
Brethren^ prescriptions, Some of our Brethr. prescriptions may well cease by
their own rule.
for the discipline and regiment Eccl. may cease well enough, which although
they had been in practice even in the Apostles times, yet, since they have no
commandment of necessity and perpetuity, and are not of the material
substance of aedifying or building of the Church, and having so long time
utterly ceased, and the Church having now this good while been begun
prosperously to be repaired and beutified without them, and that the bringing
in of them would hazard to overthrow the reaedifying of the same, as we see
by experience, what an unnecessary disturbance and hindrance the attempt
thereofhath bredde: why may not they also cease, as well as those other gifts
might? And yet the spiritual building and beauty of the spiritual house of
God, continue and prosper as (God be praised) it has done, and does, and much
better might, although this point of Discipline and Eccl. regiment cease, or at
least, be not so contentiously called upon.

But because our Breath. say they will not speak of these things: we have the
less need to stand longer in aunswering of them. Let us come therefore to
that which they will speak upon.

Walking talki^g and Collecting.
But we speak ( say they) of this, that a great multitude think they have
well served God: if they have been present at common prayers, or any part of
them, The learned disc. Page 65. and 66.
as they were wont to think in popery, although they be never so vainly
occupied in the Church, some in walking some in talking, in gathering of money,
not only for the poor, but for other contributions, etc. And they that think
they do best, are occupied in their private prays or in reading of books,
while their minister pronounces public prayers.

Bridges.
To be vainly occupied in the Church, some in walking some in talking: is (we
grant) a fault. Neither is it by any law or order allowed, that the people
should so behave themselves in the time of the common prayers. Walking and
ta^king in the Church.
If any break the laws and orders in that behalf, they are to sustain the
punishment of the law, and officers are appointed, to look unto them and
present them. But how then shall those of our Brethren be holden excused, that
to avoid walking and talking in the time of common prayers, will not come at
all to hear them, confirming by their contemptuous absence, the Popish
recusantes, besides the great offense unto their Brethren.

Contributions and collections for the poor, and for other Ecclesiastical
orders, Contributions and collections for the poor.
be such things as were done in the primitive Church, at the time of their
Ecclesiastical assemblies, as may appear, Act. 2. ver. 42. Act. 4. ver. 35.
Act. 6. ver. 2. Act. 11. ver. 29. and 1. Cor. 16. ver. 2. whereupon says
Calvin, upon one of the Sabboths etc. that is, upon that day wherein they made
the holy assemblies, Calvin in 1. Cor, 16.2.
etc. Moreover, the holy asse^bly where the communion of the Saints is
celebrated might add a spur unto the^. Upon the first day of the week (
says the Geneua note) which the scripture calls the Lords day, The Geneua
note.
others, sunday, they accustomed not only in the Church, but at home also,
according to every man's zeal, to lay up some piece of money, toward the
relief of the poor Brethren. And of the like matter Paul writes, 2. Cor.
9. etc. Which order S. Paul says* that he used, in the Churches of Galatia,
Macedonia, Achaia, and other places. To the which accords the order of
celebrating the communion, that we heard before out of Iustine: that so soon
as ever the communion is ministered, the collection is made for the poor, and
then follow other prayers and thankesgiuings* So that, these collections and
contributions for the poor, etc. may be still done in the Church well enough*
if they be made between whiles, at such times, as the public prayer is
stayed, although many good exhortations, and sentences exciting the people
thereunto, may not amiss be read, even in the very time of making the
collection, or they may give themselves to their several prayers all that
while.

And if any for their gathering of money for the poor or other contributions,
disturb the aedification of the people, Private pra^er or reading.
in the common prayer, and celebration of the divine service: they may be well
reproved and put back, or complained upon and punished.

These disturbances being thus removed, if now a great multitude have been
present at common prayers, or at so great part thereof as they could
conveniently come unto: I see not why, our Breath. should make this their most
especial point to speak on, and to find fault withal, that they should
think they have well served God. But to think this, (say they) is, as they
were wont to think in Popery. Our Breath. think too hardly (I dare not say,
rashly and uncharitably) of their Brethren, Our Brethr. unbrotherly misliking
their Brethren.
to think that they think so, as did the Papists in the blindness of
Popery. For, the Papists stood altogether on their intention, and of their
opus operatum, the work wrought; though they could not tell what they did or
said; and yet, they thought all to be done so well and sufficiently; that they
did think it meritorious before God.

Whereas, no Protestant does, or can so think. And all that is set forth in
the divine service and common prayer, is to the clean contrary. Which being
good, and the true service of God: why may not our Breath. so reco^fort
themselves, when they have orderly joined themselves, in devout calling upon
God at common prayer, and reverent hearing of his word; that they may well and
sa^ely think, ( without any thinking of the merit of their work wrought, but
as becomes humble Christians, though of themselves all unworthy to approach
before God, save that they wholely rely on his acceptance, in and for Jesus
Christ's sake) that they have well and truly served God, and though they
deserve it not, yet that God will both accept it, and reward it.

As concerning private prayers, on which our Brethren here again do speak:
we have spoken also before sufficiently, Private prayers.
till that be answered.

And as for reading of books, Reading of book^s in the time of the divine
service.
if it be the reading of the same prayers that the Minister publicly
pronounces: the same answer serves: or, if it be the same Chapters that he
reads, or, to turn their books, when the Minister cites any text, or
story out of the scriptures, in his sermon, homily, or exhortation. Which is
a point that our Brethren do allow, and call upon the people to do, and
therefore, I see not why, our Brethr. should so strictly, at the time of the
public prayers and divine service, prohibit all private praying or private
reading, and that without exception of any such persons, as perchance be deaf
or hard of hearing, and for order sake would come to the Church, The learned
disc. page 66.
that no such person may privately pray nor read, doing the same without
prejudice or offense to others.

Thus as preaching is neglected, upon color of public prayers: so public
prayers by private exercises, Private prayers.
are made altogether unprofitable to a great number. For who knows the right
use of public prayer, but they that are taught by the word of God? Let us
therefore establishe public preaching, and public prayers will follow of
necessity. But if we continue to uphold formal prayers, that preaching be
neglected, it will come to pass, that neither shall be regarded.

Bridges.
We allow not that preaching should be neglected upon color of public
prayers. For both may in their orders be continued. But sith we have not the
one so ordinary, Neglect of preaching under color of praying.
because it can not so ordinarily be had: shall we therefore have no ordinary
of the other, which we may easilier have, and in no case we may discontinue?
Did not the Jews continue the ordinary courses and times of their public
prayers, and readings of the law, of the Psalms, of the Prophets: though
they had not the like ordinary courses and times of preaching, and of
interpreting the same among them? Neither are public prayers, though there be
no sermon, ( so they be used as is aforesaid) made altogether unprofitable to
them. Public prayers made unprofitable.
But they are so, (say they) to a great number. I grant, to a great number,
what may not be made unprofitable, both prayers private and public,
sacraments preaching and all? Howbeit, they are not directly and of themselves
made unprofitable unto them, but by the parties own default and abuses of them.

I confess, none knows the right use of public prayer, but they that are
taught by the word of God. And may we not so say likewise, of private prayer?
Gods word joined with public prayer.
Tell them this, that suffer not the word of GOD to be taught among them, but
to have the people in the divine service to hear and to pray they wotte not
what. We are (thanks be to God) as careful that Gods word should be syncerely
and plainly taught, as that public prayer should be made. And therefore we
join these together, both where preaching is, and where preaching is not, that
yet the word of God should be taught withal, whenever we assemble to make
our publ. prayers, that we may not only speak to God, but may hear God also
speaking in his word to us, and teaching us.

Hereupon our Brethren seeming to wish us well, exhort us saying: let us
therefore establish public preaching, The establishing of public preaching.
and public prayers will follow of necessity. This seems to be a
charitable motion of our Brethren, but see how sclenderly it is grounded upon
charity. For where they exhort us to establish public preaching, as though
already it were not established among us, but suppressed, or altogether
neglected: what can they say of us, (if preaching be established among us) more
uncharitable and more sclaunderous? Have not their selves before confessed that
we have had rest and peace this 25. or 26. years with the the free preaching
of the Gospel. Page ^8. Formal Prayers.
And in their preface that the true and holy faith concerning the substance of
religion is of us publicly maintained. And that in our profession and
preaching we have hissed out the heretical opinion of the papists, that the
sacraments confer grace of the work wrought, etc. page 62. And, if they
would not confess these things, would not all the world cry out shame on
them, Who are admitted to be public preachers.
in a matter so apparent, that the very public adversaries of us cry out
against us for nothing more, than that public preaching is among us
established? in-deede, not so public that every publicane, nor, every
pharisee neither, may be established a public preacher, but good reason he
should be tried and authorized thereunto, before he take upon him public
preaching. And so perhaps may a number be suppressed, or rather by their
factiousnes and busiosity repress themselves, and are their own causers that
they be not permitted. But yet is public preaching so far forth established
that not only all that are lawfully called and thought sit, ( though they have
but the meaner gift of preaching) are allowed: but also the meanest of all, if
he be otherwise aunswerable to his calling, is assigned publicly to read both
the word of God, and the preaching of it. For what are else, the homelies and
other sermons, though written by other, and publicly read by him authorized
thereunto, but a public preaching alsoof Gods word? and when public
preaching is al these ways established, yea even where a learned preacher is
not, nor can be always present: can our Brethren rightly affirm, that
public preaching is not established?

But, say they, Let us establish public preaching and public prayers will
follow of necessity. And (God be praised) so they follow. The establ^shing of
public prayers.
And that also argues, that we have established public preaching. For, if the
prayer follow on the preaching and teaching, as the Disciples desired Christ
to teach them how to pray, Luke 11. verse 1. And we have true and Godly
public prayer, which follows of necessity on true and godly public
preaching: It is a good argument from the effects to the causes, that the word
of God is truly and Godly taught and preached publicly amongst us, and that
the public preaching of it is established. So that, while they cannot deny,
but that he have established among us the effects, which are by their own
saying public prayers: will they, or nill they, they must needs yield, that
we have established already the thing, that they exhort us to establish Since
public preaching must of necessity go before, if public prayers do of
necessity follow.

But ( say they) if we continue to uphold formal prayers, that preaching be
neglected, it will come to pass, that neither shall be regarded. Here our
Brethren turn all again to formal prayers, and what are these formal
prayers? are they not public prayers, whereof they spoke before? or else, how
speak they to the purpose? and may they not be formal and public too? what,
would they have them vnformall and deformed? or, do they mean, they be but
pro forma tantum? If they do so, they offer not only great injury unto those
public prayers, but also unto many good men, that with hearty devotion, in true
faith and humility, do publikelie power them forth with their Minister unto
God. And what if some abuse them, using them only for an outward formalitie,
without inward affection? Do not they as ill, that thus openly contemn them?
albeit their selves set out (and yt in much like form) other formal prayers
too: Our Brethr. own formal prayers.
yea, some of them, the very same formal prayers that our public formal
prayers are: except here and there, (in very deed, pro forma tantum) a word or
phrase, or sentence a little transformed. And should their public formal
prayers too, only because they are formal, be thus formally flouted and
rejected? or must we receive and uphold their formal prayers, and may we not
continue to uphold ours?

And here by the way, if we continue to uphold them, then we have them. Which
confirms that I said before, that then have we much more also, and do
uphold and establish the public preaching, which their selves say, is the
antecedent and cause of them.

Yea, but if we continue to uphold them ( say they) that preaching be
neglected: Public prayers to be vpholde^ although preaching were neglected.
and should we not uphold the^, because preaching may be, or is neglected? I
think we have cause rather to uphold them, and to fasten better hold on them,
that preaching may not be neglected but vpholden. For, if publ. prayer follow
public preaching: yea, now and then go before preaching. We hope also it will
often ioin with it, and will always help to uphold and establish it. And that
so long as Aaron and Hur do continue to uphold, or to hold up Moses hands:
the true Israelites yt fight with Gods word, shall preuail and uphold
themselves, against Amalek and all the enemies of Gods church. What? have our
brethren forgotten this, that they granted unto before, page 55. to be the best
means to uphold and increase preaching? Especially, considering the greatness of
the harvest and fewnes of the laborers, by praying earnestly the Lord of the
harvest, in this great necessity of ours, to thrust forth laborers into his
harvest. And is not public prayer as effectual hereunto, Public Prayer the
means to further public preaching.
where 2. or 3. yea, the whole congregation is gathered together in the name of
Christ, to beg this among other things, of our heavenly father, by their
public and formal prayer, as well as private? But (say our brethren) preaching
is neglected.

Not by public and formal prayers ( say we) but by some other means.

But, if we contniue ( say they) to uphold it, that preaching be neglected:
it will come to pass that neither shall be regarded.

Indeed, if we should continue or uphold it to that purpose: then it might so
come to pass, that neither of them should be regarded. And may we not say as
much on the other side, The popish public Prayers.
that if we should continue to uphold preaching, that public and formal prayer
be neglected: the^ it might also come to pass that neither prayer nor
preaching shall be regarded? And our Brethren are more earnest here, to have
the public and formal prayers neglected: than are we to have preaching
neglected. So that their selves go nerer then we do, to have neither of them
both regarded. As for us, we hope that either of these, Our Brethr. would
have our public prayers neglected under pretense of public preaching.
both the public preaching and the public prayers, which they in scorn call
formal prayers, may be still continued, vpholden, regarded, and established,
without any neglect or prejudice, yea rather, with mutual help and
establishment the one of the other. And I like better of that our brethr. said
before, that as we are taught by the word of God the right use of public
prayer: so by public prayer when we are taught it, the establishment of the
word of God, which is taught, is the better continued and vpholden. And if
prayer discontinue and be neglected: the neglect of preaching will follow of
like necessity. As when Moses heavy hands fell down, the Amalekites prevailed
against the Israelites. And therefore, we may rather conclude, that if we
continue to uphold public and formal prayer, that public preaching shall more
formally proceed, and be the less neglected, and both prayer and preaching be
more and better regarded. But our brethren will confute our form of public
prayer, by this instance.

For what did thrust out preaching from the Romish Church, but long prescript
forms of reading, of singing, of praying? The learned Dis. Page 66. and 67.
so that their ordinary was enough, and too much, to occupy the whole day,
though there were no sermon. Whereas contrariwise, there would be no
ordinary public prayer without preaching.

This instaunce non facit ad idem, it serves to prove a clean contrary
matter. Have our Brethren in such contempt and despite our ordinary and
prescript form of public prayer, that they can allege against it no ^itter
example, than the long prescript forms of reading, of singing, of praying, in
the Romish Church? True it is in-deede, they did thrust out preaching, being
such an evil reading, singing, and praying, as besides the length thereof,
their form was so fraught and poisoned with false doctrine, errors, lies,
Idolatries, superstitions, blasphemies, etc. that for very shame they durst not
show their faces, but were masked in a language unknown to the vulgar
people, although even that also (the stuff being no better) might be some
benefit, The corruptions of the popish pub. prayers.
with the mo^e danger. For as their trecheries might be the harder espied, so,
the less be learned. Which corruptions and ignorance so tra^sformed their
reading their singing, and their praying: that as they had been far better not
read, nor song, so deserved they not the name, of any true private or public
prayer at all, but were far worse, then the Pharisees vain lip labor. So
that, Length of Prayers.
these readings, singings, and prayings, being clean contrary to the word of
God: no meruell, though they thrust out preaching. For what fellowship is there
of light with darkness? 2. Cor 6.14. And shall now those formal prayers, (
that were indeed no true form of prayers at all, but had a form and name of
that they were not) be brought for an instance against our formal public
prayers, that in all points are agreeable to the proportion of faith, to the
rule of life, to the acceptable will of God, and to the great edifying of all
the Congregation, and clean void of all false doctrine, errors lies.
Idolatries, blasphemies and superstitions, either of the papists or of any
others? Is this a charitable or a true exemplification?

If our Brethren say, they do not resemble our Public prayers to theirs, for
any of these points, but only for the long prescript forms of reading, of
singing, and of praying. So that their ordinary was enough and too much, to
occupy the whole day. And is the only length then the only cause, The short
time of our public prayers.
wherefore the prescript forms of reading, of singing, and of praying in the
Romish Church, should be compared unto ours, or ours to theirs? but this length
as they have oftentimes before complained on it: so, have we sufficiently
answered, that, as ours are most free from all their other dangerous
corruptions: so are they nothing like in length to theirs, as all the world may
soon see, by conference of them. If their ordinary was enough and too much to
occupy the whole day? Who sees not, that neither the reading of the Lessons,
and other exhortations and sentences now prescribed, nor the saying or singing
of the hymns or Psalms, nor the praying and making any supplications or
thanksgiuings, in our ordinary public prayers, will hold us passing two or
three hours of the whole day at the most* accounting both the morning and the
evening prayer.

But so often as they complain upon the long prescript forms of reading, of
singing and of praying, and therein compare our Churches to the Romish Church:
May we remember our Brethren, of their own long prescript forms of readin^,
Our Breath. own prescribed forms of confessions and prayers longer then ours.
of singing, and of praying? are not the confessions that they read in their
prescribed form of prayer, a great deal longer then ours are? Their first
confession to be (...) being above thirteene-score lines, besides their
Chapters. Our Ordinary having but two, where as they say in their book of
Common prayer. Page 22. upon the days appointed for the preaching of the
word, when a convenient number of the Congregation are come together, that
they may make fruit of their presence, till the assembly be full: one
appointed by the Elderishppe, shall read some chapters of the Cannonicall
books of Scripture, singing Psalms between at his discretion. And this
reading to be in order as the books and chapters follow: that from time to
time, the holy scriptures may be read through. In these words, Prayers.
they prescribe so indefinite a number of chapters to be read, and of psalms
to be sung, that we may easily conjecture they do, or may do at their liking,
occupy more time, than all our prescribed reading or singing need to do.

And as for their Prayers (as we have showed already, and they are easily to
see) some one or two of them being as much as 20. of ours, besides the prayers
that they leave unto the minist. voluntary, as the spirit of God ( they say)
shall move his heart, framing the same, according to the time and matter, which
he has entreated of, Page 46, So that, he may be as long or longer in his
not prescribed prayers, as in the other that are prescribed to him. Besides
also, that even almost half, if not the more part of the Sermon it self, is
tranformed into conceiuinges of vnformall prayers. Do not all these long
prescript forms of prayer, and long prayers without form and not prescript,
thrust out also a great part of the preaching?

Ha brethren, even reckoning (they say) makes long friends. Look on your own
dealings in this matter, and see if they may not for the length of reading, of
singing and of praying, be as well compared to the long prayers of the Romish
Church, as ours may.

But, they think that whatsoever length of time of their prayers do occupy,
all is well if they have a Sermon. And for this also they accuse the popish
prayers, that they were enough and too much, to occupy the whole day, though
there were no sermon: where contrariwise ( say they) there would be no ordinary
public prayer, without preaching. The length of our public prayers no
hindra^ce to a sermon or homily.
If the Papists prayers were enough and too much, to occupy the whole day
without a sermon: and ours with a sermon and all (being no longer than a short
sermon) are little enough to occupy two or three hours of the whole day: I
ask no better acquittance of ours, from resemblance of the long prayers of the
Romish Church, than this our brethrens own testimony. And if there were no
sermon nor yet homely read in the place thereof, the time was all the shorter.

Yea, but (say our brethren) it should not for all that, be so short. For if it
were used as it should be: there would be no ordinary public prayer, without
preaching.

What do ye say, my learned brethren? should there be no ordinary public
prayer without preaching? No, ye say not so: but there would be none. And what
mean ye by these speeches, there would be none? Whether ordin^ry public
prayer may be made without pre^ching.
Do ye not mean, there should be none? I trow ye mean not, as ye said before of
the Sacraments, page 63. that where there is no preacher of the Word, there
ought to be no minister of the sacraments: and so, where there is no peacher
of the Word, there ought to be no Minister of the ordinary and public
prayer, Preaching without Prayer.
and if there be, it is vnavailable, a worldy, a dead, a beggarly prayer, and
what else but sacrilege? do ye mean so? but ye temper here this speech
somewhat more artificially for prayer, that although plainly enough it might so
seem to any, that should read or here the same: yet, (if ye were pressed with
it) when it comes to scanning, ye say not so, but only, that there would be
no ordinary public prayer without preaching.

The Will of God herein
And by whose will would there be none? by your own will? or by the will of
God? and by what will of God? For, if ye mean by his will, such an absolute
will, that he would so have it of necessity, and to be none otherwise: then
indeed, it is a wicked thing and contrary to his good pleasure, to have any
ordinary public prayer to be made at any time without preaching. But if ye
mean of Gods will* approving the same only, as but more convenient, where it
may be orderly had: we will also hold with you therein, and likewise would it
were so. The understanding of the word preaching.
Or, if ye understand by preaching, any edidifying manner of teaching and
setting forth the word of God, in some whiles between the ordinary public
prayers: we would the same also as well as you, yea, praised be God) we have
it so already.

But if ye speak of that kind of preaching, that is such free, exte^poral and
voluntary exhortation, and exposition of the word of God, as God shall move the
heart, and open the mouth of the learned preacher, to declare: and that ye
urge, this kind of preaching, to be as necessary unto ordinary public prayer,
as ye did before to the administration of the sacraments: we should then shortly
be in a proper pickle; except ye could with all devise better means, than
heretofore ye have done, that every congregation where ordinary public
prayer is to made, may likewise be presently furnished with such preachers.
Otherwise, we should not only for the mean time, lay aside the Sacraments:
but cease from all public prayers also.

If ye say, ye speak not of all public prayer, but of ordinary public
prayer: I pray you, of what could ye have spoken it more inconueniently? sith
extraordinary public prayer comes but now and then, upon extraordinary
occasions. And therefore (me thinks) that preaching were of the twain more
requisite, in extraordinary public prayers than in ordinary. And yet, that
also were very hard, so absolute to bind extraordinary public prayers, that
they might not be made without preaching. The ordinary course of the sacram.
and public prayer, not to be omitted for want of preaching.
But so to bind the ordinary public prayers, or else to cease them: that is
yet a great deal harder, and more inconvenient than the other.

I speak not this, but that we with preaching, where and when and how it it
may conveniently be had, as much as any of our Brethren do. But, if it may not
so ordinarily be had, we must not therefore intermit the ordinary course of
the Sacraments, and much less the ordinary course of Public Prayer, but
rather use it so much oftener.

And where do our brethren find any such commandment of Christ, prescribed,
that Public prayer, (be it ordinary, or extraordinary,) can not be made
without a sermon preached? It were yet more requisite of the twain, that no
Sermon were ordinarily preached, without some ordinary public prayer.
Howbeit, we read of diverse Sermons both preached by Christ himself, and by
his Apostles, when neither he nor any other then present, made any ordinary or
extraordinary public prayers. And also of ordinary and extraordinary public
prayers made, without any sermon preached at the making of them.

Our savior Christ preached often times without any public prayer at his
preaching, that either we find written, or may conjecture. As, at that sermon
contained, Mat. 5.6. and 7. Chapters. Math. 5.6. and 7. chap.
Yea, although in the same Sermon he taught the use of Prayer. Likewise Math.
13. and so the most part of all his ordinary sermons, Math. 13.
except that which he made, John 17. and as for the Apostles, the first Sermon
indeed that Peter preached, Act. 1. had a Prayer following, Act. 1.
because of the particular occasion of electing an apostle. But of the next
sermon that Peter prescribed, where so many were converted, Acts 2. Act. 2.
We read of no Public Prayer at all made thereat. Only this afterward we
read, ver. 24. that (as we have seen before) it is said: they continued in the
Apost. doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayers. But this
argues not, that they ever continued in a joint exercise of all these things,
but continued in doing sometimes the one, and sometimes the other.

And this appears better, especially for Public prayer, in the next story.
For after that Peter and John, Acts. 3.1. were gone up together to the temple
at the ninth hour of prayer, Acts. 3.
and likely enough, even to pray there also: for, yt they preached there at the
same time, it fell out extraordinarily. But when they had bin cast in prison for
that their preaching: then ( says Luke) as soon as they were let go, they came
to their fellows and showed all that the high preests had said unto them. And
when they heard it, Act. 1.23
they lift up their voices to God with one accord, and said: O Lord, thou art
the God which have made heaven and earth. etc. ver. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, and
30. Here was a Public Prayer of all the assembly, and so effectual, that
says Luke. verse 31. And when as they had prayed, the place was shaken where
they were assembled together, and they were al filled with the holy ghost, and
they spoke the word of God boldly. But this bold speaking imports not
Preaching at yt instance and place, there was no sermon by any of the^, that we
find at that time preached. But these words referred to their bolder preaching
afterward to the people. Also Acts 8.14. Act^. 8^
Now when the apostles which were at Jerusalem, hard say that Samaria had
received the word of Go^ they sent unto them Peter and John, who when they were
come, prayed for them, that they might receive the holy Ghost. Here again
was public prayer* and no sermon that we read of at that time, either by
them, or by any other preached.

In the tenth Chapter* Peter preaches before Cornelius and his assembly,
making no public prayer at his sermon. In the 12. Chapter when Herod had
caught Peter and put him in prison, verse 5. says Luke: So Peter was kept in
Prison, but earnest prayer made of the Church unto God for him. Act. 10.
Here again was public prayer without preaching. Act. 13. Acts. 13.
Paul preached without making any public prayers. Except we shall say the
public prayers of the Antiochians, being then in the Synagog, did serve that
turn. But in the 17. he had no such occasion, preaching to the heathen
Philosophers of Athens, without public prayer. Though in the twentieth,
preaching to the Elders at Miletum, verse 36. Luke says: And when he had thus
spoken, Acts 17.
he kneeled down and prayed with them all. But in 21. he enters into the
Temple, (which is the house of public prayer) and there was purified after
the Jews manner, and so, it is most likely, he used as well their public,
as his own private prayers, and yet he preached there at all no sermon: as
for the Chapters following, they mention only his preaching, without any
public Prayers that he made.

Ordinary and extraordina^ie praying and preaching.
Whereby it manifestly appears, that this our Brethrens rule, there would be
no ordinary public prayer without preaching: ( If we should precisely follow
the Apostles practice therein) is no truer, than was their other rule before,
Page 63. Where is no preacher of the word, there ought to be no Minister of the
sacraments.

Neither does this word ordinary, escape all these examples. And yet if
extraordinary public prayer may be without Preaching, much more may the
ordinary be sometimes without it, though sometime, with it. Yet at al times,
if it may conveniently be had, we grant it would be better with it, than without
it. But when preaching it self may be as well extraordinary as ordinary, so
well as public prayer may be: though, it were to be wished, that the
public prayer and the public preaching did concur more often: yet, if at
any time they do not concur, as we must not make void and vnauaylable the
public preaching ordinary or extraordinary, if on occasion it be without the
public prayer, as we have scene the clear examples: so may we not account
the public prayer ordinary or extraordinary, to be frustrate and
ineffectual, if (on occasion) it be without preaching, as these plain
examples also do lay it forth. Now upon this wrong instant of the Popish
abuses, our Brethren say: The learned Dis. Page 67.


Which terrible example of the practice of Satan in the man of sin, Fear of
the Papists example.
should make us afraid to give any like occasion of such inconvenience
hereafter to come.

The application of the practice of Satan in the man of sin, and in the
Romish Churches abusing the ordinary prescript forms of public reading,
Bridges.
singing and praying, being alleged no farther forth than thus, to be a
terrible example to make us afraid, Example to terrify us from like occasion.
to give any like occasion of such inconvenience hereafter to come: is not to
be misliked. For so, it may be applied to our brethren, and to all other, as
well as to us. In which sense S. Paul 1. Cor. 10. having reckoned up many
terrible examples of the Israelites wickedness, in their lusting after evil
things, in their Idolatry, in their fornication, in their tempting of Christ,
in their murmuring, and of the plagues and destructions that came upon them in
the 11. verse he says, Now, all these things came unto them for examples, and
were written to admoni^^ us, upon whom the ends of the w^rlde are come: 1.
Cor. 10.12.
wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall. So
that this, take heed, is a fair thing (as they say) Foelix quem faciunt aliena
pericula cautum, Happy is he whom other men's harms can make beware. But S.
Paul meant not, that al we upon whom the ends of the world are come, do
commit the like offenses, and that our doings should be compared by the way of
resemblan^e, unto theirs.

As for our ordinary prescript forms of public prayer, they be so clean
contrary to theirs, that the professed Papists of all other things in us, can
least abide them, as daring rather adventure, How contrary our form of public
pr^ier is to the example of the Papists*
to give the hearing of our preaching the gospel; than to come to the Church,
and but so much as to hear our ordinary prescript forms of public prayer,
bethey long or never so short. And therefore we need be the less afraid,
that they should ever give the like occasion, of such inconvenience hereafter
to come, as did the practice of Satan in the man of sin, by thrusting out
preaching from the Romish Church, with long prescript forms of reading, of
singing, and of praying. Although Satan by the man of sin had thrust out
preaching before (as I rather think) and then brought in his so long and so
naughty prescript forms of reading, of singing, and of praying to occupy the
whole day, and the whole people withal, in ignorance, superstition and
Idolatry.

Howbeit, we are not too sure to take warning, nor any thing is so good but it
may be abused. And so (we grant) may our ordinary prescript forms of public
prayers. It is good therefore to beware, that our Prayers degenerate not so
far. Which (of his great mercy) God forbid they should. And we trust in God,
they shall not. And we pray to him, they may not. And thanks be to him, as yet
they have not hitherto done, nor at this present do. And by his grace, we
shall not need to fear, that they will ever give any like occasion of such
inconvenience, Public prayers giving place to a Sermon
for the time to come hereafter.

But our brethren, to terrify us with this terrible example, ( as those that
are already grown into the danger of the Romish Church abuses,) do apply their
example, saying.

For, is not this opinion already grown into a great many men's heads, The
learned disc Page 67.
that the Service may not give place to a Sermon: no though the time be not
sufficient for both? And are there not many, that had much rather here a
chaunted Mattens and Euensonge, than a godly and learned Sermon? yea, they
frequent the one, and refuse the other.

These things (me thinks) are spoken a little too captiously (if they will
pardon my too playnnesse on the other side, Bridges
in this term) that the service ( meaning the divine service or public
prayer) should give place unto a Sermon. Public prayers more needful at some
times than Sermons.
For the time and occasion of danger may be such, that there may be more
need of public prayer to those that are already grounded in faith, which at
other times before they heard out of the word, than of hearing a Sermon at
that instant. But, if there be no such necessity, to employ the time wholly in
Prayer, as the Apostles did, when Herod had caught Peter, and put him in
prison. Act. 12. ver. 5. and when the Israelites in their afflictions, did so
often cry upon God to send them helpers. I do not think that this opinion is
grown into a great many men's heads, ( meaning the Protestants) that the
Service may not give place to a sermon, The Protestants slaundered as
co^^emning preaching in respect of publ. prayer
though the time be not sufficient for both. For although they do well,
zealously to love the divine service, devoutly to make their public prayers
unto God, and religiously to hear his holy word, which also at the same time
is publikly read unto them: yet, if they may have withal, a godly learned
sermon, there are no good Protestants, but they would wish with all their
hearts, if the straightness of the time ( as our brethren here say) be not
sufficient for both, that some part of the service should be left off, and
give place to the preaching and hearing of the godly Sermon.

And there are such prouisoes in the book of common prayer already provided
for that purpose: Prouisoes both for preaching and pub. prayer.
yea, though there were no other Sermon but an Homily. But our brethren not
content with this, that the divine service should be cut the shorter, to the
end, that the Sermon might be the longer would have the divine service to give
place to the sermon, that is to say, the one coming in the place of the other,
the divine Service should be thrust clean out of place, that all the place
and all the time might be taken up of the sermon. If they mean not so then
will our prouisoes sufficiently serve the turn, and the Sermon shall have
place and time enough and welcome whenever it comes, yea the service also
will give some place and yet not be turned out of place. For, Prouisoes for
giving place to sermons.
howsoever it may fall out at some odd times, in which also the whole service
gives the whole place, and resignes up all the time: yet ordinarily there is
time and place so sufficient for both, that the one need not shoulder out the
other.

And a sober Preacher will modestly tarry his due time, and let the public
prayer and divine service proceed on a Gods name, till it come to his
convenient opportunity to preach. As S. Paul and Barnabas accustomed to do.
Which appears Act. 13. ver. 14.15, The duty of a discrete pastor. Act. 13.
The reverent order of the Antiochia^s and modest de meanor of the Apostle.
etc When they departed from Perga, they came to Antiochia, a city of
Pisidia, and went into the synagogue on the Saboth day, and sat down. And
after the lecture of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the synagogue
sent vntothem, saying: Ye men and brethren if ye have any word of exhortation
for the people, say on. Then Paul stood up, and beckened with his hand, and
said: Men of Israel, and ye that fear the lord, hearken, etc. By which it
appears, not only that they had an ordinary form of the divine service, and
public prayer: and a reading of the law and the Prophets, although
ordinarilye they had no sermon: and yet were ready to hear one, whenever any
such fatherly men came among them, which appeared unto them to have the gift
of God to expound his word unto them, and to give them some comfortable
exhortation thereupon: yet as they stinted not this ordinary exercise of the
divine service, though no such extraordinary Preachers came unto them; so, when
they admitted them, and desired them, as glad of them: yet they made not their
divine service to give place to them, and ceased their ordinary public
prayers, or the lectures of the Law and the Prophets. But after these things
done, then they offered them license to preach, and requested them to give them
exhortations. And even as they used this moderation and order in the hearing of
the divine service, and of the Sermons: so S. Paul tarieth while their public
prayers, and their Lessons out of the law and the Prophets, were ended, and
then he satisfies their request, and so enters into his sermon. And if all
our brethren Preachers would marhe and follow this example, all good men would
like better of their modesty. And perhaps the rashness and vndiscretion of
some, to cut of all the divine service and ordinary form of public prayers,
and so to bring the same into contempt, to have themselves heard in the Pulpit,
might breed such an opinion in many men's heads. Although this opinion also
might be grown into a great many men's heads, on other occasions, that the
service may not give place, to a sermon: no though the time be not sufficient
for both. But is their infirmity (be it a wrong or right opinion) a sufficient
reason, to take the public prayers and the divine service clean away, or that
there should be no form thereof at all: or, being rightly used, and with a
moderate time, and y^ time also sometime abridged: to give the more place unto
the sermon: may that be truly said to thrust out preaching.

Chanting of mattens and euenso^g
As for chaunting of the Mattens and Euensong, if to chante be that which in
latin is Cantare, in English our proper word is to sing: and the Psalms and
Hymns and other joyful or doleful ditties, (as our brethren their selves do
use) may be sung: Chanting of mattens and euenso^g
and Mattens and Euensong, are but the usual terms, of the matutine (or
morning) and evening, ordinary and publik divine service: the^ is it not
unlawful to hear eue^ a chanted Mattens and Euensong: so that the chaunting or
singing of them, take not away the edifying by them. Especially, when no other
kind of matter is sung or chaunted: but such as our brethren cannot deny (if
their own senses be not enchaunted) but may be chaunted well enough. As for
the Lessons, they are read: the confessions, the collects, or brief public
prayers, in the Mattens and Euensong, they are said.

But our brethren demand, Are there not many, that had much rather here a
chaunted mattins and Euensong, then a godly and learned Sermon? A slander of
protestants


Uerily in my opinion, to answer upright, I think there are not many, nor
any (meaning godly zealous protestants,) learned or unlearned that so had
rather. I grant, of other sorts there may be many, that so had rather. But
does this follow hereupon, that although there be many which had rather
hear the one than the other? that therefore we should take the one or the
other clean away? may they not rather, ( sith both of them in their degrees,
are lawful and good) hear both the one and the other too? or if they can not
come to hear the one, should they therefore refuse the other also, and so hear
neither.

But this is that which they charge them for. yea, ( say our brethren) they
frequent the one, and refuse the other.

If any so frequent the hearing of the divine service, that he refuse to hear
a godly and learned sermon, when he may come to the hearing of it, he is
greatly to blame. But then, let our brethren look to it on the other side, how
they their s^lues will escape blameless, which when they may hear both the
ordinary divine service of public prayer, and a godly learned Sermon too, will
under pretense of hearing the sermon, refuse to hear the ordinary divine
service of the public prayer. Now, for proof hereof, that many among us are
faulty, in frequenting the divine service, and refusing the sermon, they say:

The learned disc. Page 67. Bridges
Let Cathedral Churches etc. be an example, where you shall see a great
number, that tarry while the Service is sung: but depart as soon as the sermon
begins.

To prove these instances alleged, Cathedral Churches must be the example.
For what place they mean, by this etc. we may rather conjecture, than they
dare utter. And it may be that some do so. And yet, if their so doing be so
ordinary, that they be noted thereof: noted thereof: they are called into
question for the same. Cathedral Churches.
But howsoever it may be in some, it is not so (I am sure) in all Cathedral
Churches but rather the clean contrary. The departing of some from the sermon
that hear the service.
When they come to the Cathedral church not so much to hear the Service, as
the Sermon. For they heard the Service before in their Parish Churches. Which
done, they come to the Cathedral church, ( and that almost after the Service
done there also,) unto the Sermon, which at the least, every sunday, is there
preached. And this (I take) to be the order, in the most part of Cathedral and
Collegiate, The order of frequenting the sermon in the Cathedral Churches.
or such other principal Chapter or chapels, throughout the Realm. Where ye shall
not see many at the Service soong: but toward ye ending of the service, or so
soon as the sermon begnnieth in flocks they draw thither: yea there is order
taken, if they would not, yt they should. And therefore, this is quite contrary.
But our brethr. (to help their forth) proceed to the Organes. The learned
disc Page 68. Bridges


While the Organes pipe, some are drawn with the swetnesse of music to come
up: but while the preacher cries out, continue beneath: and in laughter or
brawling, be louder than he often times.

If the piping of the Organes draw them with the sweetness of the music to
come up to hear the divine service: Organes.
then is there yet some good use thereof, except it be better to drive them
from it, than to draw them to it. If they continue beneath while the Preacher
cries out, then in the most cathedral Churches, as likewise generally in
Parish Churches, the Preacher ( for the most part) coming down unto them:
they may hear him, not the worse, but the better: and he may cry, not the
louder, but the lower, the most part of the Sermons, being preached in the
body of the Church among the people. And if in some fewer places he preach in
the Quyre: then shall ye not lightly have many beneath in the body of the
Church, especially of such, as come to the Church to hear divine Service.

One Church indeed there is, that I have seen, and which (I take) our
brethren especially mean* where many resort, partly but for a thorough
passage, and partly to walk up and down almost all day long, spending the
time beneath in talking, or bargaining, or other worldly matters: but these do
so, as much at the divine service, as at any Sermon in the Queere above. But
commonly there, the sermon is preached in the Churchyard: and that, with a
great assembly of other Parishes, where they had no Sermon: yea, though they
had a Sermon many of them in their own, or in other Parishes besides. And all that while that the Sermon is in that churchyard, none is permitted to walk
or to abide in the Cathedral Church. And if the Sermons that are in the
Church, were so provided also (I speak but my opinion and under correction)
that they were made in the body of the Church, and the walkers up and down,
by some good particular order were prohibited: there is no good person, that
frequenteth the divine service but would as well like of it, Comparion to the
Mass.
as our brethren. And good preachers that are conformable and obedient to the
Ecclesiastical government, and laws established of the Church of England,
and that say their selves the prescribed form of public prayers, and divine
service, have oftentimes called on the reforming of it. Which, if it were done,
yet may all this Ecclesiastical government, superiority of Bishops, office of
Pastors, administration of sacraments, and prescribed form of divine service,
continue, notwithstanding as intier and forcible, as it does. And yet, the body
beneath of the Cathedral Church, is so separated from the Quier above: that
the actions and assemblies in the Quire, neither at the service, nor sermons,
nor Lectures is disturbed, by any passengers beneath: save that their
unnecessary and idle walking all that while, is offensive, and (I hope) it
will be remedied.

But in general, for all Cathedral Churches, Collegiat, Paroeciall, or any
other, if any in laughter or brawling be louder or use any voluntary
misdemeanor whatsoever in the Church, especially to the disturbance of the
divine service or of the sermon: as they were better away tha^ there; so there
are laws and penalties already provided, for the chastisment of such
disordered persons. If they be not executed, the fault is in the officers. And
me thinks our brethren their selves, would become better officers, and fitter
to be made, Churchwardens, Syde-men, or Sextens, to look to the execution of
the Laws, that in this behalf are already made, than that they can, or do set
down any better new laws to mend this matter, in this their Learned discourse
of Ecclesiastical government. But now, upon these abuses, where any such
are, (thinking utterly to deface our public form of divine service,) they
here disclose the effect of their meaning, in their former examples from the
popish service, saying.

So, that which was wont to be said of the Mass, Missa non m^rde^, the Mass
was a gentle beast, The learned disc page 68.
and did byte no man, and therefore was so well beloved of many; may rightly
be verified of our ordinarye service. For, therefore a great number can so
well away with it, because it does not sharply reprove them of their sins,
nor disclose the secrets of their hearts, but that they may continue still in
all kind of voluptuousness, and all other kinds of wickedness.

Bridges.
Our Brethren begin now more apparently, to open their stomachs against the
book of common prayer, and the ordinary celebration of the divine service, Our
brethren too passionate comparing our divine service to the Mass.
that so expressly compare it, to the Popish Mass, which so expressly is
contrary to it. All the world may see, this proceeds more of the ouerflowing
of choler from the gaul, than from the deliberation of judgment in the
brain. If they say, they compare it not unto the Mass; for any such Iohlatry,
superstition, or any error contained therein, where with the Mass was farced.
If they do not, and yet will campare it thereunto, as resembling the same: The
masses biting.
it appears not for any goodwil they bear it, but for that they can find no
such corruption in it, nor can lay the least suspicion of any such Idolatry,
superstition, or error to the charge of it. But this notwithstanding, they will
compare it thus, So, that which was wont to be said of the Mass, Missa non
mordet, the Mass was a gentle best, and did byte no man, and therefore was so
well beloved of many: may rightly be verified of our ordinary service. What (I
pray you my brethren) may rightly be verefied of our ordinarye service, which
was woonte to be said of the Mass? What? that it was a gentle beast, and did
byte no man? Now surely, How gentle a beast the mass was, and how it did byte
no man.
this is somewhat too beastly a term and and too ungentle and biting a
resemblance to bestow upon the true Service of God. Prove it false, and then
spare it not. If it be true, for shame let not men, and wise men, and learned
men, and men that pretend love of Gods truth, afford so beastly a term on
Gods service. And how then may this be rightly verified? yea, and how may this
be verefied that our brethren here say of the Mass, the Mass was a gentle
beast, and did bite no man? Do they speak this in the Masses commendation? or,
do they think this a sufficient proof hereof, that they say here, it was
wont to be said, Missa non mordet the mass did byte no man? No did? Yes, and
that with a most perilous, and venomous tooth, which many felt, that were
bitten and stinged with it.

But, put case it did not, or could not, or it would not; would God that had
been the worst fault in it, that it was a gentle beast, and did byte no man.
Is that of it self so great fault to be gentle, and to byte no man? What, do
our brethren like of or delight in biting? indeed it might so be thought by
these sayings, but especially by all the tenor of this, and of all their
discourses, both in writing, and in the pulpit. For they byte often, and that
sore, not so much their adversaries, as their brethren: yea, How our brethren
delight in biting.
both the Eccl. and civil Magist, nor spare to byte any, yea, they fall to
biting one another: as though it were good, biting, and a necessary thing. Not
remembering that S. Paul warned the Galath hereof, Gal. 5.15. If ye byte and
devour one another-take ye heed least ye be consumed one of another.

But our Brethren speak not here of biting one another, but of the masses not
biting of a man. And would they have the mass if it did not byte men, to fall
a biting of them? If they had spoken of no barking, The Masse^ did byte and not
bark.
it had been somewhat to the purpose. For the mass did byte, and yet not
bark, and therefore indeed, it was a perilous, and a shrewd biting beast, and
not a gentle beast, that byte no man.

True it is, there may come no small, if not more danger even by that, that
byteth not, but seems gentle when it is abused to palliate greater vices. As
the, Syrene^ sweet song: as the flatterers false tongue: as the Harlots smyling
bewty and embracements, as the Hypocrites sheeps clothing, The Mass.
gentleness and cruelty.
fasting, praying, alms, etc. and yet the harlot of Babylon, besides that she
was arrayed in purple and Scarlet, and bedeckt with gold and precious stones,
and pearls, and had a cup of gold in her hand, full of abominations, and
filthiness of her fornication: yet was she drunken with the blood of the
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. The Harlot of Babylon a
shrewde Queen
Apoc. 17.4. and 6. and therefore, Apoc. 17.
she was a cursed and shrewd queen, and not very gentle, but could both byte
men's flesh, and drink men's blood. And the beast on which she sat signifying
the state of Rome, which chiefly bears up the Popish Idolatry as it was also
a s^^rlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy: and had seven ^eades and
ten horns: so this beast likewise, could both byte and fight too.

I grant, the Papists allured and deceived many, with their jolly enticements,
that they decked their Mass withal besides their other baits attendant on
her, of hospitalite, bowntie, alms, etc: and at this day, as in times pass,
The popish baits attendant on the mass to allure the simple.
the monks and friars, so the Jesuits now, do more hurt by their counterfeit
show of holiness, learning, humility, fair speeches, and all their policies,
to allure the people to them, as the Angel of darkness transfiguring himself
like an Angel of light, than if he should show him self like a Devil in a
horrible figure. And therefore the day of the L. should not come till that
general defection should first come, and till the man of sin should be
disclosed, The Jesuits practices.
even the son of perdition, which is an adversary, and exalteeh himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he does sit as God
in the t^mple of God, showing himself that he is God. 2. These. 5.2.2. and 4.
But when the mystery of iniquity, and the wicked man shall be revealed, whom the
Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolishe with the
brightness of his coming. ver. 7. and 8. then shall this aduersarye shows
himself as he is an open adversary, and this gentle beast the Mass, and all
her friends for her, will tooth and nail, both byte and fight. And I saw the
beast (says S. John Apo. 19.19.) and the Kings of the earth, and their
warriers gathered together, to make battle against him that sat on the Horse,
and against his soldiers.

The Mass therefore was not a gentle beast, no more than are his cruel and
tigerlike Masse-mongers, that for the maintenance of the Mass as the mother
of all their Idolatry, make these unmerciful massacres and manslaughters. The
Mass was called an unbloody sacrifice, but many men's blood was and still is
sacrificed to maintain it. The bloudthirsty nature of masmongers.
They therefore that said the Mass was a gentle beast, and did byte no man:
if they were no favorites of the Mass, did not perhaps mean it simply and in all respects, but as Christ said, Luc. 11.21.22. Luc. 11.
When a strong man armed keeps his pallaice, the things that he possessed
are in peace. But when a stronger than he comes upon him, and overcomes
him-he takes from him all his armon^, wherein he trusted, Apoc. ^3.
and deuideth his spoils. The Dragon was quiet enough, and the beast also, to
them that worshipped him, and had the mark of the beasts Image: but Apoc. 13.
ver. 7. it was given him to make war with the Saints, The mildnes and
sharpness of our service.
and to overcome them. and ver. 15. And it was permitted to him (that is to an
other false beast, representing these false Priests, these Monks, these
Friars, these Jesuits) to give a spirit to the image of the beast, so that
the Image of the beast should speak, and should cause, that as many as would
not worship the image of the beast, should be killed. So that, these beasts,
Gentle not of nature, but of Hypocrisy.
were but gentle in a counterset sort. For, to them that withstood them, they
were beasts indeed or rather flends and furies of Hell.

That they were gentle therefore, it was not of their nature, but of their
hypocris^e. For seeing that gentleness is good, Satan's practice.
and that men like it better than austerity; the Devil that was a murderer
from the beginning took upon him the shape of the lowly poor woorme, and
golden skinned subtle serpent, to speak fair, and wish wisdom, and not to
s^ing, or hiss, or byte our first and innocent parents, when his purpose was
to destroy the^ and all their progeny.

The like practice has he often used since, by his devilish Ministers and
instruments: and so did he by the Mass. The Mass like to the goodly Troiane
Horse, to Helen, and Iesabell.
Which is of some called well the Horse of Troy, that had so many fierce and
bloody Capteines even within it: and the Helene that was the cause of all the
Cities, and so many peoples destruction: or as we may more rightly call her,
the very Iesabel of the Romish Achab, that painted her face, and trimmed her
head, using her whoredoms and witchcraftes, with the murdering of so many
saints and Prophets of God. and yet forsooth she did bite no man, and can our
brethren now rightly say, that this may rightly be verefied of our ordinarye
service, that was wont to be said of the Mass, Missa non mordet, it was a
gentle beast, and did byte no man, being a cruel beast, and did byte so many
men, though it so falsely deceived them, with whom our brethren say, it was so
well beloved, that being bewitched in love with it, they felt not the sting and
biting of it?

As for our ordinary form of public service and prayers, unto the Lord: that
it is ^ylde and gentle, proceeding from the unfeigned and true gentleness and
mildness that is in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and the sweet comfort
of his holy Gospel. If therefore it be well, or better of many or any of us
beloved; it is all the better, nor any blemish to us that love it, or to it
that deserves to be loved. Neither may this rigtly be vpbrayded as a fault,
that it byteth no man, How it ^yteth not.
if it help and heal al men that are bitten, which come for comfort
thereunto. For in our ordinarye service, consisting most part of public
prayers, made by the Minister and the congregation to the Lord our God, though
we humbly acknowledge (as those that are bitten and stoong with sin, and lay
open before the L. our wounds and guilt, which are grievous unto us, and ever
against us: yet always we so flee to the trone of grace, that (reposing our
trust in the rich mercies, The myldnes and sharpness of our diu. Service.
and sweet promises of our heavenly father, in his son our Savior Christ,
through the pledge and earnest of his spirit.) we cast the anchor of hope, on
the rock of Faith, which shall never confound us, but work a strong and
assured consolation and help unto us. And in this respect here is no biting.

And yet in respect of other necessary parts, in our ordinarye service of the
Lord, What kind of biting it has.
there is a biting too, in a sort, but a good biting, if it may be so called.
As Christ likened the Gospel unto the mustardseede, that has a kind of biting
( as we term it) but such a biting, as draws no blood. And as the merciful
Samaritane powered in the sharp wine, into the bloody wounds of the man that
was fallen into the thieves hands, though it were smart and biting, the
better to cleanse them, even so well as the sweet oil to comfort and close
them. Of which nipping (rather than biting) tartness, and much more than any
beastlye biting with the teethe, though there may be some fitter resemblance,
and more profitable use: yet does this biting, in what sort soever it be, more
properly belong to the respect of the Law, than directly it does to the office
and consideration of the Gospel. How the law is joined to the gospel.
And as we like not of the false brethren, called (...), the adversaries of the
Law, as repugnant to the Gospel. So our ordinary service is not without this
part also of the Law. For both among the Psalms, ( whereof a portion every day
is read) diverse dreadful threats, and imprecations to impenitent sinners,
are pronounced: beside the terrible examples and warnings of Gods judgments,
contained in the Lessons, both of the old and new Testament: besides sundry
other admonitions, and reprehensions of vices, so well as exhortations unto
repentance, and newness of life: with prohibitions of the unworthy to
participate and receive the holy Communion: with Comminations, and denouncing
the curses, against the trespassers of the Law. All which things, are
apparently contained in the prescribed form of our ordinary service of the
Lord. Now though the bestiall Mass had none of those true comforts, nor any of
these severe judgments of God, sincerely set forth; yet, we (God be praised
for it) have them in our ordinary service of God. This therefore is a very
uncharitable and untrue resemblance, of the Mass, and our ordinary service:
being in all these things (as we have plainelye seen) the one so plain
contrary to the other.

Upon this most wrongful resemblance, our brethren conclude. For, therefore a
great number can so well away with it, because it does not sharply reprove them
of their sins, nor disclose the secrets of their hearts but that they may
continue still in all kind of voluptuousness, and al other kind of
wickedness. The learned disc. Page 65.


To away well with a good thing, it is well done, and the greater number that
so do, the greater cause we have to praise God for it. Contrariwise, to take
away, or to keep themselves away, The liking of our Divine Service.
or not to away well with a good thing: it is an ill thing, and the greater
number that do so, augmenteth the evil and the grief of it. If any away the
better with our ordinary service because it does not sharply reprove them of
their sins: Bridges
what sharpnes herein, our eager mooded brethren can best away withal, or,
The liking of our divine service is a good thing.
how they expound sharpness, I am neither so sharp set to examine, nor so
sharp witted for to find: Let themselves declare it. But this I am sure, and
it is open to all, that our ordinary service does reprove men's sins, in such
sort of sharpness, as the Scripture does: when it lays before them, even
the very words themselves of the Scripture: besides the admonitions there in
contained; that are plentifully and directly gathered out of the scripture, And
in this wise, as Gods word does, it does disclose the secrets of their hearts,
and lay them open both to God and to their own consciences. If any contemn it
or mark it not, or are not moved by it, or continue still in their
wickedness: the fault is their own, and not to be imputed to our ordinary
service of God, but to their ordinary service of the Devil. And so, the wicked
(meaning the reprobate) will continue still in their voluptuousnes, and all
other kind of wickedness, Our divine service reproves men's sins
notwithstanding all the preaching in the world.

But how may our brethren rightly verify this, that a great number can so well
away with our ordinary service, etc. that they may continue still in all kind
of voluptuousness, and all other kind of wickedness? As though our book of
common prayer, and ordinary service of the lord did teach them and foster them
up in all mischief. The heathen raised such foul slanders on the divine
service of the christians in the primitive Chapter and will our own Brethr. now
break forth into such reuiling of our (their brethrens) divine service? What
could the papists (our professed adversaries) have said worse? yea, the most
obstinate recusant of them all? Our bretherens foul slander of our divine
service.
how mightily do our brethren confirm them in their disloyalty. But neither
ye Papists on the one side, nor these our malcontented brethren on the other
side, are able (or ever by Gods grace shall be) to prove any one spark of any
kind of voluptuousnes, or any inkling of any other kind of wickedness, to be
maintained, either because, or by means, meaning directly (for indirectly what
may they not also accuse) of our ordinary service, and prescribed form of
public prayer. But that on the clean contrary, it is an utter enemy, and
tends to the abolishment of al voluptuousnes and wickedness, if it be duly
used as it should. Now when our brethr. have thus bitterly defaced our ordinary
service of the L. they return to ye comme^datio^ of preaching.

Whereas by preaching, their conscience is gawled, The learned disc. page 66.
their wickedness and hypocrisy discovered their damnation threatened, they are
called to repe^ta^ce, and forsaking of their pleasant sins, and to holiness and
innocency of life

The efficacy of our divine service.
And may not all this and more too, be likewise said to be effected of good,
even by the ministry of our ordinary service of the Lord, if it be set forth
as it ought to be, and men would hear it as they ought to do? May it not
gaul a sinners conscience, that has so gauled already the recusant
adversaries, Bridges
that they cannot in any wise abide to hear it, any more: yea much worse than
all the preaching in the world, Our ordinary service has all these effects that
our brethren attribute to preaching.
as most contrary of al other things, to all their popish, blind, erroneous,
superstitious and Idolatrous service? And whosoever shall mark the same with
reverence and attention (as in duty he is bound to do) shall find our
ordinary service of the Lord, not only full of sound doctrine for faith,
godly precepts for life and exceeding sweet consolation of the spirit: but he
shall well feel (have he any feeling of his sin) that his conscience also
shall be gawled ( to use our brethrens term) to consider how godly and
religious a form of Divine service it is, and how vnreligiously it is
neglected. And withal, it lays open unto the markers of it, their sins
before them, and touches them with remorse thereof. So that both thereby (as
our brethren here speak of preaching) we may likewise say, Our ordinary
service may better be called a preaching, than opposed against preaching.
their wickedness and hipocrysie is discovered, their damnation threatened, and
they are called to repentance, and forsaking of their pleasant sins, and to
holiness and innocence of life: so, our ordinary service of the Lord, besides
our public prayers, which also are very effectual to move us heereunto, is so
little to be opposed unto preaching: that it may better be called a fruitful
kind of preaching.

Not that we deny, but that preaching ( understood in his proper kind and
being well used) works these effects also; but we affirm this (and the
experience is appparant) that these effects may be, and oftentimes are brought
to pass among us, even by the reverent ministerye, and devout hearing and
communicating with the Minister, in the public confessions, in the public
prayers, in the public admonitions, and exhortations, in the public setting
forth of the appointed parts of Scripture, and in the public administration
and participation of the Sacraments: al which are contained in our ordinary
service of the Lord.

I grant, we cannot auowe all this to be done, in all them that hear^ the
ordinary service: no more can our Brethren a^owe, all this to be done, in all
those that hear the preaching. But, say our Brethren:

So that if there be any spark of the fear of God in them, hearing preaching:
so often as they use to hear service, they will fall down on their faces and
worship God, The learned disc page 68.
acknowledging the great power of God in his Ministers. 1. Cor. 14.15. 1. Cor.
1.5^1


This exception so that, was well added. and with the like exception, we dare
say as much of our ordinary service, For Prayers have as effectual promises in
their kinds, Bridges.
to those that fear God and honor him, and call upon him: as preaching has.
1 Cor. 14.
So that if there be any spark of the fear of God in them, meaning true
sparks, ( as Christ speaks for faith As much as is a grain of of mustard
seed Mat. 17.20) hearing our ordinarye service of the Lord, especially, hearing
the service so often as we do: although they hear not preaching so often,
because they cannot conveniently so often have it, as they conveniently may the
ordinary service: yet will they as much, if not more, than any even of our
brethren themselves, use to do at any preaching, fall down on their faces,
that is, prostrat and bow down both their souls, and also their bodies, by
inward deiection of their minds before the Lord, and by lowly bowing of their
knees unto the Lord, before his congregation, as a reverent token of their
unfeigned humility, and so, worship God: as do the other faithful Christians
assembled in his name, to call upon him, and to glorify him, acknowledging the
great power of God in his Ministers. 1. Cor. 14.25. and no small power of God
in his Minist. is declared to the penitent even in the very front of all our
ordinarye divine service of the Lord, where the Minister after the confession,
pronounces in the name of God, the forgiveness of the sins of man.

But our brethren apply this alonely to preaching, and in very deed, in the
selfsame place, which is not the 15. but the 24. and 25. verses, S. Paul
mencioneth prophesying, and he makes the comparatiue opposition, not between
public prayer and prophesying: The words of S. Paul 1. Cor. 14. applied not
only to prophesiyng, but also to prayer and to the s^ruice of God
but between the speking with tongs, and prophesiing. And as he makes this an
examplification of all that went before, concerning this matter: so not only
he stretches his whole treatise of edification, as well to prayer as to
prophesying: and therefore, not only in this ch^pter, 1. Cor. 14. ver.
14.15.16. and 17. he mencioneth also public prayers, which he would likewise
have as prophesying, to be made to edification, in a tongue known, that the
unlearned may say Amen. but also before, in the 11. chapter ver. 4 and 5. he
joins praying and prophesying together: Every man praying or prophesying,
having any thing on his head, dishonors his head. And every woman that
prays or prophesyeth bare headed, dishonors her head.

Neither does the prophesying that he so often mentions, both in the 14. and
before that in the 13. and before that in the 12. and before that in the 11.
Chapters of this Epistle, signify only the function of preaching: For
speaking of every man's prophesying, cap. 11. verse 4. and of weomens
prophesying, verse 5 and of making Prophets distinct from Teachers, Cap. 12.
verse 28. and 29. and of making the gift of Prophecye, to be the knowing of
secrets and knowledge, cap. 1^. ver. 2. and even here in this place, Ca. 14.
ver. 24. speaking of the people, which are not ordinary Ministers of the word
and Sacraments, he says: But if all do prophecy, and there come in one,
etc. So that properly, he speaks not here, The effect of preching
of the only function that is ordinarily peculier to the Minister, and whereof
our brethren now dispute: but besides the special gift of foretelling things
to come, or of revealing (though things present) yet secret, as he says
here, of him that comes in among these Prophets, that the secrets of his
heart are made manifest, as Peter made manifest the secrets of Ananias and
Zaphira: Prophes^ing taken in properly
Or else of such exercises also, in expounding the hidden mysteries and
secrets of the holy Scripture, as the gift was then more peculier to that age
of the Primitive Church, and in their courses and places, more common, than
now it is to all the faithful.

But, howsoever prophesying be here understood; it debarreth not the like, at
least, some parts of these effects, from the reverent and attentive hearing of
Gods word it self, openly read in the Church by the Minister; though at that
thme not expounded. And perhaps the place that is read, be plain enough to
understand, and to move the attentive hearer of the same, without a Preacher.
Neither debarreth it these effects, from the public and ordinary prayers of
the Church, and from other parts of the divine service, if they be so disposed,
as S. Paul there would have all things done to aedification, although no
prophesying be used, nor sermon be preached at every time when those public
prayers are made as already we have at large proved.

But ( say our brethren) that they cannot away withal, being like unto Felix
the Liuetenant of the Romans in Iewry: Who, when he heard Paul a poor
prisoner, The learned disc. page 69.
that stood before him bownde in chains, preaching of righteousness, of
temperance, and of the judgment to come, he was weary of him, because he was
a great oppressor, and an intemperate person, and therefore feared the
judgment of GOD for his sin, which he purposed not to forsake. Such is the
majesty of Gods word, when it is preached, that either it boweth or breaks
the wicked in pieces.

Saint Paul's preaching of righteousness, of temperance, and of judgment to
come, Bridges.
made Felix tremble, Act. 24. ver. 26. and yet that trembling came to no
perfect effect in him, to his conversion. And many more heard S. Paul's
preaching at the same time, The effect of S. Paul's preaching wrought in Felix.
that tre^bled less thereat than Felix did. And yet this impayreth not the
Majesty of Gods word when it is preached, Not, that it wants power to do
that, which our brethren here say, that when it is preached, it either boweth
or breaks the wicked in pieces: but that it always does it not. For, here
it neither bowed nor brake in pieces, a great many wicked hearers of it. To
which purpose, our Learned brethren might have brought out far better proves.

But, may not this be said also of public prayer? no doubt, we may safely
affirm thus much, even of our ordinary form of the divine service, where the
word of God is also set forth, with sundry admonitions, confessions,
exhortations, and instructions, besides the supplications, and thankesgiuings:
that although not always, and every man that is present at the same: yet has
it often bowed, moved, pierced: yea, and converted many a great oppressor, and
intemperate person: The effect of divine service in many herers of it.
many a blind Papiste, and superstitious Idolater, and won them to God, or
rather God has won them by it, if not so much, as by preaching, yet, very
much by it. And many, partly by the one, partly by the other. Yea, by this,
he has so broken in pieces, the rebellious hearts of the most obstinate
adversaries: that they had a great deal rather, hear many Sermons, ( yea,
they will come dogging after the preachers, whosoever the Preachers be, to
entrappe their words, as the Pharisees did with Christ) than to come to any
one assembly of our public prayers, The Papists had rather hear sermons many
times, then any times our divine service.
and ordinarye service of the Lord. Wherewith in no wise they will join with
us, or give the least hearing in the world, which they will not spare to give,
with all observation and noting of our preachinges. And have they so great
fear of our divine service, and public prayers, and do our own brethren
make so light account, and so little regard thereof? What an hardening of the
common adversaries hearts, and occasion of utterly contemning all our
profession of the Gospel, is this unto them?

Our Brethren now, to close up all this part, against our Divine service and
public prayer, conclude it also with a prayer of their making and say:

God grant therefore, that in steed of ordinary forms of prayers, we may
have preaching in all places.

And in place of Amen, God forbid say I, with an other prayer to the contrary:
(if it be his good will) not so much (good Lord,) to punish us, that this our
brethrens prayer should be granted. For then, not only this that now we have,
but simply all other forms of prayers, should be quite and clean abolished
and taken from us.

If they had prayed, that they might have continued with preaching, as before
they said page 67. there would be no ordinary prayer, without preaching, that
had yet, been more tolerable. But to pray, that we might have the one in
steed of the other, and that in all places: what is this, but to pray that all
ordinarye forms of prayer should be altogether expelled, that preaching may
occupy all the time and place thereof.

We will not, neither dare we pray; that ours, or any other ordinary forms
of prayer, should in all places be in steed of preaching: but that preaching
should rather be more often than it is, and that in all places, if it would
please God, that all places might be so furnished. If not, yet in as many
places, as may be. But to wish all ordinarye forms of prayer, to be in all
places, or in any place wholly displaced, to place preaching: God forbid it
should so be, or we should so with it. Surely (in my opinion and under
correction) this is either a very great ouershot in our brethren, or else it
sauoureth of some worse purpose, than I would gladly surmise, our brethren
went about.

Although they not only herein go about to overthrow all the ordinary forms
of prayer, that are already with us established by all the estats and highest
authority of the Church of England, or any other that we can make, if there
be any defect herein: but also their own ordinary forms both that in Scotland,
and that of Geneua, and that of Middleborough, and that which now last of all
they have renewed in London: and to the which, their selves have prefixed this
title: A book of the form of common prayers, administration of the
sacraments, etc. agreeable to Gods word, and to the use of the reformed
Churches. All this book, and these their own ordinary forms of prayers, are
here prayed for by these our brethren the Learned Discoursers, Our Blast
prayer ^old abolish the L prayer, and all.
to be as well as ours extinguished. Yea they make no exception of the Lords
own Prayer, which also is a prescribed and ordinary form of prayer. But
against this prayer of theirs, which we pray and hope God will neither grant,
nor hear: we have already at large sufficiently seen, good evidence and
warrant, for ordinary forms of prayer in Gods Church.

The second thing that we have to observe is this, that although we make it
the duty of the Pastor, The learned disc. page 69. and 70.
to pray in the name of the whole congregation, yet do we not so mean, but
that the whole congregation with one heart, and with one voice may praise God,
with singing of Psalms all at once. For, this custom has continued in the
Church from the beginning, that the congregation have praised God with Psalms,
singing altogether. 1. Cor. 14.15. and 16.


If the whole congregation with one heart and with one voice, may praise God
with singing of Psalms al at once or altogether: then may the whole
congregation with one heart and with one voice, Bridges.
al at once, or altogether, make their prayers to God. For, whereon do the
Psalms consist, but even of those parts that S. Paul 1. Tim. 2. v. 1.
speaks of, to wit: Deprecatio^s petitions, intercessions, and
thankesgiuinings. All which if they may of all the whole congregation al at
once, or altogether, be sung: why may they not as well of them be said, as
sung, if they be said distinctly, and without confusion? Singing ( I grant)
does well, where it may be had, and where they have tunable voices, and
sufficient skill to keep their notes in tune and order.

But is singing more fit for prayer than is saying? I am glad to hear our
Brethren to favor singing of prayers. But, can they not do, but they must
ouer-do? all the whole Congregation can not sing so well all at once, or
altogether, or perhaps many of them not at all, except they should sing a
black sanctus. But, they may all at once, a great deal more easily say those
prayers, or some psalms that they cannot sing, not only if they can read,
but if they can follow the Minister, that says the same before them. And yet,
they be not put either to the singing or saying of all, or of half a quarter,
but of some few, and short, and easy, and those that they are acquainted well
withal, which if they can sing, it is well, and a good hearing. But look what
they can sing, that (I think) they can as easily say, and as orderly too, if
they be so disposed.

But how do our brethren prove, they should thus sing altogether. Our Brethr.
reason of custom from the beginning.


For (say they) this custom has continued in the Church from the beginning.

Yea? and is this then, a good plea with our brethren, of such a custom as
has continued from the beginning? Then (I think) they will bethink
themselves a little better, for the continuing superiority of one priest or
Elder, above his fellow priests or Elders, Which also has continued in the
Church from the beginning, as we have at large before declared. And have we not
seen this custom also, that the whole Congregation as well saying as singing (
and that oftener saying than singing) made altogether at once, as with one
heart, so with one voice, their prayers and thankesgiuings unto God? Of which
continuance we have seen the custom, both in the old testament and in the
new, even from the beginning.

As for that our Bre* make it the duty of the pastor to pray in the name of the
whole congregation: we deny it not, that this is his duty, but, The Pastors of
p^^ying in the (...) of the who (...).
this debarreth not, but that the whole Congregation also, may now and then
join with the pastor, with one heart and with one voice and so well as sing,
so likewise may they pray altogether at once* if not in their own names, but
in the name of Jesus Christ, yet in their own voices, and for their own
selves, as well, as the minister also to pray for them, The ^oug^ d^ty of
praying with (...).
and in their names. Which debar of the whole congregation so to do, more
than debarring them of singing, is too nice and precise a Scruple in our
brethren without warrant either of commandment, or of custom continued, in
the Church from the beginning for the same.

And these three parts of a pastors duty, to preach, to Minister the
sacraments and to pray, The (...) 70.
are so necessarily required of him in the word of God, as no man may rightly
execute the office of a pastor, but he that performs all these, each one in
their due time. And to this part of prayer may be referred, the blessing of
Marriages, not of necessity, but of ancient use of the Church.

Bridges
To all these three parts of a Pastors duty, we assent in this manner. For the
first, The Pastors duty of preching.
that it is his duty to preach, either distinguishing of the manner of the
preaching, or the necessity of the duty, as we have before declared. And
likewise for the other two, we grant them as necessary, as our brethren do
require them, and as parts of his duty. Howbeit, as our Brethren here at
length do confess, His duty of ministering S^^r. and praying.
not always either these two, and much less all these three, to be
necessarily executed and performed all at once, but each one in their due time.
So that, although preaching ( in the sense as our Brethren understand, distinct
from teaching) want upon any necessary or convenient occasion at the same time:
yet may the pastor rightly proceed in executing the part of a pastors duty,
for his public prayers, and perfourming the administration of the sacraments.
And though the Sacraments also, The prayers may proceed though there be no
Sacra. ministered at that time.
upon any occasion or necessity, be not administered: as for Baptism, if there
be none to be baptized, or the people do not receive the communion at every
assembly, as our Brethr. (I think) will not say it is necessary, especially in
the assemblies at the evening prayers, except they will have no public evening
prayers, or the communion to be received in the evening: yet, without the
sacraments, may the public prayers rightly proceed. Yea, though there be
neither sacraments, nor sermon at that time, yea, and though there were a
Preacher never so learned, except they will in every Congregation, provide at
least for two preachers, one to preach at the Morning Prayer, the other at the
evening prayer, or provide sufficient health and strength for one to serve
always both the turns, or else, cease the public evening prayers, and now
and then Morning Prayers too, for want of the sacraments and the preaching.

And although it be more requisite that public prayers should be made, both at
the preaching of a sermon, and especially at the ministration of the
Sacraments: yet, as public prayers may proceed without either of these, so
may either of these both preaching, and also baptism ( though not the
communion of the L. body and blood) be administered without the public prayers,
if such necessity or occasion served as we have seen sufficient examples
thereof, even in the Word of God. Notwithstanding, with public prayer, ( we
still grant) it is always better. And when all these three parts of a pastors
duty, preaching, ministering the sacraments, and praying, are joined one with
another: we deny not, but it is best of all.

As for referring the blessing of Marriages unto prayer, I like it also very
well: But then, I would have our Brethren mark this withal, that here they say
of this blessing, The blessing of Marriages referred to prayer.
or praying for them, that it is not of necessity but of an ancient use of the
Church. Now, if the prayer for the married be not of necessity, but of
conueniencie, because it is an ancient custom of the Church: what then shall
we think of the administration of the sacraments unto them at the time of
their Marriage, or of a sermon to be preached unto them, when the public
prayer, that God would vouch safe to bless those, that are to be joined in
the sanctified and honorable estate of Matrim.) is not of necesitie? and yet
are our Bre. herein to be again much commended; An ancient custom of the
Church.
that would have these prayers of blessings used at marriages, because though
they be not of necessity, yet are they of an ancient custom of the Church.
Which rule if they would consider in many other things, being neither wicked
nor superstitions, being neither against good manners nor true Doctrine, though
they be not prescribed, nor yet expressed in the word of God, nor are of any
necessity, but of an ancient custom in the Church: they would not reject so
many things, cheefely, not so contemptuously, as they do.

The argument of the 9. Book.
THE 9. Book treats of the Churches authority in disposing matters of order,
comeliness and edification, and of the church of Engl. lawful proceeding
herein. Of these Discoursers disobedience and reproaches of the churches
doings, and urging their own orders without authority: of the danger in
contentions for small matters: and of urging and impugning ceremonies: how
comeliness, order and edification are joined and separated. Of S. Paul's
reproouing the uncomeliness of Women's prophesying and preaching, and why these
Learned discoursers so especially note this uncomeliness: how their own
positions infer Women's preaching on necessity extraordinarily, and so, of
consequence, Baptizing. How Women did then prophesy in the congregation of the
Corinthians, and of our late abusage in that exercise: the confuting of Beza
and others interpretations for Women's prophesying, to have been but only in
hearing, with the manifold examples to the contrary. How far Calvin and
other Protestants allow it or debar it: how Calvin digresseth hereupon from
Women's public speaking to their public government, and with what hard
terms he concludes against it. How Danaeus resumeth the same question, and
follows further upon it. Of the cause that carries away Calvin, Danaeus and
all the French writers from the oeconimicall to the political government of
Women: and how requisite it is to pursue this digression, both to stand on
our necessary defense in this point, and to confute all such, as heretofore,
both in other countries and among us, have set forth Books against Women's
Regiment. To which points are first examined, the arguments that Caenalis the
French chronicleo has gathered together against all wome^s Government, under
pretense of the Salike Law in France: with examining and conferring the law of
God, the law of Nations, and the civil law. besides the examination of the
often practice in France by the government of Women of the ancient state of
France: the pedegrees in and before the time of Pharamund, and since. The lines
of the Merouingians, the Carolines, and the Capetians, or Hugonians, all from
the rig^t and title of Women. The arguments for the gift of healing, and of the
same also in the kings and Queens of England. The hurt and troubles that the
devise of the Salike law has bred to all Christian kingdoms. The examples,
objections, and reasons, pro and contra in Daneus, and the answers unto him,
with the examples of wom. government in all ages and in all the most famous
peoples of the World, besides England: and chiefly in the Empire of Rome, which
Daneus excepteth: and of Daneus conclusion against patrimonial magistracy and
jurisdiction. Lastly, the answer to the arguments of Bodinus and of
Hottomanus, against women's regiment, and for the Salike Law, with Hottomans
Judgment thereupon.

FVrthermore, in those things that are necessary parts of the Pastors of fice,
the Church has authority to dispose them, The learned disc Page 70. and 71.
as touching the circumstaunces, for order and comeliness sake: but cheefely
for edification. As the days and times of preaching and administering the
sacraments, the places meet for the same, and for public prayers: also the
form and manner of using those things, so that al things be done comely and
agreeable to order, but especially that in all things, principal regard be
had to edification, which Saint Paul so often and so precisely urges in the
14. Chapter of the 1. Cor. For therefore ought our assemblies and commings
together to serve, that therefore we may be better, that we may be taught, that
we may be edified. 1. Cor. 11.17. 1. Cor. 14.23.24.25.26.31. 1. Cor. 11.17 1.
Cor. 14.23.2^.25.16.31


IF the Church have authority to dispose these thing, Bridges
that are necessary parts of the pastors Office, The church^s authority to
disposematters of order, comlines and edificatio^.
as touching the circumstances for order and comeliness sake: but cheefely for
edification, as the days and times of preaching, and administering the
sacraments, the places meet for the public Prayers: also the form and
manner of things: The Churches authority.
with what authority then do our brethren take upon them, to tra^spose in the
Church of England, that which the Church of England has disposed? with what
authority can they abrogate or alter the days and times of preaching and
administering the sacraments, Our Brethr. doing^ with out author.
that the Church of Engl. in like manner by her authority has disposed? with
what authority can they dispose assemblies, and comm^^gs together of the
people, to be made in other places, than to that purpose are disposed: with
what authority can they control or disobey the form and manner of the public
prayers, and using those things in the ordinary service, that the church of
Eng. has disposed to be used? and yet they will not only refuse to use
thosethings and the form and manner of public prayers, nor only deface and
revile them as naught, but set forth and oppose against that, which by the
churches authority is disposed, another form and manner of public prayers of
their own disposing. Yea, if we were disposed to examine better their own
positions: how stands this with their prayer, on the other side of the leaf,
page 69. saying, God grant therefore that in steed of ordinary forms of
prayer, we may have preaching in all places? If the church have authority to
dispose for public prayer, the form and manner, so that al things be done
comely, The allowance of a prescribed form of ordinary public prayer.
and agreeable to order, but especially that in all things, principal regard
be had to edification: then, not only a form of public prayers hinders no
whit, but furthereth comlines, order and edificatio^: but also the church using
her authority, in disposing of an ordinary form of public prayers, so well as
in disposing the days and times and places for preaching: it cannot be that
preaching in all places should be had in steed of public prayers, but that
both of them should still continue, in their days and times, places, form and
manner, by the Churches authority disposed.

And what follows hereupon? but that either our brethren must deny the
Church of England to be the Church, Our brethr. duty of obedience to the Church
of Eng. disposing a prescribed form.
and so, not to have authority of their disposing of these things: or else,
granting it to be the Church, yt is to say, a particular Church, for, I think
they will not say, that they mean this only of the universal church, nor yet of
every several congregation, for so our Bre. assertion were not true: but
speaking here indefinitely, that the church has authority to dispose these
things: they mean, every whole state of any true particular Church in
Christendom. As the Church of England in Engl. the Scottish Church in Scotl.
the Heluetian, the Geneuian, the French and the Dutch Church, in their own
states. Which being confessed: our Brethren being neither the Church
universal, nor the whole state of the particular Church of England, but
private members in the Church of England: and though some numbers of them here
and there collected, may make some several congregations: yet are they not of
sufficient authority, no not so to collect themselves, or have any authority of
making any assemblings or commings together at all in any place, Disobedience.
being but private persons: without the disposing of them that have authority
in the Church, or of the whole estate of the church of England thereunto: then
must they needs confess withal, that they do greatly offend* in going
about to gainsay and overthrow this authority of the whole Church of
England, which has by her authority, so much as in her lies, disposed
ordained, and established these things, as touching the circumstaunces for
order and comeliness sake, but cheefely for edification, as the days and
times of preaching, and administering the sacraments, the places meet for the
same, and for public prayers: also for the form and manner of using those
things, that all things be done comely and agreeable to order, but especially,
that in all things, principal regard be had to aedification.

Now, when the Church of England has by her authority, and by the authority
of the supreme governor of her under Christ, and of all the governors
ecclesiastical or political of her whole estate, thus disposed these things:
Is it lawful for any private persons, Their offense against God.
be they learned or vnle^rned, be they few or many, in the same* Church, to
resist this authority? whether this be to resist even God, or no: and whether,
that which Saint Paul wrote to the Romans, Chapter, 13. charging them being
Christians to obey their Civil Magistrates, ( though evil and Heathen,) in
civil and indifferent matters, do not much more bind every particular private
Christian, and all Christian subjects, to obey their Christian Magistrates, and
all good Christian both Eccl^siastical and politic governors, and the whole
particular estate and authority of their own church, whereof they are but private
members: I refer it, to every indifferent readers judgment, and to our Bre.
own answer, on better aduisement of these things.

If our Bre. deny, that they have ever done, or yet do resist the Church of
Englands authority in disposing these things: what was all this that was last
spoken of, against the ordinary form of public prayer and divine service,
besides the authority it self of the ecclesiastical governors, and many other
things of circumstances for days, times, places, and administrations of
Sacraments, that they so vehemently impugn? If they say, The church of Eng
has not ouerr^ached her lawful authority in thosething^
that herein yet, they do not resist nor speak against the Church of Engl.
for her authority to dispose these things, but resist and speak against her,
only for this, that the she has abused her authority, and that she has
encroched further, than she has lawful authority to warrant her doing: for,
that her authority as touching these circumstaunces, is but for order and
comeliness sake, and cheefely for edification: and that it is to be
restrained with this limittation, So that, all things be done comely, and
agreeable to order, but especially that in all things, principal regard be
had to edification, which S. Paul so often and so precisely urges in the 14.
Contentio^s.
Chapter of the Cor. Neither do we desire to have the Churches authority in
these circumstances, to be enlarged one inche further. And even so (God be
praised) has the Church of England had, and especial consideration of al
these 3. points, of comeliness, of order, and of edification.

If they think not so, acknowledging her to be a true Church: except they can
prove it better, than hitherto they have done, and yet should they prove the
same also, (if they could) with more modesty and humility than they attempt to
do:) they both offer too great an injury to their true and loving Mother the
Church of England, Our brethr. il demeanor toward their mother the Church of
England.
whose Children (if any children of the Church) they be, and bewray too great a
partiality to their own opion. And, more seemly of the twain, it might be
thought to all good men, that as they confess their Mother has authority,
given unto her by their Father, of disposing these circumstances to these ends
and purposes that withal, they should rather render her this honor, being
known otherwise, to be a true, reverent, and chaste mystical wife unto her
spowse and husband, and to be a natural and tender mother to her children,
having ^^urished the^ with the pure milk of Gods word, and brought them up to
that knowledge of God which they now have, to think, that she has used her
authority well, in disposing these circumstances to these ends accordingly,
and submit themselves to her disposing of them: than to accuse her to their
father, or make an outcry of her to the world, that she has abused her
authority in these things, and that these circumstances are not disposed to
these 3. ends, neither by her, nor by any for her, that either their father, or
she, has committed her authority of disposing them unto, except they be a new
disposed, and transposed, in such order, as they the private children shall
conceive, to be more agreeable to these ends. What an unnatural part were
this? yea, how is it not as great fault, on the contrary as the adversaries,
that extolled and honored their mother too much, giving her equal authority
with God, The adversaries honored their mother too much, our Brethren too
little.
( whom they pretended to be their father) not only in circumstances, but in
points of religion, and making her to alter Gods commandments? thus advanced
they their mother, which was and is notoriously convicted, of most manifest
spiritual fornication. And we now, that profess our selves to be children of
her, whom we al acknowledge to be the true wife, and chaste matron of the L.
Shall we thus on the other side dishonor her, that when we cannot deny her
authority in these circumstances, we shall say, she uses the^ not to the end,
for which they are given her*

As for that, which Paul so often and so precisely urges, 1. Cor. 14. In all
these verses so precisely quoted, 23, 24, 25, 26, and 31. What is there any
thing in any one of all these Verses to the purpose, that here our Brethren
speak of: save that only in the end of the 6. verse, Paul says: Let al
things be done to edifying? which precept I know not, nor it is yet proved,
that this our mother the Church of England, in disposing any of these
forenamed, circumstances, does transgress and abuse this her authorie. As for
the other place here also cited, 1. Cor. 11.17. is nothing likewise to the
present purpose. Now, in this (says S. Paul) that I declare, I praise you
not, that ye come together, not with profit but with hurt. Except, that it
makes more against our Brethren them selves, than it does any whitte against
the Church of England, for any circumstance of these things that by her
authority she has misdisposed. True it is, the church of Corinth began to
abuse and dispose amiss diverse things, which S. Paul dissuading them from,
teaches them in what comely sort, the men and women among them should pray or
prophecy. Contentio^s disturbers of the churches orders.
Which when he had declared, (preventing such contentious persons, as would
vnnecessarilie disturb quiet, comely, and indifferent orders) he says ver.
16. immediately before that which our Brethren allege: but if any man be
contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God.

Upon which general admonition, Calvin says? He is contentious, Calvin in 1.
Cor. 11.16.
that is, stirred up with a lust of moving strifes, neither regards he, that
place should be given to the truth. Such are all they that upon no necessity,
would overthrow pull up (or destroy) all good and profitable rites (or
customs,) which move controversies of matters not doubtful, which hold not
themselves contented with reasons, which suffer not themselves to be restrained
into order, such are also (...), those that are uncivil, or not able to be
kept company withal, who with a foolish affection are carried into a form
that men are not accustomed unto. Paul vouchsafes to give those men an
answer: because contention is a pernicious thing and therefore it ought to
be driven away from the Churches. Wherein he teaches, The dange^ of
contention against orders and the repressing of contentious men*
that such froward persons and desirous of brawling, should rather be kept
under with authority, than with long disputations to be refelled. For, there
will never be an end of contentions, if by striving thou would overcome a
quarellous man. For he will never be tired, although he be overcome an hundred
times. Let us diligently therefore, note this place, least we should suffer
our selves to be carried away with superfluous disputations: notwithstanding so
that, we shall know how, to discern contentious persons. For we must not
always hold him contentious, that yields not to our decrees, or that dare
gainsay us: but where a lust and an obstinacy appears; then let us say with
Paul, contentions ought to be far off, from the custom Ecclesiastical.
Thus says Calvin: whether it touch our Brethren or us nearer, let other judge.

Paul now upon the occasion of these contentious men, says in the next
verse, which by our Brethren here is quoted: Now in this that I declare, I
praise ye not, that ye come together not with profice but with hurt. F^r first
when ye come together into the Church, Urging ceremonies.
I hear that there are dissensions among you, and I believe it in some part.
These dissensions raised among them by dissentious persons, Contentio^s hinder
edifying in public Eccl. assemblies.
( that unnecessarily disturbed the peace of God, and quiet of the Church,)
hindered indeed their aedification in their Ecclesiastical assemblies. And it
has not a little hindered the aedification of the Church among us. For what is
aedifying, but the building up of the mystical body of Christ, that is, his
Church? And if all assemblies and comminges together ought therefore to serve
that we may be better, that we may be taught, that we may be aedified: do
not our assemblies and comminges together, ( meaning of our Ecclesiastical
assemblies) serve to the same purposes? If they take not always, nor in all
the parties that come together in those assemblies, If our publ. assemblies be
not so effectual: the fault is personal in the parties assembled* not in the
churches orders.
the effect for the which they serve, shall we blame the Churches disposing of
the assemblies? Or not rather the defaultes of the assembled persons, and
especially these makers of unnecessary dissensions in the assemblies. Which if
they were repressed with authority, and the assembled parties do their duties,
as the Church has well disposed these assemblies to serve to these good
purposes: so they would be far more effectual then they be. And therefore I
like better of Caluines note hereon, from who^ our Brethren seem to take this
saying. For ( says he) if we respect what should be done in the Church,
Calvin in 1. Cor. ^ 1.
no coming together ought to want fruit. There is the doctrine of God heard,
prayers are made, the mysteries are celebrated. The fruit of the word is, that
the trust and fear of God should be increased in us; that proceedinges forward
may be made in holiness of life, that more and more we may put off the old man,
and profitte in newness of life: and the other mysteries tend hereunto, that
they may exercise us in godliness and charity. And also unto all these things
prayers do avail. And to this it comes, that the Lord works effectually
by his spirit, because he would not that his institutions should be vain.
Therefore if the holy co^mings together do profitte us nothing, nor that we be
any whit better thereupon, our unthankfulness is in the fault: and therefore are
we rightly to be accused. For we are the doers, that those things which of
their own nature, and of the ordinance of God ought to be healthful, pass
away without any profit. Thus does Calvin rightly lay the fault where it is,
on our own selves, and not on the Churches authority or disposing of these
assemblies.

And therefore we have great marvel that some are so precise in urging
ceremonies, The learned disc page 71. and 72.
as many think much hyndering aedification, but as most men confess,
nothing profiting to aedification, having always in their mouth that saying
of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently and according
to an order, and do so little remember that the Apostle in that long Chapter,
labors altogether to drive all things to aedification, or else to drive
them out of the Church. As he says of him that has the gift of tongues,
being of it self an excellent and comely gift of the holy Ghost, and being
used orderly of one or two by course, with an interpreter, might do much good
in the Church. But if there be none interpreter (says he) let him hold his
peace in the congregation.

To urge ceremonies either much hindering aedificatio^, or nothing profiting to
aedification; and to be so precise, Bridges.
or to be precise at all in urging of them: although it be not to be marueiled,
that some do so, and that some are so: yet, is it not to be liked that any
should so do, or be. Preciseness about ceremonies.
But I marvel more, that our Brethren marueiling at some that do and be so:
do not find also that their selves do it and so be: so precisely urging the
ceremonies, which they would bring into the Church; that upon this so great
precisenes, they have gotten themselves the name of Precisians for it. And also
for that they are so precise in driving out those ceremonies, which their
selves as it should seem, dare not plainly say, or (I am sure) cannot
sufficiently prove, to be naughty and superstitious ceremonies. No, nor here
they say, that they are much hindering aedifycation: but, as many think, much
hindering aedifycation. And yet, they their selves control this manies thinking
also, and say, (as it were by correction of their former speech) but, as most
men confess, nothing profyting to aedifycation. We urge no ceremonies nothing
profiting to edification.
But who are these many, and these most men, that thus think, or confess? Is
it not only their own selves? For, if they think that other think as they
think herein; they think greatly amiss, and deceive th^mselues. For, the
most men, neither confess nor think any such thing. I speak not of the most
men among the adversaries of the Gospel: but of the most men among the
Protestants, and Professors of the Gospel. Neither is there any such cause or
truth of matter, why they should either so confess or think of any
ceremonies, that in the Church of England are now urged. But who likewise are
these that so urge them? And withal, what are these ceremonies, which they
urge, that many should think, are much hindering aedifycation: or, most men
should confess, are nothing profyting to aedifycation? And how far forth
also stretches this so precise urging of them? For all these points, if they
had of our Brethren been plainly set down: they might have been of us the
easilier and more plainly answered,

But as our Brethren name not these, some: so would I gladly, and for
brotherhood-sake, impute it to their modesty, in forbearing the naming of such
estates and persons. Howbeit, because in these speches, they seem not to mean
any blind and superstitious adversaries, but such as are open professors of
the Gospel: nor any private persons, but such as have authority to urge these
things: and that they urge the^ so precisely: although our Brethren do the
better to mollify the term, Edification
that they urge them but precisely: and not that they urge the^ with any simple
and absolute necessity, as themselves before did urge preaching, at every time
of administering the sacraments, and of pyblike prayers: yet are our Brethren
not a little to blame herein, thus to gleeke at the Magistrates, or at any
other their Protestant Brethren, with such apparent sclanders, that they urge
such hindering or nothing profiting ceremonies, and that they urge the same so
precisely. Whereas, first no ceremonies are at all urged, ( that is, as I take
it by authority commanded: What, and how ce^emonies be urged.
) but such as we can, and shall at all times, (when any such shall be named,)
clearly prove, not to hinder, but to further aedification. And then, that
(being whatsoever between our Brethren and us they shall be proved to be;) they
are not urged so precisely, but only in such manner, as may well stand with
our Christian liberty* and as touches not the freedom of our conscience at
all, as any matter of religion: but only in respect of a civil or
Ecclesiastical obedience, for comeliness and order sake, which is nothing
prejudicial or hindering to aedification, but furthering and profiting of it.
And withal, these some that urge the same, are of such estate, calling and
authorie, yea, and of such a number, so many, and the most men, and besides the
most, the best among us: that the some, or the many, or the most men or women
among our Brethren and sisters, that think of these ceremonies otherwise, and
urge the abolishing of them, as precisely, and far more precisely, than any
among us do urge the retayning of them: ought rather, (if they did well
bethink ^hemselues, either of their duties and callinges, or of the nature and
urging of these things, ^he state and Church not to be disturbed for the^.
) both to think and to confess better of the vrgers of them, and of things
urged, and to yield unto them, namely in such sort, as they are urged; at
least wise, if they will not yield; yet, not to disturb the peace of
conscience, the unity of the Church, the quiet of the state and the mutual
bond of charity, with their intemperate and unnecessary striving against
them. For whether, these ceremonies do or no; certain it is, that not only
many think, and most men confess, but that all of us (save the common
adversaries that like it, How greatly our Brethrens contentio^s hinder the
churches edifying.
and laugh thereat, and blow the coals, and warm their hands at the fire
thereof) must ne^d^s grant, that these contentions for these things, do not
only nothing profit, but much hinder aedification. Yea, and it were not more
of the surmounting mercies of our good God, and the help and comfort he has
raised unto us, by his holy Handmaiden: not only the aedification, but the
whole edifice, had long ere this for the visible state thereof among us been
quite shattered in shiuers, and clean ouerturned. And now, whether we for the
ceremonies of circumstances should rather in thankful obedience, yield unto
her Majesty, and to all our Governors under God and her, and to the state
already established: or her Majesty, and all our Governors, and the whole
estate established, Comlines and order.
should herein yield to these our Brethren: there lies the question. And I
refer it (being a question, for some certain order to be had in indifferent
things) unto the determination and order of all indifferent judgments.

But this is that also, which our Brethren find fault withal; that these some,
which they say are so precise in urging ceremonies; are always having in their
mouths, that sentence of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 14.40. let all things be done
decently and according to an order.

And is not this a good sentence of S. Paul, for them, The excellency of the
sentence 1. Cor. 14.40.
for our Brethren too, and every one of us, when we have occasion to treat of
such matters, to have always in our mouths, to have always in our hearts,
to have always in our actions and performance? What mean therefore our
Brethren here to find fault with this, that any should always have so
excellent a sentence in their mouths, for the keeping of order, especially
they that with authority urge it? Does not this sentence mightily confirm it,
when it says that all things, making no exception of ceremonies, or of any
indifferent things, to be used in the Church assemblies, but, Comeliness
joined with order.
as they must be done in a comely manner: so they must be done in order? and
can an order be kept more orderly, than when a standing and set order is
appointed, by those that have authority thereunto, Order must be ordained and
not broken.
and they precisely urge it, without violating the observation of the same?
Would our Brethren have men to lay aside this sentence of S. Paul out of their
mouths, out of their hearts, and out of their actions, and continue to break
this rule: Either that all things, or that any indifferent thing, ceremony,
or circumstance, should in the Church assemblies be done, without urging of an
appointed comeliness, and without urging any authorized and prescribed order?
But our Brethren not only find fault with them, that have this sentence
always in their mouths: but say they, and do so little remember that the
Apostle in that long chapter labors altogether, to drive all things to
aedification, or else to drive them out of the Church.

If they have always that sentence of S. Paul in their mouths, in such
sort, that they do so little remember, in their heads, this drift of the
Apostle, and this his other sentence in the same chapter, ver. 26. let all
things be done to aedification: then do they greatly forgette the principal
thing, that in these matters they ought to have remembered. Our Brethr.
fogetfulnes of their duty to their betters.
But if our Brethren remember this, as a challenge to burden the Magistrate, and
those in authority that urge these things in manner a foresaid, that they
have always in their mouths the one sentence of S. Paul for comlines and
order, and remember so little the other, for aedification, which the Apostle
likewise labored to drive all things unto: then their selves do so little
remember their duty to their betters, and so much forget the truth: that if
other had said it then our Brethren, I would have remembered them of this old
sentence, oportet esse memorem they know who. Neither can these two,
aedification not separate from comeliness and order, but included in them.
that is, comlines and order, be destitute of this other, that is,
aedification. For, the name aedifying, being a general name, to build and set
up, or join together the mystical body of Christ: does not the comely
proportion of the aedifice, not only beautify and commend the form, but the
orderly disposing of all the parts thereof, contain and maintain even the
very aedifying of the whole frame? And therefore when S. Paul had said
before, ver. 26. Let all things be done to aedification: he knitteth up all
his conclusion of that matter, with this sentence, that our Brethren would not
have men to take so often in their mouths, Let all things be done decently
and according to order: Both making either of these, comeliness and order, to
stretch their jurisdictions (as far as aedification) even to all things,
understanding them of all such things as are to be done in the Church
assemblies: and also to be as requisite and necessary in their kinds, as
aedification is, if not to be some principal parts their selves of
aedification. And if (as our Brethren say) we must remember, that Saint Paul
labors in all that long Chapter, to drive all things to aedification: why
may we not as well, or rather say, when he concludes all with the other
twain, that our Brethren must also remember this, that S. Paul labors in
all that long Chapter, to drive all things to decency and to an order? May
not all those things that went before, be more properly said to be driven to
that, that is the last conclusion, then to be driven to that, that is in the
beginning, or in the middle of the treatise?

But if this be true, that he labors to drive all to aedification, and yet
this is apparent, that he concludes all with decency and order: then, either
is comeliness, and order contained in aedification, or aedification contained
in comeliness and order. Or else, these things being not contained the one in
the other, but things several: this is not true, that he labors altogether
in the long chapter to drive all things to aedification, laboring also to
drive not only some things, but all things, to decency and to order as well,
and as much, as to aedification. But he that laboreth altogether to drive all
things to one thing, does not labor to drive the^ to any other: S. Paul
therefore laboring to drive all things withal to these two: if they be
several matters from aedification, this can not be true, that he laboreth
altogether to drive all things to aedification, except we either comprehend
the name of decency and order in the name of aedificatio^; or the name of
aedification, in decency and order; to salve our Breath. assertion, from
conviction of an apparent untruth, Comlines and order are their selves an
edifying.
so much as we can. And so indeed it may in a very good sense be understood,
for there is an aedifying in all these respects. Not only when the people do
understand those things that are spoken, and receive instruction and comfort
by them, whereby they are said to be aedified, that is, in knowledge and faith
to be builded upon Christ the rock: but also when any public action in the
Church is done, in such sort as S. Paul in that long chapter labors to
have it done, to wit, (...), comely, honestly, or decently: and keeps such
degree of place and time, that it is done (...), according to order: albeit the
matter be but a ceremony of apparel, as the uncovering or covering of men's
and women's heads, while they prayed or prophesied, which being no matter of
doctrine, Saint Paul precisely urges, though not so precisely, that we
should make it a matter of the substance of religion: yet, he drives it to
such a natural comeliness, and with so great and urgent reasons for
Ecclesiastical order sake: that he makes the comely order thereof, and of
such other things as he there handles, for speaking in their tournes and
courses, to be no little aedification to the assembly.

And therefore well says Calvin on this sentence, Let all things be done
decently and in order: the conclusion is more general ( he means, Calvin in
1. Cor. 14.40.
than that which was before, in exhorting them to seek after prophecy) which
not only comprehends in brief the whole state: but also the singular
parts: yea, rather it is a rule, whereunto it behooves us to drive all
things that appertain to external policy. Because he disputed
scatteringlye of rites or ceremonies, he therefore here would collecte all
into a brief sum, to wit, that a comeliness should be kept, and
confusion should be avoided. Which sentence shows, that he would not bind
the consciences to the former precepts, as things of themselves necessary:
but so far forth as they should serve to comeliness and to peace. The
policy of the church directed to comeliness and order.
Heereuppon (as I have said) we gather a perpetual doctrine, to what end
the policy of the Church should be directed. The Lord has left in our
liberty external rites or ceremonies, therefore; least we should think his
worship to be included in them. Notwithstanding he has not in the mean
season permitted unto us, a varying and unbridled license: but he has
encompassed round about (that I may so term them) lattisses (or cross
bars) either else, has he indeed so moderated the liberty which he gave,
that at length we may by his word esteem what is right. This place therefore
rightly waighed, will show the difference, between the tyrannical edictes of
the Pope, which press the conscience with a cruel bondage; and the godly
laws of the Church, in which discipline and order is contained. Besides that
hereupon, we may reddily gather, that these later, are not to be holde^ for
humane traditions, since that they are founded in this general commandment,
and have a clear allowance from the mouth of Christ himself.

Thus notably says Calvin on this sentence. And is not this sentence then
worthy, that we should have it always in our mouths, whenever we have
occasion to urge, or talk of ceremonies? Or does not this comeliness and order
stretch it self also to dification?

But if we now understand it thus, to save our Brethrens credit, that the
one of these does comprehend the other: our Brethren must give us leave with
all, to remember those that urge these things, which having always in their
mouths that sentence of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done
decently and according to an order: do not so little remember as our Brethren
charge them, but remember well, that the Apostle in that long Chapter labors
( whether altogether or no, let that go) to drive all things to aedification:
S. Paul's purpose was not to drive the good gifts of god out of the Church
though they were abused
aedification being contained in decency and order, and order and decency
contained in aedification. And yet we may not simply grant to this
disjunctive part of this our brethrens sentence, that S. Paul labored to
drive all things to aedification, or else to drive them out of the Church:
for, S. Paul went not about to drive any of those good gifts of God, which in
that long chapter he speaks of, out of the Church of God, though they were
by some among them then abused, and not driven to aedification, comeliness,
and order: but labors to retain them in their right use, for the time that
GOD would have them used. And therefore, this example also is not so well
alleged of our Brethren, in saying: as he says of him that has the gift of
tongues, being of it self an excellent and comely gift of the holy Ghost,
and being used orderly of one or two by course with an interpreter, might do
much good in the Church, but if there be none interpreter (says he) iet him
hold his peace in the congregation. Here is indeed mention made of holding
his peace, till he had an interpreter: but not, of driving this gift out of
the Church.

And therefore Calvin with more moderation says hereon, ver. 27. he now
describes the order and sets down the manner. Calvin in 1. Cor. 14.27.
If they like to speak with tongues, let two only speak, or if not so, yet
let there not be more then three at the most. And withal, let there be present
an interpreter. There is no use of tongues, without an interpreter, let them
therefore surcease for the time. But we must note, that he commands it not,
but only permits it. For the Church may want the tongs without any
incommoditie, save in respect that they are helps to prophecy as at this day
are the Hebrew and the Greek tongue: but Paul grants it, least he should
seem to drive away any grace of the spirit, from the assembly of the
faithful. Although this also might seem less agreeable unto reason, when as
before he said, that the tongues were convenient for the unfaithful, in
respect that they were a sign: I answer, howsoever a miracle may properly be
set forth for the vnfaithfuls sake; notwithstanding, it follows not but that
in some respects, The gifts of tongues abused.
it perteyneth also to the faithful. If ye understand it, that an unknown
tongue is a sign to the unfaithful, according as the words do sound of
Esaias: the reason that Paul here prescribes, is different. For he so
admits the tongues, that the interpretation adjoined leave nothing obscure.
He corrects therefore the Corinthians vice, with an excellent temperature,
while he rejects not any gift of God whatsoever, that all his benefits
among the faithful may appear: but he sets down a manner, least that
ambition should creep into the place of Gods glory; least the gift that is
of less moment, should hinder those that are the chief gifts: and he adds
a sauce (or seasoning) of it, least it should become a mere ostentation void
of fruit. Here then is no commandment of driving this gift out of the
Church, no although the Corinthians did abuse it. But if now, this ceasing for
the time of this gift, and other like gifts, for the abusing of them, were
the driving them out of the Church, when they tended not to aedification: what
shall we say of those ceremonies that S. Paul there speaks of, Our Brethr.
attemptes to drive out the offices and orders established, and to bring in such
as are long since worn^ out, or rather mere supposed.
and of those functions and offices, not such as they imagine, but of whom,
either for the abuse succeeding, or the needelesse use now long since of
continuing them: both the gifts, and the offices or manner of them have ceased
in the Church, so many hundredth years? And being thus clean worn out,
though not driven out of the Church; have our Brethren such a warrant and
authority, that they can bring in, yea, and with contention drive in those
ceremonies, offices, and gifts, into the Church again, and to drive out other
comely and orderly ceremonies, offices and gifts now in use, not hindering but
rather furthering aedification, to drive in those so long ceased and
discontinued? But if the gift of tongues while it was in use, were (as they
here confess) a comely gift of the holy Ghost, and being used orderly of
one or two by course, with an interpreter, might do much good in the Church:
how then does not comeliness and order, infer aedification? And therefore,
if the ceremonies, offices and gifts of the Church of England that are now
urged, be comely, and used orderly: we may well conclude, that in their kinds,
they be no hinderers but furtherers to aedification.

But, say our Brethren: the uncomeliness that S. Paul reproves was, The
learned disc. Page 72.
that women should preach in the Church, as ver. 34.35. the disorder, that
those gifts which served least for aedifying, were preferred before them that
served most for aedifying, as tongues before prophecy.

We grant S. Paul reprooueth these abuses in the Corinthians Ecclesiastical
assemblies, uncomeliness and disorder. Bridges.
But did he reprove none other uncomeliness in them, then that women should
preach in the Church, as 1. Cor. 14. ver. 34. and 35? Did he not reprove an
uncomeliness in them before, VVomens prophesying.
both for men and women too, in the 11. chapter ver. 13. and 14? Judge in your
selves (says he) is it comely that a woman pray unto God uncovered? Does not
nature it self teach you that if a man have long hear, it is a shame unto
him? And does not Saint Paul reprove them also, ver. 21.22. For their great
uncomeliness and disorder, in the participation of the Lords supper? For
every man (says he) when they should eat, eats his own supper before,
and one is hungry, and another is dronken. Have ye not houses to eat and
drink in? Despise ye the Church of God, and shame them that have not? What
shall I say to you? Shall I praise you in thi^? I praise you not. And
appointing them a better order, he concludes that Chapter with this saying,
Other things will I set in order when I come. Which done, he comes to
these gifts whereof now we speak, tongues, interpreting, prophesying, etc. in
the 12.13. and 14. chapters. And does be not here also note, that they abused
this excellent and comely gift of tongues, ( as our Brethren call it) by their
praying or prophesying in a strange tongue, though the same were not
interpreted? Was not this their abuse therefore of this comely gift, an
uncomeliness in them.

But our Brethren have a special meaning herein, that setting aside al other,
Our Brethr. do often quarrel at womensprophecying, teaching, preaching, and
^aptizing, whereas their selves as much or more than we do infe^re it.
they only note this uncomeliness and say: The vncomlynes that S. Paul
reprooueth, was, that women should preach in the Church as ver. 34.35. And
therefore I think it not amiss to consider this point better, specially that
which here they lead us unto. And at this they quarelled before, page 62. and
often times threaten kindness on us, that we maintain women's administration of
Baptism. But do not they themselves (though it be the more strange to see
their dealing therein) even where they go about to confute it, a great deal
more confirm it, than we do? Have not they confessed, page 59. that whom
soever God has instituted to be minister of his word, him also has he made
to be minister of the sacrament, and that, it pertayneth to him to deliver the
seal, which delivers the writings? Look then, whether this come not nearer
to the permission of women to baptize, yea, and to minister the communion, than
any thing that they can gather of us. Except they will flee to this article,
that here they still speak of him, not of her. But shall we thus elude the
words of the textes also, even there, for proof cited by our Brethren? Matthew.
28.19. Go ye forth and teach all Nations baptizing them, and is not both the
Latin and Greek also, (...). Baptizantes illos, baptizing them, only the
Masculine gender? As it is more plain in the other text, Mar. 16.15. Go ye
forth into the whole world, and preach the Gospel to every creature, he
that shall believe and is baptized shall be saved. What shall any say that
this article, he, conteyneth only men, or men children, and excludes women?
Therefore that shift can not serve, but that man or woman may preach, by their
saying, on some occasion. and then, look how far forth they may preach, and
deliver the writings, or minister the word, so far forth, may the same
persons men and women, by these assertions of our Brethren, deliver the seals,
and administer the sacraments also.

But now, what does Calvin say hereon, who is in this point the vehementest of
them all, that I read, against women's preaching and baptizing? Does he not
say, even of these self same words that our Brethr. refer us unto, 1. Cor.
14. ver. 34. Let your women keep silence in the Churches for it is not
permitted unto them to speak? etc. It appears that the Church of Corinth was
defiled also with this vice, that there was place, or rather licentiousnes,
open in the holy assembly to the babbling of women. He forbids them therefore
to speak in public for the cause of teaching or prophesying. But understand
this of the ordinary function, or else, where there is a set or appointed
state of the Church. For, such a necessity may happen, which may require the
voice of a woman. But Paul respects only what is comely in an assembly orderly
composed.

So that S. Paul here debarreth not absolutely all women's speaking in the
Church: Women's publ. speaking in the Church not utterly forbidden.
for then, how should that be which our Brethren said before, page 70. that
the whole congregation with one heart and with one voice, may praise God with
singing of Psalms all at once? Are not women part of the whole congregation,
so well as men? And do not the women also in their congregations sing the
Psalms together with the men? And is not this singing, publ. praying? At least
wise, is it not publ. speaking? And therefore Calvin first limits those words
of the Apostle, that women are not permitted to speak in the assembly, with
this restraint: to speak for the cause of teaching or prophesying. As who say,
otherwise they may publikly speak well enough. Yea, for teaching and
prophesying also, he does not simply forbid the same: but upon necessity or
occasion he allows it even in the holy assembly of men, and makes it
requisite that a woman may teach or prophecy. Neither helps it, that he says
upon 1. Cor. 11. ver. 5. Every woman that prays or prophecieth bareheaded,
Calvin in 1. Cor. 11.5.
dishonoreth her head: but it seems ( says he) that this is superfluous,
that Paul forbids a woman to prophecy bare hedded, when as in an other
place, he does wholly forbid women to speak in the Church, and therefore it shall
not be lawful for them to prophecy, no not under a veil (or cover.) Whereupon
it follows, that it is here in vain disputed of the veil or cover. It may be
answered, that the Apostle in improuing the one, Caluines insufficientanswere
for women p^ophec^ing.
does not approve the other. For when he reprehendeth that they prophesied
barehedded, notwithstanding he permits the^ not to prophecy by any other
manner of means, but rather deferreth the reprehension also of this vice, unto
an other place, that is to wit, unto the 14. Chapter.

But, may any man, that shall consider the peyse of S. Paul's words, (which
were the words of the holy Ghost in him,) think this a sufficient answer to
this question? For, does not the Apostle speak this, as well of men that have
their heads covered; as of women that have their heads uncovered? And does
not the Apostle speak it as well of prayers, as of prophesying? If therefore
he approve it in the men, and approve it in the prayer: Women's praying and
prophesying with their heads covered.
why approoueth he it not likewise in the one, so well as in the other? And
why may we not safely conclude? He improoueth that a woman should prophecy
bare-headed: therefore if she prophecy not bare-headed but covered on her
head, he does not improoue it: as well as we may say, he improoued that a
man should prophecy with his head covered, therefore if a man prophecy with
his head uncovered, he improoueth it not: or as well as we may say of the
other action, that in both of them he joins with prophesying: He improoueth
that a man should pray covered, or a woman bare-headed: therefore, if a man
pray uncovered, or a woman with her head covered, he improoueth it not. And
so of consequence, what he improoueth not, that he approoueth. If S. Paul
simply did improoue, and by no manner of means permit women to make public
prayers, and altogether forbid them to preach in the congregation: No
l^kelihood of S. Paul's utter improuing women's prophesying, that had the gift
thereof.
there is no likelihood in the world, that he would have brought instances of
such things, as could have no likelihood of approbation at all, were they
covered or uncovered in these actions. And therefore, this answer of Calvin
can by no means satisfy any, that shall never so little consider the Apostles
sentence. But Calvin perhaps thought it would better serve against the woman,
though not against the man: because the man is not in other places forbidden to
speak in the Church, as is the woman. And therefore he says, that Paul did
not reprehende this fault in women here, but referred the reprehension thereof
to an other place.

Now although this reason (indeed being generally spoken,) cannot be improoued,
Though one place in the scripture be referred to an other, yet in no place is
the spirit of god contrary to itself.
but that S. Paul might reserve the reprehension of this or that fault, to
this or that place, as it best liked the spirit of God in him, (albeit this
place also had not been unfit:) yet speaking of these things in diverse
places, he speaks not in the one contrary to the other, nor in any place is
the spirit of God in him, contrary to it self. But in diverse places ( as
we shall see anon, and that by their own confessions) he approoueth the
public praying and the public prophesying ( whether they take prophesying
properly, or for preaching) made by women in the holy assemblies. Therefore,
he may not only well approve it here, (being done in such comely order as he
appoints, and to aedification:) but also it cannot be utterly, wholely, and
by all means improoued, in any other place, as here Calvin says it is, which
to say, is to make the spirit of God speak contradictions. And are not men
also in other places forbidden publikly to preach in the congregation? Else,
how do our Breath. allege that place, page 58. out of Hebr. 3.4. For no man may
take upon him any office in the Church, but he that is called of God, as Aaron
was. And is preaching no office? And yet we see here, that understanding this
prophesying for preaching, he speaks it of men as well as women. As Calvin
testifies himself, upon this saying, 1. Cor. 11.4. Every man praying or
prophesying: to prophecy, I here take to be, to declare the mysteries of God
to the aedification of the audience. As afterward in the 14. chapter Even as to
pray, signifies, to conceive the form of praying, and as it were to go
before the whole people. Lo, here are even our Brethrens own words, page 64.
for their Pastors conceauing of public prayer, and the going before his flock
in public prayer. And yet, does S. Paul both 1. Cor. 11. and 1. Cor. 14.
approve this prophesying and this praying also, being otherwise decently,
orderly and to aedification used, and apply it not only to the Pastors, but to
all those among them, to whom God gave the gift of these things, though they
had no peculiar and ordinary Eccl. offices that exercised the same.

This therefore debarreth not, but that, How these things were forbidden and
how permitted.
although the ordinary public use, ( as taking it upon them by peculiar
office, being not called orderly thereunto,) might be forbidden, and improued,
not only in women, but in men: yet notwithstanding it is not altogether,
wholly, and simply forbidden and improued, but that upon such times as those
were, or upon some extraordinary necessity, or occasion, (we see) that even
publik praying and public preaching, both in men, though lay men and in women
that can do the same to aedification, is approved. Yea, no better witness than
Calvin himself against himself, and even in the very place he appealeth
unto. That is to wite, ( says he) unto the 14. chapter, Caluines better
answer.
here by our Brethr. noted. And have we not heard his judgment there already,
speaking of prophesying, that such necessity may happen, as may require the
voice of a woman? So that, he speaks not here of old examples such as we
cannot prescribe upon to do the like: but he speaks of that which may now or
hereafter happen, and as wherein, a woman's voice in the publ. assembly may be
as requisite, as at any time it heretofore has been. But what need had
Calvin to send us thence, to this 14. Chapter, or, we to hear him contrary
himself there? When as, not having satisfied himself belike, with this former
insufficient answer, for this praying and prophesying of women, chap. 11. he
answers himself otherwise, and far better even in that place, saying:
there is no discommoditie in that ( if he mean in that answer, we have
showed a great discommoditie, to the truth of the matter, and to the scriptures
credit, and his own) although, neither this does fit the same amiss, if we
say, that the Apostle requires of women this modesty, not only in the place
where the whole Church is gathered together: but also in any more grave
asse^bly either of women or of men, such as sometimes come together into private
houses. Caluines meaning
Of which words, I cannot see what sense else to gather, but that, so it be
done with this modesty here required, not to lay out their hears to the
show, as many now adays do, especially then, when they were all bare headed:
but use a Matronlike modesty in covering their heads, as was, and yet is the
Greek and Asian manner: though not ordinarily, yet, on some extraordinary
occasion, they might both publicly pray and prophecy yea, understanding it for
extraordinary preaching also, both in the open assemblies, and especially in
their private houses, though diverse other Matrones, or men also, besides their
own household be assembled. If this be not here Caluines meaning: I conceive
him not. But, I rather think it, because in the place that he refers
himself unto, (as we have seen) there is no ambiguitie in his words.

Now although, that both these words of S. Paul, and Caluines thus far
yielding thereunto, be apparent enough to any that list to see it: yet when it
comes to our Brethrens exposition, in their notes, on the Geneua translation:
all this seems so suddenly and so easily wiped away, that we would meruell,
that Calvin, which was a man (in most points) of such excellent judgment, and
is so vehement against this point in women, and of purpose moving and beating
this question, and shaking it off with this foresaid answer, and yet in the
end relenting to it, though afterward he go away from it as far again, (as
we shall see anon) did not epsy so easy and so ready an answer as this.
But, plus vident oculi, quam oculus, one man sees not all, and therefore it is
less marvel, if so singular a man also, The interpretation of the geneua
Testaments note and Bezaes exposition of women's praying and prophesying 1. Cor.
11.4. Beza in 1. Cor. 11.4.
as (God be praised) Beza is, and other that so say with him, coming after
Calvin, and seeing more perhaps than he, have found out a fitter and fuller
answer. Let us therefore see also, what Beza and these men saw and say
hereon. Upon these words, 1. Cor. 11. ver. 4. Every man praying and
prophesying, etc. says the Geneua note: this is referred to common praying and
preaching, for although one speak, yet the action is common, so that the whole
Church may be said to pray or preach. Which exposition, our Brethren chiefly
take out of Beza: every man ( says he) the universal particle takes away the
difference of orders and of age, so far forth as appertains to that which
is treated upon, praying or prophesying. Because the Apostle treats of
comeliness to be kept in the common assembly: therefore I take these things as
of the public prayer and prophecy, that is, of the treatise of the scripture.
Howbeit I refer it not only unto him which co^ceaueth the prayer or
interprets the place of scripture: but also to the assembly of the hearers
sitting together. For although that one speak, notwithstanding the action is
common, so that the whole company may be said by this means to pray and
prophecy. For first of all, the reasons which the Apostle brings, The wome^s
prophesying to be nothing but to hear the men's prophesying.
are common to all the men that are conversant in the Church, yea (I grant
also) to them that are without the Churches assembly. But for all that, the
question propounded and the conclusion of not covering the head, do show,
those reasons to be referred unto the circumstance of that time and place,
wherein the Church comes together. Moreover if ye refer this to one person
of the party praying or prophesying; the member opposite concerning a woman,
will not agree thereto. When as the Apostle afterward permits not unto a
woman, that she should speak in the Church, that is, in the common assembly
14. g. 34. and the reasons which he brings why they ought to be covered, it
is manifest enough that they appertain to every one of the women that are
conversant in the public assembly of the Church. This is Bezaes
interpretation and judgment on this place, and his reasons also for the same.
To whom accords Hyperius, and in part Hemingius.

Now although, in not subscribing (as our Brethren do) to the judgment of so
learned and profound a man with other, I shall more than hazard my self to
the hard judgment and censure of our Brethren: yet with dutiful submission
craving none other acquittance at Beza his hands, than even that here he
beginning first withal, that this universal particle, (...), every man,
takes away the difference of orders and of ages in praying or prophesying,
that is, interpreting or treating of any place in the scripture: may be my
warrant against the order of Bezaes dignity, or the gravity of his age in
this matter. And sith that he dissenteth many times, and also herein, from
other, and from Calvin his own Master, being free (as Horace said) nullius
addictus iurare in verba Magistri, but in this respect, professing him to be
our only Master, that says unto us for one is your Master or Doctor (to wit)
Christ. Matthew. 23.8. and 10. and in this point he stands not on man, but
fortifieth his interpretation with his reasons: why may it not be lawefull for
any other, and so for me, to allege also my plain and simple reasons? Aug.
contr. Maximum Lib. 13. ^a. 14.
As S. Augustine says well herein, Res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum
ratione. Way matter with matter, cause with cause, reason with reason: and
then judge who list, whether Bezaes interpretation be a sufficient answer; or
his reasons sufficiently maintain his interpretation. First he grants, (which
also I yield unto) that this prayer, and this prophecy, are here understood
of public actions.

Secondly, that this public prayer and public prophecy, is not to be
referred to him only, that conceaueth the prayer, or interprets the place of
scripture: but of the whole auditorie sitting together. This also in some part
and sense, may be granted unto him namely for publ. prayer. Because though in
the conceived public prayers, they can not all conceive the same altogether,
and so in conceauing pronounce it, as he does, except they say the same public
form of prayer with him, (as the Lords prayer, or some other appointed) which
they know before hand: and yet, if he make pauses, for them al to say after
him, the whole assembly even altogether at once, ( as we have proved) may
without confusion, with one heart and with one voice, join themselves together
in the publ. prayers. And this also have our Brethren granted unto, so it be
done by singing, and we infer, it may as well be done by saying Or else,
understanding Beza his words disiunctiuely; every man, that is, ( says he) the
whole congregation, that is (say I) every man or any man of the whole
congregation, understanding the same, of such especial exercises in those
times, or of extraordinary occasion eue^ in our times. Unto which, applying
these words (as Beza says) this universal particle, (...). every man
expels all difference of orders and ages: How every man and woman present
may make publ. prayer.
so in such cases all the assembly, that is, every one, or, any of the
assembly, to who^ God did give a special gift of conceauing a good prayer,
might the^, and may yet in like case, publikly make the same, yea, and in like
manner have prophesied also. But these things were not done, in the conceauing
of these public prayers, or in the treatises of the scripture, by every man of
the whole congregation altogether at once.

And in these senses, I deny not Bezaes interpretation. But, when here upon he
goes further, and draws it to this, that this doing of every one among the^
was the doing it of them altogether; because that his own action was in all
their names, and so they speak by the mouth of that one man, that was their
Pastor, One did not all these things in all their names.
or some number of Pastors among the^ clean to exclude all women from
speaking, and al other men present being no ministers: that is both clean
contrary from S. Paul's meaning, and from his apparent words, and from all
the circumstances of the matter, and conference of the other sentences
dependant on the same, and plain co^tradiction to Bezaes own tale, and has no
likelihood but gross absurdity, if not mere impossibility in it. For,
although ( says Beza) one speak, yet is the action common, that all the
company by this reason may be said to pray or prophecy: True it is, the
action is common, because it is done publicly, and in common, for the peoples
aedification. But no necessity drives this that every party that is present
at the doing, or assentes unto it, may be said to be the d^er of every common
action. The ministering of the sacraments is a common action: The sacram. not
minist^ed by all though common to all.
therefore by this rule of our Breath. every man and woman that is present at the
ministering of the sacraments, and assenteth to the^, and partaketh with the
Ministers, may be said also to be the ministers of the^. And yet (as I have
showed) this may be better said of the public prayer, than of the public
prophesying. For, although S. Paul brings his instance of both these
actions, praying and prophesying, and either of these words contein a relation
in them: yet are they far unlike in the things that they have relation unto.
This word Prayer, The difference between praying and prophecing.
not only has relation to the party that makes the Prayer: but has relation
also to some party to whom the prayer is made. Which party being God, to
whom only all the assembly make their prayers, and not to the Minister, nor
the Minister to them: it follows, that whether he or they pray altogether, or
he only pray in their name, it may ( I grant) be said to be their prayer: As
our Brethren said before, Page, 64. As it perteyneth to the pastor to conceive
public prayers: so it is the duty of the whole Church, in the name of the
whole Church, to join in heart with the Pastor, in the same prayers. etc. So
that, in these public Prayers, the Minister, and they whether they speak or
not, do both of them make but one party of the relation, and God the other.
And not the Minister a third person, as an intercessor or Mediator betwixt God
and them: and so, may his public prayers be said to be said to be theirs.
Although Paul here (expressing their diverse actions good and ill, not only
for the diversity of covering or uncovering of their heads, but for the
pronu^ciatio^ of the language showing also, how they should pray, and for the
courses of them, how many, and what manner, one after another, and with an
interpreter, does plainly express his own meaning for this point clear
enough, that were they men or were they Women, it was not done by the mouth of
any one of their Ministers or Pastors in their names, but by their own
mouths. This might likewise have been done (we deny not) for prayers by the
mouths of other in the name of them, even as though they all spoke it. Though
this also be but an improper praying on their parts (as we have showed) being
rather but their consent unto it.

But it is nothing alike in prophesying or preaching. For though all the people
never so much consent unto the preaching or prophesying, yet can it not be said
to be their action, as prayer might. For in prophesying or Preaching, in the
relation of these two parties, the Prophecier or Preacher respects God, and
all the people are the hearers of God, speaking unto them by him, Qui loquitur
loquatur eloquia Dei. But in prophesying ^he Minister represents one, and the
people another, and therefore the hearers cannot be said to be the prophec^er^
So that here they can be by no means be said to be all propheciers or
preachers, only because they are there present at the hearing of the
Prophesying or preaching and assent thereto: for then we clean confound this
relation betwixt God and his people, betwixt the Preacher and the hearer, when
both the Preacher is the hearer, and the hearer is the preacher. Not that we
deny, but that a Preacher may be a hearer, and a hearer may be a preacher in
sundry respects, and at diue^s times. And even so it was here, when many, and
sometimes all among the people prophesied or preached, but in their courses,
not all at once, nor one for all, nor one in the name of all. But as S. Paul
says: Let the prophets speak two or three ( meaning one after another) and
let the other judge. So that, they that are the hearers represent another
person, and not the person of the preacher.

Whereupon says Calvin. He adhibiteth a measure also in prophesying, because
the multitude (as vulgarly they say) breeds confusion. Which is true, Calvin.
for daily experience teaches it. etc. The tongues were given either to treat
upon, or to pray. In the former kind, the interpreter was in place of the
prophet: so was that the cheese and more frequent exercise. Only he sets
down a measure, least by glutting them, it might wax vile: and least those
that were less skillful, should snatch up before their betters, the place and
opportunity of the speaking. For those unto whom he assigns the office of
speaking, he would have to be indeed of the more choice persons, and ordained
by the common suffrages. But none are more ready to shoue in themselves, then
those that are slightly sprinkled over with a mean learning. That the proverb
may be made true, Unskillfulness is bold. With this evil would S. paul meet
when he attributed the office of speaking to two or three. Of which evil if S
Paul found the experience, while this exercise of prophesying or discussing
the places in the scripture, was thus used in the primitive Church: when after
it had been antiquated, and clean left in the Church so many hundred years,
Our late disorders in the exercise of prophesying.
and we began again to renew it, though we used it not for any of the layty,
men or women never so learned, but only for the exercise of the Ministers, yet
were we so pestered with this evil, that we were feign (it being but an
exercise more proper to that primitive age, than that we are bound thereunto)
to give it over again, when no Law nor order could restrain this blind
boldness, besides other more perilous dangers that grew, by the great
disorder of the same.

But both our practice in renewing it, and their first practice in using it,
apparently confuteth this, The hearers be the judges, not the propheciers
that one spoke not in the name of the residue, For, says S. Paul, Let the
residue judge. And no reason that he should be judged of them, if he spoke so
in their name that they spoke by him. And now and then they dissented, as in
the next verse: If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the
first hold his peace. For ( says Calvin) place and liberty while the matter
requires it, is left unto all, so that no man rush in out of season, rather
favoring himself than serving the necessity. Whom S. Paul's words meant, all
might prophecy.
But this modesty he requires of all, that every one give place to another,
bringing forth any better matter: and in the next verse, For ye may all
prophecy one by one, that all may learn and receive consolation. First when he
says all ( says Calvin) he comprehends not the universal number of the
faithful, but only those that were instructed with a faculty. Then, The gift
of tongues abused.
he signifies that the turns of them al were equal, but as it should be for
the profit of the people, every one of them either oftener or seldomer, to
come forth to speak, as though he should say, there is none shall lie idly
perpetually, but the opportunity of speaking shall offer it self now to these,
and now to those. He adds, that all may learn. Which though it appertain
to the vulgar people, notwithstanding it agrees to the prophets, and properly
these Paul points out, for no man shall at any time be a good teacher, that
shall not yield himself, to be taught, and is always ready to learn. etc. By
all which, it is most apparent, that these prophecyinges whosoever were the
speakers then, were not spoken by them in the person and name of all the
Congregation, nor yet of all those that had the gift thereof: but in the person
of God, whose spirit spoke in them. This interpretation therefore of Beza,
clean overthrows all S, Paul's whole treatise of these gifts. So that, the
reverence reserved of so worthy a man, and of other with with him, this (in my
opinion) is but a mere evasion, so far it is off from any show of a right
interpretation of that sentence: every man praying or prophesying with his
head covered, dishonors his head. And every woman, etc.

Neither are his reasons ( as me thinks) of greater weight, Bezaes reasons of
this interpretation.
than the devise of this interpretation. His first reason is this: The reasons
that the Apostle brings, are common to all the men that are conversant in the
assembly of the Church, and also (I grant) of those that are out of the
assembly of the Church: but for all that the question propounded and the
conclusion the head not covered, do declare those reasons to be referred to the
circumstaunce of the time and place, wherein the church assembleth: What can
be gathered hereupon, but that the Question and conclusion of uncovering the
head, do restrain his reasons to those that be in the Churches assembly,
which otherwise, Bezaes own reason overthrows his interpretation.
would stretch further? and what conclusion is this, that this word praying or
prophesying, either in man or woman, praying or prophesying, must needs be
understood for the action of one in the name and person of the whole
assemblye? Nay rather, how does not this reason, if it be any reason,
overthrow Bezaes interpretation? For, sith the Question propounded and the
conclusion, is of the being bare-headed: If the Ministers prophesying, be the
prophesying of all the men there assembled: then must all the men that be there
assembled be bareheaded too. But this was not the Apostles meaning, nor it was
not then, nor ever in custom, that all the men that hear the preacher or
prophecier should also be bareheaded. Therefore this is not the true
interpretation of Paul's meaning, that his preaching or prophesying is al their
preaching or prophesying, and that they used no other but by his mouth.

VVomens prophesying.
His second reason is this, Moreover (says Beza) If ye restore it to the one
person of him that prays or prophecieth, the me^mber (of the sentence)
opposite, concerning the woman, will not agree thereto. And why will not that
next sentence concerning the Woman agree to this sense, Beza reasons a
petitione principii.
that some one Woman also might prophesy in the assembly? forsoothe (says
he,) Since that the Apostle permits not a Woman to speak in the Church,
that is, in the common assembly. What is this else, but petitio principij? to
take that as a clear case to be beforehand granted, that all the Question
depends upon, how these words of the Apostle should be understood, whether as
a simple debar in all cases, or as, but from an ordinary function of speaking
in the Church. Neither is the Woman's covering of her head (for that it is
common to other women in the church so well as to her, that preaches or
prophecieth) any reason that she may no more speak than they do: for that is
not the reason that she speaks at all. But she speaking upon some other
occasion, she is bound much more to keep that comeliness that other Women in
the Church are bound unto, and so much more bound than men are, in as much as
it is free for the men in the Church assembled, and not speaking, to be either
covered or not covered with comeliness enough, which is not so in women,
though not speaking. But by what warrant does Beza make these, to be membra
opposita, Wherein the opposition of S. Paul's sentence lies.
the Man and the woman? indeed here is an opposition made of Paul, in the
covering or uncovering of their heads: But he neither makes any opposition in
the persons, and much less, (but al resembla^ce, nay rather, one and the same
action in them both) for the praying and for the prophesying. For if the
universal particle takes away the difference of orders and of age in the
respect of prayer and prophesying: It less considers the person or the sex,
but the matter prayed or prophesied, and the new creature in Christ Jesus, or
the Spirit of God that speaks in them. But let be the opposition in the
Pastors, or in the praying or prophesying. Go to then (says he) but if the
woman pray not publicly, nor prophecy in her own person: then, contrariorum
eadem est ratio, The prayer and prophesying of the man, is not in his own
person.

B^zaes reason returned on him self.
But see now, how this reason ( returned home again) does beat his Master.
The opposition ( says he) is in the persons of the man and of the woman, and
in the praying or prophesying, of them. Is it so? Go to then (say I) but if the
man pray or prophecy publikly, not by the mouth of another, but by his own
mouth, as I have (I trust) so fullye and at large proved, and if that will not
satisfy, I shall God willing (being called thereto, prove it better: But,
contrariorum eadem est ratio: of contraries there is one and the same order, or
reason: therefore the prayer and prophesying of a woman here mentioned, and
opposed to man^, is after the same manner and order uttered, not by the mouth
of another, but by her own mouth. Yea, if it were not uttered (her prayer and
her prophesying) as well by her mouth, as the man by his mouth, but a third
person should utter it for them both, then how must that person, The
inconueniency of this interpretation.
representing both the person of the man and of the woman praying or
prophesying, use his head? which was S. Paul's principal conclusion? If he be
covered, that is not aunswerable to the comeliness of the man. If he be
uncovered, that is less aunswerable, if not more unfit, for the comeliness of
the woman. What shall we here do? yea, though we imagined this third were an
Hermaphrodites, that is, of both genders, Man and woman, except the same party
also had two heads, the one to be uncovered, and the other to be covered.
What a strange devise therefore is this? and what a number of impossible,
unnatural, and monstrous absurdities, do arise, if a man would stand in
examining this interpretation?

I speak not this for the dishonor of them, whom I honor with good heart, as
singular ornaments of Gods Church in our age. And yet Luther, Beza now and
then alters his own interpretation.
so excellent an instrument of Gods truth and glory, when he writhed some
textes of Scripture by affection, more then by considerate and indifferent
weighing of them, into what unnecessary misconstructions, and oppositions to
the plain and easy truth, and to his own self, did he fall, and caused many
(by his too great estimation) to fall with him? And therefore we must take
heed, how we depend too much on Men. And if we will hold us always to Gods
word, so take it, that we carry not that also away after our own construing.
If it be plain and easy, not to lap it in ambiguities. If it be hard and
doubfull* to way it with other places, and consider all the circumstaunces,
grounds and occasions. And if nothing be against the faith, to go with the
best, and with the mo, the better, in the sense that seems most probable.
Which Beza here does not, who though in many places he deserve singular praise:
yet in some places he is too singular, which deserves so little praise, that
now and then he himself forsakes his former translation, and either on better
advice, comes to other men's, or changes his former translation, with another
of his own, even where no necessity nor sufficient cause does enforce him:
as, even upon this place, 1. Cor. 14.34. cited by our Brethren, (...). And the
common translation, is there true and plain enough, Mulieres vestrae in
ecclesiis taceant. Let your Women keep silence in the Churches. Where not
only Erasmus, but Calvin also reteineth the usual derived word, even from
the very Greek, in Ecclesiis: whom all the commentaries of the new writers,
(that I have looked upon) do follow. And all our translations: yea, even the
Geneua translation also. The word Churches nor well changed, not the word
assemblies.
And yet does Beza forsake it, and translate it in Coetibus in companies or
assemblies, and he alters this again, in conuentibus in meetinges together,
and says that the vulgar translation, in the Churches, is not apt enough in
this place, (...) and also in the verse following. Because that a woman also is
in the church, that is, of the number of the faithful, when she is at home.
Neither yet is she bidde^ to be silent, but in the public assembly of the
church. And is this a sufficient reason to alter this word in the churches? Who
knows not (that knows ought) ye this word church as it is commonly taken,
signifies here not only the place where the sacred assemblies of the faithful
are made: but also the faithful persons so assembled? was Beza in doubt, least
if this interpretation should have stood, that women should not speak in the
Churches, they should have bin thought to have bin forbidden to speak any where,
but to be continually in every place silent, because wheresoever they be, yea,
though at home, they be still in the church, that is, of the number of the
faithful? The drife of Beza utterly to restrain all Women from speaking in any
assemblies.
What a needless fear was this? and yet, if he would have mended the
translation, to stop this needles fear should he have mended it, to call it a
company or assembly, or meeting together? which though it seem to give women
some license to speak, where no assembly or company, or meeting together is:
yet, does this indeed restrain them no further, than the occasion that Paul did
speak on, drives unto. True it is, he afterward expou^ds himself, saying: they
are not bidde^ to hold their peace, but in the public company of the church:
but these words the public company of the church are in neither of his
translations. For there is only said, in companies or meetings together. And
yet what he means by the public companies of the church, taking the church
as here he calls it: may not a woman speak in many companies or meetinges
together of the faithful? and if the households of the faithful be called
churches also: may she not speak in her house neither, nor to the assembly of
her household, for fere she should transgres this precept? if they say, that is
but a private church, and Paul means of the public assemblies of the church:
although women then shall gain a great deal more liberty, by this gloss, then
by this hard translation of the text: yet, how much better had it bin, both for
Bezaes estimation, and our edification, especially for the matter and truth it
self, for Beza to have left these nice points, and to have yielded to his M.
Calvin, that, as necessity might require, this precept of the ordinary course
makes no absolute debar to al manner of women, but that now and then, some
may speak lawfully, yea, and their voice is requisite, even in the most
sacred, public, and greatest assemblies or meetings together of the Churches.

I confess (as I said) that other excellent men also use this interpretation:
but they are more naked thereon then Beza is, nor I accoumpt them comparable to
him. But neither he, nor they do so satisfy the simplicity of ye text herein,
as Musc. and Peter Martyr do, Musc. upon these words every woman praying and
prophesying, says* they ask here how a Woman shameth her head if she
prophecy bare headed: when, about the end of the 14. Chapter, he commands
them to hold their peace in the Church, because it is a shame for a Woman to
speak in the Church, and 1. Tim. 2. he says, but I permit not a woman to
teach. What need is there (say they) to bid a Woman not to prophecy
bare-headed* when she may not do it, no, not covered? I answer: he
restrains a Woman's rashness, that they should not (as oftentimes they are
bablatiue) leap forth to teach and prophecy, being forgetful of their
sex. Nevertheless in the mean season, he does not extinguish the spirit,
with the which some being inspired, did prophecy, by foretelling things to
come. Such as were Philip the Deacons daughters, and many others, which did
prophecy, according to the foretelling of Joel, Chapter, 2. where we read
this: And after these things I will pour my spirit upon all flesh, and your
sons and your daughters shall prophecy. For such he pronounces that they
shall shame their head, if they pray or prophecy bareheaded. Of other he would
give another sentence, if they had broken forth into the office of teaching,
yea, with their heads covered. Thus clearly and simply does Musculus interpret
the place, although he say, that other answer this question otherwise: and so
reckons up that, which was Caluines first answer.

After the like objection Peter Martyr makes the like conclusion, saying: we
answer: in this place that vice is only reprehended, whereby Women dealth
publicly being bare headed. But afterward, and to Tim. that shall be commanded,
that they shall also hold their peace: because all things are not delivered in
one place. As though, the women of Corinth had offended in a double fault. Both
that they went bare-headed, and that they spoke publicly. The one of these is
now condemned, the other shall afterward be cut off. But Pet. Mar. seeing yt
this answers not the matter: for, if they sinned in these 2. faults, and
their publik speech were the greater of the 2. as unlawful, which the other is
not: would he co^demn the less, and seem to allow that, that is utterly il: or
refer them to amend their fault at leisure by that he would afterward speak to
another, and not then, but far from the^, and long after? there is no likelihood
of this reason, which is that yt we hard before in Calu. And therefore says
Pet. Mar. further: Other say that these things are to be taken of women, when
they pray or prophecy privately, which is not forbidden them, But since this
also satisfies not the place: he makes this conclusion: We may also expound
another way this commandment of thapostle, that it was ordained that women
should hold their peace in the order accustomed, Whereupon, no public function
was committed unto the^ in the church, which should be ordinary and perpetual.
Notwithstanding, if the spirit of the L. inspired them, it was not altogether
forbidden, but that they might speak something. We know that the prophetess
Anna spoke of our savior in the temple, when the blessed virgin was purified.
Debora also sang publicly praises to God, and Mary Moses sister, and that
women now and then prophesied in the old time, many places witness. Holda a
prophetess was asked counsel of king Josias. Hanna, the Mother of Samuel set
forth a most godly Hymn. Mary also the Virgin and Mother of Christ sang an
hymn. Philip also in the Acts of the Apostles had many daughters that did
prophecy. And the Lord commanded Magdalene, that she should declare his
resurrection to the Apostles. And it is read in the prophet Joel: Of my spirit
will I power forth on you, your sons and your daughters shall prophecy. Thus
says Peter Martyr, which done: he comes in also with Bezaes, Bullingers,
Hyperius, Hemingius, and our Brethrens interpretation aforesaid, saying: they
also slip out of this place more reddily (or nimbly,) that think these things
perteined not to them only, that did prophecy or pray publicly: but also to
their hearers: Bezaes interpretation rejected.
that the men should be bare headed, and the women's heads covered. But how
does Peter Matyr like of this last interpretation? Does he allow it? no, he
counts it no better then a ready or nimble slip, and no sound answer. And
so he concludes against it, saying: But the words of Paul seem not to make
with their sentence, when as he avouches it expressly, of a woman praying or
prophesying.

Thus substancially does peter Martyr answer the matter. All which proofs
and examples does Marlorate also after his collections of Calvin and others,
word for word set down and approve as the true and simple interpretation.
And notable are every one of these examples, if we shall examine and discuss
them severally. Besides other examples both in the old and in the New
Testament, whose speeches though partly they were of other matters, and not
all concerning either prayer or prophecy: yet, were they spoken in the public
assembly of the faithful, without note of any reproach unto them. Yea, the
Law provided in what cases, the woman may claim, The womans claim.
before the Elders in the Gates of the City, ( which was the place of the most
public assemblies of the faithful) her kinseman to be her Husband. Deuteronomy. 27.
Deuteronomy. 25. verse 7. and 9. Abigails speech and wise Oration made to David,
before all his troops, is of David highly commended. 1. Sam. 25. verse 24*
etc. The wise woman in Abel saved the City from destruction by her wise
speeches and eloquent persuasion. 2. Sa. 20.18. The Queen of Saba though an
heathen Woman, yet not only is approved of Solomon, whose wisdom she tried
with diverse Questions, and so highly extolled: 2. Reg. 10.6. etc. but Christ
also gives an honorable testimony of her so doing. The wife of Esaias was a
prophetess, so well as he a prophet. Esaias 8.3. Neither are the testimonies of
the Apocryphal Scriptures in this matter of comeliness* Esayes wife.
or for such points as concern good manners, to be rejected: and they are
goodly testimonies also As the public prayer of Susanna: Susanna.
the godly mother publicly preaching to the seven Children, to be constant
Martyrs for the Law of God* 2, Macha. 7. The notable sermon that Judith made,
even to the high priest, Women's speech.
and to all the elders of Bethulia.

But if our Brethren regard not this, as (some of them have rejected the factes
and speeches of Judith, even with contumelies:) Let us come also unto other
examples not improued in the new Testament. What shall we say for that woman's
fact, that even while Christ was preaching, The woman that praised Christ.
as Luke says, Chap. 11. ver. 27. And it came to pass as he said these
things, a certain woman of the company lift up her voice, and said unto him:
Blessed is the womb that did bear thee, and the paps that gave thee suck?
Luke. 11.17.
Did Christ rebuke her; for that she spoke thus boldly in the open assembly
of the people? No, Luke says not so. But he said (says Luke) yea rather,
blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. Whereupon says the
Geneua note: Christ gave her a privy taunt, for that she omitted the chief
praise which was due unto him, that was, that they are blessed indeed, to whom
he communicates himself by his word. So that if she had given the chief
praise to Christ, she had done well, and so far forth her speech is not
reprehended, but the more commendable, in the greater congregation that it was
spoken. And in a sort, Calvin confesses her words to redound, not a little
to the commendation of Christ also. By which praise ( says ^e) the woman would
extol the excellency of Christ. For she respected not Marie whom perhaps she
never saw. But this amplifieth the glory of Christ not a little, that she
ennobleth and makes blessed the womb in which he was borne. Neither is this
blessing of God absurdie, but according to the manner of the Scripture
celebrated. For neither can it be denied, but that God choosing and destinating
Marie to be the mother unto his son, vouchsafed highly to honor her. So
that thus far forth, besides he^ commendable constancy, and open profession
of Christ, she was neither improued of Christ, nor discommended of any
protestant writer, namely, for lifting up her voice being a woman, in the
audience of the public congregation.

Likewise the woman that had the bloody flixe, The woman with the bloody f^x
Matthew. 9. ver. ^0. when as being a weak and bashful woman, and by reason of
her disease, she durst not come openly before Christ, and in so great
assembly open her voice and pray to him for succor: but came behind him and
touched the hem of his garment. For she said in her self, If I may but touch
his garment only, I shall be whole: Did Christ like this that she should
receive this benefit of him thus in silence, because a woman might not speak
in the congregation? No, says Luke, chap. 8. verse. 44. When she came
behind him and touched the hemme of his garment, immediately her issue of
blood staunched. Then Jesus said, who is it that has touched me? When every
man denied, Peter said, and they that were with him, Master, the multitude
thrust thee, and tread on thee, and say thou, who has touched me? And Jesus
said, some one has touched me, for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me.
When the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling and fell down
before him, and told him before all the people, for what cause she had touched
him, and how she was healed imediatlie. Was not this then the purpose of
Christ, that this woman should speak and declare this work of God, before all
the public assembly of the people?

The woman of Canaan.
What shall we say of that woman, Matthew. 15.22. the Cananite that came crying
to Christ, and said? Have mercy on me, O Lord thou son of David, my daughter
is miserably vexed with a devil. Here this woman cried out in an open prayer,
and spared not to speak speak aloude before all the assembly. But he
answered her ( says Matthew) not a word. What? Was he angry, that she being a
woman, durst make her prayer so openly, before the multitude of the people?
Indeed the Disciples were offended at her importunity, and came to him and
besought him. saying: Send her away, for she cries after us. But he answered
and said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. So
that he finds no fault, for that she being a woman would presume to make
this open prayer: but pretends that she was not such a woman as he was sent
to help, and that if she had been such a woman, he would have liked of her
cry well enough, and have helped her. Yet came she ( says Saint Matthew) and
worshipped him saying: Lord help me. And he answered and said, It is not good
to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to whelps. And she said, Truth
Lord, howbeit the whelps eat of the crumbs which fall from their Masters
table. Did Christ here like her replying upon him, having such an answer? Yea
verily, and that most singularli^ well: Then Jesus answered and said unto her,
O woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee as thou desire, and her daughter
was made whole at that hour.

Neither is it unworthy to consider the story, so diligently described by
Saint John, chap, 4. concerning the Samaritane Woman. The woman of Samaria.
Calvin.
Not her bold talk with Christ alone at the Well: but that, verse. 29. she
said of Christ unto the people, Come and see a man, that has told me all
things that I have done, is not this Christ. Yea Calvin, who compares her so
doing to this saying in the Psalm, I believed, and therefore I spoke. Psalm.
116. v. 10. And ( says he) this vehemency and cheerfulness of the woman,
are so much the more to be noted of us, because an only small spark of faith
kindled them. For she had scarce tasted Christ, when she sets him forth
throughout all the City, etc. But this ( says he) seems in the woman rather
worthy reprehension, that being as yet rude and not thoroughlie taught, she
passed the bounds of her faith* The answer is, she should have done
inconsideratlie, if she had taken upon her the parts of teaching: but now when
she desires nothing but to stir up her Citizens, that they should hear
Christ speak, we will not say, that being forgetful of her self, she
proceeded further than became her* Woman's public speech.
Only she does the office of a Trumpet, or of a Bell, to call them unto
Christ, And yet was this a kind of preching to the^, as Musculus calls it,
saying: The woman did so much by her preaching, Musculus.
that the people of this City went out to Christ, of whom as yet they knew
nothing. Yea, Aretius says: But as concerning that she preaches the name and
the person of Christ, she testifies by example, how much she had profited. At
the beginning she acknowledged him only to be a Jew; after that, a Prophet,
placing him in a higher degree: at the length she perfectly acknowledges him
to be the Messiah, and such a one unto her Citizens she preaches him to be*
Which also is for an example of regeneration, whereof the order is this. First
to come to the knowledge of ones own self, and then diligently to search
concerning the true worship of God. Last of all, to become careful of the
profit of our neighbor. Thus she (wherein she profited) would have her
fellow Citizens to profit also, least she should enjoy so great a benefit all
alone. Thou have therefore a woman an Evangelist. She exercises the office of
a Doctor or Teacher, she that came for an harlot, returns an Euangelical
mistress. This is the marvelous goodness of God, choosing base and
contemptuous things in the world, that he might confound the wise men of this
world.

Heerevpon Marlorate concludes out of Bucer: Therefore, Marlorat out of Bucer
there is not so much consideration to be had of the party that speaks, as
we must ponder what is spoken to us. And Alesius the Scot hereon, making this
his 16. place, does say: The ministry of the Gospel is not tied to the
ordinary power. And the doctrine of a private man, and of a woman, which
brings forth the word of God, is to be preferred before the judgment of
the multitude, and of them that take upon them the name and authority of the
Church, as the Samaritanes believe at the testimony of a woman concerning
Christ.

To conclude these examples in the new Testament, Luke mencioning Philip the
Evangelist, Act. 21 verse. 9. says: Philips four daughters.
Now had he four daughters virgins that did prophecy. But this example
Calvin would seem on the other side to cut off, saying: But how these
maidens exercised the office of prophesieng it is uncertain, except the
spirit of GOD did so moderate them, that they troubled not the order of him
set down. But when he permits not women to sustain a public person in
the Church: it is credible, that they prophesied either at home, or in a
private place out of the common assembly. Yea, not only Calvin that would
thus cut off this example of Philips daughters, but of all the other that have
been, or may be alleged for any women: says further upon Saint Paul's
precept, 1. Timoth. 2. verse. 11. and 12. Let the woman learn in quiet ^ith
all subjection, VVomens speech.
for I permit not a woman to teach, or to take authority on her over the man.
After that he has spoken, ( says he) of their apparel: he now adds with
what modesty women ought to behave themselves in the holy assembly. And
first he bids them to learn mildly, for quiet signifies silence, not that
he would take from them the office of instructing their family, How Calvin
cutteth off these examples.
but only drive them from the office of teaching, which GOD has committed to
men only. Of which matter we treated in the Epistle to the Corinthians. If
any object Debora and the like, whom we read to have sometimes ben placed over
the people, to govern them by the commandment of God: The answer is easy,
that the common policy whereunto GOD would have us tied, is not ouerturned by
the extraordinary facts of god. Therefore if at any time women have holden the
place of prophesieng and teaching, and that being stirred up by the spirit of
God: This could he do, which is free from all law. But because this is
singular, it fights not with the perpetual and accustomed policy. He
adds that which is next to the office of teaching: Neither let them take
authority to themselves over their husbands. For this is the reason why they
are prohibited to teach: because their condition does not suffer them, for
they are subject: but to teach is a matter of power or of a higher degree.
Albeit the reason seems not firm enough, since that the Prophets also and the
Doctors or teachers, are subject to kings and to other Magistrates. I answer,
there is no absurdity, but that one may govern, and also with all, obey,
according to diverse respects: but in a woman, that avails not, which by
nature, that is, by the ordinary law of God, is borne to obey. For all
prudent men have always refused the government of women, as it were a monster.
The heaven and earth therefore should in a manner be mingled together, if
women should snatch unto the^ the right of teaching. Therefore he bids them be
quiet, that is, to contain themselves in their own order.

Thus says Calvin not only of women's teaching, but also of women's
government. From women's public preaching how our breath. proceed against wome^s
public government.
But now, because this may seem not only to shake off all these former
examples, but to call the matter from public teaching, into a further and more
dangerous question, both of our estate, and simply of the public government
of a woman, which here Calvin in very broad and boistrous speeches, not only
aims at, but manifestly oppugneth, and that some of our own Brethren have
not spared to write directly against women's government, and their chiefest
ground arises from hence: therefore I think it not amiss to weigh this
answer of Calvin a little better. Yea, adding unto him for his further
help, besides Peter Martyr and others, Danaeus also upon this the Apostles
precept, as the most earnest in the same.

But first, Philips daughters.
for that Calvin says to the example of the 4. virgins that did prophecy.
How they exercised the office of prophesying, ( says he) it is uncertain If
it be uncertain, Whether the 4. virgins prophesying, Act. 2^* 9. did it
ope^^io or no.
how can he or any other determine the certeinty, that they did not prophecy
openly, as the other Weomen Prophets had wont to do? But he says, if they
should have prophesied in a public place, they should have troubled the order
that god had set down. What order was that, and where, and when? he seems to
refer us to this place, 1. Tim. 2. or to the other 1. Cor. 14. saying: when
as he permits not weomen to sustain a publik in person the church: and
therefore it is not likely, that they prophesied in open place. I demand,
whether this order were an ancient order set down and made of God before, or
after? If it were made after, then it touched not these prophetesses doings
that were before. If it were an ancient order of God, made before: how
touches it not the other prophetesses and other weomen speaking in public
place, at leastwise, some of them so well as these? and does not the same
reason hold for all, that does for some? If therefore, to save these 4. from
transgressing the order of God, this be the only help, to say they did it in
a private place: what an acquittance is this to them, that should accuse a
far greater number of as good, if not some far better than these were? Yea,
how says Calvin then, it is uncertain? may we not rather conclude thus? It
is certain, that these 4. virgins observed the order of God, C^luine on Act.
2^.0.
without any disturbance of the same: But whether they did prophecy in private
or public place, that is not certain: therefore there was no order of God
absolutely and simply set down, concerning the place private or publ. of women's
propheciing.

But how does not Calvin reasoning that it was credible to be done in a
private place? make it more credible to be done in public? he says This is
added for Philips praise, that we should not only know that his house was
well ordered; but also was famous and noble, by the blessing of God. For it was
no common gift, to have 4. daughters, all of them endued with the spirit of
prophecy. But by these means would God ennoble the beginnings of the gospel,
when as he stirred up men and weomen, which should foretell things to come.
Prophecies had almost ceased now many years among the Jews, to the intent that
their minds, should be the more erected, or awakened to hear the new voice of
the gospel. Since therefore after so long a time prophecy was returned on a
sudden, it was a sign of a more perfect state. Notwithstanding, the same
seems to be the reason, why within a little after, it decayed. For God did
sustain the ancient people, with diverse predictions, until Christ by his
coming brought an end to all the prophecies. Therefore it behooved the new
kingdom of Christ, to be beautified with this orname^t, that all men might
know, that that promised visitatio^ of God was come.

If now by this clear confession of Calvin, not only to the making noble and
famous Philips house, but to the ennobling the beginninges of the Gospel, and
that these prophesies of women, so well as of me^, should answer to the order
of the ancient prophecies, to the awakening of men, to the confirming and
beautifying of the gospel, and the kingdom of Christ: but the ancient manner
of prophesying, both in the women Prophets, so well as in the men Prophets,
was done for the most parts publicly, the more to ennoble the works of God,
and the more to ediffe the more people, and the less to breed any suspicion
of hucker mucker, or false prophesying which seeks corners: how then was not
these 4. virgins prophesying, public also? it might be that these virgins
prophesied unto Paul, of his troubles the^ at hand, they being in their
fathers house where Paul hosted. As likewise other Prophets in other places had
done. Whereof Paul says in the chapter before, ver. 22. and 23. And lo now,
I go up bownde in the spirit unto Jerusalem, knowing not what things there
shall happen unto me, save that in every City the holy Ghost testifi^th,
saying: That bonds and afflictions do abide me. And the like prophesies were
made unto him at Tyrus, as appears in this chapter ver. 4. And as Agabus at
that present did, ver. 11. But it rather seems by S. Lukes words, and by
this reference of Calvin, to the ancient manner of prophesying that ye
prophesying of these 4. virgins, is not to be restrained to time only, but
that they used to prophecy, and were notoriously known to be Prophetesses And
although they might have then prophesied unto Paul, in their fathers house,
which was a private place, yet the persons being present, not only of their
father an Evangelist, who (otherwise had authority over them) and of Paul
being a publik person, and an Apostle, and no doubt many notable persons in his
retinue, besides the faithful of the church of Caesarea: there is no likelihood,
but that it was done in no small assembly, though the place were private. And
yet, to show the manner of their prophesying further, and to resolve us in this
doubt of Calvin: Eusebius lib. 3. Eccl. hist. cap. 31. ( as we have heard
before) cites the testimony of Polycrates B. of Ephesus, of whom we have
heard before, Eusebius. on the 3. Eccle. hist. cap. 9.
page 317. This Polycrates ( says Eusebius) writing to Victor B. of Rome,
makes mention also of him, ( he means of John the Euangeliste,) and of
Philip the Apostle, and also of his daughters, saying; As we have already above
inserted, that the great lights in the parts of Asia are laid a sleep; whom
the L. shall raise in the last day of his coming, when he shall come with
glory, and require all his saints. But of Philip I say (says he) which was one
of the Apostles, which slept at Hierapolis, and also 2. of his daughters being
virgins, waxed old in that place. and another daughter of his replenished
with the holy ghost, co^tinuedat Ephesus. Whereby it appears, that they were
Prophetesses of great and public renown in Gods church: and not such as
durst not prophecy but only in private places. Women's public speaking.
Which thing although Peter Martyr do not particulerly auouche it of these 4.
virgins, yet writing on the Judges cap. 4. ver. 4. he says thus: When GOD
chose Debora unto the ministry of judging, being in her kind weak, forthwith
he made her renowned and noble in the gift of prophesying. With which gracious
gift, and perhaps with many miracles more, she was of God consecrate and with
miracles confirmed, as one that was chosen unto so great an office. Neither was
this only woman endued with the spirit of prophecy, for we read also in the
holy Scriptures, that other women were so instructed with the holy ghost. Marie
the sister of Moses, Anna the mother of Samuel, Holda in the time of King
Josias, were Prophetesses. And in the new Testament (to pass in silence the
virgin Mary, Elizabeth John his mother, and Anna Phanuels daughter: the
daughters also of Philip) the Deacon, (as is recorded in the Acts of the
Apostles) were prophetesses. Neither do I think that it ought to be denied,
that some of these women being instructed, with the gift of prophecy, taught
the people publikly, declaring to them those things that were of God showed
unto the^: Women's public teaching and edifying the Church.
since that the gifts of God were not given to that purpose, that they should
closely hide themselves, but that they should promote the common aedification
of the Church.

In which examples of the new testament, he seems chiefly to refer this
public prophesying, to this example of these 4. virgins. Now, concerning that
which Calvin says on S. Paul's precept, 1. Tim. 2. ver. 11. and 12.
expounding it thus: that women should not usurp unto themselves, the the
courses of speaking in public: ( and as he concludes,) snatch up the right of
teaching in the sacred asseblies, the ordinary Ecclesiastical office, whereof
was given of God unto men only: all this we gladly grant unto, as ye very
meaning of S. Paul, and herein Calvin does well, to refer us for the
exposition of this place, to that, which before he said. 1. Cor. 14.34. For
there he made a plain exception of extraordinary examples. And therefore, to
that which here he answers to the objection of Debora and the like women,
God free and above his ordinary law.
that the common policy whereunto God would have us bound is not overthrown by
his extraordinary facts: if some women therefore being stirred up by the spirit
of God, have held the place of prophesying or teaching. This could God do,
which is free from all law. But because this is singular, it fights not with
the perpetual and accustomed policy. This is a good answer, so that we
restrain it not only to those facts which were then done, that he may not do
the like now, or at any other extraordinary times: For that were to debar
and limite God. But understanding it as Calvin did before, that such a
necessitye may come, as may require a Woman's voice. So that the general rule
stands still, intier for the ordinarye, Ecclesiastical offices and co^ses of
teaching, Teaching and governing.
although extraordinarily, and in cases of necessity, a woman having the gift
of God to do it with edification, may make a publik exhortation to the people.

As for this reason of Calvin, why they should be forbidden to teach, because
their condition, does not suffer it: what condition is that? For ( says he)
they are subject: but to teach is a matter of power or of higher degree. The
argument is this: None may publikly teach that are subjects, or of lower power
and degree, than are those whom they teach: but women are subject to me^, and
oflower degree: and therefore Women may not publikly teach me^, First, for the
Mayor of this argument, Calvin himself seems to distrust it, and the whole
reason that depends thereon, saying: howbeit this reason seems not firm,
since that the Proph. also and the Doctors or Teachers, were subject to Kings,
and other Magist. If this reason seems not firm, then it seems as it is.
For in deed it is a weak reason, and stands upon infirm posts. May none
teach publikly, yt is a subject, or oflower degree in power, than those are
whom he teaches? But Calvin says not so. What says he then? weomen cannot
publikly teach Why so? they be subjects. what hinders that? yes forsooth
does it, for teaching is a thing of power and of higher degree, and therefore
none may teach, How our brethren slip from weomens publ. speaking, to weomens
public government.
but they must be of power and of higher degree: and over whom must this power
and higher degree stretch, but over them whom they teach: Is not this then Call.
plain meaning, that none may publikly teach other: but he that is of power and
higher degree, tha^ are those whom he teaches? If this be true, how is his own
objection true, that Prop. and Doct. are subjects to Kings, and other Magist.
May they not teach Princes, and their other Magistrates? Or will they exalt
themselves, above their Kings and Magisttes, and exempt themselves from being
subjects, because they are their teachers? As the Pope under that pretense
likewise did? For, what helps this answer of Calvin, but to overthrow his
own principle? I answer ( says he) there is no absutditie, How power and
teaching concur and differ.
but that one may govern, and withal obey, according to diverse respects. If
this his answer be good (as indeed it is) does it not clean ouerturne
Caluines own Mayor, that none may teach, but that is of power, and higher
degree, than those ar whom he teaches? If he say, and are they not of power
and higher degree, in that respect they teach? No verily, not always: even in
that respect of teaching neither. No? teaching is a matter of power and higher
degree.

I deny that, (since we must drive the matter so narowly to respects) that in
that respect it is teaching, it is a matter of power or of higher degree. For
teaching properly of it self, is but a matter of instruction and informing.
What power did Ietro take upon him, or superior degree when he taught Moses,
how he should choose and appoint out Justices, to ease him in the government of
the people? Exodus 18.14. What power or superior degree took Ioathan on him
over the Sichemites, when he stood on the topp of mount Garrizim, and cried
unto them, and said, Hearken unto me, ye men of Sichem, etc? Iud. 9.7. What
power and superior degree took Sampsons mother over her husband, when she
showed him reasons, that the appearing of the Angel of the Lord, unto them,
was no argument that he would kill them? Iud. 13.23. When David taught Saul,
how ill he did in persecuting him being an innocent did he take any power
upon him over Saul, or any higher degree above him? 1. Sam. 24. ver. 10. and
26. ver. 18. When the poor handmaide taught her Maistresse, Naamans wife, by
what means her Lord might be cleansed from his leprie. 2. Reg. 5. ver. 2. and
Naamans servant persuaded their Master to follow the Prophets
commandment? Did they take any power or superior degree upon them? And when
Counselors teach their Princes what they should do; for, what is counselling
but informing or teaching? When the King said to Elisaeus servant, tell me I
pray thee, of all the great acts that Elisaeus has done? when the servant
showed the same unto him: did he take upon him a power and higher degree above
the King, whom he informed? Does Job when he bids Eliphas the Themanite,
teach him. give him power and higher degree above him? Job 6. ver. 24. Or, when
he says to Sophar? Ask the beasts and they shall teach thee, and the fowls
of the heaven, and they shall tell thee? Job. 12.7.

Neither lets it, that some of these are private teachings: for, be they
private, or be they public in respect they are teachings, they consider not the
authority of the Teacher, but the matter taught, The power of the Teacher.
or the manner of the teaching. As for the power and superiority of degree,
that he has who is the teacher; respects the party whose doctrine he
teaches, and the commission he has from him. Which in this heavenly doctrine,
comes from heaven, having his authority and warrant from the Almighty God as
it is said of Christ: he taught as one having power, and not as the Scribes.
In which consideration (I grant) all power yields, or ought to yield, when
the hearers, whosoever, understand that the Teachers doctrine is of God, and
that they have authority of God to teach them. And so those Teachers do in the
name of God, charge their Princes: and yet in all other respects, remain as
other do, their subjects. And ca^ these respects be thus together in a Prophet,
and can they not be in a Prophetess?

And how does not this withal, ouerturne Caluines Minor? But the woman ( says
he) is a subject: as though the man were not a subject, when he says,
Prophets and Doctors are subject to Kings and other Magistrates. But in a
woman ( says Calvin) this holds not. No does? and why not in a woman as
well as in a man? being both of ^^em, in respect of Kings and other
Magistrates alike subject? for a woman ( says he) by nature is borne to obey.
Teachers subjects.
What? the Kings and other Magistrates, more than those men are, which also are
subjects? what means Calvin here, that a woman is borne to obey by nature?
Does he mean it in such sort that the woman is a servant or bondslaue by
nature, or of a servile nature? But that is both falseand odious. For a woman
may be and is as much ingenua and libera* of as frank and free nature and
condition, or (as we term it,) borne of as gentle blood, as the man is. And
although, that the servitude of sin, and thraldom to mortality, and other
calamities, coming to the man, by means of the woman: she has lost by the
law and malediction of God, that equallity of honnour that she was in before:
being joined to the man in matrimony, with equal degree of power and dominion*
and be now made subject to her husbands government in respect of that
Deconomicall or household government, of which estate properly that law was
given: and of whom S. Paul both in his epistle to the Corinthians speaks:
Of what women's subjection S. Paul speaks.
willing them to ask their husbands at home: and that which he speaks to
Timothy, that she should not vsurp authority over the man, it has a manifest
relation only to her husband; as also have the words of Gods law, given in
penance unto her, thy desire shall be subject to thine husband, and he shall
rule over thee: so that, though this law be the ordinary law of God ( as
Calvin says) in respect of the state of marriage: yet in other respects it is
not so absolute. True it is, that a virgin in respect also of her parents, is
subject in her nonage unto them, no less than the wife unto her husband: and
yet, we see here these virgins for all their subjection to their father
Philip, that was also an Evangelist, yea some call him an Apostle, did
nevertheless prophecy, and that which is most likely, even in his presence,
and in S. Paul's presence, and in the presence also of many other,
notwithstanding any inferiority or subjection in other respects Yet diverse of
the named Prophetesses, and other women that spoke in public assemblies, were
not all widows, and so of their own jurisdiction or power, but even wives
too.

But Calvin urges this, that by nature they are borne to obey. And what of
that also? comes this authority of teaching, ( whatsoever authority they have
thereto) or any gift of prophesying, by the law of nature or not rather by grace
and by especial calling, whether it be in Women or men? but Calvin himself
expounds this saying, that women are borne to obey by nature, that is the by
the ordinary law of God. Neither yet anaileth this exposition. For we stand not
of the ordinary law of God, but, of extraordinary privileges, and (as Calvin
says) upon such necessities, as wherein a woman's voice may be required.
Caluines inconsiderate speech against women's government.


But what now is Caluines conclusion of all this? For all wise men have always
refused the government of women even as of a monster: and th^rfore heaven and
earth should be after a sort mingled together, if women should snatch unto
them the right of teaching. Caluines il speech of women's government


As for snatching unto them the right of teaching, might perhaps be called
in some sense the mingling together of heaven and earth. And so were it also,
if any man should snatch the right hereof unto him, except he had some calling
ordinary or extraordinarye, or some necessity or occasion rather draw him,
than he should snatche it unto him. And the like and much more we say of women.
But if women by any respect, be called extraordinarily thereunto, or, (as
Calvin said before) there be such necessity as wherein a woman's voice may be
required: shall we call this, snatching unto them the right use of teaching,
and the mingling of heaven and earth together? and that is worst of all, shall
we herupon condemn all government of women, if by no means they might have any
allowance or permissio^ of this government, to teach or prophecy in the Church?
May there no right grow to a woman of government, besides teaching? yea, Here
is other government besid^ teaching, whereof women may have a right.
that whereunto she may be born? And can Calvin then justify this conclusion,
that all wise men have always refused the government of women, as it were a
monster? What a monstrous saying is this to have escaped so wise and so godly a
man? Did not Calvin himself confess before, that some women were godly
governors, saying: If any object Debora and the like, which we read to have been sometimes by the commandment of God, placed over the people, for to
govern them? Were there no wise men in all Israel in those days, when such
women were governors? or, did those wise men account their government
monstrous, or refuse it, being appointed by Gods commandment? or did ever any
wise man that had the true wisdom of God, or shall any such wise man among
us now, account this doing of God to be monstrous? what a monstrous rebellion
were this not only the against the state of them, but against God?

Was it this that Calvin meant before, when he said in his answer to the
objection of their government, this could god do, which is free from all law?
What? to set up such governors, as all wise men should refuse as monsters?
Verily, no godly wise man can allow this saying: nor any excuse it or can
salve it from a foul ouershot and manifest untruth. And if Calvin had better
considered it, he would never have uttered such a sentence, or have blotted
it out, or have retracted it. But thus does affection carry wise men, and
otherwise very godly men sometimes away, even from that which their selves
cannot deny to be of God, How affection carries wise and godly men away.
and not to be monstrous, but to be a godly and very gracious work of God,
both for the advancement of his glory, and the great help and comfort of his
people.

And is this now the drift of our brethr. in this matter, to refuse as
monstrous, and confounding heaven and as earth together, al women's government
in gods Church? I hope yet a great deal better of Caluines judgment in this
matter, because (howsoever here he fowly over shot himself and contrarieth
himself in his own tale* Caluines better speeches.
as we have plainly seen) yet in other places, he better acquiteth himself:
namely in his Epistle prefixed to his last edition of his learned Commentaries
upon Esaias, dedicated to our most gracious soueraign Lady, Caluines better
acknowleging of weome^s government in the Qu. most excellent Majesty
Queen Elizabeth. where so highly he extolleth her Majesty, not oneliewith
honorable words, and style of titles: To the most excellent Queen, and
renowned no less by her virtues, than by her royal gifts ELIZABETH, etc. but
also in his matter: declaring, that where he had dedicated the said
commentaries to King Edward her Majesty's most godly Brother: Me thought (
says he) I should commit no absurdity, if unto the name of the most
excellent King, I should also adioine your name, no less beloved and joyful
unto al good men. Yea rather: not only the occasion offered, but the necessitye
seems to require, Calvin craves the Q. Majesty's patronage for his
comme^tary on Esai
that I should crave the faith of your patronage unto this commentary: at the
banishment whereof I know, that a great number of godly men in your dominion,
have sighed. Although my purpose is not so much to respect privately mine own
labor, as humblye to beseech, and by the holy name of Christ to entreat you,
that not only with your favor, all the books that are sound in faith, may
find harbor again, in your England, and may be there freely conversant: but
that whereas religion in a shameful manner was decayed, that you would take
the cheifest care thereof. Which thing, if that only son of God do exact
by his right of all the Kings of the earth: he holds you (O most noble
Queen) bowden to perform this duetye. Calvin confesses both the Queens
May. right of inheritance to the Crown, and Gods calling her to the cheifest
care of the Church.
For whereas you being the Kings own daughter, were not free from that
fearful storm, that even waightily hanged over the heads of all the godly;
he merueilously delivering you safe therefrom, albeit not untouched (or free)
from the fear of the danger, has addicted you and all your studies to
himself. Of which deliverance you ought so little to be ashamed, that God has
given to you an ample and plentiful matter of rejoicing, conforming you unto
the image of his son. Amongst whose praises, our Prophet recites this,
that he was exalted unto the highest height of the celestial Empire, out of
the prison, and state of an arraigned person. But as it is no mean
commendation to rehearse such an example: so, as often as you shall call to
memory (which by no oblivion ought at any time to slip away) out of how
pitiful and doubtful trembling you have escaped, God openly even (after a
sort) reaching out his hand unto you; you may withal remember, that this end
is set before you, that with a constancy not afrighted, and with an invincible
magnanimity, God the Q. champion, and the Qu. the restorer of Gods worship.
you again uphold to him his right, that is your champion and deliverer. And
setting aside all businesses, (whereof I doubt not, that a great heap of them,
will make a stur thereat in these beginnings of the kingdom:) have you this
care to restore his worship And if so be Satan with many and hard
difficulties thrown in the way, attempt to cast in fearfulness or
slownesse: Caluines praise of the Q. majesty.
you are not ignorant from whence you should ask the confidence of proceeding
courageously, which may overcome all impediments. Neither God, which with his
blessing vouchsafes the actions of private men, will leave his own work
destitute of happy and wished success. Let the duty also of religion provoke
thee (O Queen which art to be worshipped) since that our Esaias requires not
only of Kings; that they should be nourishers of the Church: but also of
Queens, that they should be their nurses, Esaies testimony for the
confirmation of the government of Queens.
and so forth, as he proceeds in the Epistle.

In which words, he does (on better aduisement) most plainly approve, and not
refuse as monstrous the government of women: but account it both in her
Majesty, as the singular gift and blessing of God unto his church, and also
cites Esaie in general, for Queens to be the Churches nurses. What shall we
say therefore to this foresaid conclusion that Calvin made: All wise men
have always refused as a monster a woman's government? I would gladly salve
it with expounding his words to be meant only, of the wife that takes upon
her to govern and rule her husband. But because, if it should be understood of
this oeconomical government only, then it would not make to Caluines purpose,
that women should not have authority and right publikelie to teach: affirming
teaching to be a thing of power and higher degree: and he brings in the
objection of Debora and answers the same, by distinguishing the diverse
respects, wherein the teachers obey their kings and other magistrates, and yet
govern in respect of teaching: and says, that women cannot have the
consideration of these respects, because by nature, which he calls the
ordinary law of God, they are borne to obey: how therefore can this
conclusion: For (...) women's government; all prudent men did always refuse, as
it were a monster, be understood otherwise, than of the public and civil
government? And therefore, accepting Calvin where he wrote truly and
reverently of the matter, without any disgracing otherwise of his authority:
In this place so grossly ouershooting himself, and the truth of the matter,
he can by no means be fully reconciled to himself, or ought of us, or of
any other to be allowed. And so much more dangerous herein are these his
speeches, as other over zealous among our Brethren, have gone as far and
further hereupon, than he^ did.

And although Danaeus fetch the matter about with a greater windlasse, Danaeus
concerning women's government. 1. Tim. 2.12.
and with fairer speeches for our state and most gracious Soueragine: yet (as
in the end Calvin does) so he also drives the matter to the same pitch,
against not only the private government of women, over their husbands, in
domestical matters, but also against the publik government of women, in the
civil and political state: Daneus of wome^s government.
and therefore least by any scruples in reading these men might stick in a
curious mind upon this dangerous point, whereby any man might think himself
not fully satisfied: let us see also and weigh all Danaeus reasons on this
matter. How far Danaeus grants women to teach
And first we t^ke Danaeus his grant, yt this precept of S. Paul ( Let the
woman with silence learn with all subjection) takes place while women be in
the publik asse^bly: but not when they are at their own house, because they
may privately instruct their family, especially if there want a Father of the
household, and that they be widows, for then they both may and ought to pray
unto God, and to teach their children the fear of God. And therefore in such
sort as S. Paul calls particular householdes, particular Churches: it
infers, that they may teach particular Churches also. To the which I add
that which Hemingius observes heerevpon. Hemingius in 1. Tim. 2.
The second proposition of this Chapter containing an Ecclesiastical Canon,
concerning the discipline and manners of women. In this Canon two things are
commanded unto women, and two things are forbidden unto them. First is
commanded that they should learn quietly without tumult, as becomes them
which are thrall to the law of subjection. And then, that they should in quiet
deal with their own affairs, and meddle with those things that pertain to
women, not shouing themselves into the businesses of men. The first thing that
is forbidden is, that women should not teach publikelie: and then, that they
should not usurp authority over men. These things pertain hereunto, that an
order and discipline might be in the Church. Not that we should thereupon take
an argument of contemning womankinde: neither are they so bidden to hold their
peace, but it is lawful for them to give wholesome counsels to their
husbands, if at any time the matter seem to require it. Which thing the
story of Judith, Debora, Anna, and of other women does show. ( Which examples
infer not only private, but public councels and authority also) yea,
Abraham is commanded of the Lord, that he should obey his wives council of
casting out the handmaide Agar. And also by domestical discipline to teach
godliness, yea, and that they may admonish their husbands of their duty,
when they cease to do it, or be sluggish. For Paul here treats of the
common discipline, the which excludes not necessary councels and deliberation
of honest ( or worshipful) women. So that, thus far forth they grant them to
teach or govern, not only in private, but in public.

But to come to Danaeus reasons: the first reason ( says he) which is
expounded in this place, is drawn a differentia, from the difference which is
set of God himself, between both sexes, to wit, the man's and the woman's.
Danaeus arguments against women's government.
The second is, a genere, from the kind, or general words. God would have women
neither to rule, neither to teach, neither to vsurp authority in viros, over
the me^ or husbands: but he that speaks in the Church, or rules and
teaches, takes on her over men a certain government and authority:
therefore women neither cann, Danaeus ill argument.
either ought to speak in the church. This twofold division of S Paul's
reasons which Danaeus makes of reasoning first from the difference of the
sex, and then from the kind: except it had been plainer spoken, is some what
intricate, and may rather seem to be all one. For what is here the sex, but
the kind, and the kind, but the sex? except he take Genus for the general
word, and comprehend teaching in the word governing, as though he must needs be
a governor, that is, a teacher, which we have seen already, by many examples
is not so. But to y^ argument. God would neither have women ( Praeesse) yt is,
to be above, (or to be before, or to rule) neither to teach, neither to usurp
authority upon men: At qui loquitur in Ecclesiasiue praeest ea, et docet, in
viros sumit quoddam imperium et authoritate^: Ergo, etc. But he that speaks
in the church ( I think it should rather be) At quae loquitur, but he that
speaks in the Church, or rules (or is above or before) and teaches, takes
a certain government, or rule and authority upon man: Ergo, women neither can
nor ought to speak in the Church. This Ergo, neither concludes y^ matter that
S. Paul here avouches, nor any part of this argument is so plain and orderly
set down, but, is so intricate and confused, that we can scarce make a good
Syllogism, or almost any sensible reason of the same. And first for his
conclusion, where he takes, that for the cause or key of his argument, which
in Latin we call Medium, the mean, which is repeated in either proposition,
to infer and prove S. Paul's conclusion, that is, Women should not teach in the
Church, Danaeus faulty argument both inform and matter.
( which if he would prove ought) he ought to have proved: this he proves not,
but by this he would prove, that they ought not to speak in the church.
Whereas contrariwise he should have made his key or wreast of this argument* to
have been on speaking, and thereupon to have concluded teaching. As thus: God
suffers not women to speak in the church: but to teach infers to speak:
ergo, he suffers the^ not to teach. But, as he now turns it another way: so
he so doubles it with teaching and with ruling, etc. yt both he marreth the
argument, and the sense of either proposition. for where he says in the Mayor:
God neither will have women to rule nor to teach, nor to vsurp authoriti^ over
men: he seems here to speak of three distinct things that God would not have
to be in women, ruling, teaching, and usurping authority over men. But what
means he here by usurping authority over men? The mayor proposition.
Is not that all one with Praeesse to rule them, or to be over or above them?
If it be, then is not here 3., but 2. distinct things, yt God would not have to
be in women: if he make the difference to be herein, that by ruling or being
over them, Usurping autho^itie over men.
he means good and law^ull Government: and by usurping, naughty government:
then makes he a good difference, but withal he acknowledges some
government of women to be good and lawful, and some, that is usurpation, to be
naughty* and so I hold well with him in this partition of Government. But then,
how is this Proposition true, Danaeus evil argument.
that God would have neither the one nor the other? For God forbids not simply
any lawful thing. If he say, that lawful government is not simply forbidden,
but only to the Women: it still comes all to one pass. For, the Proposition
is not of Government simply in it self, but of Women's Government, whether it
be simply evil, and of women's usurpation. For either both these are but all
one* (for, if her Government be simply evil: What is it else, but mere
usurpation, or if it be distinct from usurpation ( which in women and men also
is mere and simple evil,) what is it else but good and lawful? Besides, that
this Proposition, (take ruling, or usurping authority how he will) not simply
true, is not only concerning governing, nor yet for teaching. For, were it
simply true: it could admit no debar of any occasion or necessity, nor any
exemption of such especial persons, as were lawfully called thereunto, which
we have seen at large, both by examples and testimonies of the scripture, and
by arguments and plain confessions even of our Brethren themselves both for
governing, and for teaching: besides that, we shall yet more plainly see by
Danaeus own confession after ward.

Now, as we see this confusion of these terms, in the Mayor or more general
proposition: so, the Minor is far worse and clean marreth all the argument.
The minor proposition
For, whereas to infer his conclusion, it should have followed thus: But to
speak in the Church, is to rule, to teach, and to vsurp authority over men:
Ergo, God would not have it, that women may or ought to speak in the Church:
This had been a plain argument. But then this minor had had a plain denial.
Nor Danaeus, nor all the world can ever prove it, that to speak in the Church
is to rule, to teach, and to usurp authority over men. And so were all this
argument most easily ouerturned. But Danaeus ( whether rethoritically, as not
bound to ye straight limits of Logic, The form of the argument misformed.
or to make the argument more diffuse) inuerteth the minor on this wise. First,
he repeateth women here again, whom he brings also into the conclusion, and
so clean overthrows all form and nature of any argument. Besides this, (and
that which is most vicious in any form of argument) he places, with speaking
in the Church, Governing, and (though somewhat more ambiguously) teaching also.
Making the fore part of the sentence, in Latin called Subiectum, as the
subject matter, whereon any thing is spoken, to consist here of these thr^e.
Whereas these terms to rule, and to teach, should have bin placed with the
third term, to usurp authority over men, and all three in the Predicatum,
that is, in the thing that is spoken on the matter subject. Which three should
be made the key of his argument, or cause whereupon he should infer his
conclusion, and so be reserved to be repeated in the later part of his
assumption, or minor Proposition of his argument, which it seems he would
have brought to the first mode of the second figure of syllogismes. which later
part of his assumption or minor proposition, Danaeus ill argument.
he makes here to be only the taking a kind of government and authority over
men, which before he joined together with ruling and teaching, and now he
seuereth it from rule and teaching. Neither yet makes he it to be all one with
that he said before: but in-steede of that he called before usurping, here
he comes in with taking. And where before he spoke simply and only of
authority: here he comes in with a Quoddam imperium, a certain kind of
commandment, (empire or government) and authority.

Neither is it enough, with transposing and changing thus these terms clean
to overthrow his own argument: but also he makes this minor proposition as
confused and intricate, if not much more, than was the other. For, if we
should english this proposition word by word: At qui loquitur in ecclesiasiue
praeest ea and docet, in viros sumit quoddam ^imperium and authoritatem. He
(or as I rather think, The very words of the argument senseless.
it should be she) that speaks in the Church or else rules she also
teaches, takes a certain Empire and authority upon men. See how intricately
and confusedly these words are placed. Might they not more clearly have bin
distinguished: She that speaks, teaches: and she that rules takes on her
a kind of government and authority? But then had both these parts been soon
confuted. For although it be most true, that she which rules takes on her a
kind of government and authority: yet if this taking on her, be referred to
the usurpation mentioned in the former Proposition (for else also the argument
has more terms then it ought to have) which word usurping is usually taken
in the worst part, for the^ that take government and authority, upon them
having no right thereto, for that is properly termed usurping: and so in-deede
it is a certain kind of Government and authority, but not a right and lawful
government and authority: then this part of the sentence is most apparent
false. For every woman that rules, does not so take (that is, by usurpation) a
certain kind of government and authority, that is, a wrong title, or an
usurped tyranny, as did Athalia. For, she may be specially called thereunto of
God, How many ways a woman may have lawful government
she may be lawfully chosen thereunto of man, and she may be lineally borne
thereunto by nature, and so usurps it not. Debora was no usurper. But we shall
come to more examples all in time.

And also the other part of the Proposition thus distinguished, is apparent
defective: She that speaks teaches. Do all teach that speak? if he mean,
all that speak. In that manner of speaking: what is that else, then in effect
to say: She that teaches teaches? and indeed S. Paul speaks not here
simply of speaking, but of teaching. As we heard before* 1. Corin. 14.34. Where
be said, it is not permitted to them to speak, which was thus expounded by
Calu. He forbids them therefore to speak in public for because of teaching or
of prophesying. Danaeus evil argument.
So that this cause being set aside: speaking in the Church is not forbidden.
No nor teaching neither simply, as we have showed both by the Scripture, and
by Calvin also.

And yet, if Danae. had set his rest against wom. teaching in the church, it
had been more tolerable. But now all his conclusion is against Women's
speaking in the church. The conclusion of Danaeus argu. against women's speaking.
And he reasons thus, they may not teach in the Church: ergo, they may not
speak in the Church. And in this proposition, she that speaks teaches.
What a kind of teaching or speaking is this, a genere affirmative ad speciem?
she speaks: ergo, she teaches. And if this consequence be good: then of
consequence she may teach in the Church. Since it is apparent, she may speak:
For, if all the congregation may say but Amen: if she be one of the
congregation, she may publicly speak, say she but only bare Amen. And may
not she say some of the responses, as may the other people that are not
Ministers? and may she not say the public Confession with them? may she not be
openly Catechized, and answer to the articles of her faith? may she not sing
with the congregation the psalms and Hymns? And is not that also a public
speaking? and must she not speak when she is to be married, and before all
the Congregation confess, being straightly charged so to do, if she know
any lawful impediment, why she ought not to be joined in matrimony to that
man? and do not our brethren also enioine her even in the knot of marriage, to
say these words? Even so I take him before God, and in the presence of this
his congregation. How therefore does Danaeus conclude: yt women neither can nor
ought to speak in the Church: If he say this speaking is not teaching, and
that he speaks only here of such speaking, as is teaching: why then does he
not drive his argument from speaking to teaching? and to have reasoned thus,
she may not speak, ergo, she may not teach. Rather than from teaching unto
speking, saying thus: she may not teach: ergo, she may not speak: which is
again a specie ad genus negative.

But, which way soever he drive it, it is both apparent, that she may both
speak in the Church, Necessity admits also wome^s public teaching
extraordinarily.
without the breach of Saint Paul's precept: yea, and her speaking may be
teaching also, if she take not on her the ordinary Ecclesiastical function of
teaching in the Church, which is the thing in-deede, that Saint Paul
forbids. For otherwise, if either necessity happen, (as Calvin grants)
she may extraordinarily teach also: or, if she be any way lawfully called to
the authority of public regiment, not only she may both speak and teach in
the public congregation: but her place (of consequence) does often times
require it. Which Danaeus perceiving, though he concludes not his argument
against Women's governing: yet to prove that she ought not to speak, he
takes all his force from these two which he thus intermingleth one with
another, ruling and teaching. And why does he so? Women regiment.
Is it ^^r that teaching infers ruling: or that, ruling infers teaching?
and y^^ which soever infers the other, or they be both conioined, whereas
he dr^^^ it thus: Women may not publicly rule: ergo, they may not publicly
(...): Or, women may not publicly teach: ergo, they may not publicly rule:
Why may not we send these arguments back again to their Master, which this
reciprocal answer? Women may publicly rule: ergo, Women may publicly
teach. Or, Women may publicly teach: ergo, Women may publicly rule. That
women may teach, we have seen the examples and testimonies of Scripture and
our brethrens own Confessions. And as for the lawfulness of women's public
ruling: as we have seen the scripture and Calvin, etc: Let us now see what
Danaeus says thereto, after this his argument against their speaking. For,
that which follows concerning women deacons: I stand not upon.

Now upon this occasion comes Danaeus directly to the Question of the
regiment of Women, Danaeus in 1. Tim. 2.12
with the which (as we hard before) Calvin, so rigorously did conclude.

But ( says Danaeus) out of this place it is also among some thereupon
disputed, whether it be honest for women to reign, that is, to command men,
and to obtain a chief empire and right over men, and over the male-kinde,
which thing has place in Spain, in England, in Scotland, and in diverse
other regions. Bridges


Here Danaeus sets down this Question plain, for the government of Women
over men, both for the reigning in the chief and public regiment of a
kingdom, and the right thereof, and whether it be honest, yea or no^? Which
he makes but a Question disputed upon by some that take occasion on this
place. So that he seems to infer, that there is no direct and plain place
in the Scripture which does impugn it, but that by occasion of this place,
some do dispute thereon.

So that first, this place and much less the other 1. Corint. 14. Which
accords with this, are not directly spoken against the reign or chief and
public government of Women over men, No place in scripture directly against
it.
in the souerainty of a kingdom or royal Empire. But, that rule which Saint
Paul both here and there forbids women to have and exercise over men, is
properly of another kind of rule. And therefore, whosoever alleges those
places, as by them to draw a direct argument against the public regiment of
women, in the right of a Kingdom, manifestly wresteth those places. And so
consequently, wresteth all Saint Paul's reasons there used, and also the Law,
Genesis, 3. Whereon he grounds these reasons.

Now where Danaeus says, that for women to reign, that is, to command me^,
and to obtain the chief Empire and right (or law) over men, is of some
disputed upon, Wom. regiment honest
and that the question is, vtrum honestum fit, whether it be honest: that is,
whether it be of the best kind of those things that are called good, to wit,
not only fair in show, nor only profitable in the aduantag^ ^ut whether it
be a virtuous, a just, a true, lawful, and righteou^ (...), yea, or no. The
contrary whereof, to wit, dishonest, is not only ^npleasant or incommodious,
but vicious, unjust, false, unlawful and unrighteous. Of which sort of evil
if it were: being a matter pertaining not to a few persons, but to whole
estates, and of such importance as concerns government, in their greatest and
most necessary affairs: it is likely that it should be but disputed upon of
some? or rather cried out upon of all, nor to be suffered in any place as
contrary to the express law of God, and to the universal law of nature, if
those places, Gen, 3.1. Cor. 14. and this 1. Tim. 2. be against it. Women^
govern. not dishonest.
And so by no manner of means to be suffered, and then indeed had Calvin said
the truth, that al wise men did always refuse it as a monstrous thing, being
against the Law of God and nature.

But since those places (as we have proved, and Danaeus grants) do not meddle
therewith, and much less, any other place in all the scripture, has any
appearance to condemn it, as a dishonest matter: can we think, that a matter of
such moment, not only for the public state in matters of policy, in moral
conversation (yea conservation) of man's life, and preservation of Gods Church,
and withal so often mentioned in the scripture, both for the persons, and for
the office, and for the authority of princes and public governors, that it
should have never directly and peremptorily bin forbidden, nor have been
pronounced to be a thing dishonest? yea rather, does not this silence of the
scripture, clear acquit it of all suspicion of dishonesty?

Our breth^. offense in calling the ^onestie of women's regiment into question
And in very deed, albeit some more curious and newfangled than sober or
circumspect, have called the honesty thereof in question: yet for the most and
best, and wisest part of men, the honesty thereof has not bin called into
question, but thought to be (where there is occasion thereof, and yt the laws
and customs bear it) a good, a just, a lawful, a true, a right, a virtuous
and honest matter. And for proof hereof (as Danaeus here begins well, if he
would in this point so hold out, and not yield to much to these disputers, or
not rather give occasion and matter for them to dispute upon) he does mightily
(in my opinion) confirm the honesty of it, in saying, that this thing has
place in Spain, England, Scotland, and diverse other regions. For, were there
no more regions, where the regiment of women ( as lawful, just right, true,
virtuous and honest has place) but these 3. here specified: it is enough
sufficiently to enforce the honesty of it, except we shall utterly dishonest
all these states, which (when such regiment happens,) chiefelye under GOD
depend thereon. As our estate does now in ^ngland and Irelande under our
most gracious sovereign Queen Eli^abeth.

And should we now admit these certain or some disputers, or any other, to
have it called in question, whether the state and Laws of our realm, even in
the greatest matter of the government thereof, do maintain a thing that is
dishonest, or against the Law of God and nature? For, if it be against these
places, Genesis 3.1. Corin. 14.1. Tim. 2. or these places against it: how is not
against the Law of God and nature? what a perilous matter were this, and not
only most dangerous, injurious, dishonest, and dissloyall against our
lawful sovereign, by whose happy government. God has so blessed us, and does
so graciously guide us and defend us, and so many years has done, The
dangerous inconveniences of these Questionistes.
and should we now call her state and right into so high question, by somes
disputing (if it might not better be called dispiting) as whether it were
honest or no? to her Majesty's more then dishonor, besides her overthrow, and
withal our own destruction: but that also under pretense of the Gospel, we
should maintain an inconvenience worse than a mischief, and go about to
shatter all the grounds, and principles of the Law it self, both of the
realm, yea, and of nature, for the right and inheritance and call in Question,
even in the greatest matter of estate, (sith England mainteineth the
inheritance and right of Women's regiment) whether it maintain honesty or
dishonesty, yea or no? and whether her Majesty and other Women princes, in our
and these specified regions, have or do rather rule De facto, as usurpers,
than de iure, as Godly and lawful princes? should we not herein go far beyond
the very traitors, that oppose themselves only against the princes persons?

And what should drive any Questionists to this disputation, by reason of this
place, the first of Timothy, the second Chap. Which is but haled and wrested to
this regiment?

How much better therefore is it, especialle for us whom so nearly it
touches, Our dutiful obedience and thankfulness to God and her Majesty.
that (as Danaeus confesses) the honesty and right of Women's regiment has
place here with us in England: So with all obedience, ioyfulnesse,
thankfulness, and conscience to God, to acknowledge the same. And not upon
such bious occasions to undermine it, pretending a quarrel against Women's
public teaching, which neuerthesse must must needs follow. For, Look
wherein their regiment consi^^es, therein does an authoritys of teachinge even
of consequence also follow.

If our Brethren replye: that admitting a Woman to have supreme government over
all ecclesiastical matters so well as civil: then may she preach also and
minister the Sacraments. I answer, this objection which is more fit for
papists ^han protestants) is but a mere cauil For we say not, Questions of
Women's regiment.
the prince has all the government either of all ecclesiastical matters, or
civil, in his or her person to do them, or to put the^ in action: but the
Prince has a supreme government in his or her dominions, What supreme
government, princes have ineccl. matters.
next and immediate under God, only to ouersee, to appoint, to give charge,
and to command, that all those matters be duly executed, and orderly put in
action, by all these persons, to whom of duty by their functions they
appertain. And so the Prince, he or she, without the breach of S. Paul's
precept, or of the law of God, may lawfully, and with authority, both speak
and teach, even in the greatest assembly of the congregation. For, his or her
government consists as much, in the authority of their lawful
commandementes: as in any thing else belonging to their supreme regiment. And
take away the right of their so speaking ( which quickneth and gives life
unto the laws politic that they make) to wit, The princes roial speech
quickening the Laws that are made.
their roial assent and commanding: and overthrow al their government.

And if this regiment be right and honest in England: then was it never against
the law of God and nature in any land. And if it be so now: then of his own
nature, and de iure, it was so ever, though it were not ever so, de facto. And
we have no cause but to praise God, that Ius and factum in this government, are
now joined together in her Majesty. And the right and honesty hereof having
place here: it is not so only in Spain and Scotland, but it may be so (not
as Danaeus says, in diverse other regions) but, quoad ius, every region, if
they have not other as good municipall and peculier laws ( and those not
feigned) to debar the natural right, of any Woman princes regiment. Neither
hinders it this right and honesty, that Spain or any of these diverse other
regions not specified by Danaeus, have not yet received (as we have God make us
thankful for it) the light and liberty of the Gospel: for neither in some of
these regions, where this right and honesty of women's regiment holds, they
have as yet received, so much as the title and profession of Christ's name.
Notwithstanding as their marriages and other civil laws: or moral behauior,
may otherwise be good and honest in their kinds: so their authority of
Magistracy, and the person that their Laws allow the same authority unto, may
likewise be good and honest, neither against the general law of nature, nor
against any special Law of God. For then, it were meerelie naught in all
regions, and with us in England worst of all, that know the written Law of
God. And therefore I conclude upon this saying of Danaeus, that if it be
right and honest with us: then it is not an unnatural, wrong, monstrous, or
dishonest thing in it self, or against any of these places. Genes. 3.1.
Corinth. 11. and 14.1. Tim. 2. or any other places in all the scripture.

What means therefore Danaeus here, The Salike Law against women's regiments
by specifying only of these three regions England, Spain and Scotland,
restraining his generality, not to all regions, but to diverse other? For if it
be honest and right, in any one: except some other region have other private
and special Laws against the same, such (as before I said) are godly, and
not made to the injury of any princes or persons former right: then is it by
the Law and right of God and nature, honest and right in all regions.

But I am affrayde (hine illa lachimae) that not only Danaeus, but even Calvin
also, did a little too much patrissare, Caluines and Danaeus inclination to the
devise the law Salike.
and were carried away in this matter with the devise, that of later times has
bin set forth, to defeat the natural right and title of the sovereign
Princes of England, by the color of a law Salike as they call it. But because
under pretense of this supposed Law, the defenders of it, took upon them, not
only to maintain it and the state of their Country: but insult thereby upon
all other Nations, and impugn generally the right of Women's regiment, as an
unlawful and unnatural state of government: therefore craving pardon not to
offend any (nor so much impugning, as defending) it shall be requisite, either
to remove out of the way this objection, of the said surmised Salike law: or
else it would still remain as a stumbling block unto the reader, and a
special argument unto all them, that not only among our adversaries, but
among our selves, by all means impugn and vnder^^^e Women's regiment. And
because France only, and that law Salike is so much urged: Let us only in
this our so necessary defense, consider better the state thereof, and the
cheifest arguments for the same.

And ^^rst, whosoever shall peruse the ancient histories of the french nation,
as he shall soon perceive all this devise of the law Salike to be vnturue by the
pedigree of diverse of their Princes: so shall he find, Diverse women have had
the regiment of France.
yt diverse women have also had the governing of the realm of France, even
with the Kings their husbands, and after their deceasses. As Batillidis the
widow of Clodoueus which reigned together in the administration of the Kingdom
with her son Clotharius, as witnesses Aimonius de gestis Francorum. lib. ^.
cap. 43. The french men do ordeine Clothayr to be their king, the eldest of
the three children, cum ipsa regina matre regnaturum that he should reign
together with his mother. Blanch the Mother of him whom the French call Saint
Loyes which both by the Testament of her Husband ( as Aemilius testifleth)
while her son was young, and after in his captivity in Syria, had the
government of the Realm of France, and notably governed the same, maugre all
the nobles in France that conspired against her.

As for the reasons of Caenalis, in the defense of this pretensed Salike law:
Cenalis for the Salike Law.
how odiousle (he being a popish Bishop) enucigheth beyond al modesty against
women: is to apparent. And how fondly he craketh of the french for this matter,
above all the nations in the world. Whom he acknowledges for the most part (
further than Danaeus does) to admit succession and so the regiment of women.
Cenalis arg. for the Salike Law against women's regiment.
And therefore he calls them all Gallinaceos, dunghill cocks or hennish cocks
in respect of the french. lib. 1. Perioche. 10.

But most of all, how shamelesly he wresteth the scripture thereunto. For
having alleged Munster to prove the Salike law from Pharamund, that the
succession should not come unto the distaffe, ( as he contumeliously terms
it) that is says (he) women should not be permitted to be made heirs of the
kingdom, to the which alludeth that Evangelical sentence, Consider ye the
Lylies of the field how they grow, they labor not in bringing forth, neither
spinne they in drawing their taskes of wool, as is peculier unto that weak
sex: whereby it comes to pass, that neither Solomon in all his glory is
clothed as one of these. For, that Jewish nation, were it right or were it
wrong, did sometimes (will they ^il they, sustain the government of women
kind. Which thing is by experiment found in Athalia, and in the issue of the
Machabees.

What an impudent wresting of the Scripture is this, to prove the glory of the
French Lylies, not to admit the regiment of women? And yet this bald argument,
or rather impious, in wresting the scripture, does so please the bluide B. that
he flourishes again upon it, fol. 113. b. saying: Gallia in times past was
Fennish, as appears by the arms of the toads but now it is turned into a
Cuntrie adorned with Lylies, by an heavenly benefit, under Clodoueus the first
Christian King thereof. Heereunto alluded Esdras, lib 4. Cap. 9. saying, Such
as the Feelde is, such are the seeds: such as the Flowers are, such are the
colors: Such as is the husbandman, such is the tilth. And the same Esdras Cap
5. Of all the Flowers of the world, thou haste chosen to thee one Lyly. The
Lion is fierce, the Eagle is ravenous, the Lyly is capable of the heavenly dew
Is not this a strange applying of the scripture, although this book of Esdras
be not canonical?

But now, where he adds these two examples, If he had looked further, he
should have found more, and far better examples in the Scripture. Especially
Debora. But it seems he makes al one reckoning, when he says: were it
right, or were it wrong, that women governed Gods people. Whereby he seems
to claim this, to be the prerogative of France: that whether it be right,
or whether it be wrong, they will not suffer women's gouernmtnt. Neither is
Cenalis thus content, to have thus once or twice herein abused the Scripture,
but he goes on most blasphemousely to God, and injuriously against all
Christendom: and says: in which thing that most noble Realm of the Nation of
the French Gaulles, has whereupon to congratulate unto it self, that by the
singular benefit of God, it may woorthily be called before other kingdoms, a
sacerdotall or Priestly kingdom. For it has this thing common with
Priest-hoode, that even as the Priest-hoode can not pass over unto a woman: so
no more can the Monarchiall Empire of the Salike Monarchy. What therefore
remains, but that being mindful of the grace received of God, they break
forth into these words, Apocal. 5. Thou art worthy O Lord to take the book
and to open the seals thereof because thou wast slain, and have redeemed us in
thy blood out of every tribe, language, people, and Nation, to wit, whom thou
have vouchsafed to illustrat with the title of the most Christa^ kingdom.
Caenalis shameful wresting of the scripture
And moreover, have made us kings and Priests, and we shall reign upon the
earth, to wit, being enriched with this sacerdotall dowry. Nothing therefore
lets, whereby that Nation should not be called, a holy Nation, a royal
Priest-hoode, or (if ye had rather) a priestly or sacerdotall kingdom, a people
of purchase. For the religion which afterward once it got, never intermitted,
but happily and prosperously ever increased. Gallia (or the country of the
Gauls) (says Ierom) alone has wanted monsters, with the which almost the
residue of Nations have abounded more than enough.

Thus monstrously writes Caenalis against women's regiment. Howbeit, I hope
Calvin took not this term of monster for women's regiment, from this monstrous
Popish Bishop. As for that which Jerome wrote, Caenalis wresting of Jerome.
was not against the regiment of women in Gallia, neither was Gallia in his
time called Francia, nor Pharamundus borne, and so no such Salike law as yet
invented. And therefore this must needs be wrested hereunto. Besides this
intolerable arrogancy in the French to claim that spiritual privilege of
Royal Priest-hoode, that is both common to all true Christian nations, and to
all true Christian people, not only men, but to women also and to children.
And therefore this is both injurious unto the^, to take this title from them,
and a gross error in a Bishop, The injury that Caenalis offers to all
Christians.
not understanding what these terms do mean. For although he de^arre his
Popish sacrificing Priesthood from a woman ( le^ him lay that hardely to Pope
Iohanes charge) yet in this spiritual and mystical kingdom and Priest-hoode,
that either S. Peter or S. John speaks of, every good Christian woman, never
so private or poor person, and all the elect children of God, have as good
title, right and interest, as not only the French king, but as any, or all,
the Emperors, Kings, Queens, and Princes in the world.

Now after Caenalis has thus craked of the French prerogative, in this Salike
law, so much pretended and so greatly urged: when he comes to the reason of
the same, The Etimology of the Salike law.
and of this word Salica, he shows what diversities of opinions are thereon.
Munster thinks it is derived of the word Sala a river at a village of the
same name. Other, that the laws Salike are derived of the word Sala, or vne
salle in French, signifying in Latin Aulam a Court or Hall, Vne salle Au^a.
as who say, the Courtly or Palatine law. Some thought the deriuation of the
law Salike, came of certain laws of the French Emperors, Si aliqu^.
beginning: Si aliquis, or Si aliqua, and so by contraction, striking of a
letter or two in the end, per syncopen, it was vulgarly termed the law
Salike. Some ( says he) arise higher and more commodiously, who fetch the
Etimologie of the law Salike not so much out of the marrowe (or pythe) of the
word, as out of the bark (or rynde) of the word: Sal.
A Sale from salt, as by a certain allusion that they would have the Salike
law to be spoken hereupon: as though it were perpetually constant, inviolable
and incorruptible for all times to endure. For salt in the holy scriptures, is
a token of incorruption and perpetual enduring, and moreover both of Wisdom
and discretion. As is expressed in plain words, Numb. 18. and Leuit. 2. In
the book of Numbers: The scripture fowly wrested.
All the first fruits of the sanctuary, which the children of Israel ^ffer to
God, I have given to thee and to thy sons, by a perpetual right; it is an
everlasting covenant of salt unto thee and to thy sons before the Lord. And
in Leuiticus, Whatsoever sacrifice thou shall offer, thou shall season with
salt, nor shall take away the salt of the covenant of thy God from thy
sacrifice. In every oblation thou shall offer salt. And again 2. Paral. 13.
Ye are not ignorant that the Lord GOD of Israel has given the kingdom
unto David over Israel for ever, to him and to his sons, for a covenant of
salt. By this it manifestly appears, that salt has the tooken of
incorruption. And as for the token of discretion: Let your speech (says Paul)
be seasoned with salt. And in Mark: Col. 4. Mark. 9.
B^^rie offering shall be salted with salt, Sal^ is good, but if so be it be
unsavory, in what will ye season it? That so ye may understand, the law
Salike being sprinkled with the salt of discretion, and with the sauce of
much reason, perpetually to remain in his vigor.

Thus does Caenalis seek all the shifts he can to enforce this law, not
sparing thus more and more, to hale and draw these places of scripture to the
same. But sense he alleges so many originalles thereof, and dare not resolve
himself upon any one of them, but says, Let every man's judgment remain to
himself, for I will not upon this thing contend with any man: what
certaintye therefore can this law have? The very title whereof, when it is
tossed and tombled withal these diversities of opinions, and wrestlinges of
the scripture, is so uncertain. But if this were such a wise and
incorruptible law, that it had his name of seasoning with salt to resemble
those ancient offringes couenantes, and speeches in the old and new
Testament: The words of the Salikel awe.
then it makes more for women than against them. For although that saying 2.
Paral. 13. mention only David and his sons: yet did Caenalis himself
confess before, The text of scripture that Caenalis cites, expresses both
sons and daughters 2. Par. 13.
that the Nation of the Jews did admit the government of a woman. And the
place mentioned Numbers 18. conteyneth not only sons ( as Caenalis cites it)
but the very words are: to thee, and to thy sons, and to thy daughters. So
that the offering, that is the salt of covenant, or incorruptible covenant (
if the French can draw it to hold still incorruptiblie with them, or the
resemblance of their Princes estate thereunto) gives the same not only to the
man, but to the woman.

And as for Christ's and the Apostles words, are so general: that they are
apparently to be applied, to all that profess the name of Christ, whether they
be man or woman. Both of them must have their speeches seasoned with salt, that
is, with such wisdom as will permit no corruption. For ill words (says
the Apostle) corrupt good manners. The salt that Christ and the Apostle spoke
of, is gen^rall to* all Christians.
And all must be salted with fire, and every sacrifice (says Christ) shall be
salted with salt. Salt is good, but if the salt be unsavory, wherewith shall
it be seasoned? Have salt in your selves, and peace one with an other. By which
salt, mean he wisdom, or faith, or discipline, or the word, etc. as he
alludeth to the old sacrifices, and would have our selves to be come such
sacrifices: so the ^ordes are general, and therefore (says Calvin) Christ
extends this generally unto all, whom once God has vouchsafed to season with
his word. And exhorts them to retain always their relishe. And where the
text is only (...), all, or every one: the interpreter ( says Brentius)
has added of his own, homo, man. By these resemblances the salike law should
not be against women.
Which word also comprehends woman. So that by these originalles or
resemblances of the Salike law, if there be but mica salis even one grain of
salt to season the same with wisdom and reason from putrefaction: it can not
debar women from that right of government, that by the inheritance of the
law of God and nature, they are borne unto, except their own demerites, or
some stronger harre than the pretense of the law salike, debar or deprive
them of it.

As for this law salike ( says Caenalis proceeding on among other things)
has thus. Titulo de Allodijs 62. cap. 1. Nulla portio haereditatis de terra
Salica mulieri veniat, sed ad virilem sexum tota haereditas peruentat. The
words of the sal^k law.
No portion of enheritance of the salike land, may come to a woman, but the
whole enheritance should come to the male sex.

If this law be that whereupon all the stir is made, first, it is manifestly
against the Judicial law of inheritance, in the word of GOD. For, whereas it
appears, Numb. 26. ver. 33. that Salphahad the son of Helpher had no sons,
but daughters, etc. If follows chap. 27. v. 1. etc. Then came the daughters:
The law Salike against Gods law.
of Salphahad, the son of Hepher, the son of Galaad, the son of Machir,
the son of Manasses, the son of Joseph; and the names of his daughters were
these, The law Salike against the law of God.
Malhah, Noah, Hogl^h, Milchah, and Thirsah: and stood before Moses, and
before Eleazar the Priest, and before the Princes and all the assembly, at the
door of the Tabernacle of the congregation, saying: Our Father died in the
wilderness, Numb. 27.
and he was not among the assembly of them, that were assembled against the
Lord in the company of Corah, hut died in his sin, and had no sons.
Wherefore should the name of our father be taken away from his family, because
he has no sonn^? Give us a possession among the brethren of our Father. (here
again women speak and plead their right of inheritance, both before the
Ecclesiastical and the Civil assembly) Then Moses brought their cause before
the Lord, Women in the publ. asse^bly plead for their inheritance.
and the Lord spoke unto Moses saying: the daughters Zelophaad speak right,
thou shall give them a possession to inherit among their fathers brethren, and
shall turn the inheritance of their Father, unto them. Also thou shall
speak unto the children of Israel, saying: if a man die and have no son,
then ye shall turn his inheritance unto his daughter. And if he have no
daughter, ye shall give his inheritance unto his brethren. And if he have no
brethren, ye shall give his inheritance unto his fathers brethren. And if his
father have no brethren, ye shall give his inheritance to the next in kynne of
his family, and he shall possess it. And this shall be unto the children of
Israel a law of judgment, as the Lord has commanded Moses.

Here again we see, how God not only accepts their speaking in the
congregation, but approves their cause to be right. And not only allows the
enheritance of their father unto them: This law not only judicial but
natural.
but on this occasion, makes a general law. Which law, is not simply one of
those Judicial laws, that were proper only to the Jews state and policy:
but is drawn from the right of lineall descent, direct or collateral in the
order of nature, to the nearest of the blood, without respect (especially in
the direct line) to the prerogative of the male sex in the lines transuersed.
Neither is there here any respect had of the greatness or smallness,
superiority or inferioritie of the inheritance: but that, if the King had had
none issue but daughters, This law stretches to the inheritance of the
kingdom.
the daughter had been heir to the kingdom, before any Uncles, or Cousines,
never so excellent and worthy men. And if we should deny this in the
inheritance of a kingdom, more than in other inheritaunces: how can we make it
good, that our savior Christ according to the flesh, ( albeit he took it not
upon him) was in right of inheritance, the true and natural king of the Jews:
as he was called both at his birth, and the title named him at his death,
except in the right of the virgin Marie his mother, and not of Joseph that was
but his reputed father? Therefore, it is most clear, that this law of women's
right in inheritance, stretched to the inheritance of a kingdom. And since
this was Gods law, and it stands on natural reason, and Christ on whom all
Christendom have their name, had that right hereby: Christ king of the ^ewes
from his mother.
though for other considerations he abased himself, both from claiming that
right, and from the open declaring of the power and glory of his Godheade, for
the time of that dispensation here on earth: and since all or the most part,
not only of heathenesse, but namely of Christendom, acknowledge the title and
right of this law: what privilege have the French to exempt themselves
therfrom, and to debar any Prince of this right that by inheritance accreweth
to them, under pretense of an heathen law, pretended from in^idels, only for
a show of antiquity, against the most ancient, most reasonable, most natural
and most right law made of God the father himself, and confirmed by our
savior Jesus Christ?

If this law had no greater force than one of their mere Judicials: had it not
been better than any law, that is merely of man? And much more of blind
Papists, that saw not the virtue and equity of Gods law: and much far
better than any law of the Infidels: as was Pharamund from who^ the French
pretend to fetch this Salike law, so direct contrary to Gods law. But let
them go. Shall our Brethren Protestants, in the Churches reformed, hold with
these Popish devises too? And yet pretend, that so near as possibly we can,
we should draw to the Iudicialles of Gods law given by Moses? Let us
therefore see also what Calvin says heereon.

A story of the daughters of Salphaad of the progeny of Machir is inserted,
which desired to be admitted into part of the inheritance, Caluini Harmon. in
Nu^. 27.
because their father had no successor male. But the definition of this cause
might seem doubtful, except the doubt had been taken away by Gods answer.
For when as in the law no name is given to women; no consideration in the
portion of the land, ought to have been had of them. And verily, God
prescribed this common law. But now is set down a special exception, that
so often as one shall want heirs male, women should succeed, least the
memory of him should decay. Gods decree should suffice to ou^^rule all reasons
that occur.
I know it may be called in question, because that reasons occur on either
part. But this should suffice us, that God has interposed a decree. Thus
says Calvin. And upon these words, verse, 8. Thou shall speak unto the
children of Israel, saying: when any man shall die, and if he shall not have a
son; ye shall transfer his inheritance to his daughter; Calvin adds: The
conditional proposition was the occasion of making the law, The law was a
perpetual and general rule.
which should be a perpetual and general rule, so far as pertayneth to the
right of inheritaunces. But although God prefer the daughters before all the
other Cousines, whereas the issue male wants: notwithstanding, the first
degree excepted, he admits only the males to the succession. And so he
keeps the order that is used. And verily, to exclude his heirs for the
respect of the sex, should be a very wicked thing. But when he is come from
those that are his, Gods law of ignorance
unto other being legitimate: their prerogative begins to consiste in the
males. I speak of the land of Chanaan, in the which not only the name of
Abraham, but (to the end that there might be a more certain and distinct
memory) the names of the twelve tribes ought to have been kept.

Thus says Calvin, but how far he stretches this limitation, that he says,
Caluines restraint doutfull.
he speaks of the land of Chanaan: I do not certainly understand. Except
it be only to the prerogative of the male legitimate, that immediately he spoke
of before. And not to restrain all this law of God, which before he said
should be a perpetual and general rule, to the only land of Chanaan, or to
the name of Abraham, and to the twelve tribes. For that were, neither to make
it general nor perpetual. The debar of a general and perpetual rule a
wicked thing.
And verily, if this be a very wicked thing, ( as Calvin says) to exclude
the heir for respect of the sex: then does this generallitie and perpetuity
of this rule, stretche further than to the land of Chanaan, or to the Jews.
And it is yet to this day, and in all Christendom, as wicked a thing to
debar this general and perpetual rule, for respect of the sex, as ever
then with them it was. Neither do I think, the words to go so clear as
Calvin takes them: that if the man have no children of his own, neither
sons nor daughters, that by the man's brethren, and by the man's fathers
brethren, the males have such prerogative given them, that they might ouerpasse
and debar all the females equal in the line collateral, and so proceed to
another new line, still respecting the sex, more than the neerenesse of the
line: but that the same respect which is to be had of the principal party,
the same respect is to be had of all those male or female, that in blood are
nearest to him. Only the male has the prerogative if there be any. Sisters
comprehended in the name of brothers.
And that, in the name of Brethren, ( as in the more worthy sex) the name
of all the sisters is comprised, as oftentimes woman is comprehended in the
name of man.

But howsoever these words here, Brethren, and fathers brethren, strictly or
largely may be understood: the words in the 11. verse, that for the want of
the fathers brethren they should give the inheritance to the flesh that is the
next of the kindred (or family) mentioning neither male nor female, apparently
stretches in the default of the male, unto the female. And therefore Calvin (
my dutiful reverence to him reserved) does not so well (me thinks) anouch
this saying, that where the issue male fails, notwithstanding except the
first degree he admits the only males unto the succession. The law of
marriage in their tribes restrained to the Jews Judicials.
As for that which follows after cap. 36. of the marriage of such heirs
females with those that were of their own tribes: that law indeed has the
reason which Calvin speaks of, for the memory of the certain and distinct
tribes.

And now for further proof of the woman's inheritance Boos when he married
Ruthe the Moabitish woman though she were but the widdowe of Mahlon, Boo^ had
Alimelechs inheritance by Ruth.
Alimelechs and Naomies son, Burgundy
yet, the inheritance went with her, and came to Boos by her, the great
grandsyres to King David.

Now, if the Salike law were made by an heathen Prince ( as the french
pretend) if not rather by those that pretend to be most Christian Princes,
fathered in a heathen Princes name: shall any that is a Christian Prince
indeed, oppose the same unto Gods most equal and natural law and thereby
exclude other Christian Princes titles, and vaunt of this their heathen law;
and that worse is, not only clean disinherite the natural heir, but deface
all women kind thereby, as this popish Bishop Caenalis does?

But see how he confutes himself. For, when he has set down the Salike
law, that no portion of inheritance of the Salike land, Caenalis co^futes
himself.
may come to a woman, but that the whole inheritance should come to the male
kind: Moreover ( says he) they call the Salike land, that which cleaves
indiuisiblie to the Monarchical scepter of the French, which condition they
of Bourges, and of Orleance, and the Dukedom also of the Burgundians do
follow.

If the dukedom of Burgundy ( for the other as meaner states I will not pry
into) follow the same condition that the land Salike and the land adherent to
the French crown does: I would again desire no better argument, that, the
inheritance of the crown of France deuolueth unto the right of the heir
female.

For first, what is clearer than that which Otto Fresingensis Lib. 2. cap. 29.
says: Mos est in Burgundia, etc. It is the custom in Burgundy, The custom of
Burgundy.
(which is kept almost in all the Provinces of France) that always the
authority of the inheritance of the Farher, passes to the elder brother, and
to his children whether they be males or be they females, the residue having
respect to him as to their Lord.

But to go to no other witnesses then Caenalis himself: does he not
confess, Lib. 1. perioche. 13. fol. 101. b? Unto Gondebaldus succeeded
Sigismunde, who himself also perished of a cruel death, Burgundy descends
to a woman.
being together with his son hurled down into a pit, in so much that the
kingdom of Burgundy, came in the name of inheritance unto Clotildis And the
same he repeateth in the next leaf. b. who being slain ( he speaks of
Gondomarus) the kingdom of the Burgundians passed unto Clotildis and to her
children. And again, 105. a. the kingdom of the Burgundians is the first
section, from Gondengus, alias Gondochius, or Gondebundus, until Clotildis
placed in matrimony to Clodoueus, unto whom succeeded heirs suruiuing
Gondebaldus and Gondesigillus.

But to Gondebaldus succeeded Sigisimundus, The Merouingians and Carolins lines.
who being slain, the scepter of the kingdom came to Clotildis and to her
posterity. But when as unto Clotildis and unto her posterity succeeded a
great many children: the kingdom of Burgundy flewe among them with doubtful
feathers, which must needs fall out that at the length the kingdom of
Burgundy should come to the last suruiuer, which should be only called the
Monarch of the Gauls. And all this fell out after Pharamundus, about the time
of Clodoueus, who was the first French king that was Christened, by the means
of this his wife Clotildis, from whose issue succeeded the line of the
Merouingians, The line of the Merouingians by the woman. The line of the
Carolins by the woman.
of Meroueus grandfather to Clodoueus, and by affinity as Aimonius
witnesses, (that is, through title of kindred by his wife) the successor of
Clodio. Pharamundus son, so that again, all the line of the Merouingians came
by the woman. Which line of the Merouingians continued till Charles Martell the
Father of Pipine, and Grandfather to Charles the great. In whose stock both
Burgundy, and the regiment of all France continued, until the time of Hughe
Capete, who gave the same unto his brother, it being not long before abased by
Lotharius, from the state of a kingdom to a dukedom, for his contumelious
striking of an Archbishop.

But now (says Caenalis) after that the inheritance of the Burgundian
dukedom came to the French kings: No sure footing in the Princes of
Burgundies line but by the woman.
ye shall scarce find, concerning the race of the Princes of the Burgundians,
where ye may safely fix your foot, even until the time of S. Loyes, and that
chiefly by reason of women: S. Loyes had Agnes or Agnet his daughter, Duchess
of Burgundy, whom not long time after, Jews (surnamed Hutin) succeding
married. Philip surnamed the fair married Margaret ennobled by the ftocke of
Burgundy. Then followed Ioane given in marriage to Philip the long. Whom
straightway followed Blanch Duches of Burgundy, joined in marriage to Charles
the fayrer that succeeded Philip the long. After whom Philip of Valoys
following, married Ioane Duchess of Burgundy.

This Philip got the crown of France from Edward the 3. King of England.
By whose means this Salike law, against the inheritance of the female was
first under the name of Pharamunde devised. Upon pretense as the fame went
that a certain Queen of France cast her fancy on a Butcher, The occasion of
making the Salike low.
( as Johannes Methensis witnesses) and married him. For detestation of which
fact they made the Salike law, that no woman should after that inherit the
kingdom of France. Io. Methensis manuscript.
And although Gaguinus to defeat king Edwardes title, allege that every one
of the three sons of Philip the fair, both Jews Hutin, and Philip the long,
and Charles the fair had all issue, Edward 3. right.
besides the other daughters that he mentions of Philip le Beau; yet sith it
is apparent that of none of all those issued any heirs male or female: how
could Philip of Valoys pretend, Burgundy
from his Uncle Philip S. Jews son, which Philip was Father to Isabel,
Edward the third his mother, to bereave Isabell and her son Edward of this
right, but under pretense only of this devised law? Which law as we have
seen by Caenalis own confession, taking no place in Burgundy, the
Burgundians and the Frankes following one condition of inheritance: it
follows, that this law Salike, is but a mere devise, and that in searching
the practice we find all clean contrary.

And as the inheritance of Burgundy went thus, until that time that this
devise was hatched: so has it gone since. The right of Burgundy deuolues not
to the French king but to Maximilian by his wife.
For although Caenalis when he comes to Charles Carolese, or rather Careless,
which last was flaine by the Switzers, says: who when he wanted an heir
male, by the virtue of the Salike law, the Dukedom of Burgundy came to the
kings of France even until this day: I much marvel what face Caenalis durst
so constantly avouch this thing: sith all Christendom knows, that although
the French King scambled for his share, and got a part thereof, in that time
of havoc: yet Maximilian the Emperor, marying afterward the daughter and
heir, obtained by her the right and title of that inheritance. By which it is
most clear, that these two estates of France and Burgundy, the one following
in inheritance the condition of the other: that as Burgundy notwithstanding
any Salike law, admits the inheritance of the woman: so should France also.

Yea, and by reason of this house of Burgundy, has title come by the woman
also even to the crown of France. The which Caenalis himself can not deny.
For (says he, fol. 106. a.) speaking of Philip the long, whom he calls the
Brother ( he should say, the son of Philip the fair) he succeeded his elder
brother Jews, surnamed Hutin, that is (as some interpret it) troublesome or
brawling, unto whom Margaret the sister of Robert Duke of Burgundy was married.
Of whom Hutine begat Ioane, which Ioane was married unto the Earl of Eureux,
Ebroicensi.
and to the king of Navarre. Whereupon controversy arose between the Duke of
Burgundy and Philip ( he means Philip of Valoys) which of a regent was
created king, about the year, 1316. by reason of which Joan the Scepter was
staide to be diuolued to the Duke of Burgundy, brother of Joan. But the law
Salike directly withstood this sentence. The law Salike not regarded when it
made not for them.
How beit the marriage of Joan daughter of Philip, whom the Duke of Burgundy
took to his wife, brake off that strife. But because this Ioane Hutines
daughter had no issue, Edward therefore came still before the Duke of
Burgundy. And yet had this Duke carried it away, even by affinity, for all
the law Salike, had not the matter been otherwise composed.

The Carolins from the wom^.
And Caenalis reckoning up the Genealogy of the Earls of Burgundy coming
from Otto he says: Otto begat Ioane the French Queen, and Queen of Navarre,
the Lady of the country Palatine of Burgundy, whom Philip the French king
chose to his wife, of which marriage issued Jews the french King, and his 2.
son Philip Earl Palatine of Burgundy, etc. Ioane had daughter Elisa or
Elisabeth, married to Robert Duke of Burgundy, about the year 1306. Jews the
French king and of Navarre begat the Earl of Poyters, and Palatin of Burgundy
and Lord of Salinople, not long after French king. This Philip, of whom we
have spoken, begat Margaret enriched with a triple Earldom, of Flaunders, of
Artoys and of Burgundy, etc.

Thus does Caenalis ( in prosecuting these pedegrees of these Princes) declare
withal what inheritances also came to them with women, and that unto the
French king besides Britanie and diverse other Provinces, by marriages of the
heirs female. Inheritances coming by the right of women.
Yea, what title to the French crown, himself had Pipine, but on the mothers
side. As Caenalis is feign to confess (though he would turn the matter from
title to election) that he came by the mothers blood of the Frankes. fol. 68.
of whose progeny says Volateranus, Lib. 3. fol. 17. b. Pipine therefore the
King, in the year. 751. began the second progeny among the French, of whom
we must speak a few things: taking his beginning from his ancestors, for
they boast of his kindred from the french kings. For Ambertus being a great
man begat of Hitildis the daughter of Clotarius the 8. Herkenoalde the Father
of Pipine, who had Grimoalde the father of an other Herkenolde, of whom was
begotten the other Pipine surnamed the short, of his short stature. etc. This
Pipine begat Charles Martell, who had issue Pipine that was made king, the
Father of the Emperor Charles the great. So that all this boasting that
Volaterane speaks of, came of the mother.

And likewise for Hughe Capete says Caenalis Fol. 110. This one function I
have chosen to my self, that out of the most certain Chronicles of Bochet, I
might set before mine eyes the most renowned progeny of Hugh Capete, Hugh
Caperes descent by the woman.
running down from Pharamunde by Pipine, to wit, unto whom the race of the
royal stock is deuolued, the feminine sex coming between. And this is the
order of this generation. Of Pipine the short was begotten Charles the great,
of who^ came Jews surnamed the godly, from whence out of this generation came
Jews of Bauier king of the Germans. From the Bauarian proceeded Carlomanne,
who of his body begat Arnulphus the Emperor. From Arnulphus sprange his
daughter Luigarde. Who being joined in matrimony to the Duke Odo, brought
forth Henry, which married Mawde the daughter of the Emperor Jews.
Nevertheless Henry married an other wife the widdowe of Conradus called
Placida or Placentia. From whence came Otto the first Emperor of that name,
The Capetians from the woman.
and Bruno Bishop of Colayne, and Gerberga the noble wife of the french king
Jews the fourth. From whom issued Aigunda joined in marriage to Hugh surnamed
the great, which by the title of Earl, obtained the royal City of Paris. Of
which matrimony issued our Hughe Capete. And from hence it clearly appears
that Hughe, of whom at this present we speak, was by lynage a Caroline, a
Merouingian, and also a Trojan Sicambrian. Of whom the Sicambrians also had
their name of Cambria a most wise woman the king of Britains daughter, as
Lazius de Migrationibus gentium, discoursing upon the Cymmerians from whence
the Frankes came, does witness, Fol. 83.

Thus does Caenalis himself fetch the pedigree of the royal blood of all
these houses even for Hugh Capete, still from the mother. And the like being
showed also in Meroueus, that came to the Crown by the right of affinity unto
Clodio the son of Pharamunde, ( all affinity consisting by right of marriage)
it follows, that all the translations from the right line that ever have
been in France, save only the intrusion of Philip de Valoys to exclude
Edward the third, were made only by such, as claimed the title of the royal
blood by right of their mothers, notwithstanding the French Chronicles
frivolous pretenses of election, or of the Salike law.

Now, where Caenalis would draw the reason of this pretensed Salike law,
from a contrariety to the law of nature, and to the law of GOD in the state
of a Monarchy: Caenalis Lib. 1. periche fol. 66.
let us likewise see the peyse of those his reasons. Fol. 66. By which reason (
says he) the Monarchy of the French is established. Which when it
reacknowledgeth not a superior, it might of his own right make a law to
endure for ever, and publish the same being made. If the reason hereof shall
be exacted, ye shall find that even by the very force of the word, a
Monarchy can not consiste and a supreme government of things, except it be
in the male kind. That the Monarchical scepter be Guerman, that is to say,
altogether manly, having nothing womanish mixed with it.

For by the law of God it is apparaunt, not in one place (even nature it self
teaching us) that a woman is subject to a man. Colloss. 3. Genesis 3. 1. Cor. 11.
Thou shall be under the power of the man, says the Lord unto the woman, not
so much noting her person, as her sex. And out of Paul, the man is the head
of the woman. How now can it come to pass, that the woman if she govern
Monarchically should not have the supreme government over the man? If the man
govern, she shall not be a Monarke. Contrariwise if the woman retain the
chief Dominion to her self, then shall not the man be the commander, as he
that is under the woman's laws. Monarchy.
For two can not be either of them in the whole, equally the Lords of one
thing.

Concerning that which Caenalis said before, that Burgundy followed the
condition of France in this Salike law: we have showed indeed how they both
follow one condition, that is to say, neither of them in their practice (save
against us) have followed this law. And therefore by this means, this law
Salike is not established to endure perpetually, but is broken or kept at their
pleasure. If they list to put back the nearest heir, be he also never so
much a man, or manly a man, if his title come by the mother, How the French
use the Salike law.
or if they like him not to reign over them: then out with this Salike law
against him. And if they like him, though his descent be from the woman never
so much: then for sooth, the law Salike can not hold: For why; then ( says
Caenalis) election is above all law of succession. And thus every way they
shift the matter, to establish (as they say) their Monarchy, and to set up
whom it pleases them.

But if the establishment of this law consist of this, that it was made by a
Monarchy that reacknowledged no Superior, and therefore of his own right,
might make a law to endure for ever, and publish the same being made: then was
this law far from such an establishment; Pharamundus and his Frankes being
so far off from a Monarchy, and from reacknowledging no superior: that they
were overcome by the Romans, and tributaries to them, and when Valentian
forgave them their tribute for ten years space, where they dwelt then in
Hungary by the Romans licenses: when they denied their tribute they were
expulsed from thence (Laz. fol. 66.) and after planted themselves in Holland,
and Phrisia and from thence by little and little into Germany and to Gallia.

But what enfranchesing has the French Monarchy now, (which he says, Lazius
de migrationibus gentium.
reacknowledgeth no superior) that both it and all other never so high or so
large a Monarchy, should not always reacknowledge the superiority of the
law of God, to be above and ouerrule all their Salike or humane laws?

Neither does the nature of a Monarchy or supreme dominion, ( as here he
boldly avouches) require to consist always in a man, and that man to be
altogether a manly, or a warrelike man, and admit no feminine admixture. A
Monarchy may admit a woman governor.
For then, not only every man child, but also many milder spirited men might
be excluded from their right and Monarchies. True it is, that by the law of
God, and by the law of nature, a woman is subject and inferior to a man, in
respect of her sex of womankind: but as Caenalis confesses, that the Lord
spoke these words, unto the woman, thou shall be under the power of the man,
not so much noting her person as her sex: and how then does not Caenalis
fully answer himself herein? For the word Monarke, only chief or
governor, notes not the sex, but the person. And therefore, this sentence,
Monarch respects not the sex.
not noting so much the person as the sex: is not well applied to that estate
of a Monarke, which notes not so much the sex as the person. Whereas this
subjection of the woman to the man, is of the sex, in respect she is a woman:
and not of the person, whereby she is a Prince or Monark, except it be
understood of such a person, as is a man's wife, and in respect of her
wife-hoode subject to her husband. Otherwise, A woman superior in some
respects.
if she can not by any means be superior as a person: then can she not only
be no Monarke over men in a kingdom: neither yet, have any Ladyship over any
country, no, nor be any Mistress in her own household, if any man ( though a
mere servant or stranger) soiorne in her house. And if she may have a higher
authority, in respect of the higher person, whereunto she is called over men
servant in a family, town, or Country: then may she notwithstanding her
sex, retain the highest authority also even in a Monarchy.

Which distinction of sex and person, used by Caenalis himself, How the man
is the woman's head, and how the woman may be the man's head.
expounds likewise his sentence out of S. Paul, that the man is the woman's
head, in respect ( I answer) of her sex and woman-hood: except we shall add
(if she be married) in respect also of the state of her wife-hood. But this
hinders not, but that in other respects, the woman ( though not as a woman)
but as a Mistress* a Lady, or a Sovereign, may be the man's head also, that
is, his lawful Governor, and director, and so his Monarke. So that, although
the man retain still his natural superior power, in regard of his manhood: or
his oeconomicall superior authority, in regard of his marriage: yet in other
political considerations, as wherein a woman is an heir, or lawfully
attayneth to any title of dignity or crown, she may be Lady, or Sovereign
of any land, territory or dominion, and so, the supreme government thereof
belongs of right unto her, or to her husband ( have she any) in her name and
title. And being sui Iuris, her own woman, as we term it, having no husband to
be her head: her supreme government is the less restrained.

Debora had a husband, to whom (no doubt) she was buxome and loyal, in
respect of the duty of a wife: but again, The example of Debora.
in respect of the high and public estate, that God other wise advanced her
unto, she governed and judged all Israel, and so, her own husband, and under
God, in her judgments and commandments she was their head. And although
Hester was not a Monarke, but her husband Ahashuerus, whose very name
betokens he was the chief head: yet notwithstanding she obtained great power
and authority over all the Jews her countrymen, that dwelt thoughout all her
husbands provinces. Yea, and her husband (chap. 5. ver. 3.) had her ask what
she would, and it should be given her, even to half the kingdom. The offer
made to Hester of half the kingdom was a lawful offer.
Which he would not have offered her, if she had not been capable of public
government. If now we grant that Hester might have such authority, though
under her husband, yet over her own people and over half these Provinces,
whereof one quarter is more than all the kingdom of France, and add all Italy
to it: how then is not the force of Caenalis argument overthrown? For we stand
not upon so absolute a Monarchy, as admits superior power at all: for such
a Monarke is no man neither, but only almighty God. But if a woman may have a
despoticall regiment to govern but a Town, or Lordship, as in the new
Testament, Marie and Martha, were Ladies of Bethania, as many do expound
those words, Ioh. 11.1. Mary and Martha Ladies of Bethanie. The Lady Lois. 1.
John.
A certain man was sick named Lazarus of Bethania, the Town of Mary and her
sister Martha: and also (as it may be co^iectured) the Lady to whom S. John
wrote his second Epistle: then may she also proceed further, even to the
government of a kingdom or Monarchy, for any hindrance of her sex herein.
For if she may govern men at all, she may be a chief governor of them well
enough.

Neither is it of any necessity in public government, that a man should be
the chief governor, more than a woman, for any thing contained in the quoted
sentences, Colloss. 3. Genes* 3. 1. Cor. 11. or any other sentence in the
old, or in the new Testament, as we have already seen. So that, whether the
chief governor be man or woman ( come he or she to their estates by godly
means) the sex is no such debar at all, but that without any prejudice of
their kinds, any one of them may, so far as stretches to this public
pre-eminence, govern and direct the other. Yea, Chief governor in more then
one.
in some cases (although Caenalis say the contrary) I yet see not, why two
cannot in some sort be equally governors both in one and like, either of them
in the whole even of one state; yea, one Monarchy or Empire. as it is said of
Gerion in Spain, of whom the Poets feyned that he had 3. bodies and but one
head: because three Brethren united themselves equally altogether in one
government. And the like even in the Monarchy of Rome, diverse Emperors
were. And although some of them divided the Countries and Provinces of their
possessions: yet the Empire remained one among them, which Empire they governed
jointly and with equal dignity, as though they were but one, and not the one
over or under the other, and some of the^ women also, as we shall see after,
when Danaeus shall call us to examples of that state. Only now it suffices to
have seen how this Popish Bishop Caenalis uses all those reasons also, that
Calvin and Danaeus stand upon. And how weak all these their arguments are.

The residue that follows in Caenalis, is for the most part either but vain
babbling, without any proof at all: or more fond arguments than the other.
Caenalis.
These things therefore ( says he, fol. 66. a.) fight with themselves to be a
chief Monarke, and to be a woman.

I deny this consequence. Neither follows it on any of his premises. Bridges


But ( says he) whosoever therefore doubts in that thing: Caenalis.
hears not himself speaking, not knowing the force of the word.

Whether Caenelis heard himself or no; I can not say. I rather think he heard
himself too much, Bridges
and bewrays his own ignorance of the word. For what can Monarchy else
signify, but the principality or chief government of one? And what then is
included in the word Monarke, of what sex that one chief governor should
be? So it be but the chief government of one, and not of more.

But ( says he) they that in their kingdoms claim the chief government to
themselves, Caenalis.
admitting the chief right of the kingdom in a woman, seem to do nothing
else, than that they diminish the Majesty of the Monarchical principality.

If they (that having right thereto, Bridges
and be not otherwise by their demerites barred) be women that claim the
Monarchy to themselves: what diminishing is this, when the Majesty of the
Monarchical principality still remains entier in them? If he speak of men:
his words have no sense. For how can they claim to them selves the chief
government in their kingdoms: and withal admit the chief right of the
kingdom in a woman? Except, whosoever should so do, would confess himself to
be a plain usurper; confessing the chief right to be in her, and yet claim
the chief government to himself. If he mean, not of any title of right in
present: but right in possibility, when it deuolueth to a woman: then neither
he diminishes any whitte the Majesty of the Monarchical principality: nor
she, when she lawfully atteyneth thereunto, any whit diminishes the same by
reason of her sex, except by any her demerites otherwise she diminish it, or
perhaps may lose it. But that may happen, and has happened, to a man as well as
unto a woman.

Of which matter ( says Caenalis) let them look to it, to wit, Caenalis.
the English men, the Spaniardes, and the Sicilians, and well ne^re all other.

Since not only England, Spain, and Sicile, Bridges.
but almost all other do admit this right: it argues it is not an
unlawful, and unnatural thing. Almost all Christendom acknowledges a woman
right of regiment.
Except the French would condemn the most part of Christendom for their own
peuish standing on this Salike law, which they confess came from Infidelles.
But as we of England have good company herein: so, let the French rather look
unto it, that separate themselves, for the maintenance of a Pagan law ( if not
rather a law mere forged) from the most part of Christendom. And is there
now no Monarchy or kingdom in all Christendom but only in France? If there
be, then to be a Monark, and to be a woman, are not repugnant. And he that
doubts thereof, hears not himself, nor knows the force of the word, Monarke.

Other Signiories.
As for the residue of Ditions or Signiories ( says Caenalis) how excellent
soever they are, Caenalis
the dignity of their principality being safe, (so that it be not supreme and
Monarchical) they may admit the feminine sex in the succession of land.

Bridges.
If he make this exception of the residue of ditions or Signiories, from
England, Caenalis grant in others segnioties for women's gou.
Spain, Sicill and all other, which he grants to admit women's supreme
government: then, of what other signiories he speaks, he should have plainer
expressed. But what signiories soever he mean, or what municipall laws soever
they have: since he grants this, that how excellent soever they be, they may
admit the woman kind in the succession of the soil, the dignity of their
principality being safe and unblemished: and yet that dignity is annexed to
the possession of that soil: how then does he not grant, but that women may
govern never so excellent a signiorie dition or territory, without impayring
the dignity of the principality thereof? Which if they may do: then this
exception, so that it be not supreme and Monarchical, comes too late, and is a
vain exception.

Neither is his reason hereof any more of value to debar a woman's right from
the succession of a kingdom: than of a Princedom or of a dukedom.

For ( says he) there shall not want the top or sovereignty of the Monarchy,
Caenalis.
that with the defense of arms shall supply the fraylty of the sex, in
defending of or restoring her right.

And cannot this be done as well and better by her own subjects, or
confederates, Bridges
when she her self has the Monarchical principality? And may not men
pretend as well and much easier, to take away an Erledome, a Dukedom or
Princedome or other inferior Signiories from her, The imbecilitie of a man
child or weakness.
as upon such pretense of defense, to take away her right of the kingdom? Yea,
by this reason, n^ male heir, being yet a child, can enjoy a Monarchy:
because the fraylti^ of his age, as well as of her sex, in defending or
restoring his right must be supplied by the force of arms: which lies as
little in him to do, as in a woman.

But ( says Caenalis) in a Monarchy, if a woman govern, it should be
necessary that a man should be subject to a woman, Caenalis.
against all the disposing both of the holy and of the profane law.

Well may it be against the disposing of this profane pretended Salike law:
Bridges.
but we have showed sufficiently, yea, and Caenalis has sufficiently
confessed, that it is not against the holy law of God, but that a man may be a
subject to a woman, in respect of the person of her vocation, without any
subjection or derogation to the superiority his sex and nature, in respect
that he is a man.

Caenalis.
And let this reason ( says he) be in steed of all.

If he mean this last reason, I may reply: The gift of healing.
and let that his own distinction stand for answer of al his own reasons. If he
mean that which follows: Bridges.


But also it was never heard spoken, Caenalis.
that the gift of healing whereby the sick are healed of the Squinancie should
light on a woman. The gift of healing the Squyn^cy.


Indeed it may be, he makes this his principal reason. For afterward, fol.
110. He comes in again ruffling with this self same reason, saying: by the
same work, the legitimate issue of the Hugonians, Bridges.
is from heaven approved to succeed in the kingdom of the French, by the
virtue of an heavenly miracle, to wit, while it reteineth the power of
healing the squinancy, (or the scrophules,) which thing is apparent, that it is
not granted to the English usurper. They that have attempted contrary, have
been thieves and robbers. Neither have the sheep heard them. What has the
chough to do with the harp, Caenalis.
or the sow with the sweet Oil of Maioram? with this one argument all the
inuaders of that kingdom, are driven back from the royal scepter of the
French.

These villainous terms, not aunswerable to the Majesty of a princes royal
estate, nor seemly for any modest person, much less for the mouth or writing
of a Bishop, to have uttered, being rejected: Bridges.
as proceeding from one all inflamed with choler, and blinded with partiality
besides poperye: and likewise, this blasphamy against Christ, that his sheep
will here no others voice but his, applying the same to the French king, being
removed: If there remain any monument in this which he makes his cheifest
argument: Let us with more moderation than he makes it, advise and weigh the
same. And first, for this gift of healing this disease, I deny not, but that it
may well be, that the legitimate issue of the Hugonians may have this
especial gift. Which albeit, some think contrary, notwithstanding (being
used alonely to the glory of God, and without all superstition) I take it to be
more superstitious to deny it, then to grant it. The effect so apparently,
though not always, (for God binds not himself to such gifts) yet, so often
falling out. But now, if this be so good an argument: even as we see also,
often times, by the fresh bleeding again of a dead body, whose blood, though
it has been^ long cold and congealed, nevertheless, at the presence of the
unknown murderer, God has given such a miraculous contrariety of natural
qualities and operations (which of the Greek is called an Antipathie* in
english we may term it a counterpassio^, whereby the malefactor is discried: so
contrariwise, The secret sympathy and antipathy of nature.
if God have given such a singular and excellent sympathy, or force of
compassion, to the legitimate issue of that line, or such a secret and
forcible antipathie to that evil or disease that by the expulsion thereof, the
right and legitimate line of the French Kings should be made manifest: then,
what soever power hereof the French King that now possesses the Crown, has
in this matter, I cannot not say: but of this I am sure, and an infinite number
more can witness the same, that God has miraculously healed by her Majesty's
hands, a very great number, and still does.

Yea, Ioh. Tagautius a Parisian, in his institution of surgery dedicated to
Frances the first, li. 1. chap. 13. writing of the cure of this disease, does
say: Hoc vnum tamen, etc. This one thing nevertheless I confidentlie affirm,
that it is granted of God by a special gift to the most Christian king of the
French, that with the only touching of his hand he should restore to health
those that have the Squina^cie, or the Scrophules as they term them. King
Edward also ( he means the third) as the Histories report, was wont to heal
those that had the Squinancie with touching only, given him of God, which
gift being immortal, has passed as a right hereditarie to the kings
following. For the kings of England, even now also by their touching with
certain thanksgiuings before recited, not without ceremonies do heal those
of the Squinancie or swellings in the throat.

Which most manifestly confuteth all the slanderous and opprobrious untruths
of this blind and foul mouthed Popish Bishop Caenalis. And cleerlie euicteth,
that as her Majesty is no less of the legitimate line of the Hugonians,
Carolines, and Merouingians, than Philip of Valois was: as is most apparent,
Isabel being the legitimate daughter of Philip le Beaw, which also was the
legitimate son and heir of Philip his Father, and Father also to Charles of
Valois his second son, of whom came Philip of Valois, from who^ the French
kings succeeding, and he yt is yet remainder, have issued: since therefore the
legitimate daughter, begotten in lawful matrimony, is by the express law of
God, preferred before the Fathers brother, and before fathers brothers son: how
can her Majesty's line be called or thought other than the legitimate issue of
the Hugonians? and therefore this argument is either of no force to infer the
title of the Crown, but only to prove the legitimation of the issue, which
they cannot deny in her Majesty, nor we deny in their Princes: or else this
argument does plainly convince them, and infers her Majesty's right and
title. But we stand not upon the lawfulness of the blood, but upon the
neerenesse of the blood. And Caenalis himself speaking of the line of Hugh
Capet ( whose royal blood from the Carolines was only of the mother, as we
have even out of Caenalis showed) says, fol. 68. b. For the right of the
kingdom of France, is not to be of the right every man, or of heads (
because Hugh Capet had his name of Caput, an head) Sed sanguinis esse, But to
be of blood And therefore, the nearer blood legitimate, the nearer right, even
by his own confession.

Now, as this Popish Bishop, the more he strives, the more he wrestles with
himself, beating himself, and confuteth still his own reasons: so he
concludes hereon. Thou see therefore, Monarchy.
how these being joined in a certain agreeable and indivisible league,
Caenalis.
do so defense and strengthen mutually the one the other, a Monarchy the Law
Salike, and the Law Salike a Monarchy: that whether of these two thou will,
being taken away: the other of necessity must either be changed, or perish
utterly.

This conclusion is as false and loose as all the premises. Bridges
What such Agreeable and indissoluble league has he proved, or have we
seen, between the state of a Monarchy and the Salike Law, that they can not
be severed without the utter destruction the one of the other? can not the
Salike Law stand without a Monarchy? God wotte it was a sorry vagarant and
tributary Monarchy, when (as they pretend) Pharamunde made it, and a pretty
while after. And can it not stand in other states popular or Aristocratical,
as well as, yea and firmer in them than in a Monarchy? and must there needs
be a Monarchy where it takes place? is the state of Bourges, of Orleance, and
of Burgundy, a monarchical state? and yet, Caenalis confessed before, that
they all follow the Salike Law.

And on the other side, is there no Monarchy but where the Law Salike holds?
Is not the state of England, Spain, Sicile, Scotland, Many Monarchies where
the Salike Law holds not
and many other states Monarchical, and yet admit not this Salike Law but the
succession of the woman? Is France only and those fewer and meaner states,
Monarchies, and not these Countries? What a false conclusion then is this that
includes all these falshoodes? But if none of all these reasons will serve:
yet says he:

Howsoever it be, what is more ridiculous, or preposterous and fond, Caenalis.
than if a hen should rule a cock?

Wh^ a ridiculous and proposterous reason is this, Bridges
from reasonable creatures to unreasonable, that have nothing to guide them but
the instinct and force of nature? and by this reason, all states should not
only receive the Salike Law: but the Law of God, for any pre-eminence of
womon in any inheritance at all, or Government of their household, and all
obedience of men children to their Mothers, especially after they be stronger
than their Mothers, and of servants to their Ladies and Mystresses, is clean
cut off, and should become a Preposterous and an unnatural thing, by this
Cockishe or rather Cocks-comish reason, If I may be so bold as to use this
term. In-deede the Gauls or French are called Galli, which betokens also
Cocks, as in the next leaf 67. Caenalis ridiculously and fondly triumphs on
that name saying.

Almost all other principalities by reason of succession, Caenalis.
Gallinacei sunt, are Hennishe or Dunghill Cocks (if with the good leave of
all, it may be lawful for me so to say). For that in them the woman
succeeds the man, Principali^y.
and the man the woman. Gallus vero monarcha ^mnium quos tota alit Europa,
minime gallinaceus est, sed virili tantum and masculus, nullo iure haereditario
muliebris. But: the French man (or Cock) being the Monark of all that Europe
breeds, is no hennish or dunghill Cock, but only mannish and Masculine, by
no right of inheritance womannish.

Bridges
What intolerable boasting and vain words are these? verily this Bishop (
whether he were a Hennish Cock or no, I cannot tell) is so cranke of his
comb, and so loath to have it cut, that he plays the part of a very crauine,
and croweth like a Dunghill Cock, but with his arguments fights like a
crammed Capon. And yet, were all this but a ridiculous and fond meriment,
rather than an argument, to conclude so high a matter, save that he turns
again to his old bious, of wresting not only the Apocryphal, but also the
canonical Scripture.

Caenalis.
Which thing ( says he, fol. 66. b.) How unseemly it is, he knew that said,
women do rule you, do ye not mourn?

See, how grossly this is wrested. Whereas, Zorobabel maintaining his theme,
Bridges
women are strongest, but truth overcomes all things. Among other sentences
says on this wise, 1. Esdras 4. ver. 22. Therefore, by this ye may know, The
Apocryphal scripture wrested.
that the women bear rule over you, do ye not labor and trau elland give and
bring all to the women? This now alleges this ignorant Bishop, as though it
were a mournful and lamentable state, where women have any civil and
politic government.

Caenalis.
But ( says he) no man will call the woman sex, most mighty Lord, and
dreadful Prince, nature even directly repugning against it. Therefore that
sex is altogether incapable of a most mighty Principality.

Bridges
Indeed, no man having his right wits, will be so fond as to call a woman, a
Lord: and yet may Queens with natural comeliness, and subject like duty, be
called most mighty Lady and dreadful Prince, or dread Sovereign. Or in place
of these, other reverend and honorable terms, may serve, without any direct
or indirect repugnancy to nature well enough. But if this or that term will
not beseem them, shall we for the unfitness of that term, that is more
proper perhaps to a man, deny a woman's right of principality? And if a woman
were incapable also of the most mighty principality: might not for all that, a
Woman be the Queen well enough of all France? or is that, the most mighty
principality? I think England ere now has matched well enough with all the
might thereof. And yet have women governed more mighty principalityes than
England or France, or Spain, and put them altogether.

Caenalis.
But ( says he) the woman-kinde is so prone to fall, and to plunge headlong,
that it has more need of a bridle than a scepter. For it is written, Pro. 31.
Who shall find a strong woman?

This is not only this shameless Bishops accustomed wresting Gods holy word:
but heereon he breaks forth from all arguments, Bridges.
into so black rhethorike and plain railing: that I must needs here for
very shame and werinesse begin to shake him off, and turn him loose, to some
common scoldes, more fit a great deal to deal with them, than to dispute on
Princes titles, save that where again he alleges the Scripture, saying.

For it is written. Who shall find a strong Woman? Caenalis.
I know well enough some notable Matrones in the feminine sex are provident
and beautified with many virtues. But this Woman is a rare bird, and most like
to a black Swanne. But that law does consider those things, that a man shall
find every where, not the things that happen rarely.

Howsoever this Bishop can wrest and turn his Salike Law, he ought not to
wrest the law of God. For Solomon speak not this, Bridges
as though there were no such strong women at all: For all that follows of
the woman's commendation is clean contrary. Yea, and this very word of Solomon
which here he uses, ver. 10. (...), Mulier fortis, signifying not only
substance or wealth, strength of body or courage of mind, called fortitude and
virtue, such as may be in a private man: but such as is requisite in the
government of the people, yea, of an army, which word he so ascribes unto a
woman, that he says, she puts it on as a garment, verse 25. The 70. call
this Woman, (...), a valiant, manly or a mannish Woman. And say, she has put
on (...), The deriuation of the name woman
Might and comeliness. (...) may very well be fetched from the Hebrew word,
which calls the Man (...) Ish, and the woman (...) Isha, and the Latin is,
vir and virago, the English, Man and Woman, as the party whom the man does
woo. Whereby it appears, that this sex, though the weaker vessel by nature,
yet by grace as she is, according to the Apostles saying, 1. Pet. 3.7. coheire
with us of the gift of eternal life, which of al other is the greatest gift: so
is she not incapable of this virtue of politic government in this mortal
life, which is a gift though excellent, yet far inferior. True it is, few
have had this gift in excellent manner: Neither many men But that is no reason,
for the seldomnesse of it, that the Law of man should clean debar it. For
we rather say contrary: things the more rare, ( if they be good things) are
so much more precious, and esteemed the rather, the rarer they are, The rarenes
tak^^h not away the right.
and yet might that Law perhaps the less think thereon. For, seldom seen
soon forgotten. And it is seen the seldomer, by reason that ordinarily the
parents want not sons, and therefore it deuolueth the seldomer to the
daughters. But, this should not clean drown Gods Law in utter oblivion,
Guardianship.
and much less remembering it, Man's law should not of purpose be written
against it. And yet it is not so seldom, but that in that Chapter (and using
also that very Word of the forditude of government, even of an army if need
were) he says, Verse 29. Many daughters have gotten strength, but thou haste
surmounted them all. So that, Fortitude in a woman.
though they be very rare which surmount all other: yet, he says Many
Daughters may have a competent degree even of this Fortitude, that can govern
the multitude of the people: the residue in Caenalis, which follows out of
Poets inuectiues is unworthy the answering. As for the Amazones I am of his
opinion. His next argment is this.

The Laws repel a woman from being tutor or Guardian to a pupil or
Fatherless child: Caenalis.
with what reason then should they be received to defend and protect the
chief dignity of a Monarchy? Reason first, is a weak argument from the
defense and protection of another weakness, to the title of ones own right. For
a man child, though he cannot also be a tutor, but is under tutors: yet can
he be a Monarche or a King, even while he is defended and protected under his
tutors government. A child under tutors and yet a Monarke.
For, that government of his tutors, is not in any respect of any right of
their own: but of his right. And is only a supply by another of his
infirmity. Which makes the better to prove that natural imbecility, though it
might take away the actual exercise of many things either from a Child or from
a woman: yea, from a Man also: yet, can it not take away their title and
authority from their right and propriety in the kingdom.

For though a king be continually sick, yet is he king still. As, when David
was so cold and impotent for age and broosings in the wars, Bridges
that he could no longer come abroad, nor get warmth: yet remained he king
Azaria or Vzia though he was a Leper, and lived in a house apart, and his son
judged and ruled the people in his steed, 2. Chro. 26. yet remained he in
right and title still the king. And have not some French kings also bin long
sick and weak, and so distracted, and yet continued kings, though their selves
not able to execute any part of Government of the kingdom?

Now although we see this argument is more against him than with him: yet it
stands not on so absolute and firm a principle. The Laws do not repel a
Woman from a Tutelship, Infirmity no debar to right.
except in certain conditions. Matter filij tutelam perdit, vel si
incontinenter viuat, vel si ad secundas nuptias transeat. The Mother ( says
the law) leeseth her tutelship if she live vnchastely, or if she mary again.
Pan in C. vxoratus. De conuer. coniug. So that this condition being avoided:
the Laws which hold even in France, do admit the tutelship of a pupil as
well to a woman as to a man.

And although in the ancient Civil Law there be a rule of Vlpian quae
tutela eo and haeredit as peruenit, nisi cum faeminae haeredes intercedunt:
whereupon that Law was made which says, Mulier non potest esse Tutrix. L.
s^ff. de tutelis etc. Yet notwithstanding says Montholonius in promptuario
diuini iuris and vtriusque humani, etc. Et hoc absolute verum erat de iure
antiquo, nisi a principe filiorum tutelam impetraret, vt dicitur in D. L. fi.
Quo casu, priuilegium principis habebit locum non extantibus legitimi^ and
seruata forma quae habetur in L. 2. C. Quando mulier tutelae offic. fun. poss.
Hodie vero etiam de iure communi foemina habilitata est vt tutelam filiorum
suscipere possit. Vt est tex^ in Aucten. matri and auiae. and notat Barth. in
L. si sub condition. Col. 3. ff. de testa. tutel. and talis tutela quae matri
competit non potest sibi a patre auferri. Vt notat Bald. consid. 608. Testator.
lib. 1. Vbi miratur quod Earth. dubitauerit de hoc. But what need recital of
the Laws: where the practice has ever bin, and still is, to the contrary? and
that even in the young or infirm French kings themselves, as we heard of
Batildis etc. and have seen in our own days of the Q. Mother in France which
is yet living.

But that ( says Caenalis) some object of the daughters of Salphaad, Caenalis.
Number. 2. is out of the cause. For we must not deny to a woman her fathers
inheritance, how wealthy or much soever it be, so that the chief type of the
whole Monarchy fall not to a woman, being altogether unable to defend to
sustain that burden.

As for those women that be altogether unable: that is an other question. So,
the man might be debarred too, though neither of them, Bridges
man nor woman, of their title, yet of their exercise and administration of the
same. That all women are not unable heereunto: we have partly showed fair
proof and evidence, and shall (God willing) show yet further. Yea, that none
are dissabled, only for the respect of their sex, even this law suffices,
which is of such force: that this B. grants it holds in any enheritance, A
Woman's ability to bear the charge.
be it never so wealthy or rich. And then (say I (it holds in a kingdom. If
it be not ( says he) the tipe of the whole Monarchy. And where finds he this
restraint in this law? Or in the practice of the Jews? indeed he confesses,
they used it not. But the cause that he thus restraines it, is this, that a
woman, ( says he) is altogether unable to sustain this burden. And is not a
woman now in the state of Christendom under the gospel as well able, as then a
woman was, in the state of the Jews under the Law? but he ever dreams of such
a great Monarchy in France, Many greater Monarchies then France.
that a woman is not able to sustein it. As though it were only so great a
Monarchy, that in all Christendom or in all the world none were like it. And
is not Spain as big and bigger then France? and have not the ancient
Monarchies of Asia and of Rome bin bigger then both, and then all these parts
of Christendom now are? and yet have women governed those Monarchies. But a
Monarchy is a Monarchy, be it little or great. And England is a Monarchy too,
(God be praised) and that France has felt. Yea, when this law of Pharamund
was made: God wot, it was then a poor state, vassaile and tributary to the
Romans ( as I have showed) not so much as contending for such a Monarchy,
but rather for a quiet state, which it got afterward, and in time grew (I
grant) unto the Monarchy that now it is, French Monarchy.
but, had it been so then, or be it now as great a Monarchy, as they affirm
it is: yet, if a Woman may govern it, in the name of the tutleship of her
son: ( as diverse have done) can she not do it as well in her own name, if
she had a right and title thereunto?

His fond argument of the Sun and the Moon: is in deed not worth the
aunswering. Caenalis.
That as the Moon shines by the light of the Sun: so does the Matron rays
by the light of her husband. But no man has so much as thought in his dream,
that the Sun being the greater light, should depend of the brightness of
the Moon, especially in the chief Monarchical principality.

In-deede the Pope does plead on this wise, for his superiority above the
Emperor. Bridges.
And therefore, these Popelings may be the bolder to borow his argument. But if
he compare it to a man and his wife (as here he seems to do) and so
in-deede the Sun and Moon did signify in the dream of Joseph, Genesis 37. yet
that matrimonial comparison is not to the purpose of a Monarchical state. But
to admit also this resemblance. Though the Sun be the greater light then is the
Moon: yet has the Moon a goodly light also, The comparison of the Son and
the Moon to the man and the woman, is not against women's government.
and a proper monarchy of her own, to rule the night, as well as the Sun to
rule the Day, even by the testimony of the Scripture. Which is not ascribed so
much to any other stars, although they be bigger far than the moon is.

These vain and frivolous arguments, has this French Bishop ( which yet both
in this point, and in all the French antiquities is one of the most
industrious of them all) and straineth all his wits, to recommend and set out
this Salike Law, wresting and writhing of the scriptures. How much better, in
my opinion, and with far more modesty, (though otherwise he be also a great
favorer of the French estate above England,) does Iacobus Meyer the Chronicler
of Flaunders write of this matter. Lib. 12. fol. 136 saying.

In the year of our Lord, 1335. Easter day being the 16. of April, the
English war began, which of all other continued longest, and was most
cruel. And which held out (with truces between whiles) above 100. years.
Which might rather be called a Domestical sedition than a War. The Christian
commonweal is one kingdom, and one house. Whatsoever wars are made
therein, are made with great blemish. Neither (if we should say the truth)
they are Wars, but most reproachful seditions. King Edward opposed to the
Salike Law of the French, the divine Bibles: which call the woman to
inheritance, in defect of the issue male. Certain there were in France that
misliked not those arguments of Edward. Which men being put to death: Edward
determined to pursue his right, although with long and hard war, and with
most mighty force of arms, The reaso^^ of this treatise.
to extinguish that Heathenish custom of the French. The Salij are said,
while they yet lived among the Scithians, to have ordrined and kept that law.
These Salikes in the time of the decay of the Roman Empire, got to themselves
the surname of Frankes, and began to be called Salij Francici, Salike Frankons.
As also the Frisian Frankes, the Saxon Frankes, that is to say, the free
Frisons, the free Saxons, to wit, those that could be no longer compelled to
pay tributes. These Salik Fra^ks, after that they pierced first unto the river
of the Rhen, and after that even to the river of Sequana, or Seine: albeit that
they also became Christian, yet renewed they, and tooth and nail even to this
day they have held that law. ( But that this is not so, we have already
showed even by Caenalis the chiefest vrger of it.) Howbeit not without great
detrime^t of Christian piety, as me thinks. ( And here he notes in the
margin, The Law Salike hurtful to the Christian common weal.) For if these
laying aside their hatred. and the superstition of that Law) had now joined
to themselves the riches of England: the^ had the French, the English, the
Scots, the Flemmish, and the Burgundians, grown together into one kingdom,
and with so mighty a power had easily destroyed that barbarousnesse of
Mahomet, which continued in Spain even almost until our times. But after that
(I know not by what evil spirit of the French) the French have always
attempted to bear rule among other men, all things have been troubled, all
things have been full of discomfort, all things lamentable, all things
seditious. We have since that time seen peace no where, no where quietness.
How unhappily the Salike law sotted the French.
England was seen to offer the occasion that was most to be wished for, but
that French blockishnesse and infelicitie could not take hold thereon, being
sotted by that Salike law.

And again Fol. 148. lamenting the great slaughter at the battle of
Chertsey: where he tells how the French King called King Edward, a Merchant
of wool, and King Edward called him the Merchant and author of the Salike
Law: he says: The Frenth men allege certain fond causes of so great a
slaughter. But I think there ought none other to be alleged, than we have
before mentioned, that is to wit, the frinolous right of the French men,
which is full of controversy, uncertain, and (that I may not say) false,
verily most far unworthy of so great bloodshed.

I suppress herein his vnreuerent terms of Queen Isabel by whom the right
of this title came. Only I note his judgment of this pretended Salike Law.
Which since that all the French writers so earnestly urge, to stop there with
the title of the Kings and Queens of England, not one-onelie then in the time
of ignorance and superstition reigning: but that also in this clear light of
the Gospel and manifestation of Gods Law, even these notable and excellent
learned professors of the Gospel in the French reformed Churches, Danaeus
arguments.
Calvin and Danaeus savor yet so much of this French faction, that upon the
occasion of women's public speaking in the congregation, they cannot refrain
themselves from this humor of their Country, but must also most
vnnecessarilie cast forth these intemperate speeches and disputations, against
the right and title of women's public regiment: and that some also among our
selves, snatching at their arguments, with more greedy newfanglednesse, than
with advised confideration, have likewise, to disturb and indaunger our state,
attempted the like inuectiues: I therefore thought it not amiss, both for the
playner manifestation of the right of that title, The causes of the larger
discussing this point of women's government.
which I have heard many desire to be discussed further than any yet has
done, (although I meddle not here with titles any farther than defensiuely for
women's right of government, and to justify against all slanders the right of
our Princes title) and for every man's fuller satisfaction in these questions
upon these foresaid occasions, to be somewhat the larger, though withal (craving
pardon, I confess) to be some what also the more tedious in this long process
herevpo^. But tedious or not, the more pains was mine, and they that have lust
and leisure to read it, may, or may not, at their own liking) I regarding
chiefly the satisfying of the curious in these days, at least the staying of
the simple from this curiousness, am driven my self to be rather over
curious, than over negligent in slubbering over a slight and slender answer.
To return now therefore to Danaeus further argument.

Danaeus on 1. Tim. 2.12. fol. 84.
Of which matter also ( says Danaeus proceeding on the proves of his foresaid
question in his treaty on 1. Tim. 2 verse. 12. folio 84.) the examples are
extant, in Semiramis the Queen of the Assyrians. Candace of the Aethiopians,
Act. 8. verse. 27. Cleopatra of the Egyptians under Augustus, and Zenobia, a
most valyant woman under Adrian the Emperor. To the Empire of which Zenobia
many Christian Churches also did obey. Bridges


This argument seems to tend to the confirmation of that he spoke before,
Danaeus examples of women's government.
that in Spain, England, Scotland, and diverse other regions, it was a right
and honest matter, for a woman to have the chief government over men. But
Danaeus does it so coldlie, and brings out only here these four examples
of Heathen women, and those not of the choicest neither, which among the
Heathen women he might have found: that he rather seems in so slender
defending it, to oppugn it. But, let us take the view of these his examples
that he alleges. And first, for Semiramis person we will not stand in plea
she being an Ethnike, might the easier (as in the end she is recorded to have
done) degenerate into great vices, Semiramis Q^eene of Assyria and Chaldea.
yet for a great while, both in the noneage of her son, and afterward also
in respect of worldly policy, power, and magnificence, sheee wonderfully
governed about forty years, that mighty, golden, and first monarchy of the
Assyrians and Chaldeans, and the most Hystoriographers that write of her life,
have her acts in admiration. None accuses her (that I read of) as an
unlawful governor. Neither did the people (which was in the time of our
forefather Abraham) condemn her government of that Monarchy, Candace Queen
of Ae^hiopia.
as an dishonest and unlawful state.

But I pass from her the lighter, because I had rather consider better Danaeus
his other example of Candace. Who though she were also an Heathen Princess,
notwithstanding her name at least, is registered in the holy Scripture, that
this Candace was the Queen of Aethiopia, who not only reigning in her own
right and title, and not of her husband, had the chief government of a great
monarchy in that Country: but that also diverse other Queens there had the
like sovereignty; Calvin o^ Act. 8.27.
and that it was an usual order, Calvin notes thus thereon.

The name ( says Calvin) of Candaces, was not the name of one Queen only,
but as the name of Caesar was common to the Roman Emperors: so the
Aethiopians, as Pliny testifies, called their Queens Candaces. This also
makes to the purpose, that the Hystoriographers affirm, that it was a noble
and a wealthy kingdom. Because we may the better gather by the largeness
and might thereof, how honorable the condition and dignity of the Eunuch
was. Meroe was the headand chief seat. The profane writers accord herein
unto the testimony of Saint Luke, who does report that Women were wont there
to reign.

Thus says Calvin in his Commentary upon the Acts. 8. verse. 27. and
because he names Pliny, it shall not be amiss to set down Plinies own
words, who speaking of Meroe, libro. 6. Naturalis Historiae, cap. 29 says.
Plinius lib. 6. natural. hist. ca. 29.


There reigns the Queen Candace, which name has now this many years
passed unto the Queens. The Temple of Ammon is also there religious, and
Chapels all that coast along. But when the Aethiopians were the rulers, that
Island was of great nobleness. For they say it was wont to give 250000. armed
men, and to maintain 400000. artificers. Whereby it appears that it was not
any small Monarchy.

Vadianus writes thus. The most auncientest City in Meroe is Saba, which
afterward the king Cambises in the memory of his sister, named Meroe, as
Josephus testifies in his second book of Antiquities, as I suppose,
imitating Strabo. But Pliny also mencioneth therein the Town of Meroes, being
seauentie miles distraunte from the entry of the Island, Candace.
which was holden for the seat royal of Aethiopia. This is Saba that seat of
the queen of the South (for Josephus tells, that she governed both
Aethiopia and Egypt, of whom we read in the tenth Chapter of the third
Book of the Kings. That she being stirred up with the fame of Solomon, The
Queen of Saba governed a mighty troop of men.
came with a mighty troop, and with more than princelike gifts into
Palestine. She is also commended of Christ, Matthew 12. and Luke 11. for that
she came to Solomon for the love of wisdom, even from ehe farthest coasts:
when as the Pharisees would not hear him, admonishing them to their faces,
and by a divine power witnessing himself to be the son of God. But we must
note, that the people of Meroe which were wont to be subject unto women, in the
age that followed, called their Queens Candaces, by a name as common to them,
as we have foreshewed that the name of Pharaos and Ptolomeus was unto the
Kings of Egypt. Of which matter also we understand that the Eunuch mentioned
of Luke, Acts. 8. (Whom Philip baptized, being taught out of the lesson read
in Esaie) was one of the Court of the Queen Candace. Besides that, we are
admonished, The Scripture familiar to the Aethiopians
by the delivery of Luke, that the reading of the Scripture became familiar
and usual to that nation, even from the very age of Candace, neither that
they used for any other cause, yeerelie to visit Jerusalem, as a place
renowned for religion, how distant so ever it were in journey. Caius Plinius
writes, that Publius Petronius, one of the order of Knighthood, being
liefetenant of Egypt in the time of Augustus, pierced into Aethiopia with an
army, that the Queen Candace wan the victory, which Strabo writes, was a
woman that had but one eye, but in prudence and equity of mind comparable
unto great men. I know not whether that were Candace the Eunuchs mistress,
which Luke mencioneth, or it were another. The very account of the years, and
of the exploites achieved do almost admonish us, that it was another. Neither
is it any doubt, but that the Queens of Aethiopia were long after called by
that name. And here Vadianus recites that which we have already alleged out
of Pliny. Women's government, a thing acstomable.


Neither ought it ( says he) to seem merueilous, that women do there bear
the chief rule, since that the government of women is not a thing unaccustomed,
even to the most valiant nations. For Semiramis of Assyrians is known, and the
Queens of Scithia are known, and the Roman history does celebrate Theuta,
which governed the Liburnians, as her that durst make work for their City.
Neither must we count it altogether to be fabulous, that the antiquity has
sonog of that Dido the Affricane. As for their religion, I have authors not
unworthy to be believed, which affirm that Nation to confess Christ.
Neither that they differ from our orders in any other thing than in
ceremonies, that is to wit, a very small matter. This also Vadian a reverend
Protestant writes of this Queen, and other her ancestors and successors,
called al by the name of Candaces.

Now although I do not yet so thoroughly assent unto Vadianus, that the Queen
of Sabaea, and the Queen of Aethiopia, were all of one kingdom: but rather
assent to Peter Martyr, that the Queen which came to Solomon was the Queen of
Sabaea in Arabia, from whence such aromaticall drugs are brought, and not from
Aethiopia: yet not withstanding that there was also such another notable
government of women in Aethiopia, and so approved by such both authentike
witnesses, as Josephus, Pliny, and Strabo were, and allowed by such notable
Protestants, as were Calvin and Vadianus: it is no small confirmation of
women's regiment.

But what stand we upon men, when we see the approbation of ye Scriptures? The
Scriptures approbation of Ca^daces government.
For, had it been an dishonest matter and unnatural, for man being in his sere
the superior, to have obeyed as superior to him, in the person of her
dignity, a woman's supreme government: can we conceive by any reason, that
Philip having informed the Eunuch in the faith of Christ, would not also have
admonished him of so necessary a point, for the direction of his conversation?
Philip therefore not speaking any thing at all against it, and namely Luke the
Evangelist, by the indictment of the holy Ghost, consecrating the same to a
perpetual record, that such a Queen ( had there bin no more but she alone) was
there the governor, and her such worthy nobles under her regiment, as this
Eunuch was: how can we choose but conclude hereupon that the holy Ghost
improueth not the state of a woman's supreme government, but that it may (if
there be no other impediment, than her sex) accord together well enough with
the sincere profession of the Gospel?

Danaeus next ensample is, of Cleopatra of the Egyptians, under Augustus.
Cleopatra was indeed in the time of Octauius, Danaeus.
for he vanquished her lover Antonius, and she would at the first have allured
him likewise, Cleopatra.
as she had done before his adoptiue father Julius Caesar. But seeing he minded
that she should have been under his subjection, as a captive: she wilfully made
a way her self, that she might not be under his authority, all which was
done before he was surnamed Augustus. She was Queen of Aegipt at the first,
jointly reigning with her brother Ptolomie, whom when he would have deposed
from participation in the kingdom, she fled to Julius Caesar. Who reconciling
her unto her brother, when afterward her brother was drowned, she reigned
alone, until she joined her self unto Anthonius. Who being overcome by
Octauius, Anthony and she destroying themselves, that kingdom became
provincial (as many other did) unto the Romans. But how dissolutelie so ever
she lived, her state while she was Queen was lawful. Zenobia.
Neither was this Cleopatra the only Queen that governed Egypt: there was
another Cleopatra, grandmother to this, which also was the Queen and chief
governor of Egypt, besides the widow of Ptolomeus Philometor. Besides
another Cleopatra Silene, the Queen of Syria, eue^ at that time when Alexander
reigned in Judea. Yea, the reign of a woman in Egypt was so ancient, that
the Chronicles report, that Rhea the mother of Osyris the great, reigned in
Egypt. And Isis her daughter after her called Juno of Egypt, (Eusebius
calls her Io) on whose monument, as Diodorus Siculus testifies, Rhea and
Isis. Didorus Siculus Minerua. Palladian woman. Dido.
was engraven this Epitaph: I am Isis the Queen of Egypt, instructed by
Mercury. Those things that I in my laws have decreed, let none violate. And
as it was in Aethiopia and Egypt, which are two principal parts of Aphrica:
so in Lybia, Berosus shows, how Minerua the daughter unto Jupiter of Lybia,
the son of Ammonius, taught the discipline and laws of governing an army,
and after went to Greece, where she builded Athens, and there reigned. And with
these Palladian women ( says Functius, Tab. 16.) Hiarbas in Lybia making
war, was of them vanquished, and submitted his kingdom to their power. Of
Dido in Aphrica, we have heard Vadianus judgment.

Next to Cleopatra Danaeus cites Zenobia under the Emperor Adrian, Panaeus.
a most valiant woman, unto the government of which Zenobia, obeyed also many
Christian Churches.

Zenobia.
I wonder that Danaeus says, Zenobia lived under Adrian, or in the time of his
reign, who reigned and died (if she were sortie years old, when she was
vanquished by Aurelianus) at the least one hundred years ere she was borne, a
great many famous Emperors reigning between their times. This Zenobia was
indeed (as Danaeus calls her) a most valiant woman, and is highly commended.
Though her wearing armor, and the suspicion of her husbands death, were no
small blemishes to her government. But for this point, of the lawfulnes of a
woman's government: Danaeus own testimony, is (in my fancy) a great both
praise and proof, that not only the Heathen, but many Christian Churches did
obey her. For had the government of a woman, or the obedience thereunto of men,
been monstrous, unnatural, or any whit against the faith and life of
Christianity: The Christian Churches obedient to the government of Zenobia.
though some might for fear and infirmity have been enforced, yet would not
many, and those true Christian Churches, have obeyed such a state. Which
obedience in them, argues their good affections in this point, and that
neither quarelling at the vices in their persons, nor at the infirmity of
their sexes, but to obey them as the higher powers, and that their power is of
God, is an obedience to be yielded, even for conscience: and as this was praise
worthy in them, and a good example to all other Christian Churches: so not a
little it recommendeth her, that being an Heathen woman and in those days,
Women's governing.
when the most renowned Princes were persecutors, she quietly governed many
Christian Churches, and they Christian like did obey her. These are the
examples that Danaeus cites of women's chief government among the Heathen.

But least we should think there were so few examples, as only four, for all
the world to gaze, on such rare monsters, as Calvin and Caenalis irreverently
term them: before we descend to the people of Gods Church, to the Monarchy
of Rome, and to the states in Christendom, let us yet see a few mo, to bear
these princely dames company. And even at the time of Zenobia, with whom
Danaeus leaves: The examples of many notable Queens.
Coelius tells of another famous woman governor at Coleine named Victorina,
which with Tetricus nobly defended the Gauls and the Spaniards, from the
invasions and spoils of the Barbarians. Thomiris the Queen of Massagethia,
that vanquished the mighty Monarch Cyrus, in defense of her Country, was such
a governor. Zarina Queen of the Sachans, to whom the Parthians ( for the fame
of her valor and justice) revolted from the Medians, was also such a notable
governor. Cratesipolis likewise governed the Sicionians. Such an other was
Artemisia, the Queen of Halicarnassus, that to her power helped Xerxes against
the Grecians, and built that famous Mausoleu^, her husbands tomb, one of the
7. wonders of the world. Pithodoris the queen of the Tiberians, of the
Chaldeans, of Cholchis, of Pharnacia, and of Trapezond, did nobly govern a
mighty Empire. Tania the queen of Dardania. Helen the queen of A diabene and
of the Chosroenians, which relieved the Jews with corn, in the dearth
mentioned, Act. 11. Neither need^ we be curious to inquire after such forain
Queens, yt here at home had not our own country barren of such worthy women
governors, of whom Tac^^s writes in vita Agricolae. Britanni sexum in
imperijs non discernunt. The ^ritains make no difference of the sex in their
Empires. Cordilla the daughter of Leire, succeeded her father in the kingdom.
Mercia ye wife of Guinthelinus did so prudently govern in the administration
of the kingdom with her husband, that she made many wise and politic laws,
which long after were in high reputation among the Britons and of her name were
denominated, The Mercian laws. In like manner Bundwica ruled this Realm, and
maintained wars against the Romans, in defense of her countries liberty.

Now although that these Heroines, and a great number mo. whom I refer to
their diligence that list to collect the^, were in religion to Godward al
Pagans, and therefore their government (in many actions) not so commendable,
and in some vicious, yea, beyond the bounds of the sex feminine: yet hinders
not this, but yt their government and authority ( if they usurped if not, Their
Paganism hindered their authority.
nor abused the same) might notwithstanding be good and lawful in the^ But
Danaeus setting the^ aside, turns to the government of Gods people, and says.

Salomons line.
But in the people of God we have no such kind of thing, whether the Jews or
the Israelites kingdom be looked upon. Danaeus in 1. Tim. 2. ver. 12.
For that which may be alleged of Athalia, 2. of Kings. 11. is easily washed
away. For that government of Athalia, was an usurpation, and an unjust
invasion of the kingdom, and not a kingdom or lawful power, to the which the
people willingly would assent, as it appeared afterward. Wherefore she was
justly by Ioiada the chieefe sacrificer, ouerturned and thrust out of the
royal throne, and slain also, for that she usurped the kingdom.

In saying, we have no such kind of thing in Gods people, whether we look on
the kingdom of the Jews or of the Israelites. Bridges.
Danaeus does too straightly abridge the examples of women's government over
Gods people, The state of gods people among the Israelites and Jews.
to limit the same only to the times and stories of the Kings. For they were
Gods people as well before and after, as then, even until they were cut off,
and the Gentiles ingrafted in their place. And government was as necessary for
them, and they had governors also called Judges, for the greatest part of that
time: and for the most part of those their governors, till toward the end of
that their policy, they were better governors far than many of their Kings
were. So that, if Danaeus would have thoroughly looked upon their whole estate,
so long as they remained Gods people: he should forthwith have beholden Debora
such a governor, Debora.
in manner as that state was ordained under God and over his people, though not
such hereditarie Monarkes to reign over them, as the Gentiles round about them
had, (for that was the state of the government that the people desired. 1. Sam.
8) yet was she under God, the chief and supreme Magistrate, and so is called
their Judge, A woman judge.
as were the other Judges that were men, which sufficiently answers to our
purpose. For, if a woman may be a Judge, and sit in judgment, and administer
justice, and be under God the chiefest in those judicial actions, which are the
chiefest points of a Monarks office: What the^ lets but that a woman also
may be a Queen or Monark? And by so much more r^ason, as a Monarke; King or
Queen, are not so necessarily bound to execute in their own persons by
themselves, all those Judicial actions, that a Judge is bound to do.

But now, set aside a while this example of Debora, although there had been in
that estate, while the kingdoms of the Jews and the Israelites did continue,
not one Queen that had the chief government, or any public administration of
the common weal over the people of God: Were this a good consequence, that for
defect of such an example, either he or any may conclude a rule thereon, that
therefore it was not lawful for a woman, at any time all that while, to have
had any chief or public government of Gods people? Or rather, Why might we
not better hold our selves contented with this reason? That there was no woman
governor all that while; because, that either God so provided (as in the
kingdom of the Jews) there wanted never an heir male all that space, Athalia.
God continuing the issue male, or destroying male and female.
and therefore there was no occasion of the woman's supreme government, which
is no debar to their right thereunto, if that the issue male had failed. Or
else, that god rooted clean out diverse of their kings whole posterity, male
and female, and raised up others, as he did in the kingdom of the Israelites,
so destroying the house of Jeroboam by Baasa, The house Jeroboam clean rooted
out. The like destruction of the issue of Omri, save Athalia. The issue of the
kings of Judah slain save Ioas.
that he left none alive. 1. Reg. 15. ver. 29. And this punishment of rooting
out his house, God also threatened to Baasa. 1. Reg. 16 ver. 3. and 4. and
performed it, by Zimri, ver. 11. and 12. and the like he did to the house of
Omri, that slew Zimri by the hand of Iehu, destroying Ioram and his mother
Iesabel, and all the issue of Ahab, save only this wicked Athalia, whom
Iehoram Iehosophats son, the king of Judah had married. Yea, not only the
issue of diverse kings of Israel were thus destroyed for their wickedness: but
also the kings of Judah were slain partly by Iehu, 2. Reg. 10. ver. 13. who
afterward also slew Ochozias: and partly by the Philistines and Arabians, 2.
Chron. 21. verse 16. and 17. and Chap. 22. verse. 1. but chiefly and most
unnaturally, all that remained, by this bloody tiger Athalia, save that Ioas
Ochosias son, an infant, one year old, was hidden by his aunt Iosaba, the
wife of Ioiada, the high Priest. So that, there was none of them which was then
known to remain alive, except this Iosaba the high Priests wife, and sister
to Ochozias, to whom in that line the inheritance of the crown could
immediately deuolue. Which Iosaba being not capable thereof, because of her
marriage with the high priest, which though it were lawful, yet, since these
offices of the Prince and of the priest were divided: she lost therefore by her
marriage, had she been by nature the nearest, yea, the only heir, her title
of inheritance to the kingdom. So that, if there had remained any male or
female, which female had been known, and had not ben married to another Tribe
or family: all Athalias cruelty had not served her turn, but the party male
or female had been straight ways inheritour to the kingdom. For, Athalia her
self had thereto no right in the world at all; Athaliaes ^sorpation.
but was (as Danaeus says) a mere usurper, besides her unnatural tyranny,
in murdering her own sons children, to establish unto her self the
kingdom. Unto the which, although she had no title, she being not only of
another Tribe, but extract from another kingdom, the daughter of Iesabel,
which was daughter to the king of Sidon: yet notwithstanding having ben before
both the Queen and the Queen mother; and in both estates, having also borne
the chiefest swaie, Athalias ^^ling in her husbands and sons days.
as well in the impotencie of her husband Iehoram, who lay sick a long
while, and even rotted above the ground by Gods just punishment of him, 2.
Chron. 21. verse. 15.18. and 19. and in her sons days also, having borne all
the stroke, as appears, ^. Chron. 22. verse. 3. and 4. (the king following
her and her kindreds counsel:) she having thus continued all the government
at her own wicked and Idolatrous disposition, it was the easier both for her to
make away all the right heirs, Ioas.
and to establish her self in the kingdom.

Now although this especially prove that she had no right: yet withal this
proves the stronger, that a woman that had right, had not been clean cut off,
since she that had so little, and used it so ill, was permitted thereunto. For
if it had been so utterly against the law, that by no manner of means it had
been lawful for any woman, bad or good, not heir, or heir, to have governed
at all: then had she sought the only way to have her self presently
clean put down, and to be reduced into a private state, by the introduction
of another line. And then the line of Nathan had entered, as some also
following Philo affirm it did, and that this Ioas was of Nathans line, and
that she had clean destroyed (save Iosaba) all the line of Solomon. But,
because the government of a woman was a thing, that long before the people were
well acquainted withal, as lawful and usual, yea, in some respect though
there were kings living, and of full age and strength, and good Kings too, as
appears, 1. Reg. 15.13. How Asa put down his grandmother Maachah from her
estate, because she had made an Idol in a grove.

Whereupon ( says Peter Martyr) for the committing of this wickedness he
abrogated from his grandmother her principality. For the mothers of kings were
wont to be of great authority in the common weal. Which though it prove not,
that women had the sovereignty, when there were Kings able to sustain the
same, Wome^s government even under kings among the Jews.
yet argues it, that commonly they were not without some authority even of
public government in the common weal over Gods people. Which authority, Asa
(no doubt) would have let his grandmother to have still inioyed, but that ( as
Peter Martyr says) the good Asa was afraid, least if any power should
appertain unto his grandmother, detestable Idolatry should be fostered.
Which late example of the grandmothers deposition for Idolatry, Athalia
peradventure setting before her eyes, more than either the fear of God or man,
or than any natural or womanly affection, being blinded with Idolatry,
Athaliaes massacre.
and kindled with ambition, and extraught from the bloody race of Iesabel, and
perhaps desiring as great a slaughter of the royal blood of Judah, as Iehu had
made of the blood of her Father Achab: she brake forth into this cruel
massacre, and usurpation of the kingdom, thinking that now none remained,
that could, or durst make nearer title than she thereunto.

Athalia therefore ( as Peter Martyr well concludes) got the kindome the
kingdom by tyrannical violence, which was not lawful. Since, that she was a
stranger, and drew her mothers kindred from the Tyrians and Sidonians, except
peradventure she would pretend inheritance and succession from her son
Ochozias which was slain. But in the kingdom of Israel such right had no
place. The law of God. Deuteronomy. 17.
For in Deu. 17. it is commanded, that the king should not be chosen out of
those that were strangers, but out of the number of their brethren. Salomons
line.
And in Judah the family of David was appointed, which perpetually should have
such succession. The prophecy of Jacob The promise to David. 1. Chro. 17.4.
The reason of which law was both for the preservation of Gods true religion,
and also for the establishing of Gods promise, prophesied by Jacob. Genesis 49.
ver. 10. and made unto David his seed. 1. Chron. 17. v. 14. prefiguring and
directly leading unto Jesus Christ. So that the Jews were bound unto the
stock of David, and that in Solomon. And therefore I think not, ye Ioas which
here was saved came of Nathan. For although Nathan were David's son, and so
Salomons brother, as appears, 1. Chro. 3. v. 5. yet I take it not (as
Tremelius draws his table) that Nathan came of Bethsabee. For where Tremelius
table puts Salomo^ first, and Nathan next, and so Shobab and Shimea: it is a
manifest inuersion of the text, which is thus; And these former were borne unto
him in Jerusalem, Shimea and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon of Bathshebaha the
daughter of Ammiel. And the like order also is set down, 1. Re. 5. v. 14. in
which words is no necessity, that the naming here of her after them,
unporteth, she was mother to them all four: but, that the other were named
without mention at all of their mothers, as well as all those his other sons,
in the three lines following are also named without mencioning of their
mothers. Only when he came to the naming of Solomon, among the children that
David had in Jerusalem, as he mentioned the names of the mothers to the sons,
which he had in Hebron; so he makes mention of Salomo^s mother, as Matthew also
does emphatically, or with greater force of signification because of Gods
especial promise unto Solomon. And Solomon was the next son to that, which
died begotten in adultery, as appears 2. Reg. 12. v. 24. and as for the note
of the Geneua Bible upon 1. Chro. 3. v. 5. to salve the matter, it makes the
matter far worse, in saying: Only Solomon was David's natural son, the other
were Vriahs, whom David made his by adoption. For, the text is not only clean
contrary, A great mistaking of the note of Geneua translation.
plainly telling how they were his sons, borne unto him in Jerusalem, not
adopted unto him, but borne unto him. And the very same words the holy Ghost
uses also. 1 Reg. 5. v. 14. And if it were not so that he had been one of
David's natural sons indeed, 1. Chro. 3.5.
except we help the matter better, by some marriage of the mothers line from
Solomon or from David: all the pedigree mecioned by S. Luke; chap. 3. mou^ting
unto David by Nathan, and also the holy Ghosts promise to David of Solomon and
his seed, is clean defeated. But as the text is manifest that Nathan was
David's natural son, though his mothers name be not expressed: so might he come
into this line well enough by marriage of the daughter and heir of some of
those, that after the kingdom was lost, have their name so changed in that
pedigree, that we cannot certainly tell in whom that line of Nathan did begin.
For, that it began in Ioas, and that he was not the natural son of Ochosias,
as diverse imagine, upon this occasion of this daughter.

VVomens governing
I yield not thereto, for diverse reasons following, although Flacius Illiricus
faith in his Gloss on Matthew: Iora^ begat not Ozias, but Ochosias who being
slain without children, although Athalia attempted to destroy the whole
stock royal: Flacius Illiricus conjectures out of Philo, that Ioas was but
legal ^on to Ochozias.
yet was Ioas saved of Ioiada, being a child coming of Nathan. For, David
he ordained that the posterity of Solomon being extinguished, the issue of
Nathan should succeed, and to that purpose (as witnesses Philo) Nathan was
called Achisar, that is, my brother the Prince: so that, plainly he was not
a private person, since Solomon called him so, for the ordinance of David.
Ioram therefore begat Ochozias, who being slain, and the interraigne of
Athalia being ouerpassed: Ioas of the stock of Nathan did succeed, who begat
Amazias, and he Ozias. This Ioram therefore begat Ozias, to wit, because this
was his heir, reigning in the fourth place at length after him. And so was
both he and his ancestors, as it were the adoptiue sons of Solomon and of his
posterity. But Matthew does therefore proceed by Solomon and other kings,
not so much by the natural, as by the legal and adoptiue succession: that
both he might touch Solomon, which was the type of Christ, and that he might
show him to be their successor, and the kingdomt of Israel to be due unto
him. Thus says Illiricus, and although diverse others (by reason of this
daughter of Salomons issue) are also of the same opinion: yet had I rather
hold with Chytraeus, who in his Chronologic says on this wise: That this Ioas
was the son of Ochozias, Chitraeus proves out of Scripture to the contrary.
nor that the stock of Solomon ended in Ochozias, six, yea seven clear
testimonies of the Scripture do declare, the 4. Kings. 11.2.4. and 12. the 4.
Kings. 13.11. Chron. 3.11. (2. Chron. 22. ver. 11. and the 23. verse. 3.11.
which worthily ought among us to be of more value, than either the opinion of
Philo, or of Annins, that rests on no foundation of the Scripture. Yea
indeed, it has neither necessity nor probability. Besides that the text is
plain. 1. Chron. 3. verse, 11. Whose son was Ioram, and his son was
Ahaziah, and Ioas was his son: and 2. Kings. 11.1.2. Then Athalia the mother
of Ahaziah when she saw her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the
kings seed, that is, the children of her son, were they male or female, had
he any Daughters besides her that is mentioned in the words following. But
Iehosaba the daughter of king Ioram, and sister to Ahaziah, took Ioas the
son of Ahaziah, and stale him from among the Kings sons that should be
slainee, both him and his nurse, keeping them in a bed chamber, and they
hid him from Athaliah, so that he was not slain.

By which words it is evident that he was one of the very natural sons of
Ahaziah. And not as Flacius and other say, his legal son descended from
Nathan. For else, if we should understand the word Son in so large a sense,
as to fetch it up from the descent of Nathan, Salomons line.
Salomons brother, all the posterity of Roboa^, Abia, Asa, Iosaphat, and Ioram,
No likelihood that Ozias was of Nathan^ line.
besides the seed of Ahazias coming between: a far greater number should
be included in the name of Ahazias sons, than either it is likely that
Ahazias maintained, or accounted as his sons, many of them older than
himself: or then Athalia murdered, or so much perhaps as dreamed on, that
they after so many descents had any title, or would make claim unto the
kingdom.

Now although Athalia her self had no better title, and that there was yet
suruiuing an heir male to Ahazias, that by this providence of GOD, escaped
both her fury and her knowledge, to whom the crown was due, and whom
Iehoiada showed to all his confederates, not in the name of a new line from
Nathan, but as Ahazias own son, and in that title he was brought forth in
the 7. year after he had been hidden in the Temple, and solemnlie made King,
and Athaeia for her usurpation, Athalia, though an usurper, yet she reigned 6
years. K. Richard 3
and unlawful murder, removed and executed: yet not withstanding, for all
that time the text is plain. 2. Chron. 22. verse. 12. that Athalia reigned
six years. And therefore as we say of king Richard the third with us, though
he for his part was but an usurper, and came to his usurpation also, by
unnatural murder of the right heirs, and his nearest kin: nevertheless he
is reckoned among the number of the Kings that have reigned in this Realm: So
is Athalia reckoned as an absolute Queen among the Kings, and the years of
her reign, even by the holy Ghost are numbered. And therefore, this is not so
well said (me thinks) of Danaeus, that it was no kingdom nor lawful power,
to which the people willingly assented, as it afterward appeared. For, a
kingdom still it was the which she held, and the power also was lawful,
though she unjustly usurped, and with furious cruelty did misuse the same.

Neither does the willing or dissembled assent of the people, or their cloking,
or manifesting the same in the en^* The state depends not on the peoples
willingness.
either prove or improve the substance of a lawful power or kingdom, but
only she weth either an evil Prince, or a wicked, mutable, and unthankful
people. But to make the state depend upon their not willing assent, is a most
perilous point. Neither is it so sitting to the subject, to call the Princes
title into question, being invested and possessed in the kingdom. For,
Athalia came not so ill by the Jews kingdom, but the Romans came afterward
as ill both to the same, and to many other kingdoms in the world. The Romans
came worse to the kingdom tha^ Athalia, and with more grudging of the people.
And yet would not Saint Paul have the people of God, either to resist them,
or to call their right and interest into question; And therefore does Calvin
very well collect upon the words of Paul: Let every soul be subject to the
higher, for there is no power but of God. And verily ( says he on this word
Higher powers) the Apostle seems to me in this word, that he would have
taken away the frivolous curiosity of men, Athalia.
which oftentimes are wont to inquire, Calvin in 1. Cor. 13.
by what right they that govern the state have gotten their power. For to us
it ought to be enough, that they do govern.

If we now inquire farther, how then is Ioiadaes disposing of Athalia, and
causing her also to be stain justifiable? Peter Martyr debateth this at large
in 2. Par. 10. fol. 279. b. But peradventure ( says he) some man will reprehend
this endeavor of Ioiada, Peter Matt. in 2. Par. 11. fol. 279.
first that he did not well nor orderly, in putting down that person that was
already in the magistracy, verily it is lawful to good men, to attempt and
endeavor to their power, that in the common weal the state of things present
should not be altered, But when it is altered, and that any already
possesses the state, and has entered into the office of the magistrate: it is
not lawful to thrust him out of it. To this objection he answers, saying: It
is not indeed the duty of a private man, The approbation of Ioiadas executing
Athalia.
to thrust out of place a Magistrate, or a Prince already ordained, that
possesses the state. But we deny that Ioiada was a private person, since that
in the common weal he had the next place to the king, and when as he judged
not only the sacred, but also the civil affairs, and now and then also
dispatched them, and was the keeper of the laws. And in Deuteronomie is the
law contained, concerning the institution of the king. Which Law was now
violated by Athalia, and the promises made to David and his posterity, were by
Athalia stopped. And moreover besides this, she was not only a stranger, but
an idolater, and that incurable: therefore she deserved by the governors and
nobles of the kingdom to be deposed.

By which answer, withal it appears, that he finds not any fault that
she was a woman, but that she was not of the posterity of David, and
therefore by the foresaid decrees of God, she was not capable of that
kingdom, so that, had she been the nearest in the posterity, and had not
stained her self with such horrible murder, and open Idolatry, as she did,
she ought not for any reason of her sex, by him, or all, or any never so
noble in that kingdom, to have been deposed*

But now the right and title lineallie descending to her nephew, to wit, her
sons son, which by Ioiada had been harbored in the Temple, unwitting to
this unnatural Queen mother, and cruel grandame: it was Ioiada his duty
not only to give notice of the true heir; but to i^yne with all the Clergy
the Princes, and the people that he could, to inthronize the King, for so he
is also called for his right, before he was seized in his kingdom, verse. 7.8.
and 11. and to dispossess this usurper, so that even by this example of
Athalia, being better considered, we see that this supreme government under
God, and over Gods people, was not prohibited to a woman, if by right of
inheritance it fell unto her, and yt she used it well, although there were no
occasion of the like example among ye Jews, all the time of the estate of their
Kings. God furnishing the ^ill with heirs male to succeed their parents in
that kingdom.

And as we now see this, in the tract of David's line, from Solomon til after
that estate of the Kings, it joined with the race of Nathan: The Queen of Sabea.
so even for Solomon himself in whom this issue of the Kings began, and was of
them all the most magnificent, let us see likewise what was his opinion of this
matter. For as we read, 1. Reg. 10. verse. 1. etc. The Queen of Saba (or
Sabea) hearing of the fame of Solomon, in the name of the Lord came to ^rie
him in hard questions. We have heard already the judgment of Vadianus out of
Josephus, concerning this Queen, that she was the Queen of Sabea in
Aethiopia, and that the Queens there had continually the supreme government,
as we have seen both Plinies and Straboes testimonies of Candace.

But (as I said before) I take Peter Martyrs judgment to be the truer, Pet.
Mart. in. 1. Reg. 10. fol. 79.
that she was rather the Queen of the Sabeans, a people of the happy Araby.
And when as ( says he) the Country being so happy, and blessed with much
riches, makes the inhabitants dainty: this woman is to be commended, which
casting daintiness aside, took upon her such a far peregrination. She was
of the stock of Chanaan, the son of Cham. For Saboth (as is contained in the
tenth Chapter of Genesis) was the son of Chus, and Chus the son of Canaan.
We are also taught in this history, that there is no accepting of persons with
God, but that of every people and nation he has his elected. Christ calls
her the Queen of the South, because that coast is Southward, if it be
compared with the City of Jerusalem. And he says, that she came to Solomon
from the ends of the North. Whereupon I believe the rather, This Queen one of
the elected.
that she came out of Arabie the happy, than out of the Island Meroe. Neither
happened this without God, for verily it was he that stirred up this Queen,
with the fame of Salomons wisdom. Yea, in a manner, he drew her thither, to
the end that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of before: all nations
shall know thy great name, etc.

And again, Let us in the mean time ponder this speech, wherewith it is
said, In the name of the Lord, and in the Hebrew (...). For thereby is first
declared, that this Queen did acknowledge the true God. And also (as Kimhi
says) that the wisdom of Solomon was not spread forth but in this name, that
the Lord had inspired the same unto him, This Queen did acknowledge the true
God.
etc.

By this sentence also may be declared, that although Solomon was adorned with
an heavenly spirit in all kind of learning and wisdom: notwithstanding
this thing most of all inflamed the Queen, that he was richtly instructed with
divine matters, The Queen of Sabaea.
such (I say) as pertayned to the name of god. The religiousnesse of this
Queen
As though peculiarly she sought that wisdom, the which is joined together with
religion. And this thing is very honorable, to travail for wisdom and
godliness sake. Plato, Pythagoras, and Apollonius Tianaeus, are commended, for
that they wandered through the world to attain wisdom. Verily great
studiousnesse of excellent learnings were in them, and therefore would they
both see and hear also the men that excelled in erudition and virtue. Other
besides the^e have been, The commendation of this Queens coming to Solomon.
and are at this day not a few, that of curiosity, delights, and pleasures
are stirred up to travail, and draw themselves thither, where they live more
delicatlie and with more pleasure, and where they hope they shall see certain
new and strange things, but these are not worthy to be praised, but rather to
be discommended. As for the fact of this woman, may be numbered among the famous
examples, wherewith we may be inkindled, to the studies of godliness and
true doctrine. And although very many came to Solomon, yet does the sacred
history make mention, especially of this woman, and that very exquisitelie,
because she among other obtayneth the principal place. For, she was a Woman,
whom the weakness of her sex did easily withdraw. She was also a Queen,
wealthy, and abounding in delights. Whereunto besides, did come also the
far distaunce of the journey: nevertheless she staying not for these
things, No let could stay thie Q. journey.
went forth to Solomon.

But if we say: was it lawful for her to forsake the Region committed to her
administration, that she might enquire after the learning and wisdom of
Solomon, yea, although it were for religion? To this may be said, that it
might be, she left either her husband, or her son, or some other, which in
her place might have governed* the Kingdom.

Moreover, she took the journey, that she might get not only to her self,
but also to her people sound religion and sincere godliness: she therefore
profited more her people in trauayling abroad, than in sitting quiet at home.
To the which ye may add, that in this folded up secret, The mystery of
this Queens coming. Christ's commendation of this Q.
was signified the calling of the Gentiles, which were to gather themselves to
Christ, the true Solomon. Whereupon Christ himself (as is contained in the
Gospel) commended this woman, and affirmed, that in time to come she shall
judge the Hebrews, because she far excelled them in faith. And in this
place, yea, and by this declaration, the contemners of Gods word are grievously
noted, which daily more than needs do bewraie themselves: While in so great
a light of the sacred doctrine, which by the goodness of GOD even at this
present day has shined, they are nothing at all moved. For, often times do
they linger and forslow, even to arise out of their bed, to hear the sacred
sermons. So far off are they, to suffer themselves to leave their Country, or
their house. They despise the holy Books in respect of their delights. The
Doctors also and the Preachers they hate worse than a snake: and with their
tongues vehemently detest good studies. And if they see any Princes somewhat
given to learning and to godliness, they deride them. Verily this Woman
behaved not herself after this manner. And therefore, as Christ has
forespoken it, in the last day he shall judge them.

She came to tempt Solomon, but not with a pernicious temptation. Yea, rather
with a holy and an honest temptation, wherewith she desired to be enstructed
of those things whereof she was ignorant. Aenigmata, hard sentences properly
are called very obscure allegories, which are rare in use, the which in daily
speech do well-neere always come in use, which are easy. But in this place,
by hard sentences, we understand doubtful and difficult questions, which
mightily occupy the mind, not about light business, or every kind of
matters: but about great and grave points, appertaining both to eternal life,
and also to the civil government. The Hebrew Word as (...), Her questions to
Solomon about ^t^rnall life an^ civil government.
which signifies to sharpen, from whence the Noune being deducted, betokens
an oration or obscure question. To the exposition whereof, it behooves to
apply the sharpness of the wit. It is likely that the Queen had a^ home
Philosophers, Magitians and wise men, which concerning human and natural
matters, could have easily answered her. But concerning Divine and
supernatural matters, sith that in them there is need of the spirit, and of
divine revelation: they were not able to satisfy her. VVhereupon she
travailed her self unto Jerusalem, in the which City, GOD had placed not
only the Castle of Wisdom, and pure religion: but also Solomon, of all Kings
the most wise.

Thus at large writes Peter Martyr, in the commendation of this noble Queen.
Whereby it appears, that not only she was for worldly estate, a mighty
Queen, not under her husband in that respect but above him, and he (had she
any) but her deputy under her in her absence, albeit she was inferior to him
in the bands of matrimony, and inferior in sex, to all the men in her
Monarchy: but also that for religion, though her people were Idolaters, yet
was she a professor of the only true and living God, The Q. a Mirror to al
Christian Princes.
and even one of Gods elected (if we may adventure to judge so far, on such
excellent fruits) and not only a figure of bringing the Gentiles to the
knowledge of God: but a very mirror and Pattern for all Christians, specially
Christian Princes, to set before them. And if she be such a spectable to all
Christian Princes, and shall be also a judge to a great many of them: might
not she, or such another as she, have been the Queen or chief governor
also, even over the people of God? and would she not have governed them far
better, than many or most of their kings did?

And verily, Solomon does no less esteem of this most excellent Lady that
came thus unto him, then the goodness of the cause that moved her did
deserve. How Solomon did esteem of this Queen.
Did he repel her out of his kingdom as a Monster? For so unadvisedly Calvin
said: all prudent men have always repudiated (or put back) the government of
Women, as it were of a Monster. Or did he mislike any whit of her the more, for
her supreme Government over men? We find no such matter. Was he of Caluines
and Caenalis judgment?
But that he received her with all honor, and heard her speak unto him
whatsoever she had in her heart, and Solomon declared unto her all her
questions, not one word was hidden from the king, that he declared not unto
her. And, had he misliked her estate, that she being but a woman should rule
me^, should busy her head about such high questions, and meddle with the
administration of a commonweal, and be the chief governor of a kingdom: if
he had thought this to be directly or indirectly against Gods Law, or against
the Law of nature, since she came especially to hear Gods Law, and to
confer about such matters: no doubt he would never have concealed that matter
above all other, but have reproved her, or have gently persuaded her, at least,
(take it how she would) have truly informed her, of the unlawfulness and
indecency of her calling. Which thing, since he did it not, and yet neither he
nor she dissembled or flattered the one with the other: A great confirmation
of a womans supreme government.
I cannot tell what other men will judge. quot capita tot sententiae, so many
heads, so many wits: surely my dull wit cannot conceive, but that it is a
mighty argument, to confirm the supreme government of a woman.

Neither ground I mine argument so much, on Solomon's doings or approbations,
but that the holy ghost also has so far allowed thereof, that he has
consecrated the same, both to perpetual memory, and to profitable example, and
therefore cannot this government be debarred even from the people of God.
Especially, being also approved and recommended to al Christians, by our L and
Savior Jesus Christ. Mat. 12.24. and Luke 11.31. in plain terms calling her
the Queen of the south, Jesus Christ approoues her state as Queen.
not the monster or usurper of the south Countries. And here, because our
question of women's public government arose on women's public speaking: let us
see also, how this most excellent Qu. behaved herself in her publi^e speaking.
For after she had propounded al her questions, and was satisfied in his
answers to them: and after she had beholden al his wisdom, and his house that
he had builded, and the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and
the order of his ministers, and their apparel, and his drinking vessels, and
his burnt offerings, which he offered in the house of the L: she was
exceedingly astonished, and said unto him: It was a true word that I heard in
mine own land, of thy sayings and of thy wisdom. Howbeit I believed not this
report till I came, and had seen it with mine eyes. But lo, the one half was
not told me. For thou haste more Wisdom and prosperity, than I have heard by
report. Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servant which stand ever
before thee and hear thy Wisdom. Blessed be the Lord thy God which loves
thee, to set thee on the Throne of Israel. Because the Lord loved Israel for
ever, and made thee the king to do equity and righteousness.

These words though she spoke especially to him, yet as she spoke them
publicly in the audience of his subjects (for so her words import) happy
are these thy servants that stand before thee and hear thy wisdom: So
therein she contains notable matter. What excell^nt and high speeches and
Prophecies she publikly utters.
And being before so public a person, both a king and a Prophet, and before
the assembly of his Court, and of her troop, she breaks forth into the
function of a great Prophetess. The Queen ( says Peter Martyr on these
foresaid words) being no less Godly than prudent, places the cheifest good,
neither in power, nor in riches, nor in pleasure, but in the knowledge of God,
which should be had in his Word, and not only by the contemplation of
natural things. The Son of God brought forth this self same sentence,
but somewhat more augmented, Peter Mart.
and more clearly expounded. Blessed (said he) are they that hear the Word
of God and keep the same: that is, do not suffer it easily to fall from them,
but express it both in their factes and works. After this, she refers all
the good things of Solomon, unto God. Which example of her, it becomes us
also to imitate. For while we behold the good works of Godly men, it
behooves that we glorify our heavenly Father. For it is a vicious thing to
stay our selves in the causes inferior, when we ought always to ascend to
the highest, that is, unto God the founteine, the head, and beginning of all
good things. But (says she) God which has delighted himself in thee, (or
which has loved thee:) She teaches, What this Q teaches
that so many and so great things happened not to Solomon of his deseruinges and
his virtues, it was the mere goodness and clemency of God, that had so
greatly ennobled Solomon. She amplifieth the benefit given unto him of God,
that he had gotten a kingdom, and that not of any Nation whatsoever, but of
the people of Israel, whom she testifies that God had loved perpetually. But
if ye shall demand, from whence she could know these things, that God
esteemed the Israelites so much? I answer, that the deliverance out of Egypt
which consisted of so many and so great wonders, was known almost to all the
southern, and the Eastern provinces. Which also were not ignorant, that
Israel was brought into the possession of the Land of Chanaan, by the help of
God.

(...) they knew also the acts of David prosperouslye achieved, who (the
Lord being his guide) with great might and many victories, obtained Syria,
even unto the river Euphrates. At length she touches the end, wherefore the
King was placed of God over that people, that is to wit, that he should do
justice and judgment. That is, he should govern them with right and equity.

Thus does this notable Queen, not only set forth the public praises of
God, In the presence of so wise a King: but as it were presume to teach him, at
least wise, to confirm him, in the most special points of a Princes supreme
Government. And therefore she her self, being also taught and confirmed
mutually, by the wisdom of him, was not ignorant of the lawfulness of her
state, nor how to govern her people accordingly.

Now, although this example do not yet prove, that there was any Queen the
chief governor over Gods people: God ^had people over whom she was Queen.
yet since (as Peter Martyr says) she took this iourny, that she might get
not only to her self, but also to her people sound religion and sincere
Godliness: If this her good purpose were not frustrated, but took such
effect, that many of her subjects, both of the very great train that came
with her, and saw and heard the wisdom of Solomon likewise and of her other
subjects at home, to whom she related (no doubt) that she had seen and heard
abroad, whereby many are thought to have believed as she did, in the only true
and living God: then may we safely say, though she were neither Queen of Judah,
nor of Israel, yet was she a Queen over Gods people, though not over that
people of God. And this also being a secret folded up, signifying the calling
of the Gentiles, which were to gather themselves to Christ the true Solomon:
What does the unfolding of this secret infer (to have the thing signified,
answer to the sign) but that those Gentiles that should be converted to the
true Solomon Jesus Christ, which is the wisdom of God, and Prince of peace and
all true glory: should come to him, and become his people as well by the
travel and under the government of Queens, being their supreme governors ( as
this Queen was) as under the supreme government of any kings. And that (as
Martyr well observes) in this respect also, as of Gods elections, there is no
difference of persons before God, so much less of sex, Male or Female, as
here we see, by the notable example of this Queen.

By this example it is plain, that although there were no good Queen like this
queen of the Southe, that had the chief government over Gods people, The
lawfulnes of Women's government over Gods ^c.
during that state of their Kings in Jury and Israel, before the captivity:
yet sith Solomon one of the best Kings among them, does thus allow it in
other Nations, therefore De iure, it had not been unlawful among the people
of God, if De facto, they had had occasion of Women's lawefull inheriting of
that state. Though they had it also de facto in Athalia, where in Jury de iure
it appertained not unto her. Alexandra.
And yet in that disturbed state of the Jews that succeeded their return out
of captivity, we are not destitute of another example of Alexandra, Alexandra.
whom Josephus and other histories do record. True it is, she was not of
the right line of David and Solomon, nor of the tribe of Judah, but of the tribe
of Leui, and descended from the Machabees, which not long before had mightily
defended the Jews, and therefore they gave to their posterity this honor of
the chief government of them. Albeit the Scepter was not yet clean taken from
the tribe of Judah, in whom the jurisdiction of the Sanedrin did continue. And
although the Pharisees at that time bare the greatest sway, and Alexandra the
title and the dignity, insomuch that Josephus says, lib. 13. antiq. Iud. cap.
22. The Queen only the royal name, but the Pharisees possessed all the power,
etc. Yet, notwithstanding in those dangerous times, all that, was done but for
a policy, which her husband Alexander taught her on his death bed, for the more
assurance of their state, and preservation of their children. Which counsel
Alexandra following, she governed very politikely. And therefore, of all the
Chroniclers that mention her she is reckoned in the number of their lawful
Princes, and nine years so reigned over Gods people, that she deserved not by
Danaeus, to be wittingly buried in oblivion.

Danaeus his next example is of the Amazones. Amazones.
Which, since I accord also, that it was an ill state of government, in
murdring, and expelling of men from the whole affairs of the co^monweale, and
from living among them: though I take it not to be altogether fabulous, but
that there were in-deede such Women, and had such government: I therefore pass
it over without further answer, as I did before, to the like objection of
Caenalis. Howbeit, this we may say, that if they had not so misused themselves,
but given that honor unto the Man, which by the Law of God and nature, is due
unto the dignity of his sex: and in the society of Matrimony, had not
violated the man's prerogative. Then, if the right of governing those regions
had fallen to a Woman, I see not why it had not been as lawful there, as in
Ethiopia, Sabaea, Jury, or in any other kingdoms above specified?

But (says Danaeus) ( as though this that he alleged of the Amazones,
Danaeus.
were not to the matter) Let us return to the question propounded. Albeit that
we read Isai. 3. verse 11. that it is set for a great sign of the curse of
God, that children and women should obtain the government in any Nation:
Notwithstanding, that thing is not perpetual.

I grant that God here threatens a great curse, Bridges.
and a miserable state, that he would bring upon the wicked Jews, The curse
of God in ill governors.
in taking away all their natoble men, and giving them weak and wicked rulers.

Childish and effiminate Princes.
As he says, verse, 1. etc. For Lo, the Lord of hosts will take away from
Jerusalem and from Judah, the stay and the strength, even all the stay of bread,
and all the stay of Water, the strong man, and the man of War, the judge and
the prophet, the prudent and the aged, the Captain of fifty, and the
honorable, and the Counselor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent Man.
And I will appoint Children to be their Princes, and Babes shall rule over
them. And again, after he had threatened them, verse. 6. etc. That every one
shall take hold of his brother of the house of his Father, and say, thou have
clothing, thou shall be our Prince, and let this fall be under thy hand: in
that day shall he swear, saying, I cannot be an helper, for there is no
bread in my house nor clothing, therefore make me no Prince of the people.
Doubtless Jerusalem is fallen, and Judah is fallen down, because their tongues
and works are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory: etc. Then
comes in this curse, Children are extortioners of my people, and women rule
over them. O my people, they that lead thee cause thee to cry, and destroy the
way of thy paths. By which it appears, that he speaks here of such a
miserable state, that they should be driven to seek for their Princes, and
offer the chief government to any, (had he right, or had he not right) that
would help them and they should find none, but only such, as here by these
speeches he describes.

And therefore this being a token ( or rather the stroke it self) of Gods
curse for their wickedness, is very odiously and wrongfully alleged, (clean
besides Gods and the Prophets meaning) in this purposed question of women's
supreme government, or of childrens supreme government over Gods people. Diverse
writers therefore that expound this Prophecy, considering the states, wherein
both women and children have been given of God to be supreme governors, not as
any token at all of his curse, but of his great favor and blessing, dare not
so literally understand these words, but according to the manner of the
Scripture, metaphorically. For, where he says in the words here by Danaeus
cited, verse. 11. the exactors of my people are a child, or, as the Geneua
translates it, Children are extortioners of my people, and says, they lead the
people and cause them to cry, and that they destroy the way of Gods paths:
since exaction and extortion imports violence and oppression, and since infants
cannot lead, but are led, nor cause the people to cry, nor destroy Gods
paths: How can we understand this of a natural child ( or not rather of a
man that uses force? and yet because he guids not by ancient counsel and true
wisdom, is for his lack of discretion, called a child. Or, because he is a
wanton and effeminate man, called a woman. Paruulos scientia vocat (says
Vatablus) he calls them children in knowledge. Not those that be children in
age ( says Luther) but children in mind. And here he takes Women ( says
Musc.) for those that are tender and effeminate, Gods curse.
and so does the Geneua note well interpret it: That, because the wicked people
were more addict to their Princes, than to the co^mandeme^ts of God, he shows
that he would give them such princes by whom they should have no help, but
that should be manifest tokens of his wrath, because they should be fools
and effeminate. Children ( says Call.) understand it not only in age, but in
wit and manners, such as are tender and effeminat men, Calvin in Esai. 3.
which excel in no virtue, nor can govern the sword committed to them. He
opposed not every singular member, the one against the other, for it sufficed
to define the manner whereby the common weal easily runs to ruin, to wit, if
fools and unskillful men do rule, as though they were children, in who^ is no
gravity nor prudence, etc. Furthermore, whomsoever the Lord governs not,
nothing remains unto them, What person^ the Prophet understands by Children
and Women*
but that they be like to children, to wit, destitute of all both counsel and
prudence. Moreover God exercises his punishment two ways, because oftentimes
while we seem to ourselves to have grave men and skillful in things, when it
comes to the matter they blunder like blind men, and they have no more prudence
then have children. For God depriueth them of that notable virtue, that before
he had endued them with all, and does so sot them, even as if had stricken them
with some thunder. Now and then God proceeds more slowly, and by little and
little takes away the men of heroical wits, which were apt for the
administration, and transferreth the gouernmentes of matters to them, that can
not indeed govern one child or one family. When these things happen it is
most certain that destruction is not far.

Moreover ( says Musculus) He calls exactors not them that exacted those
things, that were due unto the Magistrate: but such as wroong from the people
at their pleasure, whatsoever they liked, and so pilled them with wicked
exactions, Since therefore Children could not be such exactors: as we cannot so
well understand these words of those that are in years, children: so neither, of
those that are in sex, women.

But now, be it spoken in the natural sense of very children, and of very
women, and those lawful princes: does not this prove so much the more, Though
women and children be in this curse literally understood yet it still co^firms
the lawfulnes of their state.
that albeit it were also a curs always of God, to have such Princes ( as we
shall see anon, even by Danaeus own reuocation, that it is not,) yet, that the
principality, even of them is a lawful state, and that, although in nature it
were the better of twain, (if men could always have their wish) to have
their Prince rather to be a Man than a Woman: and to be a Man of ripe and
perfect age, than to be an Infant or a child: yet notwithstanding, sith
neither infirmity of sex, nor of age, debarreth the Lawefulnesse of the
estate, when GOD sends (be it also, but for a punishment) such a Prince:
yea, although he gave not withal, to the weaker sex of the Woman, any other
heroical and supernatural gifts, nor to the tender age of the child, any
other industrious and Godly tutors: yet for all that, the people of God ought
not resist ^his ordinance of God in these* their Magistrates, but obey the same
for Conscience sake. Which saying of the Apostle to obey higher powers as the
ordinance of God for conscience sake, Romans 13.
if it took place, when such hypocrites, and tyrants, such wilful and
unskillful rulers, such childish and effeminate persons, and of all the^
infidels, heavy plagues, curses and scourges both to Gods people, and to all
the roman Monarchy, were the supreme governors: why should it not take
place, when the supreme governors are not Women or children in such vicious
senses, but only in nature, without all these vices, and all other infirmities
sufficiently provided for and supplied? but if these words of God, by the
Prophet Esaias, are to be understood literally: then did God perform the same
unto them literally. And then it follows of necessity, that the people of
God, had not only men, but children, nor children only, but Women also to be
their lawful princes, which is the thing that Danaeus before denied. If now
again, this that was threatened here as a token of a curse, do not debar the
right and lawfulness of their estate: what shall we say then to those, where
God of his surpassing might and goodness, so provides for these infirmities
of nature, that he turns all this dreadful token of a curse, into the
comfortable feeling of a blessing: for, dare Danaeus make a perpetual rule of
this sentence, that it shall always stand for a token of Gods curse unto the
people, where children or Women are their Princes? No, he dare not. But
straight way correctes his former saying, Danaeus.
and says: Howbeit that same is not perpetual, The curse turned into a
blessing.
for oftentimes Kings being children also, as for example Solomon and Josias,
have most holily and most happily reigned, and the empire of them was
enriched of God withal kind of good things. The same may be said of certain
Women, and of their Empire, whom the Lord has in marvelous manner blessed,
as appears out of diverse histories.

Bridges.
Ha, go too then, this is another manner of matter. For recompense of our
former tokens of cursing and misery, here are better effects of happiness
and blessing, in the government, both of Children, and of women neither as a
rare, but as an often experience put in practice, and that among the Lords
people. But what is this to the lawfulness of these parties government? No is?
In-deede (as Christ says, Math. 5.45) God makes his Sun to arise on the
evil and on the good, Women and childrens government lawful.
and sends reign on the just and unjust: and the wicked many times prosper
and reign, in that which the world esteems happiness. But when as Danaeus so
places it here, yt holiness goes before, and happiness comes after, and
when their Empire is enriched of God with all kind of good things, and with the
spiritual riches of Gods kingdom: if all this may truly be said of childrens
government, and the same may be said also of women's government: Childrens
government.
does not this importe, that their government must needs be lawful? And as
for childrens government, these two here by Danaeus alleged, are notable
examples. For God himself giving him his name, appointed Solomon both before
his brethren that were his elders, Solomon a child.
who otherwise by nature should have had the kingdom before him, but that God
beyond all their expectations and aspiring, advanced him unto it, when he was
but about 17. years of age: and did God all this, and was it not lawefull? And
as for Josias, he was but 8. years old when he began to reign. And yet was his
reign in that age so acceptable to God: that he was prophesied upon by name,
almost 200. year before he was borne. 1. Reg. 13. ver. 2. Josias a child.
And Ioas was yet younger tha^ was Josias. who was worst in his old years,
when he ought to have been best, and best when he was young, and is therefore
commended to do that, which was good in the sight of the Lord all his time,
while Ioiada the priest did teach him. 2. Reg. 12. ver. 2. Azaria began his
reign at 16. years of age. 2. Reg. 15. ver. 2. and is also commended to have
done uprightly in the sight of the Lord. Azaria a child.
Which is understood only of his younger years. Manasses was 12. years old
when he began to reign. 2. Reg. 21. ver. 1. who though he did evil in the
sight of the Lord: Manasses a child.
yet was his reign as lawefull as the others.

Now (as Danaeus confesses) that the same may be said of some women and of
their government, The government of women as lawful as the gou^rnment of men.
which is enough to conclude all the matter: (for we desire no more to be
granted but even thus much) and what more can be said of the government of
men? For who can justify all men's government, either that they, hold the
same by right, or rightly administer that they came rightly by? Yea, least we
should take this that he says, of some women, to be of some such, for whom he
might pretend exception of example, as that they had some special calling, as
Debora: although we have heard of other also in the scripture, and that in
commendation, of whom we can allege no such special calling, but that might
well be drawn to an example of our own times and state, and so do his words
also importe, that this some may be said, as spoken of some women of this
age: when not only he says, as appears by diverse histories, as we shall
after ward (God willing) see, how the state of Christendom is not unfurnished
of many examples: nevertheless, for the more manifest proof hereof, he
begins with our state in England, as an honorable and present testimony of
the same, saying:

Verily, of the most renowned Queen of England Elizabeth, which now most
happily reygneth, it may be said, Danaeus.
that the whole compass of the world has seen nothing at any ^ime, more
happy or more to be wished for, than is her reign.

The more we consider this testimony of Danaeus, Bridges.
of the which both our selves especially, Her Majesty's happy reign.
and other foreign regions not a little, find the proof and feel the comfort:
the more are we all bound to glorify almighty God, and to think and speak
well of her Ma. government, not only to be lawful: but also most necessary and
expedient for Gods Church. How much we are bound to glorify God for her
Majesty and to love her, and obey her laws.
And to pray to God to bless her Majesty more and more, and to defend her, and
us by her, to whom he has given (in these troublesome and dangerous days) so
happy a reign over his people, and a government so much to be wished after.
And the more are we also bound both to love and honor her, and to obey her
government in her laws. And this being true which Danaeus here confesses:
then how unthankfully, yea, how untruly do our Brethren report to the world,
that the state of the Church of England, is a disordred, deformed and corrupt
estate? As we have heard their hard speeches, besides other that write a great
deal harder. How do these here agree with Danaeus? If her Majesty reigns
most happily, and that in all these foresaid happy things: how reigns she
not lawfully? And how unlawfully then, yea how unhappily do our Brethren
oppose themselves against her so happy reign? I grant, they do it not in
such virulent and treacherous manner, Our Brethr. disobedience not like the
Papists.
as do the adversaries of the Gospel, which her Majesty defends and
sets forth, and wherein chiefly consists this her happiness: b^t in an
other way-warde and not contented sort, as maintayning such a disordred,
corrupt and deformed state of the government and discipline of Christ's Church.
As though her reign suppressed the reign of Christ, and the sincere
aduauncing of his kingdom, which in the Lords prayer we desire. If her
Majesty did thus: what happiness were there, or rather what unhappiness were
there not in her reign?

But now, when such as worthily are accounted, to be the most learned
professors of the Gospel in other Nations, and such as so hardly can brook
women's government, Strangers and those that brook not women's government,
surmount our Brethren that are subjects.
smackering too much of the french humor, as we have showed, shall
notwithstanding give this honorable testimony of her Majesty, and of her
reign: And I hope they do it no more for flattery, than they need for fear,
but even for the truth sake it self, (for except they would suppress it, they
can in conscience say no less): shall now her Majesty's own subjects and
those Protestants too, that feel the benefit, whereat other rejoice so
much, for the hearing thereof, shall not they confess as much as does a
stranger? What a great ingratitude should this be? Howbeit, Danaeus confesses
not so much, but we find much more, the experience and benefit of this her
most happy reign. God make us with like thankfulness to acknowledge it. For
certainly, if we shall consider al circumstances, we shall not choose, (at
leastwise in our consciences, though we would not with our mouths, but
confess as much as does Danaeus, that the whole compass of the world has
seen nothing at any time, that is more happy or more to be wished for, than
is her reign (or government). Neither the government under the Queen of
Saba, or of Gods people under Deborah, neither yet under the most excellent
men. David, Solomon, Asa, Iehosaphat, Josias, or Ezechias; no, not in
Christendom under Constantine the great, or the great Charles, though their
reigns did in some things excel her Majesty's reign: yet all things
pondered, especially those kind of good things wherein true happiness most
consists: (Danaeus spoke here a great word, but we may well uphold it for a
truth,) that the whole circle of the world, saw nothing at any time, more
happy (or blessed,) and a thing more to be wished for, ( if men might have
their wishes) than is the reign or government of her Majesty. The Lord ( I
say again and again) make us thankful to him chiefly, and after him to
her, for the same, and vouchsafe to continue and increase, this her most happy
and wished reign, still among us, to his further glory, to our aunswerable
thankfulness, and to the refuge, succor and comfort of other kingdoms,
where his Church also is dispersed, and yet by the seducinges and oppressions
of Antichriste, have not atteyned to this happiness and wished state for all
their Kings, that we in England under our Queen Elizabeth, his most happy
hand-mayde, and our most gracious Sovereign, have all the time of her reign,
and yet (God be magnified therefore) do enjoy. And still shall a stranger
say these speeches, and our selves bury them in dumb silence, or if we speak
thereof, deny it or deprave it?

This is much to our shame, and to the great commendation of Danaeus: if
happily he had stayed even here, and so concluded up this question. Danaeus his
high praise if he had stayed here.
For what could he or any have said better, that could more fully confirm
the supreme government of a woman to be lawefull in the Church of Christ,
than this so manifest example and present instance, of Gods so happily blessing
her Majesty's supreme government, over us his people.

But, what shall we foade our selves with all these goodly speeches, when the
matter for all this is still impugned? For, to what purpose does Danaeus drive
all these great praises of her Majesty's reign? To confirm and establish a
woman's government? Or not rather in the end, even as our Brethren do (but
with a more cunning compass) to undermine it? And yet, our Brethren (as we
have heard) cast forth now and then very fair speeches of her Majesty, and
of her happy reign, Fair praises and foul practices.
and of her lawful government also. But when it comes to the very point,
they not only refuse to obey her Majesty's laws and government, but they so
cry out upon the same, as a most deformed, and corrupt state of gods Church:
that all their praysings are nothing comparable to their dispraysinges What a
strange kind of dealing is this in so high matters, and with such great and
noble personages? It is an old saying, Non est bonum ludere cum sanctis. And
shall we dally thus, Danaeus joins wih Caenalis.
in the chiefest matters of estate, with Princes? What could have been more
avouched for confirmation of a woman's lawful government, then this so high
recommending to all the world her Majesty's government? The inuinci^le
instance of her Majesty's government.
Solemnly pronouncing: Verily, for Elizabeth the Queen of England that now
most happily reigns, the circuit of the world has seen nothing at any
time more happy (or blessed) and more to be wished for, then is here reign.
If here Danaeus have not flattered (as he had no cause) but spoken (as indeed
we find it) the very truth: what then can he afterward or all the circuit
of the world allege, against this so excellent a president of Gods
approbation for women's supreme government? In very deed nothing can be
rightly opposed, that shall ever be able to ouerturne this instance. And
verily, if Danaeus shall now allege any thing, against the lawefulnesse of a
woman's supreme government over Gods people: he shall but contrary and werie
himself in vain, as we saw how Caenalis did. And in the end, we shall see
likewise, how Danaeus fair and softly drives the matter, not only to the same,
but to a far worse pitche, though in better speeches, and with more learning.
For Danaeus having gone thus far, dare not now say that the government of
women is a naughty, dishonest, or monstrous thing: ( which term Calvin used)
for then, all the world would have straightway seen it, and cried out upon
it, as a gross and manifest contradiction. But, he so fetches it about by
little and little under hand, that in the end it comes all to one pass, as if
had flat and plain denied it. And first here, as he has so highly commended
her Majesty's reign: so will he not seem to discommend, but to give at least
some sober commendation, to those that will admit no such government.

Notwithstanding ( says he) those people seem to have wisely looked unto
their profit, Danaeus.
which have taken heed unto (or provided) by their laws, and by a right (or
law) public, least that women should rule among them, and over them, and
should have the chief right and government. If we confer the sex of the
woman with the man's, because that unto many offices which the administration
of a kingdom requires, they are less apt and are unable, by reason of the
nature and imbecillitie of their sex. As for example to govern an army, to
pronounce the law sitting in public. Which things certainly do not become
at all a woman's shamefastness.

In commending the wisdom of those people which have provided by their laws,
Bridges
that women should not have the supreme government among or over them: Danaeus
seems (though with more modest couerture then did Caenalis) to insinuate the
French his country men. But with what wisdom they could devise better laws
than Gods laws, and oppose their caueats or provisions of those their laws,
to cut off his laws: I refer to Danaeus and to the indifferent readers
further deliberation. But, if we may conjecture by the event (as we have seen
already out of Meierus, the Chronicler of the Low countries) this wise
provision of their laws contrary to the provision of Gods law, has been
the very folly, which has made that realm of France refuse, to unite it self
with this Realm of England and with all those countries, whereby such a
mighty Monarchy might have grown, as might have both repressed the
usurpation of Antichrist, and the invasion of the Saracens and Turks; the one
having woonne and spoiled more than half, the other having seduced and
tyrannized almost over all Christendom, without any Christian Monarke,
sufficient to resist or stop them. For the kings of England that ever to
their power, did most withstand these two open and privy enemies of Christ's
Gospel, were either still crossed by the french* or, for want of this union,
(that in right ought then to have been made) had not might sufficient to
atchieue it. While in the mean season, France has felt, that the only
mayntaining of this their wise provision, has been the greatest plague and
scourge that ever France has had, and the chiefest occasion of their greatest
overthrows. And at this day (God be praised for it) England has the light
and liberty of the Gospel, and is so blessed withal, under her Majesty's
most happy reign ( as Danaeus says) that would to God France and every
Christian kingdom, yea, all the world had the like blessings of God, if it
were according to his good will. Not, that they should be all governed still by
women; for so is not England. But, not to debar the right of inheritance,
no, not to a woman. And if all the world never saw so happy a reign as is the
Queens of England: Why might we not charitably wish that all the world,
France and all, might see the like happiness in their dominions? What could it
prejudice if a woman now and then reigned over them, so long as God blessed
their reign as he does her Majesty's?

But now, where Danaeus draws his sentence further, with this conditional, if
we confer the sex it self of the woman with the man's: If he add this, as a
reason that moved the French or any other, to make this prouiso against women's
supreme government: then I answer, that indeed in this conferring; the
woman's sex is inferior to the man's. Howbeit, government having rather
relation to that principal person, that is represented in the government,
which is God; and with all, to the ability, by the gifts and spirit of
government, which God gives to the party whom he aduaunceth; and also, to
the right of inheritance, whereby the Governor claims title or comes
thereto: the superiority is rather to be conferred, in these or the like
respects or co^parisons, In co^ferring the sexes, the man to be preferred.
tha^ in the sex of man and woman only. And yet, we grant, that the sex of the
man ( cateris paribus, all other things in conferring of them, being found to
be equal) is evermore, The sexes conferred.
as the more worthy, to be preferred before the sex of the woman. But if now,
this conferring of the sexes, be referred to the later part of the sentence,
Personal imbecilitie no bar to right of government.
which renders a cause hereof, saying: because that unto many functions which
the administration of a kingdom does require, they are less apt and are
unable, by reason of the nature and imbecilitie of their sex: then I deny this
also to be a sufficient cause or reason, to debar any persons of their right
to a kingdom, only for that they are not able, personally to administer many
functions, which the administration of a kingdom does require. For if he mean,
that all Princes must of necessity administer all such functions in their own
persons, or else they be not lawfully administered: then, not only (as we have
showed) a man child ( while he is a child) is clean cut off from the
possession of a kingdom, and must, for conferring his age with the age of a
man that is of riper years, be excluded: because that unto many functions
which the administration of a kingdom requires, the nature and imbecilitie of
his age is less apt and is unable: but also of what age soever he be,
Sickness.
yet his sickness may so greatly, or so continually empaire the strength of
nature: that he may be even altogether unable, at least, the less apt to
administer many of those functions. Yea, what health so ever he have also, and
might, and wisdom: yet if he have many kingdoms or provinces under him, as
diverse Princes had, that are not therefore improoued in the scripture,
Viceroyes and deputies in personal absence.
yea David, Solomon, Iehosaphat, etc. had such Provinces too, and deputies in
them: and how then can the king administer those functions in his provinces,
personally? Yea, have he but one kingdom, and that but a small one too, yet
will there still be many functions which the administration of a kingdom does
require, that he shall be driven to do by other persons in his name and right,
and not all of them in his own person. If now, this administration of those
functions by a deputy or minister in his name, and having authority from him,
be good and lawful in a man: why it is not good and lawful also in a woman? If
any reply, that although the King may appoint such deputies, yet he must
appoint a man to do the actions that appertain to a man: I deny it not. But
can not a woman Prince appoint men also to do them, as well as a man Prince can
appoint them? But of that after, only this now, why should a woman be more
bound to the personal administration of such functions, more than a man is
bound? Or should she not rather, even for the nature and imbecilitie of her
sex, be of the twain, (seeing she is the weaker, Deputies more allowed in
women than in men
and so the more to be honored and borne withal) be permitted to administer
all such functions by other men, as she can not administer by her self,
without any prejudice to her right or supreme authority in the kingdom?

The Apostle S. Peter went not thus strictly to work for Princes personal
administration of all their functions, but says 1. Pet. 2. v. 13. etc. submit
your selves unto all manner of humane ordinance for the Lords sake, The
ordinance of God.
whether it be unto the king, as unto the superior, or unto the Governors, as
unto the^ that are sent of him, etc. here he first names this general word,
1. Pet. 2.13.
every humane ordinace, or creature. For the words (...), comprehend both the
ordinance created, and also the creature or person either of man or woman. And
though he afterward specify the name of king, which rather seems to be
limited to a man: yet his reason includes both sexes, though according to the
common phrase, he mention only the more worthy sex. Saint Peter's words
stretch to men and women.
As when he says afterward, ver. 17. honor all men: he excludes not the honor
due to women, but includes it. And v. 18. and 19. Servants be ye subject to
your Masters withal fear, not only to the good and courteous: but also to the
froward. For this is thank worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure
grief, suffering it wrongfully. here these words Master and man, are not
limited to the sex, but are rather spoken of the persons. So by a courteous or
a froward M. is meant also a courteous or a froward Mistress; and by man either
any servant, or any person he or she that suffers wrongfully. Neither only
does Peter in the term of one sex, include both: but meets also with this
reason, that it is no disobedience to the king, but only to his deputy: and
therefore says he: or unto governors, as unto those that are sent of him. Which
word him, if we refer to the king: If he may have such governors, as sent of
him: so also may a Queen as sent of her. Calvin rather refers it, as unto
those that are sent of God. But this again makes for us. Calvin in 1. Pet. 1.
He signifies ( says Calvin) al sorts of Magistrates, as though he should say,
there is no kind of government, to which they ought not to subject themselves.
He confirms this, because they are Gods ministers. For they that refer this
Pronoune (him) to the king, are much deceived. This therefore is a common reason
to commend the authority of all Magistrates, that they rule by the commandment
of God, and are sent of him. So that, what sorts of Magistrates so ever they
be, we neither respect the difference of their states, whether in a Monarchy,
or in an Aristocratie, or in a popular common wealth: nor yet respect we the
sexes of the governors, but God that placed them in authority, and for his
ordinance sake we must obey them, and their ordinances, if they be not
contradictorie, but subalternall, to God their principal, that did send them.
So that, the inabilitie of the sex, is no more lawful pretense to repel the
authority of the person; the^ is the inability of age, or of health, or of
strength, or of knowledge, Examples of de^u^ies.
to administer personally many functions that pertain to the administration of
a kingdom. Pharao could not do many things pertaining to the administration of
his kingdom, yt Joseph could do: neither Nabuchodonozer, that Daniel could do:
nor Saul, that David: nor Oziah, yt his tutors in his name could do: and yet
was this no impechme^t to their states.

But here Danaeus pickes out two things, that he thinks by all means to be
utterly inconvenient, for women to have any doing at all in them, Danaeus his
exceptions.
that is to wit, to be over an army, and to pronounce law sitting in
public place of judgment. Princes deputies.


These two functions are such (I grant) as appertain unto a supreme governor,
Two functions of a Prince to govern an army, and to sit in judgment.
and are necessary both for war and peace, the two chief estates of every
common weal: the one to defend the^ from their enemies, the other to
maintain them among themselves. Howbeit, neither of these two functions,
either to be a governor in war, or to be a Judge in peace, are such
functions, that if a Prince can not personally exercise the same, he should
therefore be debarred from his right; or having it, he should surcease it. For
if the king be a child, well may they live in hope of his riper years; but in
that infirmity of his age, neither the actiuitie of his body, nor the skill
of his mind, will reach to the administering of these two functions. Yea, when
he comes to man's estate, he may both be so weak in body, so faint in heart,
and so inexpert in the feats of war: he may again be so simple in
judgment, so unlearned in the laws, and may prove altogether so unapt for
discerning and deciding of controversies; that neither child nor man, he may
be able or apt for the personal administration of these functions. And what
then? Shall he be clean excluded or deposed from his kingdom, for his only
inability or unaptness in these functions? Or, on the other side, if we shall
more safely conclude, that deputies may supply his imbecilitie herein, Azarias
though for his sickness by himself he could not, yet by his deputies be
administered these things.
as we have seen, how Azarias remained king being a ^eper, separate and shut
up from the people, neither able to govern an army, nor to sit in
judgment: but to do these functions, and al other b^longing to the
administration of a kingdom, by his son Iotham, who governed the house and
judged the people of the land. 2. Reg. 15 ver. 5: can then not Christian
Princes, where any imbecilitie of nature or of sex, makes them less able to
do these things them^elues, supply them also by their deputies? Did David
guide all his armies by his personal conducte, or not his greatest and most
dangerous battles by his liefe-tenant Ioab? David's deputies.
Yea 2. Sam. 18. ver. 3. the army would not suffer him to go to battle with
them, but said: Thou shall not go forth, for if we flee, they will not
regard us, neither will they pass for us, though half of us were slain, But
thou art now worth ten thousand of us, etc. And yet David ceased not to be
their king still. Yea, he was the safer from danger in his person, and for the
matter, he made no less noble conquestes by his Captains. The Senate and
people of Rome did all by deputies.
The Senate and people at Rome conquered the most famous parts of all the
world, and all or most by their deputies, whom they sent forth with their
armies, while they sat still and debated the matters in the Capitol.

And although that the sitting in publik judgment and pronouncing right, be
easier for the body of the twain: yet since it requires the knowledge of the
laws ( except Princes should sit for a show, or according to law will I,
or resolve the doubt as Alexander undid Gordias his knotte:) how many Salomons
are there, that sit their selves in judgment, A Princes functions.
and some of them good Princes too, having learned and vncorrupt judges to
administer those functions for the^? But can any of the^ therefore be said, that
he is not a lawful Prince, or no Prince at all, yea, Though a Prince can not
decide controversies yet he cease not to be a Prince.
although he were also a dissolute and unjust Prince? If now these functions in
men Princes, can be thus administered by the deputations of other men,
experienced and approved in these functions: why should this supply be debarred
from a woman Prince? What alleges Danaeus against them? That though some men
Princes do not these things; yet for women Princes, though they would, they
can not? Nay, Danaeus is not yet so peremptory, that by any means they can
not do it: but (says he) these things become not at all women's shamefastnes.
Indeed shamefastness is one of the chiefest ornaments of women, and great
reason it is, they should have a special regard to the comeliness and
shamefastness of their nature. Neither is fighting and martial affairs so
fit for their imbecillitie and the profounde discussing in pleas of right and
law, does commonly surmount the capacity of women, which as by custom they
are not so enured and acquainted withal, so are they by nature (for the most
part) more witty than wise, and more pregnant in invention of delightful
matters, than deliberate in judgment of grave and doubtful controversies.
Howbeit, we speak not now of the ordinary sort of women, but only of
those that are supreme governors of a kingdom, which also falls out very
seeledome: nor yet ascribe we the ability of these functions to all those
that are such women Princes. No more than it can be said also, How a woman
Prince may do these actions.
of all those Princes that are men, though it be no sufficient debar to the
right of either of their estats, which is a far higher point in law, than is
the personal administration of their functions.

And yet, well may we justify this, that as God has so given the
administration even of both these functions to some singular women princes,
without any stain at all unto their shamefastnes: so upon especial occasion
or necessity thereunto, why may we not conclude, when God calls a woman
prince to the supreme government of a kingdom, that she may in good order do
these things, without any touch of blemish to the decency and honor of her
shamefastnes? I speak not of personal fighting in the wars, like the Amazones
and the french pucell: and yet in some necessity, women have put to their
hands sometimes extraordinarily, to the defense of themselves, and striking of
their enemies, and that without reproach. Iael.
As Iael that killed Sisera, and got thereby great honor. Iud. 4. and the woman
that cast a piece of a millstone on Abimeleches head, and brake his brain pan.
Iud th.
Iud. 9. And Judith that cut off Holofernes head, and by her prudence and valor
overthrew all his mighty army, and directed her people how to set forth
their armies. But these were yet no governors of armies. And indeed it is one
thing to strike the enemy, To govern an army.
or to defend themselves, and another thing to govern an army. But have not
we recited a number of those women that have governed armies, Governance of an
army.
and some of the^ without any discommendation, but rather to their high praise,
besides the great benefit of their subjects? But to conteyne us in the bounds
of the Canonical scripture; did not Debora, Debora.
as well as Barak, go forth with the army, yea and chiefly govern it, both
what number they should be, and who should be their Captain, and when they
should give the onsette; and of all this she took no shame but glory? And when
the Queen of Sabaea, The Queen of Sabaea.
came to Solomon with so great a train that Peter Martyr says thereon, habuit
multitudinem secu^ instar exercitus, she had a multitude with her as it were an
army: did not she chiefly govern then? And why did not Solomon lay that in
her dish, and tell her, that she could not be a Queen, because she could not
with that shamefastness which becomes women kind, govern an army? No, nor
Christ debarreth her of the title of a Queen, or of her due commendation, for
all that matter. Neither Philip found this fault in the Eunuchs Lady and
Mistress, Candace the Queen of Aethiopia, Candace.
that governed such an army, as we heard already out of Pliny and Strabo.
Neither (besides the scripture) Josephus finds this fault in Alexandra.
Alexandra.
And yet al these had, and must needs have had, armies and defenses against
their enemies, yea though they had peace with them. Therefore, notwithstanding
this exception of Danaeus for the governing or being over an army, whether by
their deputies (as Peter Martyr says, the Queen of Sabaea might appoint her
son, or some other in her absence;) or in case, by themselves, as her self
conducted the troop that came with her to Solomon: Queens are not to be
sequestered from all supreme government of a kingdom. Yea, they may so orderly
govern over all their armies also, that they may still with honor and without
shame, reteyne the decency and shamefastnes of their calling.

The other function, though it pertain more to peace and quietness: yet
because it has the hearing and debating of quarrels and brawles: Sitting in
judgment.
the contentious pleading of titles and doubts: the finding out and
determining of right and law: seems to be as far from women's modest
shamefastness and milder capacity, as the other in the broils of wars. And
yet if we shall thoroughly consider this function, having granted the one,
which is the harder, for the government over an army in the war: women will
hope the better and plead in peace the harder, not to be clean^ debarred from
the bar, nor yet from sitting in the judgment seat, if the importance of
necessity or special occasion, and much more title of right, do call them to
it, and they have able gifts to answer it.

What authority in her City the wise woman of Abele had, The wise woman of
Abele.
2. Sam. 20 ( though she pleaded so wisely even in the wars with Ioab, and in
giving counsel to her people for their peace,) Sitting in judgment.
I will not examine because she was under God no supreme governor, nor sat in
any public judgment, that we read of. But for Deborah it is expressly set
down in the scripture that she judged Israel. Debora.
Judge. 4. ver. 4. and that the children of Israel came up to her for judgment.
ver. 5. If it be replied, this was a specialtie, and therefore can not be
drawn into any ordinary rule or example: although it may be well answered,
that God did not draw such specialties from such persons, as otherwise in them
the function had been monstrous and mere against nature: so that any person
whom God calls to authority, and furnishes with his spirit of judgment,
enhabling their inhabilitie, may take it on them, and look on Debora for a
president: yea, were the Prince a child, and had the gift of judgment beyond
his age, (as had Daniel, or Solomon:) for all their rare and singular gifts,
yet might he well set them before him for a pattern. But howsoever we exempt
the example of Deborah: what shall we say to these two foresaid Queens of
Sabaea and Aethiopia, The queene^ of Sabaea and of Ethiopia.
mentioned without touch of ignominy, if not rather of praise, both in the
old and in the new Testament, at leastwise, approved to be lawefull Queens?
For, either the Princes personal execution in the administration, of this
function pertaynining to the government of a kingdom, is not so necessary,
but that they might do it, and did it by their deputies: or else these queens
did sit their selves in public indgement, and yet no reproach or vncomlines
unto their shamfastnes.

But whatsoever they did then, Danaeus will prove that this should not now be
done. And why not now?

From hence ( to wit, that it is utterly unseemly for the shamefastnes of a
woman, Danaeus.
says he) by the civil law of the Romans L. mulieres D. de regul. iuris,
women are rightly repelled from administering the functions and offices
belonging to me^, such as also are those that ought to be exercised in public.
And the same is the saying of Augustine, Lt. de nupt^s. cap. 9. Neither can it
be doubted, that men ought rather to be principal unto women, than women to
men.

Here is both the authority of the civil law, Bridges.
and of this most famous Doctor of the Church S. Aug. alleged, against women's
sitting in public judgment and their supreme government over me^. To S. Aug.
afterward in his order. Let us first consider the civil law hereon. The
civil law.
Not that I will take upon me lawyerlike, to answer this rule of the law of
man, in such learned and full manner, as the professors thereof would do: it
suffices me, that I find sufficient warrant for women's supreme government, out
of Gods law. Notwithstanding I deny not this law civil, so far as it
contrarieth not the law divine, which we and all Christendom are more bound
unto, tha^ to any civil law of the Romans. Io. Ramus in his Inchiridion (or
manuel) de reg. iuris, li. 2. axiom. 50. de Faeus. mentions this rule, and from
who^ Danaeus takes it: Vlpian ( says he) does say, Judgment of women.
that women are removed from al civil or public offices, Vlpian.
both because it is not commendable for the shamefastnes of the feminine sex,
to be provoked to do those things which appertain to men: and also because the
counsel of women is feeble, frail, and without the experience of matters.
Vlpian alleges examples, and therefore women can be no judges, nor demand
(right) nor appear for other, nor be procurators.

Of what women and matters Vlpian speaks.
Of the motives that induced hereunto this famous lawyer Vlpian, ( and yet but
an heathen Idolater, not knowing Gods law, nor seeing such measure of his
gifts among the heathen Romans in those days:) we shall after (God willing)
see further, Danaeus leading us to the inquiry, what women have also governed
the Roman Empire. As for this law, both properly is understood of the
personal actions of such offices or functions, as appertain only to pleas,
for hereunto he drives all his examples: and so, no more restrayneth the
principality of a woman's supreme government over a kingdom, than it does of
a childs: neither is it further to be stretched, than serves to the reasons
here alleged, which only take place in the ordinary sort of women. But when
as we have showed so many laudable examples to the contrary, and shall see
further in the practice of the greatest states in Christendom: yea, Danaeus
also himself has specified some such examples, as in all points are
aunswerable to all the virtues here required, and to many far more excellent,
besides as firm, as constant, and as expert counsel of most weighty matters,
as in the most and best Counselors: among men, not only such as Holda, Holda.
to who^ Josias, the high Priest, and the grauest Counselors resorted for
counsel: nor as Judith, Judith.
that gave most godly, stout, and prudent counsel to the Priests, the
Elders, and all the people: but (God be praised) by Danaeus own confession, we
are not unfurnished in this behalf. And therefore such excellent women, are to
be excluded from this rule of the civil law, but not from the rule of the
civil government.

But for our better proof hereof, to show how this rule of the civil law,
debarreth not simply all women, Montholonius in promptuario diuini and
veriusque iurishum.
especially not Princes, no, not from public sitting and pronouncing law in
judgment; the promptuarie of the three laws, to wit, the divine law of God,
the Cannon law of the Bishops, and the Civil law of the Emperors, collected
by Montholonius, as coming next to hand, may suffice (me thinks) both for
the matter it self, and for the laws reaching to or restrayning of this rule.
Upon this sentence Judge. 4. Debora the wife of Lapidoth, was the Prophetess
which judged the people, at that time (of Iabin king of Chanaan) and she fate
under a date tree, that was called by her name, between Rama and Bethell in
mount Ephraim, and the children of Israel came up to her for all judgment,
etc. Upon the word she judged ( says Montholonius) By the law of man it is
not permitted for women to judge or to exercise the office of a party that
judges. The text is open, in L. faeminae. in princ. ff. de reg. iuris. and in
c. cum Praetor.. 1. ff. de iudi. in C. 1.. tria sunt. 3. quaest. 7. and in c.
mulierem militem. in fi. 33. quaest. 5. which notwithstanding proceeds not in
the case that is put in c. dilecti. de arbi. where it is said: Dilecti fill
Abbas etc. Our beloved sons, the Abbot and Covent of Sardinia of the
Cistercien order, have by complaint declared unto us, that whereas among them
of the one party, and the hospitalers ( he means those of the order of S.
John, whom we called the Knights of the Rhodes, or now, of Malta) of the
other party, a question was moved in suit of law, about the usage of a
certain wood, it was by both parties compromitted to the French Queen: The
french Queens judgment.
who understanding the merits ( or rightes) of the cause, thought good the
definitive sentence to be promulgated or published by arbitriment. But,
although according to the rule of the Civil law, women are removed from
public offices: and in an otherl place it be said, that albeit they be of
most high estimation, if they take upon them an arbitriment, or else being
Patronesses, they interpose themselves in the hearing of matters among their
Tenauntes manumised ( or made free) they are to be separated from all
judicial examining, so that no penalty nor any exception of covenant may be
taken against the contemners of them, by reason of their prolation: The custom
and the f^ench law for women having jurisdiction.
( or sentence that they have given forth) nevertheless, because of the
custom approved, which in the parts of France is holden for law, women
preexcelling are known to have an ordinary jurisdiction over their subjects:
we therefore command, that by the penalty decreed in the compromise, the
hospitalers observe the same arbitriment, even as it is prouidently set forth
and received of either party, especially sith it has been ratified with the
presence and counsel of the Bishops. These words has the text. Which well
proves that those which are preexcellent women ( or of great nobility) may
give judgment. Hereupon says Angelus in his Counselles, Consil. 270. that he
saw Queen Ioane sitting in the throne made for the judgment seat. And
although this, to wit, that a preexcellent woman may judge, be understood by
the gloss in the word. Regina. in c. cum deuotissimam. 12. quaest. 2. and in.
1. in the word mulieres. 15. quaest. 3. that it proceeds only of custom,
according as the fore-sayde chapter dilecti speaks: notwithstanding this also
proceeds even by the common law, because although a woman can not judge, in
that she is a woman, In what respect a woman may be a Judge.
notwithstanding if any dignity be delated ( or brought) unto her, by reason
whereof there belongs withal a jurisdiction, she may exercise the
jurisdiction. So does Panormitane notably say by that text in c. dilecta. in 1.
no. de arbi. and in ^. significauit. de rescript. Aug. wrested.
And so peradventure may it be understood, that is here spoken of the
Prophetess Delbora. Debora.
Howbeit, if it were the custom that women should judge, that custom ought to
be kept, not only in women that were preexcellent; but also in others. For the
cause that women can not judge, is brought in by custom only, Custom the
ouerruler of this question.
even as it is proved in the said law, cum Praetor.. 1. in verbo. moribus ff.
de indi. And in the said chapter. 1. in verbo moribus. 3. quaest. 7. therefore,
by the contrary custom, the contrary may be induced. So holds, after other
by him alleged, Dominus meus Decius. in dicta lege. 2. Colum. 1. ff. de regu.
iuris. Thus we see, does the civil law of the Romans answer the civil
law of the Romans, and that not only in other regions, but especially in
France, where the civil law is most in force, to the more full satisfaction
of this objection, and rule of the civil law that Danaeus here alleges.

As for that which Danaeus annexeth out of Augustine, Lib. 1. de nuptijs cap.
9. saying: neither can it be doubted, that men should rather have
principality over women, than women over men.

S. Aug. wrested by Danaeus.
I muse much that so excellent a man (as I gladly acknowledge Danaeus to be)
could be thus far carried with affection, to cite a testimony of any Father,
or any other in this manner, both clean besides the authors matter, which he
was in hand withal, that should have fully declared his meaning: and even in
that little sentence which he takes, to leave out those especial words, that
should have bounded all the sentence. Albeit, he ought to have taken notice,
(at least wise, some inkling) where about S. Augustine went, even by the very
title of the book that here he quoteth, de nuptijs, of marriages. So that the
principal drift here of Augustine is not to prove the principality of civil
government, that it is not competible to a woman over men, but only to men
over women: but he drives all to that natural principality, which
appertains to the sex, and to the state of marriage, for the propagation of
man and womankinde. Why one man was rather for that time permitted to have mo
wives, than one woman to have more husbands.
And in that ninthe chapter, Saint Augustines purpose was, to prove, that
although for propagation of children, one man was then permitted to have mo
wives: yet could it not be permitted to one woman, to have more husbands. For
that would not increase, but rather hinder the propagation of children. For
says S. Augustine, If the multitude of wives had not therefore displeased the
God of our Fathers (and which is our God also) that wanton lust should vaunt it
self more abundantly: then estsoones had the holy women likewise each one of
the^ obeyed diverse men. Which if any had done, what had compelled her, but
even the uncleanness of unlawful lust, that she would have mo husbands: since
this licentiousness should not have had the mo children? Howbeit, that not one
man and many women, but one man and one woman, appertains rather to the
goodness of marriages: even the very first conjunction of matrimony made by
God, does sufficiently declare, that marriages should fetch their beginnings
from thence, where the example should be marked with more honesty. But the
race of mankind proceeding forth, good women were joined to certain good men,
the mo women to particular men. Whereupon it appears, that the modesty of
the dignity rather desired that: and the nature of frutefulnes permitted this.
Man's principality in marriage over the woman.
For principality also can be more naturally of one over many, than of many
over one. ( And here comes in the sentence that Danaeus cites) neither can
it be doubted, by natural order, that men should rather have principality
over women, than women over men. Which thing the Apostle keeping says, The man
is the head of the woman. And, women be ye subject to your husbands. And the
Apostle Peter says, 1. Cor. 11.
even as Sara obeyed Abraham and called him Lord. Which although it be so, that
the nature of the beginnings loves singularity, and we shall more easily see
a plurality in the subjects: notwithstanding, many women should never be
lawfully joined to one man, except from thence many children should have been
borne. Whereupon if she join her self with more men: because that from thence
she has not the multiplication of her children, but the frequenting of wanton
lust, she can not be a wife but an harlotte.

This is all S. Augustines whole chapter on this matter. What now is here that
can be drawn (except it be drawn with violence) against a woman's
principality over men, in respect of Civil government? True it is, that by
way of comparison, he speaks also here of civil principality. But does he
say, a woman can not be such a Prince, as in that respect of civil
principality she can not be principal over many men that are her subjects?
No, he has no such words nor meaning: but only by the similitude of a Prince
in the state civil, The plain meaning of S. Aug.
he proves the order of the natural and oeconomicall state. That sith in
natural order, the man by his sex, is the woman's head: and the woman also in
the law and order of matrimony, which follows the law and order of nature is
subject to the man that is her husband: both which he proves out of S. Paul's
testimony in the new Testament, and by Abraham's and Saraes example in the
old: ^^^^efore he concludes, that in this natural and oeconomicall
principality of the sex and of matrimony, it can not by any means be admitted,
that the husband being the head and natural prince, should be mo tha^ one; and
the woman being the subject in this law natural and oeconomicall, should be
but one: and so one woman to have mo husbands. Whereas, if the law of God had
not ben against it, it had been more orderly of the twain, for one man to have
had more wives, ( as it was a while permitted for propagation of mankind,)
because this comes nearer to the order of the civil state, where one Prince
may have more subjects. But yet, he shows in this similitude, Aug. true
meaning.
how the law of the natural and oeconomicall government in matrimony,
differs also in this comparison, from the law of the civil government. For
all marriages must chiefly be leueled to the proportion of their first
institution, the law whereof was, that they should be but two. Though process
of time bredde a permission to the contrary, for the respect of that, whereof
now sith there is no need: therefore in all marriages there ought to be but
one man and he the principal, and one woman and she the subject. Whereas in
the political or civil principality, there is one prince and many subjects.
And therefore the comparison of these two kinds of principalities do not
simply resemble nor imitate the one the other. Danaeus strikes out the very
words that show S. Aug. meaning.
This I take to be S. Augustines plain meaning. And this sentence cited by
Danaeus, had been plain enough, if he had but set down the whole words
thereof. Neither can it be doubted, that by natural order, men should rather
be principal to women, than women to men. Who may not easily perceive here,
that he speaks not simply of all principality: but such principality: only
as arises, by natural order? And who denies that? Or what is that to this
purpose, of political order? And yet we deny not, but when these two orders,
natural and political, can be orderly joined together; it is all the better.
But there is a natural order also of inheritance, by which a woman may be
nearer to civil principality than a man. Whereunto when by the civil law,
yea by the law of God, there acreweth withal this civil or political
principality. Then by that natural order of inheritance, the woman's government
over the man, is not to be debarred, for any natural prerogative of the man's
sex or marriage over the woman. And so when all is done, this sentence of S.
Augustine is no absolute prohibition to a woman's principality over men, if it
rather in some cases do not allow it, when he says, it is not to be doubted,
that by natural order, men should rather be principal to women than women to
men. But as we speak not now, so much of natural order: so neither speak we
of that, that were of twain the rather, if men might have their choice. But
they that can not have Princes as they would, must be glad, at least wise,
content with the^, as they may. And where God, and law, and nature, calls
women to this civil principalility: we must not there stand descanting, what
we had rather have them, but obey the^ as the higher powers of God, whether
they be me^ or women. And since S. Augustine, in the sentence before this cited
by Danaeus, and as the ground thereof, does say: for principality also is
more naturally of one over many, S. Aug. allows women's principality over men.
than it can be of many over one: and the same S. Aug. in other places clearly
allows a civil principality unto women: then must it needs fall out, that
either he must admit such a state of women's government as was among the
Amazons, where no men were: or else, that this woman governor might have
principality over men.

But if now, this plac^ be too weak, Aug. for women's government.
to infer any thing against women's principality: if any here in searching
further S. Augustines meaning, would corroborate the same, with that sentence
which is contained in the 45. Question out of the old testament. Tom. 4. For
how can it be said of a woman, that she is the Image of God: since that it is
evident, she is subject to the government of the man, and has no authority,
for she can not teach, nor be a witness, Another objection. Tom. 4. Aug. 45.
Quest. ex vettest.
nor give faith ( or take an oath) or Judge: how much less is she able to
govern. These words in-deede, come both a little nearer to the purpose, than
does the sentence that Danaeus alleges, and also specify the particulers
mentioned in the rule of the civil Law aforesaid. Albeit that the former
answer may satisfy well-ynough, likewise, all that here is said: yet I hope
our Brethren will not justify this work to be S. Augustines: nor yet this
sentence, if it were his. The Question is this. Quomodo homo ad imaginem Dei
factus sit, and vtrum ad dominationem, and an mulier quoque. How man should be
made to the Image of God, and whether unto government, and whether also a
woman? Whether man and woman were both made to che Image of God and to
government.
It seems notwithstanding to some (says this suborned Augustine) that man
was made to the Image of God in government: and because he says, let him rule
over the fishes of the sea, and over the Fowls of the heaven, and over the
whole earth: sith that these things are seen to be subject not only to man,
but also to Woman, who it is evident has not the Image of God. Which thing
verily wants reason, two ways. For by this it is avouched, that neither God
spoke to his Son, Let us make man unto our Image and likeness: but unto the
celestial governors, which the Apostle reherseth, if that man have the image
of God in Government: and it is given to the woman, that she also should be the
image of God, which is absurd. And so follows this sentence above cited.
Now, as we hold not this opinion, Wherein the Image of God confisteth.
that the Image of God, consists wholly or cheefely in dominion, but withal,
and much more, in that integrity of holiness and righteousness, whereunto S.
Paul exhorts us, and declares that Christ has reformed us, which
appertains as well to women as to men: so, how can this author then,
maintain this to be absurd, and demand how it can be spoken of a woman
that she is the image of God, since there are more, and more excellent respects
of Gods Image in us, then Dominion? But rather, how do his own words hang
together, in saying, the woman has no authority? and yet he goes about to
prove, that this Image of God cannot be vnstoode of government, because she
has government with the man, according to the words of God. Which words are
not, as he cites them, Let him rule, but, let them rule, referring the
authority of rule, both to Man and woman. But as S. Augustine him self in
this point of Gods Image, is so curious about the powers of the soul, to
resemble the mystery of the Trinity, and so variable thereon in many places,
that our Brethren their selves, dare not rest upon him: so, can they press us
the less, by his opinion herein. Not but that we accord to the sense
hereof, whereunto Saint Paul ( as we have showed applies it) 1. Cor. 11.
verse 7. The man ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and
glory of God: but the Woman is the glory of the man. Whereupon (says Calvin,)
The same question may now be moved of the Image, that was before of the
head. In what respect woman is Gods Image, and in what, the man's.
For, either sex is created to Gods image, neither does Paul bid the women
less than the men, to be reformed unto that Image. But the Image whereof now
he speaks, is referred unto the order belonging to Marriage. In which sense,
and in all other prerogatives, that God by nature has given to Man, yea, and
that in all civil principalities, we evermore so grant the preferment to the
Man: that they be not absolutely denied from the Woman. For that was so little
the meaning of S Augustine to affirm that Women can not possibly and lawfully
have any civil principality over men: that in his 253. sermon, de tempore, he
acknowledges so far forth the Queen of the South, that he makes her not
only a good and lawful Queen: but to be a notable figure of Christ's
Church. S. Aug. allowa^ce not only of the Q of Sabees government, but also of
Semiramisses reign.
And avouches also (as do the other historiographers) that Semiramis reigned
over the Assyrian Monarchy. Li. de Ciuit. Dei. 18. cap. 2. and that Ino came
out of Ethiopia into Egypt, and that being a Queen, long iusteque (...)
pericaueri^, she reigned far at large, and righteously. And therefore after
her death, they worshipped her for a Goddess. Whereby we may easily see, that
S. Augustine does not utterly condemn the civil principality of a woman over
men.

Danaeeus now thinking that this was the resolution both of the civil Law,
and also of this famous divine: concluding hereupon with the practice of the
cheifest state in Christendom, would clean carry away all the matter.

Danaeus.
Whereupon ( says he) a Woman can not be Empress of the Romans and Queen.
And when Athalia in Judea, and Irene the Mother of Constantine the third,
would take upon her the Empire of Constantinople, either of them ouerthrewe
all things, brought in the worship of Idols into the Church of God, and this
Woman ( to wit Irene) laid open the Empire of Rome to be torn of the
Saracens. Whereupon also Charles the great was at that time to be chosen into
the Roman Empire in the West, and Nicephorus in the East.

It is an old saying, show me not the meat, but show me the man. And
therefore I like this order of Danaeus well, Bridges.
to examine the practice of this thing. The practice of women's government.
But he says the woman can not be showed in this practice. For, a woman cannot
be the Roman Empress and Queen. Although these speeches seem so ambiguously
spoken, yt the meaning may be construed diverse ways: Empresses.
since that (as these terms are now in use) one may be called King of the
Romans, and another Emperor of Rome: For example, Charles the fifth, being
Emperor of Rome, his Brother Ferdinand was King of the Romans, ( which title
is used rather for security of succession, than present possession of the
state) and so peradventure it mae be true, A woman has bin Empress and Q of
Rome as cheef governor.
a Woman can not be Empress of Rome and Queen also: Notwithstanding, I take
Danaeus in no such sense, nor yet, to be as Empresses and Queens under their
husbands government, and without all rule, save only bearing these Titles and
names, in the honor of their husbands, and no further: but (I take) that he
means, no Woman has had the chief governance and administration of the
commonweal in the Roman Monarchy. Which saying if it were true, albeit it
were the less to be regarded, though a woman could not be there the Empress
and Queen, since in so many places else (as we have sufficiently declared, and
Danaeus has also clearly granted) a Woman might well be either Queen or
Empress, that is to say, the principal or supreme governor of a Monarchy:
yet how can this be true, even for that state, by Danaeus own confession, when
he streightwayes acknowledges, that Irene was the Roman Empress? If it can
not be, how then was it? except he understand it, that she could not be by
Law, and therefore, he compares her with Athalia: But we shall examine that,
anon in order. Let us first (even from the shel) behold that state, but
cheefely, after this title and authority of the Emperors, and so shall we fully
be resolved for the practice.

Functius cites out of Berosus. A view of the women governors in Italy and
the Roman state.
Tab. 15. that Europs the second K. of the Sicionians sent his daughter Crana
Helerna into Italy with certain colonies of people. Which woman was by voices
chosen and exalted to be their Q. unto whom he gave a white scepter. And that
this was about 20. year before the birth of Abraham, and about 50. before the
death of Noah. Moreover he alleges out of Berosus, tab. 28. that Kitim, who
for the excellency of his mind, was of the progeny of Ianus, called the Italian
Atlas, gave in marriage his daughter Electra unto Co^bus Blasco^ Prince of the
progeny of Ianus. Who for this marriage sent certain colonies beyond the Alps
nere to Italy, and Italus does consecrate his daughter Roma to be under him
the queen of the ancient inhabitants of that country. This Roma laid the first
foundations of the city of Rome, which were afterward so beautified by Romulus,
that it was worthily called a City. As he also confirms it out of Quint. fab.
pictor, and Sempronius, In diuis.

But as Danaeus here cutteth us off, from searching all the Antiquities of
Rome, to the time of the Roman Emperors: so this his assertion cannot stand:
and that even in diverse of the Emperors themselves also living and reigning,
not of the worst, but of the best Emperors that have been. I stand not on
this, that all the Empresses in general, Empresses of Rome.
were advanced to the participation of this honor, that they are called
Augustae, and have their coins of money with their names and pictures, so well
as the men: sith this might be be rather ascribed to the participation of
honor, than to the administration of government. Neither will I cite (as any
argument to infer the practice of Women's government) the most dissolute and
voluptuouse time of Heliogabalus, The occasion of Vlpians law against women
judging.
when the Emperor himself was so effeminate, as is not to be written, and the
insolency of his wicked mother Semiamira which ruled all the state, had a
Senate of Women by themselves, which caused the Romans afterward, specially
tha^ famous lawer Vlpianus to make that foresaid Law, that Women should not
sit in Judgment, nor govern in the common weal. And yet notwithstanding,
this Law was kept so small a while, that even in the days of Alexander
Seuerus the next and immediate emperor ( which also among the heathen is
accounted one of the best Emperors) both his grandmother Moesia and after her
his mother Mammea, being excellent Women, had the public administration and
government of the common weal together with him, all the whole continuance of
his Empire, even in the life of Vlpian, that was (as Chytreus calls him)
Chancellor to Alexander Seuerus. And although the Emperor Valens were both a
rash governor and an Arian, and thereby came to a miserable end: yet his wife
Dominica Augusta is greatly commended for her virtue, and among other things,
for her public government of the Roman Empire, while thorough her noble and
politic conduct, Dominica Augusta.
she overcame the Hunnes, the Alanes, and the Goths, when they beseeged
Constantinople, and thereby she preserved the Empire. Eudoxia.
Eudoxia also the wife of the Emperor Arcadius had all or the chief
administration of the Empire, wherein although she were to insolent, in causing
Chrysostom to be banished: yet argues it, that women were not then thought
incapable, of the public administration of the Empire. But howsoever the
mother did somewhat misgouerne the state: Pulcheria in the nonage of her
brother Theodosius.
her daughter Pulcheria is greatly of all the writers recommended. For when her
father Arcadius died, and committed the tutelship of his young son Theodosius
to Isigerdis King of Persia, but especially to his daughter Pulcheria: she so
politikely governed the Empire, and brought up her young Brother in so godly
education: that he proved one of the most excellent Emperors. Neither ceased
her government even of the Princes Court and all the affairs, even when
Theodosius came to his full years, and that she had procured him a wife, and
in the time of his best government And when as by subtle subordination or her
evil willers she was removed from the government, and Eudocia the Empress had
all the administration of the commonweal, under her husband Theodosius for
seven years space: Pulcheria was not only afterward restored, and so
continued all Theodosius reign: but also she advanced Martianus to the
empire, another most noble Prince, and set the crown on his head, and with him
governed the Empire of Rome, not married unto him, but continuing all her life a
most renouned virgin, and in that sense, as not holding the empire under
Martianus, but jointly with him, is of Zonaras called Empress. Theodora the
wife of Justinian, Theodora in the lunacy of Justinian.
while her husband was not well in his wits, had the most part of the
government of the Empire in her hands, and emprisoned Vigilius the Bishop of
Rome. After Justinian, Justinius succeeded, who when he died left Tiberius his
successor, giving him in charge for his Widow Sophia, Sophia widow of
Justinius.
vt eam (says Cuspinian) veluti Dominam ac reginam obseruaret, that he should
hold her in reverence as his Lady and Queen. Moreover Martina the wife of
Heraclius, after her husbands death reigned jointly with her son about two
years. After whom, about the space of seuenscore years, came this Irene
whom here Danaeus only, Irene.
of all the Roman Empresses, does mention, saying:

And when Athalia in Iurye, and Irene the Mother of Constantine, the third,
would bear the rule at Constantinople: Danaeus.
either of them ouerturned all things, brought the worship of Idols into the
Church, and this woman (Irene) laid open the roman Empire to be torn in
pieces by the Saracens. Whereupon Charles the great was to be chosen into the
Romayne Empire in the West, and Nicephorus in the East.

Of the usurpation of Athalia we have heard sufficiently before. The Empress
Irene, notwithstanding she maintained the worship of Images, Bridges
and called by her supreme authority the second Nicene Idolatrous council: the
histories nevertheless accord, that she was then lawful Empress of Rome, yea
the doing it self declares, that she had the chief stroke in the
government. And so reigned together, with her son, ten years. And when he
had deposed her, she again deposed him, and caused his eyes to be put out.
Wherein although she showed her self not so natural a Mother, yet (were the
good or bad,) this infringeth Danaeus rule, Irenees government lawful
notwithstanding her faults.
that a woman cannot be the Roman Empress and Queen. But Danaeus charge
her that she ouerturned all things, brought in Idolatry, and laid open the
Empire to be torn of the Saracens. If she had done all this: yet argues it
the stronger, that she had the chief government, or else she could never have
done it. Neither do I defend, but utterly mislike her doing, both against the
true worship of God, in setting up Images: and against the course of nature, in
putting down her son. But in that superstitious age, were not many Kings as
far to blame for Images as was Irene? and yet for all that, they were lawful
Kings. Neither is it meet, how superstitious or unnatural to her son soever
she were, to charge her (for the more reproach to women's government) more then
with matter of truth, and in truth she so little laid open the Roman
Empire to the Saracens, wasting at that time the East parts, or any part of the
Empire, that not only she once stopped all their great army, by intercepting
their victuals: but also another time in plain battle overcame them. By which
noble doings, she bought her peace with them far more honorable, than many
Emperors before had done, The praise of Irenees administration.
or did after her. Volaterrane says, she governed all things with great
prudence. Zonaras says, she sent also Legions to repress the incursions of
the Arabians: the Agarens therefore going forth to seek their prays, when
they chanced on the Romans army, were put to flight, many of them being
overthrown. Cuspinian with Volaterrane affirms this of her, Mulier vna rebus
administrandis aptissima, and omnino nata. That she was the only Woman that
was most fit and altogether borne for the affairs to be administered.
Neither was there any need to chose Nicephorus, but violently and with craft
while Irene was sick, he gat the Empire from her, and ruled it far worse than
she did.

And as for Charles the great chosen Emperor in the West, it came nothing by
the occasion of this Empress, but by the falsehood of Leo the Bishop of Rome
and his predecessors, that under pretense of Images, had rebelled in the time
of Leo Isaurus her father in law, and utterly revolted from the Empire of the
Grecians, Irene the means to have the Empire reunited.
and fled to the French. Nevertheless the Empress Irene by her prudence so
labored the matter, that by the marriage of Charles the great and her, the
West and the East Empire had been reunited into one state, but that by the
treason of Nicephorus she was hindered and desposed. Not long after, succeeded
Theodora with her son Theophilus. Theodora.
For ( says Cuspinian) he being a child was not able to order the reins of
the Empire, and the administration of Irene the mother of Constantine, made
that the Gretians not unwillingly received the Empire of a woman. This Empress
was no less superstitious for the worship of Images then was Irene, and yet
otherwise for her politic government eleven years space, The Grecians willing
admission of Women's Government.
she is greatly praised, and her deposition was her sons overthrow. Besides
these, not only Zoe alone, but her sister Theodora afterward together with
her, were both Empresses, and had the chief government of the Empire. Eudochia
also with her sons, and after with Diogenes, three years. Now, if that
after the Empire was divided, Eudochia.
Danaeus account not these for Empresses of Rome: ( albeit the Chronicles do
still so call the East Empire) notwithstanding what shall we say of Theophania
the Empress, that subdued Rome, and all the coasts about it unto her Son
Otto? Theophania the Mother of Otto.
And did not the mother also of Henry the fourth Govern the Empire, while her
Son for his youth was not yet able? And how then, having so many examples of
Women's Government in that state, while it was entire, and being severed in
either part thereof: can this saying of Danaeus be vpholden, that a Woman
can-not be Empress of the Romans? As for that he adds, that a Woman
likewise can-not be queen: If he refer it to the Romans, call her
Empress, or queen, or any other Title of chief souerainty under God,
Empress or Queen.
so she have the supreme Government of that Monarchy, either in her own
name, or the chief administration of the Commonweal, in the name of another,
as we see in the diversity of these examples, it comes all to one reckoning and
sufficiently satisfies the question of Women's public Government. And as it
was thus of the Romayne Empire, so for other Kingdoms in Chrystendome, of the
Lombardes, of Cicilia, Polonia, Suetia, Demnarke, Boemia, etc. Because also we
find that every one of these have been governed by Women, since the time they
have received the faith of Christ: The government of women in their states.
I refer then over to those diverse Regions, which Danaeus says, do admit
the right of Women's chief Government, so well as England Spain and Scotland
do, as appears by their particular histories.

Now when Danaeus has thus far discoursed of Women's supreme Government over
empires and Kingdoms: descending down, he grants VVomens supreme
Government in inferior states, and says:

But where inferior Jurisdictions, such as are Dukes, earls, Barons,
Castellanes, are patrimoniall (or succeeding by inheritance) as in France:
Danaeus.
they verily in my judgment, may be holden and possessed by Women, because
these dignities and offices are not chief empires.

And in my judgment, this is but a mere shift, and frivolous devise (if I may
be so bold so to call it) to elude the matter. For although I might show, how
diverse Dukedomes have been turned into Kingdoms, as Boemia, Polonia,
Muscouia, Croatia, Dalmatia, etc. And Kingdoms turned into Dukedomes, as
Austriche, Burgundy, Lumbardie, Gascoin, Britannie, etc: And some Dukedomes
hold the mere royalties, save the bare Title of kings, acknowledging no
superior Prince, If other sta^es that have royalties be co^petible to women:
tha^ Danaeus has assoyled al his own arguments.
as Venice or perhaps Florence. etc. Or in some respect of vassaiship, they be
^eodatarie, inferior to Emperors and Kings, as Saxony, Bauier, Prussia,
Cleueland, Gelderland, etc. Besides many that be united unto kingdoms as
Nomandie, Guien, Britannie, Lancaster, Cornwall, etc. Or holden of kings in
respect of other Titles, as Millaine, Brabande, Holland, Zeelande, Friselande,
etc. Besides many Earledomes and Baronnies also under Emperors and kings:
yet, sith in Danaeus Judgment, all these Dukedomes, Earledomes and Baronies,
or the most of these be patrimoniall, that is to say, may pass in the right
of succession and enheritance, and so be holden and possessed of Women: then is
the Question clearly euicted, that a Woman may be a public governor.

Magistracy patrimoniall.
Which being granted it is not the greatness or smalnesse nor the quality of
superiority, nor yet the supremacy, any more than the inferiority, yt can be a
sufficient debar unto them. But if any thing be, it must be the nature it
self of public government, or else, if she may have the jurisdiction of a
Duchy, Earldom or Barony, she may have it of a kingdom also. Yea, and in my
judgment, against his judgment, she may have the higher dignities much better
than the inferior dignities: because the higher, require the less personal
exercise of those functions and actions that the inferior dignities and offices
do require. And therefore where he says:

But nevertheless these jurisdictions neither can neither ought to be
exercised of the same women. Danaeus.


I gladly grant hereunto, for some of these jurisdictions, and for the
ordinary exercise of them. Bridges.
But this also is against Danaeus himself. For if in these inferior
dignities, the jurisdictions may be exercised by another, and yet they may be
held and possessed, and that by patrimony, as well of women as of men: Danaeus
ouerturnes al his own arguments.
then what lets, but that it may be so, and that much more easily, in the
supreme government of a kingdom? And withal, this answers all Caenalis and
Danaeus former arguments, that a woman can not govern an army, nor sit in
public judgment, nor can do those things that belong to men. May not these
things be done in Dukedomes, Earledomes, and Baronies, so well as in kingdoms?
and if they hinder not a woman's possession of the one: why hinder they her
possession of the other? but here again Danaeus grows into a misliking, and
says:

Danaeus.
Although this be utterly evil, and most naughtily received any where, that
Jurisdiction should be any part of patrimony, and of our rent (or revenue) and
dominion. But so largely stretches and rages covetousness over all, that it
has made the things that are most holy, as is magistracy, to be
patrimoniall, and numbreth it in a rent, but attributes it not to the virtue
and doctrine of them, that are capable of the same functions.

Bridges.
This is a most dangerous conclusion that Danaeus here makes of this
matter. For by this rule, that Magistracy should not be patrimoniall, or that
it is utterly evil and naughtily any where received, that jurisdiction should
be any part of patrimony: This position touches too near the grounds of our
faith, besides the spoil of all princes and kingdoms
he quite condemns not only all the ancient birthright of the Patriarchs,
but also the prophecy of Jacob* Genesis 49. ver. 10. The scepter shall not be
taken from Judah, and a governor from his Loins, until he come with us to be
sent, and he shall be the expectation of the Gentiles. And was not this
promise renewed to David, 2. Sam. 7. ver. 12. And to Solomon 1. Reg. 9. verse. 5.
Which promises so continued, until their accomplishment in Jesus Christ, that
always either in the supreme jurisdiction of the kings, or at the least in
some jurisdiction, and that in matters capital pertaining to the Sanedrin, the
Tribe of Judah, the root of Iesse, the stock of David, and Solomon, or Nathan,
had patrimoniall jurisdiction. Yea, Very slanderous and dangerous speeches.
the high Priest and all the Priests add all the Levites in that time before
Christ, had also their jurisdictions patrimoniall. And therefore patrimoniall
jurisdiction is not a thing utterly naught any where, and brought in by the
rage of covetousness, for it was then brought in by God himself. And though
that sacrificing Priesthood be ceased in Christ, and the Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction of our ministry now be not patrimoniall: yet can we not so say
of the Civil magistracy. For though Christ be both the King and Priest, How
Christ^ kingdom was patrimonial
prefigured by both their estates: yet since he would not meddle with the
external civil state of the magistracy, in such real manner as he meddled with
the Ecclesiastical, wherein he both taught personally, and personally also
offered up himself, for a full and perfect sacrifice, to translate that
Priesthood, and to rest it for ever in his own person, and founded (in that
respect) a new ministry unto us: but in the civil dominion he would not
take upon him the kindome due to him, but all in spiritual manner, confessing
himself, though to be a King, yet that his kindome was not of this world:
therefore the civil jurisdiction of magistracy and dominion, being allowed
of God to be patrimoniall before, (though the Jews policy and civil
jurisdiction be extinguished,) remains entire throughout all Christendom,
and over all the world whersoeuer it be, in the same nature, for this respect
of patrimony, that it did before, as a matter that Christ neither translated,
altered, nor meddled withal.

These speeches therefore of Danaeus, are most dangerous speeches, and not
true. For hereby he utterly condemns all Princes titles of inheritance, as
well of men as of women. Yea, he clean contrarieth all, that his self
hereupon has said before, and almost even his own last words. Did he not
say, that inferior jurisdictions, such as are of Dukes, Earls, Barons,
Castellanes, are patrinomiall? And how then says he here, Danaeus still
confutes his own positions.
It is utterly naught wheresoever it be, that jurisdiction should be any part
of patrimony? May this serve (trow ye) for a sufficient excuse, to salve this
most perilous assertion, because that through covetousness, virtue and
learning is not always preferred? Where election is to be used, there (I
grant) virtue and learning is to be preferred. Yea, there oftentimes,
patrimony is of purpose excluded, although there be both sufficient virtue and
learning in the persons. The dangers of turning out patrimoniall magistracy
and bringing in election.
But that the jurisdiction of all magistracy and dominion should go by
election, and none by patrimony, would not only abrogate all that hitherto
both in the Scripture, and in all Realms Christian and Heathen, universally
have been approved for good, lawefull, expedient, and necessary: but would
call in question all estates: yea, it would turquise and set all the world
together by the ears. Hottoman


I know also what Calvin says on the 17. of Deuteronomy. upon this point. But in
reverence I forbear him, and rather construe his words (in the gentlest sense
I can) only unto such offices, as may or should still pass by election.
Nevertheless I wish, that those so excellent men had not measusured all states
by theirs, but remembered the old Proverb, Mayor est orbis vrbe: and that they
had used in those sr important matters, more circumspect and advised speeches.
For some of our Brethren (I think) on their credit (if I may not rather call
it credulity) and imitation of such notable men, have adventured further over
the shoes, than stands with the due obedience of Christian (specially
Protestant) subjects. Neither have the disobedient Papists herein the
advantage of us, we being so far from any of their accustomed rebellious
practices, that we suffer not so much as any of these incommodious speeches,
to have escaped any of our dearest brethren, howsoever otherwise in Christ we
honor them, and in the Gospel agree with them.

As for that Danaeus refers lastly us to see the Canon, Mulierem. 33 Quest.
5. of this argument: it suffices to refer him also, unto that we have already
seen, for the laws full resolution of the same.

Now although on this foresaid occasion, I have thus far withdrawn thee,
not unwilling I hope to follow me (gentle Reader) from our Brethrens Learned
discourse, upon the occasion of their citing Saint Paul, for the uncomeliness
that he reproved among the Corinthians. 1. Corinthians. 14.28. That Women should
preach in the Church: Whereupon, in perusing the judgment of these excellent
men, Calvin and Danaeus, they straight lead us from Women's oeconomicall or
domestical and matrimonial obedience, and government of man, to this question
of Women's public and civil government; which they impugn by these arguments
and contumelies aforesaid: following with Caenalis the French faction, against
the title and right of Women's government: which has carried me also into so
whole a Discourse, The Occasion of this digres^^on from women's government.
that I would gladly have here stayde the course thereof, with desire of
pardon, both of Danaeus, ( which is, GOD be praised, yet alive, and otherwise
an excellent ornament in Gods church) that I have thus opposed my self against
his opinion, for the danger of letting these things go clear away
vnaunswered (which I marvel hitherto none has looked unto) and therefore I
thought it not amiss, thus by the way, to satisfy the scrupulous Reader
somewhat in this point, and hope of the easier pardon for this long digression,
though not impertinent, but much important: yet now, being even ready to
return to our Brethrens Learned discourse: see how another couple (though an
uneven pair) of famous writers as were before, Caenalis and Danaeus: so now
Bodinus and Hotomannus, the one (whatsoever the other is) professing the
Gospel, but both, excellently learned and of great estimation, Bodinus.
Hottomannus and Bodi nus against women's government.
are a-freshe come forth, and renew this question of Women's government: I am
therefore for the closing up of this matter, to crave even a little further
patience of the reader, to give but one turn more to either of them, for the
short hearing of a few their chiefest arguments, and then with all my heart
again have with our Brethren.

Hottomannus in his 19 Chap. of his Franco gallia, makes modestly and wisely
before hand, his open protestation, saying: Primum autem, etc. But first we
will have that to be openly testified, that we dispute not of the ordinances
of the Romans, nor of the right of other Nations, but alonely of our Franco
gallia. Hottomannus in Franco gallia, cap. 19.
And he touches there but the women's procuration of that Kingdom in the name
and right of their sons or husbands, and though he pry more narowlie into
their faults, or lay such faults unto them as they deserved not, by the
testimony of other Chroniclers: yet we have the less to regard those quarrels,
having seen enough already even in France, for the confirmation of our
principal question. And if he start out of the bounds of his Franco gallia,
he is to be reclaimed to his own protestation.

As for Bodinus, is a great deal more blame worthy, that writing in general
of the common weal, Bodinus de Repub. li. 6. cap. 5.
not only utterly excludes Women's government, but loadeth it after Caenalis
and the French manner, with heaps of untrue reports and cholerik speeches.
Who notwithstanding, having ben here in England, and with whom my self I have
conferred, and he with his eyes has beholden the excellency of her Majesty's
government, and in admiration confessed the same, yea, he has been vouchsafed
her Majesty's nearer access and gracious conference: and yet see the
unthankfulness of the man, shall I say for the indignity of the fact, of a
man otherwise so learned (yet in his other works not without great escapes) Ad
vomitum canis, How much Bodinus is blame worthy.
et sus lota ad volutabrum? He has since contrary to his certified
conscience, and (as some say) to his solemn promise, not only renewed but
amplified and aggrauated his former follies. And where they were half hid
before among his French, he has now translated them into Latin, as by a
tongue universally more known, to deface the government of women in all
nations, but alack poor, vainglorious and intemperate man, in the judgment
of all godly wise, he procures but his own blemish. And yet, to give him
where he is praise worthy, his one praise, How much Bodinus is worthy praise.
before he enter into this question, even in the same Treatise, libro. 6. de
Rep. capitulo. 5. concerning a Princes right of inheritance against election.
And in discoursing the dangers of the states, that are governed by elected
Princes, I must needs confess, that he has many singular and worthy
observations, and deserves no small praise and commendations.

Bodinus arguments.
But when he comes page 738. to women's government, the foresaid French toie*
in the old jealousy of the English title, straight takes him in the head, and
caries him quite beyond all Gods forboad, further than any of his Countrymen,
and more fondly.

And first he makes a boistious beginning, Hoc amplius oportet ab imperiij
maiestate quam longissime foeminas arcere: est enim Gynaecocratia naturae
legibus inimica, etc.

Bodinus.
Moreover this, we must drive women furthest off from the majesty of Empire (or
government) for the government of women is an enemy unto the laws of nature,
which has given prudence, strength, magnanimity, force of governing unto men*
from women has she bereft the^.

Bridges
How untrue this ground is, we have heard before at large, albeit we have not
here to consider simply, the course and force of nature uncorrected, which is
vicious and defective in all men: Nature unreformed, and reformed.
but when nature is with grace reformed and strengthened, in such persons as God
aduanceth. Or if not, yet the defects of nature are no good bar against right
of inheritance by Gods law. Or else, the inheritance also of many a man
Prince, might be likewise debarred.

Bodinus.
But Bodinus said before, page. 728. Nec tamen satis est successione regnum
dari, nisi proxim^ cuique tribuatur, etc. Neither only is it enough, that the
kingdom should be guien by succession: except it be given to any which is
the nearest, that is, to the first begotten male: for so, not only the order
of nature and of Gods law, but also of all nations every where requires.

Bridges.
This is most true, if in want of the male issue, the female be not excluded,
for this is neither the law of God, nor the law of nature, to exclude the
parents natural issue legitimate, from the parents possessions, nor the law
nor practice (to which Bodinus appealeth) of all nations: but a peculiar devise
of France contrary to all these Laws. But when such devises take place
against the right of succession due by Gods law, the law of nature, and the
law of all nations: See how Bodinus confuteth himself even by his own
examples, Bodinus examples confute himself
page. 729. Nam quoties naturae ius illud inter principes violari contigit,
etc. For so often as that law of nature shall happen to be violated among
Princes, most grievous wars (such as we read there were, Bodinus.
among the posterities of the progeny of the Ottomans) and most lamentable
murders of their kindred did ensue: as when Amulius the younger brother, gate
the kingdom of Albania from Numitor, and Aristobulus gate the kingdom of the
Jews from Hyrcanus. For the civil war; could ever find an end, until by
the sentence of Pompey the great* the kingdom was restored to Hyrcanus:
notwithstanding Aristobulus seemed to be borne for government, and the other
unfit thereto. Which reason has oftentimes eaused the parents themselves to
disturb the rights of their children.. Bodinus.
For when Ptolomeus the son of Lagus, breaking the law of Nations, gave the
kingdom of Egypt to the younger: Ptolomeus Lagi filius.
he caused the laws of nature to be violated, by the one brothers murdering
of the other. Ptolmeus Phisco offended in the same error. Who (being induced
by the persuasion of his wife) preferred the younger before the elder. But when
the Father was dead, the people expelled the younger, and restored the Scepters
to the elder. Anaxandrides also, Anaxa^drides
the king of the Lacaedemonians, took the kingdom away from Cleomenus his
eldest son, that the younger might reign, not without great grief of the
people, because that (under the show of virtue) the laws of nations were
broken, as Herodotus writes. And although Pyrrhus had appointed the most
valiant of his sons to be the king to come: Pyrrhus.
the people for all that preferred the eldest, which was more unmeet for the
war. For, neither the virtues of the body or of the mind ought to be so
esteemed, that for them we should swerve from the common Law of all nations.

Thus writes Bodinus, and more at large. Yea, adding this withal, The l^we of
nations ought not to be broken for the virtues or defects of the mind or body.
page. 730. Nec tantum propter ignauiam et inertiam primogenitus ab imperio non
est repellendus, sed nec propter corporis deformitatem quiaem. Neither only
ought the eldest to be repulsed from the government, for his slothfulness and
dullness: no, nor yet for the very deformity (or misshapennesse) of his
body. Albeit by the laws of Romulus and Lycurgus, it were lawful to kill the
monstrous births: notwithstanding, the Law of God suffers not the
prerogative of the first borne, to be taken away by any deformity of the
body. Which thing the Senate and people of Hungary adjudged, in an example
worthy memory. For when Ladislaus was childlesse, he adopted Almus his
brothers younger son, refusing Coloman whom he commanded to be entered into
holy orders, and to be sent (as it were banished) unto Parise, Colomans
deformity.
to take from him all desire of affecting the kingdom. For all over the whole
state of his body he was deformed, a stammerer a buzzard, a limper, a crook
back. Nevertheless when the king was dead, the Cities and the people had
rather call that monster to the government, than suffer the government of the
younger, and by their Ambassadors obtained of the Bishop of Rome, that he
might be disgraded of his orders, sent home, and marie a wife. And no otherwise
did Agesilaus, being a lame dwarf get the kingdom of the Lacaedemonians
(expelling the bastard Leotichis) his adversaries in vain complaining, that
they had a halting Kingdom.

If now these reasons of Bodinus do hold in the weakness of such men, do
they not hold in the weakness of a Woman? Bridges.
And then how much less debar is the only weakness of her sex, when the
Woman besides the right of her tile) excels, Bodinus argument.
not only in all due proportion and natural gifts of body: but much more,
in all heroical ( at least, in all requisite and princely) virtues of the
mind: and perhaps, excels most men Princes, yea, few men at all therein
comparable?

^^dinus.
But Bodinus goes further, At etiam diuina lex, etc. But the law of God also
has not only bereft them the government of the common weal, Bodinus argument
from Gods law.
but also the government of the family. When as expressly it subdueth women
under the government of their husbands. And heereto he qu^teth Genesis 2.

We have sufficiently and at large answered already unto Caenalis and Danaeus
for this point, Bridges
concerning the difference of the oeconomicall and policall governments. The
difference of the oeconomicall and political government.
The law of God speaks expreslie of the oeconomicall government of the
husband. And yet even in the oeconomical government, if the woman be a virgin,
having no parents, or a widow: may she not then be chief Lady, mistress, and
governor of her own householde goods, and of all the persons in that her
family: but that another must be her governor in the same? And yet, there are
many things in a family, and in the laws and administration of an householde,
that she in her own person is as unfit, and perhaps as unable, to do or
exercise, as in a common weal, nevertheless this lets not by Gods law,
but that she not having any husband, is the chief governor of her
householde.

But for the common weal, Bodinus adds: Bodinus.


And almighty God so often as he testifies, that he will most sharply
revenge himself on the enemies of his name: Bodinus argument for GODS plagues.
he threatens that they shall be subject to the governments and laws of
women, as though that were the most extreme of all evils and calamities.

Bodinus being no great nor sound divine, may the more be borne with, in
misquoting the Chapter, Bridges
and perchance that is not his default: but his misreporting of the holy
Scripture, is in him less excusable. In the 8. of Esaie God indeed threatens
curses, Bodinus double mistaking.
and most dreadful revenge on the enemies of his name: but no such curse of
women's government* but a curse of the government of such as were men. If he
mean the third Chapter of Esaie, we have answered the same unto Danaeus, and
the same answer may serve him, though no Protestant. Yea, I think, that when
he came into England, he wished in his heart (if he loved his Country) that
France were cursed no worse of God, under their king: than England ( God be
praised for it) is under our Queen. The Prophet speaks indeed not of any
curse, threate, or plague of God to come to the state by heroical women: but
by effeminate men. Yea, he that promised that curse: promised (and that by the
same Prophet) this blessing: And Queens shall be thy Nurses. It were better for
that state of Gods Church in France, if they felt the comfort of this blessing.

Moreover ( says he) the Roman laws have withdrawn women far off from all
civil offices and public functions, Bodinus.
Bodinus argument from the Roman laws, and the reason thereof.
not only for that they want prudence (as Martian thought, when among all
women, he said only Pallas wanted a mother, being begotten of Jupiters
brain, that it might be understood wisdom could not follow from women) but
also that men's functions, are contrary to the sex and shamefastness of women.

If Bodinus had any shame, or grace, or truth, or wisdom, or wit, but so
mean as might beseem such a man, Bridges.
he would never have let these words escape him. Does he think to play out
the matter thus with this vnfauourie jest that Minerua had no mother, of whom
for her wisdom the Poets fained that she sprung out of Jupiters brains? Was
not Bodiuus brainlesse: or had he more brains than wit, when he wrote this?
What Martian iested (whether he mean Martian the Emperor, or Martianus
Mineus, or Martianus Rota) is to little purpose. If Martianus the Emperor had
not found that the Empress and virgin Pulcheria had had both wit, wisdom,
and prudence in government of the Empire, he had not come to the government of
it.

Have not diverse women both Queens and subjects excelled in prudence? If
Bodinus did not leauer delight to allege Poets than Scripture, he should
have found many commended for their great wisdom and prudence, far passing
Pallas. If the Poets also did not rather give us to understand, in the person
of Pallas, that not only in man, but also in woman, wisdom and prudence,
namely of government in peace and war, was the only and special gift of
God, coming not by the parents, father or mother, but that God of his mere
influence, The excellency of diverse women in pr^dence.
inspired this gift of prudent government not only to man, but unto woman,
even as he pleased, and as we read the examples, and find the present
experience in our Pallas, such another indeed, as France could never show the
like, and therefore Bodinus brains did less conceive it.

As for that he says of the Roman laws, and the practice of their estates,
we have very sufficiently enough seen the quite contrary. And have
likewise discharged that shifte, that for Women to deal in men's functions, is
contrary to their sex and shamefastness. The publik supreme government of a
kingdom is no such peculiar function of a man, but that it is competible both
to man and woman, and the calling and gift of God, in which estate, they
(whosoever) represent God and his power: in regard whereof, neither person nor
sex of male or female is respected, as we have seen, not by Poettes
fictions, but by clear testimonies and examples of the Scripture. And yet,
even Poets recommende unto us some wise women for their government, besides
Pallas.

But here Bodinus coming to examples, tells how nothing troubled the Roman
Senate more, Bodinus.
than that the Emperor Heliogabalus brought his mother into the Senate,
Bodinus argument a minore ad maius, and his examples.
not to give her sentence, but to behold that most holy assembly of the
City. Which also ( says he) seemed new unto our ancestors, when Mawd the
Countess of Arthoise was present, while the Council judged Robert Arthoise
his cause. But, if it seem absurd and ridiculous for women to intermeddle in
the functions and assemblies of men: much more absurd ought it to seem, that
those things which appertain to the majesty of the government. should be
laid open to the lust of women: but most absurd to bear the Scepters.

If Bodinus would tell the truth, I think he would say, that the Senate of
Rome, Bridges
although at that time (God wot) not very holy, was a little more troubled
with the presence of that effeminate and monstrous Emperor, and with his most
dissolute government: than with his mothers only coming into the Senate
house, and there, so much as but looking on them. If neither she nor he had
attempted far worse things than that, neither the Senate nor the state had
been much troubled or hurt by them. Moesia both the graundmother of him, and
of Alexander Seuerus, and Mammea, Alexanders mother, did more than thus in the
state of government, and that without offense unto the Senate, or detriment
unto the state. But whatsoever they did, have we not heard of many far
better examples, than that wicked mother of the monstrous Heliogabalus? As of
Debora, sitting in iudgemen: of Judith, making her oration before all the
assembly of the Elders and people: and of diverse others. Does Bodinus come in
with such an outcrie and amazement, Moses, David, Salomo^ and other Princes,
permitted women in the assembly of judgments
at the only coming of a woman into an assembly, and but beholding, or
hearing of the Judges? Neither Moses in his sitting in judgment, nor Solomon
in all his roialtie, was ever so dainty: but that even women also might look
upon them, yea and private Women come themselves, and plead their rightes
before them, and hear their inditements. But it was news in France, to see a
woman but to come into the place only, and standing by in silence to hear,
how a matter was adjudged. If Bodinus would look better on his own Countries
old Chronicles, or but consider those that we have noted, it would not seem
so new a matter. But whatsoever that Mawde made there: our own Country has a
better example, of a more noble Mawde the Empress, and that had no small
roialties in France too, besides many other far more excellent women, that
have spoken many notable public speeches, both with the praise of God and man,
and to the benefit of the Church and common weal. So that, it is no such
absurd nor ridiculous thing, for such women as have just cause, to be in open
assembly. Neither is this any lapping of themselves in men's peculiar function.
And therefore, for any thing in this argument, which Bodinus on these examples
draws, a minore ad maius: Women may govern well enough, and bear the royal
Scepter, that God puts into their hands. Not, that the things which
appertain to the Majesty of government should be laid open to women's lust: nor
to men's lust neither; but not to be locked up from their right. These are but
ouerlustie speeches for so grave a man and so weighty a matter, but more
unseemly for godly Princes Majesty's.

Hereupon he frames a Dilemma. Bodinus his Dilemma.
For first ( says he) there is one of these two. Either the woman shall be
joined in marriage, or else she shall govern by her self. If she marie: yet
notwithstanding it is women's government: because she marieth with that law,
that the rightes of the Majesty and government may remain together, but not
to her husband. For that expressly was excepted, when Isabel Queen of Castile
was married to Ferdinand king of Aragon. And the same again was called upon, in
the marriage of Philip Prince of Spain, and Mary Queen of England. Which also
was provided for, in the marriage couenaunts of Sigismund the Emperor of the
Germans, and Marie Queen of Hungary, whom her subjects called King Marie.
Which laws were made with most unequal conditions, since that the husband,
which by the law of nature is the head of the family, and has the government
domestical, is compelled publikly to the woman's government, because the
government domestical has nothing common, with the government public. And
hereto he quoteth the civil Law, L. nam quam attinet ad Trebell.

And can Bodinus see this manifest difference: and not see withal, how he
fully answers his Dilemma? Bridges
But we have seen this also sufficiently answered before, both in the examples
of Debora, and the queen of the South, and diverse others. As for the covenants
in these marriages, were very good and necessary for both estates, and nothing
dishonorable to the husbands. No, not that term of the Queen of Hungary,
that was called king: if we understand it as our Lawiers do, that, be the
person reigning, man or woman, yet the law for the dignity of the sex, still
acknowledges all as king. And as the Scripture contains Eve in the name of
Adam, and women and children often, in the general name of man. And this does
Bodinus own example that he alleges hereunto, confirm. Bodinus example of
Fabius Maximus and his son.


For ( says he) when Fabius Maximus, which was called Cunctator, the delaier,
riding on horsback, approached near his son being Consul: he was of him
commanded to alight; when as (the father) might by his fatherly authority have
killed him, indicta causa, without hearing the cause.

Now unadvisedly of so famous a lawier, Bridges.
and learned historian was this spoken? Could Fabius Maximus at that time
being but sent as a Legate unto his son, The civil law mis aleaged by
Bodinus.
then Consul, and chief magistrate of the common weal, have put him the
chief magistrate to death, and that without his cause heard? Or was the law
that he quoteth, In suis de liberis et posthu (which is long since abolished
and of no force) to be understood so absolutely and in general, that it
admitted no exposition, no, not of the public and chief magistrate? Yea
rather, is not the chief magistrate ( in a higher tha^ the natural and private
respect) the Father of the Country and common weal, and so, of every
particular person or private Father? Which thing Fabius Maximus did well
consider, that his son Fabius Gurges did represent in his magistracy and
political fatherhood, an higher estate and majesty, than for that time his
natural fatherhood could compare unto. And therefore he alighted forthwith, as
he was commanded, and obeieth his magistrate, not his son, and rejoices in his
sons doing, that he could thus wisely discern between the states. Which
example (with others in the Scripture, of Jacob and Joseph: of Solomon and
Bethsabee, clearly confuteth Bodinus dilemma, and euicteth all the cause. For,
if this be no blemish to the Father to obey his sons commandment and public
authority, not in respect he is his natural son, but his civil father, nor
any absurdity or inequality in the son, to overrule and command his
Father, not as his private Father, but as his politic subject: ( for the
proportions of this rule and obedience, are not here Arithmeticall, but
Geometrical, and the justice of the^ distributive, not co^mutatiue:) how is
not this absurdity of Bodinus, and these unequal laws ( as he supposes)
clearly answered: when the woman obeieth her husband as her husband, and yet,
the husband obeieth the wife as his prince as we have seen before in the
example of Debora and her husband, not he, but she being judge of the people,
and so, in that regard, his judge also: without any inequality or absurdity.
Yea, much more easy may this be in the state of man and wife, than in the
state betwixt the Father and the son: the son owing far more obedience to
his Father, and the Father having more authority over the son, as his son:
tha^ the husband has authority over the wife, or the obedience that the wife
owes to her husband. But since these authorities ( as Bodinus cannot choose
but confess) are so distinguished, that the one has nothing common with the
other, the public with the domestical, the natural with the civil: this
justice that gives in each proportion Singula singulis, will never confound
these things, nor bereue any party, son or wife, of their honor in the
one, for their service in the other, but let both stand intier in their states.

The other part of Bodinus dilemma, if the Queen marry not: because it is
nothing but an heap of contumelies against womenkind, Vasthi.
with more impotent inuectiues tha^ we have had before in Caenalis: both for
the honor and shamefastnes of the sex, and for the very shame of so learned a
man's forgetgetting himself, I pass it over as a fallation ab accidente, as was
the other part of the argument. The examples of Vasthies arrogancy and
disobedience is nothing pertine^t. The sovereignty of the kingdom was not in
the right of her, but of her husband, and so, in all respects she ought
obedience. As for the examples of Ioane Queen of Naples, Athalia, Cleopatra,
Zenobia, Irene, etc. We have already heard of many better, and have seen also
what is to be said, of the most and worst of these women. But he ought not,
for more odiousness to slander any, as that Cleopatra (to reign alone) slew
her brother: so many credible stories testifieng the contrary.

These are the best of the arguments that be makes. For all the other, (save
that which he has of the Salik law) are not arguments: but his overmuch
intermedling in matters of estate. As for the urging of the Salike law, we
have seen before many better confutations of it, than he alleges any
confirmations. First, after he has set down the words of the law it self: De
terra vero Salica nulla portio Haereditatis Mulieri veniat, Bodinus argument of
the Salike law.
sed ad virilem sexum tota tertae Haereditas perueniat: to prove this law,
page. 745. he says. At etiam Childeberti, etc. But also by the edict of
Childebert king of the French, the which is comprehended in the Salik laws,
wherein the nephues are called to the succession of the grandfathers, The Salike
law.
the women are removed a far off.

How does not this devise bewray it self, eue^ as the ass in the lions skin,
by his over long ears? save that this forgerie, by his ouershort reckoning of
Childeberts time, she weth that these Salik laws are nothing so ancient as
they pretend? For if this Edict of Childebert be comprehended in the Salike
laws, and the Salike laws were made by Pharamund. Bridges
Here is not ye nephue succeding the grandfather, but rather the grandfather
succeding the nephues nephue. If not the great grandlie, father to these Salike
laws, intruding it self to exclude women's government.

But to fortify this better, says Bodinus. And verily if there were no Salike
law, when as for the tipe of the government, there was strife between Philip
earl of Valois and king Edward: and Philip maintained the Salik law: Lege
Voconia, by the law of Voconius: but Edward maintained the protection of his
cause by the hereditarie laws of the Romans: a decree was made by the consent
of all the Fathers and Princes, Bodinus.
that no man in that disputation, should use the authority of forain laws: but
that every man should study to interpret the Salike law for his right. To what
purpose should they so do, if there had been no Salike law?

What kind of reason shall we call this? Might not Philip and his associates
feign such a law? or might they not wreast it, Bridges.
or misconster it if there had been any such an one? Or might it not have been
as well antiquated and altered, as long before that time Voconius law was? For
if Voconius Law had at that time stood in force, how could King Edward have
pleaded his right from the Hereditarie laws of the Romans? Was not Voconius
and his law Roman? But such broken stuff as Voconius law, was good plea for
Philips broken title, and for the Salike laws defense. As for king Edwards plea
from the Roman hereditarie laws the^ in force, shows that the Roman laws
were not against women's titles. And that they were in force also even in France,
which was a good plea. Albeit King Edward pleaded higher, even from the law of
nations, and from the written law of God.

Yea, but (faith Bodinus) when Philip made a decree with the consent of all the
Fathers and Princes, The foul practices of Philip for the upholding of the
Salike law.
that none should use in this disputation the authority of foraine laws: but
every one study to interpret the Salike law for his right: why would they so
have done, if there had been no Salike law? This is a proper proof of the
autentike force and truth of the Salike law, and praise of their upright laws,
that they set out, to uphold their Salike law withal When Philip saw that
king Edward pleaded the law of God, the law of Nations, and the civil law of
the Romans, which law stood then forcible even in France: by and by he forbad
such pleas, and calls them all foraine laws. So that, for this Salike law,
the French nation renounceth the law of all nations, yea, makes Gods law a
foraine law, to bring in this Heathen Salike law. Was not this Philip a most
Christian king that made this decree? And why the^ used he Voconius law? was
not this forain? But in forbidding al foreine laws, did he not forbid the
Salike law withal? Which was a law ( if there were any sueh) of the old
Francons, and at that time (as yet now, and long before) of the germans,
bordering on the river Sala, and not near any part of Gallia. He forbids
al men to use any so much as disputation, in these other laws yt were not
foreign. Where learned he this example? of them that forbad the Disciples to
speak any more in Christ's name? But Philip goes further, charging not only
to use only ye Salike law, but to study also how to interpret it for his
right. What meant he by that would he have them study to hale and writhe with
their misconstructions, the interpretation of the law for his purpose? What a
foul practice was that, and indeed if we confer this with their own
Chronicles, we have heard, how (when he could not stop their mouths thus, that
among the French defended king Edwards title) he put them to death.

Yea, but (says Bodinus) could they have done this, had there been no Salike
law. Bodinus his sorry conclusion of the Salike law.
And is this then Bodinus his best conclusion? God wot, this is but a sorry
conclusion to prove the truth of this law, or the force of it: when Philip was
feign with such unlawful laws, yea, with death it self to restrain the^ that
called the credit thereof in question. But I would learn, what Philip meant by
this law, that they should study to interpret the Salik law for his right? Does
this law the^ admit diverse interpretations, and yt such interpretations, yt it
may be interpreted otherwise tha^ Philip commanded the^ to study how they
might interpret it for his title? Hottoman.
Hottoman confuting the great error of the French historiographers and lawyers
in misinterpreting the Salike law.
And that they must be fain to study out such an interpretation of the law?
Yea verily. For if we shall read Hottomans Francogallia, cap. 8. ( although
he also be against women's government.) He shows, how greatly both the
Hystoriographers and also the Lawiers have erred: Insomuch ( says he) that
almost the error has mede the law. To the confutation whereof, after he has
showed, of the second kingdom of the Francons, the one in Gallia, now called
France, the other beyond the Rhene. at the river of Sala, from whence those
Francons were called Salij, or Salikes, whose both kingdom and name is now
well near worn out of use: he tells of their four peers and Indges,
Wisogast, Arbogast, Salogast, Windogast, and that from this Salogast, they
say, that the law was found, which of him even to this day is called Salike,
of his name, whereby their error may be reproved that name the Law Salike of
Salt, that is, prudence: or that think the word Gallica to be corrupted (into
Salica) then the which, nothing can be spoken more absurd. But far greater
errors have sprung out of the same fountain. First that by those authors it
was believed, that the Salike law did appertain to the publik right of a
City and Empire (or government) of the hereditarie succession of a kingdom.
For the Tables of the Salike law were found and brought forth to light not many
years hence. By the inscription of which it is known, that they were first
written and set out about the age of Pharamund. The very words of the Salike
law.
But in those there is extant this one Chapter. Title. 62. No portion of the
inheritance of the Salike land passes to a woman, but this the man's sex does
obtain, that is, the sons succeed in the same inheritance. But where among
the nephues and their children, after long time contention is raised De allode
terrae, of the ownship (or right) of the land: Non per stirpes, sed per capita
diuidatur. Let it be divided not by the stocks for issues, but by the polles.
The like Law is extant apud Ripnaries. Tit. 58. and also apud Angli^s. Tit. 7.
Where it is so far off from that that it was ordained of the inheritances of
kingdo^es, that those laws appertain not so much to the successions of Feudorum
fees, but only of Allodioru^.
ownships, (or the things that are ones own) although indeed a dowry was
assigned unto the woman out of those ownships. Thus says Hottoman of this
Salike law, whereof the French err so foulie, and make such a boasting. As
for that he adds, Howsoever it be, first this is evident, that although there
be extant neither any Chapter of the law Salike nor yet of the French law by
which women are put back from the inheritance of the kingdom: A weak hold
and often interrupted.
notwithstanding the institutions and manners of the nation, kept with such a
consent of ages, hold the force of a law written. This is vltimum refugium,
and the strongest string that Hottoman, ( when all is done) can find to uphold
all that controversy withal. ^ut since that string has been so often cracked
(as we have seen already) by the French own Chronicles:) both Hottoman and
Bodinus may be now dismissed in good peace for that matter, and likewise
Danaeus, with all due reverence. By whole and Caluines Questions about women's
government, we have discoursed out thus far from our Brethrens Learned
discourse, upon occasion to answer our Brethren, The reason why, leuing the
learned discourse, I have discoursed thus far on this matter.
for that they note, of S. Paul's reproving the uncomely disorder, of women's
speaking in the Church of the Corinthians. By the which, searching after my
plain and ordinary manner, what Calvin, Beza, and Danaeus said on this
matter: and at the first chop, meeting with such their foresaid arguments, I
thought it very necessary, albeit Impar congressus Achilli Troilus, yet thus
far forth to oppose my self, even to so famous men in these matters. Which I
have the rather hazarded my self, unto, only least any scruples of these
inuectiues against Women's government, might stick in any of our Brethr.
minds, by mistaking the Apostles words, through overmuch credit of these most
famous writers, I mean, specially Calvin, Beza, and Danaeus. If our Brethren
shall say, that all this was the more needless, since they which make this
Learned discourse, do acknowledge her Majesty's public and supreme
government in the Church of England. Would God they did so, as they ought to
do. Then indeed we should not need these questions, but join together in all
dutiful obedience under God, to her Majesty's laws in these matters. But, to
our grief we see, yea, to our shame, all the world cries out thereon, it is not
so. It is but nice daliance. We grant a form of words (as we saw both in
Calvin a Danaeus) and we impugn the matter. Nowbeit, because to our greater
grief, we shall yet see this more and more, throughout all this Learned
Discourse: Let us now return, and hear agains our Brethren the Learned
Discourses.

The argument of the 10. Book.
THe 10. Book concerning the Ceremonies of our Church, for the fruitfulness,
use, and urging of them. Wether confirmation of children by the Bishop, and the
churching or solemn thanksgiving of women after childbirth be utterly to be
rejected. Whether the dead should be buried without any ceremony, form of
service, or sermon, or presence of the Pastor, etc. For hot contentions in
small matters, and of a true pastors duty about the Churches constitutions. Of
the Pastors authority in common with the elders. Of the power of order and
jurisdiction. Of Timothies authority, and of the governing Elders authority.
How unnecessary and dangerous to the state and magistrates, the erecting of
these supposed Seniors would be. Of the removing all usurped authority. What
kind of mastership and office of being greatest Christ allowed: and of
tyrannizing in the Church. Whether all the rules of government and policy be
set down and prescribed in Gods word, as the dostrine of faith, and precepts
of moral life are. Whether a Bishop have any separate authority from others,
or the Apostles had any such authority, and whether Paul delivered any such
to Timothy. Whether his rules to Timothy be general rules to all Bishops of
their authority and manner of ordaining Ministers, and judging of them. Of
Paul and Barnabas elections and ordeinings. Whether separate authority infer
sole and absolute Monarchical authority. What regiment Christ left to his
church, and of his sentence Matthew. 18. ver. 15. for the consent of the
household servants, and whether we should consent unto our Breath. or our
brethren to us, in these ceremonies. Whether all that consent have authority
and that equal. Of the difference of the churches, and of the Persons
authorities in them.

Ceremonies
The learned disc. page 72.
BY which it is evident that Saint Paul's words are wreasted of some, clean
contrary to his meaning, to make him a patron of idle, if not hurtful
ceremonies, maintained more upon will than reason, or granted* of Gods word,
under the color of order and decency, not only with neglect, but also with
great hinderance of Gods building, by spoiling the Church of so many learned
pastors.

TO apply Saint Paul's sentence, Let all things be done according to order,
We use no wresting of the Apostles words.
to the patronage of hurtful or of idle ceremonies; I grant, were an evident
wreasting of his words. But this would be proved, and not said only, that we
so do. Wlee have seen and proved too evidently, how our Brethren are
ouerbolde to wreast Saint Paul's words, otherwise than either he spoke or
meant. As for us, we maintain no idle Ceremonies, We have no maintenance of
idle and hurtful ceremonies.
and much less hurtful. If any such shall be showed, we are as ready as any
our Brethren in all humble and dutiful manner, to desire the abolishing of
them. But we hope all suth are by law and order already removed. Would God
our Br. would remember by whose endeavor they are taken away, and in
thankfulness be contented. For what ceremonies can they prove, are by any
authority commanded to be used, that are idle and hurtful? Have we any at
al, exeept those that either God himself has prescribed, or we have ground
and grant of the lawful use of them, out of Gods word? or that, being of
their nature mere indifferent, have as mech reason as will for them to be
used, not under the color, but in very deed, only for order and decency,
and so consequently for edification, and not otherwise. And may not
indifferent ceremonies be so used? And both the Ministers and the people, so
far forth be bound without scruple of conscience, What cermonies, and how we
use them
and matter of Religion, but only for obedience sake, as matters of decent
comeliness, and the edification of quiet order, to use them: and yet never
(under the color of prejudice to the liberty of Christianity) to disturb
the peace of the Church, the course of the Gospel, the obedience of the
Prince, for the resisting of them? Verily, if any hereby do hinder the
building of Gods Church: our brethren herein have to take great heed, that
make so great, and so vnnessarie troubles in the Church, for these Ceremonies,
with great hinderance of Gods building. As for our parts, if any such
Ceremonies as these, indifferent in their own nature (save that by order they
be appointed) were also removed: we doat not on them, but could well enough
be content, so that by order and law they were removed, and some other as
comely and decent ceremonies, by her Majesty's authority, and by our whole
Churches consent, were orderly ordained in their places. But thus (...)
disorderly to take these away, and that with such reproaches, Confirmation.
both of these ceremonies and of all those that only in this manner, for
external order, and obedience sake, do admit the^ to leave it free to every
congregation, to cast all our ceremonies off, or to take what other new they
shall like better, and to alter them also as they list, either every man, or
every congregation, at their pleasure: or though they would ty themselves more
strictly to them. yet living al under one state, to innouate or abrogate any
authorized, with out the license and authority of that state: this were (me
thinks) not only an indecent and disorderly thing, and nothing furthering,
yea, greatly hindering the building of the church: but very dangerous both to
the higher powers and to the whole realm. And as for the hinderers of Gods
building, by spoiling the church of so many learned pastors: we know not any
church, or learned pastor therein, that need so to be spoiled, except that any,
more upon will than reason or learning ( be they otherwise never so well
learned) do wilfully withdraw themselves from doing their more important and
necessary duty, in yielding unto (though not necessary nor weighty ceremonies,
in their own nature: yet) so necessary and weighty in y^ manner as they are
ordained and prescribed: that at leastwise, they ought to tolerate them, for
fear of great dangers in these perilous days, (although they wished them
away) and not to spoil the Church of themselves, and of their ministry, nor to
make such troubles and divisions in the Church, for the remoouing of them.
Which is nothing according to the duty either of faithful ministers, or of
(...) subjects, as they ought to be, and (these controversies set aside) I
trust they are.

There are besides these things, certain other matters: The learned d^^c* Page
73.
as confirmation, churching of women, burial of the dead, thought to belong
to the office of a B. or pastor. Whereof the first two are mere devises of
men, and ought to have no place in the Church of Christ. The other, albeit it
be to be retained with a certain honesty, yet it is not to be tied to the
proper office of a pastor.

Here are now 3. other matters, confirmation of those yt are baptized,
Churching or public thanksgiving of women, Bridges*
after their deliverance from childbirth, and lastly the burial of the dead,
which our brethren find first this fault withal: that they should be thought
to belong to the office of a B. or Pastor. This goes very hard, that none of
all these things, Wh^th^r confirmation Churching of Wom^n and (...) may be
thought to belong to a Pas^or.
may not only not be tied to a B. or a Pastors office: but that they may not
be so much as thought to belong unto them. Their reason is, that the first two
are mere devises of men, and ought to have no place in the Church of Christ.
And is confirmation to be thus symplie condemned, and that as a mere devise of
men? If they said, such confirmation; as the adversaries of the gospel used,
as, to make it a sacrament, or to tie it to necessity of salvation: or to use
it with any of the superstitious trinkets that they profaned it withal, or to
hold any of the errors that they maintained about it: then indeed this
speeches should have had good pretense. But we using none of all these things,
but such a reverend order, as in all points is agreeable to the manner of the
very Apostles: to understand in what sort the parties were baptized, to see
that the parties which were baptized ( because they are included in the
covenant, What confirmation we use and to what purpose.
that God would also be the God of our seed) should now being grown to
understanding, openly before that pastor, which has the superiority of
Episcopal dignity which we have proved, that from, and in the very Apostles
times, some pastor had, among and over some other his fellow pastors) declare
the sumine of their faith, and he especially lay his hands on them, and pray
for them, that God would more and more confirm them in that faith, in which
they were baptized and have professed: as the Apostles used to lay their hands,
and to pray for the confirmation of such, as by other pastors had bin baptized
and shall we call this order, a mere devise of men? and say, that it ought to
have no place in the Church of Christ? True it is, that at the so doing of the
Apostles, they received commonly withal the miraculous gifts of the holy
ghost, according to the dispensation of that time. Nevertheless, that was not
their only end: nor the order of laying on of hands upon them, which were to
be confirmed by him that was the foresaid (...), unto whom^ the superior
Episcopal dignity among the Pastors was committed, did so cease: but was
continued, both in the Apostles times, while any one of them James, Jude or
John were living without any contradiction of them: and so, simply was used,
according to the Apostles manner, til the other additions afterward, Chrysme.
as that of Chrisme, etc, were joined unto it. Which addition Chrisme, though
it be very ancient, yet we rejecting it as a mere devise herein of men, and
reducing confirmation to the first simplicity of prayer and to the ceremony
only of laying on of hands, especially by those that have the foresaid
episcopal superiority: why should our brethren here affirm, that it ought to
have no place in the Church of Christ?

But this so hard censure of theirs, neither agrees with those our Brethren of
the Germain and Saxon Churches: nor yet with Calvin in Geneua. Melancthon in
Analis. Locorum com. says, Confirmation among the ancients, Melancthon
was a trial of doctrine, in which they that were to be confirmed, did recite
the sum of the Christian doctrine. Whereunto was added public prayer for them.
But of the Apostles was added also, imposition of hands, which the manifest
gifts of the holy ghost followed. As for that popish confirmation, is
altogether a void and idle ceremony. Nevertheless in the mean time, it should
be profitable for the trial of doctrine, to be made with the public prayer
for them. Which certainly should not be in vain. Herbandus in compendio
theologia, following Melancthon, and writing of confirmation, says: What do
thou think of Confirmation? properly it is not a sacrament, But in the ancient
time it was a trial of the Doctrine, made in the Institution of Christian
religion, (as the Catechism is among us) in the which, they that were
Catechized, did render a reason of their faith, and did testify, that they
embraced this only religion, and to dissent from Ethniks and from heretics.
Which being publicly done of the B. the prayers of the Church were added, with
the imposition of hands. At which imposition, in the time of the Apostles, they
were manifestly endued with the holy ghost. As it is manifest in the Acts, the
19. chap. Afterward by success of time, when miracles ceased in the Church,
the ceremony of the Imposition of hands was nevertheless retained. Whereby
those that were baptized, were prepared to the Christian conflict, and by the
prayers of the Church and solemn blessing, were confirmed. But the age that
came after, thrust unto the Church a certain feigned confirmation for a
sacrament. etc. Thus writes also Herbandus of this matter.

He husius in examine theologico. loco. 18. de sacram. What think thou of
Confirmation? the answer. Confirmation is not a Sacrament. Heshufius.
For it is not an external action peculiarly commanded of God, neither is it
a seal of the promise of grace. The ancients searched the profiting of
Children in the doctrine of the Catechism, and those that were rightly
instituted, they admitted to the holy Communion. This is a laudable discipline
in the Church, if superstition be absent.

Kemnitius after he has confuted the Papists errors of Confirmation These
things ( says he) being thus unfolded, the examination of the canons of
confirmation shall be easy and plain. For, whereas that the first cannon
condemns such a confirmation as consists in a Catechism, and childrens
profession of the faith: it has this meaning and reason. Our men have often
showed that the rite of confirmation, (the traditions unprofitable,
superstitions and repugnant to the scripture being removed) both it may be used
godly and to the churches edification, according to the consent of the
scripture, after this manner: to wit, that they which are baptized in their
infancy (for such is now the state of the church) when they came to the years
of discretion, should be diligently instructed in a certain and simple
catechism of the churches doctrine: and when they seemed to hane meetely well
perceived the beginnings: they should afterward be presented to the Bishop
and to the church. And there hear the child that was baptized in his infancy,
which should first with a short a simple warning be admonished of his baptism:
to wit, that he was baptized: how and why: and into what he was baptized:
what the whole trinity gave and sealed up unto him in that baptism the
contract of peace, the covenant of grace: how the renouncing Satan the
profession of faith, the promise of obedience was there made. Secondly, the
child himself should before the Church declare, his own and the public
profession of this doctrine and faith. Thirdly, she should be asked of the
principal points of the Christian religion: he should answer to every one of
them: if he did not so well understand them, he should be better instructed.
Fourthly, he should be admonished, and this he should declare in his profession,
that he dissenteth from all heathen, heretical, phanaticall, and profane
opinions. Fifthly, a grave and serious exhortation out of the word of God,
should be added, that he should persevere in the covenant of baptism, and in
that doctrine and faith, and with often profiting be confirmed. Sixthly, a
public prayer should be made, for those children, that God with his holy
spirit would vouchsafe to govern, keep, and confirm them, in this
profession. To the which prayer, the laying on of hands may be adhibited
without superstition. Neither should that prayer be vain, for it relieth on
the promises of the gift of perseverance, and on the grace of confirmation.

Such a rite of confirmation shall bring with it very much profit, to the
edification of youth and of the whole Church. For it were agreeable both to the
Scripture, and to the more pure antiquity. For in the Apostles laying on of
their hands, that there was a trial of doctrine, and profession of faith, the
history, Acts. 19. manifestly does witness. Of the exhortation also unto
perseverance, of the confirming them by the word, in the doctrine and faith
which once they had received: the examples of the apostolical Church are
extant, Acts. 14.15. and 18. And that public prayer was adhibited, the
history witnesses, A and 8. Thus speaks the 7. Canon of the Council of
Laodicea and the 8. of the Council of Aries, concerning the trial and
profession of doctrine, and faith in confirmation as we have before noted. And
therefore the Canon of the Council of Orleaunce, requires a perfect age in
confirming. Neither agrees this evil hereunto, that Dionisius in the end of
his ecclesiastical Hierarchy, writes of the Master of the catechisinges,
when the children baptized in their infancy, were delivered to be instructed,
that they might with doctrine and exhortations betrayned up to perform and
keep the profession of the faith the renouncing of Satan and the promise of
the obedience of God made in their baptism. These things were proposed in the
conference at Ratispone in the year. 1541. And so he tells how Eccius in
the name of the papists did utterly and proudly reject all these things,
affirming that in confirmation the use of reason must not be tarried for.

Thus notably and at large, does Kemnitius also declare and approve, this good
order and rite of confirming children, and how contum^liously the Papists do
reject it. This therefore sauoreth nothing of popery, nor of any other error or
superstition but is Godly, reverend, and very beneficial to youths, and to the
whole Churches edification.

And what does Calvin in his Institutions, differ from these, concerning the
ancient custom of Confirmation? In the ancient time ( says he) this was the
manner, that the children of the Christians, Cap. 19. sect 4. de confir.
after they were grown up, were presented before the Bishop, to fulfill that
office (or duty) which was exacted of them, that being of ripe years, offered
themselves to baptism. For these sat among them that were catechized, until
such time as being orderly enstructed in the mysteries of the faith, they were
able to declare the confession of the faith, before the B. and the people.
Those infantes therefore which were initiated by baptism, because they had not
made confession of the faith before the church, at the end of their Childhood,
or in the entry of their springalship, were again presented of their Parents,
were examined of the Bishop, according to the form of a Catechism, which
they had then certain and common. But to the end that this action, which
otherwise ought worthily to have bin grave and holy, should have the more
reverence and dignity, the ceremony also of the imposition of hands was
adhibited. Thus was the child (his faith being approved) dismissed with a
solemn blessing. The ancients do often make mention of this manner. Pope Leo
says: if any return from Heretics, let him not be baptized again: but for
that which wanted unto him, let the virtue of the spirit be conferred unto
him, by the Bishops imposition of hands. Here our adversaries will cry, that it
may be rightly called a sacrament, Epist. 3^.
wherein the holy ghost is conferred. But Leo himself otherwhere expounds
what he means by these words. He that is baprised (says he) among
heretics, let him not be rebaptized, but by the invocation of the holy Ghost,
let him by imposition of hands be confirmed: because he received only the
form of baptism, without the sanctification. Epist. 77.
And Hierome against the Luciferians mentions it. Albeit I deny not that
Hierome was somewhat ouershot therein, that he says it was the Apostles
observation, notwithstanding, he is most far from the toys of these men.
And he mitigateth the self same thing, when he adds that this blessing was
given to the only Bishops, rather for the honor of their priesthood, than of
the necessity of the Law. Such an imposition of hands therefore which may be
done simply in the place of blessing. I do commend, and would that it were
restored at this day into his pure use. But the late age having almost blotted
out the matter, have placed for a sacrament of God, I know not what feigned
confirmation. etc.

Sith therefore Calvin himself thus far forth, acknowledges this to
be the ancient order of confirmation in the Church, and commending the same,
wishes that it were restored and even as he wished, we have restored it, and
abolished all the Popish superstitions and errors that succeeded: how
intemperately do our brethren here say, that it ought to have no place in the
Church of Christ? But what reasons more than Calvin had, have our Brethren
utterly to displace it?

The learned disc. page 73.
And as for confirmation ( say they) it ought therefore to be shut out, and have
no place in the Church of God, as well because it displaced catechizing, and
brought in steed thereof vain toys, and childishe ceremonies to the great
hurt of the Church, as for that also it derogateth much from the dignity of
Baptizme, the Sacrament of the Lord, and is extoled above it, being a devise
of man, and is pretended to be a sign to certify the Children of the favor
and gracious goodness of God, toward them, falsely grounded upon the example
of the Apostles. Whereas the ministration of baptism, is permitted to every
hedgepreest Minister and Deacon.

The confirmation that we do use, as it brings no vain toys, nor childish
ceremonies into the Church of God, Bridges
nor is used to the great hurt or to any hurt of the Church at all: so is it,
so far from displacing Catechizing, that (as we have showed out of Calvin
and other) it was both used with catechizing in the ancient Churches, and with
us it is one of the principal means for the maintenance of it. And therefore,
if there were no other reason for the holding of it, Our confirmation
displaceth not but maintains catechizing.
but even this (so long as it maintains no evil besides) since this good at the
least comes by it, that our children are the rather enduced to be
catechized: it ought not to be displaced and shut out of the church of God,
since Catechizing is not only not displaced, but so greatly furthered by it.

And whereas our brethren say, also it derogateth much from the dignity of
Baptism, the sacrament of the Lord, and is extolled above it, being a device
of man: If they mean the popish sacrament of confirmation, that is another
matter: they impugn one thing and we maintain another. For, We prefer not
nor make equal ^onfirmation with baptism.
we neither account confirmation to be any sacrament at all, nor extol it
above, nor yet make it equal unto baptism. But use it only as a good and
convenient ceremony, order, or rite, helping more and more to the confirming of
them that are baptized, in the profession of their faith, which they make
before the B. being now more strengthened and confirmed therein, by his
approbation in solemn laying of his hands upon them and and praying together
with the Church, that God would confirm them.

And where they say, it is pretended to be a sign, to certify the children of
the favor and gracious goodness of God toward them, falsely grounded upon the
example of thapostles: We say not confirmation is a sign, though the imposition
of hands be a sign If they mean by these words a sign, that we pretend such
a sign as sacraments be, that are appointed of God to be visible signs of some
invisible grace: we make in confirmation no such sign. And yet we deny not, but
the B. imposition of hands is a sign, and is given even to certify the favor
and gracious goodness of God toward them. But will our Brethren thrust* this
sign also of Imposition of hands clean out of the Church of God? Or, if it
be a sign that has been, and is, and may be well retained, will they deny,
it-may certify the parties upon whom the hands are laid, of Gods favor and
gracious goodness toward them? What error or superstition is in this: except
it were made such a sign hereof, as we use to call a Sacrament?

But, say they, it is falsely grounded on the example of the Apostles. If the
Apostles did use the imposition of hands upon them that were baptized, to
confirm them: and use with prayer for them, Confirmation maybe well said to be
grounded on the Apostles example since the apostles gave such example though
they prescribed it not.
that they might receive greater grace of God, in the confirmation of their
faith, besides the extraordinary graces than of working miracles and the gift
of tongs: and we use the imposition of hands, without any of the popish or any
other ceremonies: nor tie it to this, or to that, or to any grace to be
necessarily given thereby: nor make any precise necessity at all thereof: but
use it only as an ancient, reverend, and convenient order, for the foresaid
reasons, and in such manner as Calvin himself prays, and wishes that it
were restored: why may it not be truly said, that the use thereof (if there
be any good use of it at all) is grounded upon the example of the Apostles,
although they commanded it not to be used, as we have heard Kemnitius allege
for examples. Act. 8.14.15. and 18.

But, say our Brethren: Whereas the Ministration of Baptism, is permitted to
every hedge-preest, minister and deacon.

Our Brethren when they enueighed against the superiority of Bishops made them
and all preests or pastoral elders in dignity equal. And now in dignity
they are so unequal, that they term some hedge preests. What they mean by
this contemptuous term, let them selves expound, but they here seem to
excuse us pretily well, We permit not women to baptize.
for committing the administration of Baptism unto Women: when they name
(though in contempt) these three, Hedge-preest, Minister, and Deacon, to whom
the ministration of baptism is permitted. No, we permit it not to every Deacon.

But does this argue, that confirmation is extolled above baptism, because the
B. does only confirm and every Minister may baptize? Do they measure the
dignity of the Sacrament by the minister? what call they this? is not this a
manifest error? or do we maintain any such opinion of co^firmatio^? yea how
does not this the more reco^mend the dignity of baptism, that it may be
administered by every never so mean a minister, and yet not leese his dignity,
being a sacrament. The dignity whereof depends not on man, but on God.
Whereas confirmation being no sacrament ( which if it were, were appertaining
to every minister) is reserved to the B. not for any higher dignity of the
action compared with any Sacr. but used for the trial of the baptized parties
profession of the truth, Why the B. confirms.
by another higher person than ye minister that baptized him. The apostles that
were sent to confirm them that were baptized by Philip, Women's churching.
took not upon them to extol their confirmation, above the baptism that
Philip had administered, and yet were they higher than he in office and dignity.
For any of these reasons therefore here alleged, against our order of
Confirmation, as it had place before the errors and superstitious of the
papists did defile it, so may it* well have place still amongst us in Gods
Church.

The learned Dis. Page 74.
And as for churching of Women, ( say our Brethren) because it sauoureth of the
Jewish purification, and of popish Institution, it ought altogether to be
omitted, for it breeds and nourishes many superstitious opinions in the
simple peoples hearts: as, that the woman which has born a child is unclean
or unholy: whereas the Apostle pronounces, that Godly women are sanctified and
saved by bearing of children. 1. Tim. 2.15. that it is unlawful for her, 1.
Tim. 2.15.
for any necessity to go out of her doors, before she be churched: that this
churching is a necessary part of the pastors office: that she must wear a
white rail over her head, when she goes to Church by the Midwife, waighted
home with the parish Clearke, with diverse such like Bables, which in a well
reformed Church are not to be suffered.

Bridges
The first reason here alleged against Women's public thanksgiving in the
Church for their deliverance, after the birth of their children, commonly
called Churching, is because it sauoureth of the Jewish purification, and of
popish institution. In deed for the Jewish purification, I think it has some
savor of it, so far forth only, as the Woman then gave God thanks, for
his special benefit of her deliverance, and for her child. For, so far it
sauoureth of the moral Law. Even as our sabbath also sauoureth of the Iewishe
Sabbath, only in respect of the moral part thereof, though not with any like
bond or necessity of the time. Other Jewish savor it has none, to any whose
smell or taste is not distempered.

As for popish Institution, ( meaning for any popish error, or superstitious
ceremony) much less has it any savor at all thereof. It sauoureth nothing at
all of any popisherror or superstition.
Our brethren affirm it has. And why? For it breeds and nourishes many
superstitious opinions, in the simple peoples hearts: as that the Woman which
has borne a child, is unclean or unholy. There is no occaosin at all, in the
order prescribed by the book, to give the least suspicion in the world, to
any never so simple a person, that the Woman which has borne a child, should
therefore be accounted the more unclean or unholy. What one word or syllable
tends thereunto? If the simple people will take or nourish such an opinion ^n
no occasion given, but only for that the adversaries of the Gospel held such
an opinion, and therefore it ought altogether to be omitted: we might
^ltogether omit the sole^nizing of marriage by the Minister in the Church,
because the simple people might thereby, nourish many erroneous and
superstitious opinions, which the adversaries of the Gospel before taught
them, and confirmed them in, at the administration of marriages. True it is,
that S. Paul, pronounces of the woman 1. Tim. 2.15. That she shall be saved
by bearing of children, The woman for so special a benefit and preservation
bound to make a special thanksgiving.
adding this caution thereunto* if she shall abide in faith, and love, and
sanctification, with sobriety. But what does this hinder, or not rather much
more infer, that she ought so much the more for her child-byrth, to give the
more solemn and public thanks to God, both for her children, and for her
deliverance from her travel, and that he has vouchsafed the same to be among
other his especial graces, a means also toward her salvation; and to
beseech him, that as he has preserved her in the one, so he would strengthen
her to abide also in the other, to wit, in faith, and love, and
sanctification with sobriety. So that (me thinks) this sentence is a better
inducement, to have such a solemn form of thanksgiving, as our book
prescribes unto women in such a case; than to say, it ought altogether to be
omitted.

But they allege also, Not going abroad before she go ^o the Chu^h.
that it breeds and nourishes another superstitious opinions in the simple
peoples hearts: that it is unlawful for her, for any necessity, to go out
of her doors, before she be Churched.

Our Brethren seem to have enquired more curiously of women's demeanor in such
a time, than ever I heard of, or than (I think) was used among any never so
simple or superstitious people. I beleeur, none have now a days among us, any
such opinion, or so strict usage. And yet a reverend order herein, is to be
retained, which though our learned Brethr. would deny; How commendeble an use
this is
yet our sober sisters (I hope) would even for the modesty and commendation of
woman-hoode, have respect unto. And not so soon as God shall have strengthened
them again, rather go forth (unless any great necessity urge them, which,
as it is said, has no law) to other unnecessary worldly affairs, or
company; than before all other things, to repair in solemn and reverend
manner to the house of God, and there present themselves before the
congregation, to give God public thanks for his great goodness extended unto
them. Which order does much recommende their devotion, and is a good example to
all other.

Besides this, our Brethren not another superstitious opinion which it
breeds, that this Churching is a necessary part of the Pastors office.

For such convenient necessity, The Pastors office in this Churching of women.
as by law and order he is bound to do, as likewise, to join in the
celebration of marriage the man and the woman; whose office should it rather be,
than the Pastors? As for any absolute necessity of salvation, the thing it
self is not so urged, nor necessary as any particular express commandment
of God, pertaining to his office; otherwise than in general, and as he is the
public minister of the word. And this order being admitted, and by law
prescribed; it may be well avouched in this foresaid necessity, that this
churching, that is to say, the pronouncing of the public prayers in the
Church, at the woman's thanksgiving; is a necessary part of the Pastors
office. As for that which follows:

A white rail on her head.
That she must wear a white rail over her head, when she goes to Church by
the midwife, waighted home with the parish Clerk, with diverse such like
bables, which in a well reformed Church are not to be suffered:

I think our Brethren, that talk thus of rayles and bables, were rather
disposed disorderly to babble, on women's matters, than they would want matter
to rail on our Churches orders. Does our book or any law prescribe, The
ancient matrones attyres.
the woman to wear a white rail over her head, when she goes to Church? Or
to be accompanied by the midwife? Or to be waighted home with the parish
Clerk? Is not this a clerkely and Learned Disc. to note these matters? And why
may not eue^ these things be done also, as well as not done? So that there be
no superstition in the^, as (me thinks) there is none. For, what is the whit
rail or keuerchief, but such an ancient cover of the woman's head, as
represents the simplicity and antiquity of women's attire, such as the
ancient matrones of Asia, Greece and Rome are noted to have worn. And as yet
in the East parts, and in Grecia, and Africa, the sober and chaste women go
with such white linne^ couerture on their heads, when they go abroad, even to
this day. Which argues that this attire arose not of any superstition at all,
but in the old time was the usual attire of honest matrones. And not unlikely,
but that as other parts of Greece did use it, so the attire that S. Paul
mentions of women's covering their heads, 1. Cor. 11. when they prayed in the
congregation, ( though he mention neither matter of lynnen, woollen, silk or
cotton: nor color of white, black, or any other,) was not much different from
the same.

And as for her company: who fitter, among all her neighbors, for diverse
considerations, The midwifes attendance and the Clerks.
than her midwife. And if the poor Clerk would not leese his fee accustomed
or his dinner, but would weight on her home, or rather weight ( poor soul) to
fill his belly, ( without hope whereof he would give but sorry attenda^ce) ask
him, whether he minded more a babble, or the table? And must this also, as a
part of this Learned discourse of Eccl. government, be solemnly registered, for
a matter breeding and nourishing superstitious opinions in the simple peoples
hearts: which in a well reformed Church, Conceiving superstitious opinions
hereupon.
is not to be suffered? These then are the great and weighty matters, wherefore
our Brethren find fault with this order of wome^s churching ( or coming to the
Church) to yield their public thanksgiving to God, for their child and safe
deliverance, after their childbirth, for which causes (they say) it ought
altogether to be omitted. But who sees not that these quarrels had been
better omitted, Burial.
and are altogether if not bables, yet bubles of mere babbling (if I may have
leave to use such terms) rather than any causes of importance, to omit or
take away this reverend matronlike and comely order. And that although any were
so simple to conceive superstitious opinions hereupon: and though this white
rail also were left clean off, and that the midwife kept her self at home:
and that the Clerk lost his dinner too: yet might this order of women's
Churching, being nothing but public thanksgiving in the Church, after their
deliverance, continue in never so well reformed Churches, and be suffered
without just offense given, well-inough.

The third quarrel of our Brethren is at the manner of Burial, of which as they
said before, page 73. The other, albeit it be to be retained with a certain
honesty, yet is it not to be tied to the proper office of a Pastor: so
proceeding page. 75. they say:

As for the burial of the dead, because Satan took occasion upon Ceremonies
appointed thereunto, The learned Dis. Page 75.
to sow the seed of many heresies in the Church, as prayers for the dead,
Oblations for the dead, Purgatory, etc. also many superstitions as hallowing
of Church-yardes, distinctions of Burials, as some in the Chauncell, some in
the Church, and some in the Churchyeards: some with more pomp, as singing,
ringing, Burial of the dead.
etc. some with less, burying toward the East, lights and holy water
bestowed on the dead, etc. it is thought good to the best and right reformed
Churches, to bury their dead reverently without any ceremonies of praying or
preaching at them, because experience has taught them, what inconvenience may
grow thereof, by example of that which has been before.

Our Brethr. having so peremptorily condemned the other twain, Bridges.
confirmation of children, and churching of women: as though they could be
retained with no honesty: for burial, they are somewhat yet more favorable,
in saying it may be retained with a certain honesty. Our Brethr. favor to
bury the dead that it may be retained with a certain honesty.
Whereas if at the least, we should not aforde the dead thus much: we should
either let them rotte above the ground, or cast them to the beasts or fishes,
as did the Capsians: or let the birds eat the^, as did the Hyrcans: or the
dogs eat the^, as did the Bactrians: or eat them our selves, as did the
Messagetians and the Derbites: or hang them upon gybbets, as did the Tibarenes:
all which were no honesty at all, but horrible and unnatural savageness: or
else we should burn the^ to ashes as did the Affricans, the Romans, Whether
our man's of burial may so be retained.
and diverse other people as was the Ethnike manner among the Gentiles: or else why
may we not be bold simply to say, It is an honest thing to bury the dead? But
that the burial of the dead may be retained, albeit with a certain honesty.
If our Brethren mean not simply here the burial of the dead, but our manner
of burial which the book prescibeth, that it may be retained with a certain
honesty: how speak they not then against themselves, in speaking against our
manner of their burial, The Pastors office in burial.
if with a certain honesty, or any honesty at all it may be retained? But
they say: yet it is not to be tied to the proper office of a Pastor. So that
they will stand to this, that it may be retained with a certain honesty, How
other may bury the dead.
and will not use here precisely these words, proper office, and the manner
of tying: I grant them also, upon necessity or occasion, both that other may
bury the dead, and that the dead also may be buried amongst us otherwise, and
that properly of it self, it is no part at all of his proper office, no more
than is the solemnizing of marriage. Howbeit, it is such an action, as may be
well adjoined to his office, without any blemish thereunto. Yea, if the public
ministration of the word, How burial as, and how not the Pastors part.
be a proper part of his office, which our Brethren do not deny: if there be
any public use and ministry of the word at the time of the burial of the
dead: then, how has not the Pastor his part herein? And other parts he is
not put unto* as to dig the grave, to bear the corpse to the grave, to lay
it in the grave, or to fill up the grave again with earth, or any such action:
but only to pronounce the sentences of scripture, that concern the state of
the dead, the information, and consolation of the living; the giving thanks to
God for the party departed, and praying for our selves that are alive: except
a sermon be also preached at the funeral. If these things may be retained
with a certain honesty: to whom then are these things more tied, than to the
proper office of a Pastor.

But our Brethren go further in the burial of the dead and say: because
Satan took occasion upon ceremonies appointed thereunto, to sow the seed of
many heresies in the Church, as etc. also many superstitions, etc. that
therefore, it is thought good to the best and right reformed Churches, to bury
their dead reverently, without any ceremonies of praying or preaching at them.

I grant, some heresies in the Church might be the more strengthened, by the
superstitious manner of burying the dead: but I rather suppose, a co^uerse; that
the corrupt manner of burying the dead: took occasion upon the seed of those
heresies. But here among the superstitions which our Brethren recite, of
burying the dead: How came in these three, under the name of distinction of
burialles, as some in the Chauncell, some in the Church, and some in the
Churchyeardes: some with more pomp, as singing ringing, etc. some with less:
burying toward the East?

Is all distinction of burials, Distinction of burials.
absolutely and without all distinction, superstitious? Would our Brethren have
a confusion of burialles, and no distinction but all persons, Princes,
Magistrates, private and common people, rich and poor, to be buried all a
like? Are they offended that some should be buried in the Chauncell, some in
the body of the Church and some in the Churchyeardes? What mean they hereby?
The grounds to bury in.
Would they have none buried, in any of all these places: but every body to
bury their dead in their own proper grounds, or in some other common ground
appointed properly thereunto? Neither do we contend with them, against this
last mentioned ground of burial: neitheir ought they to contend with us, for
the burial of the dead, so far as conveniently may be done, neither in
Churchyearde, Church, or Chauncell. If they respect health or contagion, as
diverse do: those are Physical causes, and not superstitious.

If they respect the superstitions, into the which the Papists did
degenerate: we reject them as much, as any of our Brethren, or ani^ other do.
And howsoever any did abuse the burial of the dead, with superstition, by
occasion of the place: yet at the first they did not so. But as Aretius on the
title of burial says: the Christians when things were at the length set in
order, did bury the dead at the Martyrs Churches, Aretius in problem. desepult.
which thing may be thought to be done therefore, because that at the Martyrs
Churches, the prayers and the sermons were made. And if so be that any
persecution should light upon them by the example and constancy of the
Martyrs, they were stirred up among themselves, The originals of buriing in
churches.
to constancy in the faith, and in the profession of it, to the which thing,
the present sepulchers of the Martyrs did incite them.

But howsoever the posterity abused this afterward with superstition ( from
the which, God be praised we are free) neither are there many that are buried
in the Chauncell, or in the Church; and it is a thing done not for any opinion
of more holiness in the place, but only for more civil honor of the party,
in a place counted more worshipful. As Christ speaks in his parable, Luke
14. of the higher and of the lower place at the table, to be reserved for a
more honorable man. And so h^re, the Chauncell being counted the higher place
in dignity, then the body of the Church: and the body of the Church, than
the Churchyeard: if now, the dead be buried according to his higher degree,
when he lived in a place of higher estimation, so there arise no danger of
superstition to the health of the souls, nor danger of contagion to the
health of the bodies of the people living: what great matter is to be made of
the distinction of these places? And if they stand so much on the distinction
of these three places: will they disallowe all three without distinction? If
they count the burial in the highest place, to be but pomp: why should they
mislike the burial in the Church-yearde, which is the common place of burial
for the basest? If they should not be buried in the Church-yearde, neither.
Where would they have them bury them? In the open fields; to be dug up of
swyne, or in men's private grounds, gardens, or orchyeards; as the worshipful
among the Jews were, or the common sort in some common plo^ of ground (as I
said before) dedicated to that purpose? But what is that ground, other than a
Church-yearde, Any place of burial may be subject to supe^stition.
or a yearde of many Churches or Parishes, for their burialles? Which, stand
it near or round about the Church, or further from it, or within the City,
Town or Village, or without; except some consideration be had of narrow
places in a populous City, and of contagious times and diseases, only to
avoid contagion for the body, which consideration we hold well with, but let
that place, or any other, be once made the ordinary place of burial:
admitting withal any ministry of the word at the burial: may not that
place also be subject to as much superstition as the other? Yea, if no
ministry of the word at all be there used: may not that also, even for
lack of-good instruction, breed as much, if not more, and that more
dangerous superstition?

Why should our Brethren therefore stretch their quarrel thus far, even to
the burial in the Church-yeard? The Church-yeard.
For although the Chauncell and Church, be not properly dedicated unto burials,
save that extraordinarily, some burials may be in them: yet the Churchyeard is
the proper place allotted thereunto, which the ancient Greek Church called
(...), a place to sleep in, as the Monks termed their Dortoir or Dormitorie,
likening our death to our sleep, and our burial to our bed, for the hope of
our waking, at the last and general resurrection. And yet the Hebrews much
better, call it (...) beth caym, the house of the living: because though the
bodies only be there lodged, as in a house; yet their souls sleeps not, but
are living. The Germans call it Gottes acker, of ager dei, the aker or field
of God. And we term it, the Churchyearde, as the measure of earth pertaining
to the Church, derived of the old word, kyrke-gerth, yet used in the North, as
the earth that is dedicated unto the Lord, not unaptly fetched from, (...).
And what place fitter (all superstition being disclaimed) than is this ground,
if not of the Church: yet of this Churchyeard, for our burials?

But as our Brethr. find fault, with this distinction of places: so they find
fault with this distinction of our manner of burying the dead: that we bury
some with more pomp, as singing, ringing, etc. some with less.

Pomp in Burials.
If our Brethren take pomp in the better sense: would they have all persons
buried with like pomp? Or if in the worst sense: would they have no pomp nor
solemnity used at al, at any persons burial? but what this pomp should be,
except that they mention only, singing and ringing: I can not certainly tell.
For they suppress the residue, with an etc. but that singing or ringing is
utterly or then unlawful: or any to be buried with more solemnity than other,
according to the decency of their state and calling; me thinks our Brethr.
herein should not be so hard, to condemn the distinction of that also, as in
it self merely superstitious. We read in the old Testament of great
distinction, about the burial of the dead, even of the holy Patriarchs.
Distinction of burials, some with more solemnity than other both in the old
and new Testament.
Who were all buried in such solemn place and manner, as Abraham buried his
wife? Genesis 23. And was himself buried, Genesis 25 and as Isaac was buried, and
Rachel Jacobs wife, Genesis 35. and as Jacob and Joseph Genesis 50. and diverse
others, that were buried more solemnly than other were. Neither was the greater
pomp of their funeral, esteemed of the holy fathers, before the coming of
christ, a superstitious, but a decent and an honorable thing. Neither was it
any such figure of Christ's more honorable burial ( as Zegedinus thinks)
that it should cease after the burial of Christ, and that we should now be
buried all alike: no, it rather argues (as Selnecserus therein thinks much
better in my opinion) that a Christian man according to his higher estate, or
to the excellency of his life in his calling, may have without superstition, a
more honorable burial. And as it appears how Stephen was buried, Act. 8.
with greater mourning, than were the common sort of Christians in those days.

As for the offense which our Brethren take, with burying toward the East:
Burying toward the East.
I think it not a matter so worthy, as to have bin once noted in their Learned
Disc. Indeed it is a common order among Christians, so to bury the dead; as
well to differ from Turks and Jews: as also (making no necessity of the
matter, nor matter of religion) to be the more sign, that they have the better
hope of the resurrection, in laying the corpse of the dead Christians, in such
manner, as though they respected the reddier lifting up of them selves, when
they shall all be raised to life again, to behold the coming of our Savior
Christ, which to us ward as^ended in the East. Not to tie him to descend
here or there; or that they doubted, but yt whersoeuer they be, and howsoever
they lie, or shall be consumed, he will at the glorious appearance of his
coming, gather the^ all unto him, as he says: Luc. 13.29. Then shall many
come from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the South,
and shall sit at the table in the kingdom of God And I take that our ancestors
in these west parts in so laying the dead, had this especial respect. If any
did it superstitiously, or made any matter of religion in so doing; I excuse
him not, and think, so it be done without offense, or contempt of the common
order, that they may use it otherwise, without any danger or impediment, for
any thing I know to the contrary.

As for the other things mentioned here by our Brethr. as they were proper to
the adversaries of the Gospel: so (God be praised) they are removed. Neither
does our prescribed form of Burial allow them, or give any the least occasion
to any of all those heresies, errors, or superstitions.

But now, to avoid all occasion o^ heresies, errors and superstitions* what
form of burial would our Brethren have? Forsooth they say: It is thought good
to the best and right reformed churches, to bury their dead reverently, without
any ceremonies of praying or preaching at them.

Here is a short manner indeed of burying the dead, and agrees herein with
the book of the Form of Common prayer, which our Brethren have of late set
out. Wherein upon the title of burial, they say: The corpse is reverently to be
brought to the grave, accompanied with the neighbors in comely manner, without
any further ceremony. And this is all that they say there, of the form of
burial. But if this be the form of the best and right reformed Churches: what
shall we then say (to go no further, than even to the Church of Geneua it
self) to the book called, The form of prayers and ministration of the
sacraments, etc. used in the English congregation at Geneua, and approved by
the famous and godly learned man John Calvin? Which book on the title of
burial, page 88. says on this wise: The corpse is reverently brought to the
grave, accompanied with the congregation, without any further ceremonies, which
being buried, the minister goes to the Church, if it be not far off, and
makes some comfortable exhortation to the people, touching death, and
resurrection. Here is yet a Sermon to be preached at least wise some
comfortable exhortation to be made by the Minister, at the burial of the dead;
though not at the very place (for neither do we so tie it, to the place) of
burial. The dead may be buried in the Church-yeard, or any other place
assigned thereunto, and the sermon be in the, Church, and nevertheless be
well said, to be at the burial, because it is made for that especial
purpose, and for that commonly, the congregation is not dismissed all in a
doombe and silent action, but that some words of consolation are uttered by
the Minister ere they depart.

Bucer in his Epitome Ecel. Argentinae cap. 27. says on this wise: We teach
concerning those whom the Lord in the confession of his name has received to
himself out of this life: Bucerus in Epitome Eccl. Argent. cap. 27.
that they are withal fear of God and honestly to be committed to the earth,
and there the people out of the word of God to be admonished, of the heavy
judgment of God against sin, and also of the redemption of Christ who has
redeemed us from death, and of the aeternall life which he has purchased to
all his faithful. After which men are to be exhorted also to the repentance of
their sins and to a firm hope of the blessed resurrection and heavenly life,
and also to the earnest study and care of the life to come. Which verily is
placed in the mortification of the old Adam and restoring the new. Whereunto
also prayers are to be joined for true repentance, and confirmation of faith,
and also for the blessed resurrection, both of the dead and of them that be
present. To conclude, alms also are to be given.

Yea, Calvin himself in his Epistle to the Monsbelgardians Epist. 51 (
wherein he tells them what he himself would do, if he sustained their
person) when he comes to burial writes thus. In the burial of the dead I
would have this moderation to be adhibited, Caluini Epist. 51.
that the corpse should not be carried into the Church, but straight unto the
Churchyard, there also would I have an exhortation to be made, that the
company should acknowledge that which should be spoken in the present matter
of the funeral. No contention for ringing at burials.
This manner were not much to be disallowed. As for the ringing of the bell, I
would not have you stiffly reclaim against it, if it may not be obtained that
the Prince would remitte it. Not that I allow it, but that I think it not a
matter worthy of contention. Thus writes Calvin, what he would, and what he
would not have, to choose, about the burial of the dead. Yea even of ringing
also, though he mislike it, yet would he have no contention for it, but
modestly refers it to the Princes order. Neither disalloweth he the burial
in the Church-yarde. As for an exhortation to be made, it is the special thing
that he would have observed at a burial. Which exhortation, if it be a sermon
( as the English Church in Geneua allowed by Calvin does also prescribe the
same: Calvin prescribes an exhortation or sermon at funeral^.
then may that part of prayer, which is thanksgiving, be used at the burial
of the dead. Yea and the other part of petition, though not for the dead, yet
for the living and for the resurrection of living and dead, both may well be,
and are always used in sermons, and a good part of our Brethrens sermons are
most what spent in the conceauing of prayers and petitions.

Now if either exhortations or sermons be to be made at the funeralles of the
dead: who should rather pronounce or make them, than the Pastor? And if this be
the order of the Church of England in Geneua approved by Calvin: who also
wishes it in other Churches: have our Brethr. here in England any just cause
now to mislike it? If they think Geneua the best, or any right reformed Church
( for I press them not here with the Protestants Churches in Germany,
Protestant^ books of funeral sermons.
who have set forth diverse funeral sermons, and Spangelberges book is of
the same matter; nor with the Churches in Heluetia: and Brandmillerus book,
composed of 180. funeral s^^^^ns) how can our Brethren say, as here they do,
that it is thought good to the best and right reformed Churches, to bury their
dead reverently, without any ceremonies of praying or preaching at them? Me
thinks yet of twain, the English order in Geneua approved by Calvin, is
far better, than this new English order of our Brethren.

Zanchius in his confession of Christian religion, cap. 25. de Eccl. militantis
gubernatione. Aphoris. 33. treating of the burial of the dead, Zanchius of the
burial of the dead.
writes on this wise. As for their bodies we doubt not, but that they are to
be brought with honor to the sepulcher: even as our Churches both in words
and in very deed do teach: openly testifying, that they were the temples of
the holy Ghost, now indeed destroyed, but in their time to be again restored,
and to be raised up to life and that eternally. In the mean season the very
sepulchers and the Churchyards are to be kept holily and reverently, as among
us it is done. As for the children, or parents, the kindred and alliance of
the dead, are to be comforted. And both we study, Singing Psalms at burials.
to yield all the duties of humanity, that can be yielded: and we teach, that
they ought to be yielded. And if any thing out of the Psalms, concerning the
resurrection of the dead, be any where soong, A sermon after the burial.
while the corpse is borne, or if any sermon, after the corpse is enterred, be
made to the people, wherein honest mention be made, of other also which holily
have slept in the Lord: we do never a whitte disallowe the same. Since that, it
is not made for the saving health of the party, or parties that are dead; but
for the consolation and utility of the living, and to the aedification of the
whole Church. For we do believe, that the souls of the faithful being loosed
from their bodies, do pass forthwith to Christ into heaven, and thereby have
no need of our suffragies. Howbeit, the aedification of the Church, is always
upon any occasion given, to be furthered. Thus reverently writes Zanchius of
the manner of burying the dead not only allowing a sermon after the burial:
but the burial to be in the Church-yarde* Yea, not improuing singing of the
Psalms: as Calvin before referred ringing to the authority and order of the
Prince.

And therefore our public order of burial appointed in the Communion book,
as no whit inferior to any of these, (if not much better) may stand well
enough in state as it does, for any reason here alleged to the contrary. Our
Brethrens only reason is this:

Because experience has taught* what inconvenience may grow thereof, by example
of that which has been before.

It is a good saying, Happy is he whom other men's harms do make to beware.
But both our Brethren and we must again be as wary, least that while we fear
to stomble at that which might be occasion of like inconvenience, we both of us
should mistake non causam pr^^^^sa, that to be a cause or occasion of heresies,
errors, and superstition, which is no cause nor occasion of them: and so to
shun the one, run on the otherside into as gross or grosser
inconveniences, for lack altogether of preaching or exhortation, and that part
of prayer, which is thanksgiving at the burial of the dead, as other
heretofore have done by erroneous and superstitious abusing of the same. But
our Brethren drawing now to the conclusion of these matters, The learned disc.
page 75. and 76.
say.

And as they are not to be excused, if any for small trifles only, raise up
hot contentions: so they have much to answer before God, that suffer the
people of God to lack the only food of their souls for such humane
Constitutions.

Whether any of these things afore-saide, Hot contentions.
for the which our Brethren raise up these hot contentions, as the burying in
the Chauncell, Bridges
Church, or Church-yarde, the burial with more pomp or less, the laying of
the corpse toward the East: Ho^ inexcusable they are that contend for small
trifles.
the woman's white rail the midwiues going with her to Church, and the Clerks
atte^dance on her home, be trifles and small trifles, yea, in comparison very
nyfles, or no: let other Judge. And yet must these be added to the residue,
that the Churching or thanksgiving of women after their childbirth, might
altogether be omitted: and that among the superstitions used in burial, no
kind of praying nor preaching should be used. If preaching be the souls
food: who did last forbid it? And besides these things, what stir and
hot contentions have been raised up, for a number of other things, which in
regard of preaching ( though otherwise in their kinds and degrees they be
comely and decent, yet in that respect) may be accounted for small trifles? And
therefore I would wish our Brethren to take good heed, what here they say, that
they are not to be excused, if any for small trifles only raise up hot
contentions: since this touches themselves nearer than they ween.

What makes them to cast forth these speeches? But that they think, either
these matters, for which they thus contend, are matters of great importance:
or else, that not they, How farr^ things indifferent being authorized, are to
be contended for.
but we raise up such hot contentions for them. And indeed, though in their
own nature many of them be indifferent: yet, being by lawefull authority
ordained to be used, for public order, and for comeliness: they are become
hereby more important, than that it may be lawefull to any private man, at his
own voluntary to shake them off, except by the like lawefull authority,
whereby they were brought in, they shall be removed. Yea, in this case we are
bound to be hoate for defense of them also (so we exceed not the bounds of
Christian charity) both for obedience to the lawefull authority that made
them, and also for the order and comeliness sake, for which they were
authorized, not to see them impugned; sith that in the impugning of them, not
only the obeyer yielding to them is defaced: but the laws and Magistrates
authority in making them, is violated and indaungered. Wherein, although the
defenders be hoate, yet properly not the defenders, Not the defendants but
oppugners, the raisers of these hot contentions.
but the impugners are indeed the very raysers of these hoate contentions.
And therefore by this their own saying, our Brethren are not ( in this
behalf) to be excused, but rather (with grief, and in charity be it spoken)
to be accused, yea they accuse in these words their own selves, as disturbers
of the Churches quiet.

Neither can they shelter themselves under this word, only; saying: they
raise not up this hot contentions for small trifles only: but that among
their quarells, Humane constitutions.
there are some of great importance. For, let any of the^ be of what
importance soever they shall be found to be: ought they (only or not only) to
raise such hot contentions for any such small trifles? Now as in this point,
they plainly make themselves not excusable: so much more, in adding these
words:

So have they much to answer before God, that suffer the people of God to
lack the only food of their souls, for such humane co^stitutio^s.

Verily, this goes nearer to the quick. For howsoever we may shufle out
aunsweres one to another: The vnexcusablenes of our Brethr. in withdrawing
altogether of themselves from the ministry of the word for these
constitutions.
when we shall come to answer before God, we can not so answer before him.
For if none should suffer the people of God to lack the only food of their
souls for such humane constitutions: shall our Brethren be excusable, that
being lawfully called to the office of distributing this only food of our
souls, do altogether with draw themsemselues, and that only ( if they will
afforde them no better title) for such humane constitutions? But they say, the
fault is not in them: for they would gladly continue in feeding the people of
God, if they might be suffered.

Yet does this their own saying, still make them inexcusable. For seeing they
be but such humane constitutions, as should be rather suffered, than that they
should suffer the people of God to lack the only food of their souls; they
suffering this, for not suffering the other; do invincibly recharge themselves,
that herein they have much to answer before God.

If our Brethr. reply, that these humane constitutions, for which they suffer
the people of God ( as far as in them lies) utterly to lack the only food
of their souls, Whether our humane constitutio^s be such as our Brethr. can
not receive with reteyning their functions
be such as by no means are sufferable, and can not be joined with the
delivery of the word of God: this requires to be better proved, than yet it
is. Which if they can prove, then we must needs yield the fault to be in us,
and that we have much therein to answer before God, and to cry God heartily
mercy, and join them. And also (I hope) upon such proof, every good man will
do. But (for my part) I could never yet see this proved. As for any humane
constitution, that our communion book, and the Eccl. government of our Church
of England does require of them: has bin further by others and I also (I
trust) have evidently and sufficiently proved, for those that as yet we have
seen, that they are none other humane constitutions, but such as may well
stand with the Pastors feeding the people of God, with the only food of
their fowls, to wit, the word of God. And therefore, they have much to
answer, who (by their not yielding to them, but rather clean forsaking the
Pastorship committed to them, and ministry of the word and sacraments) are
the cause their selves, that they be not suffered to preach; and so suffer the
people to lack the only food of their souls, for things, which are in
comparison far inferior matters.

But to conclude ( say our Brethren) it is the duty of every true Pastor to
observe those things that are concluded by the lawful authority of the
Church, Controlme^t of the churches conclusions.
concerning ceremonial matters for order and comelines sake, and for
aedification, and not to control public order, The learned disc. Page 76.
by his private judgment but upon great and weighty causes.

This is a good conclusion, that our Brethren do here make of all these
matters. But do they not yet see, how flatly withal they conclude against
themselves? For we are now in hand with ceremonial matters: And the whole
Church o^ England has fully concluded long since, Bridges.
and that by lawful authority, that these things are to be observed, what
things a true Pastor must observe and not control.
concerning ceremonial matters, for order and comelines sake and for
aedification. What follows then? But as our Brethr. here do say, it is the
duty of every true Pastor to observe those things, and not to control
public order, by his private judgment. How then do our Brethren in
controlling and not observing those things, observe the duty of true Pastors?
Do they think that their judgment is not private judgment? But what is it
else? For although they were some greater number of Pastors tha^ they be: yet
being compared to the lawful authority of the whole Church of England, they
are but private Pastors, and their judgment private, especially being
deprived (by lawful authority) of their Pastorship, or rather, exauthorating
themselves of the ministry. Do they think this exception, Our Brethr. their
selves and their judgment private.
which they reserve for the last cast, (and place it as a rereward in the end
of this conclusion but upon great and weighty causes,) will be a sufficient
starting hole to save all upright, and themselves from pronouncing the
definitive sentence against themselves, that their doing is not the duty of
true Pastors? No* that will not help them. For, these matters being but
ceremonial matters ( as they call them) and so not great and weighty: what
great and weighty causes should move a true Pastor, by his private judgment,
to control public order* in those things that are concluded by lawefull
authority of the Church, concerning ceremonial matters for order and comlines
sake and for aedification? Shall any private man think (if he think them to be
indeed the Church of God) that the Churches concluding of those things by
lawefull authority, proceeded not of greater and waightier causes, than his
controllment? And therefore, except men shall make so little and light account
of the true Church of God, and of her conclusions and orders by lawefull
authority, as to prefer every private man's or Pastors private judgment
before hers: our Brethren by this their own conclusion, Cont^mpt of the
churches conclusions and lawful authority.
must either needs yield to the Church of Englandes public conclusion and
lawful authority, concerning these ceremonial matters, that they are to be
observed for order and comelines sake and for aedification, as the Church of
England has decreed them, and not to control public order by private
judgment: or else let our Brethr. harken to their own conclusiue sentence and
determination, The power of order and jurisdiction.
that they do not the duty of true Pastors. And thus much also for these
ceremonies.

We have hitherto entreated of the proper duty of a Pastor himself: now it
follows, The learned disc. Page 76.
that we likewise set forth his authority in common government with the
Elders. But least any man should mistake that, which we purpose to say of his
authority, we have need to express what we mean by this word authority.
For even those things that we have showed before to be the duty of a Pastor,
may also be called his authority, as to preach and teach, wherein is included
his authority to forgive and retain sins. Also his authority to minister
the sacraments, and to do other things in the Church, which none may do but
he. But in this place we understand authority, for power of government in
the Church. 1. Cor. 12.28.
Whereof the Apostle speaks, that it is one of the graces and gifts of God
necessary for the building of his Church. This authority of regiment we have
declared that it ought not to be a Lordly ruling, 1. Pet. 5.3.
Luke. 23.26.
neither over their flock: nor yet over their fellow servants and brethren: 2.
Cor. 1.14.
and least of all, that they ought to have dominion or Lordship over the faith
of the Church.

Bridges.
Our Brethren here promise to set forth that part of the Pastors authority,
which they say, he has, not of the proper duty of a Pastor himself, but in
common government with the Elders. The Pastors authority in common
government with the Elders.
But because these words, as they are grounded on the presupposall of that
Eldershippe, which they make one part of their Ecclesiastical Tetrarchie, not
dealing with the word: so promising ^o treat of the authority of the Pastor
in common government; they seem their selves to doubt, that (except they
should expound what they mean thereby) it might easily be mistaken what they
meant. Neither doubt they this mistaking without a cause, which of purpose
shun the plain and usual approved distinction, of the authority or power
of the order, and of the jurisdiction. But what-so-euer authority of the
Pastor they will now set forth, and make plain what they mean thereby:
when as they faye, For even those things which we have showed before to be
the duty of a Pastor, may also be called his authority, as to preach and
teach, wherein is included his authority to forgive and retain sins: if
this authority of the Pastor to forgive and retain sins, How our Brethren
beginning to include the Elders in the power of binding and loosing do exclude
the^ from it.
be included in his authority of preachinge and teaching: and withal, this
be a thing appertaining to the proper duty of a Pastor himself, as also is
his authority to minister the Sacraments, and to do other things in the
Church which none may do but he: then have not the Elders to deal in the
authority of forgiving and retayning sins. For if they should; they should
intermeddle with the word. For this is included in preaching and teaching. But
our Brethren exclude the governing Elders from preaching and teaching: The
Pastors auth. in common.
therefore withal they exclude them from the authority of forgiving and
retayning sins. And this by the way is not unnecessary to be here
observed, because afterward they give authority of forgiving and retayning
sins, unto the governing Elders, which they confess are not Teachers, nor
Preachers, nor dealers at all with the word. But does not this authority of
the Pastor belong to jurisdiction? And therefore not only the authority of
his order, to which properly preaching and teaching, and ministering the
Sacraments do appertain: but the authority also of jurisdiction, to which
the power of forgiving and retayning sins appertains, is the proper duty
of the Pastor himself, which none may do but he, and is an authority
separate from that his authority which is in common government with the
Elders, or with any other which are not Pastors in the Church.

And as for that power of government in the Church, whereof the Apostle
speaks, 1. Cor. 12.28. What that power of government was whereof S. Paul
speaks* Cor. 12.28.
That it is one of the graces and gift, of God, necessary for the building of
his Church: S. Paul makes not all the graces and gifts of God, which there
he speaks of, necessary for the building of his Church, if we speak of such
perpetual necessity, as that the Church can never be without them. For S.
Paul reckons up there great offices, graces and gifts of God, that are not
necessary in that sense. As even the first office that he begins there
withal, of Apostles, besides the gifts of healinges, the gifts of powers or
of working mighty miracles, and the gifts of diverse kinds of languages. All
which are not now so necessary in our days, (nor many hundredth years sithence)
to the building of Gods Church. Neither is it agreeed upon by the best
interpreters, what manner of grace and gift of God, this power of government in
the Church was, which S. Paul in that place speaks of. For albeit Beza say:
he declares the order of Elders that were keepers of the Discipline and
policy Ecclesiastical: yet says Aretius, it is a political faculty of
administering the common weal, and of ruling others commodiouslie, and of
conseruing them in order, which gift is necessary in Magistrates. And while
the Church wanted a politic Magistracy, certain choosen Elders governed
the assemblyes of the faithful, as it were an ordinary Magistracy. Aretius
in 1. Cor. 12. Elders governing till public Magistrates came.
Here in deed he says, this gift is necessary, but he adds in whom,
to wit, in Magistrates: and yet he specifieth in what kind of Magistrates,
to wit, political, and in the administering of the common wealth, not the
Ecclesiastical discipline. And withal, he limiteth a time, how long this gift
of government in these Elders continued in the Church, to wit, while the Church
wanted a politic Magistracy. As who say the gift of this government in the
Elders is ceased long since* and not now necessary, the Church having a
politic Magistracy, Political Governors.
in whom the gift of government is still necessary, and not in such Elders.

And in this sense I deny not Caluines interpretation. Calvin in 1. Cor. 12.
Governors, I interpret Seniors, which were the Presidentes of Discipline.
For the first Church had her Senate, that held the people in the honesty of
manners, which thing Paul declares otherwhere, when as he sets down a
double order of Elders, the government therefore consisted of Elders, which
excelled others in gravity, experience and authority. So that, although
Calvin distinguish the order of these Elders into two sorts, as do our
Brethren, (which yet no necessity does enforce:) nevertheless, he both
restrayneth this their gift of government, to the honesty of manners, not to
any Ecclesiastical orders: and he makes this office and Senate not to be
perpetual, but as a thing that ceased, he says, prima Ecclesia habuit. the
first Church had her Senate, as who say, it went no further. And so we may
say, The first Church had Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and diverse gifts
of healinges, miracles, tongues, etc. The ordinary offices of which gifts
have long since ceased. And therefore we can now make no ordinary nor
necessary plea upon them, nor the governing Ecclesiastical Elders that our
Brethren would erect are such Elders.

To the larger and better manifestation whereof, Gualter ( expounding this
word, Gualter in 1. Cor. 12.
Gouernmentes says: The seventh place in this order sets down
gouernmentes, by whom is comprehended political men, which in matters of this
world helped any body, and took intelligence of their causes, if any should
arise among the Christians. For as it is said in the sixth chapter, the
Apostles would not that those which professed Christ, should contend for
their goods, or for other matters pertaining to this life, before the tribunal
seats of the Ethnikes. Prudent men therefore and exercised in the use of
matters, were appointed to the oversight of such causes. By whose authority
and Council the contentions were decided. The same also were publikly present
with the Church, if any thing were to be done before the Proconsuls or the
presidentes. Which thing there is no doubt, but that it happened oftentimes. To
conclude, they with their Counsels and prudence (even as it were certain
shipmasters governed the Churches being then tossed among the diverse dangers
of matters. At this day there is not in public, such need of such persons, No
need of such governors in these days.
since that (as we have aboue-sayd) the Magistrates are Christian, by whose
authority all these things may more happily be dispatched. And we ought to
acknowledge the singular benefit of God, which in these last days,
vouchsafes to give unto his Church, both politic and Eccl. Governors, even
as in the old time he promised by Esaias. Let none therefore lightly disturb
the order instituted of God, that (trampling down the authority of Princes and
of Magistrates) he should institute a new senate, The gifs of powers.
that should challenge to themselves a right and Empire, The abuse of the
popish.
(or authority) of commanding) over them. This thing in the old time did
certain Bishop^, perhaps of a good zeal. Howbeit that matter turned at the
length into a Pontifical tyranny, and for the ambition of a few, did utterly
ouerturne the Christian state. Let the Princes know again, that they are the
members, not the Lords of the Church. And therefore let them use their Empire
to the defense thereof, and direct all their counsels to this scope, that the
order and safety thereof may be preserved.

Thus, even where Gwalter speaks against the abuses of Princes, and of the
Popish Bishops: yet does he acknowledge both their lawful authorities: and
shows what the authority of this seniory was, to wit, a mere public
government all in seculer, and not in ecclesiastical matters: and how long it
continued: how unnecessary now it is: how it is not the order instituted by
God for us, but the very disturbance of it: and that this senate can not be
now brought in a new, without the trampling down of the very Princes and
Magistrates authority. To conclude, these gouernmentes that S. Paul here
names, are nothing that grace, gift or office, which our Brethren here
pretend, for their senate of governing Elders. Which Gwalter rather likeneth
unto the gift of powers, which S. Paul before in that place did mention.

In the fourth place ( says Gwalter) proceeding these gifts are reckoned up,
powers for those that exercise lawful power in the Church. These were seniors,
which beeinge set over the Discipline, corrected them that had done any thing
contrary to the duty of a Christian man. What was the gifts of powers and who
had it.
As for the wicked and obstinat they corrected them with a greater power of the
spirit. For they were armed with a singular gift, that they might also deliver
unto the devil to be afflicted, those that could not with admonitions and
reproouinges be corrected. Examples of this power were showed from Elias and
Elizeus in the old time. Of whom he (to wit, Elias) burned up with flames
sent down from heaven, Elias.
the soldiers that were sent to take him. But this man ( to wit, Elizeus)
called forth the Bears, Elizeas.
which tore in pieces the Children that more saucily mocked him. By the same
virtue (or power) Peter slew Ananias and Saphira, which presumed to lie unto
the holy Ghost. Peter.
He delivered also Simon Magus to destruction. Paul also used this power
against Elimas the sorceror, whom he deprived of his sight, for that he
proceeded to deceive the proconsul of Cyprus with his lies. The same (Paul)
writes, Paul.
that he delivered to Satan Himeneus and Alexander, that being stricken with
some punishment, they might learn from thence forth not to blaspheme. And
hereto also ought to be referred, that which in threatening manner he says to
certain obstinate persons, Jurisdiction.
in the second Epistle to the Corinthians: but if I shall come again I will not
spare you: sith that ye seek the experiment of Christ speaking in me. For in
these words he insinuates not obscurely that with his words he had a
virtue joined, of perfourming that which he spoke, and of correcting his
contemners. Why there was need of these offices then and not now.
And in the old time there was altogether need of this faculty of the
spirit, when as the Churches had not a Magistrate, and therefore could not use
the right of the sword. There is no necessity to require the same at this day,
when as the gift of this spirit has ceased. And the Princes and Magistrates
are Christians, who with laws and public authority, restrain any whosoever
in their office, and as for the stubborn and froward, they punish them. Some
in-deede there are, which after the example of the ancient and primitive
Church, will institute seniors or a Senate Ecclesiastical, which may have
Empire (or commandment) even also over the Magistrates themselves, if they
at any time shall not do their duty. But those men ought first to have made
demonstration, that their seniors have this power, whereof in present Paul
speaks. Which thing when as by no argument it appears: The frivolous
imitation of the primitive Church in the erecting up of their senate.
and nevertheless they deliver to Satan whom they will: they do alike, as if
any would attempt to cleanse the lepers, to raise the dead, and to work such
other myraclous work. For because that in the old time, such things were
commonly done in the primitive Church.

Thus again, Gualter: and on these graces and gifts of of God, grounding this
Ecclesiastical Seniory, not of the Word (...)* Gouernmentes: but on the
former word (...), Powers: betokening such power as is myraculous, which
although some Seniors in the Church than had it yet he alleges the examples
hereof, that such only exercised the same in Ecclesiastical matters, as were
Ministers of the Word. But howsoever these Seniours were, or what power soever
they had: he makes them and their power, not to be perpetual, but abiding a
while, only for the state of that time, and so to have ceased, after that the
public state of Christendom was settled, and governed by such princes and
Magistrates as openly professed Christianity: and that from thence forth, the
Churches were not tied to such Seniors, but that we (after thus many ages of
Christian princes) be free from them. So that, where our Brethren say, they
will not now set forth the pastors authority, in common Government with the
Elders: If there be no need of such Elders to join in commons with him in
his government: then as the other authority was proper to himself, so may
this authority for power of government in the Church, ( for any thing here to
the contrary) be as proper also to himself, as the other. For, if these
graces and gifts whereof the Apostle 1. Cor. 12.28. speaks, were such
distinct offices, as our brethren say can not be, but in distinct officers,
without confusion of the^: then either these gifts pertain not to the
Pastors, Our brethr. confusion by their elder enter-comming in the P^stors
jurisdiction.
so well as to these Elders ( as here our Brethren say they do:) or else, if
the Pastors have authority in them: than have not Elders to deal with them,
except we should infer this confession, that they would have us shun.

But now, our brethren giving this authority in common with the Elders:
proceed to the limittation of the same, and say: This authority of regiment we
have declared, that it ought not to be a Lordly ruling, neither over their
flock: nor yet over their fellow-seruants and bret. and least of all, that
they ought to have dominion and Lordship over the faith of the Church. Dominion
and Lordship over the faith of the Church, we grant none has but almighty
God, Dominion and Lordship.
and Jesus Christ only, that is both God and Man. As for the other authority,
which they call Lordly ruling over their flock, or over their
fellowe-seruauntes and Brethren: as they refer us to that they have declared:
so I refer them to that we have declared. And among other (I hope I have
sufficiently declared, what manner of ruling they may have, both over their
flock, and over their fellow-seruaunts and brethren, both by the word of God,
by the practice of the Primitive Church, and by the approbation of diverse the
best learned protestants, in the reformed Churches of our age. But how this
authority of Government, which here they give in common to the pastors with
the Elders, shall be parted among them: is not yet determined. For, albeit our
Brethren acknowledge, that the Pastors have rule and authority herein, yet the
form of prayers in the English congregation at Geneua, does deny it, and say:
Page 43. Because the charge of the Word of God, is of greater importance than
that any man is able to dispense therewith: Our brethr. disagreeme^t about the
pastors jurisdiction
and S. Paul exhorts to esteem them as Ministers of Christ, and disposers of
Gods mysteries: not Lords or rulers as Peter says over the flock: therefore
the Pastors or Ministers cheef office, stands in preaching the word of God
and Ministering the sacraments. So that in consultations, judgments, elections,
and other political affairs, his counsel rather then authority takes place.
So yt by this rule, he is so far from al lordly ruling: that he has no rule
nor authority at all, in Common with the Elders in these matters. But of the
twain, our Brethren here say better, that he has authority, understanding it
for power of government in the Church.

But say our Brethren: In all these, the man of sin has exalted him self,
contrary to the word of God: The learned Dis. Page 77.
so that he would be head of all the Church, Bishop of all Bishops, and
have authority to make new articles of Faith. Whose intolerable presumption,
as we have long since banished out of this land, so we wish that no steps
of such Pride and arrogance, usurped authority.
might be left beyond him: namely, that no elder or Minister of the Church
should challenge unto himself, or accept it, if it were offered unto him,
any other authority, than that is allowed by the spirit of God, but cheefely
to be ware, that he usurp no authority which is forbidden by the word of God.
For wherefore do we detest the Pope and his usurped supremacy, but because he
arrogateth the same unto himself, not only without the warrant of Gods word,
but also clean contrary to the same?

Bridges
All this section we confess with our Brethren, and gladly subscribe unto it,
save that we wish it not, as though it were only to be done, and is not done:
but we trust it is performed already. If it be not, let our Brethren prove
the contrary.

Now if the reasons and authorities that have banished the Pope, do serve to
condemn all other usurped authority, The learned disc. page 78.
that is practiced in the Church: why should not all such authority be
banished as well as the Pope?

And good reason too, that all other usurped authority, that is practiced in
the Church, Bridges
should be as well banished as the Pope. But do our brethren mean by these
speeches, of all other usurped authority, that is practiced in the Church,
that there is any such practiced in the Church, meaning the church of England?
For, these words are uttered so covertly, that we might seem in granting the
consequence, that such should be banished: No such authority nor steps thereof
except in these new devises.
to grant withal, that there is some such in the church of England, remaining
and practiced yet among us. But we deny that there is any such, to our
knowledge, or by the Laws approved in this Realm. And if there be any
steps thereof: I doubt they will rather be found in the trake of our
Brethren themselves, sooner than in any part of that authority which is
allowed to our prelates.

We can allege against the Pope, and rightly, that which S. John baptist did
answer to his Disciples. The learned Dis. Page 78.
No man can take unto himself any thing, except it be given him from heaven.
John. 3.27. John. 3.27.
And that saying of the Apostle to the Hebrews: Heb. 5.4.
No man may take upon him any honor (in the Church of God) but he that is
called of God, as was Aaron. Insomuch that Christ himself did not give
himself to be an high Priest, but he that said unto him: Thou art my son,
this day have I begotten thee. He says in another place, Thou art a priest
for ever after the order of Melchizedech. Phil. 2.6.
Now seeing these rules are so general, that the Son of God himself was
not exempted from them, but showed forth the decree wherein he was authorized:
by what rule can any man retain that authority in the church of God, which is
not called thereto by the word of God?

Bridges.
All this again being granted unto, beats more our Brethren the Learned
Discoursers that it does our Bishops. Mastershop
Our Brethren take upon them more in these their pretended reformations, than
either they have hitherto done, or I think ever will be able, to show their
warrant and calling, authorizing them thereunto, by the word of God.

Likewise we can allege again, against the supremacy of the Pope, The learned
disc page 79. and 80.
to prove that Peter was not superior to the other Apostles, that which our
savior Christ says to his Apostles, Luke. 22.26. Luke. 22.26.
And Math. 20.25. Math. 20.25.
Mark. 10.42. Mar. 10.42.
It shall not be so among you, but he that is greatest amongst you, shall be
as the youngest, and he that rules as he that serves. And Mat. 23.8. Math.
23.8.
You have but one Master, which is Christ, and all you are all brethren. If
these places prove, that the Pope ought not to be above other Ministers of
the Church: why do they not likewise prove that the Ministers are equal
among themselves? And for the most part, all those arguments and authorities
of Scripture, that are used to confute the usurped authority of the Pope, are
of as great force against all other usurped authorities of one pastor over
another. Bridges


These sentences of our savior Christ, having been before alleged by our
Brethren, page 28. and 29. have been already sufficiently answered, that they
neither forbid the titles, nor the authority, that we acknowledge in our
Bishops, by the confession of the best writers even among our Brethren
themselves. Which sentences as they are rightly alleged against the supremacy
of the Pope, to prove that Peter was not (such) a superior to the other
Apostles, as the Papists do pretend: so are they not rightly alleged, to
prove that he ha^ never any kind of superiority, but no such kind of
superiority, as the pope falsely claymeth in the name of Peter. For, not only
all the ancient Fathers, and all the best writers, acknowledge, (as we have
seen) some superiority in Peter, such as contrarieth not these sentences: but
also S. Paul is most plain herein, that S. Peter had a kind of superiority,
if not to all, yet to many of the other Apostles. And for these sentences, Luke
22 ^^*
as we have already at large considered the peyse of them: so the first
sentence here cited, allows in plain words, both a Ruler among them, and a
greatest: so that he be in humility and serviceableness, as courteous and
diligent as if he were youngest, or as he that serves. The other place here
cited: You have but one Master, which is Christ, and al you are Brethren:
proves clearly, Math. 32.8.
that the Pope ought not to claim that mastership which he requires: but it
proves not, that (were he otherwise a true a true faithful Bishop) he might
have no Mastership at all: for than our Brethren might not be called Masters,
All mastership not forbidden in the ministry nor the title thereof.
neither as we (and that worthily) call M. Calvin, M. Beza, etc. Masters. But
this sentence is against the Pope, not against them: because the pope, not
they, would intrude himself into that absolute and supreme Mastership, and
Lordship. Which properly and only belongs to our Lord and Master, Jesus
Christ.

But our brethren demand: why do they not likewise prove, that the Ministers
are equal among themselves?

And so they do, in respect of the supreme Mastership of Christ, and in
respect simply of their Ministry: but, the reason why they prove not such an
equality, as our brethren surmise, is, because they are spoken absolutely,
against all kind of superiority and Mastership among them. And therefore,
where they say, that, for the most part, al those arguments and authorities of
scripture, that are used to confute the usurped authority of the pope, Usurped
authority.
are of as great force against all other usurped authorities of one pastor over
another: Although this be but a loose consequent: yet we may well grant this
conclusion, for usurped authorities. But till our Brethren can prove some such
among us, as are usurped: al these sentences, arguments, and authorities, are
but usurped, and wrested against their authority which is lawful.

Therefore while we entreat of the authority of the Pastors, we must take
heed that we open not a Window to popish tyranny, The learned disc. Page 80.
in steed of Pastoral authority, and that we enlarge, not the bounds of
authority, without the bounds of the scripture.

We also like well the caveat of this conclusion. Would God our brethren would
in-deede take heed unto it. Bridges
For if it be not taken heed unto in time: their Pastoral authori^^ w^ll so
enlarge the bounds thereof, that it will not only tyrannize over the
authority of the Doctors, Our breath. good caveat against themselves.
whom they clean debar from all public exhortation, reprehension,
conselation, and application, and over all their Seniory of new Governors as
we shall (God willing) see in this Discourse: but over all the Church. And it
begins pretily well, to abridge the Christian Princes and civil
Magistrates supreme authority in ecclesiastical causes, ( as in part we have
already seen) and al without the bounds of the scripture. But this their
Pastoral authority, by that time their governing Seniory were every where
settled and established, and had enlarged her bounds in every Congregation,
would be meetely well repressed, as we have seen in the form of prayers
printed at Geneua. And thus would one enlarge it self ^uer another, which
might open, not a window, but the broad gates, to a worse than Popish
tyranny, and still all without the bounds of the Scripture.

Wherefore while we search the scripture, the only rule whereby the Church of
God ought to be governed: The learned disc page 80. and 81.
we find that in regiment and governance of the Church, the pastor, B. or
elder, has none authority by himself, separated from other. For in the Church
there ought to be no Monarchy or sole absolute government, but that is
referred particularly to our savior Christ only, ^2. Tim. 6.7. Jude. 4.

Christ says, search the scriptures, Tyrannizing.
for in them ye reckon unto your selves that ye have eternal life, and they
bear witness of me. John. 5.39. In searching the scripture we find this rule,
Bridges.
where the Apostle warns Timothy: But abide thou in those things which thou
haste learned, and which are of trust committed unto thee. Gods word the rule
of our faith and life.
Knowing of whom thou have learned them, and that thou have from a child
known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee skillful, concerning
the salvation by the faith which is in Christ Jesus. The whole scripture
inspired from God, is profitable to Doctrine, to reprehension, to correction,
to institution, which is in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, being perfectly enstructed to every good work. 2. Tim. 3. And this
we confess against the adversaries of the scripture, and with our Brethren,
that the divine and Canonical scripture as the only rule, that contains all
things perfectly, concerning faith and the salvation which is in Jesus Christ,
to make the man of God perfect unto all good works: but that the holy
scripture is the only rule, whereby the Church of God ought to be governed:
understanding by these words, Gods word has not set down an only form of the
Churches government.
that the scripture has set down a perpetual and general rule, of all the
only order of the Churches form of external government, as well as it has
of faith, and of the moral part of man's actions and conversation: if we search
the scrpture never so much, neitheir we nor our brethren shall ever find it.
For, the church of God may safely admit, according to the diversities of the
states thereof, diverse forms and orders whereby it may be governed. So that
nothing be withal admitted, prejudicial to the Law, and to the Gospel, that
is to say neither against faith, nor good manners, as S. Austen terms it.

Neither is all the Government of the Church, in the government or authority of
the pastor, Bishop or Elder. The Princes government of the Church of God.
For the Christian Prince and civil Magistrate has a government of the
Church of God also, and there be diverse approved forms, whereby princes and
Magistrates govern the Church of God, in the diverse parts and states thereof,
besides the ecclesiastical government of pastors.

And as for that here our Brethren say, the pastor, Bishop or Elder has no
authority by himself separated from other: These speeches are spoken
ambiguously. It is true in one sense, that neither pastor nor yet Bishop ( for
I distinguish these terms that here are confusedly clapped together) has any
authority by him self separated from other in the regiment of the Church: but
that he has the same in common with all other in the church that be of his
calling: and not like a pope as an A-per-se, as though none other should have
it but he only, and all other from him: Neither has any pastor, How the
authority is not separate from other.
or Bishop, or Elder any such authority by himself, that can properly be said,
to be separated from other. For if it be separated from other, the^ it has no
government of the^, nor dealing with the^. Yea, Separate authority.
we grant, that whatsoever authority and Pastor, or B. or elder has, it is
the Churches authority, because it is given unto them that are the parts and
members of the whole Church, and to the Churches use and profit. As S. Paul
shows, Ephesians. 4.11. etc. He therefore gave some to be Apostles, other
prophets, other Evangelists, other pastors and Doctors, to the growing
together of the saints, to the work of the Ministry, to the edification of
the body of Christ. And the Apostle 1. Cor. 12. after he has showed, how the
spirit of God gives seperately his spiritual gifts, saying, verse. 11. But
all these works one and the self same spirit, S. Paul's example of the
mystical body compared to the natural
distributing privately even as he will: he adds: for as the body is one,
and has many members, but all the members of one body, when as they are many,
are one body: so also Christ. For by one spirit we are al baptized into one
body, whether Jews or Grecians, whether servants or free, and all have drunk
one drink, into one spirit. For the body is not one member but many. If the
foot say, I am not the hand, I am not of the body, is it therefore not of the
body? and if the ear say, I am not the eye, I am not of the body, is it
therefore not of the body? If the whole body were an eye, where were the
hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the smelling? But now has God
placed the members every one separately in the body? even as he would. But if
all were one member, where were the body? but now there are many members, and
yet but one body.

Thus does S. Paul reason, from the resemblance and proportion of the natural
body, and the regiment thereof, to the mystical. So that, although, what gift,
faculty, power, or government soever they have, it is not so separated from
other by themselves, that it has no Community with the other, nor is
pertaining to them. For, it pertains to the whole in common, as we say also
in the schools, of the soul or life of man: anima est tota in toto, and in
qualibet part. The soul or life is whole in the whole body and in every part.
But yet every faculty and power of the soul and life, is not in the whole
body, nor in every part thereof, but in the member only, The respects of the
community and separation.
that is the proper organe to the same. And so has every Bishop or pastoral
Elder, some authority by himself, in the regiment and government of the
Church, so separated from other, that other which have not the same office,
have not the same authority. So that the community in respect of the benefit,
bars not the separation in respect of the exercise of the authority, and
therefore faith S. Paul, 1. Cor. 12.27. You are all of the body of Christ and
members in part. And some has God ordained in the Church, first Apostles, the^
Prophets, thirdly Doctors, then powers, then the gifts of healing, helpings,
gouernmentes, kinds of tongues. Are all Apostles? are all prophets? are all
Doctors? are all powers? have all the gifts of healing? Do all speak with
tongs: do all interpret? So that, as in the first and second degrees here
mentioned, the Apostles and Prophets had some power and authority in the
regiment and governance of the Church, by themselves separated from other: so
may we safely conclude of the Doctors here mentioned also (by which name our
Brethren do here comprehend both Bishops and Pastors) that they had some power
and authority of regiment and governance in the Church, by themselves
separated from other in like manner.

And this manifestly appears in their practice. The Apostle Saint Paul by
his Apostolical authority in the Ecclesiastical regiment and governance of
the Church, sets down in diverse places diverse rules, some temporary,
some perpetual, concerning orders, rites, and ceremonies of the Churches,
without any ioynture of those Churches authorities to whom he enjoined them.
Yea, without so much as asking any counsel of them, or deliberating with them.
And 1. Cor. 11.34. he says in general: other things well I set in order when
I come. 1. Cor. 11.34
He says not, you and I together in joint authority: and yet (no doubt) he
had the joint consent (compromitted to him before, and declared after) of all
good men, in all those ordinances that he had made, or should make amongst
them. But the authority was his, not theirs, and by himself separated from
other, he exercised the same: I, not we, (says he) will disp^se them. If our
Brethren say that Paul was an Apostle, and they allege this rule, not for
Apostles, but that in the regiment and governance of the Church, the Pastor,
Bishop, or Elder, has none authority by himself separated from other:
although we have showed already that Saint Paul exercised sometimes the
office of a pastoral Elder, which he did also in Corinthus: yet, Our bre.
reason from Christ deba^reth Apostles and all from any separate authouritie.
since our Brethren annexe this reason, For in the Church, there ought to be no
Monarchy or sole absolute government, but that is referred peculiarly to our
Savior Christ only: How does not this reason cut off Saint Paul even as an
Apostle, and all the Apostle, and all other besides our Savior Christ only?
Did they take upon them the Monarchy, or sole absolute government, that is
referred peculiarly to our Savior Christ only?

And what though no ordinary Bishops, Pastors, nor Elders, have in all
things like authority as the Apostles had? Yet to take upon them this
monarchy and sole absolute government peculiar to Christ only, they and all
the Angels in heaven were as much debarred as any other. So then, by this
our Brethrens reason, the Apostles might have none authority by themselves
separated from other, in the regiment and government of the Church: But we see
how they had such separate authority: neither may we think, they invaded
Christ's monarchy, or sole absolute government: and therefore Christ's monarchy
or sole absolute government may stand intier, and yet may some other
Ecclesiastical person have from Christ some authority by himself separated
from other in the regiment and governance of the Church. For he that has some
part of the Monarkes authority, ( and that not of himself, but representing
the Monarke) committed to him, and that to him by himself, separated from
other, does not forth with take the Monarchy on him, or that sole absolute
government, that is referred peculiarly to our Savior Christ only, but the
Apostles had and exercised so far forth some authority in the regiment of
the Church by themselves separated from other: that they appointed other also
to take such authority upon them, and give them rules of the same.

Timothies authority given him separate to himself both in teaching and
governing.
And as we have showed out of our Brethren themselves, that Timothy ( whose
example they would elude, under pretense that he was an Evangelist) was the
Pastor of Ephesus, and the chief Pastor there, (...), Antistes, Bishop, and
that their first or Archbishop: so Saint Paul that had it and used it by
himself, gives Timothy likewise authority by himself, separated ( in
respect of the authority) from other, and that not only in the function of
teaching, but also in the Ecclesiastical and public government of the Church.
For teaching, he says 1. Tim. 1.3. As I besought thee to abide still in
Ephesus, when I departed into Macedonia, that thou should command some, not
to teach other doctrine. And in the 4. Chap. verse. 11. etc. These things
command and teach. Let no man despise thy youth, but be unto them that
believe, an example in word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith, and
in pureness, till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, and to
doctrine. Despise not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
prophecy, with the laying on of hands of the Presbiterie (or Eldership.)
These things exercise thou, in these things be thou, that they profiting may be
manifest among all. Take heed^ to thy self and to thy doctrine continue these
things. For doing the same, thou shall save thy self, and the hearers of thee.
Al which authority as it is peculiar to ye proper duty of thepastorall
office, and in common to Saint Paul, to the Apostles, Evangelists, Bishops,
Pastors, and to all Elders and Ministers of the word by themselves separate
from other: ( in which part, neither any of them, nor all they, nor all the
Angels in heaven, can make, nor teach any other Gospel:) so, for that which
follows in the next Chapter, consisting all or most of that authority, which
our Brethren say, they now understand for power of government in the Church,
the Apostle ascribes also many parts, and those the chief and principal
parts of that authority, to the rule and governance of Timothy by himself,
separated from others in that authority, even as he did before in the
doctrine. And in this respect with much better reason, that in these things
both Paul and Timothy had, and the Bishops and pastors have more
authority, as in matters that men might make, and some of them also alterable.
As for example. Rebuke not an Elder ( says Saint Paul to Timothy, Timothies
separat^ authority.
1. Tim. 5.1.) but exhort him as a Father. The rebuking therefore of an Elder
appertained to his authority in the government of the Church. But he might
rebuke him by himself, and separated from other, that is, as well by his own
pastoral authority separated from others authority, as priuatlie by
himself, or separating the Elders from other.

Moreover ( says Paul to Timothy, verse. 11.) reject the younger widows.
The rejecting therefore of the widows ( to whom Beza ascribes an
Ecclesiastical office) appertained also unto Timothy. And verse 19. Against
an Elder admit no accusation, except under 2. or 3. witnesses. Not only
therefore the hearing, and all the chief process in judgment, but the very
admitting o^ the accusation, appertained particularly to his authority by
himself separated from other, though not so separated, that they might not sit
with him, but that in the admitting and determining such accusations, even in
the Consistory against an Elder, and the Elder a Pastor also: the authority
of the negative voice is ascribed here to him, and in his person to a Bishop.

This may also be referred ( says Hemingius) unto the honor of Priests (or
Elders) that the Bishop should not give care, Hemingius in 1. Tim. 5.
to the slanderers of the life and fame of them, except they were convicted
before, by lawful witnesses. For if he would hearken to tale tellers, without
evident knowledge of the cause, it cannot be but that oftentimes he should
give over hasty judgment, and should be carried rashly against the
innocent. Wherein he plainly ascribes the authority of judgment ( over a
Pastor accused) to the Bishop.

The proposition of this place is ( says Aretius) that a Bishop must endeavor
himself, Aretius in 1. Tim. 5.
that the Ecclesiastical judgments may most ho^^lie be administered. He
appoints the parts from the division. For sin either is hidden, and
therefore by witnesses to be convinced: or is notorious, neither has the
sinner need of witness, because the sin is evident, or else also he does
confess it. Of either of this kind he briefly treats, but he begins
with that that is hidden. As it is wont in great men, such as are the
Praesidents of the Common weal and of the Church, whose sin is not evident,
for because of their authority. These if they be complained upon, inquiry
must be made by witnesses. Signifieng, that the complainers must not easily
be believed.

Moreover, that the fame and name of those that are good, must be favored,
that they be not openly defaced with every small rumor. First, here I take
Priest or Elder, by office and age, that is, the Ministers must not be
condemned, except diligent inquisition be had.

Neither only the Ministers, but all persons of grave years. For unto whom
God has given a good name and gravity of age, it behooves to worship them
in the place of parents. Therefore diligent heed is to be had, that the
defamers be not rashlye believed against such persons.

Moreover, because such Priests or Elders were Judges and Senators
Ecclesiastical, that corrected other for their sin, according to the reason
of their fault: it is credible that they incurred the offense of many, insomuch
that they should not want backbiters It was therefore a matter worthy of
admonition, that nothing should rashly be credited against them. Neither
follows it thereupon, that witnesses should be had only in these, and in
other they must proceed without witnesses: yea rather, because in these
gravity is required: he teaches that the same must be had in every
Ecclesiastical judgment. In the mean time there are many light and childish
matters, in which neither the integrity of the fame nor name is touched, The
rule given to Timothy, is general to all present governors and Bishops
wherein there is no need of like rigor. Let us therefore establish this for
a common rule, that in all Ecclesiastical judgment the president or governor
must have care, that in a godly and holy sort inquisition may be made of men's
sins.

Thus does likewise Aretius draw this precept of Paul to Timothy, to a
general rule* that in the consistory and in criminal causes, even against a
Minister, whom he calls also a Praesident over the people the hearing, that
the Bishop is a higher Praesident above him, and has the admittance, and his
judging of the matter.

And what differs Beza herein from these: Be^^ain 1. Tim. 5.
Against an Elder ( says he) (...). The Greeks refer this to men of more
ancient years, which to me seems very absurd. For although somewhat
ought to be given to the hoare head, yet I see no cause why in this point the
condition ought not to be alike. But in a Priest there is a far other reason,
because it is certain that Satan lays his snare chiefly against this sort
of men. And for that cause none are so much thrall to slanders and
backbitings. In hearing therefore the accusations of them, there is most need
of great heedfulnesse. But thou will say, what is that? Here me thinks some
have stumbled, while they think that nothing is here praescribed of Paul,
which in all judgments is to be observed. And therefore they sweat much in
untying this knotte, and do manifestly wreast the words of the Apostle,
insomuch verily that some (which thing Erasmus out of a certain Epistle
written by Saint Jerome to Marcella rehearses) do clean blotte out all that
member following, and then expound it: receive not, that is, receive not
easily. Howbeit I do not suppose any difficulty to be here, for it is one
thing to admit the accusation, and anotherthing to absolve, or condemn the
accused. But this is the office of a judge, to hear any that will accuse, A
Judges office.
whom afterward if they shall not thoroughly prove him guilty, he may chastise
according to their deserts. But for all this, when as a Priest is accused, the
Apostle would have a certain peculiar thing to be observed, that no man
should be admitted, no not so much as to accuse him, except before hand,
before two or three witnesses, he shall cause his accusation that is to come, to
be believed. So that the Priest be not straight way condemned, or the cause
heard in his absence. But that after it shall appare that it will not be a
frivolous accusation: That then at the length the guilty party shall be
called, and that it shall be lawfully determined on the whole matter. But I
find the cause of this Apostolical constitution to be two fold: to wit, By
Priest or Elder, he means Doctor or Teacher.
because (as I said right now) none are alike thrall unto slander, as are
godly Doctors. And then because in a manner no private judgment can be
ordained against a Priest, since that it must needs be joined with the public
offense of the whole Church. Insomuch, that although he be absolved,
notwithstanding some imfamie thereupon shall redound to the whole Church, and
that there should be need of great caution, not only in judging him, but
also in admitting his accuser. Moreover, we must note out of this place* that
Timothy in the Ephesine Presbiterie, was then (...), that is, (Antistes) the
Bishop, as Iustine calls him, not that he should do all things, as he
listed, but that for his godliness and wisdom he should moderate all
things, that all things in the assembly should be well done and in order.

Thus does even Beza also not only acknowledge Tymothie to have been the
Bishop of the Church of Ephesus: but also that both he had, and every Bishop
by this rule ought to have this authority of moderation, whether any
accusation, ( and how far forth) should be admitted against a Pastoral
Elder, This authority was separate unto Timothy.
and in hearing and determining the cause to be his judge. Which authority (
in so great a Consistory as then and there was) being singled and separated
out from other unto him: how had other any part with him of the same? And as
it was thus in trial of matters pleaded before him: so if any Pastors were
found to have openly offended, Timothy again in the next verse (and in
Timothy every Bishop) has authority given him over any such pastors openly
to reprove them. And the reason is a^ded by the Apostle, That the other also (
speaking especially of the other Pastors) may have fear. From hence ( says
Aretius) is this noble argument drawn. Fear in the church is to be confirmed,
Aretius.
therefore Ecclesiastical judgments are gravely to be administered: so that,
since the Bishops authority should be such, as should strike fear in the
other pastors, it is apparent, they had not the same nor equal authority with
him.

And so Hyperius refers all this in general to the authority of Bishops,
though the matter be brought before the Church, and that the Bishops should
seem to favor their sins, if he dealt not thus. And he concludes in these
words, But of what matter the Priests (or Elders) may be accused and reproved
before the Bishop, it were long to dispute. And the next verse declares yet
further his separate authority, I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou observe these things, without
preferring one before another, and do nothing partially. This contestation (
says Hemingius) wherewith as it were with an oathe, Paul binds Timothy,
declares how hard the office of a Bishop is. How the Bishop should do
these things.
And it contains a very serious admonition, least that in the sight of so
great witnesses, God the Father, Christ, and the elect Angels, (he calls
these elect, for the difference of the reprobate) he should do any of those
things that pertain to the office of a Bishop, of private affections. But
that he should do all things lawfully and orderly, to the glory of God, and
to the edification of the Church, according to the praescribed Canons,
preferring none to any thing for private causes. And speaking of the diverse
readings of this sentence, he says: al these readings although they differ in
words, yet they offer the same sentence, that is to wit, a Bishop according to
the Canons praescribed of Paul, should do and judge al things, esteeming
more the verity of the cause, than the condition of the person. Which thing
verily is in common commended to all Judges, Exodus 18. Wherein ( says Beza)
he is said of the Grecians, (...), The office of a Judge.
to give preiudicate judgment, that accounts any man as excelcellent and
choice. But a Judge ought in judging to lay down all these opinions, as he
that sits not to judge of the persons, but of the cause, etc. For a Judge
ought to weigh the rights of the pleaders, as it were in a balance, so that he
should incline to neither part Otherwise it will not be a right judgment. But
a Judges authority in all such judgments i^ the chiefest on the bench, A
Judges office is an office separate from all the bench.
whosoever sit with him as assistant: neither does he (howsoever he communicate
with other in council and deliberation) join any with him in the authority
of judgment: the Bishop therefore being such a Judge, in these matters
pertaining to the Ecclesiastical regiment and governance of the Church: we
find by searching of the Scripture, that a Bishop has authority by himself
separate from other, clean contrary to our Brethrens saying.

Neither has the Bishop this authority only, concerning their lives and
conversation. But for their very entry and admittance also into the
ministry, all the authority of being ordained was to pass (by whom so ever
they were elected) by his only ordeining of them, as appears further, verse
23. Lay hands lightly on no man. And although Beza here do abridge this
his authority in ordaining Ministers, and say: Lay hands etc. that is,
admit not every one lightly to have any Ecclesiastical function, to wit, so
much as in thee is. For neither all the authority lay in Timothy alone, but
by election made of the suff^agies (or voices or the whole Church, as we have
said, Beza restrayning the Bishops authority.
Act. 14. d. 23. and appears by the elelection of Matthias, and of the
Deacons. And then afterward, the (...) or Bishop, in the name of the
Presbiterie, did by the imposition of hands consecrate unto the Lord the
elected party, as is abouesayde 4. d 14.

But all this over nice mincing, serves not the turn, for, The election of
Matthias Act. 14
in the elections which Beza here cites for example of like manner, there is
great difference. In the example of Matthias, Act. 1. his election was by lot,
and not by voices, nor any laying on of hands is there mentioned. In the
Deacons, Act. 6. the multitude chose them, and the Apostles, not any of the
other Elders, laid their hands on them. And as for the example, Act. 14.
whereof although we have seen some what already, yet so often as our brethren
lead us to this place, which is one of their principal sanctuaries to which
they run: it shall not be amiss so often to show, that they claim a wrong
privilege. And first, that it was done by the peoples voices and holding up
their hands, as a testification of their consentes unto them, which the words
of the text do not enforce. (...), but ordeining by the hand unto them,
Priests (or Elders) by every Church: although Erasmus interpret (...), Erasmus.
quum creassent per suffragia: and when they had created by voices Elders unto
them: Calvin.
whom Calvin follows, saying: The word (...) signifies to discern by
holding up the hands, as is wont to be done in solemnities or assemblies of
the people.

And Beza follows him, saying: This word sprang of the custom of the
Grecians, which gave their voices with their hands held out. Beza.
Whereupon sprang that decree noted of Cicero for Lucius Flaccus, they
stretched out their hands. And diverse others most excellent learned among our
Brethren and us, follow that translation: and albeit our Geneua translation
says, And when they had ordained them Elders by election, but adding this note
in the margin: The word signifies to elect by putting up of hands, which
declares, that Ministers were not made without the consent of the people: yet
(with the good leave and reverence of all these singular learned men be it
spoken) not only no necessity drives them to this interpretation: but I see
not (though I would be right glad to learn) how it can stand with the
sense and reason of the Lert.

For first the text makes there no mention at all of their election, The
words of the text m^nc^o^ not election.
whereof we doubt not, but that they were not made without the consent of the
people. But the question is, who did make, create, or ordain them? Whether the
people together with Paul and Barnabas: Election.
The word (...) (...) referred only to Paul and Barnabas.
or Paul and Barnabas only? But it is most evident that the word (...), is
referred only to Paul and Barnabas: and therefore whatsoever the people did
in voic^, or hands, in the election; the hands only of Paul and Barnabas
were in the creating and ordaining of them. And although that the Heathen
Grecians had such an use, that when a law or decree was to be approved of the
people, they gave their consent thereunto in their great assemblies, by holding
up their hands: yet to take the word here in such a profane sense, me thinks
Calvin aunsweres himself sufficiently: Notwithstanding the Ecclesiastical
writers use the name (...) in another sense. that is to wit, in a solemn
custom of ordaining, which in the Scriptures is called the laying on of hands.
Moreover, by this form of speaking is excellently expressed the lawful
manner in creating Pastors. Paul and Barnabas are said to choose the Elders.
Paul and Barnabas modera^ors of the election
Do they this alone by their private office? Yea tather, they permit the
matter to the voices of them all. Therefore in the Pastors that were to be
created, there was a free election of the people. But, that nothing should be
done tumultuouslie, Paul and Barnabas (as it were moderators) had the
government. Thus ought the decree of the Council of Laodecia to be
understood, which forbids the election to be permitted to the people.

Thus writes Calvin. Wherein he drives all to the election. But the word
(...), imports by his own interpretation, and by the Ecclesicall custom in
the Scripture, the ordination by laying on of hands. A^ for the election was
another matter, which then in part pertayned to the people. And yet therein
Paul and Barnabas had a several higher authority by themselves, than any
other had jointly with them.

As for the decree in the Council of Laodicia, ( which was holden about the
year of our Lord 360.) the words and meaning are plain, Chap. 13. That it
must not be permitted unto the people, to make election of them, that were to
be promoted unto Priesthood. What tumultes they had found therein, I remit to
the Ecclesiastical histories. So that we cannot (as Calvin does) understand
the words of the Council so, as that they only take away the moderation of
the voices from the people: for that they never had so much, The peoples
election no necessary or any material part of making pastors.
as to be moderators of their own voices. But the Councels meaning is most
apparent, that the people should no longer have any voices at all to elect the
pastor. And therefore that ancient Council ( in making this decree)
declares, that they took not the peoples election to be any necessary and
material part of creating, ordaining, or consecrating of a Pastor.

But whatsoever authority our Brethren would renew unto the people, concerning
election: What is that to the ordaining of him? The election makes him but
ordinable or capable to be ordained As for that example which Beza adds,
Imposition of hands.
Act. 4. mencioneth indeed Imposition of hands of the presbiterie or
eldership: The imposition of hands of the presbiterie.
Which word if we should here understand, for a number of Elders, that laid
their hands on him, ( which Calvin says we need not do, and we have showed
the contrary:) yet, neither follows it of necessity, that they were any
Elders that dealt in the government of the Church and not in the word, as Beza
himself confesses: neither that this imposition of hands on him, was at his
first creating, minister of the word or pastor, but on some other occasion, and
therefore says Beza, (...). id est, (...). of Prophecy, that is, to
prophecy, or in prophecy, as Romans 4. b. 11. or by prophecy, that is, the
holy Ghost by the mouth of the Prophets so commending, as is above said,
Chap. 1. d. 18. howbeit because mention is made of the gift bestowed upon him:
I prefer the former interpretation. For it is more probable, when as he had
already an excellent gift of prophecy, that he was chosen for a while, to
wit, until he were of the Lord called to some other place, for he was an
Evangelist. Which laying on of hands out of doubt did confirm the grace of God
in him, as 2. Tim. 1. b. 6. But of Prophets, what was their function has often
been declared of us. Imposition of hands pertained to pastors.
Of the presbiterie (...), that is, of the order of the Priests or Elders. In
the which name it is probable, that the company is signified of all them,
which labored in the word, in the Church of Ephesus, as Act. 20. d. 27. and f.
28. For sometimes these names of Bishops and Priests, yea, and of Deacons also
are general. See, Phil. 1. a. 1. a certain fellow translateth it the Senate,
as in another place for the Church, he said, the common weal.

Thus writes Beza, of the imposition of hands, and of the presbiterie, both
counting the name Senate, too profane a name of the presbiterie: and ascribing
the imposition of hands, to those only that were laborers in the word: and
that Timothy was a minister of the word before this imposition of their hands.

But if now we shall understand, that in this place 1. Tim. 4.14. by laying on
of hands upon Timothy, was also meant the ordaining or creating of him a
minister of the word, as Saint Paul means it in his precept to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.22. and as Calvin takes it: let us see again what Calvin says
thereon: He says that grace was given unto him by prophecy. How? To wit,
because (as we said before) the holy Ghost by Oracle appointed Timothy, that
he should be chosen into the order of pastors. For he was not chosen only
by the judgment of man, as is wont to be done, but the calling of the spirit
went before. He says it was given him with the imposition of hands. Wherein
he signifies, that together with the ministry he was also endued with
necessary gifts. It was usual and solemn to the Apostles to ordain
Ministers, by the imposition of hands. Separate authority.
And veri^y of this custom, and of the original and signification thereof, I
have touched somewhat before, and the residue may be gathered out of my
Institution. The Presbiterie: they which think this word is collectiue, put
for the College of the Priests (or Elders) do in my judgment think well.
Notwithstanding (all things weighed) I grant that the other sense, does not
ill agree ^hereto, that it should be the name of the office, etc. And because
Beza refers the expounding of this place, to the 2. Tim. 1.6. on these
words: Wherefore I warn thee that thou stir up the gift of God which is
in thee by the imposition of my hands. Let us see again withal what Calvin
says thereon: There is no doubt but that Timothy was wished for with the
common desire of the Church, and not elected by the private will of Paul
alone. But it is not absurd, that Paul should ascribe the election priuatlie
to himself, whereof he was the chiefest author. Although here he rather
treats of the ordeining of him than of the electing, that is, of the solemn
custom of his being instituted.

Moreover, it does not cleerelie appear, whether that when any was to be
consecrated, all were wont to lay their hand upon his head, or one only in
the place and name of all. My conjecture rather inclines unto this, The
separat authority of one in imposition of hands.
that there was one only which laid his hands upon him. Howbeit, it may be
doubted, whether this present imposition of hands be referred to his
ordaining, because at that time the graces of the spirit, whereof Saint Paul
treats to the Romans* Chap. 12. and 1. Corin. 13 were conferred by
imposition of hands unto many also which were not instituted Pastors. But I
easily gather of the former Epistle, that Paul treats here of the Pastors
office. For this place agrees with that: Neglect not the grace which is given
to thee with the imposition of the hands of the Presbiterie. Whereby it
appears that the hands of the Presbiterie in the ordaining and consecrating
a pastor might be well enough not the hands of many, but of one alone, that
had principal authority above the other in that action.

And as Paul testif^eth thus of his own manner of ordaining Timothy: so he
proceeds in his precept to Timothy, 1. Tim. 5.23. Lay hands lightly on no
man. Whereon says Calvin: Caluinus in 1. Tim. 5.
There is no doubt but that he would put away envy from Timothy, and meet
with many complaints, that oftentimes arise against the godly servants of
Christ, which refuse to obey the ambitious prayers of any whosoever. For some
accuse them of roughness, some of envy, some cry out that they be cruel,
because they do not by and by admit those that vaunt themselves by any manner
of commendation. Of which thing at this day we have too much experience.
Paul therefore exhorts Timothy, Sole absolute authority.
not to go from his gravity, nor suffer himself to be overcome with
preposterous studies. Not that Timothy had so much need of such admonition,
as that by his authority he might repress those, which otherwise might be
troublesome unto Timothy. First the imposition of hands signifies the
ordination, that is, the sign is taken for the thing it self. For he
forbids that he should of too much facility admit any, which as yet is
not so tried a man. The Bishops authority in set out by the authoriritie of
Timothy.
For some there are which for the study of novelty would haueeuerie man
though most unknown, to be promoted so soon as ever he has set forth any
one show or other that likes them. It behooves a grave and prudent Bishop to
resist this importunate desire, even as Paul here commends Timothy to do.

In which words Calvin draws this especial rule to Timothy, to a general
rule to all Bishops to do the like. As likewise heerevpon does Hemingius.
Hemingius
He adds (says he) another Counsel, or an other Canon concerning those that
are to be ordained to Ecclesiastical offices, that he should not lay hands
upon any that is not fit or proved enough, that is, that he should ordain
none to an Ecclesiastical function. For by (the Figure called) Metonimia, the
sign is put for the thing signified. He requires here a stout Bishop which
should not admit every one by and by unto an Ecclesiastical office, but only
tried even according to the former Canons.

Aretius likewise draws this precept to an ordinary and general rule for
Bishops. Aretius.
A Bishop ( says he) must do his diligence to be heedfull and wary in
Ministers that are to be chosen. For herein also is a fault, even in celerity
and rashness of judgment, that a man should judge him to be fit, which is
nothing so.

Thus do all these, and a number more of excellent Protestants agree, that not
only Saint Paul gives this power of government in the Church, as a
peculiar authority to Timothy to ordain Ministers, and to repel those that
he thought unmeet: but also that herein and in the points aforesaid.
Timothy is a patt^r^e for all other Bishops to follow.

Since therefore Saint Paul makes a rule hereof, and this rule stretches to
the duty, and so to the authority of all Bishops: I marvel how our
Brethren can justify that which here they affirm. That while we search the
Scripture, the only rule whereby the Church of God ought to be governed, we
find that in the regiment and governance of the Church, the Pastor, Bishop, or
Elder, has no authority by himself separated from other.

As for the reason which our Brethren render: for in the Church there ought to
be no monarchy, Political regiment.
or sole absolute government, but that is referred peculiarly to our savior
Christ only, 2. Tim. 6.7. Iudae. 4. If their meaning all this while be,
only of such government* we gladly grant the same, that none other than
our Savior Christ, has such a monarchy, or sole absolute government, neither
by himself separated from other, nor yet joined with other in the Church. Nor
any (except the Pope only) that I hear of, takes it upon him. But this
debarreth not, but that there may well be, and is, some monarchy, as in
Christian Princes, and also of Bishops some absolute government of our
Savior Christ also. And therefore these two quotations. 1. Tim. 6 15. and
Iudae. 4. are cited in vain.

The learned disc. Page 81.
And that regiment which he has left unto his Church is a consent of his
householde servants, to do all things according to his prescription, as he
witnesses Matthew. 18.19. Math. 18.19.
If two of you consent upon earth upon any matter, whatsoever ye shall ask,
it shall be granted to you of my Father which is in heaven. For wheresoever
two or three be gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them. Seeing therefore that our savior Christ has neither authorized nor
promised to bless any other form of regiment, than that which consists of
the consent and gathering together of his servant in his name: we hold us
content with this simplicity, and therefore we are bold to say, that the
authority of the pastor in publik regiment or discipline, separate from others,
is nothing at all.

These words, that regiment, which he ( meaning Christ) has left unto his
Church, Bridges
is a consent of his householde servants, etc. are spoken too generally. If
they had said that Ecclesiastical regiment, it had yet ben the more
tolerable. For Christ has left other political and civil regiment unto his
Church, besides the Ecclesiastical regiment of it. True it is, that in that
also there is a consent of his householde: but neither so, that it debarreth
the civil Princes monarchy in the Church, and his government in many things
by himself: The wreasting of Christ's sentence.
neither has Christ praescribed al orders and laws in particular for the
Princes and Magistrates to do all things according to his praescription of
them. And this sentence Matthew. 18. if it should be thus opposed to the
regiment of Princes, Mat. 18.
is manifestly wreasted, and dangerously concluded, That our Savior Christ
has neither authorized nor promised to bless any other form of regiment,
than that which consists of the consent and gathering together of his
servants in his name.

Neither yet helps it the matter, to understand all this, for the only
Ecclesiastical regiment. For although we deny not, but that those causes
which appertain either to the civil or ecclesiastical regiment of the
Church, should not be ordained nor imposed upon the Church, without any (...)
fully spoken: and much more that which our Brethren add, it is a consent of
his householde servants to do all things according to his praescription. For
by this rule the Ecclesiastical regiment of the Church is in no other thing,
than Christ has prescribed.

But our Brethren have granted, page 76. even in their last point of
ceremonial matters, that the Church had lawful authority, to conclude a
public ordinance of them, for order and comeliness sake, and for edification:
and it is evident that many things are of their own nature indifferent, which
may be so ordered and authorized by the Church, as our Brethren already have
confessed. But the Church could have no such authority of them, or of any
thing, if it be already by Christ praescribed: and therefore the Churches
regiment is not only a consent ( as our Brethren say) to do all things
according to his praescription. For he has made no praescription of these
things, whether they should be done or no. Except they understand this to be
his prescriptio^, yt they shall be done for order and comeliness sake, and for
edification. But those points concern the ends wherefore, and the manner how
they should be done, and not the things and matters that are done, or consented
upon to be done. And it is one thing to do, or how to do the things that are
consented upon to be done, and another thing to consent that such things
should be done. For, the Churches regiment in these matters, consists most in
the consent ( as here is said) to authorize them to be done, The difference
of the Churches consent, and of the Bishops and Pastors.
and the Bishops or the Pastors regiment, in the authority of doing or
executing of them.

But, for the consent of them to be done, what is this that they call here a
consent of his householde servants? Is it requisite, that express consent be
had of all those that are Christ's householde servants, that is to say, of
every particular person in the Church? What if it seem otherwise to some one,
or few, that will give no consent thereto, but dissent? Does this cut off the
Churches regiment? No. For, our Brethren, to prove that all things must be
done with the Churches consent, allege this sentence: If two of you consent
upon earth upon any matter, whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be granted
you of my Father which is in heaven. And must this consent then, of the
regiment of the Church, be contracted to any two of the householde servants:
though the most part of all the other, that be no less servants, and
faithful servants of the Lords household, do dissent from them? But
wherefore do our Brethren allege this sentence to this matter? To confirm
their regiment in the Church, being in comparison but two, to two thousand,
that have consented to the orders of the Churches regiment now established: and
they dissent from our consent herein? Indeed, were it matter of faith in
doctrine, and substance of religion, or any thing already prescribed, not
only the consent of two, and the dissent of one, is better than the consent of
all the rest in error (as we allege Gerson and Panormitane against the
Papists, when they boast of consent and Councels, against the manifest truth of
Gods word) but when we all therein agree with full consent, against all the
errors and superstitions of the Papists, and yet in some matters of
Ceremonies, of their own nature indifferent: and of those points in the
Churches regiment, that concern comeliness, order, and edification, some
servants of the householde, dissent from other some: whether is it better that
many, and almost all, and the most experient, and that in matters of regiment,
and counted as learned as any of the other, and the chiefest also in
authority, yea, the Prince also having the supreme authority, and that in
the publyke regiment of Ecclesiastical matters, should give place to two or
three, or to a few persons dissenting: or that these few should leave their
dissension, give place and consent, to the greater and better part of the
company?

And will God grant the requests consented upon by two or three, and not
their requests consented upon by so many thousands, when they are also
gathered in the name of Christ, as not only the people are in our publik
prayers, The sentence of Christ Mat. 18.19. more confirms our consents tha^
our breath.
but also all the estates of ye whole realm, and chief parts of the Church
of England, all which have often been assembled, and given already their
consent, to the establishment of this form of the Churches regiment that we
have? And therefore this promise of our Savior Christ, if it may be drawn to
matters of public Ecclesiastical regiment: does more and more confirm us in
our form established: that God approues it, and was in the midst of them
that consented on it, and is still in the midst of our assemblies gathered in
his name, when we direct our actions according thereunto. And now, seeing that
our Savior Christ has neither authorized, nor promised to bless any other
form of regiment, than that which consists of the consent and gathering
together of his servants in his name: we hold us content with this
simplicity, and therefore we are bold to say, that God has promised to
bless, and (as we have found the experience, if we have grace in thankfulness
to acknowledge his manifold blessings) has diverse ways alredie blessed our
form of regiment, which with such consent, and gathering together of his
servants in his name, is established. And our brethren have not to be
ouerbolde, but rather to fear and bethink themselves, how they gather
themselves in consent and consort, against this authorized form of regiment:
least their gathering together breed a banding in factions of themselves, to
dissipate the unity of the Church, and to make scismes amongst us.

And now, where our Brethren conclude this Section, saying: And therefore we
are bold to say, that the authority of a pastor in public regiment or
discipline, separate from others, Joint authority.
is nothing at all:

I will be bold also to say thus much: that it is nothing at all against our
pastors authority, in publik regiment or discipline. For (as they have
described it) he has none such given him, nor exercises any such (by any
authority in this Realm established) that is separate from others, that is to
say (as before our Brethren have expounded their meaning) a Monarchiall
authority or sole absolute government. But that is referred peculiarly to our
Savior Christ only. 1. Tim. 6. v. 7. Jude. 4. Otherwise, if they mean not
such authority: I dare be bold again to say thus much, yt not only this
exception of Christ's Monarchical or sole absolute authority is alleged here
in vain, and is nothing at all unto the abridging of the Bishop or Pastors
authority: but that also in manner and matter before rehearsed, a Bishop or
Pastor has a great authority separated by himself, as the foresaid
examples and precepts to Timothy have declared.

Let us then see, what is his authority joined with others, and first, who are
so joined in Commission with him, The learned Dis. Page 81. and 82.
that without their consent he can do nothing. We say therefore, that the
authority of Christ is left unto his whole Church, and so to every Church:
that none may challenge Episcopal or Metropoliticall authority as it is with
us at this day over other, without great tyranny and manifest injury.

That the Pastor or the Bishop can do nothing by his authority, in the
government of the Church, without the consent of others joined in commission
with him, for every particular act that he must do: our brethren have not yet
proved. Yea, we have showed the clean contrary both in making Ministers, and
in admitting, hearing, judging, and determining of their caused, by their own
authority, without any joined in commission with them. Not that they did all
things alone, but used the counsel and consent of others, and perhaps of the
whole Churches: but that, they were not joined in commission with them, nor
were their equals in the authority of those doings.

Neither is this conclusion better than the antecedent: We say therefore that
the authority of Christ is left unto his whole Church, Bridges.
and so to every Church etc. For my part, I dare not be thus bold to
affirm thus indefinitlie and in general, that the authority of Christ is
left unto his whole Church, and so to every Church. But that certain parts
of the authority of Christ is left, and that in a certain legantine and
ministerial manner, unto his whole Church, and so to every Church. And yet
not so, that every Church, that is, every particular congregation, has as
full authority of that part, as the whole Church has: but that, the whole, or
to every Church, it is so left, that none may challenge Episcopal or
Metropoliticall authority, as it is with us at this day over other, without
great tyranny and manifest injury: This indeed is a mere, we say it, not:
we prove it. Against this our Brethrens we say, as though all lay on their
bare saying, and that whatsoever they say, we must hold it by and by for an
oracle, or for such a principle, as the Pythagoreans did the saying of their
Master, (...), he said it. We have heard at large what Saint Paul has said
to Timothy, and what a number of most excellent men in the primitive Church,
and some immediately after the Apostles times, by the clear testimonies of the
unsuspected histories, and auucientest fathers, and by the grant of the best
late writers in the reformed Churches, have had both Episcopal, and also
Metropolitical authority, as it is with us at this day over other, without
any tyranny great or little, and without any injury manifest or hidden, at
all. And if they might have it, they might challenge it. Yea, to challenge them
for it, much more to take it from them, were rather not only the greater
tyranny and more manifest injury of the twain: but to say, the authority of
Christ is left unto his whole church, and so to every church that none in the
church has any power or exercise thereof over other: The confusion of our
bre. equality
is the greatest and most manifest confusion yt can be. For by this rule we
must not say (as our Br. here do) Let us then see what is his authority
joined with others, and first who are so joined in commission with him, that
without their consent he can do nothing: but we must rather say, Let us then
see, what is his authority joined with others, and first, who are not so
joined in commission with him, that without their consent he can do nothing:
if the authority of Christ be left unto his whole Church, and so, to every
church, that none may challenge it over other. So that now, there should not only
be, no Metropolitical authority over Bishops, nor Episcopal over Pastors: but
also no pastoral authority over the people. For, the people are some body
(as I take it) both in the whole Church, and in every Church also.

Yea, if these words which our Brethren so generally say, we say therefore,
that the authority of the Church is left unto his whole Church, and so to
every Church, be not restrained to that part of his authority, that
consists only in the Ecclesiastical regiment of his Church: it will as
much endanger all Magistrates civil estates, that they have no authority
neither over other. For, they hold that also of Jesus Christ, and it is a part
of his authority over his Church. But, howsoever that may stand or fall
hereby, the Princes supreme authority in Ecclesiastical causes, over all
persons Ecclesiastical and civil in their dominions, is clean taken away
from them, even as well as the Metropolicall over the Bishops, or the Bishops
authority over the Pastors.

Now, although this most absurd, Christ's promise.
and most dangerous confusion of all authorityes Ecclesiastical and civil
might ensewe heereon: Yet our Brethren having promised herein, that they
would be bold to say these sayings: and having hethereto (though boldly, yet
but barely) said them: they will now be bold, ( as good reason is they
should) to assay to prove them.

For, seeing our Savior Christ promised his presence and authority to every
Church indifferently, The learned disc page 82
Mathewe 18.19.20. Math. 18.19.20.
None may challenge any such prerogative before other: but as the churches are
limited out for order and conueniency, so is every one of them of like
authority in it self: but because they make all but one Church, and one body
of Christ, therefore there is but one authority in them, to determine of
matters concerning them all.

This argument still relying on this former cited sentence, Bridges
Matthew 18.19.20. which properly treats of the efficacy of prayer, where the
faithful, although they be in never so small a number assembled, to make their
petitions in Christ's name, are promised that God the Father will grant their
requests, and that Christ also will be present among them: neither
comprehends all the authority that Christ has left unto his whole Church,
or to any especial persons in the same: neither (if it be drawn to matters of
government and authority) is any debar against any particular auth. of any
Pastor, more tha^ of any Christian Prince or magistrate. For, how follows
this? Christ will be present where 2. or 3. are gathered together in his name:
therefore, where but one makes his praiyers alone unto him, he will not be
present? except our bre. can bring this exclusive, only, or, at the least, into
this promise of Christ, that where 2. or 3. only, or two or three at the least
are gathered together in his name, he will be present with them. If then,
this follow not in prayer, whereof this sentence properly is spoken: how much
less does it hold, This sentence is principally spoken of consent in prayer,
not is any deb^^ to the prayer of one alone.
if we stretch this promise of Christ, to matters of government in the
church, as (I grant) it reaches also thereto. As, to reason thus: Christ has
promised that where two or three be gathered together in his name, to consent
on the establishment of any authority or government of his Church, his presence
and authority shall be among them: therefore, if the Christian Prince either
by himself, and his supreme authority, do establish any thing in the Church:
or though he join other with him, yet not in authority, but as counselors,
or, though in authority also, yet, not as equal in authority with him: except
he, and they, and all, gathered together in the name of Christ, be of the
like authority in giving their consents unto the matter: neither Christ's
presence will be with them, nor his authority will ratify their doing.

If this reason hold not, but be an untrue and most dangerous resolution in
these matters that are done of the christian Prince neither yet of him alone,
but of other in co^sultation with the prince, but the only superior and supreme
over all other which are all parts of the Church, and assembled about matters
of the Churches Government: Our brethr. loose conclusion.
does it hold any more against Bishops and Pastors? How agrees this even
with their own assertions afterward? Page 114. of James his prerogative, in the
assembly of the Elders at Jerusalem: Was not the holy ghost among them because
one had this prerogative? Neither helps it yt they say this prerogative was
only of order, and not of authority: for if it were not of authority, it were no
orderly prerogative, but a tyranny. But they say, he may challenge no authority.
If it be orderly given him, and so his due: why may he not challenge it? but yet
they say, he may challenge no episcopal or metropoliticall authority, How Christ
promised his authority.
as it is at this day with us. If it were so with them, in tbe ancient and
holy Church yea in the Apostles times, as in this respect, it is at this day with
us, even by Caluines own testimony (as he have heard) both for Episcopal
authority, and that James his authority was it self Episcopal: then is this
neither any tyranny, nor any let to the presence of the holy ghost, that one
among them has and chale^geth episcopal or metropolitical authority before the
rest, as it is with us this day over other. Our bre. therefore make here a lose
conclusion: All particular churches not alike indignity.
that seeing our savior Christ has promised his presence and authority to
every church indifferently, Mat. 18.19.20. Therefore none may challenge any such
prerogative before other, meaning such as Bishops and Metropolitanes do
challenge. But since the words of Christ are spoken (as they say)
indifferently. Why might they not conclude as well, any such prerogative before
other, as Christian Princes also challenge in the Churches Government?

In-deede the matter that Christ there promised to ratify with his presence
and authority, he promised the same to every Church ( as our Bresay)
indifferently: but he neither promised there or otherwhere his auth. to all and
to every one in the Church indifferently: nor yet all kind of authority to
every Church indifferently. Since some Church may have some such prerogative, as
appertains to dignity and pre-eminence, before other Churches. Jerusalem being
a Metropoliticall Church had a prerogative before many other smaller Churches
round about it, even in the Apostles time. And so (it appears) had Ephesus
in Asia: Antiochia in Syria, etc. yea although no church might have any
prerogative at all, before other churches: yet does not our Br. argument hold,
from the churches to the pastors or B. in the Churches. Our bre. reason thus:
Seeing our Savior Christ promised his presence and authority to every Church
indifferently, Mat. 18 19.20. none may challenge any such prerogative before
other. What is signified here by this word, none? but no person in the church:
as much, and more to the purpose, then to say none, that is to say no Church.
And if our Brethren would have none in the Church, The Churches authority.
to have any such prerogative as apperteineth to the auth. of Government, in or
of the Church before other: what else were this, than to give every person in
the church, aequal authority? whether this would breed confusion or no, let
themselves judge.

If they say they mean by these words: none may challenge any such prerogative
before other: not, no person before other persons, but no church before other
churches: and that they expound their meaning in the words following, saying:
but as the churches are limited out for order and conueniency: so is every one
of them of like authority in it self: although this also be not true, for
diverse respects, in comparison of churches one with another: yet, what is this
to the Question now in hand, for the B. or pastors authority in the
Government of the church, whether he have any by himself, separated from
other, yea, or no? Our brethren say, he has none, and we say, he has some.
They, to prove he has none, have alleged the promise of Christ Math. 18.
And are come now to see what is his authority joined with others, and first,
who are so joined, in commission with him, that without their consent, he can
do nothing. Difference between ^he Churches authority and the pastors authority
in the Churches.
Upon whom is all this spoken? and who is this, he, so often mentioned. Is this
he turned into a she? that is to say, into a Church? and is this our Question,
whether a church has any authority by her self separated from others? or,
whether a B. or pastor has any authorty by himself separated from others? And
what meant they by this conclusion? We say therefore that the authority of
Christ, is left unto his whole church, and so to every church, that none may
challenge episcopal or metropolical authority, as it is with us at this day
over other, without great tira^ny and manifest injury? who is here this none
that may challenge no episcopal or metropolitical authority? do not B. and
Archb. as it is with us at this day challenge this authority? And therefore,
except they reason of the persons: their reasonsare not to the purpose. But
they name the churches for the persons: because they challenge the authority in
the right of their Churches: although in this controversy, their challenge is
rather in the right of their office, than of their Churches.

But as the churches are limited out for order and conueniency, The learned
Dis. Page 82. Bridges
so is every one of them of like authority in it self: but because they make
all but one Church, and one body of Christ, therefore there is but one
authority in them, to determine of matters concerning them all.

To speak of the church, as the mystical body of Christ, I grant, it is all but
one body, and but one church. Howbeit, in y^ respect, All the parts in one
church have not one and like auth.
have all the parts thereof one only, and the like authority: nor al, one only,
and the like exercise of functions and actions. As I showed before, how Paul
reasons, 1. Cor. 12. 17. If all the body were the eye, where were the
hearing? if all were hearing where were the smelling? But now God has placed
the ^embers every one of them in the body, even as he would. But when they say
here, the churches are limited out for order and conueniencie: in that
respect, as they make them not all one Church, but in a different sense,
different Churches: So is there less necessity, that all their authorities
should be but one. For, as in that respect, they may differ in regiment,
concerning many orders and conueniencies among them, this Church from that
church: so may they differ also in preheminences and authorities of the same
orders, and for determining of such different matters. But now although there
were but one authority in the whole, and in every church, to det^rmine matters
concerning them all: yet if the same be not equally distributed among them
all: in the whole and in every part alike: what lets, but that both some
churches, and much more some persons in the churches, may have some separate
authority by them selves, and some more authority than other have and some
prerogative also before other?

By which there appears to be a double authority of the Pastor, one with the
several congregation, in which he is pastor, the other with the whole Synod
or assembly whereof he is a member, and both these authorities we find
sufficiently authorized in the Scripture, The learned Dis. Page 82. and 83.
as shall plainly appear in the several discourses of them. First therefore,
we will speak of his authority in his several church, in which he may do
nothing without the consent of the church.

Our Brethren do here divide again or subdiuide the Pastors authority. They
divided it before, Page. 76. and 77. into the authority or power of government
in the church, or authority in common Government with the Elders: and into
the authority or power that belongs to the proper duty of the Pastor
himself. Which was somewhat an intricate Division.

Bridges.
Since the authority or power belonging to his proper duetye, is a great part
of his public Government in the church. The Pastors authority not one but
indifferent.
This authority now, which before they said, that they understood for power
of Government in the church, they divide again, into a double authority: the
one with the several congregation, in which he is Pastor: the other with the
whole Synod or assembly whereof he is a member. If now their selves do
here find, and that twice together, that in one function, there is not only
a former double and different authority: but also of one of the former divided
parts, a redoubled and different authority in the Pastors: how then did they
auouche immediately before, that there is but one authority in them, to determine
of matters concerning them all? but perhaps they mean that, of the churches
authority: and here they speak of the authority pertaining to the pastors of
the churches. But that helps not. For if the Pastors authority, which he has
in common with the Elders ( whom they make the church) be thus divided: then is
the churches authority divided also.

First therefore ( say they) we will speak of his authority in his several
Church in which he may do nothing without the consent of the Church.
Sufficient authority.


I would gladly learn, Bridges.
where our Brethren have all these divisions and subdiuisions, all these Canons
and limitations of a Pastors authority. For although it be here promised, Our
Breath. division and positions besides the scripture.
that we find them sufficiently authorized in the scripture: yet hitherto,
here is no Scripture cited for them, save, 1. Tim. 6.15. that God is blessed
and only mighty, the king of kings and Lord of Lords. And Math. 18.19.20.
Which was before alleged to other purposes, although God wot very
impertinently. But they promise us further, that, both these authorities we
find sufficiently authorized in the scripture, as shall plainly appear in the
several discourses of them. So that, here is yet nothing that we can find,
which may be counted a sufficient authorizing in the scripture of these things.
And therefore our Brethren in this their Learned Discourse made hereupon, do
well and learnedly ( in my opinion) to let all this pass that they have
already alleged, as insufficient, and refer us to the hope of better
proofs, in their more Learned Discourse to come, as shall plainly ( they
promise us,) appear in the several Discourse of them. But when we shall come
also (God willing) unto those several Discourses of them* to search, whether
these authorities and assertions of our Brethren, be sufficiently authorized
in the Scripture: I doubt, we shall find that this sufficient authorizing in
Scripture, is not any express and and plain testimony of the scripture: but
only their own collection thereon. And if this be sufficient to make us
reckon a thing sufficiently authorized ( as in some cases we deny it not, if
they can make it plainlye appear, that it follows by necessity of
consequence, though verbatin^ it be not expressed in the Scripture) if we must
permit this in them, that their collections on the Scripture, must go for
authorizings in the Scripture: why must not the same manner of authorizings,
where we prove necessary consequence, be of as good authority on our parties?
In the mean time between us both, for any thing yet by these our Learned
Brethren alleged: till I see better proof thereof, either out of express
and plain Scripture, or out of some necessary consequence of Scripture I yield
not to this their dubble Canonized Canon, as shooting off nothing but a bare
bold, we say: not, any Testimonye or proof sufficientlye authorized in the
scripture: that the Pastor by his authority in his several Church, may do
nothing, without the consent of the Church. Nothing ( they say) has no savor,
and this has no truth. It is so far from being sufficiently authorized:
that it is more then sufficiently confuted, as already has often appeared, and
plainly in the manifest example of Saint Paul's precepts to Timothy, even by
Caluines and Bezaes own clear Confessions, besides diverse others on the same.
Not, that we deny, but that Paul and Timothy had the churches consentes (
for the better part among them) in what things soever they did by their
authority in their churches: but, that in all things they asked not their
consentes before, nor that they which gave their consentes had such a negative
authority, but that if they would not have given them, Saint Paul and
Timothy might have proceeded in some things against their consentes: which
when they were given, were not the sufficient or any authorizing at all, of
Paul and Timothies doings among them.

The argument of the 11 Book.
THE 11. book is of the third kind of Tetrarkes which our Brethren call
Governors: beginning first with the Churches diffused authority: and of
confusion in the multitude: and of the appointing to avoid it certain
officers for government: how the name of Governors and Rulers is understood,
Romans 12. and 1. Cor. 12. how these governors must rule every several
congregation, and how their government stretches to al matters. How these
Governors authority is to be moderated. And first for the election of these
governors, who should chose them, and what qualities they must have. What
elders were elected, Act. 14. And what elders are mentioned. 1. Tim. 5.17. and
of the 3. conclusions that our brethren would have us learn out of that
testimony. How the name elders is common to Pastors and governors, and how the
words may be well understood of relation between the civil officers then among
the^ and the pastors. How the words infer not such governors as our brethren
imagine: and how that although they might be so understood, yet they infer no
perpetuity, as well of the one sort of Elders, governing and not teaching, as
of the other of governing and teaching elders. How the words infer no such
distinction of eccl. elders the one teaching and governing, the other not at al
teaching but only governing: but rather seem to infer a distinction of the
travels, than of the function: or if of the function to incline to the
distinction between past. deac. or between those Pastors that were (...)
antistates, B. and others, that labored more in ministering the Sacraments then
in preaching. How Calvin dare not infer any such necessary sense as he
conceiueth on this place, but only says, it may be collected. How our brethren
inueighing against them, make these gouernor^, dumb and not teaching Bishops
and preaching prelates. How the Apostles words infer not their joint government
with the Episcopal Elders. How the ancient Fathers that have expounded this
Epistle, Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Theodoret, Theophilact, and Ambrose, have
interpreted this place, especially because Calvin, Beza and Danaeus allege
Ambrose for these Elders. How Beza further alleges Cyprian, with a full
examination of Cyprian for them. How Snecanus likewise alleges Cyprian and
Tertullian with parsel of Tertullian for them, besides the examining of Clemens
Alex: Irenaeus, Justinius Martyr, Ignatius and Policarpus. How Danaeus alleges
the Ecclesiastical histories cheefely Socrates, with his allegations out of
Augustine, Basil, Dionisius, Jerome and the canon Law, with the examination of
the ecclesiastical histories, the Fathers, and the canons, for these Elders:
and of the cause of these so learned men's mistaking in all these searchings for
them, making all not only nothing for them, but clean against them, nor being
ever able to prove not one such consistory, no not one such Elder. How
Danaeus with Beza and Calvin return back again to search the Scriptures
better, for them Romans 12.1. Corinthians 12. Ephesians. 4. Act. 20.1. Peter 5. And
of Caluines and Danaeus contradictions. Of Danaeus return again to the
Ecclesiastical history in Sozomen, in which speeding as il as before, if not
worse for any practice that he would find; he comes again to the scripture,
searching for these Elders, Acts. 15. Acts. 21. Philip. 4 1. Tim. 3.1. Pet. 3.1
Corinth. 14. and Iac. 5. And so home again to that, wherewith our bret. began
the inquiry for them, at Act. 14. Lastly of the second point of moderating
these Elders authority, by propounding all their actions to the people, to
confirm them. And of the popular state and our Bret. fear (But not avoiding) of
horrible confusion. And of the example they seek to avoid it by, in the manner
of Saint Paul's excommunication of theincestuous Corinthian.

AND first ( say our Brethren) let us examine, Diffused authority.
whether this authority be so diffused over the whole Church, that the
hearing, The learned Dis. Page 83.
trying and determining of all matters, pertayneth to the whole multitude, or
to some special choosen persons among them, meet for that purpose.

COme they now in almost at the last casts, saying: Bridges.
and first let us examine, whether this authority be so diffused over the
whole Church, etc. Our Brethr. beginning to examine their former positions.
What mean our Brethren hereby? That the first shall be last, and the last
shall be first? Should they not have examined this before? They said in the
former page, 82. that the authority of Christ is left unto his whole Church.
And also before that page 81. That regiment which he has left unto his Church,
is a consent of his householde servants. And that our savior Christ has
neither authorized, nor promised to bless any other form of regiment, than
that which consists of the consent and gathering together of his servants in
his name. What else, can any of the servants of the household of Christ
suppose, when they hear of this; but that where-so-euer they be diffused, they
must gather themselves together, Diffused authority.
either the whole church universally, or every whole Church particularly, and
give their consent thereunto; or else, the matter whatsoever, is not authorized
by the authority that Christ has left unto his Church. And that he has
blessed none other form of regiment? And must it now be called in question,
and examined, whether this authority be so diffused over the whole Church,
that the hearing, trying and determining of all matters, perteyneth to the
whole multitude? And why not, if the former sayings be true? Do our Brethren
begin now, to call this a diffused authority? Diffused comes near confused.
And I Think, shortly they will find it confused too. And as they now begin
to incline, to some special chosen persons amongst them, meet for that
purpose: so by little and little, they will peradventure come down at length,
to some authority of government even of one Pastor before other in one
congregation, and perhaps in one Diocese also, which is the thing that they
now so peremptorily deny. Let our Brethren now therefore in their good
mood, proceed. The learned disc. Page 83.


The authority ^s the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, granted unto the
Church.

Our Brethren said in the page before, that the authority of Christ is left
unto his whole Church: here yet, they say more circumspectly: Bridges.
the authority is the power of our Lord Jesus Christ. Not that Christ has
left his authority unto the Church: but that, the authority which he has
left unto his Church, is not so the Churches, but that it still remains his
authority. Nor, that he has left that his authority to his whole Church, as
they said before; but (as they say here) it is granted unto the Church. Which
may well stand, if any part or persons of the Church have it, although the
whole Church have it not.

The learned disc. page 83.
But ( say they) because the judgment of the multitude is confuse, whereas God
is not the author of confusion, but of order: and that we find in the word of
God, certain officers appointed for government: we are bold to affirm, that
that charge belongs unto those that are such.

Bridges
Here our Brethren in this Learned discoursing of the matter, hau^ now at
length found out, not diffusion, Confusion in the mult^tudes judgment.
but plain confusion, in the judgment of the multitude. So that, we may now
(I hope) with our Bretherens good leave, dismiss in peace the gathering
together of the household servants nor enquire after their consentes: but for
the consent only of certain officers appointed for government. And here our
Brethr. say: they are bold to affirm, that that charge belongs unto those
that are such.

This boldness of our Breath. is here yet the more commendable, that they fear
not to repel the peoples consent and judgment for fear of confusion. Whereas
God is not the author of confusion, but of order. But it had been better (in
my simple judgment) not at all to have set the multitude a-gogge, as having
an interest of consent and authority, to hear, try, and determine all
matters, only to bridle the Pastors and the Bishops authority: than now,
having brought them in, to thrust the^ out. Turpius eijcitur qua^ non
admittitur hospes. Will the multitude hearing, that Christ has given his
authority to his whole Church, and so to every Church indifferently; and that
that regiment which he has left unto his Church, is a consent of his household
servants: and that he has neither authorized nor promised to bless any
other form of regiment, than that which consists of the consent and
gathering together of his servants, How o^r Brethren mock the multitude.
( if they think themselves to be any part of his whole church, or of any
particular Churches, and servants of his household) suffer themselves after
they are gathered together to use their authority, and to give their consent,
to be this mocked, and in the end be told; it pertayneth not to the whole
multitude, but to some special chosen persons amongst the^: because the
judgment of the multitude is confuse, and God is not the author of confusion
but of order? What offices are appointed in Gods word for government.
What makes our Breath to ware so bold, to take away not only the Bishops and
Pastors authority of government; but thus also to mock and dally with the
multitude? But (as matter of conscience moving the^ hereto) they say: we find
in the word of God, certain officers appointed for government. And they say
very sooth.

But do they not find also in the word of God, The multitudes confusion.
that Princes and Magistrates are certain officers appointed for government? If
they say, they mean it of Eccl. government: do they not find likewise in the
word of God, that Bishops and Pastors are certain officers appointed also for
Eccl. government? But they mean certain other officers who^ they will further
describe anon. And if we should grant this also, and withal, that that charge
belongs unto those that are such: would it follow, O^r Brethr. too bold
presupposals.
that it belongs only unto those that are such? Or that, there should be such
always and in every congregation, to have that charge which those had; when
they find in the word of God, that any such supposed officers were, acording
to the time and place appointed, for their extraordinary kind the^ of
government? This is over much boldness to affirm, neither shall they find so
much in the word of God. But let us now see, where they will find it.

And that does S. Paul plainly declare, where he puts a difference of the
several offices of the Church, The learned disc. Page 84.
whereof he names Governors for one. 1. Cor. 12.29. and Romans 12.8. Let him
that rules do it with diligence.

Our Breath. have found out these sentences, ^. or 4. times already, and we have
seen at large, the discussing of these places. Bridges.
But because they find it again, let us crave pardon of the readers, once
again to peruse the^, least any should think, when they allege any testimony
for proof, Several offices, and yet not* several officers.
besides their bare sayings, that we slightly shook it off. They say, S.
Paul does plainly declare it, where he puts a difference of the several
offices of the Chuch, whereof he names Governors. Our Brethren do well
indeed to say, several offices: but our question is now, of several
officers. For although by some of these several offices, may also several
officers be understood: yet not so, but that more than one severally of these
offices, yea, many of them jointly, were competiblie sometimes to one man,
According as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith. (as S. Paul
says, Romans 12.) for as we have many members in one body, Romans 12.
and all the members have not one office: so we being many are one body in
Christ, and every one, one another members. Seeing then we have gifts that
are diverse, according to the grace that is given unto us: whether Prophecy,
according to the proportion of faith, or the ministry in ministering: either
he that teaches, in doctrine: he that exhorts, in exhorting: he that
gives, in simplicity: he that rules, in carfulness: he that has mercy,
in cheerfulness. Might not one man have diverse of these gifts or offices?
Diverse gifts and offices in one officer.
May not he that prophecieth, teach? Nay, is not prophesying mixte with
teaching, yea a teaching it self? And have we not showed sufficiently how
teaching may be joined with exhortation, and exhortation with teaching? And may
not both of them be joined with the ministry, or with an office as some
translate it? And may not giving and showing mercy, The Governors.
be joined together, as well as they may be separated a sunder; And why then
may not he, that has all these gifts ( as some have had them all) rule also,
as well as he that has but some of them, or but the gift of rule only? Yea
may not these words here of him that rules be understood also of civil
officers or governors, and not only of Ecclesiastical? And have we not also
heard, that some excellent writers among our Brethren, do so expound here the
word (...) he that governs? And therefore no certainty of our Brethrens
governors, can be gathered out of this place.

And as for the other place of 1. Cor. 12.28. the Apostle said before, ver. 7.
etc. But unto every one is given the manifestation of the spirit to pr^fite.
For to one is given by the spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word
of knowledge by the same spirit, to another faith in the same spirit, to
another the gifts of healings in the same spirit, to another the operations
of powers, to an other prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, to another
the kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues. But all these
things works one and the self same spirit, This place also 1. Cor. 12.
shows not whether one might not have ^o tha^ one of these gifts.
dividing to every one, even as he will. So that, no certainty neither, can be
affirmed here, in what measure these gifts were given. Whether one to every
one, or to one more. And this seems the more probable, that some had mo than
one of these gifts, because many of these are coincident, and distinguished
not so much by diverse officers, as by diverse offices of these gifts. And
even so, for that which follows, ver. 28 And some indeed has he placed in
the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Doctors, then powers,
afterward the gifts of healinges, helpings, gouernances, kinds of tongues;
Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all Doctors? Are all powers? Have all
the gifts of healinges? Do all speak with tongues? Do^ all interpret? Did
not all these gifts concur in the Apostles here first mentioned, and some
of them in the Prophets, and in the Doctors? Yea, when he comes to the
repetition of this gift, and should by order (as he does the other) mention the
gift of governing, The Apostle includes the governors in the other officers.
which our Brethren here especially discourse upon, and urge more than the
other; the Apostle, though he reck^n up other severally, yet, as though
governing might be better included in the other, he repeteth it not, nor says:
are all gouernaunces? As he said before, are all Apostles? Are all Prophets?
Are all Doctors? are all powers? But either conteyneth it in one, or some, or
all, of the former offices or gifts: or else passes it in silence, as not so
necessary as the other, and yet the other are not ordinary offices. And so
he omitteth helpinges, except in the gift of healinges he include it. Besides
that, he expresses not here also, any more than in the other place Romans 12.
what kind of government in the Church he means. Whether civil only, or
Ecclesiastical only, or both of them mixed, or separate. And how then can our
Brethren so boldly affime, that S. Paul does plainly declare these officers,
that must be joined in commission with the Pastors or with the Bishop, and give
their consent with him, in the hearing, trying, and determining of all matters?
But now upon the bare allegation of these two places, our Brethren proceed to
this conclusion.

Therefore there ought to be in every Church, The learned disc. Page 84.
a Consistory or Segnorie of Elders or Governors, which ought to have the
hearing, examination and determining of al matters, pertaining to discipline
and government of that congregation.

The premises inferred not this conclusion, S. Paul speaks not at all in
those places, of every Church, and congregation: Bridges.
nor how many offices ought to be in every of them: Our Brethr. bold
conclusion for their Segnorie, upon the Apostles only naming of Governors.
nor of any consistory or Seniorie at all of Elders or Governors in them: nor
of the hearing, examination, and determining of all matters, pertaining to
discipline and government of that congregation: nor who, or how many of them
ought to do these things: nor of any certain perpetual and ordinary
platform of officers, or offices, to the whole Church, or to every
particular Church and congregation. None of all these points are here either
plainly declared, or inclusiuely insinuated by S. Paul: and yet see, how our
Brethren when they are once grown to be bold to affimre one point out of Gods
word, for these officers, more than the word of God leads them unto: dare
from one point, proceeding to another, wax bolder and bolder, and in the end
so bold, not now only to affirm plainly all these things: But to make a
flat and plain conclusion on them, and that a necessary; that, The overthrow
of all Princes government.
therefore there ought to be in every Church, a Consistory or Signorie of
Elders or Governors, which ought to have the hearing, examination and
determining of all matters, pertaining to discipline and government of that
congregation: and then indeed farewell, not only our former questions of
women's government: but of all Princes government, women or men, in any of
their dominions. For, here is not only mentioned discipline, but also
government: and not in Ecclesiastical matters only, but in all matters
pertaining to the government of that congregation: and not only the hearing
and examination of all matters, but also the determining of them all. And all
this, not to be done in some, but in every Church, and in every congregation
in the Realm, yea, in the whole world. And all this, to be done, not by any
officers of the Prince, but by a Consistory or Segnorie of Elders or
Governors chosen among themselves, not any officers of the Prince, being so
much as mentioned among them: no, nor now when it comes to the conclusion,
either Pastor or Bishop is joined with them. So that both the Pastor and the
Bishop is now so far removed, Both Bish. and Pastors government excluded.
from having any authority of gouernemnt in the Church, separated from others
by him self: that he may keep it by him self have he any, for with them (in
conclusion) he getteh none, Moderating the governors.
they will have all separately by themselves. Are not these matters (trow we)
in this Learned Discourse of our Brethren, properly concluded, and to the great
beautifying of Gods Church, and to the quiet establishment of this Realm? O
Brethren, Brethren, it is more than high time to look to such a Segnorie, How
violent the beginning is of this Segnorie.
the very peeping out of whose heads, and the first appearing in the
Discoursing of them, shall begin his course, on this course fashion: and
under pretense of putting by the Bishop, and of joining with the Pastor,
shall so exclude the Princes established authority, and set up such a
strange new government among themselves, and that in every particular
Congregation, that is, in every parish Church, both with us in England* and
throughout all Christendom. But now, to mittigate all this, least it might
grow into shrewde suspicion of most dangerous troubles, innouations and
confusions of all Realms and states, by giving too great authority to the
Segnories of these Congregationall Elders and Governors: Our Brethren adioyne
heereunto (with great circumspection) certain cautions of moderation.

Which authority of theirs ( say they) nevertheless ought to be moderated, The
learned disc page 84
that their judgment may be rightly accounted the judgment of the holy Church.

I think they would say, of the whole Church. But the term holy, is
well-inough. For verily, if the Church be not the holier this Segnorie might
breed a mystery of great mischief and unholiness, Bridges.
except their judgment in choosing and the authority of those that be chosen,
shall the better be moderated. Let us therefore mark our Bretherens moderating
of these Governors, to bridle and repress all these inconveniences.

Which thing consists in these two points. First, that the Elders be elected
and chosen by consent of the whole Congregation, The learned disc. Page 84.
men of godliness and wisdom, in whom the whole Church reposeth such
confidence that they commit unto them their authority, in hearing and
determining such matters, as without horrible confusion they cannot perform
themselves.

I looked here, for the moderating of these Elders, that their authority
should have been so restrained or limited, Bridges.
that either they should not deal in all matter of government, Our Brethr.
manner of moderating their Segn. auth.
or not proceed over far therein. But our Brethren talk of no such
moderating of them. Their moderation consists in two points, whereof the
first is, for their election, that the Elders be elected and chosen by the
consent of the whole congregation. What? And shall neither Prince, Magistrate,
Bishop, Pastor* nor any officer civil or Eccl. have any stroke, over and
above the whole multitude of the congregation, in the election of them, which
shall deal in all matters of government? This first point, is a point as
dangerous, Electing the governors.
as any of the residue. And how shall the whole congregation give their consent
in the electing of them? Shall they do it by some other chosen persons among
them, that shall give their consent for them? How the whole congregation shall
choose the Elders.
And then who shall choose them, that shall chose those, that shall choose
these Elders, chosen for them? Or shall every person of the whole congregation
by himself, or all of them together on a huddle, choose them? And what if they
cannot consent upon them? Shall the half, or greater part, go for the whole:
when the other half, or the lesser part of the whole congregation dissenteth
from the election? And how then will they chose such men of godliness and
wisdom, as they imagine? And what also if the greater part themselves of the
congregation, want wisdom to make such choice of them? Or affection of love,
hate, fear, hope, The wisdom and godliness of the greater part.
etc. overcome their wisdom? As we see it does oftentimes, not only in few,
but in multitudes. And the greatest part has not always the greatest
wisdom, nor greatest godliness. Whereupon arises the common saying: mayor
pars vincit meliore^, the greatest part ouercomes the better. And our greater
part must be accounted for the whole, or else no choice at all will be made
among them. And where then shall our men of wisdom and godliness, by the
consent of the whole congregation be elected and chosen?

Well (say they) yet they shall be men of such wisdom and godliness as in
whom the whole Church reposeth such confidence, that they commit unto them
their authority, in hearing and determining such matters, as without horrible
confusion, they can not perform themselves.

And can they not give their consent to the hearing and determining such
matters, without not only confusion, but horrible confusion? The horrible
confusion of the whole congregation^ dealing here in.
And yet can they give their consent to choose such persons without horrible
or any confusion? And how is it said, to be their authority in such matters,
whereof they themselves cannot perform the hearing and determining without
horrible confusion? And is the authority then, not the Governors, but the
peoples authority? And the Governors do but represent the people, whom they
govern? And are chosen only as the peoples or the whole congregations
debities or executioners, to do yt for them, that they can not perform
themselves without horrible confusion? And is this the peoples only remedy to
repose such confidence in other, that they commit all their authority, unto
the authority of these Governors? And may not these committies themselves
upon such confidence committed unto them, commit as horrible confusions, and
breed as foul dissensious and disorders, as may the people themselves? Are
not all these points, ( besides a number mo, and perhaps more horrible, that
experience would teach us) confused and intricate?

Governors.
And hereto also ( say our Breath.) may be referred that, which is said of
election of Pastors that the Apostles Paul and Barnabas did ordeine by
election of the congregation, The learned disc. page 85. and 86.
Elders unto many Churches Act. 14.23. because the name of Elders is common
both to Pastors and Governors and is used in the scripture to comprehend both
at once, Act. 4 23.
as it appears manifestly by S. Paul 1. Tim. 5.17. 1. Tim. 5.17.
Those Elders that govern well are worthy of double honor, especially those
that labor in the word and doctrine. Of which testimony we learn these
three things: first, that there be Elders in the Church, which meddle not with
teaching, but are occupied altogether in governing. Secondly, that the Elders
which labor in teaching, otherwise called Pastors, are joined also in
government with them* which teach not. And thirdly, that the name of Elder,
comprehends both sorts of Elders. And especially in the place before
alleged for election, there is great reason to lead us to think, that the
Elders for government, are as well understood, as the other for doctrine,
because it is written in the same place, that after they had ordained them
Elders in every congregation by election, as having set the Churches in
perfect order (which could not be, Act. 14.23.
except they had established discipline as well as doctrine) they committed
them to the Lord, in whom they believed.

To confirm that which our Brethren have so boldly affirmed, that there ought
to be in every Church a Consistory or Segnorie of Elders or Governors,
Bridges
which ought to have the hearing, examination and determining of all matters
pertaining to discipline and government of that congregation: Our Brethr. to
prove what ought to be, tell us what may be.
they allege here again the example of the scripture Act. 14.23. which they
have before twice or thrice alleged and is sufficiently answered unto. But
their proof for the election of these Consistory governors, stands upon no
certain ground by our Brethrens own confession. For they say not: hereto also
must be referred that which is said of election of Pastors, etc. but, hereto
also may be referred, etc. So that this example relying at the most, but on
conjecture of probability, can make no sound plea of argument, that so it
must be alleged. Nevertheless upon good hope to prove it, our Brethren will
assay to bestow an argument on it. And (if they reason at all) thus they reason:

The name of Elders is common to both, to Pastors and Governors, and is used to
comprehend both at once: Our Brethr. argument for their governors.


But Paul and Barnabas did ordain by election of the congregation Elders unto
many Churches:

Therefore, by these Elders that Paul and Barnabas did ordain unto many
Churches, is comprehended Pastors and Governors both at once.

This conclusion in sensu coniuncto may be granted. For, what does this
conclusion let, but that these Elders were Pastors and Governors too both at
once, being Governors in that they were Pastors? The Elders Act. 14.
If they mean it of distinct persons and offices: then, if the mayor of this
argument mean, that the name of Elders is so common to both, that is to say,
to Pastors and governors, as distinct persons, that it is used always to
comprehend both at once: I deny the Mayor. The scripture is most manifest to
the contrary, and their selves also.

Otherwise, granting the Mayor, that it is so used now and then: to show
that it is so used in this place here cited by our Brethren in their Minor:
how will they prove it? Which if they do not: where is the argument? Our
Brethr. own prowes that that place Act. 14. is understood of governors that
are Pastors.
But what need we seek further confutation of their Minor, than their own
Learned discourse heereon? Have not their selves alleged this example for
Pastors, Page. 33. treating there only of the Pastors proper duty, and
joining this place, Act. 14.23. unto the conciliation of these, 1. Pet. 5. and
Tit. 1.5? Yea, what other are their own words here present? Do they not say:
And hereto also may be referred that which is said of election of Pastors? And
whereas the text says, (...), they restrain here the word, Presbyters,
Priests or Elders unto the Pastors. So that, by their own exposition they do
but hale and draw this place, to prove such governors as are not Pastors. I
speak not this, that I utterly deny, there were any such Elders in the
Apostles times, as were chiefly governors, little dealing with the public
ministry of the word, What governors those Elders were that meddled nothing
with the word.
in such places as they wanted Magistrates that were Christians: but that these
Governors ( as we have seen at large out of Gualter) upon, 1. Cor. 12. and
out of Gellius Snecanus on 1. Cor. 6. were rather as Magistrates among the^ in
those times. which persons having received of the spirit of God the gift of
government, the name of Elders ( I grant) accords also well unto them. And
so, both in the old Testament and in the new, the Civil governors are called
Elders. But these were not Eccl. Elders.

And that this place Act. 14.23. is to be referred to no other Elders then
Pastors, the testimony also of Calvin ( even where he acknowledges that
there were such Elders, as meddled not with the ministry of the word) does
manifestly herein confute our Breath. When they had created Elders. Hereupon (
says Calvin) it appears that it suffices not for men to have been once
endued with the doctrine of godliness, and to hold a sum of the faith: except
they make continual encreasementes. Therefore, Christ not only sent the
Apostles that should spread abroad the Gospel: but also he commanded that
Pastors should be ordained, that the preaching of the Gospel should be
perpetual and in daily use. This order set of Christ, do Paul and Barnabas
observe, when they assign Pastors to every Church, least that after their
departure, the doctrine should cease and become silent. Whereupon this place
teaches, that the Church can not want the ordinary ministry, Acts. 14.
neither can they be accounted Christians before God, save those that
willingly are disciples all the race of their life. Who^ Calu. understands for
Elders. Act. 14.
I expound it that Elders are here called those, unto whom the office of
teaching was enjoined. For that there were certain which were only censors
(or controllers) of manners appears out of Paul, 1. Tim. 5.17.

So that even here, where Calvin alleges the other testimony that our
Brethren also do, yet he clearly cutteth off this Testimony, Act. 14. 23. to
infer any proof at all of these Consistory governors, and Elders that are
not teachers. Neither do our Brethren here thus violently draw in their
Governors, under the name of Elders, where it is apparent that Pastors are meant
only: but also the word which should yet better prove, that it is meant of
Pastors, that is to wite, (...), the ordeyning of them by hands, to carry the
better show that it was not of Pastors only, but of Governors, they
translate it thus: They did ordeyne Elders by election of the congregation.
Where the word neither speaks of, nor necessarily infers, any election at
all, and much less of the congregation, but only, of ordeyning or creating
with hands, signifying the consecration of them, by laying on of hands upon
them. Which ceremony was not used in those that were Governors only as were
these controllers of manners. For although there might be such at that time
civil Elders ( the people being in such case) elected among them: The Civil
officers had not imposition of the Ministers hands.
yet can it not be showed, that they had also the imposition of hands. Although
peradventure that profane or civil order of holding up their hands among
the Grecians, for which Beza cites Cicero, might be well used in the election
of them. And albeit Calvin also interpret (...), quum creassent suffragiis,
when they had by suffrages (or voices) created Elders: and mention also (as we
have seen before) the heathen manner of holding up of the hands: yet, as
noting this to be too profane, he says: notwithstanding the Ecclesiastical
writers use the name, (...), of ordeyning by hands in an other sense, to wite,
for the solemn custom of ordeyning that in the Scriptures is called, the
laying on of hands. And therefore, where he applies this to election, and
that also to the peoples election, although he give the moderation of the
election, not to the people, but to the Apostles: yet if the word (...), be
understood Ecclesiastically (as the Ecclesiastical writers use the name) for
the solemn custom of ordeyning, that in the scriptures is called, laying on
of hands: then cannot this word betokening ordeyning, be drawn to election,
and much less to the election of the people, that had no authority of the
laying on of hands, neither in ordeyning nor in electing

This therefore may suffice hitherto to answer the minor of our Brethrens
argument. But they (as though all were safe and sure, The Elders 1. Tim. 5.17.
if they only strengthen their Mayor) go about to confirm it by an other
place, saying:

Because the name of Elders is common to both, to Pastors and Governors, and is
used in the scripture to comprehend both at once, as it appears manifestly
by S. Paul, 1. Tim. 5.17. those Elders that govern well, are worthy of
double honor, 1. Tim. 5.17.
especially those that labor in the word and doctrine.

This confirmation of the mayor is here needles, to prove that the name of
Elders is common to both, ( that is to wite) Pastors and Governors, and to
comprehend them both at once. Where the name of eldersis common to pastors and
governors both at once.
For as we have said) even so it does in every place, where the pastors are
called Elders* Because that in the nature of their Pastorship an Eccl.
government is comprehended. Especially, Hebr. 13. ver. 7. and 17. Where the
pastoral Elders are called (...), Governors. So that, pastors and Governors,
may both of them at once be very well comprehended in the name of Elders. But
our Brethren mean it here not only so: but that the name also comprehends
sometime, as well Elders that were Governors and not Pastors, as Pastors and
Governors. For, I think they will not say Pastors are not also Governors;
though no such Governors as they mean. Neither do we deny, that the name of
Elders comprehends Governors that are no Pastors. The name of Elders taken
generally for governors.
For (as we have said before) the name of Elders was an ordinary and general
name for the judges, the head officers, and Magistrates of the people.

But that either this place, 1. Tim. 5.17. confirms that place, Act. 14. 23.
to be understood of both sorts of Elders, especially, of Elders that were
Governors and not Pastors, as it is of Pastors that were Governors: that will
be too hard (I think) for our Brethren to prove. Yea, (to let alone the
confirming of that place, Act. 14.) I doubt it will be somewhat hard also
(except they will press me with the authority of our Brethren only
themselves, that so think) to prove any necessity of understanding this
place, 1. Tim. 5. ( understanding Ecclesiastical officers) for such a double
kind of Elders, some meddling with teaching, and some not meddling with teaching,
as they gather thereupon and infer, saying:

Of which testimony wae learn these three things: first, The learned disc
page 85
that there be Elders in the Church, which meddle not with teaching, but are
occupied altogether in governing. Secondly, that the Elders which labor in
teaching otherwise called Pastors, are joined also in government with them
which teach not. And thirdly that the name of Elders, comprehends both sorts
of Elders.

Elders Magistrates.
Oportet discentem credere, The learner must believe. And we are bound and that
of necessity, Bridges.
to learn and to believe, all that the holy Scripture teaches us: but not
all that men shall gather thereon, except they prove unto us with all, We are
not bound to learn our Brethr. collections.
that their teaching follows in necessity of consequence thereupon. This
place neither in express words teaches these three things, nor they teach,
nor can teach, that these three things which here they set down, follow
(by any necessity of consequence) on this testimony. And how then do we
learn thereon these three things? For my part, I will offer my self to
become their scholar to learn them gladly, if they substantially (as Learned
discoursers should) can teach them.

The first thing that our Brethr. say we learn hereon.
And thus forewarde (as one ready to learn) I will show my self before
hand, concerning the first and chiefest point, that here, in this inuersed
order of these three things, is proposed: that I deny not but freely grant,
Saint Paul's words may indeed be well enough understood of such Elders in
the Church, as meddled not with ordinary and public administration of
teaching the word, but only with government, being chosen among
themselves in those days, as their civil Christian rulers, or petite
Magistrates, to compose and take up their controversies, that they should not
strive and go to law, before the heathen superior and public Magistrates,
to the obloquie of the Gospel. And that they were not only (as Calvin
calls them) controullers of manners only: but meddling also in the oversight
of Ecclesiastical causes, as the civil Christian Magistrates do now (God be
praised) more openly, and with more authority than at that time, because the
chief civil Magistrates were not then Christians: and yet the general
direction and oversight for manners pertayned in duty unto them.

But what necessity infers this: that because there were such Governors
then; therefore now also, we learn that there be Elders in the Church, The
Magistrates are the governing and not teachinh Elders in the Church.
which meddle not with teachinge, but are occupied altogether in governing?
For, although this be granted, that there be Elders in the Church, which
meddle not with teaching, but with governing, meaning the Civil Christian
Magistrates, for they both be, and be in the Church, and that lawefully: yet,
what are our Brethren the nearer, for the proof of such Elders as they here
contend for, except they will make them, the civil Christian Magistrates? But
understanding by this word Elder, such Ecclesiastical Elders as they suppose:
although again I grant them, where they say, there be Elders in the Church,
etc. If in this word be, they signify the time present: that indeed there
be such Elders in the Church as they would have, that is to say, there be such
in those Churches of our Brethren, in some other Countries, or the French or
Dutch in usual: Perpetuity of those Elders.
notwithstanding I learn it not by this place, 1. Tim. 5.17. that there be
any, but rather that there were some, though not such in all points, as they
imagine they were. And does this follow that because we learn likewise, and
more clearly, and with more apparent warrant and nature of the offices, that
there were Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets in the Church: therefore we
learn there be Apostles, Evangelists* We learn in the scripture that there
were Apostles, etc but not that there be.
and Prophets in the Church still among us? But if our Brethren mean by
these words, we learn that there be Elders in the Church, etc. That is to
say, there ought to be, and that perpetually, and that in every Church and
congregation, such governing Elders as they, pretend, which meddle not with
teaching: that, we learn not here, nor they prove, nor (I think) shall ever
be able to prove, that S. Paul here, or he or any other, in any other
place of all the Scripture, Difference between there be, and there ought to be.
does teach or touch it.

If our Brethren say that the words of S. Paul infer a perpetual
necessity, that there should be Elders governing the Church, which should
be laborers in the word and doctrine: admitting therefore that he speaks
here of 2. distinct sorts of Eccl. Elders in the Church, Presupposing there
were then 2. such kinds of Elders, yet though the one were perpetual, it
follows not that the other was so
the one meddling with teaching, the other not: if the one infer a perpetual
necessity of the office, so does the other.

I grant again, that both there, and in other places, S. Paul's words
infer, and so do others also in the scripture, a perpetual necessity, that
there should be Elders governing in the Church which should be laborers in the
word and doctrine. Albeit he speaks there, either of those that were then,
or should be at any time in the Church, what honor they should have: which was
the Apostles purpose in these words: The Elders that govern well are worthy
of double honor, especially such as labor in the word and doctrine. And I
pray you, was not S. Paul, and the other Apostles, Evangelists, and
Prophets, Elders also, and worthy of as much honor, as were those Elders,
who and whatsoever? And yet are now and long since, these functions ceased,
for any necessity, or ordinary need or exercise of them in the Church.
Though, more or less, there have still been in all ages, (at leastwise there
ought always to have been in all ages,) laborers in the word and doctrine.
And therefore admitting there were then together in the Church, such distinct
offices, the duty to have them honored accordingly, infers no such
necessity of perpetuity; that if the one continue in the Church, the other
also must continue. For then we should still have Apostles, except our Brethren
can teach it, and we shall learn it better; than that this place will infer
any necessity, or continuance of it.

Now, as we see here, that we can not learn this by any necessity of the
Apostles words, Collection on 1. Tim. 5.17.
that there be, that is to say, there ought to be in the Church, that is to
say, in every congregation; Elders, that is to say, a Consistory or Seignorie:
not meddling with teaching, that is to say not meddling in the public
administration of the word and sacraments: Our Brethr. own exposition on
their own words.
but are occupied altogether in governing, that is to say, which ought to have
the hearing, examination and determining of all matters, pertaining to
discipline and government of that congregation: for this is their own
exposition of their words: admitting still that the Apostle speaks here of
two diverse sorts of Elders, that ought in good order of teaching these 3.
things to have been the first point, which our breath. should have taught us, and
we to have learned, and they have here placed it last: so, let us now see, what
necessity drives us first or last to learn, on these words of the Apostle,
1. Tim. 5.17. that there were such Elders then in the Church, and that Paul
there means of such Elders, as meddled not with teaching, but were occupied
altogether in governing. For first, S. Paul says not this in plain words. It
is our Brethrens collection. Colligere hinc licet (says Calvin hereupon) it
is lawefull to gather, that there were then two kinds of Elders, because all
were not ordained to teach. For the words do openly sound, that some governed
well and honestly, to whom notwithstanding the parts of teaching were not
committed. And indeed out of the people were chosen grave and tried men, which
together with the Pastors in common counsel and authority of the Church,
administered the discipline, and were as it were the Censors or controllers in
correcting manners. Calvin says here, it may be gathered, and so already (to
search out the matter better) we have admitted it, Whether these Elders were
controllers of manners only
that such there were, and yet not such neither, as our Brethren prescribe, nor
Calvin agrees fully to him self of their authority. For where he says
here, that together with the Pastors in common counsel and authority of the
Church they administered the discipline, and were as it were controllers in
correcting manners, on the former place, Act. 14.23. he says, fui^se enim
quosdam duntaxat morum Censores, apparet, 1. Tim. 5.17. that there were
certain (Elders) the controllers of manners only, ( for we can not so
expound it, that they were the only controllers of manners, sith the Pastors
were controllers of manners also) it appears out of Paul, 1. Tim. 5.17. And
here when he comes to the place that he refers us unto, he leaves clean
out this duntaxat, only: and gives them together with the Pastors in common
counsel and authority of the Church, the administration of discipline. Thus
does Calvin with this contradiction, or wavering in his speeches heereon,
infringe the authority of his own collection. Why Calvin gathers this
collection.


But what makes him, or any other of our Brethren, to think this so plain
and necessary a collection. On S. Paul's words, that there were two kinds of
Elders in the Church, the one meddling with teaching, (...), 1. Tim. 5.17.
and the other not, but occupied altogether in governing? It is because the
Apostle uses this word (...) chiefly, especially, most of all, or above all
other? And must needs this specially of the persons, make a specialtie also of
the functions? Might they not as well be all of one function, and yet for some
specialtie in their labors, either in gift, or in travel, or in diligence, or
in dexterity, or in success, (...) have a more special recommendation then
some other? And yet no disprayse unto the other, which though they were
ministers of the word also, yet some of them, according as they excelled in
diversity of gifts, might be most employed otherwise. The Apostles were
ministers of the word and meddled with teaching, before they chose Deacons:
and yet they say, The example in the Apostles themselves.
it likes us not that leaving the word we should minister to the tables,
which plainly argues, that, they labored not so much in the word and
doctrine before, as they did after, and yet then were they Elders meddling with
teaching, and according to that time governing well also, and deserving double
honor, though not in comparison of their labors in the word and doctrine,
after they had chosen the Deacons to help them.

Yea, The example in the Deacons.
the Deacons also were not excluded from meddling with teaching, as appears
both by Stephen Act. 7. and by Philip. Act. 8. When Paul and Barnabas were
chosen out by the holy Ghost, unto the work whereunto he called them, which
was a work in both of them meddling with the word, Act. 13. yet because S.
Paul meddled more with the word than Barnabas did: not only the Licaonians
called Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul Mercury: but S. Luke adds the reason
thereof (...). Because he ( to wit, Paul) was the guide or ruler of the word,
that is to say, the chief teacher of it, who labored more in the word not
only than Barnabas, but than all the residue, 1. Cor. 15.10. and yet meddled
with teaching, as well as Paul did. The specialtie therefore of laboring in
the word, The laboring in the word.
more chiefly and above other, debarreth not other, but that they may meddle
with teaching also, yea and be of the same function in that behalf: neither S.
Paul makes his distinction, of meddling with the word, but of laboring in
the word and to express the more painful or effectual labor therein, he
doubleth his speech, saying, that labor in the word and doctrine. And Calvin
himself construeth these words thus, qui been praesunt. They that rule well,
that is, which faithfully and stoutly travail in their office. And they that
labor in the word and doctrine, that is, they which are intentive or earnest
in teaching the word, referring it not to the diversity of the office, but to
the diversity of the industry in the office.

Unpreaching Prelates government.
I speak not this neither so peremptorily, that of necessity we should on the
other side conclude that he speaks there but of those Elders only, that were
all Elders of the word, and yet that he commends some more especially than
others, for their more especial labors in the word: but that we may thus
also conster his words, with probability and reason enough, for any thing
herein to the contrary.

And thus sith neither these words, 1. Tim. 5.17. infer any necessity of
such Elders as meddle not with teaching, but were altogether occupied in
governing: nor yet, if they had meant any such Elders then, they infer any
rule of perpetuity, that there should be such still: and what their
government was, is not here set down, nor insinuated, and not only some
enlarge it, some restrain it, but Calvin himself, which is the chiefest (if
not the first) that so construeth these words, is so contradictorie to him
self or uncertain and varying therein: how shall we learn this first
point, ( except our Brethren shall teach us better) that there be Elders in the
Church which meddle not with teaching, but are occupied altogether in
governing? meaning such government, of such Elders, and such necessary being
of them, in such Churches of every particular congregation, as our Brth. here
do pretend and urge on this testimony.

Now as we can not as yet, upon any necessity of consequence, out of this
sentence, The second thing that our Brethr. say we learn on this testimony.
1. Tim. 5.17. 1. Tim. 5.17.
Learn the first point: so I (in my dull head) much less the second, that the
Elders which labor in teaching, otherwise called Pastors, are joined also in
government with them, which teach not. For admitting again, that there were
2. kinds of Elders in distinct function, intended in this testimony, the one
meddling with teaching, the other not: and both governed, as it is said here
generally, (...), the Elders that rule well: where with all, is not to be
forgotten how Paul to express their well ruling uses the very word, (...),
that Beza ascribes to Timothy, not only for an Elder of the word, but also
for such a principal Elder of the word, as Beza calls out of Iustine,
antistitem, Our Brethr. call these Elders not teaching Bishops, and so make
the^ unpreaching Prelates.
a Bishop. So that, unless our Brethren will make each Elder of the Seignorie
in every Congregation a Bishop, and so set up unpreaching Prelates like the
Popish dombe Bishops: they can not so properly expound it of Elders not
meddling with the word, as meddling with it. But understand it either ways as
they list. (For so they call them B. as we have seen in Beza and the Geneua
note, on Phil. 1.1) yet does not this sentence make their gouernements join
with the Bishops and Pastors teaching. Yea, in the one and better half, that
is in the government of teaching the word, they they selves do disioyne
their gouernements. And if (as we have seen out of Gualter) they were only
politic and civil Christian governors: except our Brethren will give politic
and civil jurisdiction also to the Pastors: how do they join in government?
Yea how do our Brethren here say, Two sorts of Elders.
that the Pastors are joined in government with them which teach not? and yet
in their form of Common prayers and ministration of sacraments, both that
which was set out in Geneua, and that which now of late is set out again at
London by our Brethren, they do confess (which I have often before noted)
that the pastors and Ministers chief office stands in preaching the word of
God and Ministering the sacraments, so that in consultations, judgments,
elections, and other ecclesiastical affairs, his counsel rather than
authority takes place.

And this they say is approved by Calvin. And yet Calvin plainly says (as
we have heard before) that these Elders not teaching, together, The pastors
authority clean set out of joint by the joint authority of these new
governors.
with the pastors in common counsel and authority of the Church, administered
the Discipline, and were as it were the censors to correct the manners. Are not
those sayings clean contrary? or do they think to help all with these words?
that the Prayer book speaks of his chief office which indeed it does: but,
so, that it debarreth from him (in the other inferior matters all authority
quite and clean, and leaves him only to bare Council where Calvin gives
him and them both Council and authority in common: and likewise our Brethren
here say that the pastors are joined also in government with them. Which
saying of our brethren is yet far better then his abridging, abasing, or rather
annihilating of the Pastors authority in the government of the Church, and
giving all to these not teaching Elders and only counsel to the pastors.
Howbeit the said books of Common Prayer, do after ward clean again
contrary themselves, saying, in the title of Elders: whose office stands in
governing with the rest of the Minist. in consulting, admonishing, correcting
and ordring al things pertaining to the comely direction of the congregation
they differ from the Ministers in that they preach not the word nor minister
the sacraments. In which words, they give the Pastors not only counsel but
authority, and (as do our Brethren here) join them in Government both
together. Which though of the twain it be the better, yet to join these
Elders not teaching in equal and joint authority of Ecclesiastical
Government with the Pastors, neither is it convenient, nor our Brethren have
proved it, nor we learn it by any plain words, or necessary consequence,
out of this testimony, 1. Timothy. 5.17.

And as for the third point, which should rather have been the first, or
second, that the name of Elder comprehends both sorts of Elders: The third
thing to be learned What the n^me of elder comprehends.
for such Elders as our Brethren here plead, they can not prove it, at
leastwise, as yet they have not. Notwithstanding, (taking Elders, as we have
said before) though this place of Saint Paul do not infer it, and so we
learn it not also out of this testimony: yet in other places we learn it
plain enough, Chrysostom. in 1. Tim. 5.
and freely grant in the church two sorts of Elders.

Now although this may suffice to answer our Brethrens testimonies out of S.
Paul to Timothy, that we can not learn by any inferrence of this place,
there were such Elders then, as our Brethren gather that there were: yet on
this occasion, to proceed a little further herein, either for our Brethrens
fuller satisfaction, at least wise for the plainer opening of the matter, to
any indifferent, or not to much forestalled judgment: The conference of this
testimony with that that goes before and after.
it is the more probable by all likelihood, that S. Paul in this place, meant
not any such governing Elders as meddled not with teaching, because the text it
self (if we peruse that that goes before, and that comes after) speaks of
such Elders as either our Brethren them selves understand for Elders in age,
not in office, as ver. 1. rebuking not an Elder: or if in office, of such only
as meddled with teaching, so well as with government. As immediately after his
proof of this testimony, S. Paul proceeds saying: against an Elder admit no
accusation, except under 2. or 3. witnesses. Which our breath. confess, is
spoken of an Elder meddling with teaching, as we have before at large declared.
And as for all the ancient fathers (at least, those which I have red) gather
in their Commentaries thereupon, no other kind of Elder, then such as meddled
with teaching in their Government.

Chrysostom Homil. 15. writing upon this place, says: on this wise, The
Elders that govern well are worthy of double honor, The examination of the
ancient interpreters of this testimony.
most of all they that labor in the word and doctrine. For says the
Scripture, Thou shall not moosle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the
corn, and the VVorke-man is worthy his reward. He calls in this place
obedience and the yielding of necessary things, honor. For that which
follows: Thou shall not moosle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the
Corn and the VVorke-man is worthy his reward signifies this. And therefore,
when he commanded Widows to be nourished with honor, it should be
referred to their necessary living, that it may serve to suffice them that are
widows indeeede.

And again: Honor the Widows, that is, those that are in poor estate. For
how much the poorer she is, the more she is a Widow. He sets down the
testimony of the Law, and adds the testimony of Christ, and both of them
agree together. For the Law says: Thou shall not moosle the Oxes mouth, that
treads out the Corn. Thou see how he would have the Doctor to labor.
Truly there is no other labor to be compared thereunto. He adds the
Testimonye of Christ. For he that is hired is worthy his reward, let us not
therefore look only to the reward. But let us now also hear the precept.
He that is hired (says he) is worthy his reward. If any therefore shall be
dainty or remis: he indeed is not worthy. Except any shall be the ox treading
out the Corn, and bearing the yoke, he shall draw against the cold and against
the thrones, nor depart till he have done: he is not worthy. It behooves
therefore that the doctors have their living abundantly ministered unto them,
least they faint or be weakened or be occupied in the least matters, and
deprive themselves and others of the great, that they may labor the matters
that are spiritual, having no regard to the seculer things. Such kind of
persons were the Levites which had no care to the things seculer, in such sort
as had the laity. For the caring for the Levites was permitted to them, (to
wit, to the Laity) and by law were appointed for them revenues, tenths,
Gold, first fruits, vows (or offerings) and many other things, but these
things were by the law worthily permitted to them, that only sought the
things present and earthly. I may boldly say therefore that the prelates (or
governors) of the Church, ought to have nothing but their living and their
apparelling, that they should not be drawn with lusting after these things.

But what is that he says with double honor? think we, that it is spoken of
double, for that it is stretched to the widows and to the Deacons (or
ministers) or else is it put, of double, that is to say, of grace? let us not
therefore, look only to that that he said he is worthy of double honor: but
let us much more mark that which he added, they that govern well.

But what is it to govern well? Harken to Christ saying: the good pastor
lays his life for his sheep. To govern well therefore is this, Chrysostom. in 1.
Tim. 5. Homil. 15.
to spare none of them for their government sake. Chiefly, says he, they which
labor in the word and doctrine. Where now are they that say, there is no need of
the word and doctrine? since with such study Paul admonishes Timothy saying:
meditate these things, in these things be thou. And again, Intend to reading
and consolation, for doing this thou shall both save thy self and them that
hear thee. And these he commands chiefly of all, to be honored, and he adds
the cause, saying: for they sustain much labor. And how right is this? for when
as another watches not, nor is pined with care, but is every where secure and
quiet in his daily talk and companies, this man is stricken with care and
continually appleth meditation, especially if he be inexpert of external
discipline: who sees not how much he is to be preferred before other: since
that he has exposed himself to so many labors? for he is laid open to be
torn in pieces with tongs innumerable, one blames him, another praises him,
another defaceth him, one calls in question his memory, another his style.
Great constancy has he need of, to bear these things. And very much it
ferdereth the edification of the Church, if the prelates do excel in the
grace which except they have, very many things of the discipline eccl. shall
perish. Therefore after he had said, it behooves a doctor to keep
hospitality, to be courteous, to be unreprovable: Theodoret in 1. tim. 5.
he reckons this also, and adds a Doctor. For to what purpose is he called
Doctor, but that he should teach? but perhaps thou will say, that he should
teach philosophy, by the example of life. These things are vain: For the
Mastership of words is necessary also, and therefore Paul says, cheefely
those that labor in the word and doctrine. For where as he treats of matters
of opinion, what place has the holiness of life? What force has that?
Neither yet will I praise that sermon which swelling in haughtiness follows
the boast of outward cunning, but that which has much power and juice, which
is weighty in sense and full of Wisdom. He has no need therefore of
furniture and pomp of speaking: but of intelligence and of force meet to utter
that, that he thinks ought to be uttered.

By these words it appears that Chrysostom takes S. Paul's words to betoken
no other Elder Governing Ecclesiastical Discipline, than such as meddled or
ought to have meddled with teaching. Theodoret mentions no such elder
interpreting this place.
And that the more they excelled therein, Paul meant they were worthy to be
more honored. As for other kinds of Elders not teaching at all, he mentioned
here, or commended none.

As for the referrence of any other compared unto these Elders (whom here also
he calls Doctors, not knowing of any so nice distinction between Doctors
and Pastors as our Brethren devise) which might seem by this word (...), to
insinuate some other kind of Elders: besides the comparison of those that
labor more or less in the word and Doctrine: he takes it to also to be spoken,
in comparison of those Elders, that were either the forenamed Elder Widows, or
else, of the Deacons or Ministers of the church, without mention of any other,
save of the Layty, that provided of maintenance of the Clergies liuinges. And
here he makes an agreeable probation, between the state of the Levites and
of the Laytie, in the state of the old Law under Moses: and the state of the
new, under this general precept of Christ, the workman is worthy of his
reward. And as for the outward Discipline of the Church, he makes the same to
appertain to those Governing Elders, that labor also in the Word and
Doctrine, showing what pain they take till they be grown to experience
therein. Of other unpreaching Prelates or Ecclesiastical Governors of the
Church, or Churches Ecclesiastical Discipline pertaining to any such Elders,
as were Ecclesiastical Governors, not teaching at all: neither here nor any
where else Chrysostom makes any mention. But, as in this place, so in all
other, he uses the word (...). Presbyter, Priest or Ecclesiastical Elder,
only for such as are Ministers of the Word. And that this is the very meaning
of Chrysostom: Theophilactus his abridger does clearly expound it. He calls
Honor ( says Theophilact) as appears in that which follows, the things
that are bestowed for their maintenance. For they that instruct other, must
abound in those things, that are necessary for the life of man: least being
distracted with the care of them, them omit the fuuction of preaching. But he
inferred it should be double, in respect of the Widows or of the Deacons.
But wherein all the World are they, which affirm, there is need of a kind
of a kind of good life, and not of speech, wherewith other may be instructed?
Which question Oecerinus, repeateth yet playner, saying: But But where now are
they that say, he that governs has no need of speeches nor of Doctrine,
but of like only? Hark, hark (good Brethren) and answer to your call for
Ocumenus plainly calls for all such as say there were some such
Ecclesiastical Governors of the church, that would meddle all with manners
and Discipline of life, and nothing in speech and teaching doctrine. Neither
can ye post it of to those that preach the seldomer, or can-not preach: for
these do the best they can, and teach yet some way or other: it least, it is
their duty and profession. But your Governing Seigniors profess only ruling,
and remove teaching.

Theodorete having noted on the first verse of this Chapter, 1. Tim. 5. rebuke
not an Elder, and said, non dicit hic sacerdotem. etc. Theodoret mentions no
such elder interpreting this place.
Here he names not a preeste, but one that is waxen old: when he comes to
this 17. verse, the Elders that govern well: etc. without any distinction, as
naming there only such as were Ministers of the word, he says: so laudable a
thing is Doctrine. He puts dubble honor for more ample. So that, if
Theodorete had thought that Paul had also meant here* any such kind of Elder,
as meddled not at all with Doctrine, there is no likelihood, but he would also
have expressed it. Especially saying before on the 4. Chap. ver. 14. Despise
not the grace that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, with the
imposition of the hands of the Presbytery or Eldership. Here he called
Doctrine, Grace. But the presbytery here he calls those, which received the
Apostolical Grace. So also has the holy scripture called them Elders which
were honorable in Israel Likewise here Theodoret had good occasion, to have
noted these Elders governing the Ecclesiastical regiment of the Church, not
meddling with teaching, if he had thought Saint Paul had meant of any such
kind of Elders.

The commentary that is added unto Hierome, says: The commentary on Tim. added
to Jerome.
The Elders that rule well: are those that fulfill their office* are worthy of
double honor, both of the office and of the Doctrine: cheefely they that labor
in the word and Doctrine: He said not of all that have the Word, but that
labor in the Word. But he commands him to ordeine all that have it.

As who say, all the Elders are ordained into the office and Ministry of the
word, Ambrose in 1. tim. 5
as having the word, and so are to be honored with a double honor, both for
their office, and for the Word sake, whereof they be officers, but they are
most of all to be honored with this double honor, that are painful
laborers therein, whether Jerome in the name of Presbyter, Priest or Elder
understand in any place, such Elders as our Brethren pretend: we shall here
more afterward.

But Calvin alleges Ambrose, and so does Beza, and Daneus, for these Elders
governing the Ecclesiastical Discipline, Caluins allegation of Ambr. for the
governing and not teaching Elders.
and not meddling with teaching of the word. Calvin having alleged (as we
have heard) on this testimony, 1. Tim. 5.17. that we might gather there was
such Elders, says: Ambrose complains that this manner was worn^ out of use,
through the slothfulness or rather the pride of the Doctors, while they only
would excel. But what is this unto this place, 1. Timothy, 5.17.

Upon the which, Ambrose has only these words: The Elders that rule well, etc.
The good and faithful dispensers or stewardes are not only to be judged
worthy of high honor, Ambr. interpretation of this place 1. Tim. 5.17.
but also of earthly, that they might not be made sad for want of maintenance,
but rather that they might rejoice of their faith and Doctrine. For if he be
not humbled with need, he will become more earnest: and authority will
increase in him, when he sees himself even in the present time to enjoy the
fruit of his labor. Not so that he should abound, but so that he should
not want. And this is all that Ambrose there says heereon. Manifestly
acknowledginge in this sentence, but one kind or function of Elders to be
spoken of, and those to be Dispensers of the Word. And as for other kind of
Elders not Dispensers nor medlers with teachinge at all, he medleth not at
all in this place with them.

True it is that on this first verse of the fifth Chapter, Rebuke not an Elder
but exhort him as a Father. etc. Ambrose in 1. Tim. 5.1.
He says before: For the honorablenesse of age, he that is the greater in
years, is to be provoked to do well, with gentleness, that he may take the
admonition the more easily. For he that is warned, may be afraid least he
should afterward be rebuked, which is unseemly for a senior. For verily
among all nations old age is honorable whereupon also the synagog and
afterward the church, had Seniors, without whose counsel nothing was done in
the Church. Which thing by what negligence it grew out of use, I can-not tell,
except perhaps by the slouthe of the Doctors, or rather by their pride, while
they alone would seem to be somewhat.

Thus says Ambrose, but whether they had no parts at all in meddling with the
Word, because they labored not altogether therein, as the Doctors did, or
what their office was, if they had any peculier office, or only so reverenced
for their age, that their only counsel was asked, or whether they joined in
authority and government in common with the Pastoral and teaching Elders, S.
Ambrose doubtful speech of other governing Elders besides the doctors.
or when they came into the Church, or how they began, or whether it were but
only a continuance, or imitation of the Jews order in the Synagogue, or
there were any commandment of them, either from the Lord, or from the
Apostles, or whether there were any such in the Apostles times, or whether they
were in every congregation, or but in some principal and great Churches, or
how long they continued, in every or any Church where they were, or when they
ceased or grew out of use, whether al at once, or by little and little: none of
all these things (which were very material to our consideration of them) we
can learn on these words of Ambrose. But it seems (since they were gone so
long before S. Abrose time,) that he confesses he did not know how they were
clean worn out of use: Whether it were likely or no, that they were thought
convenient to remain, it is apparaunt they were not counted so necessary, as
were the offices of Bishops, of Pastors and Teachers, and of Deacons. For if
they had so esteemed of them, they would have continued in the Church, as well
as the other, at least wise in some places, neither negligence nor sloth, nor
pride, either of Doctors, or of any other, nor of all the Church, could have
ever so clean, and that so long time before S. Ambrose, and so many hundred
years since, have abolished them.

But if this yet satisfy not our Brethren for Ambroses Judgment upon these
other Elders that were not Laborers in the Word and Doctrine: because he
says they were such Governors, as that nothing was done in the Church without
them? Albeit that also may be lmitted in the understanding of such consent or
assistaunce, as wherein the Deacons were ever ready at hand, atttendaunt on
the Bishops and Pastors yet why might it not then (if we will not
understand it, neither of those temporary civil officers, that were at that
time as Magistrates among them, such as Brentius, Gualter, Snecanus, and other
do say, that then they had:) be well enough understood, even for such
Elders, who though they were not the Bishop or the Especial Doctors that our
Brethren distinguish from Pastors: ( which Doctors labored most in the Word
and Doctrine, though they joined exhortation and application to there Doctrine,
( as did the Pastors) yet these other not so much laboring in that manner,
sith there was nothing done in the Church without them, ( except our Brethren
will count teaching nothing) it argues (if they dealt more or less in all
things, that were to be done in the Church,) that they were not clean
excluded from all teaching.

Cyprian.
But whatsoever office those Elders had, that Saint Ambrose says, was grown
out of use: it is plain impossible, that he being himself an Archbishop
and approving so far forth (as we have heard) the superior separate
authority of every Bishop one in a City: and reckoning them to succeed in the
Apostles places: should withal conceive, that they had ever any such office
of ioint-authority in all things, yea, in excommunication with the Bishop, as
our Brethren ascribe unto them, but the contrary thereof, we shall see after
(God willing) further in the practice of S. Ambrose himself.

In the mean time, because this Testimony out of Ambrose, does not yet
sufficiently describe unto us, what kin officers these were: (for if by the
sloth or by the Pride of the Doctors these Elders decayed: then be like they
had some kind of teaching:) yet lea^^e our Brethren having no better testimony
than these uncertain words of Ambrose, should under pretense of reviving
these old Elders dead and buried long ago, obtrude unto us some new young
Elders, missebegotten and fathered in these old Elders names, let us now see
further what other Elder Fathers, for these Elder Governors, that meddle not
with teaching, and yet join in common Government with the Pastors, our
Brethren allege also besides Saint Ambrose

Beza that said in his confession of the christian faith, Cap. 5. de eccl.
artic. 32. Bezaes testimonies for these Elders.
But that the Elders were chosen by suffrages, or at least by the approouing of
the whole company, as it openly enough appears out of Ambrose, complaining
that certain men transferred this right unto themselves: adds heereunto:
and out of Cyprian also, of whom we may eftsoons understand that matter, Ambr.
in 1. Tim. 5. Lib. Epis. 2. Epis. 5. and lib. 3. epist. 10.14.15. and aliis
deinceps.
that the Bishop governed a College of Elders, not that he should there
reign: but that according to their sentence, he should govern the
Ecclesiastical policy, especially while at that time the Aphricane Churches
were not helped of the Magistrate but rather most cruelly vexed.

By the leave still of this so excellent man, whom otherwise (save in these
matters of Discipline and Government) I honor as highly as any of our Brethren
do, and herein withal reverence dissent from him (as I have before of him, and
of all other our like reverent brethren protested) this which here Beza says,
that it openly enough appears by Ambrose ( quoting Ambrose in 1 Timothy 5.) that
the Elders ( which there Beza speaks of) were chosen by suffrages, or at
least by the approouing of the whole company: neither any choosing of them
either by suffrages, or by approouing of the whole or any of the company,
app^areth, openly or darkly, enough or at all. Ambrose mentions no such
matter, in all the whole Chapter. How openly enough Ambrose there speaks of
these Elders, we have already seen. It is not so open enough, that we can
learn thereby, either what office, or authority, or ground thereof they had: nor
yet where, when, nor how they began, continued or ended. And therefore it is
not so open enough, but that to prove, these Elders which our Brethren would
bring in to be like unto those: and to bring warrant enough that we are
bound to receive and chose them: I think our Brethren would wish it were
more open and apparent than Ambrose makes it: And so would I wish also, that
we might once certainly know, whether we must needs choose them, or we may
choose, whether we will choose them, yea or no: supposing they had been such,
as our Brethren suppose they were: which neither could be, nor has any
probability, but all contrary, by the testimonies, conjectures and reasons
that we have seen.

But because, if it be not open enough, Beza will open it more by Cyprian, that
was Ambroses ancient, by almost two hundred years. Let us search likewise
what his Quotations out of Cyprian, will open unto us, and whether in his time
which was about the year of our Lord, two hundred and sixty, there were any
such Elders as meddled not with teaching, that Governed the Ecclesiastical
Discipline and spiritual jurisdiction. For so Beza in the beginning of this
article says, Whether Cyprian mention any such Elders.
that the spiritual jurisdiction was committed to them.

Now to prove this, after he has done with Ambrose, he adds: and out of
Cyprian also, of whom we may eft-soones understand that matter, that the
Bishop Governed a College of Elders, not that he should there reign, but
that according to their sentence he should govern the Ecclesiastical policy.
Or ever we come to see by his Quotations, what manner of Elders soever these
were, whether such as Beza goes about to prove and our Brethren urge, yea or
no: (let that fall out after, as it shall:) this is first worth the noting,
that the Bishop governed the College of these Elders, and so was above them.
And that not for an action or two, or for any set days* Months, or years:
but continued, as the College continued, during his time, except he were
deprived of his life, or deposed of his dignity, or exiled from his Country,
This government of the B. was permanent in him
or otherwise absent, or fled, as then Cyprian himself was fled from his
College, by reason perhaps of the personal persecution against him. And yet
he remained still, as well absent as present, the Governor of them.

Yea, but (says Beza, not to reign there, God forbid, we should allow any
bishop to reign over those, of whom he has the Government. Let that be
vpbrayded to the Pope. We houlde our selves content with this, that Beza
says, he should rule the Ecclesiastical policy.

Yea but (says Beza) according to their sentence. And what rule is that, if
they give the sentence, and he only rule according to their sentence? do not
they rather rule than he? (...).
or is he any better than their servant, Officer, or executioner of their
sentence, and they his Governors, not he theirs? therefore that should be
opened yet more plain, what is meant by their sentence, and how far it
stretches. Or else it is not yet made by Beza open enough, to whom the
Government does belong, to him or to them. But so far forth as belonges to
him, he still is all their superior therein. Now then, if it shall fall out,
that this College of Elders over which the Bishop is Governor, shall prove to
be a College of such Elders, as meddled as well with teaching of the word, as
with the Government of Ecclesiastical Discipline: and be of those Elders that
be his Brethren in the office of Eldership, which we call (of Presbyters)
Priests: then have we here again the permanent superiority of Bishops over
Pastoral Elders, whereof we have so much before debated.

But Beza goes about another matter clean contrary, to prove that this
College of Elders were of such Elders as were not medlers with teaching of the
Word. Bezaes confession that these Elders governing with the B. were in the
time of persecution.
Which if they were, as we shall see anon, by trial out of these Epistles of
Cyprian: yet says Beza, that this was then* when as especially by that time,
the Churches of Aphrica were not helped of the Magistrate, but rather most
cruelly vexed. And what means Beza to come in with this, Especially of that
time of heathen Magistrates and their persecution? when Gualter makes the same
reason, that there were such Elders not teaching (though not Ecclesiastical
Governors as our Brethren imagine) in the Church then, when as there wanted
Christian Magistrates and Princes: what other thing did he infer thereon, but
this? that now sith there are Christian Magistrates and Princes^, and that the
Government of Ecclesiastical matters so well as temporal pertains to them*
as we also acknowledge, and that most rightly in the Queens most excellent
Majesty ( and if in her, then in the right of all other Christian Princes,)
that therefore, this defect being now furnished, this supply of these Elders
is needless and no longer necessary. Yea, and should now be prejudicial to
the authority and Government of Christian Princes. And what other thing says
Gualter there, but that this reason of Beza does infer? Our Brethren reason
on S. Paul words, 1. Tim. 5.17. That because S. Paul brings in these
words, How Bezaes words confirm Gualters.
Especially those that labor in the word and Doctrine: therefore there were
other governing Elders, that were not teachers. And may not we reason as well
and much better? that since the Elders which were no teachers, but only ruled
the Eccl. Discipline, were then, when as especially at that time the churches
were not helped of the Magistrate: therefore being now helped of the
Magistrate, there need no such Elders to be the rulers of the churches
Discipline.

But let us now see by the search of these Quotations, Cyprian^ Elders.
that Beza cites out of Cyprian for these elders, what manner of Elders they
were. Whether not meddling with teaching, ( as Beza and our Brethren pretend)
or Ministers of the word and Doctrine. And first, for the second book of his
Epistles, the fifth epistle: which is here first by Beza quoted, the
superscription is thus.

Cyprianus presbyteris and Diaconis and plebi vniuersae salutem. Cyprian to the
Elders, and Deacons, and to the whole people, Greeting. Cypr. lib. ^. epist. 5.


Here are Elders named before Deacons, as the Deacons before the people. But
whether they meddled with the word or no, as yet appears not. But by the like
style in his other Epistles precedent, when he writes to other, or writes of
other, whom he calls Presbyterus, and applies to them the name Sacerdos: we
may he bolder (before hand) conclude that he means in that name, no such
Elders as our Brethren plead for. Cyprian commends to these Elders, Deacons
and people, one Aurelius whom he had ordained a Reader. And in the beginning
of his Epistle says: In the Clearkes that are to be ordained (most dear
Brethren) we are wont to consult with you, and in common counsel, to weigh
the manners and merits of every one. In these words he tells them what he
was wont to do with them, in ordeyning of the Clergy. But he says not that
they had the authority thereof so well and as far forth as he, and that they
joined in Common government with him, but in common counsel, and that only to
consider of their conuers^tion: nor that he was so necessarily bound thereto,
but that, when he himself apparently knew the party to be fit (as he
commends this Aurelius to be) he was not then bound to consult with them
thereon, How far Cyprian dealt with the Elders in giving Ecclesiastical
orders.
but he himself without any further consultation, might ordein the party, as
here he did this Aurelius. And he says Merebatur talis Clericae ordinationis
vlteriores gradus and incrementa maiora, non de annis suis, sed de meritis
aestimandus, sed interim placuit vt ab officio lectionis incipiat, etc. Such an
other as he deserved further degrees of the Clericall ordination* and greater
aduauncementes, not being to be esteemed by his years, but by his merits.
Nevertheless it pleased me in the mean season, that he should begin from
the office of reading: because both nothing does more agree unto the voice that
has confessed the Lord by glorious preaching, than with celebrating the
Divine Lessons, to sound out aft^rwarde the high words: he which has uttered
the Martyrdom of Christ, to read the Gospel of Christ from whence the
Martyrs are made, to come to the pulpit after the stocks: to have been
beholden there of the multitude of the Gentiles, and here to be beholden of the
Br. there to have been heard with the wonder of the people standing about him*
and here to be heard with the rejoicing os the Brotherhood. Know ye therefore
(most dearly beloved brethren) that this man was ordained of me, and of my
Colleagues which were present, because I know that you do both willingly
embrace and wish, for many such to be ordained in our Church.

Here he speaks of Colleagues indeed, that joined with this holy
Archbishop Cyprian in ordeining this man a Reader. Cyprians i^yning Elders with
him in imposition of hands argues they were elders of the word
But he shows that all the action was at his pleasure, and that he might
have given him higher orders if he had pleased. But what is here to prove that
these Colleagues, though he governed them, were of any College under him, or
were not Elders meddling with the Word? yea rather because he speakketh of
ordeining, and that he joined them with him in the ordeining, and that action
was done by imposition of hands, which we have seen before, was only of
those that were Ministers of the Word: why should we not think that these
colleages, were elders that meddled with the word and teaching, when the reader
whom they ordained meddled with it?

Here is at least (to begin with) a good conjecture, that these Elders
meddled with teaching, when they joined thus far in the ordeining of Teachers:
but here is nothing at all, whereon we may conjecture, that these Elders did
not meddle at all with teaching.

The next testimony that Beza quoteth out of Cyprian, for these governing
Elders not meddling with teaching, is in the third Book the tenth Epistle.
Cypr. lib. 3. epist. 10.
And here he begins as he did before (save for the people) Cyprian to the
Elders and Deacons his brethren, Greeting. Whom he means here also by the
name of these Presbyters, Priests or Elders, and in what matters they meddled,
appears more plainly by this Epistle.

Verly I wished (most dear brethren) that I might have saluted with my
letters, our whole Clergy intyre and safe. But because this malicious tempest,
which has beaten down our people for the most part, has from hence also
added an heap unto our greeues, insomuch that in the slaughter thereof, it
has wrung in a portion also of the Clergy: we beseech the Lord that we may
salute you, whom we know to stand in constancy, and in the virtue (or
power) of faith, being protected hereafter also through the mercy of God. And
although the cause compel me, that I my self ought to hasten and come unto
you, first for the longing and desire of you, which thing is one of my chiefest
wishes: and then moreover, that those things which the common profit about the
Government of the Church requires, we may treat of (or handle) them together,
and may file them being examined by the counsel of many: nevertheless it is
rather thought good, yet a while in the mean season, to keep a privy corner
and rest, in respect of other commodities, which appertain unto the peace and
health of us all.

Whereof a reason shall be rendered to you, of our most dear Brother
Tertullus. Who for his other care which in godly works he greatly imployeth,
was also the author of this counsel, that I should abide wary and
refraining, nor rashly commit my self unto those places, where I was so often
inquired after and sought for. Reposing my self therefore on your love and
religon, which I have known sufficiently, I do by these letters both exhort
you, and command (or charge) you, Et hortor and mando.
that you (whose presence there is not envied, nor so much dangerous,) occupy
my room (or steed) about those things to be done which the religious (or
Ecclesiastical) administration does require. Vice mea fungamini.
And again his concluding his Epistle he says: but unto that which our
Elders Donatus, Nouatus, and Curdius have written unto me, I being alone
could write nothing again, sith that from the beginning of my Bishopric, I
have determined to do nothing of mine own sentence privately, without your
counsel, and without the consent of the people, but when as by the grace of
GOD I shall come unto you, then will we treat in common of those things that
are either done or to be done, according as mutual honor does require.

In this Epistle (as in the other) he says he will treat together in common
with them, How Cyprian joined in common coun^ell with the elder his authority
reserved.
of those things that concern the government of the Church, and therein do
nothing without their counsel: Howbeit he makes this nothing else, but his
own determination with himself so to do. Neither gives he to them in common
any joint or aequall authority with him in these things, as of their right and
office, otherwise than as he made them his deputies in the authority thereof.
Yea, he not only exhorts them, but commands and charge them to stand
in his steed.

And all this he does in his absence, which recommendeth the more his authority
in his presence. Although therefore in his presence among them, he would in all
things consult, examine and (as he says) file out matters with the counsel
of many (for, plus vident oculi quam oculus) yet can we not gather thereupon,
that this their counsel and treating in common argues the authority of
Governing those things, to be in common also among them. For, where he
attributes to these elders thus much, The Elders council and the peoples
con^ent.
that he would do nothing without their counsel: he adds, and without the
consent of the people. And consent is more than counsel ( for a man may give
his counsel, and yet, it may be done without his consent: but if it shall not
be done without his consent, then he has a greater stroke therein, than in
giving his advice or counsel) and shall we say then, that the people also had
the authority, and that greater authority to, in the government of the churches
discipline, than had these Elders? these humble and courteous speeches therefore,
or these his doings (so far. as here he says, mutual honor required) argue not
the peoples, Noua^us.
nor the Elders and deacons ioint-authority with him. Yea our brethren
their-selues give not this authority and government to the Deacons. And yet
here Cyprian, look what dealing in the Government of the Ecclesiastical
Discipline he yields to the Elders: he joins the Deacons jointly with them.

But admit now, that these Elders and Deacons had joint authority in common
with him, in the government of the Churches Discipline: still our Question is,
who, and what manner of Elders these were? whether Governing Elders not meddling
with the Word, as Beza and our Brethren do affirm? but if we shall better
consider this, that here he makes them and the Deacons to be his Deputies:
That these Elders to who^ Cypr. wrote were ministers of the word
although the Deacons were inferior, but were not excluded from meddling in the
Ministry of the Word: What likelihood is there, but that these Elders their
superiors, were Ministers of the Word also? and what vnlikelihoode is there
not in this? that if there had been any other kind of Elders, to wit,
pastoral Elders, higher then both of them, as they must needs either grant
that there were, (if these that he writes to were not Pastoral Elders, or
else, that they wanted Pastors and Ministers of the Word and Sacraments) that
he would make these Elders and Deacons his Deputies, rather than the
Pastoral Elders amongst them? the Pastors being of the same function of
eldership that himself was of, and so might much better represent him, he
only differing in degree of dignity and authority of Government over them.

One of Cyprians elders was Nouatus a teacher of puritanisme
But to make it yet more plain, when as he mentions also in this Epistle,
three of these Elders, Donatus, Nouatus and Curdius, whatsoever the other were,
this Nouatus ( for I can find no other Nouatus but one, that was in Cyprians
time, and one of his elders,) not only meddled but ouermedled with the Word.
And both wrote unto him, and afterward much troubled him, breeding a most
dangerous Schism and heresy in the Church, and all under a pretense of more
severe Discipline and purity, and yet was himself, when he was well sought
out, a most impure and licentious man. This Nouatus being an elder of Carthage,
where Cyprian was Bishop, fled from Carthage to Rome, and there also brake
forth into such factions, as we have seen before out of Eusebius, Cypr.
epist. li. 2. epist. ^.
Lib. 6. Cap. 33.

Whereupon Cornelius the B. of Rome, writes of him unto Cyprian. Whom Cyprian
aunswering, Lib. Epist. 2. Epist. 8. says: Concerning Nouatus, The description
of Nouat^s.
there was no need to show us from thence: when rather by us Nouatus ought to
have been showed unto you, that he was always desirous of new matters. Of
covetousness insatiable, furious in ravening, puffed up with arrogancye, and
an insensibleness of a proud swelling, ever known there unto the Bishops in
an ill sort, condemned by the voice of all the Priests, as an Heretic
always, and faithless, evermore curious that he might betraye, flattering to
this end that he might beguile, that he might love never faithful, a
fyre-brande and fire to kindl^ the flambes of sedition, a whirle-winde and
Tempest to make Shipwrackes of the faith, an adversary of tranquillitye, an
enemy of peace: to conclude, Nouatus departinge thence from us, that is to
say, Nouatus scisme and seuering the brethren from the B. and from the clergy.
the storm and the Whirle-winde departing from us: quietness was partly made,
and the glorious and good confessors, which by his inciting were gone from the
Church, after that he was gone from the City, came to the Church. Again, The
same Nouatus is he, that amongst us first sowed the flambes of discord and
Scisme, which here severed some of the brethren from the Bishop. Which even in
the very persecution it self, that he might turn away the minds of the
brethren, was another kind of persecution unto our people.

It is even he, which by his faction and ambition, made Felicissimus his
Catch-pole a Deacon, neither I permitting it, neither writing of it. And
sailing with his tempest to ouerturne the Church at Rome also, he has there
attempted the like and even such parts, Nouatus his making of a B. and of a
Deacon.
pulling a portion of the people from the Cleargye, cutting asunder the
concord of the brotherhoode, that held well together among them selves and
loved one another. Certainelye sith that, according to the bigness thereof,
Rome ought to go before Carthage. He has there committed greater and more
grievous things, he that here against the Church made a Deacon, made there
a bishop. Neither let any man marvel at this in such kind of men. The
evil are ever carried mad in their furye. And when they have committed their
wickedness, they are vexed with the conscience it self of their wicked mind.
Neither can they abide in the church of God, which have not holden the
Discipline of Gods making, and that which is Ecclesiastical, neither in the
conversation of their doing nor in the peace of their manners. The pupilles
whom he has spoiled, the Widows whom he has defrauded, the churches
money which he has denied, require these punishments which we see in his
furye. Nouatus unnaturalness toward his father, wife and child.


His Father also died for famine in a Village, and yet afterward when he was
dead, he buried him not. With his foot he struck his VViues bellye,
whereupon she trauellinge before her time, was delivered of her child
murdered. And dare he now condemn the hands of them that make the
offeringes, when he himself is worse than his feet were, with the which
his Chilyde that was borne was slain? His conscience misgaue this guiltiness
of his crimes long ago. The Presbytery.
For this cause he made sure reckoning, that he should not only be called
out of the Presbyterye, but also excommunicated, and the Brethren urging it,
the Day of his trial approached, in the which before as his cause should be
handled, if that the persecution had not come before it. Which he taking hold
of, with a certain kind of vow that he might escape and save his
condemnation, committed and intermixed all these things, (as he which was to
be cast out of the Church and excluded) prevented the judgment of the
priests, by his voluntary departing: as though, to have prevented the
sentence, were to have escaped the punishment.

This presbytery consisted of such Elders as were Sacerdotes, Ministers of the
word and sacraments.
By this inuectiue of Cyprian, it is not only most apparent that this Elder
Nouatus was a Minister of the word and sacraments: but that also these
consistories or colleges of Elders, in such great cities as Rome and Carthage,
that with the Bishops were assistants in the government of the Ecclesiastical
Discipline, were not of such Elders as meddled not with the word: but were of
such Presbyters Priests or Elders, as were also called sacerdotes. Which in
the Epistle before this that Beza next cites, is called of Cyprian, the corpse
of the Priests. Lib. 3. epist. 13. Where, after again he has inueighed
against this Nouatus, whom there he calls Nouatian, he says: for therefore
(most dear Brother) the corpse of the Priests is abundant, coupled together
with the glue of mutual concord and bond of unity: that if any of our college
shall attempt to make an heresy, The college of the Elders a corpse of Priests
and pastoral Elders.
and to rende and waste the flock of Christ, the other should help, and as
profitable and merciful pastors should gather together into the fold the
Lords sheep. And thus by the occasion of this one Scismaticall Elder, we
find not only a profitable warning for us all to take heed, of making
schism in the Church under pretense of greater purity, and innouating new
orders of more severe Discipline: but also, which is the point we now rely
upon, that these Colleges of Elders, whose counselles the Bishops used in the
Government of the churches discipline, were colleges of pastoral Elders.

Cypr. Epist. li. 3. epi. 14.
But to search it yet further with Beza, let us proceed unto his next
quotation, Epist. 14. even the next Epistle to that we last cited, although we
have partly seen the same already, for the superiority of Bishops over
pastoral Elders. Wherein Cyprian writes to the Elders and Deacons as before.
The occasion was* because they admitted some to the supper of the Lord, and to
the peace of the Church, who had fallen in the time of persecution, and had not
before their receiving, publicly confessed their offense, and declared their
unfeigned repentance. Whereupon says Cyprian:

I have long held my patience (most dear Bre.) as though our shamefaste
silence should gain quietness. The Elders claim of government.
But when the immoderate and cutted presumption of some, endeuoreth by their
rashness to disturb both the honor of the Martyrs, and the shamefastness of
the confessors, and the tranquillity of the whole people: I must not hold my
peace any longer, least too much silence grow to the danger, both of the
people together and of our selves. For what danger of offending the Lord ought
we not to fear, when as some of the Elders, The Elders claiming all the
Churches eccl. government to themselves is the contumely and peril of the
people.
neither mindful of the Gospel, nor of their place, neither thinking of the
judgment of the Lord to come, nor of the Bishop that now is placed over them,
claim all to themselves with the contumely and contempt of their governor.
Which thing was never done at all under our ancestors. Yea, would to God they
claimed not all things to them, with the overthrow of our Brethrens
salvation. I can wink at and bear the contumely of our Bishopric, as I have
always winked at it, and thoroughly borne it. But there is now no place of
winking at it, when as our Bretherhood is beguiled by certain of you, who
while without the reason of restoring them to salvation, are desirous to be
plausible: they do rather hinder such as are fallen. For, that it is a most
heinous offense which persecution compelled to be committed, even they also do
know that have committed it, when as the Lord and our judge has said: He
that shall confess me before men, Luke. 22.
I will acknowledge him also before my father which is in heaven. But he that
shall deny me, I will also deny him. And again, Mark 3.
All sins shall be forgiven to the sons of men, yea blasphemy; but he that
shall blaspheme against the holy Ghost, shall have no forgiveness, but is
guilty of aeternall sin. Again the blessed Apostle said: ye can not drink
the cup of the Lord and the cup of Devils; ye can not communicate at the table
of the Lord, and at the table of Devils. He that concealeth these things from
our Brethren, 1. Cor. 10.
beguileth the misers, as though that they which truly repenting them, might
satisfy unto God the father for mercy by their prayers and works, should be
seduced, that they might perish the more. And those that might erect
themselves, might the more fall. For when in lesser sins, the sinners declare
themselves penitent at a just time, The Elders presuming to restore the
penite^ts without the Bishop.
and come to the confession of their sins, according to the order of
discipline, and by the laying on of the Bishops and the Clergies hands, they
receive the right of communicating: they are now (in the raw time of the
persecution, yet continuing, the peace of the Church it self being not yet
restored:) admitted to the communicating, and their name is offered up, and
having not done their penitence, their confession of their sins being not yet
finished, nor the hand either of the Bishop or of the Clergy being as yet
laid upon them; the sacrament of thanksgiving is given unto them. When as it
is written, He that shall eat the bread or drink the cup of the Lord
unworthily shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But now are not
they guilty that know not the law of the Scripture, The Eccl. gou. teachers.
but they are guilty that are the Governors, and do not declare these
things unto their Brethren, that they being instructed of their Governors,
might do all things with the fear of God, and with the observation given and
prescribed of him. Moreover, they cause the blessed Martyrs to be envied, and
set at strife the glorious servants of God, with the Priest of God; The
Bishops authority over these governors teachers.
that when as they that are mindful of our law shall have directed their
letters to me, and shall have requested that the desires of every one may be
examined, and the peace to be given, when as our mother her self shall have
first by the Lords mercy received peace, and that the divine protection shall
have brought you again unto the Church: these men taking away the honor
which the blessed Martyrs, which the Confessors keep unto us, contemning the
law and observation of the Lord, which the same Martyrs and Confessors
command to be holden, The governors ministers of the Sacrament.
do communicate with those that are fallen, and offer, and deliver the
Sacrament of thanksgiving, before the fear of persecution be extinguished,
before our return, before almost the very departure it self of the Martyrs.
When as the Martyrs yea if so be through the heat of glory not so much
looking upon the scripture, should desire any thing more than they ought,
contrary to the law of God; they ought to be admonished of the Elders and
Deacons suggesting (or declaring it) as it has always in times past been done.

Thus does Cyprian most clearly show, that these Elders ( whom also he
calls by the name of Governors.) Not only with the Bishop laid their
hands on the penitent, but administered the supper of the Lord unto them.
Which thing they doing without the offenders due acknowledgement of their
faults: nor they preaching the law of God and repentance to them, as they
ought to have done: and laying their hands on the penitent, or ever their
Bishop was returned: as Cyprian rebukes them for these presumptions; so by
this he declares, that these Governors Consistoriall were such Elders, as we
call Priests, that is, Ministers of the word and sacraments; and not such
Elders as meddled only with governing and not teaching, as our Brethren and Beza
do pretend.

And because Beza quoteth yet an other testimony out of Cyprian, to wit, the
15. Epistle, for proof of these Elders: it behooves us to see that also,
least we should leave any thing out that our Brethren affirm. And so far
(for my part to my pore skill) as I find ought in them, although I grow over
tedious thereby. Yet I more covet the full boulting out of the truth, and
through satisfying the desire even of the most scrupulous and curious reader,
in so hoate and great controversies, especially as this is of this Eldership
than I fear the glutting of the^, that care not much for these questions, or
will be easily though with reason answered. The Elders and Deacons teachers.


The 15. Epistle is written to his brethren, the martyrs and confessors in his
Church, who having written to their Bishop Cyprian, for the orderly admitting
into the communion of the church, Cypr. Epist. lib. 3. Epist. 15.
such as had fallen; he returns this answer to them. The carfulness of our
place and the fear of the Lord compels me (most valiant and most blessed
martyrs) to admonish you by our letters, that of whom the faith of the L. is
so devoutly and so stoutly conserved, of the same also the law and discipline
of the Lord may be reserved. For sith all the soldiers of Christ ought to
keep the precepts of their Emperor; then much more convenient is it, that
you should more obey his precepts, which are made unto other an example, both
of virtue and of the fear of God. And verily I believed, that the Elders and
Deacons which are there present, warned and enstructed you most fully,
concerning the law of the Gospel, Both the Elders and Deacons were teachers.
even as also in times past it has always been done under our ancestors,
that the Deacons resorting unto the prison, should with their counsels and with
the precepts of the scriptures, ouerrule the desires of the Martyrs. But now I
know with most great grief of mind, that not only the commandments of
God are there not declared: but as yet they are rather hindered, in so much that
even those things also which of your selves are warily done, both concerning
God, and honorably concerning the sacred Priest of God, are again undone by
certain of the Elders. Who neither thinking on the fear of God, nor of the
Bishops honor, when as you directed unto me your letters, by the which your
requests were to be examined, and that you craved I would give peace unto
certain that were fallen at such time as the persecution being finished, we
should begin to come together in one with the Clergy, and be recollected:
they contrary to the law of the Gospel, and to your honorable petition,
before the accomplishment of their penitence, before the confession made of the
most grievous and extreme trespass, before the hand of the Bishop and the
Clergy laid upon them for their poenitence, durst offer ( he means prayers
and thanksgiving) for them, The Elders were the ministers of the Sacrament.
and give them the sacrament of thanksgiving, that is, durst profane the
holy body of the Lord. And verily to them that were fallen, pardon in this
point might be granted. Who being dead, would not make haste to be quickened?
Who would not hasten to come to his health? The governors, Teachers, and
Pastors.
But it is the duty of the Governors to keep the commandment, and both to
instruct them that either hasten, or be ignorant, least that they which
ought to be the Pastors of the sheep, should become their butchers. For, to
grant those things that should turn to ones destruction, is to deceive him,
neither is the fallen reared upon that fashion, but by the displeasing of God,
Bezaes mistaking.
he is rather pushed down to his ruin. Let them learn therefore even of you
that which they ought to teach you, etc.

What can be plainer spoken than these speeches, to declare that these Elders
which Cyprian writes of, were such Governors, that both the ministration of
the word and sacraments pertayned to them, How greatly Beza and our Brethr.
are deceived in the college of Elders governors that Cyptian mentions
and were such as in plain terms he calls Pastors, and that they ought to
teach?

Thus have we seen how all these Epistles which Beza cites, for a college of
governing Elders not meddling with teaching of the word, to have been no such
kind of Elders, as he and our Brethren do imagine but clean contrary. And
though his quotation proceeds further in a generality, and alys deinceps,
and in other Epistles following: yet in none of his Epistles, Epist. lib. 3.
Epist. 16.
either following, or going before, can I find that he mentions any such
Elders, as he and our Brethren do conceive. In the 16. Epistle, speaking of the
Presbyters, Priests or Elders, he says: whom our Elders and Deacons ought to
have warned, that they might nourish the sheep committed to them, and by their
divine maistership, instruct the^ unto the way that is to be prayed for. In the
17. Epistle, he says: I marvel, most dear Brethren ( writing to the Elders
and Deacons) that unto many my Epistles which I have often sent unto you,
^pist. 17.
you have written nothing again. When as either the Profit or the necessity
of our brotherhoode should verily be thus governed, if that we being of you
instructed, may file our counsel for the ordring of matters. Not-withstanding
because I see I have not ability as yet to come unto you, and now the summer
is begun which time afflicts men with continual and grievous infirmities:
I think good to help our Brethren, as those that have received libelles from
the Martyrs, that if they be prevented with any hurt or danger of infirmity,
they should not expect our presence. But that before any Elder being present,
or if an Elder shall not be found, and their end begin to urge them, they
may declare the confession of their trespass, before a Deacon also, that he
laying his hand upon them for their repentance, they may come unto the Lord
with the peace, Their feeding and comforting of the other repenta^tes.
which the Martyrs in their letters given unto us, have desired. The other part
of the people that is fallen, nourish ye the^ with your presence, and refresh
them with your comfort, that they fall not away from the faith and mercy of
the Lord, etc.

In the next Epistle, writing again to the Elders and Deacons, ( having
received letters from them of the same matter) he says: Epist. 18.
I have received your letters (most dear Brethren) in the which ye have
written, that your wholesome counsel unto our Brethren is not wanting, that
setting aside this rash haste making, they should give unto God a religious
patience, that when by the mercy of God we shall come together, we may treat
of all kinds, according to the Ecclesiastical discipline. Cypraians
Colleagues.
Especially, when as it is written: Remember from whence thou have fallen; and
repent. But he repents, Apoc. 2.
that is meek and patient to the commandments of God, and obedient to the
Priests of God* and wins the Lord, with his seruiceablenes and workers.
Howbeit, because you have signified, that certain are immoderate, and do urge
hastily to receive the communion, and you have desired a form to be given of
me unto you for this matter: know ye that I have fully written for this
matter, in the last letters that I wrote unto you. And so tells them (as
before) how they should lay their hands on them, and absolve them.

In the next Epistle, writing yet further unto them on this matter: Epist. 19.
he says, But I have read also the letters of all the Confessors, which they
would have made known by me to al my colleagues, and the peace that they have
given to come unto them: of which matters so that a reason be apparent before
us, what they have done after the fault committed: which thing, sith it
tends to the counsel and sentence of us all:) I dare not judge it before
hand, and claim to me only a matter common. And therefore let them stand on
the Epistles which I last made, an example whereof I have also sent already to
my colleagues ( he means by this word Colleagues not the Elders of his
College, for he wrote to the^, Whom Cyprian here means by his colleagues.
but other his fellow Bishops) who have written that that which we have
decreed likes them, etc. Here with some things he will not meddle alone, but
with his Colleagues. And yet this decree he made alone, and in his absence, as
appears by the two former Epistles,

In the 22. Epistle, writing to the Elders and Deacons, he says: Epist. 22.
Least any thing should be hidden from your conscience (most dear Brethren)
what is written to me, I have sent you a copy of either Epistle, and I
believe, that which I have written again to you, misliketh you not. But this
also I ought by my letters to declare unto you, that upon urgent cause I sent
letters to the Clergy being in the city: and because I should write by
Clerks: albeit I know that many of ours are absent, and as for those few
which are there, do scarce suffice unto the daily ministry of the work: it
was necessary to constitute some new which should be sent, wit ye
therefore, that I have made Saturus a reader, and Optatus the Confessor a
Subdeacon. Whom we had made a good while since, by the last common Clergy
Counsel. When on Easter day we gave once and twice the reading (or the lesson)
either unto Saturus or to Optatus. With the Priests (or Elders) Doctors and
Readers we constituted a Doctor of the hearers ( by the name of Doctors he
means the Catechisers, The Bishop with the Priests, or Elders. Doctors and
readers constituteth a doctor of the hearers.
as we showed of Pantenus, Clemens, Origene, etc.) examining whether all
things agreed unto them, that ought to be in those that are appointed for the
Clergy. I have therefore done no new thing in your absence, Cyprians Clerks.
but that which began long a-go, by the common counsel of us all, is promoted
(or advanced further) necesitie urging it. Thus again does he in his abse^ce
promote to higher orders in the Clergy (as need required) those whom before
by their Counsel, he had begun to choose into the Clergy. The Elders above
the Doctors.
But still. for these Priests or Elders, they were in the number of the
Clergy, such as we have before showed, being Pastors, whom he places before
the Doctors or Catechisers.

In the 24. Epistle, Epist. 24.
( allowing in his absence, a portion of his own stipende, to help the poor
persecuted amongst them) he calls Rogatian compresbyterum his fellow
Elder. Not that he had like authority to him, as Bishop: but, that he was of
the same Priesthood or Eldership of the word and Sacraments, that Cyprian was.

And the next Epistle he directs unto nine other Bishops, whom he calls
Coepiscopis his fellow Bishops, item Compresbyteris and Diaconis in metallo
constitutis martyribus, etc. and also to his fellow Elders, and to the Deacons
placed in the mines, the Martyrs of God the Father Almighty and of Jesus
Christ the Lord and God our Savior, etc. And thus calling the one company
his fellow Bishops, being none of them Bishop of Carthage, where he only was
the B. though absent, and yet was not Carthage being so great a city destitute
of Pastors: and calling the other sort Compresbyteros and placing these Elders
between Bishops and Deacons, and withal distinguishing them from both of
these; and giving them the term that S. Peter does, of Compresbyter, fellow
Elder, which S. Peter ascribes to the Pastors: it is most manifest that he
means only by those Elders such as were ministers of the word and
Sacraments, but not Bishops.

Epist. lib. 4 Epist. 4.
In the next and last book of his Epistles, he speaks little of them, and
writes seldom to them. In the 4. Epistle writing to two Elders that had been
constant in persecution; he cites unto the^ as part of their duty, this
sentence of Christ, Mat. 28. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them, in the
name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to
observe whatsoever I have commanded you, etc. when ye shall show forth these
precepts, you have kept the divine and heavenly commandments.

To conclude, the last of all his Epistles, is not the least to confirm this
matter, Epist.
what was the dignity and office of these Elders, that were assistantes to the
B. in such great Cathedral Churches, and such famous Cities as was Carthage.
Cyprian to the Elders and to the Deacons and to all the people his most dear
and best beloved Brethren, greeting.

Most dear Brethr. I have to signify unto you, that which I have thought
appertains to the common rejoicing, An Elder chosen to be an Elder at
Carthage.
and to the greatest glory of our church. For, know ye, being admonished and
instructed by the divine favor, that the Elder Numidicus is to be enrolled in
the number of the Elders of Carthage, and that he sit in the clergy, being
famous with the most clear light of his confession, Cypr. Elders.
and advanced with the honor both of virtue and faith, who by his exhortation
has sent before him a plentiful number of Martyrs with stones and fire. The
E^der were married
Which joyfully beh^lde his wife that cleued to his side, when as together with
other she was burned. He himself being half burned, and overwhelmed with
stones, and left for dead. While that afterward his daughter with a careful
service of godliness seeks the corpse of her father, where he being found
almost dead, and refreshed, and drawn out from his companions whom he had sent
before him, remained against his will. But this (as we see) was the cause of
his remaining that the Lord would join him unto our Clergy, The Elders that
sat in the Consistory of Carthage, were Sacerdotes.
and would adorn gloriosis Sacerdotibus, with his glorious Sacred Priests,
the abundance of our Elders being desolate. And verily, he shall be promoted,
as time shall permit, unto a more worshipful place of his religion, when
through the Lords protection we shall come in presence. In the mean season,
let this be done that is declared, that we may receive this gift of God with
thanks giving, hoping that by the mercy of the Lord, such ornaments shall be
also furnished, that renewing the strength of his Church, he will make our so
meek and humble Consessus.
consistories, to flourish in honor.

Whereby we plainly see, not only the Bishops authority over the
consistory of the Elders, in making this Elder Numidicus, an Elder in the
clergy and consistory of Carthage: but also that he was a Preacher and
exhorter of the people. And that Cyprian uses the name of Presbyter, and
Sacerdos, indifferently, as betokning one and the same office for the which, we
in English (wanting a proper name for Sacerdos) use the contraction of the
other better and less offensive term Presbyter, calling them Priests,
signifying here Elders ministering the word and Sacraments. And of other
sorts, whom Cyprian calls Presbyteros, Priests or Elders assistent to the
Bishop in the government of the Eccles. discipline, I find no mention, nor
inkling of them in all the Epistles of Saint Cyprian. Neither cite I him in
those editions, that the Papists have of late corrupted him. And therefore I
marvel not a little, that such an excellent man as Beza is (God be praised for
his gifts in him) was so ouershot to cite these Epistles of Cyprian, for a
Consistory or College of such Elders governed by a Bishop, which together with
him should have the spiritual jurisdiction, and the government of Eccl.
discipline, that were not ministers of the word and Sacraments.

As for that which Gellius Snecanus cites also out of Cyprians Epistles Epist.
2. lib. 1. there is no mention there at all of any other of the Clergy, Gell.
Sne^anus de discip. Eccl. 2. pa^s me^hodi.
then only of Bishops, or of such Priests as he calls Sacerdotes and
Pastores. Which Epistle being written to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, by Cyprian
and a great number of other Bishops of Aphrica, joined in counsel with him:
Tertulli^n
he uses there this term Colleagues, meaning other Bishops that were of his
own function. But if ( says he) there shall be any of the Colleagues, which
when persecution urges them, thinks the peace should not be given to our
brothers and sisters: let him in the day of judgment render a reason to the
Lord, either of his importune censure, or of his inhumaine roughnes. Is this
any thing to any governing Elder in the Church that is not a minister of the
word and Sacraments? As for any other Colleagues either of those that he
wrote of, or wrote unto, or that wrote with him, in this or any other Epistle:
I find none. Nor our Brethren can show any such Elders as they urge unto us,
in all these Epistles, or any other work of Cyprian.

But because Gellius Snecanus adioyneth also the testimony of Tertullian in
his Apology against the Gentiles, cap. 39. which we have likewise already
seen, Tertulllanus* in Apol^on^r. g^nt. cap. 39.
for the manner and form of the primitive Church, in their public prayers:
nevertheless, to the fuller search of these Elders which our Brethren would
have, let us again consider what Tertullian says, especially he going not
only immediately before Cyprian, about the year of our Lord, 200. but being
in such estimation with Cyprian that he always called him his Master. I will
now my self ( says Tertullian) set forth the affairs of the Christian
faction, that I which have refuted the evil things, may show the good. We
are a body of the conscience of religion, and of the truth of discipline, and
of the covenant of hope. We come together into an assembly and congregation
that praying unto God (as though by prayers we strined for works) this force
is acceptable unto God. We pray also for the Emperors, for their ministers and
powers, for the state of the world, for the quietness of their affairs, and
for the prolonging of their end. We are gathered together to the reciting of
the divine scriptures, if so be that, the quality of the present time do
compel us to give fore-warning, or to reknowledge it. Certainly we feed our
faith with the holy speeches, we erecte our hope, we fix our confidence.
Nevertheless, we thicken (or increase) the discipline of the masters, (or of
the praecepts) by prouocations or inculcations. At the same place are also
exhortations, chasticements and the divine correction: for the judgment is
given with great weight, as among them that are sure that God beholdes them.
And it is the chiefest foreiudgeing of the judgment to come, if any man do so
trespass, that he be banished from the communicating of prayer and of the
assembly and of all the holy partaking. The Praesidents or Governors are all
of them approved Seniors, having obtained this honor not with price, but with
testimony.

What is there here in any of these words, to prove that these Elders which
(as he terms it) praesidebant did govern the congregations, medl^d not with
teaching? Or rather does he not ascribe teaching to the^? Clemens Alexa^dr.
When (...) says, We are a corpse of the conscience of religion, of truth, of
discipline, and of the covenant of hope? When he says, their coming together
was for prayers, and for recording the Scriptures? When having added how they
fed their faith with the word of God, erecting their hope, and fixing their
confidence, they join this withal, that nevertheless they do increase the
discipline of the masters by their inculcations or often calling upon them? Or
if we should conster these words Disciplinam praeceptorum, for the discipline,
not of the masters, but of the precepts: so that we take it not that they did
increase the discipline of men's commandments. And does he not also join
exhortations together with castigations of the divine censure? By all which and
much more, we may well gather out of this place, that these Praesidents or
governors of these congregations were not such as meddled not with teaching.
For if the Elders not teaching were governed ( as Beza said) in their Colleges
and corpora^ions, of the Bishops: how were these Elders the praesidents or
Governors or not rather the governed? And he speaks of them that obtained
the honor of their government or Praesidentship, not by price of money, but by
testimony. All which accords with our Breath own sai^ngs, for the election
of Bishops and pastoral Elders. And he speaks of such tried and approved
Elders, as Paul in pastoral Elders gave charge to Timothy. But when withal,
he uses for their government, that very term which he used in other places,
speaking also of the Christian assemblies, as in his book de Corona militis,
where he says: Eucharistia Sacramentum et in tempore victus, et omnibus,
mandatum a Domino, Tertu^^de ^^rona (...).
etiam ante-lucanis coetibus, nec de aliorum manu quam de praesidentium
sumimus. The Sacrament of thanksgiving is commanded of the Lord, both in the
time of repast, and in all times, yea also in our asse^blies before the break
of the day, neither do we receive it at the hand of any other tha^ of those
that are our Praeside^ts (or Governors.) Whereby it is plain, that those of
whom here he says, Praesident probati quique, Sentores, the Seniors that are
Praesidents (or that govern) are every one of them tried (or approved) men:
were every one of them none other, but such as ministered the Sacraments, and of
consequence, teachers of the word. And of such Elders governing in ye Church of
Christ, and of none other, Clemens Alexand. le 6. Seromat.
speaks Clemens Alexandrius ( who also was an elder in office, and in time
was somewhat elder tha^ Tertullia^) li. 6. Siromat. He is in very deed ( says
he) an elder of the Church and a true Deacon, that is a minister of Gods will,
if so be he do and teach the things that are of the Lord, not that as he is
ordained of me^, neither that he must be accounted righteous that is an elder,
but that he which is righteous should be brought into the eldership, etc.
Wherein making also afterward the degree of Elder to be in dignity different
from, and placed between Bishop and Deacon: he acknowledges no such kind of
Elder governing the Church in hi^ time, Irenaeus.
that is not a teacher of the word.

Irenaeus con^ra haer. li. 1. ca. 12. Lib. 2. ca. 39
And the same also is manifest in Irenaeus, who in his first book against
heresies, ca. 12. says against the heretic Marcus: Wherefore justly and
aptly unto such thy blindness, the divine Elder and fit preacher of the truth
inueighed against thee, etc. And in the 2. book, cap. 39. speaking both of
Elder in age and office, he says of Christ: And so he was a Senior (or Elder)
among the Seniors, that he might be a perfect master in all things, not only
according to the exposition of the truth, but according to age* sanctifieng
together also the Seniors (or Elders) himself becoming an example unto the^,
etc. And again, But because the age of 30. years, is of a young man of his
first towardness, and stretches to 40. every one will grant that from the
40. or 50. years, he now declineth into an elder age, which age our Lord
having, he taught, as the Gospel and all the Elders testify, which assembled
together unto John the Disciple of the Lord. And the same thing did John
deliver unto the^. Now although herein Iraeneus foully over shoot himself in
Christ's age, more regarding the relation and tradition of the Elders, than
exactlie considering the just time: yet still he acknowledges those that were
called Elders, not in years but in office, concerning the Ecclesiastical
state of Christ his Church, to be such as taught ye witness and relation of
those things that were delivered them by the Apostles, though they remembered
not so well the Apostles reckoning. And this he has more plain, li. 3. ca. 2.
when again we challenge them that are against the tradition, Li. 3. cap. 2.
to come to that tradition which is from the Apostles, which is kept in the
Churches by the succession of the Elders, they will say, they being more wise,
not only than the Elders, but also than the Apostles, have found out the
sincere truth. And li. 4. ca. 43. Li. 4. cap* 43
Wherefore it behooves us to hear these Elders that are in the Church, those
which have their succession from the Apostle, as we have showed, who with the
succession of the Bishop, have (according to the decree of the Father) received
a sure grace (or gift) of the truth. And in the next Chapter: But such as of
many are supposed to be Elders, but serve their pleasures, etc. from all such
therefore we must abstain, and cleave unto these, which (as we have also said
before) keep the doctrine of the Apostles, and with their order of the
Eldership, show forth the sound word and their conversation without offense, to
the information and correction of the residue. Whereunto alleging the examples
of Moses, Samuel, and S. Paul, he says: Even as the Apostle Paul when he was
of good conscience, said to the Corinthians: For we are not as many are,
adulterating the word of God, we have corrupted n^ne, we have circu^uented
none, such Elders does the church nourish: Of who^ also the Prophet says: And
I will give thee thy Princes in peace, and thy Bishops in righ^eousnesse. Of
whom also the Lord said: Who therefore is a faithful agent, good, and wise,
whom the Lord shall prefer over his family, Justinius.
to give them meat in time? Happy is that servant whom the Lord shall find so
doing when he comes. What can be plainer than this, to show that by the name
of these Presbyters, Priests, or Elders in the government of the Church,
Irenaeus always meant such, as were teachers of the word, and none other?

Iustine the martyr in his defense of the Christians unto the Emperor
Antoninus, Iustin^s m^^tyr in Apolog. Christ. ad Antoniu^.
mencioneth (as we have seen) one only governor of the congregation, whom he
calls the chief brother. But he tells withal, that he makes the
exhortation to the congregation before the receiving of the Sacrament, and he
offers the prayers and thanksgiving* and first celebrateth the whole action
of the Lords supper, and the Deacons deliver the bread and the cup, to every
one present, and of other Elders or Governors among the^, that I can find he
makes no mention. As for Ignatius, because our Bre. in their pamphlet of the
learned man's judgment for the 3. kinds of Bishops, do allow of the Bishop
mentioned in Ignatius: by as good reason they have also to allow of his Elders
and Deacons. For almost in every Epistle (if they be the Epistles of Ignatius)
he mencioneth especially these three, and makes the Elders the successors of
the Apostles. In the first Epistle to the Trallians, he says: Be ye subject to
the Elders, Ignatius ex^mpl^ ad T^allian^^.
as to the Apostles of Jesus Christ concerning our hope, in who^ perseuering, we
shall be found in him. And therefore ye must by all means please the Deacons,
which are for the ministry of Jesus Christ, for they are not ministers in
meat and drink, but of the ministry of the Church of God. It behooves
therefore to keep their precepts, even as the burning fire. And let them be
such, but as for you: reverence ye them as the Lord Jesus Christ, because they
are the kepers of his place, as the bishop is the form of the Father of al,
but the Elders of the consistory of God, and joining together of the Apostles
of Christ, for without them it is not the elected church, nor the collection of
the Saints, nor the holy Congregation. And again. What is the Eldership but a
holy institution of a counselor or confessor of a Bishop. What also are the
Deacons but followers of Christ ministering to the Bishop, as Christ to the
Father, and working unto him a clean and vnspottrd work, even as Saint Stephen
unto the most blessed James, and Timothy, and Linus unto Paul and Anacletus,
and Clement unto Peter. And in the 4. Epipistle to the Philippians: Yet I say
to the Bishop and to the Elders in the Lord, that who soever shall keep the
Passover with the Jews, or take up the solemnity of their feast days, shall
be compartner with them that have killed the Lord and his Apostles.

These and such other speeches of the Presbyteral Elders do declare, that
whosoever in Ignatius name wrote the^, for I dare not so boldly (as our Br.
do) affirm them to be his, yet in writing thus of the Consistory of the
Elders) yea, of the Deacons under them, he thought them both to meddle with
teaching, Polycarpus
Polycarpus.
and with the administration of the Sacraments. As for the Epistle that is
adjoined in the name of Polycarpus and the Elders with him, it is most manifest
how they joined teaching to their governing. Let the Elders be simple, in all
things, merciful, converting all from error, visiting all the sick, not
neglecting the widows, the fatherless and the poor, but always providing
good things before the Lord, and before me^. As for any other yt is more
suspected stuff, I cite not. But be they suspected, or be they not, as I
grant they are very ancient: so we can find in none of them, such Elders
mentioned, as our Br. threape upon us yt there were, neither yet in any
ancient and autentike Ecclesiastical history.

For as for that Danaeus writing of the office of Elders, in Christ. Isagog,
part. 2. cap. 10. cites, saying: Lites ^utem dirimere, etc. But to decide
debates, and (as out of Socrates, lib. 7. cap. 37. may be gathered) to behave
themselves as Judges and arbiters, Socrates lib. 7. cap. 37.
I never read that it was the function of Elders, or part of their office.
This proves nothing at all, that the Clergy of whom Socrates there
speaks, were not Ministers of the word and Sacraments: but rather seems to
infer that the^ were, The Eccl. histories for th^se Elders
and that the Bishop of whom Socrates speaks, would not hau^ them draw too
much away from their function, to the hearing and determining of such
controversies. Albeit Socrates tells that Siluanus the Bishop did it, when as
he saw the Clerks to make a gain by the controversies of the striuers, that
from thence forth he permitted none of the Clergy to be a Judge, but taking
the bills of those that made supplications, he preferred one faithful lay man,
whom he knew to favor that which was ^ight and good, to have the hearing of
those matters, and so he set free the striuers from contention and
controversy. Here the Clergy that had the dealing in those matters, the
Bishop by his superior authority took it from the^, and appointed it not to
the consistory of Elders, but to one lai^ man. But to show more fully and
plainly that Socrates always understands by the term of Elders, only such
as we call Priests, to wit, Ministers of the word and Sacraments: Let us also
see some testimonies out of Socrates, because Danaeus cites him for these
Elders. And I would gladly search all the testimonies and examples generally,
if that Calvin, Beza, and Danaeus, or any other author have ought, for the
proof or but probabiliti^ of these Elders.

In the 3. Chap. of his first book, he says: And on a certain time, the
Presbyters, Eccl. hist. Socrati. li. 1. cap. 3.
(Priests, or Elders) being present which were under him, (he speaks of
Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria) and the residue of the Clergy, he treated
somewhat more curiously and subtillie of the Trinity, and philosophicallie
proved, that in the Godhead there is the unity in the Trinity. But Arius
being one of the number of the Elders, which in that degree were placed under
Alexander, a man not ignorant of the quirkes of Logic, Danaeus al legation of
Socrates.
because he suspected that he would afresh bring into the Church the error of
the Affricane Sabellius, being kindled with the desire of contention, declined
to an opinion clean contrary to the opinion of that Affricane, and affirmed,
that if the Father begat the son, he that was begotten had a beginning of his
being. And that thereupon it is clear, that there was a time when the son was
not, and that necessarily it followed, that he had his being of nothing. When
he had concluded with this new kind of reason, and never before heard of: he
stirred up many of them to seek after those matters, and of a little spark
was kindled a great great flame, etc. Whereupon Alexander calling a council of
many Bishops, he deposed ( says Socrates) Arius, and the fautors of his
opinion, from the degree of the Eldership. By which it plainly appears, that
these elders were ministers and teachers of the word.

And to this not only accords Ruffinus, lib. 10. Eccl. hist. cap. 1.
sai^ng: Ruffinus lib. 10. Ec^l. hist. cap. 1.
A certain Elder at Alexandria named Arius, a man more religious in show and
form than virtue, began to set forth certain wicked points concerning the
faith of Christ, etc. And Theodoretus, lib. 1. cap. 2. yet more plainly:
Theod^r^^us Eccl. hist. lib. 1. cap. 2.
In these times ( says he) Arius which was in the company and order of the
Elders, and had the authority of interpreting the divine Scriptures. When he
saw the government of the Sacerdotall Priesthood or Bishopric, to be
committed to Alexander, being impatient of envy wherewith he was chafed, he
began to seek occasions of prouokements, of discords and striuings. And albeit
the dignity of the man, and his laudable administration, brake off the web of
all slanders, yet could not envy let him rest. The enemy therefore of truth
having gotten this fellow, he moved and stirred up the waves of the Church, and
so provoked him, that he durst openly gainsay the Apostolical doctrine of
Alexander. As for Alexander, he avouched the speeches of the divine Scripture,
that the son is of the same dignity with the Father, and has the same
essence with his begetter. But Arius fighting against the truth, called him a
creation and a work made. Adding those words, that there was some time when
he was not. Which things may better be known out of the Scriptures themselves.
These things did he not only in the Churches continually, but also in other
outward assemblies and meetinges, and treating upon them house by house, he
drue away as many as he was able.

And yet to show further, not only that this order of Elders was above the
Deacons, but that of Deacons they were made Elders: Sozomenus li. 1. cap. 14.
says: Of these disputations Arius was the author, an Elder of the Church of
Alexandria which is in Egypt. Z^zomen^^ lib. 1. cap. 14.
Who although at the beginning he seemed very studious of the doctrine of
Christ: yet was he a furtherance to Meletius, The Elders in the Eccl history.
attempting new matters. Whos^ parts when he forsook, he was of Peter Bishop
of Alexandria ordained Deacon, And afterward of him cast out of the Church,
when Peter deposed the fautors of Meletins, and improued Baptism. This Arius
inueighed grievously against the Acts of Peter, and could by no means be
quiet. But when Peter had suffered martyrdom, Arius craving pardon of
Achillas, was not only permitted to exercise his Deaconship, but also was
exalted to the degree of the Eldership. Afterward Alexander had him in great
estimation, etc.

By this it may not only appear that the orders and Senates of Elders in such
great Churches as these, were Ministers of the word, but also were thereto
promoted, having before ben Deacons. When therefore we read in Socrates ( as in
the restoring of Athanasius, lib. 2. cap. 18.) the Letters of the Emperor
Constantinus directed unto the Bishops and to the Elders of the Catholic
Church, saying: Moreover, unto the benefit bestowed on him, Socrate^ lib. ^.
cap. 18
this also we thought good to be noted, that all those that are enrolled into
this holy number and company of the Clergy, may understand, that security
is given unto all, be they Bishops or be they Clerks, that have holden with
him: it argues, that there was indeed such a company of Elders, whom here
he calls Clearks, but we cannot gather hereupon, that they were such as
ministered not at all the word and Sacraments, but rather the contrary. For
else if Athanasius the Bishop had been the only Minister of the word and
Sacramente^, all the people of Alexandria had been destitute of the word and
Sacraments all the while of Athanasius banishment. And to confirm this, that
these Elders about the Bishops had not only the public ministration of the
word, but also that some one or other of their number, was appointed to hear
the co^fessions of such as were penitent, and in token of their unfeigned
repentance, to inioyne them to submit themselves to some bodily chastisement,
which thereupon was called penance:

At that time ( says Socrates, li. 5. ca. 19.) the Church thought good,
Socrates. li. 5 cap. 19.
that the Elders which had the government of the order of inioyning penite^ce
in every Church, was taken away. And that on this occasion: from the time
wherein the Nouatians separated themselves from the Church, and refused to
communicate with those, which in the time of the persecution raised in the
reign of Decius, had fallen: the Bishops of the Churches added unto the Canon,
that in every of the Churches there should be one certain Elder, which should
be over the Penitencies, to the end, that those which after Baptism were
fallen, should before the Elder appointed for that purpose, confess their
offenses. This Canon as yet among other sects remains ratified and firm.
They only which confess the Father and the Son to be one in substance, and
the Nouatians that consent in faith with them, rejected this Penitenciarie
Elder. The Nouatians would never from the beginning suffer this to be so much
as a hanger by. The bishops which now govern the Churches, although for a good
space of time they have held this institution: notwithstanding in the times of
the Bishop Nectarius, they changed the same, by reason of such an offense as
then by chance was committed in the Church: a certain noble woman came unto
the Penitenciarie Elder, confessing particularly such faults as after her
Baptism she had committed. The Elder commanded the woman that she should give
her self to fastings, and to continual prayers. Whereby together with the
acknowledgment of her sins, she should declare a work meet for her
repentance. The woman proceeding further in confessing, accuses her self of
another fault, and declares that a Deacon had lain with her. For the which
offense (by this means being made manifest) the Deacon was driven out of the
Church, and a tumult was made among the multitude of the people. For they
grudged not only against the offense committed, but also for the note of the
grievous slander and reproach, that thereby was raised on the Church. When as
therefore the sacred Priests were very much evil spoken on for this cause,
Eudaemon a certain Elder of the Church, (...).
a Countrieman of Alexandria, gave counsel to the Bishop Nectarius to remove
the Penitenciarie Elder, and to give free power that every one according to his
own conscience, should come to the participation of the mysteries. For by that
only means it should come to pass, that the Church should be void of all
spot of infamy. These things because ( says Socrates) even I my self had
them of Eudaemon, I doubted not plainly to commit them to this our history.

In which words, these Elders having this office among them, which pertains
especially to the ministration of the word, (...)
and all of them indifferently called Sacerdotes, as well as Presbyteros: it
is again apparaunt, by Socrates whom^ Danaeus cites, that these Elders were
not such, as here our Brethren do conceive or pretend, but Ministers of the
word and Sacraments, which in the next Chapter (save one) following, does
yet more fully appear. Where Socrates showing the diversities in diverse
places, concerning Easter day, Fasting, Marriage Divine Service, and other
Ecclesiastical observation, amongst other matters, says on this wise.

Moreover, I my self have known another custom to have grown in Thessalia,
that there he which is a Cleark, if after he be made a Cleark, he lie with his
wife whom he married while he was a lay man, is deposed from his Clergy.
Whereas all the famous Elders in the East, yea, the Bishops and all, are by no
law compelled to abstain from their wives, except it please themfelues. For
even while they govern their Bishoprikes, not a few of them beget children of
their lawful wives. He that was the author of that custom in Thessalia, was
Heliodorus of Trica, a city of that region, of whose making are the amorous
books, which he composed when he was a young man, and entitled them, The
Ethiopian history ( he means that of Theagenes and Cariclea:) The same
custom is kept also at Thessalonica, and in Macedonia, and in Hellas. Besides
this I have known another custom in Thessalia, to wit, that they baptize in
the days of the feast of Easter only. For which cause, all of them (except a
very few) die without baptism. The Church of Antioche in Syria is set
contrary to other Churches, for the Altar (or Communion table) is not set
Eastward, but Westward. In Hellas, and at Jerusalem, and at Thefsalia, the
prayers are made while the candles are lighted, after the manner of the
Nouatians that are at Constantinople. In like manner at Caesarea of Cappadocia,
The Elders were expou^ders of the Scriptures,
and in Cyprus, (...).
the Elders and the Bishops expound the Scriptures evermore on Saturday and on
Sunday, at evening by candle light. The Nouatians that are at Hellespont, keep
not in all points the like manner, as do the Nouatians that are at
Constantinople, but for the more part they follow the order of the chief
Church among them. To conclude, in all the forms of religions and sects, you
shall never find two, that in (...).
the manner of their prayers agree among themselves. Furthermore, at Alexandria
an Elder preaches not, which custom has had his beginning, since the time
that Arius disturbed the Church. Upon what occasion the Ministers at Alexandria
ceased to preach.


And here at length is noted, where only, and upon what occasion, the Elders
preached not. Howbeit he says not, that heerevpon they were prohibited
utterly the ministry of the word and Sacraments. For as he showed before
lib. 2. cap. 8. the very Deacons out of whole order the Elders were made, did
say the public prayers before the people. But this the Elders ceasing of
preaching, how long ti^e after Arius troubles it began at Alexandria, and how
long time it continued: he declares not. But in noting the same (as such a
strange and diverse order, different from al other Churches) it declares, that
it directly belonged to their office, and that in all other Churches the Elders
were such, as were not prohibited to preach, and that they preached there also,
before that occasion did fall out. And whereas as a little after he cites
(for not troubling the Church about indifferent things) the decree made by the
Apostles, the Elders, and the brethren, Act 15.23. it appears that Socrates
took also those Elders that are ther^ mentioned, to be no other kind of
Elders, than such as meddled with teaching. And so does the very text
insinuate, that those Elders were, when it says, Act. 15.6. The Apostles and
Elders came together to look to this matter. Which matter was a great
controversy in doctrine. And Calvin himself says t^ereon: Luke says not
that the whole Church was gathered together, but those that excelled in
doctrine and judgment, and they that by reason of their office, were lawful
Judges of this cause, it may be that the disputation was holden before the
people, but least any should think that the people were admitted
indifferently to meddle in the cause: Luke expressly names the Apostles and
the Elders, as those that were more fit to take notice thereof. And to show
further who these Elders were, he says on these words: When there was great
disputing: when as the grave men and public Doctors of the Church were chosen,
neither yet could they agree among themselves, etc.

And to show that these Elders in all other Churches were still of thi^ ^orte,
Socrates proceeding to his 6. book, chap. 2. tells, that when the Bishopric
of Constantinople was vacant by Nectarius decease, which took away the
penitenciarie Elder aforesaid, and that they labored much about the choosing
of a Bishop, and some sought one, and some another for that office; and that
they had consulted often thereupon: at length it was thought good to call from
Antioche, for John an Elder of Antioche. For the fame of him was great, that he
was meet to teach them, and very skifull in the gift of utterance.

And in the seventh book (which Danaeus cites) cap. 2. speaking of Atticus,
which was afterward likewise made Bishop of Constantinople, Socrates lib. 7.
cap. 2.
he says: When he first obtained the degree of the Presbytery, Priesthood, or
Eldership, the Sermons which he recited in the Church, he made them with great
study, and conned word by word: afterward by often use and diligence getting
more audacitie, he began to preach ex tempore (on the sudden occasion) and
attained to a more popular manner of teaching.

And in the 5. Chapter he ^e^^eth of Sabatius an Elder among the Nouatians
preaching in his Sermon this false doctrine: Cursed be he who soever
celebrateth the feast of Easter without unleavened bread.

In the sixth Chapter be tells of two Arian Elders preachers and interpreters
of the Scriptures.

Besides that, Chap. 16. he tells of three Elders, Philip, Proclus, Socrates
lib. 7. cap. 16.
and Sisinius, that ^too^ ^or the Bishoprike of Constantinople of which
Sifinius by the desire of the people, he being an Elder not ordained in any
Church within the City, but of Elea a suburb of the City, obtained the
Bishoprike. Whereby it appears also, that these Elders had several
Congregations and Churches in and about the City, and were Ministers of the
word and Sacraments in them. And although Proclus was afterward made Bishop of
Cizicum, whom the City would not receive, but chose on^ Dalmatius a Monk, and
so Proclus went not thither, but continued in preaching at Constantinople, and
afterward was made Bishop of that City, after Maximianus, which did lead a
monastical life, yet by degree of dignity he was an Elder. So that these
Presbyters, Priests, or Elders were not (as Danaeus supposes) a Senate or a
Consistory chosen from among the people assistant to the Bishop: and much
less to every Pastor, ( as our Brethr. affirm) governing only the
discipline of the Church, but not meddling with teaching: Socrates never
speaks of such kind of Elders, but simply and plainly of such as we call
Priests, and our brethren call Pastors.

To conclude this no less appears in the last Capter (save two) of all
Socrates History: (...)
even in Paulus the Bishop of the Nouatians. Who before his death calling
together all the sacred Priests of the Churches that were under him, said
unto them. Provide ye, while I am yet alive, that a Bishop may be appointed
unto you. When they answered: The power of choosing the Bishop is not to be
permitted unto us. For (say they) while one of us thinks this, another that,
we shall never name one and the same man. But we desire that you would
design, whom you would have us choose. Deliver me then (said he) this your
promise in writing, that ye will choose him whom I will name unto you. Which
writing being made, and subscribed with their hand, raising up himself a
little in his bed: he secretly (they that were present not privy thereto)
wrote therein the name of Martian, which was one that had obtained to the order
of the Elders, and therein had learned a rigorous kind of life, and at that
time by chance was absent. And when he had sealed up the writing, and had
brought the chief of the Elders to confirm the same also with their seals:
he delivered it to, etc. I note this only that these Nouatians also, which
were a kind of Praecisians in that antiquity, having for their precise
austeritie of life, cut off and divided themselves from all other Churches
(albeit in substance and grounds of faith and doctrine not dissenting, but in
profession of more severe discipline) not only had their Bishops in the chief
Cities, and many Elders under them: but also that these Elders ( as in all
other Churches) were Saceraotes, Ministers of the sacred word and Sacraments,
and not such as meddled not with teaching, or were equal in the Churches
government with the Bishop.

This we see was the continual and universal practice of the Church, from the
Apostles times, until this age, when Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustine began to
flourish. Neither ani^ thing as yet aleadged by Beza, Calluine, Snecanus, and
Danaeus out of Ambrose, or Cyprian, or Iustine, or Tertullian, or any other
ancient father: or out of Socrates, or Sozomene, or any other Ecclesiastical
Historiographer, that can prove their Ecclesiastical Elder governing only and
not teaching: but all these (as we have seen) show the clean contrary.

But yet we have not done. Augustis.
Danaeus besides and before Socrates alleges Saint Augustine Sermon. 19.
Danaeus his allegation of Aug. for these Elders
De verbis Domini in Matthe^m, for proof of such governing and not teaching
Elders* Now although there he no likelikelihood, we should find mention of
those in Saint Augustine, that lived some what after Socrates time, and the
Fathers aforesaid: yet because I would gladly see all, that for my part I can
find in any of our brethren, for the practice and proof of these Elders,
what office they had, both for mine own and for others satisfaction: let us
view also what these words are, which Danaeus understands for these Elders.
Saint Augustine treating of the stipends of soldiers, and of their spoils
and hauocks, says on this wise: Illud autem quale est, quum ob errorem aliquem
a Senioribus arguuntur, etc. But what manner of thing is that, August. de
verbis Domini in Matthew. Sermon. 19.
when for some error they are reproved of the Elders, and any of them is
charged, why he was drunk, why he invaded other men's goods, why in his hurly
burly he committed manslaughter: that he will answer, what should I have done?
I am a secular man, or a souldior. Am I professed a Monk or a Clerk? As though
it were lawful for every one that is not a Monk, or a clerk, to do that which is
unlawful?

Here indeed is mentioned this word Elders, and that in the Latin term,
Seniores. But so generally: that whether he mean Senior or elder in years or
in office: and if in office, whether civil or Ecclesiastical; and if
Ecclesiastical, whether meddling with teaching, yea, or no: no, necessary
certainty can be grounded heerevpon. Is there any word here, or going before.
or coming after, that may prove these Elders reproving these soldiers not to
meddle with teaching? Or may we not rather (if we shall go by conjecture) a
great deal more probably gather the clean contrary, that they meddled with
teaching, and with reprehension, which is also part of the Ministers office?
And namely the example that S. Augustine in the said sermon brings hereof
(for S. John Baptists teaching the Publicans and soldiers their duty what
they ought to do) does plainly in^inuate, that he means here by these Seniors
or Elders, the very teachers of the word, and Ministers of the Sacraments, as
was John Baptist that reproved, taught, and baptized the soldiers. August. li.
1* Quaestionu^ super Genes. Quaest. 70. says: In the Latin tongue Presbyter is
called Senior. Li. 6. Locutionum Iosue. Aug. li. 1. Quaest. super Ge^. quaest.
70 Aug. li. 6. locutionu^ Iosue
Not every senior is an old man, but every old man may be called a senior: And
in no place that I can find he uses the word Presbyter, as a term to be
used among us, but either (as there) for an elder in years, or else, for an
elder in office, and that not only Ecclesiastical, but also in the very
ministry of the word and Sacraments. When the Manichees defaced and
discredited the Clergy for their lives (wherein would to God our Br. would not
resemble that practice of so evil men) S. Aug. commending the Clergy li. ^. De
moribus Eccl. Cath. ca. 32. says: Aug. de mori. Eccl. Cath. li. cap. 32
Neither yet are the manners of the Catholic church so straightned, that I should
think their lives who^ I have reckned up to be only commended: Eld^ugustine
the (...)
for how many Bishops excellent and most holy men have I known? How many
Elders? How many Deacons, and such like Ministers of the divine Sacraments, etc?

Likewise in his questions, Ex vtroque mixtim, Quest. 101. where he proves
that the Elders are in office and dignity above the Deacons, August. quaest ex
viroque mixtim, Quest. 101.
v^^ng this name Sacerdos and Presbiter indifferently, and as betokening all
one office, concluding thus: For except the Priest unto whom they owe
attendance, the Deacons are placed before all, meaning all the other inferior
orders Ecclesiastical. ^o that Augustine acknowledges no such governing and
not teaching Ecclesiastical orders, as our Breath. would have, preferring
withal these Elders before the Deacons, and preferring the teachers and Pastors
before these Elders, but not in the Churches government. If there had been any
such in S. Augustines time, other than the Priests, Ministers of the word, and
between the Priests and the Deacons: he could never have placed the Deacons
above all other, save the ministering Priests. Whereby it is plain, that he
counts Elders and Priests to b^e all one.

Aug. in quin quaginta homilijs, hom. 5 at 7.
Yea, Danaeus himself proceeding a little further, in this foresaid tenth
Chapter of these Elders, alleges Augustine heereunto, in his ^iftie
Homilies, Homil. 5. and. 7. that the saying of Esaie, Clama, ne cesses, etc.
appertains not only to Bishops but to Elders. The words of Augustine are
these, Homil. 7. If ye mark diligently (most dear Brethren) ye know that all
the Priests of the Lord, not only the Bishops, but also the Elders and
Ministers of the Churches, are in great peril. For the holy Ghost witnesses
unto them, saying: Cry out, cease not, lift up thy voice like as it were a
trumpet, and tell my people their offenses, and the house of Jacob their
sins. Is not this, lifting up of the voice, a meddling with the word and
public preaching or teaching? So that Danaeus must need confess, that these
Elders which Saint Augustine mencioneth, were not such as meddled not with
teaching, but were public teachers or Preachers of Gods word.

To conclude, concerning Augustine, here is nothing that Danaeus alleges for
Elders out of him Homil. 7. in 50. Sermon. 16. in Math. and 18. and in Luc. 1.
Sermon. 24. that makes any mention at all, or any inkling of suspicion for
such Elders, as our Brethren imagine, and Danaeus would prove: but are all for
Pastoral Elders, meddling with teaching. Neither only meddle not these places
with any of these supposed Elders: but also no other place that I can yet
find out, in all the Tomes and writings of Saint Augustine.

But Danaeus alleges not only Saint Augustine, but Basil, Dionisius, and
Hierome. And in his seventh Chapter Isagog. Christ. part. 2. he ^aith.

But these orders that are appointed for ever in the Church of God remaining in
this earth and visible are few. Basil for the Elders,
Which Basile upon the 33. Psalm, seems obscurely to revoke unto four
kinds, to wit, that some of them should be as it were the eyes, as the
Seniors: other like the tongue, as the Pastors: other like the hands, as the
Deacons: other like the feet as those that attend upon the baser ministeries
of the Church, as are the door keepers.

It goes hard belike with our Breath. for the proof of these Elders, when such
obscure conjectures out of the Fathers, must underprop them. And here is
alleged a sentence out of Basil, which notwithstanding Danaeus dare not
avouch, to make any clear or plain assertion for these Elders. But he says,
that Basil seems, and that obscurely, to revoke (all the perpetual orders of
the Ecclesiastical ministry in the Church) unto 4. kinds, whereof he makes
these Seniors or Elders to be the first, and compares the^ unto the eles.
Indeed this is well added, to say he seems obscurelie, for if we shall
bring Basils sentence to the light, there is not one word that makes for these
Seniors. Basil upon the 33 ( or as we better account it with the Hebrews the 34.)
Psalm, verse. 15. Basilius in 33 vel. 34. Psalm. ver. 15.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears on their cry,
has these words: Even as the Saints are the body of Christ, and in part
members: and God has placed these in the Church as eyes, those as ears, other
as having a proportion of the hands, other of the feet: so also the holy
spiritual virtues (or powers) occupied about the holy place, some of them are
called the eyes, to whom the care of us is committed; so the ears, which
receive our prayers, and refer (or bring) them to God. But now this our virtue
or power contemplative and helping of our prayers, he called the eles and the
ears. The eyes therefore of the Lord are upon the righteous and his ears on
their prayers because all the action of the righteous is fit to be holden and
considered of God. And to conclude, every word (since nothing is of him
spoken idly) stands fruitful and very profitable. Therefore he says here,
that the righteous is continually both seen and heard.

Thus says Basil. And is there any word here that may so much as but
obscurely seem, to infer these our brethrens Governing elders not meddling with
teaching, to be any of those that he calls the virtue or power
conte^platiue, which he resembles in the mystical body of Christ unto the
eyes? And who then are these which he compares to the ears? if (as Daneus
says) he compares the Pastors to the tongue, which he does not, Ba^il nor
obscurely by the eyes means the Bishops.
nor makes there any application at all either of the tongue, or of the
hands, or of the feet: but only of the eyes and ears. And likeneth the eyes
to those, unto whom the care of us is committed. And the ears to those which
receive our prayers, and refer or bring them unto God* Whereby as it is
plain, that by the ears, he means the Ministers, which make the public
prayers unto God for us: So what lets but by the eyes, to whom he ascribes
the spiritual and contemplative power of government, Basil
and places them first and before the ears, we may well (for any thing here
to the contrary) understand the Bishops. Whose very name (...) (betokening
an ouerseer) is answerable to the contemplative virtue of the eye, and his
office is in spiritual contemplation, more then these not teaching Seniors,
whose government they make to consist, only in external discipline, and in
the correction of manners. As for the hands, that he should mean the Deacons,
is further applied than Basil went. For he rests his application only on
these two members, the eyes and the ears, saying: But now our virtue
contemplative and helping of prayers, he called the eyes, and that the eyes of
the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears unto their prayers, because all
the action of the righteous is meet, that it should of God be beholden and
considered. So that in the end, he drives all, unto Gods beholding and
considering the action of the righteous man, seeming to mean the minister of
God, that directs all his spiritual and contemplative power of seeing, that
is, of taking care of us: and of hearing, that is, of offering prayers to God
for us. And as for any rese^blance of the tongue, he mencioneth not at all.
But since the prayers ( namely public) not only proceed from the heart, but
are uttered with ye tongue, ( the tongue also fitting well thereto) he concludes,
saying: And finally, every word (since nothing is idly spoken of him)
remains fruitful and very profitable. And therefore he says here, the
righteous man is both seen and heard continually. And can Danaeus or any other
man, be his eyes never so good, see in this sentence, that Basil meant, there
were 4. perpetual continuing orders of the Ecclesiastical ministry in the
Church, whereof these Seniors not teaching, are likened to the eyes, and have
the first place even above the Pastors? He had need have better eyes than I
have, that should see this. And yet (I thank God) I can see thus much, that if
Danaeus had but turned over the former leaf, and looked upon the 11. verse,
that in the Psalm goes a little before: we and other may easily see this,
that Basil in plain words, ascribes to the teachers of the word, and not unto
any not teaching Seniors, the eye and oversight of the Churches discipline,
saying: Hear (my children) hear me, Basil ascribes teching of the doctrine,
to the^ that have the government of the Eccl. discipline.
I will teach you the fear of the Lord. This is as the voice of a most loving
master (or teacher) and of one that even by the Fathers bowels allureth them
to discipline. For the Scholar also is the son of the spiritual master.
For whosoever receives of any the form of godliness, he verily is as it were
fashioned of him, and brought forth into the light, even as a woman with child
that bears the infants fashioned in her womb. So Paul when all the Church of
the Galathians did fall from their first discipline, being sotted with a
certain drowsiness and astonishment of the mind, he taking them again,
reforming and instructing Christ in the^, calls them his sons. And because
after his grief, he erected them being fallen, and reduced them unto the duty
of their faith: he therefore minded also to travel for their heaviness that
were fallen a way. My children (says he) of whom I travel again, till
Christ be fashioned (in you). Come therefore (my children) hear me. What then
has our spiritual Father for to teach us? I will teach you (says he) the fear
of the Lord.

This sentence (lo) of Basil even in the same treatise, is a great deal
cleerer, and without all obscurity shows, that he took those whom he
afterward calls the eyes, to be these that the oversight and care of
discipline belongs unto, declaring withal, that these are such spiritual
Fathers, as to whom the teaching of the feate of God, and the instructing,
exhorting, and reducing Gods people unto the true faith, from all error and
wickedness does pertain, and not to Elders that meddled not with teaching. And
to show this yet more plain in Basil: His book De Institutione Monachorum,
translated by Ruffinus, an Elder also of Aquilegia, but withal, a teacher of
the word, living in Hieromes time, does sufficiently declare. Basilius de in
s^itutio^. Monachoru^. c. 16
Where Cap. 16. and treating of a governor of the Church, he makes the Monk (
for he proceeds dialogue wise) to ask this question. Monachus. What ought
he to think of himself which is a governor? And what manner of man ought he
to be toward them whom he commands and governs? Basilius. Verily before
God, even as the minister of Christ, and the steward of the ministeries (or
rather, the mysteries) of God, fearing least that besides the will of God, or
besides that which is evidently commanded in the holy Scriptures, he either
speak any thing, or command any thing, or be found as a false witness of
Christ, or a sacrilegious person, or a bringer in of any thing that is
strange, from the doctrine of God, yea, or leuing out or going beyond any of
those things that are acceptable unto God. But to the brethren he ought to be
as it were a nurse that cherishes her little ones. And he must be ready
according to the will of God, and according as is expedient for every one, to
communicate with them not only the Gospel, but his life also. Being mindful
of the commandment of the Lord, and our God, saying: I give you a new
commandment, that ye love together as I have loved you. No man has a greater
love than this, that he should give his life for his friends. Whereby it
appears yt Basil acknowledges no other Eccl. governors of the Church, but
such Elders as were ministers of the word and Sacraments. And this also be
says of those yt were the correcters or their breca. 17. Mo. Cap. 17.
How shall we (O Father) reprove and amend him that offe^deth? Ba. As it is
written, the Lord speaking it, If thy bro^her shall sin against thee, The
Ecclesiastical governors duty of publik reprehensio^.
go and reprove him between thee and him alone. If he shall hear thee, thou
have won thy brother. But if he will not hear thee, take with thee another or
two, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may stand. But if
so hebe will not hear them, tell the Church. And if he will not hear the
Church, let him be to thee as an Ethnike or publicane. If perhaps this rebuking
which is made of many, may fall out unto him for his health. And as the Apostle
said reprove, beseech, comfort, in all patience and doctrine. And again, if
any man obey not the word, note him by an Epistle, and keep not fellowship
with him. Without doubt (he means) for the participation of the table. Thus
writes Basil of his duty, especially, to whom the reproving of faults does
belong, that he should not only be a private admonisher, but such a public
reprouer also, as occasion requires, and that with doctrine, as Saint Paul
prescribes to a Pastor. And if our Brethren will vnderst^^^ these words, Dic
Ecclesia, tell the Church, to be the only of Elders: then let those Elders be
such reprouers, as here Basil applies the Apostles sentence unto, that they
teach doctrine with their reprehensions. So that if they be not with all
teachers of doctrine, they cannot be the Churches officers for public
Ecclesiastical reprehension.

And as we see Basils judgment sufficiently by these his writings: so for his
own estate and his life, set out by Gregory Nazianzen, that was also an Elder
under Basil, is apparent in Gregory's Monodia; who having before declared the
parentage, the youth, the study of Basil, at length he comes to this
Eldership, Monodia Gregorij Nazianzen, de vita Basilij.
and says: Illum vero dei dispensatio pe^ Sacerdotij gradus illustrem ac notum
o^nibus fecit, ac inter Presbyteros constituit, non, etc.

As for him the dispensation of GOD made him famous and known by the degrees
of the sacred Priesthood, and placed him among the Elders, howbeit not by and
by, and besides order, but by little and little, proceeding and being promoted
by degrees and courses. In which words he manifestly shows, that to he^
preferred from one degree to another, till he come to a governing Presbyter,
Priest, or Elder, was not to come to be one that meddled not with teaching, but
to be Sacerdos, to wit, a Minister of the sacred word of God and of his
Sacraments. For ( says Gregory) I praise not them that without order, are by
and by promoted in the Church: I rather commend the Mariners custom. For they
make not their governor at the first dash, and on a sudden: but first they
exercise and try him by all the offices of a Seaman. They will before see how
he can row, and then placing him in the fore-parte of the ship, to know
and perfectly to learn the winds, acquainting himself cunningly to shun
the cliffes and rocks. Last of all, having been exercised in all the offices,
they place him in the hinder part of the ship, and give him the stearne in
his hand, and make him governor. Likewise also in the discipline of war,
first he is made a soldier, then a wiffler to set them in their ranks, and
lastly he is made a Captain.

The same is the manner both of the Physician and of the Painter, the one, that
before he make his profession, he have conned many rules, and have seen and
had in handling many diseases: the other to know how to mix and temper his
colors before, and then to draw his lines and last of all to give perfect
figures unto his coullors.

But we see (which is a ridiculous matter, or rather a lamentable) how a Bishop
is made with tumult and confusion ( he speaks of that time when the Bishops
were choosen by the election and voices of the people, The disordred making B.
and Elders
as the Eccles^^^^icall Histories are full of such tu^^^ts and co^^^^^ous)
neither in order nor directly, but by viciousnes and craft, not he that is
worthy but he that is mightier. For he is not promoted that is exercised
before, but he that is ignorant and rude of the Churches affairs, in so much
that he comes fresh from the seculer life, as the Giantes at Thebes for ( as
the Poets feign) when Cadmus at Thebes in Boeocia, had sowed the teeth of
Dragons, suddenly there sprange up Giantes, armed down to the navel, and so
making battle one with an other, were slain the same day. And even so we
make Prelates of one days breed. And we having not learned what they be, do
believe that they be wise men, which were fortified before with no degree, with
no virtue, with no eloquence, having sustained no travail for righteousness,
nor any thing at all for the Church. For he which only meditateth divine
matters, and subdueth his body to the spirit, that hereafter he may be fit
for a place in heaven, is gladly content to hold a low and inferior place
among men. But he that is ignorant, and without learning, being puffed up and
lofty, is advanced above his betters, nor is moved with the example of
goodness or humility: but with all his endeavor only seeking honors,
promises him-^elfe wit and wisdom (to spring) out of his power. Whereupon
that of Demosthenes is true, to atchiue a matter luckily besides worthiness;
is an occasion for fools to imagine and think evil. But our Basil as he is
made a rule and example unto other of his other virtues: so also of a Priest
and of the Ecclesiastical ordination. How Basil ascended to be an Elder or
Priest by degrees.
For even from the first swathing-bands of the Sacerdotall offices, he grew up
by little and little, in-so-much that he disdayned not in any wise to be made
a Reader of the holy scriptures, and then to be made an interpreter and
expounder of them, even as David says: Let those of the chair of the Elders
praise the Lord: and so at length deserved he to be made a Bishop. Which place
he never at any time sought nor ever wished.

In which sentence, we not only see the complaint of Gregory, how many came
to be Elders, yea and Bishops also in those days (as in all ages like
corruptions, and complaints have been) but especially it grew then of the
disordered and factions elections of the people: so for the purpose now in
hand, we see hereby, that these Elders were the sacred Priests, whose office
consisted not in governing only, but with ^ll in the ministry of the word
and Sacraments. And how by degrees, (...) ^x^^cising themselves in matters
tending unto teaching, they attained, or ought to have attained, unto this
Eldership and from thence such as excelled were, or ought to have been,
promoted to be Bishops. Except it fell out otherwis^, by extraordinary occasion
in some rare and singular men, as in Ambrose, and Thalassius even in Caesarea
where Basil was Bishop, etc. and of other Elders than these, here is no mention.

Now when Basil was thus ordained an Elder. Gregory shows how he exercised
himself under Eusebius B. of Caesarea, Basils exercise under his Bishop while
he was Elder.
how he labored against the Heretics, in exhorting and teaching of the
people, how he sent for Gregory to come and help him. And here Gregory
sets down Basils example unto him. For ( says he) even as Barnabas in
times past was present with Paul, to make manifest the truth of the Gospel,
and common conflict of the faith: so came I, then unto my Basil, as his fellow
against his fight with the Arians. Listen to the Epistle wherewith he called
me. Make ready thy self, have regard to deliver me in this present conflict,
and with us to meet them which desire utterly to overthrow us, whose
boldness thou shall bridle only with thy countenance, and shall cause that
they shall not make our matters go to wrack: and therefore all shall know
how thou only (by the grace of God) do govern our congregation, and that
thou shall e^sily repress every wicked mouth and the insolency of them that
speak against God.

But ( says Gregory) to return my speech to my purpose, Basil returning to
Caesarea, regarded nothing more than to pacify Eusebius to the end that he
might ouer-throw the Heresy, and wholly to serve him, and be ready at his
hand in all those things that were of God, that he might make apparent to
all men, that all things which he had suffered of him ( for Eusebius had been
heavy before unto him) proceeded from the instigation of the Devil, that the
common enemies of the faith might have the greater advantage by their rageing.
( as the Papists get now by our Brethrens and our Bishops falling out, though
the Bishops do all they can to pacify them, whereas Basilius labored all
that he could to pacify his bishop) but he when as he knew very well the
laws of obedience, and of a spiritual life, he was attendant on him in all
things, in hearing, in consulting, and in doing, he employed his spiritual
and diligent endeavor for the bishop. And to say at one word, he grew as much
into his favor, as before he seemed to be far from it. Basils authority
under the Bishop.
For which cause Eusebius held indeed as bishop, the chief place, in the
Church, but Basil had the power of the Church and the authority. The one fate
in the chief dignity, the other went about all the business. For there was a
singular and wonderful concord between them. The one helping the other, and
taking strength the one of the other, the bishop growing strong by the counsel
and wit of Basil, and Basil by taking authority of the bishop. To conclude,
the bishop had the people, and he the bishop. And even as he that tameth a
Lion, being inferior in strength, does handle him gently, and make him tame by
a certain art, The bishops defect having been before but a lay man.
by which means well near he asswageth and molifieth the violence and
fierceness of the wild beast: so Basil the great behaved himself about
Eusebius. For when he having ben of late a lay man, and ignorant of
Ecclesiastical matters, was exalted unto this dignity, especially at the same
time that the flame of Arius heresy did bear the swaie, he was not fit enough
for this burden. Whereupon he wanted Basil to be his guide and helper,
chiefly by whose virtue there was hope, that the matters would have prosperous
and good success. And therefore it was not as some suppose, that Basil was
under the Emperor Iulia^, Basils government.
but he was bishop after the death of Valens. But when as he received the
government and administration of the Church of Caesarea under the bishop
Eusebius, he appeased all discords, he removed all privy grudges, he
established their manners, not only with his words and excellent Sermons that
he uttered: but also by the example of his life. For he endeavored to help
the people both with his spirit and his body, with his body by labor and
exercise careing for them, by walking about every way, by courteous behavior,
and by helping the^ with his riches: spiritually, by teaching, by admonishing,
and by giving to all men a measure and institutions of their life.

Thus does Gregory set forth the ecclesiastical government of Basil and of
his own government also, being Elders under the bishopp in the Church of
Caesarea, consisting as much and more in teaching, than in the correction and
composing of manners and censures of discipline. And that these were not
distinct offices in the diverse kinds of Elders, but they meddled with both
together, and both under the bishop, ^n^ h^w^ God blesse^ this ecclesiastical
government, until Basil himself after the decease of Eusebius was made
their bishop. And then says Gregory; after he had praised Basil in this
promotion: ^s for me, all men thought when they heard of his promotion, that
I would foorth-with depart ( he means from the place where he then was) and
that I would go to him, and that I should have equal power with him they
knew that there was such friendship and benevolence between us. But (I when
as I shunned envy, least I should seem to occupy the places of those that
were near him; and with-all, least they should falsely judge that Basil
having received me, preferred me before other, for private friendeshippe:)
refrayned and forbore my self as much as I could. While that in this behalf,
I desired rather to yield to reason, than to my appetite. But he ceased not to
call me, and now and then to complain upon my lingering. And yet he took my
cause and excuse in good part. At the length, In the Consistory and order of
the Elders one was called the first Elder.
certain days after I came unto him, and when he would have placed me above
the residue, and would have created me the first or chiefest Elder; I
straightwayes refused it, and foorth-with renounced the honor, for the cause
which I have before declared. Whereby it appears, that there was in that
great Cathedral Church a number of other, and as it were a Consistory or
Seniorie of them in this Eldershippe, and some one called (...) the first
Elder, which is all one with the term (...), the Arch-elder or chief among
the Elders. But all under the Bishop, and all ministers of the word and
Sacraments. And to show this better, he tells afterward, how Valens the
Emperor in Basils time, and being desirous to see, and to terrify Basil, and
persecuting the professors of the truth: took 80. faithful Elders that were
sent unto him, to entreat him to forsake his wickedness, and bynding them put
them in a ship to be driven with the winds, Socra^es lib. 4 c^p. 13.
and at length burned the^. Socrates telling the story at large, says, that
these 80. Elders were religious men of the eccl. order. And in proceeding
further Gregory also tells how Basil defended a widow that fled to the
Church, when she was hal^d to be married against her will. and when he was
called in question for this fact, Tell me ( says Gregory in his defense) I
pray you, what should not only Basil the great, but a simple priest have done?
I omit his appeasing the controversy with the Archbishop of Tyana for calling
the Bishops from his part of Cappadocia, Caesarea being the ancient
Metropolitan Church, and so be conti^ue^ while he lived. And after in the
funeral of Basil, says Gregory: he was of the Priests carried forth in
a Cophin thorough the City.

All which here in Basil being put together and considered: it shows that in
Basils time, there was in his City and Cathedral Church* and with all in
others, a Senate College, Eldership, Seniorie or Consistory, of such Elders,
under the Metropolitan Archb. and assistent unto him* both in the government
of the Church and in teaching of the word, as (rising from one degree of
ecclesiastical orders and offices to an other were attendant in the ministry
of the word, till they came to this degree of Presbyters, Priests, or Elders,
who were also called indifferently Sacerdotes. And of other Elders, such as
our Brethren and Danaeus do pretend, we find no mention at all in Basil.
And therefore, sith we have all these clear testimonies, both of Basil
himself, and such as wrote of him, and were Elders with him: what need we
stand harping about blind conjectures, which Danaeus himself confesses,
do but seem, and that obscurely, that there we such imagined Elders. As he
fancieth.

Now to strengthen this obscure seeming of Basil, Danaeus proceeds to an
other witness, for these not teaching Elders, saying: Danaeus alleagation of
Dionisius for these Elders.


But Dionisius reckneth only three orders in the Church, to wit, Bishops
Elders and Deacons. Therefore they may be thus better distinguished, that of
the perpetual orders in the Church, some are occupied either in the treatise
of the word of God. Which Paul generally calls (...) Prophecy, Romans 12.
verse, 6. or in the procuring of other matters which seems to be called of
other by a general name (...), governance, but of Paul it is called, (...),
ministry or Deaconship, Romans 12.

Is not this conclusion properly inferred? That because (after Basil obscurely
seems as is aforesaid) Dionisius mencioneth only these three Ecclesiastical
orders of the Church: therefore these three may be thus better distinguished
into these two, to wit, into those that meddle with the treatise of the word,
and those that meddle with the Ecclesiastical government. Do not those that
meddle with the treatise of the word, meddle with the Ecclesiastical
government? And why then may it not be, that those which meddle with the
Ecclesiastical government, as governors Ecclesiastical, may also meddle with
the treatise of the word? What is there here in Saint Paul, Romans 12. or any
where else to the contrary, more in the one than in the other? But how
follows this argument from Dionisius particular, dividing the Ecclesiastical
orders into three: to S. Paul's general division into two? And is Dionysius
now with our Brethren become authentical, that he also must be alleged for
proof of these Elders? What will T. C. think if he shall hear of this? If we
allege any such suspicious fathers for never so mean a point. Lord how our
Brethren triumph upon us. And yet we must take these for good proves, and
credible witness at their hands, in this so weighty a matter. And for my
part so will I, Dionisius ancient but not the Areopag^te.
so desirous am I to hear any tydinges of such Elders, in any of the fathers,
that were in the ancient Church, be they never so much suspected to be forged.
For I deny not, but that this Dionysius was of some antiquity, whom I take
to have been also before Basil, and whose testimony we have heard already
cited by other our Brethren, though a mere counterfeite of that Dionisius the
Areopagite which either he feigneth him self to be, or at least whose name he
bears.

Let us now see, what this Dionysius has to prove these Elders. Dionisius (
says Danaeus) reckons up three orders in the Church that is to wit Bishops,
Elders, and Deacons. And where does Dionysius reckon up these three orders? Can
Danaeus set us down any certain place, that we might see and consider of
these words better? Dionisius.
No I warrant you, but we must be feign to search for it, as well as we can,
and we shall find it all at leisure. True it is, that even at the very first
front and title of his first work we find by and by the name of Bishop,
(...). Of Dionysius the Areopagite (or one that was a judge in the street of
Mars) Bishop of the Athenians, unto Timothy Bishop, concerning the celestial
Hierarchy, (or heavenly holy government. Here is Bishop named, which is one
of these three orders, but our question is now upon these Elders.

And lo good luck again, even immediately after the argument of the first
Chapter, it follows: (...). Dionysius the Elder unto his fellow Elder
Timothy. Here is indeed the name of Elder and of fellow Elder also, even as
our Brethren cited before the sentence, 1. Pet. 5.1. the Elders that are among
you, I exhort as a fellow Elder. But what Elders did S. Peter here acknowledge
them and himself to be? Any other than of whom it follows: And a witness of
the suffringes of Christ, The Elders that Dionisius speaks of were teachers.
and a communicatour of the glory to come that shall be revealed, feed the
flock of God that is among you, (...) etc. ouer-seeing it, etc. does he
speak here of any elders or fellow elders, that meddled all with governing and
not with teaching? And even so does this Dionysius use the name of Elder and of
fellow Elders, in this place. For not only in the words before, these are
both of them called Bishops: but what a teaching Elder Timothy was, and was
commanded to be: the scripture is plain, and we have heard at large out of
S. Paul in both his Epistles written to him, among other things, namely for
that purpose. Therefore here is nothing yet for any such Elders as our
Brethren seek for, distinct from both Bishop and Pastor, meddling not with
teaching, but all with governing; nay, this name of Elder as it is here taken,
makes clean against them. And the like style he uses in his ecclesiastical
Hierarchy or holy government of the Church, and in the style of his book of
the divine names. Save that there, he calls Timothy Bishop of Ephesus. As
also in the style of his mystical Theology. But when we come to the view of
all the books, and of all the Epistles that he wrote: where shall we find
these three reckoned up, Bishops, Elders, and Deacons? He has in some seeldome
places the name of Bishop, as for the name of Elder, except it be in one only
place, (besides the title aforesaid) which is the 8. Epistle: we shall never
find it. Dionis. Epist. 8.
But once is as good as a 1000 times, if it be to the purpose. Let us therefore
see what this Dionysius says in that place, for proof that there were any such
eccl. officers as these governing and not teaching Elders. And to speak
plainly ( says this Dionysius) in all things that are, they are distributed
from the first to the second, according to their dignity, concerning the god
order, and most righteous providence of the^. And that those which are
appointed of God to govern others, should give to them that are their
inferiors and their subjects, the things that are, according to their
worthiness. As for Demophilus, let him with reason cut off wrath and
concupiscence according to their worthiness. And let him not violate his own
dignity, but let reason bearing the rule, govern her subjects. For if in the
market we see an household servant reuiling his Master, (...) etc. and a young
man reuiling an Elder, either also the son r^uiling the Father, The name of
Elder not for office, but age.
and with all rushing on him and laying on stripes: we also should seem to be
godless, if we should not running to them, hasten to help them that are the
better, etc. What can we gather on this word (...) in this place, but simply
by the name of Elder, an Elder man in age, and the other a younger man the
relation of the one to the other, the terms of Master and household servant,
of father and son, the one going before, the other coming after, and both
understood in their literal and natural sense; to conclude, the whole drift
and circumstance of the place considered: who would fetch this so far, as to
think that he spoke here, or so much as dreamed of, either an eccl. or a
civil Elder? If it be replied, yt the whole argument of this Epistle arose,
upon a Priest that was beaten and misused: true it is indeed. But by what name
calls he the Priest or any priest Presbyterum? or (...), Sacerdotem, he that
gives the sacred word and Sacraments. Which word not only he uses more
than half a score of times in this Epistle, and he has once also even here
the name of Bishop: but neither here nor any other where that I can find, he
has the name of Deacon. Not that he acknowledges no Deacons; but that he
comprehends them (as I take it) in the name of (...), a minister or worker of
the public services. And as in all places where he treats thereof, he makes
indeed most especial mention of three eccl. orders, namely, in his eccl.
Hierarchy, cap. 2.3. and 5. resembling them to the proportion of his
celestial Hierarchy, in these three points of perfecting, illuminating, and
purging, of whom the Bishop is still called (...): the priest or Elder, (...):
and the third, (...). And so, even in this example within a few lines after
he had named the Elder, that is, the old man afore-sayde: he says of all
these three: The 3. degrees of eccles. orders that Dionisius acknowledges.
(...). Thou thy self therefore distribute to thy concupiscence and to thine
anger and to thy speech, the things that are according to their worthiness.
But to thy self, let the divine public ministers distribute: and unto them,
the Priests: unto the Priests, the Bishops; and unto the Bishops, the
Apostles and the successors of the Apostles.

Where are here these Elders that meddle not with teaching? If they be neither
contained in the Bishops, nor in the Priests ( both which, meddle principally
with teaching) then either they have no place at al, or they must be included
in the 3. number of the (...), wherein he comprehends not only all the
inferior officers of the Church, but Monks also. So that (I think^) these
governing Elders would be loath to be thrust down into so base a company.
Although the purging be given unto them, which is somewhat aunswerable to the
correction of manners, that they would meddle with all. Save that Dionisius
also makes these purgers, but to pull off the clothes of those that should be
baptized, and to void the Church at the communion, of those that were
possessed with foul spirits, or were not thoroughly taught their Catechism,
and to keep back the lay people, The office of the purgers in Dionisius.
and such other servile offices. If now, they disdain to be of the number of
these purgantes; and will not become ministers of the word and Sacraments;
nor with the Bishops be perficientes; nor with the Priests, be illuminantes:
then Dionisius clean renounceth these Seniors that would be tantu^ dominantes,
and will have none such in his eccl. Hierarchy. And therefore, if I might
counsel such an excellent learned man as is Danaeus; he should never bring in
Dionysius for these Elders. But either race his name out of his book; or else,
how so ever an other have at his peril, counterfeited the name of Dionysius
the Areopagite mentioned Act. 17. let not us cuunterfeite any thing in his
name, but allege his words rightly as he uttered them. For he is wrong enough
of himself. But right or wrong, sith we shall never wring any thing out of
him, that may make so much as a shadow for these governing and not teaching
Ecclesiastical Elders: let us now go to be better resolved of that more
reverend Fathers judgment, whom Danaeus also cites for these Seniors.

Danaeus in Christ. Isag. 2. part. ca. 7.
Danaeus proceeding in the 7. chap. aforesaid, 2. part. Christ. Isagog. says:
Caet^rum caetus, etc. But the assembly of the eccl. governors, that is of the^
that are set over every Church, is called the Senate of the Church, Hiron* ad
Rustic. It is also in the Canon, Ecclesia, 16. quaest. 1. least perhaps any man
should suppose, that this name now were of us first forged and usurped for
ostentation.

We think not that this name of the Churches Senate, is new forged or feygned
by our Brethren. We think more reverently also of Danaeus, than to make any
such forgerie, usurpation, or ostentation of this name, the Senate of the
Church. And we grant the name has been used of other heretofore, albeit (as
we have heard) Calvin him self esteems the name of Senate to be some what
too profane or seculer a name, though we deny not but the name is reverent.
Howe-beit, our question is here, in what sense Hierome uses it, whether for
such an Ecclesiastical senate of Elders, that are governors and not teachers,
Hierome.
as our Brethren would bear us in hand. And this is the point that Danaeus
alleges it for. If now Jerome allege it for any Senate of such
Ecclesiastical Elders: then has Danaeus and our Brethren gotten a good and a
strong testimony, Ieronimus in epistola ad Rusticum gallum.
that there were some such Seniory of Elders in those days. But if Hierome
allege no such matter: but rather the clean contrary, to wit, if he
allege it for a senate of those Elders that were teachers: what then has
Danaeus or our brethren gained out of Hierom for these Governing and not
teaching Elders? Now therefore to examine better this testimony also of Saint
Hierome, in his Epistle written to Rusticus: we find that he wrote two
Epistles to men of that name: whereof that which here is meant is the former,
written to one Rust. Gallus a young man that was become a Monk. Howbeit such a
Monk, as Erasmus well observes thereupon, Erasmus bseruatio^s of Ieromes
example for the difference of the Monks in Ieroms time, and the popish Monks
in these days.
saying: Least that should offend any, that in this Epistle, (as neither
also in the former) S. Ierom commands none of those things, that are
required of Monks in these days: he suffers them to have the possession of
household stuff, so it be moderate. He permits them to live with their
Mother, with their Sister, to conclude, with any body men or women, so that
they shun suspicious and dangerous company, He exhorts him, he exacteth
not, that if he had leauer live abroad: he should rather live in the
fellowship of many together under the discretion of some Father, than to live
after his own all alone. As concerning any certain Monastery or form, or color,
or matter of garment: there is no mention in any place. Only he would have
such apparel, that neither with the sluttishnes thereof it should savor of
hypocrisy, nor with the neatenesse it should savor of pride. Now concerning
the three vows which they call solemn: there is not one word. He prayseth
in this man the study of eloquence, and that to attain learning, he traveled
to Countries far distant. But we must remember, (which thing is manifestly
apparent by these men's writings) that there was not in the age of Hierom, this
kind of Monks, such as we see in our age, which would to God the world had them
all as good, as it has many, and so excellent over other in holiness, as they
differ in apparel. In those days Monks were nothing else, but such as
professed the contempt of the World, in a more severe life. Howbeit they
obeyed their Bishop as other did, and exercised the office of Clearks even as
other also.

I do the rather by the way note this observation, least any should mistake
that kind of life, when they read in these old Fathers, as in Basil
aforesaid and in the Ecclesiastical History the names of Monks, least they
should think it makes any thing for the maintenance of such superstitious
sects as swarm in popery, and are expelled from us.

Now then unto this Rusticus: being a young man, and such a kind of Monk
writes old Father Hierom this epistle, full of fatherly precepts and good
council, how to behave himself in that profession. And at length (among other
things) coming to this, he says: Neque vero peccantium etc. Neither be thou
carried away with the multitude of sinners, neither let the number of them that
perish trouble thee, that thou sholdst think with thy self, what? and shall
all perish then that dwell in the Cities? Lo they enjoy their goods, they
minister to the Churches, they hauute the bathes, they despise not oyntmentes,
and yet are they commonly in every man's mouth. To the which I answered also
before, and now breefely I answer, that in this present pamphlet I dispute
not of clearks but instruct a Monk. The Clearkes are holy, and the life of
them all is laudable. So therefore behave thy self, and live in the Monastery,
that thou may deserve to be a Cleark, that thou defile not thy youth with
any uncleanness, that thou may come unto the altar of Christ, even as a
virgin out of her chamber, The B. separate choosing of Clearke^.
and that abroad thou have a good testimony, and that the women know thy name,
but not know thy countenance. When as thou shall come to a perfect age (if so
be thou shall live so long) and that either the people, or else the Bishop of
the City, shall chose thee into the Clergy: do those things that pertain to
a Clearke, and among them follow the better, because, in every condition and
degree, the best are mixed with the worst. Nor leap thou out by and by to
write, and be carried away with a light madness, be long time learning that thou
teach, give not credit to those that are the praysers of thee: Yea rather,
to the mockers of thee willingly listen thou not. Whom when they shall have
foaded thee with their floutings, and shall after a sort set thee besides thy
self. If thou shall suddenly look about thee, The clearks were teachers.
thou shall either find the necks of the strokes bowing behind thee, or the
Asses ears to be solfaed with the hand, or the hot panting tongue of the Dog to
be lolled out. ( He means, that with such beastly parts they will mock him
behind his back, whom to his face they praised). Backbite no man, neither
count thy self holy herein, if thou deface other men. We accuse oftentimes
that which we do, and are eloquent against our own selves. We are carried
with inuectiues against our vices, while the silent judge the eloquent.
Grunnius coming forth to speak, with his pace like a snayle, scrasly carped
out, and that by certain yawning pawses, few words, that he would rather
think he sobbed than he spoke: and yet when the table being set, ^he had
laid forth an heap of Books, bending his eye browe, snuffling up his nose,
and wrinkling his foreheade, Phillipped with both his fingers, by this sign
provoking this Shcollers to here him.

Then began he to power out his mere toys, and to declayme against every
one. You would have said, he had been Longinus the Critike (or one that
gives his judgment against every body) and a Censor (or Master Controller) of
the Romayne eloquence, to note whom it liked him, Et de Senatu doctorum
excludere. And to exclude him out of the Senate of the Doctors (or of the
Learned men.) This fellow is well monied, he is better liked in his dinners,
etc. Here at length we are come to the Word Senate, which Danaeus aymeth at,
in saying: But the assembly of Ecclesiastical Governors, that is, of them
that are placed over every Church, is called the senate of the church.
Hieronimus ad Rusticum.

But as Hierome speaks all this sentence, in deriding the contemptuous and
scornful inuectiues, of the rich and proud disdainers of all other, be they
never so learned men: (and therefore that we might the more fully perceive his
meaning, I have set down his Words thus at large) so what can be gathered
hereupon, that he alluded to any Ecclesiastical senate of that time?
Especially understanding the same for such an Ecclesiastical senate, as were
governors of the church, and not teachers of it? Erasmus in his scholies
coming to these words, De senatu Doctorum: applies them to an allusion of
the Senate of Rome, saying: The Censors or Con^rollers office.
For this also was lawful for the Romayne censors (or Lord controllers of the
Romayne manners) to expel out of the senate: as Portius Cato removed out of
the senate Titus Flamminius, Iunius Brutus removed Lucius Antonius, and others
removed other, as Valerius Maximus records, li. 2. cap. de Censoria nota. So
that by these terms, de Senatu doctorum excludere, Hierome meant, that this
Grunnius took upon him like a Censor or Lord controller, to exclude such and
such as he pleased out of the senate, that is, out of the number of all those
that are accounted Learned men. And is not this now a proper proof, to
infer that in Heiromes time, in every or in any congregation or church,
there was a senate of Learned men and yet not teachers? If Danaeus will needs
apply it to the state of a senate then present in the Church: yet where is
here become this Ecclesiastical senate, that he would prove was then, by
these words? If he say, that it is included in this word doctorum: what
shall we call these? Learned men? or Doctors? if they were Senatus doctorum, a
senate of Doctors: What Doctors were they, if they meddled not with teaching?
Were they such as the common saying decideth: doctor a docendo sicut mons a
mouendo? and will our Brethren allow such Doctors, rather than they will not
prove an Ecclesiastical senate of governing and not teaching? If he say, that
by these words, he means a senate of learned men, but not actiuely of
Doctors or teachers, but passiuely, of such as are taught or learned. Does not
Hierome here deride those, that being their selves unlearned, will in teaching
their scholars, inueighe against all other that be learned? And if he make
here this arrogant ass, a teacher of scholars: does he not much more allow
the Learned themselves to be Teachers? Hier. words rather allow a senate of
teaching than not teaching Elders.
I dare not precisely say, of so dark and general words, what Ieromes
meaning was, but (me thinks) the words Senatus Doctorum, sound rather for a
Senate of Teachers, than for a Senate of those that were not teachers. But what
is this unto our Elders? he speaks there (as we have seen also) of Clearkes,
and of a number of them, commending the life of them to be lawdable, and
wills him so to live, that he may deserve to be made a Clearke, and if that
(God lending him life) either the people or the Bishop of the City chose him
into the clergy, that he should then live as a Clearke should do, and that
he should follow the better sort of them: but what then were these Clearkes?
( if perhaps they were this Ecclesiastical Senate) But so soon as ever he had
spoken of these Clearkes ( if Rusticus should be made one of them) does he not
straight ways say: leap not out by and by to be a writer, and be carried
away with a light madness, be long time learning that thou teach. And also
in the same Epistle he said before, Haec dico etc. I say these things, that
if thou be tickled with the desire to be of the Clergy, that thou should
learn that, which thou might be able to teach and might offer unto
Christ the reasonable offering. Be not a man of arms, before thou haste
been a young souldior, be not a Master before thou haste bin a scholar.

So that it appears, this Clergy were teachers, at least wise, their
profession was not separate from teaching, though all among were not a like
able, yea, the very Readers in the Clergy, cheefely had a kind of teaching
even in reading. As for the Elders in the Clergy, Governing Elders, were much
more Teachers. For he would not have Rusticus ( when he should now become one
of Clergy) such a Teacher as should find fault with other, The elders that
our Br. would erect would be such as Ierom reprehendeth.
and be culpable himself of the same faults, specially in learning: nor to be
like Gruninus a M. Controller, corrector and displacer of learned men, being
himself unlearned So that I can see none so fit, that we may resemble these
Governing Seniors unto, that are not Teachers, and yet are Censors or
Controllers, ( for Calvin also gives that term Censors, as we have heard)
unto them: as unto these Elders that our Brethren plead for. For as they take
not upon them to be Teachers, so they had not need, being their selves
unlearned. At least wise, for the most part it would so fall out, that this
Seniory in every parish could not be of Learned men: and yet must they be the
Censors and controllers of the Learned men, and that not only for manners, but
to see that the Learned teachers, teach no false doctrine. Which in many
Parishes would be. S^t Mineru^^* And so the hoggish and rich Grimus, must
gruntle and play th^se parts (that Hierome d^scribeth) against the learned
teacher, and teach his teacher, being himself no teacher. But does Jerome
like of this? I think not, and yet this would often times a fall out, if our
Bret. seniory were brought in, who would play Grunnius part more lively then he
that were as Ierom says here, been nummatus, plus placebat in prandii^, a
well monied man, fitter to please us with good chere than with good doctrine
doctrine? which fault our Breath find now in some unlearned pastors among us,
and call them unpreaching Priests and Prelates: and yet it should then be
common, in these governing and not teaching, controlling and unlearned seniors
among them. And so it should be, not senatum doctorum ( as Hierom says) but
Senatum indoctorum, as our brethren and we too soon should ^^^de it. If it
were not far worse, as it follows afterward in Hierome, against these
unlearned Controllers of the Learned Pastors, and yet flatterers of the people,
saying: Nec mirum etc. Neither is it meruell, if he that was wont to feed
many with his baytes, come forth abroad, making a train after him, of the
babblers that make a noise about him ( or of the people giving him all their
voices, and saying as this M. Senior Controller says) Intus Nero, foris Cato,
The description of such Controllers not ^eachers
totus ambiguus, vt ex contrarii^ diuersisque naturis, vnum mo^^trum, no^a^que
bestiam dicere^ ess^ compact a^: iu^cta illud poeticum, Prima Le^ postrema
drac^, media ipsa Chim^r^. Nero within, Cato without, altogether doubtful,
insomuch that you would say, it were one Monster, or a new Beast, Lucretius.
compact of contrary and diverse natures, according to the saying of the Poet,
a Lion is the formest part, a Dragon last is seen, the Monster Chimere placed
is, within the midst between. And such a Senate compact of such as Grymsyre
Grunnius, a Critical longinu^ (if not rather such a blind longinus, as is said
to have pierced the side of Christ^ with his spear) such inward Neroes, and
outward Catoes, such Lions, Dragons and Chimers, might quickly creep into this
Senate of unlearned Seniors, that would become the Electors of all
Ecclesiastical officers, the Governors of all Ecclesiastical Government, the
Censors and controllers of all the Discipline and manners of the Teachers, and
themselves no teachers, nor able to meddle with teaching. ^o, Jerome allows
not any Ecclesiastical Senate of such Seniors. But when Jerome mentions such
Elders or Seniors, as he knew and allows (as he does within a few words
after) he says: veritas angulos non amat, etc. Truth loves not Corners, nor
seeks out Whisperers. It is said to Timothy: What Elders Hierom. allows
of.
against an Elder receive not straight way an accusation. Him that sins
reprove before all, that the other also may have fear. We must not easily
believe the slanders spoken) of that old age, which both their life forepassed
does defend, and the term of their dignity does honor. Here he plainly speaeth
of Seniors not only in age, but in dignity. An^ applies S. Paul's sentence to
them, 1. Tim. 5.19. which w^ have seen, ^oth by the te^timony of Calvin of
Beza, is spoken of such Elders, as are Pastors and teachers. Yea Danaeus
himself so expounding it, and saying thereon: It is a transition ( or passing
from the one part to speak of the other) for now he treats of the 2. part of
this argument, Danae^s in 1. Tim. 5.19
to wit, what is the office of Elders themselves toward themselves and their
Colleagues, least any offense should arise on that part. For first, heed must
be taken, least that they do excuse one another and spare themselves, while
that notwithstanding, they correct other severely, and least that in them the
old proverb have place, The mules do nibble one another. Let that sentence of
Christ come rather to their mind, You are the salt of the earth, if the salt
melt away, in what shall it be salted? you are the light of the World, Mat. 5.
v. 13.14. And also those sayings, let your loins be gi^t, and burning lampe^
in your hands. Luke 1^. ver. 35. Yea and those also of Peter, that the pastors
ought to be an example in soundness of life and purity of Doctrine, and to
shine before other. 1. Pet. 5.3. Therefore as on the one part, they must
diligently take heed, that they wink not in their own, and in the sins of
their Colleagues: so on the other part they must look, that they give not to
froward men, and to such as refuse and shake of the yoke of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, an entry unto an easy appeachement and accusation. etc. These are
the only Elders in office th^^ Jerome in this Epistle mentions.

These Elders therefore and their Colleagues (as Danaeus tearm^th them) being
these Pastoral Elders, and to whom these sentences and that which follows,
Ezech. 18 do appertain: what is here to relieve these other kind of Elders,
not pastoral that are all governing and not meddling with teaching? Now, if
our Brethren will but turn v^ the other side of the leaf, before that where
this word senate is of H^erome named, which here Danaeus takes hold upon: we
shall find perhaps such an Ecclesiastical company insinuated, as again may
make a senate Ecclesiastical. The superior government of one in every company.
Nulla ars etc. There is no Art ( says Ierom to this Monk Rusticus) that is
learned without a Master, yea the dumb living creatures and herds of wild
Beaste^ follow their guides. Among the Bees there are their Princes, the
cranes follow one another in a lettered order, or like the row of Letters.)
The Emperor is one, the Judge of the province is one. So soon as Rome was
built, it could not have 2. brothers to be kings both of them together, and it
was dedicated in Parricide ( or in the blood of one brother murdering another)
so that it is less marvel, if it have ever since bin the city of blood from
whence such horrible, murders, treasons and unnatural ma^sacres ever have bin
contrived, even from the laying of the foundation of it: and yet less marueil,
for there is now an Eccl. senate al of governing elders that meddle not with
teaching: which in Ierom* ti^^ was not, nor he any of them, as he is now
pi^^ured: but let Ierom go on: In the womb of Rebecca Esau and Jacob made wars
together. Singuli ecclesiarum episcopi, singuli archipresbyter^ singuli
Archidiacons, and omnis ord^ ecclesiasticus suis rectoribus nititur. etc. The
B. of the churches are but single (or one) the archpreestes but one, the Archd.
but one, and every eccl. order rests upon his governors. In a ship there is
one governor, in a house there is one M. in every great army one ensign or
standarde is expected, and (least that in unfolding mo things, I should
accloy the reader) my speech by all these tends thereunto, that I might teach
thee (says Ier. to Rust.) that thou should not be left to thine own chois, but
to live in a Monastery under the discipline of one Father, and in the consort
or company of many. If any thing in this epistle come near to the nature and
matter (though not to the word) of Senate, but consort, and that
ecclesiastical, it is here (me thinks) nerer touched, than where the name of
the Senate of doctors, or learned men, was spoken of. But what is there here, to
show whether all in this consorte were seniors, and those that were seniors,
whether teachers, or no? but teachers or not teachers, to whom is here the
Government referred? to the consort? no but to one over them. The consort is of
many* the government of all, is still referred unto one.

Indeed he drives all this drift, to the Monastical state. The less (say I) it
serves to such an Ecclesiastical senate of Elders, as our Bre. refer it unto.
Yea, but he boroweth examples not only from many natural and civil orders,
but also from the Eccl. order of the church. we grant he does so, and they much
more should live in order, and therein be example to other If therefore any Eccl.
senate be among the clergy: omnis ord^ eccl. (says Ierom) suis rectorib^^
nititur. All eccl. order rests on their governors. And who then, or how many
are these governors forsooth but one. Here are three orders of the clergy
reckoned up, the deacons as the lowest, and they have their archd. for their
governor: the Elders midlemost, and they are distinct here from the deacons,
and from the B. and have their arch-elder among themselves, and over them al,
in the senates of them. And the B. are cheifest over the several churches.
Except we shall find in several provinces, archb. also over them. Which
authority likewise Ierom allowed among and over the B. though he make none but
Christ the universal head and governor over all these in general, that the
pope now takes upon him. The orders and governments of that Jerome co^me^deth.
But where is here this government of all this senate of governing Elders? and
where are these governing elders that are not teachers? does Ierom here, or any
other where, acknowledge any such order of eccl. elders, as meddled not with the
ministration of the word and sacraments? Ierom says, yt the names of Elders
and B. were ^^rst used for all one office ( as we have at large seen his opinion
therein and how that use was altered) but does he acknowledge any other
presbytery Senate, College, Consistory or seniorie, of any other Presbyters,
Priests, seniors and Elders, than such as he says, were (...) called Bishops:
or than such, as he calls indifferently, (as well as he calls Bishops)
sacerdotes, and such as were more or le^se teachers, and Ministers of the Word
and sacraments? Hier. in epis. ad Euagr.
Does he not say in his Epistle to Euagrius: Quid enim facit excepta
ordinatione episcopus quod Presbyter non faciat? For what does the Bishop
except ordeining, that an Elder does not*

As for the other Epistle to the other Rusticus, being altogether of another
argument: we find nothing tending hereunto, save only that he has these
words: Vnde and ad viros Ecclesiasticos, etc. Whereupon also unto the
Ecclesiastical men, which are called the walls and towers of the church, the
saying of the prophet speaks: power forth your tears ye Walls of Sion. But
because here he neither shows what he meant by these ecclesiastical men, nor
speaks of any Senate of them: we can gather nothing directly either for
Elders or other Ecclesiastical persons. And if he meant elders: why not such
as are teachers and Ministers of the Word^ and sacraments, and such as he
meant of in the other Epistle, and in all other places where he mentions any
ecclesiastical elders? Thus, as we find nothing in Hierome, that can make any
thing for any ecclesiastical senate of elders governing and not teaching: ^o,
because Danaeus cites not Hierom simply, but endorseth him with a
con^^rmation of the degrees in the Canon Law, as though it were a perpetual
Canon, that there should still be such an ecclesiastical senate: albeit the same
being fetched out of this sentence of Hierome, as we have seen, makes more
against it than any thing for it: so that this decree being grounded thereon,
the one falls to the ground with the other: nevertheless, for the more full
satisfaction of the reader, in this eldership so much urged: let us also
repair to the decrees, and peruse what is there likewise for this senate of
Governing and not teaching elders. Danaeus allegation of the Canon Law for this
Senate of Elders. Canon. Eccl. 16 quest 1.
And here indeed is express mention made, that the church has a Senate of
elders, ecclesia habet senatum catum presbyterorum, etc.

The Church has a senate, the company of the Elders, without whose consent it
is not lawful for the Monks to do any thing. Roboam the son of Solomon did
therefore leese his kingdom, because he would not hear his elders. The
Romans also had a senate by whose counsel they did all things, and we have
our senate, the company or assembly of the elders. These words are plain,
that the church has a senate, and this senate is the company of the elders,
and that also the Monks could do nothing without their counsel. Howbeit
this Canon applies not this restraint to the B. but to the Monks. And if we
should understand it of Bishops also, which this Canon does not, yet were it
but of counsel, not of necessary consent, and much less of joint authority
with him. But the Question is now, what manner of elders these were? The Canan
Law.
Whether they were such as these examples of the Roman Senate, or as the
Elders whose counsel Roboam did refuse: or they were Ministers of the word and
Sacraments? For our better understanding hereof, we have to resort to the cause
handled immediately before, which was the 15. cause. Quest. 7. Absque Synodali.
Without a synodal audience, Canon Absque Synodali causa 15. quest. 7.
for a Priest to be condemned, it was in the Council of Hispalis, wherein
Isodorus was present, forbidden, on this wise: Sexta action, etc. In the sixth
action we find, that Flagitanus an Elder of the Church of Corduba, was in
times past deposed by his Bishop, and being innocent was condemned to exile (or
banishment:) whom we find again to be restored to his own order: the same
thing have we again decreed against your presumption, that according to the
synodall sentence of the holy fathers, none of you think that any Elder or
Deacon ought to be deposed, without the examination of a Council. For there are
many that by tyrannical power* not by authority Canonical, do condemn
those that have not been examined. And as they exalt some for favor sake, so
they debase some for for hatred and envy, and condem them upon a Le ui aura.
light blast of opinion whose fault they mislike. For a bishop can alone
give honor unto priests and ministers: but he can not alone take it from
them. For if those which in this world have of their Lords atteyned to the
honor of their liberty, are not tumbled down again into the bond of
servitude, except they shall have been publicly accused, before the Praetors
or chief Justices and governors in the judgment Court: These elder^ were
ministers of the sacraments.
how much more, they that being consecrated to the Altars of God are adorned
with Ecclesiastical honor: which verily neither by one condemning them, nor
one judging them, can be deposed from the privilege of their honor, but by a
present Synodall judgment. That thing must wholly be determined of them, that
the Canon has commanded.

And it follows Si quid. etc. If any thing shall come to thine ears of any
Clearke, that may justly offend thee, believe it not easily, least the matter
being not known do inflambe thee by reuengement. But the truth of the matter
is to be searched out diligently in the presence of Seniors of the Church, and
then, (if the quality of the matter shall require it) let the Canonical
correction strike the fault of the offender. Here are Seniors also of the
Church named.

And again, Episcopus. Let the Bishop hear the cause of none without the
presence of his Clearkes, The B. and his Clearks
otherwise the bishops sentence shall be void, except it be established by
the presence of the Clearkes. Here the Bishop is restrained that albeit he may
do some thing alone, unto his Clearkes, Ministers, Seniors, and Elders: yet
that he may not alone and without the presence of their assembly, depose any of
them from his living, etc. But who are these Clearkes, Ministers, Seniors, and
Elders, in whose presence he must do these things? Does he admit any other
then Bishops themselves, or at least the Sacerdotall Priests? the gloss (
disputing this matter, who should be this Counsel, or Chapter, or sitters by
with the Bishops,) to prove that they must be all Clearkes, refers us to the
sixth cause, Quest. 3. Scitote. Know ye, that to be a certain province, which
has ten or eleven Cities, and one King, and as many inferior potestates under
him, one Metropolitan, and other suffraganes, 10 or 11. Bishops, being Judges,
unto whose Judgment all the causes of the Bishops, Who these Elders and*
Clarks were that these Canons have relation unto.
and of other priests and Cities, may be referred. That matters may be
discerned by all these, Justly and with consonant voice, except they that are
to be iudgd do appeal to a higher authority. It must not be that every
province should be debased or dishonored, but should have in it self
Judges, every of the Priests and Bishops. That is to wit, according to their
orders. Whereby it appears that these Ecclesiastical Senates of such as sat
in the Councelles and Judgments of Priests were either Bishops or at least
Sacerdotall priests only, and not persons of inferior orders, but every one
was Judged according to their estate, by them that were (at the least) of their
own orders, and not Teachers by such as were no Teachers.

Now after this fifteenth cause wherein he treats of Clearkes, Elders,
Seniors, Ministers and Priests indifferently: This next cause, to wit, the
sixteenth* Which Danaeus cites, is altogether of Monks, and especially that
first Question which he alleges. Whether they may do that thing (in respect
simply they be Monks, that secular Clearkes and preests or Elders) may do.
This first Question is this, Vtrum Monachis liceat officia populis celebrare,
poenitentiam dare, and baptizare. Whether Monks may celebrate the Divine
service to the people, enjoin penitence and baptize? To the which, the answer
is this, They can-not. And anon amongst other reasons, he alleges this out of
Hierome also, Ad Riparium and desiderium: Monachus non docentis sed plangentis
habet officium. A Monk has not the office of a Teacher, but of a mourner. And
even immediately before that which Danaeus cites, are these words: Alia causa.
The cause of a Monk is another, and another the cause of a Clearke: The
Clearke, feed the Sheep, ( says the Monk) I am fed: they live of the
Altar, the Axe is put to me, The difference of the Cleark and of the Monk.
as at the root of an unfruitful tree: If I bring not my gift unto the Altar,
It is not lawful for me to sit before an Elder: if I shall sin, it is
lawful for him to deliver me to Satan, for the destruction of the Flesh, that
the spirit in day of the Lord might be safe. Idem ad Rusticum. The same ( is
in Hieroms* Epistle) unto Rusticus. And here comes in that which Danaeus
cites: Ecclesia: The church has a Senate, the assembly of Elders, without
whose council it is lawful for the Monks to do nothing. All this now duly
considered: it is manifest, that by this the Churches Senate or assembly of
Elders, is meant only a Senate of such Elders, as did feed both the people
and the Monks also, with the Word and Sacraments. For so the gloss
expounds the Monks words, Ego pascor, I am fed, A sacramentis ipsorum, of
their Sacraments. And that these Elders lived of the Altar, The Monks paid
tithes and offerings to the elders The Elders might excommunicate the Monke^
and that the very Monks in those days, were not exempted from paying tithes or
offerings unto them. And that these Elders might excommunicate these Monks so
well as they might other men. By all which it appears, that this
Ecclesiastical Senate was none other, but an assembly, Colleage or Consistory
of Priests or Pastoral Elders.

And as for any other Ecclesiastical Presbyters or Elders, in all or any of
the Canons either of the Counsels General or Provincial, or of the Bishops,
or of the whole body of the Canon Laws, Decrees or Decretals, then such Elders
as were Ministers of the Word and Sacraments: Our Brethren shall find but
sorry comfort. No nor in any of the Doctors of the Church. And therefore it is
their best (as I take it) to leave all further search that ways, for any
proof or practice at all of such Ecclesiastical Governing and not teaching
Elders in the Church, even from the very Apostles times. And this withal is
to be observed, that where our Bret. would now bear the world in hand, there
were such Senates and Segniories of these governing and not teaching Elders, in
the Primitive and in the ancient Church: and for proof hereof, dare
adventure to cite all these testimonies: (and if I could find that they cited
any mo,) I would crave pardon to search them likewise) which when they are all
viewed and examined: there is not one Father, not one Historiographer, not one
Canon, that makes any whit, for any such kind of Elder, as our Brethren
pretend to us, is worn out of use, and they now endeavor to have again
euiued.

I know that these our reverend Brethren (being both godly and learned men)
do not cite these authors of any set purpose to deceive us, The cause of our
Bret. and these reverend men's mistaking the^e allegations of these Elder^
in Fathering that on them which they never spak, nor thought, nor knew: but as
the proverb says mistaking makes misse-reckoning: so they (having conceived
this with themselves, that such a kind of Governing and not teaching
Ecclesiastical Elders there was in the Apostles times, and in the Primitive
Church:) so often as they read in the Fathers the name of Presbyters of
Elders, especially, if there be any mention of Senate, College or company of
them, and that these in any matters joined with the Bishop ( to whom they
apply only the name and office of Pastoral Elder:) straightway they
conceived that which they fancied, that these Elders were those Ecclesiastical
Elders governing only and not meddling with teaching*

Mistaking the fathers
Which too quick conceiving, upon their forestalled opinion, (especially in the
heat of zeal to have things amended,) may fall out now and then, for lack
of more mature deliberation and examining, even to the best learned and most
holy men. And that (I think) has been the cause of our Brethrens misliking
and misseporting the Fathers meaninges in the Eldership. Which when their
selves shall apperceiue, I doubt not (for the reverent opinion I have of them,
and of all our Brethren) but that they will relent in this behalf, at
leastwise, for these fathers thus cited amiss, and either let them all go, or
seek further in them, or in other, for other and better Testimonies, than
these alleged. Which if they shall find, and can clearly euict thereby, that
there were any such: for my part, I shall be most ready to acknowledge it.
Howbeit, when they shall have proved, that such at any time in the Church of
Christ there were: yet would not that example infer a necessity, that there
ought to be such always and every where, because there was such sometimes,
perhaps, and in some places.

But sense as yet, we neither hear of rule, nor example of them: we may (I
hope) with safe conscience dissent from them. Since therefore, it can not
hitherto be proved by any of these Fathers: Let us now see these excellent
learned men's allegations and examples for these Elders, out of the holy
Sciptures, if yet in them, we may find better and invincible proof, that at
least in the Apostles times, there were such Elders, for then there is no
remedy, but we must needs yield that such there were, Since we also (as is
our bounden duty) do admit and reverence the holy Scriptures, with the same
honor that our Brethren do. Albeit, neither we nor they can make any
perpetual rule, of every particular example in the scripture. But let the rule
thereof fall out as it shall, let us yet see, what examples in the scripture
our Brethren auouche.

In the seventh Chapter aforesaid, 2. Part Christ. Isag. Danaeus after his
citations of Basil and Dionysius, Danaeus in 2. part Christ. Isag. Cap. 7.
alleges saint Paul ( as ye have heard) saying: Therefore they may thus
better be distinguished, that of the perpetual orders in the Church, other
should be occupied in the treaty of the Word of God, which Paul generally
calls (...), Prophecy, Romans 12. verse. 6. Or else in the procuring of other
things, the which seems by a General name to be of other called (...).
Governance, but of Paul it is called (...), Romans 12.

This Testimony is also alleged of Beza in his Christian Confession, Chapter
5. Artic 32. with the 1 Corinthians. 12. verse 28. prefixed thereunto. The same
Testimony likewise cites Calvin, in his Institutions Cap. 8. Sec. 42. saying.
Caluines allegation of the same in Instit. cap 8. sect. 42


But as for that that I called bishops, and elders, and pastors, and Ministers
indifferently, those that govern the Church: The Scripture of the Elders.
I did it out of the use of the scripture, which confundeth these terms. For
whosoever enjoy the ministry of the word, it gives to them the title of
Bishops. So with Paul, where Titus was commanded town by town to ordeine
Elders, streight-wayes is set under it, for a Bishop must be blameless, etc.
So in an other place he saluteth more Bishops in one City. And in the Acts is
rehearsed, that he called the Ephesine Elders together, whom he his-selfe in
his oration names Bishops. Here now we must observe that hitherto we have
reckoned none, but those offices that consist in the ministry of the Word,
neither of other does Paul make remembrance in that fourth Chapter to the
Ephesians, which we have cited. Howbeit, in the Epistle to the Romans, and in
the former to the Corinthians, he reckons up other, as powers, the gifts of
healing, interpretation, Government, tendance on the poor, of the which I omit
those that were temporary, because it is no importance to stand long about
them. But there are two which abide perpetually: gouernm^nt, and the car^ of
the poor. Governors (I think) were seniors, chosen from among the common
people, which should together with the bishops, rule the Censure or
controlement of manners, and the discipline that should be exercised. Who^
Call. thin^eth ^o be the governors. Bom 12 and 1. Cor. 12.
For ye can-not otherwise interpret that which he says: he that rule^h let
him do it in carfulness. Therefore every Church from the beginning had her
senate enrolled, of Godly, grave and holy men. Moreover that that kind of
order was not of that only age, the experience it self does declare.
Therefore this gift also of Government is necessary for all ages.

Thus do Calvin, Beza and Danaeus ( for in these three as principal I
comprehend any other of our Brethren that follow them) gather this Senate of
Governing and not teaching Elders, on these two testimonies Romans 12. and 1
Corinthians 12. As for that which Calvin here speaks of the scriptures
indifferent use of the names of bishops and Elders: We have already seen
sufficiently, how it was used, and how it was altered, even in the Apostles
times. And have seen withal, sufficient proof of the superiority of one
among the Elders, yea, among the Apostles themselves, which was more peculiarly
called bishop, and that by Caluines and Bezaes own confessions. But for these
two places in the Scripture here cited, Romans 12. and 1. Corinthians 12. that
all the gifts or offices there mentioned, are either temporary or perpetual,
the Apostle expresses not, the event only shows that point Not but that
Government should be always in the Church, and care of the poor also. As our
Savior says, John, 12. The poor ye shall have always with you: and then
charity infers a good consequence, that we should always have a care of
the poor, and the Scripture is plentiful in that behalf. Romans 12. For
governors.
And so likewise for Governors and care of Government. But whether the like
form of Government, and of care for the poor, and the like, or rother the
same kind of officers for these things, should be always in the Church and
perdetually abiding: that is not here declared. Neither yet that the gifts or
offices of Government mentioned in these places, were of any such officers and
Elders Governing and not teaching, as our Brethren do pretend they were. Only
Calvin says Existimo. etc. I suppose (or think) that the Governors were
Seniors chosen out of the common people, which together with the Bishop should
rule the censure (or controulement) of manners, and the Discipline that should
be exercised. Caluines interpretation not necessary.
This is but Caluines thinking. Who though he were a most excellent man, yet
his supposing and thinking, though it may move many to think as he did, yet
it binds none, but that another man may think otherwise, as Beza also in
many things, thinks otherwise than Calvin does. But when Calvin adds on
his thinking, that these words, He that rules, let him do it in
carfulness, cannot be interpreted otherwise: This is somewhat further then
needs. Can none that rules be careful in his ruling, but he must be a ruler
chosen from among the common people? and that he must be a controller of
manners, and of the Discipline that should be exercised? and that in this
Government he must join together with the Bishop? and that he must not meddle
with teaching? what necessity is there in these Testimonies, to interpret
these Governors to be such Governors? and that it can-not be interpreted
otherwise? is there any other here alleged than Caluines bare thinking? and
we have herad already how excellent men have thought and interpreted these
words otherwise, and alleged their reasons for the same. And I see no reason
to the contrary, why they may not be interpreted, both for civil Magistrares in
the church and also for Bishops and Pastors that are Teachers: or for
who-soeuer has any rule and Government committed to him, to dee it heedefully
and with carfulness.

Now upon these his bare supposall or thinking, and on his only auouching
that it can be interpreted no otherwise, which must easily and without any
absurdity, may be understood for diverse other: Calvin concludes, that
therefore every Church from the beginning, had her senate enrolled of Godly
grave and holy men, that had the jurisdiction of correcting vices. Every Church
had not a Sanate
Whereas Saint Paul mentions no such thing, neither in these places, nor in
any other. Neither is there any likelihood, that it was in every Church, if it
were in some, or in any, nor Danaeus himself dare go so far, as to every
Church, but to some Churches.

Danaeus confesses, that from the beginning there were in-deede pastoral
Elders in every Church. And he alleges a reason, saying: Governors.
Cap. 10. For the former and cheefer care was in the Churches, that the word of
God should be preached. And therefore as pastors, Preachers should be chosen.
The 2. kind of Elders ( he means these Elders, now in Question) was wont
to be appointed in every greater City only, wherein there was a large and
populous Church, and a great number of the faithful* which is clean contrary
both to Calvin, and to our Brethren in this Learned discourse, that would
have these Elders in every church and Congregation. And much l^sse does this
appear, that it was in every Church even from the very beginning thereof. The
Apostles themselves had not the office of Deacons, no not in Jerusalem the
Mother Church of all* from the beginning. But in continuance the same was
added (as the number increasing) there grew need of them.

But Calvin proceeding on this conclusion, says: that now it was not an
order of one age, meaning it was of more then one. And Seculum an age, is
commonly understood for an hundredth years. As though it left not of in so
short a space, and hereupon he puts himself for proof, to the declaration of
the experience. But what time, or whether any mofull ages, or how many: he
himself declares not, but leans us to search. But (for that we have
already searched,) we can-not hear so much as of any one age. Age? nay, nor
one year, nor one Month, nor one week, nor one day, nor one hour, nor one
moment, either of any one such Senate or, but of one such man, for any
certainty that we have hitherto found. But in all the experience that our
Brethren hitherto have declared: we have found either plain proof, or far
more probalilitie, that all those whom they have alleged were such Elders, as
withal were Ministers of the Word. And yet, if all this, that Calvin upon
his bare thinking runs on withal, could be avouched: it were not able to
bear out his final conclusion, for these his supposed Elders, saying: Therefore
this office also of Government is necessary for all ages. Where indeed he
might have concluded much better, that it is not necessary for all ages. Yea,
although there had been experience of some ages, Churches, This consistory of
these elders not necessary.
or persons: yet, wanting a rule and commandment for them: what necessity
can or ought to be perpetually imposed on all Churches for them, without a
manifest oppression of our Christian liberty? And therefore, away with this
Word necessary ( except it be construed in some gentle sense) especially,
when as yet we have not certainly found, in the experience of the Doctors and
of the Fathers, and of the historiographers, any one age of the Church of
Christ, since, nor in the Apostles age, that had any such Ecclesiastical
Senate of Governing and not teaching Elders, as they imagine and would obtrude
unto us.

And since Calvin here refers that testimony of S Paul, Ephesians 4. verse,
11. to no other, Romans 12.
but to such as were teachers of the word: and S. Paul shows the reason why
those gifts and offices were given, to wit, For the renewing ^f the Saints
into the work of the administration of the body of Christ, until we all come
into the unity of faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, into a
perfect man, and into the measure of a full ripe age, that we should not now
be Children any longer, which are carried away with every blast of Doctrine:
but following the truth in love, we should wax strong by all things in him
that is the head, to wit Christ, in whom the whole body being coupled and
compacted through out every joint of the Ministration, according to the act in
the measure of every part: makes the increase of the body, to the edification
of it self, by love: Ephesians. 4.

If all this can be done by the offices there cited, of the which none have
perpetuity hereunto, but these twain (as our Brethren divide them, which may be
also well contracted unto one) Pastors and Doctors: either our Governing Elders
that our Brethren plead for, must be included within these, and then can they
not be such as they plead for (for they would have them neither Pastors and
Doctors, but a distinguished office from them both, and not meddling with
teaching, which is the cheifest thing in Pastors and Doctors) or else there is
no necessity of their perpetuity, nor of necessary helping to the
accomplishment of these so necessary ends. If they reply, that the Deacons
neither be there mentioned, and yet they be perpetual, and helping hereunto:
albeit we shall God willing hereafter see, Of the perpetuity and necessity of
Deacons.
in their more proper treatise, how they are perpetual and necessary, and how
not: yet what lets, but that, (as at the very first erection of them,) they
were not excluded from teaching and preaching? ( example, Steven and Philip.
Neither can this shift serve, to say, that Philip ( besides) was Evangelist,
except they show the like also for Steven. And why then may not Deecons be
comprehended in S. Paul's partition, Ephesians. 4. well enough, and so Governors,
Interpreters, Healers, Helpers, speakers with diverse languages, which might
be all teachers, save only these, not teaching but governing Ecclesiastical
Elders. Whose office ( as implying a contradiction of teaching and not
teaching) is not compatible with the other offices.

And if (as Danaeus here says) the name (...). governance, that the Apostle
uses, Romans 12. be there general how is it then restrained to such a proper
kind of Ecclesiastical Government, of Elders not teachers, more than of
teaching elders, or, more then of Deacons? And if Paul ( as Danaeus says) use
the name (...), for these governors: which is either proper to Deacons, or
taken generally, for the Ministry: why may it not better comprehend the
pastors and teachers, which ordinarily are called Ministers, then these
governing elders that are nor teachers?

The next proof out of the scripture that Danaeus cites, (after his former
allegation of Hierome ad Rusticum, for the imitation of the Jews Synedrion, we
shall come to it (God willing) after ward, our Brethren leading us to that
argument. But because that stands rather on a presupposall of an imitation,
or continuance of the order in the old law among the Jews, than any proof of
institution in the new, among the Christians: let us now first, go to those
arguments, whereby Danaeus will euict, both manifest example and institution
of these Elders, in the new Testament. ca. 10. part, Christ. 2. Isagog. (or
introduction (he says: Horum igitur Presbyterorum qui, etc. The offices
therefore of these Elders, Danaeus in Christ. Isag. 2. para. ca. 10.
that rule the manners, is to attend upon the flock, and to watch as well
over the doctrine, as over the manners of the Church, and of the faithful that
be in the same. Act. 20. ver. 28. 1. Pet. 5. ver. 2. and especially in his
parish, that is, in that part of the Church or region, which is committed
peculiarly to him. And verily concerning doctrine, least any Haeresie should
be brought in, and least any error should be sowed, and generally least the
substance of the faith should be corrupted. Act. 20. ver. 29.21. ver. 18. which
thing may be done* and thereupon arise offenses, and those grievous.

Here are three testimonies of scripture alleged, of which the two former;
Act. 20. and 1. Pet. 5. we have seen sufficiently before; The Elders mentioned
Act. 20. and 1. Pet 5. were Pastoral Elders by our Brethrens own confession.
concerning those Elders, especially those that are mentioned, Act. 20. whether
they were all Bishops of Ephesus, in the proper sense of the name of Bishop:
but there the question was all of such Elders, as, whether they were all
equal, or no, yet were they all Pastoral Elders, Teachers, and Ministers of
the word and Sacraments. And our Brethren in this Learned Discourse, in their
treatise of the Pastors office have cited already for such Elders only,
these testimonies Act. 20. 1. Pet. 5. saying: page 19. Besides Doctors, there
must be Pastors ordained in every congregation, which have diverse
appellations in the scripture, as Ephesians. 4. they are called by the name of
Pastors, because they ought to feed the several flocks of Gods sheep
committed to their charge. As appears, Danaeus co^tradiction to our Br. for
the Elders in these places.
Act. 20.28. 1. Pet. 5.2. they are also called Elders etc. Again page, 21.22.
and 23. where at large they urge this, that all the functions of the Elders
mentioned, 1. Pet. 5. and Act. 20. is to be employed in such government only,
as is feeding, even as a Pastor does his sheep. And that therefore they are
called Bishops, Super-intendentes, or Ouer-seers. And yet see how boldly
Danaeus cites teese testimonies, for these governing and not teaching Elders.
Wherein, although our Brethren hold the truer opinion, and the text is plain
enough, that the elders there mentioned, were only such as meddled with the
word: yet the rather to move Danaeus with the judgment of Calvin also
thereupon: Calvin likewise in his Institutions ca. 8 sec. 4. treating of the
Pastors office, Caluinu^ in Instit. ca. 8. sect. 4.
says: Of these and other places which here and every where come to hand, The
Elders Act. 20. and P. 5
we may gather also that in the function of the Pastors, these are the
principal parts, to declare the Gospel, Calvin contrary to Danaeus for the
Elders. Act. 20.
and to minister the Sacraments But the manner of teaching consists not only
in public sermons, but pertains also to private admonitions. So does Paul
cite the Ephesians to be witnesses, that he shunned none of those things, that
were for their profit, but declared and taught them publicly, and by every
house, etc. And in the 42. Section he says: Calv. in Inst. ca. 8. sect. 42.
And in the Acts is rehearsed, that he called together the Ephesian Elders,
whom he himself in his oration names Bishops. Here now is to be observed.
Calvine confesses that the place Act. 20. is only of ministers of the word.
Caluinus in Act. 20. ver. 17.
that hethertoh we have reckoned up none, but those offices, that consist in
the ministry of the word. In his Co^mentarie indeed upon the same ver. 17. he
says: Moreover it shall more clearly appear out of the context, that the
Seniors are called, not they which were of old age, but they which ruled the
Church. But it is usual almost in all tongues, that they should be called
Ancients, and Fathers, which were the Governors to rule others, although their
Age did not alwaie: answer thereunto.

The Elders Governors
Here he speaks of governing Elders or Governors; which is the term, whereby
our Brethr. signify their Segniorie. But now, what manner of Governors or
governing Elders, makes he them to be? On these words, Vos scitis, etc. ver.
18. Ver. 18. These Elders that were governors and and correctors of ma^ners
were also teachers.
In this sermon ( says he) Paul chiefly with hereunto, that those whom he had
created the Pastors of Ephesus, he might by his example, exhort them to
perform their office faithfully. For so is the censure (or correction) of
manners made aright, and authority gotten to the doctrine, when the teacher
prescribes nothing with words, the which he has not before in the deed it
self performed. And so he goes on, applying S. Paul's words in every verse,
to Ministers and Pastors. And on the 26. verse, he says; Moreover this place
contains a brief sum of teaching orderly and well; and he exhorts the
Doctors themselves with a vehement and severe statute, that they should
diligently apply their office. And to this duty of the Pastors, in the next
verse he applies the sayings of Ezech. 3.18.20. till he come to the 28. verse,
Those who^ Danaeus calls governing and not teaching Elders Calvin calls
Pastors, Bishops and feeders with the word.
which Danaeus cites, where he concludes thus; Since the time they were
created Pastors, they are not their own men, but publicly bound to the whole
flock. And on these words; The holy Ghost has made you Bishops. Furthermore (
says he) although from the beginning the L. would have the Ministers of the
word chosen by voices: nevertheless he always chalengeth to himself the
government of the Church, etc. And as he says; We must breefly note this, of
the name of Bishop, that all the Ephesine Elders were of Paul so called: so
withal, we must note, that he said before in his Institutions: Whosoever
enjoys the ministry of the word, he gives them the title of Bishops. And
on these words; To rule the Church: The Greek word (...) signifies to feed:
Elders. 1. Pet. 5.
but by an apt similitude it is translated to any regiment. And on the 29.
verse; This is verily as it were the perpetual destiny of the Church, that it
should be vexed of wolves: wherefore there is never any time of sleeping.
Howbeitt, he more, and the more hurtful do break in; the more attentive
watches must be made of the Pastors, etc. And on the 30. ver. Then does the
synceritie of the word of God flourish, when the Pastors with a common study
do gather disciples unto Christ, etc. And in the 31. That he says, he warned
every one, may be as well referred to the common people, as to the Elders. For
since he had purposed to make his sermon common to the whole Church: he speaks
as though the whole body were present. Notwithstanding, if any had rather
restrain it to the order of the Pastors, etc. So that in all this assembly of
these Elders, he mentions still none other, but such as were Pastors and
Ministers of the word and sacraments. This place therefore, Act. 20. ( be it
spoken by Danaeus leave) is merely abused, for the proof of any Senate of not
teaching Elders

And the same answer serves to the other testimony, 1. Pet. 5.2. Our Breath.
sestimonie against Danaeus for the Elders 1. Pet. 5.
which likewise our Breath. join in this learned discourse, to their former
testim^^^e for Pastors only: page 19.22.25. and 32. And the like does Calvin
( with all other interpreters new and old) saying both in his Instit. ca. 13.
Sect. 7. Caluinus in Instit. ca. 13. sect. 7.
Peter therefore while he warns the Pastors of their office, exhorts them so
to feed the flock, that they exercise not a dominion over the Clergy. By
which name he signifies the inheritance of God, that is, the people of the
faithful. And in his Comm. While he would exhort the Pastors to their duty,
he notes chiefly three things, For the Elders 1. Pe. 5.
that are wont much to hinder the^, that is to wit, slothfulnes, desire of
getting gain and licentiousnes of governing. True it is, yt he afterward says
upon y^ name Elders: By this name he designeth Pastors, and whosoever were
appointed to the government of the Church: but they called them Elders or
Seniors for honors sake, not that all were old in age, but because they were
chiefly chosen out of old me^. For age has for the most part, Eue^ the
general name of ecl. Elders for governors exemplified by teachers.
more wisdom, gravity and experience. Howbeit because now and then (as is
said in the Greek proverb) The hoare hear is not wisdom: and there are young
men found that are more fit, such as Timothy was: it is received in use, that
they also are called Elders, after they are chosen into the order. When as
Peter likewise names himself an Elder, it appears that this name was
common, the which also is manifest more clearly in very many places.
Furthermore by this title he gets authority to himself: as though he said,
that of his own right he warned the Pastors because he himself was one of
them. For this mutual liberty ought to between them that are Colleagues.

Here he says that the name of Elder is a common name, not only for old age,
but of dignity. And he says, that the Apostle designeth in this name, Pastors
and whosoever are appointed to the regiment of the Church: but does he not
still restrain the understanding of it in this place, to such Governors only,
as either are Pastoral elders or to such teachers as himself (although he
were also an Apostle) was one in the same office of this Eldership, The office
of their Eldership consisting in feeding.
a Colleague among them? And what was their office of this Eldership that he
requires of them? But even that which follows in the second verse by
Danaeus cited: feed so much as li^th in ^ou the flock of God. And what was
the food wherewith these Elders should feed them so much as lay in them? Any
other than the doctrine of Gods word? Hereupon (says Calvin) we gather what
the name of Elder does import, to wit, that it contains in it the office of
feeding. The Pope creates his Elders far to an other end, that is to wit,
that they should daily offer up Christ. In their ordeyning there i^ no mention
of feeding. Let us therefore remember to discern the order of Christ, from the
confusion of the Pope, even as it were the light from darkness. The
definition also of the word ought to be holden. Because the flock of Christ
cannot be fed, but with pure doctrine which alone is the spiritual fodder.
Wherefore Pastors are not either dombe gho^^^s, or such as sprinkle their forged
tales, as it were deadly poison to kill the souls.

And upon this word (...); I doubt not ( says he) but that Peter would
express the office and name of a bishopric: it may also cut off other places
of scripture be gathered, The words of Peter spoken to feeders, haled to such
as are not feeders.
that these 2. Bishop and Elder, are names betokening one thing. He charge
them therefore, how they should rightly exercise the Pastoral office.

Who sees not hereby, that Calvin in this place restrayneth the name of Elder
to such only as were feeders of the people with the word, nor that Peter in
that place, speaks to any other officers? And to what purpose should he
charge those, to feed the people with the doctrine of the word, that were no
feeders, and meddled not at all with teaching? So that this testimony of Peter,
1. Pet. 5. makes nothing for any such eccl. Elders governing the Church and
not teaching, if rather it make not clean against them, being such
ecclesiastical Elders as be only dominium exercentes in Clerum; exercising
government over the Clergy, and do not pascere nor meddle at all with
feeding or teaching the people.

As for that which Danaeus gathers on these two testimonies, Act. 20. and 1.
Pet. 5. that the office of these Elders was to attend and watch both over the
doctrine and over the manners of the Church and of the faithful that are
therein, and especially in his parish, that is, in that part of the Church
that is peculiarly committed unto him: in what thing the attendance and
watching of the Elders consisted, in these foresaid places, we have fully
seen; Not only (as Danaeus says) over the doctrine and over the manners: but
as themselves expressing the example of the manners: so also feeding with the
doctrine so much as in them did lie. If they say, that is nothing at all,
because they were but Controllers and Ouer-seers of others, and themselves
meddled not with teaching: then were they not such Elders as S. Paul and S.
Peter do prescribe, but what means Danaeus by these words, his parish? The
several parishes of the Elders.
Which he expounds to be that part of the Church that peculiarly was
committed to him? Was there diverse parishes in those great Cities that he
speaks of, where he supposes a Senate of these Elders were, and that every
one of them had a part of the City assigned to his oversight, which was called
a Parish? And that all these Elders of several parishes, had some one great
and mother Church, wherein all these Elders held their Senate, Seignorie, or
Consistory? And can this also be proved out of these two places, or out of
the scripture, that the Apostles ordained any such Senate of governing and not
teaching Elders, of several parishes? If it could, how would this agree with
these our Brethren, that would have a Senate, Seniorie, or Consistory of
these Elders in every parish Church and Congregation, except they would bring
the whole City ( as London) but to one Congregation? But whereupon gathers
Danaeus this? Upon these testimonies, Act. 20. or 1* Pet. 5? No, he cites
them after in the conclusion of his former assertion. For when he had said: As
Daneus reports Sozomenus, there was but one Elder in every parish.
the second kind of Elders was wont to be ordained in every great City only,
wherein there was a large and populous Church, and a great number of the
faithful: he proves it thus; for every part of the City, and of the
Church, as it were a parish, had his own Elder. As it may be gathered. ex
Herm. Sozome. lib. 1. cap. 8. and the history of the ancient Church. These
last words, the history of the ancient Church, are too general. When the
places are particularly quoted, they may be better examined. And we have
examined a good many already. But we could find no such second kind of
Elders. And I am half a fraide before hand, that we shall find none even in
this place. And for trial, let us start aside, and see it.

The title of the Chapter shows the argument: An enumeration of the noble
acts of Constantine, Eccl. hist. Hermiae Sozomeni li. 1. cap. 2.
both in purchasing the liberty of the Christians, and in building of temples,
and other things beneficial to the commonweal. In which chapter among other
matters, he says: he builded also in the Palace a Church, and he made a tente
expressing the figure of a Church, the which he used to carry about with him
when he marched in battle against his enemies: to this end, that a Church
should not be wanting to him nor to the army, while he aboade in the
wilderness. In which Church they should praise God, they should call upon him
with their prayers, Sozomenus for these Elders.
and receive the holy mysteries. Nam (...).
Sacerdotes and Diaconi, etc. For the Priests and Deacons which according to
the institution of the Church should perform these functions, did continually
follow the Tabernacle. Ex eo tempore militaeres Romanorum ordines qui iam
vocantur Numeri, singuli sibi Tabernaculum separatum construxerunt,
hahueruntque secum (...).
and Sacerdotes and Diaconos, ad rem diuinam faciendam designatos. From that
time forth the military orders of the Romans, which are now called the
Numbers, every one of them builded a several Tabernacle, and had both Priests
and Deacons with them, appointed to execute the divine service.

This is all that Sozomenus has of this matter, and is not here a fair
proof, that in every greater City, wherein there was a fair and populous
Church, and magnus fidelium numerus, and a great number of the faithful, every
part of the City and Church had his Elder, whose office was to attend upon the
flock, and to watch both over the doctrine and over the manners of the Church,
and of the faithful that are therein, and especially in his Parish, that is,
in that part of the Church that is committed unto him. Indeed there is mention
made of some like words, that Danaeus gathers.

Danaeus miscollection of Sozomenus words.
Sozomenus tells, how Constantine made a Tabernacle or Tent expressing the
figure of a Church: thereupon Danaeus belike gathers these words; An ample and
a populous Church: except he gather that of the words before; As for that that
pertains to the holy Temples, they that were large enough, were repaired:
other were raised higher and made brother, not without increase of stateliness.

Sozomenus tells, how this Tabernacle was carried about in the wilderness,
while Constantine marched against his enemies: and Danaeus gathers belike of
this Wilderness, a great City. Except also he gather that of the words
before: Moreover, out of the land which was tributarie in every City, he took
the rated tribute, that was wont to be paid to the Eschequer (or Treasury)
and distributed it to the Churches and to the Clergy: which gift he enacted by
Law to be ratified for ever.

Sozomenus tells of the military orders of the Romans: and Danaeus belike
gathers thereupon, the flock of the faithful.

Sozomenus tells, that these military orders of the Romans were those which
were then called; (...), Numeri, Numbers: and Danaeus belike gathers
thereupon, that there was Magnus fidelium numerus, A great number of the
faithful.

Sozomenus tells, that From that time forth every one of these military
Orders builded a several Tabernacle to themselves: and Danaeus belike
gathers thereupon these words, Every part or parish of the City and of the
Church.

Sozomenus tells, how they had these 2. eccl. orders, Sozomenus mistaken,
Sacerdotes and Diaconos, sacred Priests and Deacons with the^: and Danaeus
belike gathers here upon, Secundum genus Presbyterorum, the second kind of
Elders, Priests, or Presbyters.

Sozomenus tells, how these did follow the Tabernacles, and were designed
according to the Institution of the Church, to execute the divine service and
perform these functions; to wit, to praise God, to call upon him with prayers,
and to minister the Sacraments: and Danaeus hereupon belike does gather, that
their office was to attend the flock, and to watch both over the doctrine and
over the manners os the Church, and of the faithful that are therein, each one
in the parish, part, or region committed to him.

Verily, except Danaeus gather these his collections, on these words of
Sozomenus ( for they be the words that me thinks come nearest unto his) I know
not on what words else, he can make this collection. But to conster Danaeus to
the best: (as he is our Reverend Brother, and excellent learned Father in the
Lord: so, Bonus aliquando dormitat Homerus,) he ouertrusted and followed too
much some others ill collection, and considered not the place himself, and so
might easily be abused. Which least we also in so weighty a matter might be,
The lack of through serching, the cause of our Br. mistaking.
especially on the trust of so notable a man (as, I am afraid, too many of our
Brethren be, running too much on the credit of such a credible party): it
stands us upon (craving evermore pardon of him and all our betters) to search
better the places, our selves, that are alleged; and to see, whether they be
rightly alleged, yea, or no. If yea: then humbly, (so far forth as is
requisite) to yield unto them, be the party never so mean, that does
allege them. If no: then modestly to dissent from them, and not allow them,
be the parties otherwise never so learned. Christ bids us, to Search, yea,
the very Scriptures: and so shall we find whether they be well or ill
alleged. And the Baeroeans are even therefore commended, for that daily they
searched the Scriptures, to see, whether those things were so, Act. 17.11.
that S. Paul had preached. And then must our Br. be content to give us leave,
if we examine these testimonies by the originals, which in this place also when
we have done, (besides a number of other gross escapes,) what is here for ye
proof of these Co^sistorie governing and not teaching Elders? The Elders that
Sozomenus me^tioneth were teaching elders.
Is this Elder now become (...), Sacerdos, a sacred Priest, the executer of the
divine service, and a minister of the holy mysteries? Well the^, since we find
not as yet these Elders here; let us return again to Danaeus search for the^ in
the scripture.

The third testimony of Scripture that here he cited, was Act. 21.18. Danaeus
testimony for for these elders. Act. 21.18.
And when we were come to Jerusalem ( says S. Luke, verse 17.) the Brethren
did receive us gladly. But the next day Paul entered in with us unto James; and
all the Elders were assembled.

Act. 21.18.
Here are again Elders named, and an assembly of them all at Jerusalem. But
whether these Elders were only governors and not medlers with teaching of the
word, that is not mentioned. Neither is there any circumstance, that should
incline to such opinion of them, but rather to the clean contrary. The
probabilities that the Elders mentioned Act. 21.18. were teachers.
Calvin says: out of this place we may gather, that which we had in the 15.
chapter, that so often as any weighty business was to be treated upon, the
Seniors were wont to come together, that the consultation might be the more
orderly composed without the multitude. We shall afterward see in their order
that the people were admitted. Howbeit, after that the Seniors had had their
Innermore Counsel.

Since therefore these Seniors consultation with the Apostles, was not only
about manners and discipline, but about principal points of the substance of
doctrine: and withal, that Calvin refers us to these Seniors (or Elders)
in the counsel holden at Jerusalem, Act. 15. where Calvin said before, as he
says here, that all the Church was not gathered: sed eos qui doctrina and
iudicio pollebant, and qui ex ratione officij, huius causae legitimi erant
iudices: but those that excelled in doctrine and judgment, and they that by
reason of their office, were the lawefull judges of this cause: what
likelihoode is there, that these Elders meddled not with teaching the doctrine,
which excelled in the doctrine, and in judgment, and by their offices were the
lawful judges, in the decision of the controversies of doctrine?

But since the oration that is made unto Paul, Act. 21. is by S. Luke set
down in the name of them all: albeit some one among them spoke it in their
names: These Elders were exhorters of Paul.
and they were such as of whom Calvin says, upon these their words to Paul:
Thou see (brother) how many thousands, etc. Moreover, they exhort him, that
taking upon him a solemn vow, he should purge himself, etc. There is no
doubt, but that zeal of the Law was faulty: and verily the Elders do
sufficiently declare, that they liked it not. For although they do not openly
condemn it, neither yet complain thereon more sharply: nevertheless, because
they separate themselves from their affection, secretly they confess that they
do err. If it had been a zeal according to knowledge, They were such as from
who^ knowledge should begin.
it ought to have begun from them. But they strive not for the Law it self,
nor they pretend just reverence thereof, nor they subscribe unto them that were
zealous of the same, as they call them: therefore they insinuate that they
think otherwise, and that they like not the peoples superstition. But this
ouerthwarteth it, They were such as were not of the people, but distinct from
them.
that they say Paul was burdened with a false infamy. Furthermore, when they
exact of him a satisfaction, they seem to nourish that zeal, etc.

And again: Neither verily was the liberty of Paul unknown to the Elders,
when as therefore they knew the matter well, only this they will, Act. 21. and
15.
that it should be witnessed to the unskillful and rude, that Paul purposed
nothing less, than that he should bring the Jews to the contempt of the
law. Wherefore they look not upon the bare matter, but knowing what was the
peoples judgment of Paul, by reason of the malicious backbitings: they desire
to remedy it. Although I know not whether they required this of Paul more
importunatlie than was meet. But heerevppon it appears, how preposterous is
the credulity (or light belief) of men, in taking hold of slanders: and how
stiflie an ill opinion once rashly conceived, cleaves fast. There is no
doubt but that James and his colleagues did their indeauor to defend the fame
of Paul. And again; in the mean season we see how modestly the Seniors
behaved themselves in nourishing concord: while in good time they prevent the
peoples offense, except in that they bear peradventure too much with their
weakness, in exacting a vow of Paul. But this moderation is to be kept in
the Church, that the Pastors should indeed excel in authority: but they
should not rule proudelie, nor despise the residue of the body. For the
distinction of their orders, which is the bond of peace, ought not to be the
cause of discord.

What can be more clear than this, that these Elders which spoke these
things, and took this authority in these matters upon them, were Pastors? As
Calvin in plain words applies all their doings unto Pastors. And yet this
more appears in his observation of that which follows on the 23. verse: Do
this therefore that we say unto thee, we have four men which have made a
vow, etc. Although it may be, These elders Act. 21. are here plainly called
Doctors.
that these ( he means the four men) were as yet nouices and that therefore
their faith as yet were tender, and scarce well framed, whereupon the Doctors
(or teachers) suffered them to perform the vow, that by ignorance they had
rashly vowed.

In these words, the Elders that before he called James and his colleagues, and
of their doings gathered the rule and authority of the Pastors: he plainly
here calls Doctors and teachers. And therefore what kind of Elders these
were under James and the Apostles at Jerusalem, we need seek no further, it
is manifest they were not governors that meddled not with teaching, but with
oversight of doctrine, and with correction of manners and discipline only:
for as they were teachers, and here taught, though not so well: so, their
chiefest meddling was with teaching. And that their selves testify in the
conclusion of their Oration, saying: For as touching those of the Gentiles that
have believed, ^e have written, decreeing that they should keep no such thing,
etc.

If our Brethren reply, that that decree went in the name not only of the
Apostles and Elders, but also of the brethren, which in the verse before, Act.
15.22. he calls the whole Church: and yet, we cannot conclude hereon, that
therefore the whole Church were teachers: Calvin ( referring us to that, which
he noted on that decree) says, on the 22. ver, Act. 15. Not without the
singular grace of God was that tempest ceased, that the cause being well
discussed, all should descend into the consent of the true doctrine. The
modesty also of the common people is gathered hereupon, that after they had
permitted the judgment unto the Apostles, and to the residue of the Doctors
(or teachers): then also the people subscribed unto their decree. The Apostles
also on the other side, gave a show of their equity, because they established
nothing concerning the common cause of all the godly, but the people being
admitted thereunto. For, verily, of the pride of the Pastors this tyranny has
sprung, that those things which pertain to the common state of the whole
Church, have been subject (the people being thrust out) unto the will, that I
might not say unto the lust of a few men. But the Apostles and the Elders did
prudentlie decree, that Judas and Silas should be sent, to the end the matter
might be less suspected.

Concerning this complaint we have already answered: and let them give the
people no more than the notice and approbation, so that the debating and
determining be referred to the authority of those that succeed the Apostles
and the Elders, that are Doctors and Pastors, meddling only with such matters as
are these, not with the affairs and authority of Princes: and we can be
content to afford the people no less, being such modest and godly people as
these were. But our question is now, what were these Elders? ( For here are but
three sorts reckoned up, the Apostles, the Elders, and the whole Church, or the
brethren. Forsooth (still says Calvin) the Doctors and the Pastors. And for
other kind of Elders governing and not teaching among them, we hear as yet of
none.

But Danaeus cites another testimony out of the Scripture, Danaeus testimony
for those Elders.
for proof of these Elders, saying:

For they ought to have that admonition of Paul always before their cies,
that if there be any thing honest, right and holy before GOD, they should
inculcate (or often urge) the same unto the faithful. Phi. 4. verse. 8. and it
ought to take place in Gods Church. Phil. 4. v. 8.


This testimony is so little serving for these governing and not teaching
Elders, that except they would have us think, the Epistle was only, or
especially written unto such Elders: I cannot see how it is more appliable
unto them, than unto any others, or how it can be proved heerevppon, that
there were any such Elders in that Church. First, the Epistle it self is
written to none such, as appears by the first verse: Paul and Timothy the
servants of Jesus Christ, unto all the Saints in Christ Jesus, which are at
Philippus, with the Bishoppos and the Deacons. Phil. 4.8.
Here is none of these Elders not meddling with teaching, named. For although
Beza and the Geneua Bible would include them in the name of Bishops, which
is very hard: notwithstanding since we have heard, how Calvin ( even where
he takes all these names confusedly) does say in his Institutions, Cap. 8.
Sec. 42. Caluinus in institus. cap. 8. sec. 42.
But as concerning Bishops, and Elders, and Pastors, and Ministers, in that I
have called them without difference: I did it by the use of the Scripture,
which confounds these terms. For whosoever enjoy the ministry of the
word, unto them it attributes the title of Bishops. And heereto he adds
this testimony for proof, Phil. 1. a. 1. therefore, howsoever they would
include Elders here in the name of Bishops, yet can they understand no such
Elders, as Danaeus and our Brethren plead for, but such only as inioye the
ministry of the word.

But what is there in this testimony, Phil. 4.8. that should be properly
pertaining to an Elders office? Phil. 4.8.
That which remains (Brethren) whatsoever things are true, whatsoever are
weighty, whatsoever are righteous, whatsoever are pure, whatsoever are honest,
if there be any virtue, if there be any praise: think of these things
which ye have learned, and have received, and have heard, and have seen in
me. Do these things, and the God of peace shall be with you. Can any thing
be gathered out of these words, that is peculiar to an Ecclesiastical Elders
office? Calvin says: General exhortations follow, which are stretched to
the whole life. And yet if they were peculiar to Elders, and that they should
do, all that which they learned, and received, and heard, and saw in Saint
Paul: When Calvin says, By this repetition of words he signifies, that he
was continual in preaching these things, as though he should say, this was
my doctrine, this was my tradition, this was my speech among you: And on these
words: Ye have seen in me: but this is the first thing in a preacher, that
he should not only speak with his mouth, but with his life, and with his
goodness of his life get credit to his doctrine: Paul therefore worthily
gets authority to his exhortation thereupon, that he was a guide and
master of virtues with his life, no less than with his mouth: And therefore
if this be spoken to Ecclesiastical Elders, and if they should do the like
action: how should they not be such Elders, as taught not only with their
lives, but with their mouths also, exhorting and preaching the doctrine? But
what need better testimony, than Danaeus against himself? When he says:
These Elders should inculcate this saying of Saint Paul unto the faithful?
For, what else is this inculcation, but their often teaching of the people, the
things contained in that sentence? But Danaeus ( belike not perceiving how he
confutes himself) proceeds, saying:

2. Tim. 3.
Danaeus other allegations for Elders all which also are clean against him.
But these Elders ought to watch both pri^atlie by every house, and publikelie
in the assembly of the Church. Act. 20. verse. 20. Act. 20.
Augustine there fore in his fifty Homilies, Homily the 5. anc 7. teaches,
Aug. in hom. 50. hom. 5. and 7.
that that saying of Esaie, Cry, cease not: pertains not only to the
Bishops, but also to the Elders. For, when many mischeifes may be done at
home: and they that corrupt the faithful are wont also to enter into houses,
as Paul says, 2. Tim. 3. ve. 6. It is the office of them that watch, to look
also house by house, least either the good doctrine or the holy manners be
corrupted. But of those things that may be done amiss in houses, there is
example, 1. Pet. 3. verse 3. But of those that edify evil publicly, there is
example, 1. Cor. 14 verse. 34. and 35.

Not one of these places mencioneth any such Elders, as are Ecclesiastical
governors and not teachers, neither can they be haled, but with violence, to
them. The 20. of the Acts, we have seen and seen again to the full, how it
is all of such Elders, as were teachers of the word. The place in Augustine
we have likewise seen. And that of Esaie is so apparaunt for teachers and
preachers of the word, that I a^ even ashamed that so learned a man should (of
all places) allege that, Esa. 58.
for not teaching Elders, which speaks of such crying out, exalting the voice
like a trumpet, and telling the people of their sins.

As for this, 2. Tim. 3. verse. 6. wherein Saint Paul having described the
wicked hypocrites of these later days, that should trouble the Church of God,
he says: For of these there are, that craftily enter into houses, and lead
women captive, laden with sins, the which are lead with diverse lusts,
always learning, etc. Whereupon says Calvin, You would say, that Paul
here of purpose painted out a lively pourtraiture of Monkerie. But to omit
the name of Monks: the notes themselves with the which Paul sets out the
false and counterfaite Doctors or teachers, are open enough. Their insinuation
or creepings into householdes, their baits in taking women, their dishonest
flattery, their leading them about by diverse superstitions. It behooves us to
mark diligently these notes, if we desire to discern between the
unprofitable drones, and the good ministers of Christ.

Here Calvin would have us diligently to mark the difference, between
these false and counterfeit teachers, and the good Ministers of Christ:
Difference of the false teacher and true teacher
not between them and these Elders, that would have Ecclesiastical
government, and not meddle with teaching. For me thinks, they rather seem to
resemble those Monks, than any Elders, that Saint Paul there would have, to
oppose themselves against these false teachers. For who should better set
himself against them, than a Bishop or an Elder that is a good Minister of
Christ, and a true teacher? And therefore he wills Timothy ( being a
teaching Elder,) to take notice of them, saying, verse. 1. But know thou this,
that in the last days, perilous times shall approach, men shall be lovers of
themselves, etc. And having described these wicked teachers: he stirs up
Timothy to oppose himself against them, verse. 10. saying: But thou have
attained my doctrine, institution, purpose, faith, tollerance, love, patience,
etc.

And here upon says Calvin: This argument also does he use to stir up
Timothy, that he shall not come forth into the combat, a rude and unskillful
young soldier: being such an one as Paul himself had long time trained up
in his discipline. Neither only is doctrine handled, for the things that he
reckons up together, do add no small weight, insomuch that in this sentence
he does paint out unto us the lively Image of a good Doctor (or teacher) to
wit, such an one as informs and instructs his Disciples, not only with
his speech, but opens his breast also after a sort unto them, that they may
understand, that the things which he teaches, he teaches them even as he
thinks.

He^e then are these two lively Images, the one of the false teacher, entering
into houses, and corrupting them: the other of the good teacher, opposing
himself against the false teacher. But between good teacher and false teacher
of these houses; where is this Elder that is no teacher? Is there any thing
either in the text, or that Calvin, or any other good or badde interpreter
alleges, that makeeth for him?

As for the example, 1. Pet. 3. verse. 3. Danaeus testimony 1. Pet. 3. makes
nothing for Eccl. Elders that are not teachers.
That things may be done amiss at home: is nothing for proof, that any of
these Elders, Ecclesiastical governors and not teachers, or that any their
Segnorie, should come into men's houses, and there take view of their wives
apparel, and control it. Only Saint Peter ( in giving this sober and
general exhortation unto women, saying: Whose attire let it not be outward in
folding or breidring of their hair, in decking themselves with gold and
ornature of vestiments^s) shows how the grave and discreet Minister or
Preacher, may give private or public exhortation, by the examples in the word
of God, when he sees a fault herein. But not that he has authority to go
into their houses, to ouersee with what apparel they trim themselves
withal. But whatsoever the Minister may do, what is this to these Elders,
that would be master controllers and rulers of every body, men and women,
even in their own houses, but not teachers of them?

The other place, 1. Corinthians. 14.34. and 35. for the women's part, Danaeus
testimonies 1. Cor. 14.34. and 35. are likewise nothing for Eccl. Elders not
teachers
we have meetelie well perused already. As for governing Elders not teachers,
to be their controllers, neither those verses, nor all the Chapter mencioneth
any. And why should they not be controllers over the men's faults there
mentioned, as well as over the women's? But there is none such at all, that the
Apostle there speaks of, other than the ordinary teachers to whom the
public reprehension did belong. James. 5.14. for these Elders.
Which in the former cited Chapter, 2. Tim. 3.16. and 4.2. he makes to
pertain unto the teacher and Minister of the word of God, and not to any
governing Elder not teaching, who may better be called an unpreaching Prelate,
than any of the Popish Bishops. Especially since Beza and the Geneua Bible
gives them the term of Bishops also, besides this of Presbyter, Priest, or
Elder.

Danaeu^ testimony for the^e Elders out of Ia. 5. and 14.
But Danaeus has yet one other testimony for them, saying: But the Elders
ought to watch both over the hoale and over the sick, and afflicted by all
manner of mean. For it is the office of the Elder to comfort the sick, and to
pray for them, and for other godly also afflicted. James. 5 verse. 5.14.

The fifth verse has no mention at all of any Elders, nor medleth with any
watching over* either hoale or sick. Except these Elders would be such, as of
whom he says: Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and in wantonness: ye
have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter. I hope yet better then
so, of their vnteaching Elders. But in the 14. ver. there indeed is mention of
better Elders. Where the Apostle says: Is any sick among you? let him call
f^r the Elders of the Church, and let them pray for him, etc. Here the Elders
of the Church are named. But whether these Elders were such, as meddled not with
the word and Sacraments, but only with the discipline and government of the
Church: there is no mention at all made by the Apostle.

I know here what Calvin says, I comprehend generally all those ( says
he) that were set over the Church to govern it. Caluines opinion for these
Elders D^naeus contrary to Calvin.
For not only the Pastors were called Elders, but those that were chosen out
of the common people, as it were censors or controllers, to defend the
discipline. For every Church had as it were her Senate, chosen out of grave
men, and of approved integrity. But because the manner was to choose chiefly
them that were endued with more excellent gifts, therefore he bids them
call for the Elders, as in whom most of all, the force and grace of the holy
Ghost showed forth it self.

This is Caluines opinion for these Elders. Howbeit this is but his judgment,
and still consists all on this mere presupposalll, that every Church had a
Senate of such Elders. But we need no further confutation of that
presupposall, than Danaeus own testimony, that cites this place of James for
these Elders. For (as we have heard) Danaeus, on the other side of the leaf
said before: The second kind of Elders was wont to be ordained in every
greater City only, in the which there was an ample and populous Church, and
a great number of the faithful. Which if it were true but even so far forth,
then is Caluines saying not true, that eu^rie Church had as it were her Senate
of these Elders. Albeit, they both agree herein, James. 5.
that Saint James meant such kind of governing Elders as were not teachers.
But how can we make that good in Danaeus, if every Church had not such
Elders. And yet in every Church some sickned: but these Elders, by Danaeus
testimony were in few Churches: for there were but few such greater Cities
and ample populous Churches, wherein great multitudes of the faithful were:
Aretius judgment of what Elders James speaks.
and therefore by Danaeus own witness against himself, this rule of Saint
James stretches not unto these Elders, except in such few places, where he
supposes they were: though he have not, nor can prove it. But rules
(especially those that be general touching all men) are not made for few
places.

And therefore this rule of Saint James was not for any such Elders. So that,
much better than both these (in my simple opinion) is Aretius his judgment
upon this place. Is there any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of
the Church. The third place ( says he) is of the care of those that are sick
in the assembly (or company) of the faithful. But he teaches, that the
manner of healing and comforting the sick, ought to be made for the health of
the sick, with the fruit also of them that stand about him. Concerning the
sick party, he ought to call for the Elders of the Church, that is, of his
company or assembly: at this day we should call it* Viciniae Seniores
aliqu^s, some Seniories (or Elders) of the neighborhood (or of the street or
village near adjoining) with some Minister of the Church, among whom some
Physician may have a room. For neither do I here take the Seniors or Elders to
be those anointed only and shaven, which are sacrificers and Monks, neither
also an Ecclesiastical Senate, quem (...) quadam, whom of a certain ill
zeal, some go about to represent. But I take the Seniors of the church to be
grave and godly men in the whole assembly. The Elders that James speaks to
be of no one certain office either Ecclesiastical or lay persons.
Whose godliness I know (or like of) whether they be lay men, or they be in
the Ministry, or also they be Physicians, yea, or else otherwise. To
conclude, I call the godly and sound hearted the ancient men. For in these is
greater experience of things, greater force of comforting, greater affection
also, of having compassion, and more sound counsels than in young men.

Thus plainly and simply, says Aretius of these Elders, that S. James would
have the sick party, to send for his elderlie neighbors and friends, men of
gravity and experience, that can give the sick good counsel. As for
governors of discipline, or controllers of manners, or an Ecclesiastical
Senate to be sent for, and to come to every man's house when he lies sick and
in danger of death: what use is there of them? Whereas of his acquaintance and
good neighbors there may be great use, especially of the Pastoral Elders.

And therefore Hemingius says well, Accerset Praesbyteros tanquam animae
medicos, Let him send for the Elders, as for the Physicians of the soul, to
give him some spiritual consolation out of the word of God, of the which then
he shall have most need, and to strengthen and confirm his faith and hope in
Christ, to move him to repentance, to patience, and to call upon God for the
forgiveness of sins in his life passed, to persuade him to a readynesse to
forsake the world and this transitory life, and to desire (according to Gods
will) to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, and to call upon him while his
strength and understanding, and memory serves him) to dispose of his worldly
goods, and make his will, and with the assembly to make the public prayers to
God for him: who fitter to do all these things, than the Elders that are
Ministers of the word?

Besides, that Calvin makes this anointing of him with oil, Caluines own
testimony, that these Elders were Ministers of a te^porarie Sacrament and so
teachers.
in the name of the Lord, to have been a temporary Sacrament, saying: Verily
I grant, that it was used for a Sacrament of the Disciples of Christ (for I
assent not unto them, that think it was a medicine) but even as the verity of
this sign endured not but for a time, I say, the sign was likewise
temporary. If then this were a Sacrament serving for that time: it seems so
much the more, that those Elders then were teachers, since the action of making
the prayers over him, and of the anointing of him with oil is attributed to
those Elders. For, the public or solemn prayers, especially the ministration
of the Sacraments in the Church of Christ, does principally, and (as our
Brethren themselves say) does only belong to him, that is a teacher and
Minister of the word. And that it can be no better than sacrilege, to
separate the ministration of preaching of the word, from the Sacraments etc.
and that a word or writing may be available without a seal, but never, a
seal without a writing, page. 61. And that, where is no Preacher of the word,
there ought to be no Minister of the Sacraments. Furthermore, it appertains
to the duty to make prayers, etc. page. 6^.

Since therefore these things are here ascribed to the doings of these Elders of
the Church, that the sick party is willed to send for: is it not yet more
likely than any of al these opinions, that by these Elders are meant pastoral
Elders? Otherwise, how would not our Br. own words in this learned Discourse,
beat down Danaeus, saying? Therefore in this behalf, we have had a great
default so long time, Our Bre. discoursers confute Danaeus.
to commit the administration of the Sacraments to those men, who not only
have been known to be unable, but also have been forbidden to preach the word.
page. 61. And what other were these Elders ( by their description of them) but
such as meddled not with preaching the word, nor it pertained at all unto their
office, but only government of discipline, and controlment of manners? And yet
see now when they can find them no where, rather than they should not be
found, they will call them to the making of the prayers over the sick, Act.
14.23.
and to the ministration of that temporary Sacrament. Yea, our Bre. these
Learned Discoursers their selves in plain words, page. 22. ascribe this
saying of James, to the action and office of the Pastors. Since therefore, what
kind of Elders these were (mentioned Iam. 5.14.) the text expreslie (other than
by these conjectures) names not: nor it is agreed upon among these learned
men: What firm argument can be gathered hereon, for the proof of these
governing and not teaching elders? If not rather (as we have seen) far more
probability every way to the clean contrary, yt they were teaching Elders.
And now, seeing yt, as neither before in the authority, proof, or place in
any of the acts or examples of the Apostles* we find any evident example, or
plain precept, or institution in the church of Christ, set forth in ye holy
Scriptures, of these Ecclesiastical Elders, governing the discipline, and
controlling the manners of the Church, but not meddling with teaching nor
preaching of the word and doctrine, nor ministering of the Sacraments. Let us
now return from them to our Br. learned discourse, if they perhaps have yet
any better proof after al these, for the authorizing and setting up amongst
us, ye Co^sistories and Segnories of these governing and not teaching Elders.

We have heard how our Br. have alleged the 14. of the Acts. ver. 23. upon the
which we have seen Caluines judgment to the contrary, Our brethr. return
for proof of these Elde^s to the ^ormer alleg^tion. Act. 14.23.
that the Elders there mentioned were only pastoral Elders. We have heard also
their allegation, 1. Tim. 5.17. and of the three ^^ings, that (they say) we
may learn thereon, and that the same testimony infers none of all those
three things And hereupon, because Calvin on the same testimony cites
Ambrose ( which is cited also of Beza) I have both examined the place in
Ambrose, and the other allegations of Beza out of Cyprian, and a number of
other Fathers and histories for the search of these Elders. Which not yet
finding, I have returned to the Scripture, to search what places any other of
our Bre namely Beza, Calvin, and Danaeus ( which chiefly write upon this
matter) have alleged. And not yet finding any sufficient proof of the^, till
some other of our Brethren shall bring better proof, or prove these places
better, I am now come again where we began, to the 14. of the Acts, verse. 23.
because our Bre. here will further yet again reuiew the same.

And especially in the place before alleged for election, The learned Dis.
Page 85. and 86.
there is great reason to lead us to think, that the Elders for government,
are as well understood, as the other for doctrine, because it is written in the
same place, That after they had ordained them Elders in every congregation by
election: as having set the Churches in perfect order* (which could not be,
except they had established discipline so well as doctrine) they committed them
to the Lord, in whom they believed. Act. 14.23.


This great reason is nothing but our Brethrens over great presupposall, that
except there were such Elders ordained, Bridges.
there were no perfect order set, Moderating these Elders.
nor discipline established in the churches. Which great reason lies all on
the great and common fallation, Pe^itio principij, reasoning on that, as on a
great and granted principle, which is a great and principal question. They
might well have set the churches in perfect order, and have established
discipline in them, without ordaining any Consistory or Segnorie, of such
Elders or governors as meddle not with teaching. For what would it have hurt
the perfection of order, and establishment of discipline in the churches, if
all the Elders that they ordained, had been teachers to (as Calvin says they
were)? Albeit Saint Luke in that place mencioneth not of any perfection of
orders, or of discipline established at all. But only says the text in this
23. verse here mentioned: The text me^cioneth not that the Apostles set the
Churches in perfect order and established discipline.
And ordaining with the hands, Elders unto them (Church) by Church, making
prayers with fastings, they commended them unto the Lord, on whom they
believed. Did Saint Paul in all the Churches where he went preaching (yea,
though some of them were famous Churches, and in some of them he lay long, as
at Corinth) set the churches in perfect order, and established discipline in
them as well as doctrine? How then does he write unto the Corinthians of so
many things, that (as it plainly appears by his reproving, teaching and
ordering of them) were not before set in such order, nor established? No nor yet
all things (as concerning the perfection of order, and establishment of
discipline) were contained in his Epistles afterward written unto them, but yt
he says: he would ^et an order of other things at his coming to them. 1. Cor.
11.34. which we expound not (with the adversaries of the Gospel) for matter of
doctrine, but for order and discipline And therefore it is not so great a
reason, as should lead our Brethren to think that Paul and Barnabas
tarrying so small a while in every place, that then they went unto, did set
such perfect orders and establish discipline in those meaner churches. But
since our Br. here do urge this place no further, than that there is great
reason to lead us so to think: and we see also some reason, to lead us to
think the contrary: whether theers or ours be greater, yea, whether theirs
be any great or small, and whether Calvin himself be not of force to
overrule this so slender a reason of theirs, saying, Not of some among them,
but of all of them. I interpret Elders in this place, to be those, to whom
the office of teaching was enjoined: Which interpretation if it be true, then
whether by any reason they could be such Elders, as were governors only,
and not teachers. I refer to the readers, yea, to our Brethrens own)
indifferent judgment, and proceed to their second point of moderating these
Elders.

The second point for moderation of the Elders authority, in such sort that
their sentence may be the sentence of the Church, The learned Dis. Page 86.
is this: that when the Consistory has travailed in examining of causes
pertaining to Ecclesiastical discipline, and agreed what judgment ought to
pass upon the matters, they propounde it to the whole multitude, The popular
state.
that it may be confirmed by their consent.

This second point draws somewhat nearer to a moderation of the Elders
authority, than the former did. Bridges.
But how agrees this with the former moderation of them? For before, although
they should be elected and chosen by the consent of the whole congregation: yet
the whole church was to repose such confidence in them, that they commit unto
them their authority, not only in hearing and examining, but also in
determining of all matters, pertaining to discipline and government in that
congregation. If therefore these Elders shall have authority to do all this,
how is it here said, that when the consistory has travailed in examining of
causes, pertaining to Ecclesiastical discipline, and agreed what judgment
ought to pass upon the matters: they propounde it to the whole multitude, that
it may be confirmed by their consent If the whole multitude have before hand
committed unto them their authority, to determine all matters: why should
they be brought to the whole multitude back again, to have that confirmed,
that before was determined, and that by their own authority was committed
unto these Elders to determine? And what authority have they reserved and
left unto themselves herein, to confirm by their consent, after these
committies have determined the matter? For what if the whole multitude shall
dissent? Have they all, or some, or the greater part of them, a negative voice,
to dash all that these Elders have before determined? And how is not this then
a plain Popular state, when in all matters, none excepted, not only
pertaining to discipline, but also to government, the chief and last
authority consists in ye co^firmatio^, no not yet of ye prince, but of the
whole multitude.

We feared before (...), the dominion of a few persons in this Seniorie. And
therefore our Brethren to moderate and reduce them ad (...), to the government
of the best men, The reducing of al to the popular state.
which our brethren call men of godliness and wisdom: they have now so
moderated the matter, that they have brought all ad (...), to the popular
regiment not only of the common people, but of the whole multitude. And all
under pretense, that the Bishops before did some things more than they should,
separated from other by themselves, in the Ecclesiastical discipline. And now
they have so excluded this separate government of the Bishops, that withal,
they have clean cut off the Monarchy and supreme government of the Prince and
all, yea, of these Seniors determination and all, and given all matters
pertaining to the discipline and government of every particular congregation,
to the assembly of the common people, yea, to the final consent and
confirmation of the whole multitude of the congregation.

It is much, to debase the authority and government of these matters to the
popular state. But I fear very much a worse estate, and more horribly
confused. S. Paul's excommunication. 1 Cor. 5.
For why may we not here again fear as horrible confusion in the whole
multitudes dissent or confirmation of that which these Seniors have determined:
as our Brethren before feared it, in hearing and determining such matters? But
to put us out of this fear, and to confirm this confirmation of the whole
multitude, that the people can confirm this themselves without any horrible
confusion: our brethren allege us an example.

The learned disc page 86
Whereof Saint Paul speaks, touching the execution of excommunication
(because the fact was manifest) When you are gathered together with my spirit
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to deliver such a one unto Satan.

1. Cor. 5.4.
Although this example is but of one matter, whereas the question is of al
matters (for so said our Brethren before, Bridges.
that there ought to be in every Church a Consistory or Segnorie of Elders or
governors, which ought to have the hearing, examination, and determining of al
matters, pertaining to discipline and government of that congregation) and so
this example touching the execution of excommunication reaches not home: yet
is this example so little to the present purpose, that it is rather clean
contrary. Which example if it should directly pro^e, that which our Br.
affirmed (for so their words would seem to infer, saying: Whereof S. Paul
speaks touching the execution of excommunication) they should prove this:
that when the Consistory has travailed in examining of causes pertaining to
Ecclesiastical discipline, and agreed what judgment ought to pass upon the
matters: they propound it to the whole multitude, that it may be confirmed by
their consent. So that this example of some matter at the least, heard,
examined, and determined by the Consistory, and by them propounded to the whole
multitude, to be confirmed by their consent, might draw nearer to their
purpose. But can they show us any such example, whereof Saint Paul speaks?
As for this touching the execution of excommunication: Who did execute the
same, and excommunicate this incestuous person? S. Paul by his separate
authority gave se^te^ce of excommunication before the Corinthians knew of his
doing.
Did not S. Paul himself, by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ given unto
him? What* do they make Saint Paul an Elder not teaching? And did he it not
first alone? At leastwise, without any Consistory of the church of Corinth
joined with him? As he himself says, ver. 3. For I verily, being absent in
body, but present in spirit, have already judged as present, him that has so
done this thing. In which words he plainly declares that he had passed the
sentence of excommunication upon him, before he wrote to the^ thereof. Neither
does it appear that any of their Co^sistorie joined with him, in pronouncing
that his judgment on him. Yea, he says, that although he was in body absent
from them, yet because he was in spirit as present with them, his judgment
should stand as effectual, as though he had been bodily present, at the
denouncing of his sentence.

And who were these that he writes thus unto, what he had done? Was it to a
Consistory among the Corinthians, to make relation unto them of his doing, and
then they to take upon them the hearing, examining and determining of the
matter, and then to propou^d it to the whole multitude? This had been yet
somewhat nearer to our Brethrens moderation. But here is no such order. Paul
first does the deed, and that imediatlie, both in his absence, and unwitting
to them of his proceeding. Which done, he writes not thereof to any
Consistory or Segnorie of Elders or Governors over them, nor in any place of
either of his Epistles to them, he makes any mention or inkling of any such
among them, nor yet Saint Luke, that mencioneth (Act. 18. verse. 11.) how he
tarried a year and a half, teaching the word of God (and planting a Church)
among them. But he writes of this matter (as of the residue) to them to whom
he writes the whole Epistle indefinitlie, to the Church of God being at
Corinthus, No such Co^sistorie among the Corinthians
sanctified in Christ Jesus, called Saints, with all that call upon the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, in all places, both their Lord and ours. 1. Cor. 1.2. So
that, he writes to the wholde multitude. But did he write unto them thereof,
to have his doing so confirmed by their consent, that if they would not have
consented to this his manner of excommunicating the person before hand by
himself alone, but that he should first have made them privy thereto, or
ever he proceeded so far, that then upon this their dissenting, though not
for the person and matter, yet for the manner of his proceeding, his judgment
should have been frustrate and reuersed? No, but his signification thereof unto
them, was rather to command the^ to obey his sentence, and to put the same in
execution, as our Brethren say well herein, touching the execution of
excommunication, for when they were gathered together, as Saint Paul had, and
that some Pastor or Minister among them, did before the whole multitude
pronounce this sentence, which Saint Paul had given forth against the
incestuous person: they al approved it, and so confirmed S. Paul's former
sentence of excommunication.

But our Breath. add this parenthesis (because the fact was manifest) wherefore
they add this, they do not show. But the more manifest the fact was, the
less need had the Apostle to have proceeded so far, The manifestnesse of the
fact.
if in a manifest fact, an Ecclesiastical judge may not procee^e separatlie
his self to the sentence of excommunication, without the consent of a Segnory
of that Congregation. But although the fact here was manifest, yet the
wickedness of the fact was not manifest enough unto them. At leastwise, not
this manner of the punishment for it, until Saint Paul did thus reprove them
of it, and thus proceed against it. But had it ben never so manifest, what
does that give him authority to deal so far therein separatly by himself,
without and before any authority of theirs joined with him, but only to make
them afterward to put that in execution, that he had before ouerruled,
Excommunication. 1. Cor. 5.
and iudicially concluded upon. Since therefore this was a good excommunication,
and that all they could not reverse this sentence, as otherwise passed than it
ought to have been, because they joined not in the doing of it, but only in
the obedience of putting the same in execution, as he commanded them: and
withal, since this was not written as an information to any Senate,
Consistory, or Segnorie of Seniors, or of governing Elders among them, but
written as a charge to the whole multitude: What is this for the proof of any
such Elders? Either else to infer that no excommunication in a manifest or
not manifest fact, can be pronounced by a Bishop, or by a Pastor, except a
Consistory of that Congregation, The order of discipline that our Br.
prescribe, and thereto wrest S. Paul's excommunication.
shall first travail in examining the cause, and then determine and agree,
what judgment ought to pass upon the matter: and then also propound it before
the whole multitude, that it may be confirmed by their consent: and last of
all, the Bishop, Pastor, or Minister to denou^c^ it. For this is the discipline
that our Brethren would draw out hereon.

But who may not see, that this is to draw this example clean contrary? If
they would directly gather aught hereupon, they should gather, that in manifest
facts and crimes the Bishop or Pastor, though in his absence, may judge,
determine, and pronounce the sentence of excommunication, and by the authority
of our Lord Jesus Christ committed unto him, may command the whole multitude,
Church, or Congregation, or any Consistory of them, if they have any, to
gather themselves together with his spirit, and charge them in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that they fulfill, obey, and execute his sentence, in
delivering such an excommunicated person ^0 Satan, that is, exclude him from
the fellowship and communion of the faithful, by separating themselves from
his company, and him from theirs: but this would clean dash all the imagined
authority of their governing Segnorie, if they should become such executioners
only unto the sentence of the Bishop or Pastor, and that in his absence also,
he being the judge and determiner of the matter.

But what is this any more than all the residue, for the proof of any such
Ecclesiastical Elders in the Church of Corinth, as were Governors only, and
not Teachers? Of the which point (so much urged and sought for) we have
hitherto seen, not one testimony nor example. But our Br. will now, and God
before, go to higher and more important proves hereof.

The argument of the 12 Book.
THE 12. Book proceeds further to our learned Brethr. proves of their third
Tetrarches whom they call Governors. Whether their institution be grounded on
Christ, whereunto they alleadg as their Capital place the words of Christ,
Matthew. 18. ver. 17. Tell the Church. Whether Christ in the name of Church,
meant simply a Congregation of the faithful people, or a Senate of governing
Elders. And namely: whether he alluded to the Jews Sanedrim or Synaedrion.
How the ancient Fathers have expounded those words. The expositions of the
Protestant writers, especially Caluins: with the examination of Caluines
reasons, laboring to prove that Christ in those words did renew and translate
to his church the Jews Sanedrim. Whereupon is laid forth a full view of the
Jews estate, out of Bertram, Sigonius, and Chytraeus for all their sorts of
governing Elders and Senates, especially their Sanedrim. After which follow
these our Learned Brethrens proves of this translation, and of the Elders
mentioned in the new Testament. Moreover, for the authority of these Elders
our Brethrens proceeding, Matthew. 18. to the 18. verse, for the power of the
spiritual keys. Whether they appertain to these governing Elders that are
not Ministers of the word. Brentius interpretation of those words, how far
they reach, and how far the Ecclesiastical Excommunication is requisite, and
of the civil excommunication, and of Caluines exposition of those words.
Aretitius concerning the parties that may excommunicate. Wigandus and Matheus
Index for the use of the keys in the Jews Church. The practice of
excommunication in the Apostles times. The practice in the primitive church
showed forth by Tertullian, Eusebius, etc. The testimonies of the ancient
Fathers Cyprian, Jerome, Augustine, Chrysostom, etc. The judgments of the
Protestants, namely, Kemnitius, Melancthon, Aretius, Beza, Snecanus, chiefly
Danaeus, examining his proves and reasons for the Presbytery that may
excommunicate. Our Bre. conclusion concerning discipline. The weighing again
(at our Brethrens request) of Saint Paul's excommunicating the incestuous
person. 1. Cor. 5. Of the Popish excommunication. Of Excommunication for
weighty, or light offenses. Of the offenses excommunicable. Of our Brethrens
answer to our objection, that this Presbitery is not mentioned in Saint Paul's
excommunicating Hymenaeus, Alexander, Philetus, and the Corinthian. How far
the Congregation may deal in this power. Whether the Minister have any
singular power herein. And lastly of our Brethrens glimpses (as they call
them) inueighing against the excommunications and jurisdiction in our Church.

NOw therefore to prove that there ought to be a Consistory of Elders in
every Church, The learned disc. Page 87.
for governing of the same: it is manifest by the commandment of our Savior
Christ touching him that despises private admonition: If he hear not them,
tell the Congregation: if he hear not the Congregation, let him be unto thee
as an Heathen and Publicane. Verily I say unto you, Math. 18.17
whatsoever you shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven. In which
saying of our Savior Christ, this word Congregation, is not so largely
taken, as in other places for the whole multitude, but for the chosen assembly
of Elders.

OUR Brethren here would prove their Consistory of ruling Seniors, Bridges
out of Christ's words, Matthew. 18. v. 17. which if they shall be able to prove,
God forbid, but we should be as ready to yield. And if they cannot prove it,
I would wish our Brethren to take good heed, how they wax so bold, not to
fear to writhe Christ's own words. Which least we also might mistake; let
us set them down more fully than our Bre. do, Math. 18.15 But if thy brother
shall sin against thee, Mat. 18. for these Elders.
go and rebuke him between thee and him alone. If he shall hear thee, thou
shall win thy brother. But if he shall not hear thee, take yet with thee one
or two, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may stand.
But if he shall neglect them, tell the Church: but if so be also he shall
neglect the Church, let him be to thee as an Ethnicke or a Publicane. Verily I
say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven,
and whatsoever ye shall lose upon earth, shall be losed in heaven. Again I say
unto you, if two of you shall consent upon earth, of all things whatsoever they
shall ask, it shall be done unto them of my Father which is in heaven. For
where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them.

Here first the ground of the matter (upon which Christ spoke these words,
that our Brethren cite) is private offense. And therefore, first he wills,
(as our Brethren say well therein) private admonition to be made. Which if it
shall be neglected, then that the party offended reprove the offender, before
the witness of one or two besides themselves. Our Breath. supposall of Christian
words.
And then it follows, if he shall not hear them, (inferring that they
should also admonish him) that then he should tell the Church or
Congregation. Here (say our Brethren) This word Congregation is not so
largely taken, as in other places, for the whole multitude, but for the chosen
assembly of Elders. This is but our Brethrens collection and supposall, which
they can never be able to prove. Nor that Christ ever used the word Church in
that sense, for a chosen assembly of Elders out of the Church: and as eas^e
had it been for Christ, and much more plain for us, if he had said, Tell the
Elders of the Church. But his meaning is manifest, that the party injured
should reveal the offense before the assembly of the whole multitude. For
why might not the whole multitude hear it? And either severally from among
them, or all of them by the Minister, or by some other appointed thereunto,
give the party offending a public admonition, The admonition may be done
without a Consistory. and likewise ^xco^m.
but that it must needs be done by a Consistory of governing Elders? Neither
does he say here, that if the admonition be neglected, that then the Church,
or in the Churches name, a Consistory of Seniors, or the public Minister
should excommunicate him: but only, let him be as an Ethnic or Publicane unto
thee. Wherein he rather seems to give the party offended leave, to account or
shun him as an excommunicated person, than to give any commandment, that
the Church should so proceed against him. And yet if it be gathered thereon,
(as it may also well be, and is collected,) because he has despised the
Churches authority, and seems remediless unto the Church: what necessity
is there, that this censure of excommunication must be prenounced against him
by a Consistory of certain chosen Seniors, and not by the Bishop, nor yet by
the Pastoral Elder of that Congregation?

Mat. 28.
But see here the flexible interpretations of our Brethren to serve their
fancy. Before, when they would prove the Pastor could do nothing without the
consent of the Church, Our Brethr. varying in this place Math. 18.
and gathering together of the servant of Christ's household; they alleged
that which immediately follows this text here cited: If two of you consent
upon earth, upon any matter, whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be granted
to you of my Father, which is in heaven. For wheresoever two or three be
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Here they
make but three, yea but two to be the Church, and to have the Churches
authority. Page 81. and 82. And applying this to their Consistory, Where two
of you consent upon earth, The Consistory that our Br. call the Church
consisting but of one of these Eld^rs.
etc. It will fall out, that since the Bishop or Pastor can do nothing without
the consent of the Consistory, nor the Consistory but with the consent of the
Bishop or Pastor: if the Bishop or the Pastor be one, how many shall make up
this Consistory, when they be but two in the whole, that (as Christ says)
have consented upon any matter? Is there any more than one? But now, where
two or three are reckoned up, even in the same place: here two or three is but
private admonition, and the Church is but the chosen Seniors of the Church. And
thus they enlarge and restrain the words of our Savior Christ, rather after
their own humors and devises, than that any necessity or probability of
the place, does so to conster them. But to confirm this their construction of
Christ's words, our Brethren proceed, and say.

For our Savior Christ, in that word alludeth unto the assembly of Elders
that was among the Jews, The learned disc page 87 and 88.
which they called (but corruptly) of a Greek word Synedrion, which
signifies a Counsel or Consistories, Sanedrin, which had the hearing and
determining of all difficult and weighty matters among the Jews, the like
whereof he willed to be established in his Church, for administration of
government. For seeing it was first instituted by God for government of his
Church in the old Law, as has been showed before out of Number. 11.6. although
it was shamefully abused by the wicked Jews: Math. 11.6.
our Savior Christ translateth it into his Church also in the new
Testament. And the name of Elders does most aptly agree unto them, that be
Governors in the Church now, even as it did to the Ancients of Israel. So
that the Pastors seem to have borrowed the name of Elders, especially in
respect of their government.

Bridges.
Still our Brethren feed themselves with their own humors, and would feed
us also with mere wind and allusions, if not rather illusions of their own
conceits. Bearing us in hand, that Christ alludeth to the assembly of the
Elders that was among the Jews called the Sanedrim. Allusion to the Sanedrin.
What a strange illusion is this, to imagine these alluons out of Christ's
words?

They say they will prove, Allusions* to the Sanedrim.
that there ought to be a Consistory of Elders in every Church for governing
the same. But how will they prove this? It is manifest by the commandment
of our Savior Christ. Where is this manifest? Christ says, Tell the
Congregation. Our Breath. proves of these Elders ^ut of this place, Math. 18.
But Christ means not there, the whole multitude, but a chosen assembly of
Elders. And is this commandment come but to a meaning? And how prove they
that he meant such an assembly of Elders? He alludeth to the assembly of
Elders among the Jews, that was called the Sanedrim. And is this meaning
again come to an allusion? And how prove they that Christ alluded to that
Sanedrim? The Sanedrim had the hearing and determining of all difficult and
weighty matters among the Jews, the like whereof he willed to be established
in his Church, for the administration of government. And where willed he the
like to be established in his Church? For seeing it was first established in
his Church in the old Law, Christ translated it into his Church in the new
Testament. And where made he this translation? The name of Elders does most
aptly agree to them that be Governors in the Church now, even as it did to
the Ancients of Israel, so that the Pastors seem to have borrowed the name of
Elders, especially in respect of their government.

And is all this in the end come to the Pastors, The head of all this question.
and to their name only of Elders, and that to the seeming whence they borrowed
their name? Here were great matters promised, such as if they could be
substa^cially proved, must needs overrule all this question. For we are now
come to the very head and fountain of the matter. Our Br. here pretend not so
much any longer the ancient practice of the Church, nor the testimony of the
Fathers, neither yet the examples of the Apostles, but the very original and
institution of Christ himself, willing and commanding this Segniorie to be
translated from the Synagogue of the Jews, and to be perpetually ordained and
established in his Church, and in every Congregation of the same. If this now
can be proved; there is no further reasoning on it, we must needs yield; or
else we should be found to resist God, and to have no part in Jesus Christ. But
if this be but only our Fr mere imagination. and that Christ neither made
any such translation; nor willed or commanded any such matter; nor has any
such words or such meaning, as may enforce any such a thing, or any allusion
of it, or of the like unto it; but that the thing it self, which they their
selves would apply the words of Christ unto, were most different and clean
contrary from the Seniors, which under the name thereof they would erect: nor
their selves could pretend (whatsoever they entend) to have the like erected;
which if they should, they could not, without the great alteration and manifest
danger of all Christian Princes estates and governments, and of all their
Laws, Policies and Commonweals: Christ's words directly.
what shall we then thi^^e, not so much of the great ouershooting of our
Brethren; as of the full stay and resolution of our selves, from all these
devices and casting thus about, to seek some ground and warrant for these
Seniors?

And first for Christ's words, (...), Tell the Church. Here he plainly
speaks of the Church, but of no Synedrion, or Sanedrin, nor any of the
ancient Fathers (that I can find) d^^ so expound his words, or gather any
such meaning of them. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom
Tell the Church: that is to say, the Bishops and Presidents, but of Sanedrim or
Consistory he makes no mention. Neither said he ( says Chrysostom) unto the
Bishop bind this man with bonds, but if thou shall bind him. Hierome upon
these words, Hierome.
But if he will not hear the Church, says: He gives power unto the Apostles,
that they which are condemned of such, might know that the sentence of man is
confirmed by the sentence of God. Hilarie indeed makes an allusion of this
word, Hilarie.
the Church, unto the coming of Christ, but not to any Sanedrin or Senate,
but rather contrary, in ascribing the keys to the Apostles. Theophilact
expounds it as does Chrysostom: Theophilact.
and as for the Churches excommunication he thinks Christ speaks not of
it, but only says: If thou, says he, being offended, hold him which has
done thee injury as a Publicane and Heathen, he shall be so holden also in
heaven: but if thou losest him, that is, if thou forgiuest him, it shall be
also forgiven him in heaven. For not only those things that the Priests do
lose are losed: but whatsoever we also being injured, shall either bind or
lose, the same shall be also bound or losed. So that he applies this either to
the Priests action, or to the private party injured. The old Gloss
expounds it thus: Tell the Church: that is, the whole Church, that he may
sustein the greater shame.

As for the late Writers, Vatablus expounds these words, Vatablus.
Tell the Church, that is the assembly or public Congregation or the
multitude. And so says Aretius, Aretius.
The third degree has a provocation to the whole Church, that is unto the
assembly of the faithful, whereof ye are members. But the Church is the
assembly of the faithful, wherein the word of Christ, and the Sacraments are
rightly administered. This form afterward the Apostles followed, 1. Cor. 5.2.
Cor. 2. But neither of those Epistles, neither that matter was written to any
chosen Consistory, but to the whole multitude. Munsterus says, Mansterus.
Dic Ecclesiae. Let his frowardness be showed to the Church. And if he shall
not hear the Church being warned of many, let him be holden of them as an
Ethnicke and a a Publicane. And whatsoever they shall so bind, shall be holden
bound in heaven, that is, whom they having so warned shall have cast out of
their company, they also shall be holden cast out before the Father, and
again whom they shall lose and receive being penitent into their Company,
that shall be ratified with the Father. Caluines proves on Mat. 18.
Of this power of binding and losing, that is, of thrusting out of the Church,
and receiving into the same, we have said somewhat before ca. 16. Where also he
said: But for that which follows of the keys, it has this sense. By the
kingdom of heaven, is understood, the Church of Christ, and this is opened by
the key of Gods word. But the kingdom of heaven is opened to the believers,
that is, forgiveness of sins, and eternal life is promised by the word of
God. And this is to forgive sins, as contrariwise to them that believe not,
the key of heaven is shut by the word, that is, remission of sins is
denounced. So that all this excomm. is referred to the denouncing of the
Minister of the word: and this execution of thrusting out, to the Church And so
says Bucer: But and if he shall contemn this, let the frowardness of this
man sinning, and not willing to repent, be showed to the Church, that he may
the third time be admonished of the whole company among whom he is conversant.

But Calvin expounds (these words, Tell the Church) far otherwise:
Quaeritur quid per nomen Ecclesia intelligat, etc. Caluines applying Christ's
words to the rewes Sanedrim.
It is demanded ( says he) what he means by the name of the Church? For
Paul commands it not of any chosen number, but of the whole assembly of the
faithful, to excommunicate the incestuous Corinthian, 1. Cor. 5. b. 6. And
therefore, it may probably seem, that the judgment here, is referred to the
whole people. But because as yet, there was no Church which had given her name
to Christ, nor any such manner appointed. but the L. himself speaks,
according to the usual and received custom: there is no doubt, but that he
alludeth to the order of the old Church. Even as also in other places, he
applies his speech, unto the known custom. When as he commands the gift
which we will offer, to be left at the altar, until we shall be reconciled
with our offended brother. Mat. 5. d. 23. There is no doubt, but that out of
the present and legal form of the worship of God, he would teach us, that
we can not orderly pray nor offer any thing unto God, so long as we are at
discord with our brethren. So now therefore, he looked upon the accustomed
discipline of the Jews: because it should have been absurd, to have proposed
the judgment to the Church, which as yet was no Church. Furthermore, where the
power of excommunication appertained to the Jews that were Seniors, which
sustained the person of the whole Church: aptly does Christ say, that those
which sinned, should then at the length be publicly brought footh unto the
Church, if proudly they contemn the private admonitions, or that they elude
them skoffingly. We know, that from the time the Jews returned from their
exile in Babylon, the censure or controllment of manners and of doctrine, was
committed unto a chosen Council, Caluines proves on Mat. 28.
which they called sinhedrim, in Greek (...) (a Counsel, Session, or Assembly
of Senators or Judges). This government was lawful and approved of GOD, and
this was a bridle to retain in doing their duty the froward, and such as
would not be taught. If any shall except that in the Age of Christ, all
things were corrupted and perverted, insomuch, that nothing ought less to
have been accounted the judgment of the Church, Caluins reasons for this
Segniorie of Elders to be renewed to the Christians from the olo^e Sanedrim by
this place Ma. 18
than that tyranny: the answer is easy, although the manner were then
corrupted and perverted, notwithstanding Christ does worthelie praise the
Order, such as it was in times past, delivered of the Fathers. But when as a
little after he erected a Church, taking away the corruption, he restored the
pure use of excommunicating. But there is no doubt, but the manner of
discipline which flourished under the kingdom of Christ, succeeded in the
place of the old discipline: and verelie, when as the profane Gentiles also
held a shaddowed custom of excommunication, it appears, this was even of
God engrafted from the beginning in the minds of men, that if there were any
impure and defiled, they should be put back from the sacred things. It
had been a foul thing therefore and a shameful, for the people of GOD, to
have been altogether void of that discipline, whereof some step remained
among the Gentiles. But that which was kept under the Law, Christ has passed
over unto us, because the reason (or manner) is common unto us with the
ancient Fathers. For, neither was it the counsel of Christ to send his
Disciples to the Synagogue, which when as in her bosom she gladly nourished
filthy flatteries, she excommunicated the true and simple worshippers of God:
(whereof we have example in that man that was blind from his nativity. John
9. f. 34.) But he warned, that the order should be holden in his Church,
which long ago was holilie instituted under the Law. If any either
stubbornly refuse the former admonitions, or by going on in his former vices,
do show himself to contemn them, when as with witnesses brought he has
been warned the second time: Christ commands him to be called to the
judgment of the Church, that is, unto the Sessions of the Seniours, there to
be more greeuouslie admonished, as it were by public authority, that if he
reverence the Church, he may submit himself and obey.

Thus says Calvin for the proof of this Segniorie, to be authorized,
instituted, and commanded, in these words of ^ur Savior Christ, Tell the
Church. Whole interpretation, Beza, Stephanus, in his new Gloss alleging
also these reasons of Calvin, besides Danaeus, and diners other of our
Brethren since, have followed, and more at large urged. Calvin the principal
interpreter of Christ's words for a consistory of Elders.
But because Calvin began this interpretation (as I take it) and all their
Discourses chiefly stand on these his Reasons and Assertions: therefore I
have so fully and wholly set him down.

And if we shall find that this his Interpretation, and these his Reasons
prove not this matter: we must crane the same pardon, that their selves
yield to Beza, and to other our Reverend and and Learned Brethren, when they
also in their interpretations, dissent from Calvin, or Calvin from other
godly, ancient, and approved Fathers. Otherwise, of all the excellent
Interpreters of our Age, I profess the honor of Calvin with the chiefest,
bringing sound proof and reason of his Sentence. Let us now therefore a while
consider, how he proves this interpretation of the word Church, to be here
necessarily understood, for a Consistory of these Seours.

And first he confesses that the former place, The examination of these proves
of Calvin.
1. Corinthians 5. concerning The excommunication of the incestuous Corinthian,
( A place which our Brethren applied to this Consistory,) was spoken of Saint
Paul to the whole assembly and multitude of the people, and not to any
chosen number of them. So that, The inc^stuous person not excom. by a
Consistory of the Church*
that place is in this place clear acquitted from this Consistories
excommunication.

But if Christ had here before (as Calvin says) set down an order,
that excommunication should be made by a Consistory or Session of such
Elders, as Calvin here pleads for: how can we think that Paul would
have dealt herein with the whole multitude of the people, and not with a
certain number chosen out of them, for the governance of such matters? And
therefore this is one good step to prove, that here Christ set down no
such order.

But Calvin would drive this but to a probable Argument, That because Saint
Paul refers it to the whole number, and not to any chosen number,
therefore it is likely that Christ also here should so refer it. But
Calvin thinks not this Argument of any force. And why?

Forsoothe, because then as yet there was no Church that did profess Christ,
nor any such manner ordained. And less reason (as I think) to gather it on
this place, that this name Church should here signify a Segniorie or a
certain number chosen out of the Church, when there was yet no such order in
the Church. And yet, there was a Church of Christ, even when Christ spoke
these things. Caluines reasons for these Elders on Mat. 18.
But the Corinthians and diverse other Churches afterw^rd^, did both openly
profess the name of Christ, and had Orders also among them. If therefore this
order of Discipline for the Government of Seniours, had been here of Christ
founded and ordained: Saint Paul would never have broken it, There was a
church when Christ spoke these words Mat. 18. and a Church that had orders when
Paul wrote to the Cor. Bucer using Caluins reason, applies it to no such
Co^sistorie.
at least, if he had thought it necessary. Except we should excuse him by
ignorance: but that hadd^ been too gross an excuse in him, if this had
been here ordained, and that so necessary, as our Brethren and Calvin ^o^
pretend the same to be.

Bucer writing upon these words, Tell the Church: alleges the sam^ reason
that Calvin here does, that There was no such order in the Church, when
Christ spoke these words. But what? Does he gather thereupon, that Christ had
an allusion to the Seniors of the Jews? No such thing. Moreover that ( says
he) Tell the Church: let no man understand it thus, as though it were of
Christ commanded, to accuse him in the public Sermon of them that come
together to hear the word of God, that shall have despised two admonitions,
and then to have him there openly reprehended of the preacher: for when Christ
taught these things, there was no such face of the Church. Furthermore the
power of binding and losing is not given, except to them that come together in
the name of Christ, No excom. without Pastors and B.
and that in a certain order, and those going before whom the holy Ghost has
ordained in the Church, the Pastors and the Bishops. Whereupon Paul would
namely also have those to exercise this power, that are gathered together in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his spirit present with them. 1.
Corinthians 5. Now our meetings together are yet too impure: and truly there
is a small number of them, that have wholly given themselves to Christ. Neither
is it lawful, by reason of the public peace, to expel from the assemblies of
the Church those that are not tried, Wherefore in the public assemblies of the
church (as for the most part at this day the matter goes) excommunication can
not publicly be exercised, except where the Lord has bestowed such grace,
That the Chur. may be without excomm.
that the greater part of the whole people, with the Magistrate should be
converted unto Christ with a full heart. Where that is not granted, it is
necessary, that they which have received Christ more fully, reduce this most
holy and most healthful institution of Christ among themselves, and whoso^uer
of their familiars or neighbors, or by other means they have joined to them,
which have given their name to Christ, that diligently and freely they
admonish them. And when any shall proudly contemn their admonitions, they
should declare the contemners of the admonition unto the Church, which they
have among themselves, either of the company of their neighborhood, or
otherwise of familiarity, or to conclude by reason of kindred or family. Which
Church if they shall continue to contemn: shall declare the matter to the
common Ministers of the whole Church, that they also in the name of the whole
church, may warn the^. And if they shall go on to contemn the word of the
Lord, they shall also excommunicate them, or else the self same Church in which
they are peculiarly known and familier, shall then not admit them to the holy
communion, until the Lord shall restore unto us a just policy in the Church,
and a true censure. But howsoever all things are yet mixed together and
perturbed, notwithstanding if the Ministers of the Word will with a good
fidelity employ themselves in their office, they shall easily restore the
most part of the Christian Censure, without any disturbance or cutting in
sunder of the Church, The Ministers office and power in the church.
which a faithful Minister of Christ will by no means bring in, who knows
that to him all power is given in the Church to aedification, not to
destruction: and that it is more appertaining to his office, from every place
to gather them together unto the kingdom of God, yea the blind, the deaf,
the weak, than to drive them out of it. Of the true moderation of the
ecclesiastical censure, S. Augustine wrote many things against the Donatistes.
But the cheifest place of this matter is in his third book against the
Epistle of Permenian. Bucer refer^ us to Aug. for excommunication.
Wherein this man of God most prudently gave charge, of the correction and
excommunication of the evil persons that seem to be in the Church. This place
chiefly at this time were of us with singular deligence to be read and
thoroughly weighed.

Thus writes also Bucer on thi^ matter, where he complayneth most of the lack
of this Discipline, and where he somewhat agrees with Calvin, in alleging
this reason, That when Christ spoke those words, there was no face of a Church
that professed his name. And yet does he so little gather hereupon, this
unnecessary consequence, that Christ alluded to any Seniory among the Jews,
to be revived among the Christians, when they should have Discipline in the
Church, that he acknowledges by the name of the Church nothing else, but (as
the name imports) the whole congregation. Neither yet that the whole
congregation should excommunicate, otherwise than not to permit the man to
receive the Communion, but the common Ministers of the church only to denounce
the excommunication. And least we should understand thereby, any Seniorie not
teaching the word: he declares withal, that they be the only Ministers of
the Word, and that to them, and to their office, the exercise of the power of
binding and losing is ^om^itted, though the power in general by the churches.

But Calvin says, that in the name of the Church, the Lord did speak, as
though it were of the usual and received manner.

(...) if he so did: then he spoke of the present state either of the true
Church, among those few that professed his name: or of the Jews Synagoue. But
Calvin says after, that it was not the counsel of Christ to send his
disciples to the Synagogue. But to allude unto the old order of the church, and
not to the present order, had not been to speak according to the usual and
received manner: why should we not therefore rather think^ that Christ spoke
of such order as should be afterward used in the Church among the Christians*
either for such states and times as the church was in, or to continue: then of
such order, as either in the old time had been, or at that present was in the
Synagogue among the Jews:

But now, if we should grant to Calvin and to our Brethren, that Christ
alluded in these words, The admission of this allusion, infers no
perpetual rule of a like Consistory.
unto the assembly of Elders that was among the Jews: is this enough also to
infer, that the Law or rule that Christ prescribes, must stretch to the
establishment and continuance of the same order, or to the erection and
Institution of a like order, as that was, whereunto in these words, he
alluded? if this be a good argument, let us see the force of it, even in the
present example, whereof Calvin himself gives an instance.

There is no doubt ( says he) but that Christ alludeth unto the order of the
church, even as also in other places, he fitteth his speech unto the known
custom, when he bids that the gift which we will offer, should be left
at the Altar. Math. 5. d. 23. There is no doubt but that he would teach us
out of the present and legal form of the worship of God, that we can not
orderly pray nor offer any thing to God, so long as we are at strife with our
Brethren. These words are indeed apparent, to be an allusion of these terms,
Altar, gift and offering, to the present and legal form, Calu. own example,
overthrows this perpetuity.
nor can be understood otherwise, as the word church may, whith is more
properly used among us christians, than ever it was among the Jews. Whereas
the words Altar, gift, and offering, were more proper to the Jews than unto
us. But does it follow, that because Christ in setting down this rule of
reconciliation, alludeth ( for the plainer understanding of the people) to such
speeches of Altar, gift, and offering, as were then more usually received and
known among the^, that therefore he meant withal, to establish and carry away in
his rule, the same manner of Gods worship at an Alter, by a gift and offering as
was then used, received and known among them? If it do not in this present
instance, that Calvin himself brings in (as it is most clear it does not):
can Calvin then, or any of our learned Br. or all the world infer, that if
Christ did allude in the term of Church to an Eldershippe or consistory among
the Jews, in prescribing his rule of Reconciliation or excommunication, that
therefore, he continued, or renewed, or constituted the same, or the like order
among the Christians? Or, if he looked upon their Discipline, that therefore he
ordained the like to continue for ever? did Christ establish every thing that
he only speak of, or but looked upon?

But says Calvin, It should have been absurd, to have propounded the
judgment to the church, which as yet was no church.

Although this again be not altogether so, that there was no church: yet, what
if there had bin none the^* had Christ in these words, no further respect, but
to the present time? if he had not: how shall any perpetual rule be grounded
hereon: And if he respected a perpetual order of his church: why should we
rather understand it* of the o^der of the church at that time among the Jews,
which was forthwith to be dissolved: than for the state of the church that he
would erect, that should among the christians be continued? But what now was
this order among the Jews, that Calvin and our Brethren say, Christ alluded
unto and looked upon?

Moreover ( says Calvin) when as the power of excommunication belonged to the
Jews that were seniors, which sustained the person of the whole church: aptly
does Christ say, that those which have sinned, if they shall either proudly
contemn the first admonitions, or scoffingly exclude them, are then at length
to be brought forth publicly unto the church.

That the Seniors among the Jews had the power of excommunication, is not in
question, What Seniors among the Jews had the power of excommunication.
but what Seniors they were which had that power. Whether a chosen number out
of the ancients of the people, or such as were only of the Priests and
Levites: I speak it, for that power of denouncing excommunication. Not, but
that (I grant) they had other Elders, for other matters: But, that either, or
both these Elders, represented the person of the church, being the heads and
Governors of the church: I see no such aptness in the representation. The
head represents not the body, nor the body the head. And yet the subjects
may more aptly represent by substitution the person of the governors, than the
governors may be said, to represent the person of the Subjects. And no doubt,
Christ's words were most apt and proper, The governors of the Church are not
so aptly said to represent the Church.
for the matter that he spoke of. For as Calvin says, of bringing forth the
matter publicly to the church, if he had meant of them that were but Elders or
governors, or admit also they were representers of the church: yet should he
not have spoken so aptly, as if he had said (if he had so meant) tell the
Elders, or governors, or represe^ters of the church. And not, tell the church
which is a great deal more improper and vnapter speech.

We know ( says Calvin) that from the time that the Jews returned out of
the captivity of Babylon, the censure of the manners and of the doctrine was
committed to a chosen counsel, which they called Synhedrin, in Greek (...).
This was a lawful regiment and approved of God, and this was a bridle to
retain in their duty, the froward, and such as would not learn.

To prove that there were such a chosen council among the Jews, to whom the
sensure or controlment of manners and of doctrine was committed. Calvin here
assigns the time, after the return from the captivity of Babylon, which
council was called Sinhedrim, in Greek (...), And he says, God approved it,
and that it was a lawful regiment, and a good Bridle against the wicked. I
meruell that Calvin fetches these Seniors among the Jews from so late time,
as after their return from Babylon. And yet he names no time, when after
their return they were created, that we might have turned to it, and seen what
persons they were, Danaeus 2. part. Chri. Isag. li. 2. c. 10.
and what office was committed to them. Danaeus to make this more cleeare, in
his foresaid introduction, 2. part. lib. 2. cap. 10. says: But to determine
strifes and (as out of Socrates, li. 7. cap. 37. may be gathered, which example
we have before perused) to take upon the^ to be Judges and Arbitrators, I never
read that it was the office of Elders, or part of their office. For although
the presbytery or Synedrion of the Jews (which was the same, Act. 22. verse, 5.
and 30. And Math. 5. verse 22.) seem to answer to our presbytery, and judged
oftentimes of certain causes: Notwithstanding, our Presbyteries do not judge,
and therefore are different from those from Judicial, because those partly had
political, and partly Ecclesiastical jurisdiction both at once, as appears
Esd. 10. ver. 8. But ours have only ecclesiastical.

If this which Danaeus says be true, that that Presbeytry Act, 22. be the same
Presbytery with that mentioned Esdras 10. We find it then indeed (as Calvin
says) after the return out of the captivity of Babylon. But how then doeour
Learned discoursing Brethren say? The like whereof he willed to be established
in his Church. Will these our brethrens Seniors ( contrary to that which
Danaeus says) take upon them politic and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction both at
once? And so in-deede these our Bret. plainly say, the Synedrion had the
hearing and determining of all difficult and weighty matters among the Jews.
Here is nothing left out, be it in politic or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
so it be a weighty and difficult matter. And our brethren apply it to us
saying: The like whereof, he willed to be established in his Church, for
administration of Government. So that, nothing here remains entiere to the
Prince and nobles, to the Judges and Magistrates: for our Governing Seniors
must have all, or a stroke in all. But the authority of the Presbytery. Act.
22. was much abridged, What Presbytery that was. Act. 22.
concerning the Politic Jurisdiction, ( as we shall God willing see anon. And
yet who were those Seniors in that presbytery? Acts 22. ver. 5. Paul says:
the chief priest does bear me witness, and all the Presbytery, of whom I
received letters unto the Brethren and went* to Damascus, to bring them that
were there bounden, to Jerusalem, Calvin for the Sanedrin.
that they might be punished. And in the thirteenth verse, speaking of the
captain that kept paul prisoner, he says: on the next day, because he would
have known the certainty, wherefore he was accused of the Jews, he losed him
from his bonds, and commanded the high priests, and all their (...) or
Council to come together. And he brought Paul and set him before them.

Here are both these terms Presbytery or Eldership, (...) or Council, These
were all in-deede Controllers of Doctrine, as Marlorate well notes out of
Brentius, commending the aequity and prudent doing of this Tribune. Who because
he was ignorant of the Jewish religion he would refer the cause of
religion to the Council of them that were the Prelates of religion. So that
here this council seems to have been all of those that were teachers of
Doctrine, for such are or should be the Prelates of religion. But, did God
allow of this (...)? If it were all one with that before mentioned, Esdras 10.
The Synedrio^ or Sanhedrin was not in Esdras time.
We may well say with Calvin, It was a Lawful regiment, and approved of
God. But this (...), Acts 22. was not a Lawful regiment, nor approved of
God: and therefore it was not the same that is mentioned, Esdras 10. But a
degenerate corruption of it. Neither was that in-deede called either (...) or
Sanedrin, or Synhedrin, nor any such Greek name, or any corruption of that
name begun among the Jews in Esdras time. The Babylonians had no dealing with
the Graecians. Neither the Jews, till after the conquestes of Alexander the
great, who translated the Monarchy to the Graecians, and so with^l, the state
of the Jews dispersed in A^syria, Media, Persia, Egypt, and after in Greece
also, about the times of the Machabees and after the Bible was translated into
Greek under the Egyptian king Ptolomeus Philadelphus. And therefore, How our
Bret. run to the corruptions of Jewish traditions to seek out the grounds of
this co^sistory of governing Elders.
in all the Canon of the old Testament, there is no mention of this Sanedrin
or (...). But in the Jews Thalmud and tradition. And yet see here, how our
Brethren will run to these Jewish traditions, and think that Christ approves
them, and takes these corruptions from the Jews, and translateth them into
his Church, rather than they will omit to gather argument, for the Institution
of these Seniors, on never so light a show, or inckling or allusion, or any
thing of them. And must this also go for good proof of them?

But to prevent the offense of this, Calvin says: If any man except, that in
the age of Christ all things, were corrupted and perverted, that nothing
ought less than that tyranny, to be accounted the judgment of the Church:
The answer is easy, although the manner then were adulterated and perverted,
notwithstanding Christ worthily prayseth the order, as it was in times past
delivered of the Fathers.

The answer is not so easy, as Calvin supposed, although the order were the
same, and the difference but in the corruption of the manner. For what order
was this, that Calvin does not say, was ordained of God, nor names when,
where, what, or by whom it was delivered: but says at large, a patribus
fuerat traditus, It was delivered by tradition from the Fathers.

What? shall we have the Fathers traditions here approved and praised,
without the manifest Word and Institution of God, for the ground of them? If
the Papists hear of this, they would triumph* And what can be gathered here
on Christ's words, that he does praise any such order of their Seniorie? I
speak not in the disprayse of any good order taken among them, for their
better and more orderly Government, in times of their afflictions after their
captivity: but I deny, that this can be proved out of Christ's words, that he
has continued, borrowed translated, or erected up the same or the like order,
to be established among the Christians.

Christ's words import no translation of the Jews Sanedrin to the Christians.
These words enforce no such thing. This is but Caluines mere conjecture,
and theirs that follow him. And I do yet more commend these our Brethren the
Learned Discoursers, that they would fetch this order higher, from the Canon of
the Scripture, rather than from the traditions of the fathers: saying: for
seeing it was first instituted by god, for government of his Church in the old
Law, as has been showed before out of Numb. 11.6. Although it was shamefully
abused by the wicked Jews, our Savior Christ translateth it into his Church
also in the new testament. Although they speak here of a translation, which
they have not yet proved, nor can ever be able to prove on this place: yet
if they would prove it, here were somewhat for it, that we are sure was good,
and had good warrant, if they could prove the translation of it into the new
Testament. But when we shall see what that Presbytery was, which was instituted
by God for Government of his Church in the old Law. Numb. 11. Although we
have some what seen already, (and that out of Calvin) that it was no such
Presbytery as our Brethren pretend, Supra Page 23^.
and therefore that was not translated: yet we shall further (...) more fully
see, both what that was, and how far different, and what danger
consequently follows on this point, to the state of all Christian Princes and
commonweals, if this translation, continuance, or reviving of that seniory
should take place.

But ( says Calvin) where that within a little while after, he erected a
church, he restored the use of excommunication, the corruption being taken away.

That Christ restored that use of excommunication, which was used before in
the Law, is not here proved. Nor yet that there was any such use of the Law
for excommunication, or that Christ in these words, so much as respected or
looked upon, either the old use of the Law, or the present corruption of the
Jews, or erected either for the one or the other, when he erected his Church,
or the use of Excommunication in it.

And this do Caluines own words sufficiently declare. For if he had no
church, when he spoke these words, nor referred them, if he had a Church, to
the state thereof at that present (as Calvin said before) but that (as he
says here) he erected his Church within a little while after, and that then
when he so did, he restored the pure use of excommunication: then did he not
restore it in this place. And yet, if here he did translate it, and willed it
here to be established: how is not this the restoring of it? What discipline
succeeded in the place of the old discipline.


Notwithstanding ( says Calvin,) there is no doubt, but that the manner of
the Discipline which flourished under the kingdom of Christ, succeeded in the
place of that old Discipline.

To succeed in the place, we deny not. So did baptism succeed in the place
of Circumcis^on. And the Supper of the Lord in the place of the Passe-ouer.
And the Ministry that we have, in the place of the Ministry that they had.
And yet are all these far different, from the translating, continuing,
renewing, erecting, restoring, or establishing of those things. Calu. argument
from comparison of the Gentiles.


Neither do we deny this argument of Calvin. That when as the very profane
Gentiles held a shadowishe custom of Excommunicating, it appears, this was
instilled of GOD, even from the beginning, into the minds of men, that if
there were any impure and defiled, they should be put back from their holy
things. It had therefore been a foul and a shameful matter for the people
of God, to have been utterly ignorant of that discipline, whereof there
remained some step among the Gentiles.

This is a good Argument, both from the lesser to the greater, that we being
Gods people, should have such Discipline as God has appointed us to have: and
a greater shame for us, if we have it not. But our Question lies on this,
whether GOD have appointed us this Discipline, and these Governors of it,
which our Brethren pretend: yea, or no. The shame and danger of this new
San^drin.


But, if this were so shameful among the Jews, yea, among the Gentiles too,
for profane men to meddle with their holy things: how quickly should we
incur the greatest shame of all, when s^che as could not meddle with the
teachinge of the Holy Word of GOD, should not only meddle with the
teacchers of it, and be the controllers of them, and of all their sacred
actions: but meddle with excommunicating and absoluing, the cheifest ^ey and
force of the Word it self? not shame only but peril, which if it should
be in every parish, what in many Parishes both in the Country and in the
Cities too, it would breed, were too shameful, yea, too dangerous for them
to practice, or for us to suffer.

But that ( says Calvin) which was kept under the Law, Christ has
transmised or sent over to us: because the reason (or manner) is common to us
with the ancient Fathers.

Neither is this proved that Christ has sent over unto us, that which was
kept under the Law, any more in this matter, then in others which are
abrogated, and not sent over to us nor we to them, neither is the reason (or
manner) common to us with the ancient Fathers, under the law, but very
greatly different. And though it had some general community: yet, that
infers not so importaunt a specialty. Neither has Christ sent us over to
the ancient Fathers, any more herein, than to the Synagogue then present, nor
admonished by any words heers expressed or included, that that order should
be holden in his Church, which long ago was instituted holily under the Law.
All these are but Caluins mere sayings, without any proouings, other than these
aforesaid weak and bare reasons, which we have heard. But since Calvin
pr^^seth so much on the Law of Moses, for these Seniors, and our Brethren
likewise expressly, both now and before, urge the 11. of Numbers, and other
places where any mention is made of the Jews Elders, assemblies, and
Counselles: and still beat upon the name, that of (...), was called Sanedrim:
Let us therefore, to see this point even to the full, since this is the place
that must make up all the matter, Noua glossa Stephani in Math. 18
and that the New gloss also of Robertus Stephanus following Calvin,
concludes thus: Tantum illos admon^bat etc. Only he warned them* that this
order must be holden until the end of the world, that wheresouer there
should be a Church, there ought perpetually to be some ( he speaks of these
Seniors) that should have the care of the Church: Let us therefore crave
patience here a while, since this Synedrion and the original thereof is so
straightly urged, to search eu^^ to the grounds thereof, and see what these
Seniors, their assemblies, Senators, and Counsels were, and in what things
their authority most consisted. Which no doubt (if it shall not seem tedious)
will give great light to the whole matter.

Bertramus de politia Iudaica.
Cornelius Bertramus that writes of the policy of the Jews ^ dedicateth the
same even to Beza: makes (in his 3. Chapter) these 70. Elders, to have
appertained to the civil policy and that God did not then first ordain them,
The 70. Elders not first ordained. Nu^. 11.
Numb. 1^.16. ( as our Learned Brethren Discoursers said before, page 20.) but
rather continue and confirm them. And in the sixth Chapter: Therefore, this
kind of senate, as it consisted of the seniors and Prefects that were more
approved, Bertra^. of the Jews Elders.
(for they seem to be those that already exercised this office in Egypt, as
we have before coniectured) and were appointed to ease the charge of Moses:
seems to have had the understanding (or hearing) of the weighty judgments,
and de Reip. summa ita statuisse, and to have so determined of the sum (or
principal state of the Common weal: that the same senate had his Prefectes
also, Immo and summum caput ipsum Mosem. Yea, and his cheef (or supreme) head
Moses himself. Of what number they were, and why those Elders had that number.


Some do make the precise number of these to be 72. as though 6. out every of
the 12. tribes, were described: (of whom nevertheless, Moses left 2. in the
camp,) because the Lord had commanded to bring only threescore and ten. Other
make it the number of 71. Perhaps, because the number of Judges should be odd.
And to this number, the Hebrews commonly subscribe, which call their Synedrion,
by the name of Seuenty-one. But these numbers may on this wise be well
reconciled. For, where the Lord expressly commands threescore and ten to be
gathered unto him: it is likely that they were first 70. only. Unto whom,
Moses being added, to moderate the asse^bly: it made up 71. But the high priest
that was to answer out of the Law made up 72. etc.

And in the ninth chapter, writing again of their civil policy, after their
possession of the land, from Iosues time, until their exile into Babylon: The
preceps and the pr^ctise of this Seniory.
It is certain ( says he) that the Hebrews being now sent in-to the possession
of the land of Chanaan: kept not only those things, the use whereof they had of
Moses received, together with the precepts: but they revoked those also into
practice, whereof they had the precepts only, but no use, by reason of the
hindrance of the wilderness. The precepts that seem to perteine to that
policy, are contained Deuteronomy 16. ver. 18.19. and 20. And in the whole 17.18. and
19. chapt. and in certain places of Exodus and of Numb. Yea* and of Leuiticus it
self also.

Therefore, they so drove their policy to those chapters: that every city
should have her Seniors, (or her Senate) consisting of Chiliarkes, or chief
of Thousands, Centurions, (or chief of hundrethes) Quinquagenariens, (or
chief of fifties) and Decurions or chief of tennes. Josephus in his fourth
book of the Jews antiquities, chapter 6. prescribes the number of these
Judges to be seven, because, perhaps he regarded his own time. Certain
Thalmudistes as they divide the inferior judgments into matters pecuniary,
The Levites with their offices.
(or perteyning to pryses) and capital (or matters of life and death): over
the pecuniarie, they place three Judges, over capital, three and twenty.

Josephus in the same place, ascribes to that seuenfold number of Judges duos
(...), two Ministers, being Levites, that is to say, such prefectes as we have
described.

And verily, out of those things that were done of David and Iosaphat, in
restoring the judgments, it is likely, that the Levites sat with the Judges.
But of their number it is not certain, except out of those traditions of the
Thalmudistes, we shall say that it seems, there were 3. Levites, The matters
wherein the Elders and governors dealt.
which so did first of all take notice of the pecuniary causes: or certainly,
2. Levites, with some one of the seniors or Elders of that place or city, which
so excelled among the other, that he was called, (...) Sen Praetor, the
captain or Mayor. And these afterward being joined to 20. seniors determined
of capital causes.

Certainly, out of the 4. chap. of the book of Ruth, ver. 2. There seem mo
Elders than 7. When as Boas is said, to have taken 10. of the Elders of the
City of Bethlehem, that should take notice of the cause of redeeming, and of the
state Leuirationis.
of the husbands brother.

It is clear out of controversy, that of every city the Judges municipall (
or men capable of offices, as the freemen or Burgesses) as they are called the
Elders, they were the Chiliarkes, the Centurions, the Quinquagenariens (or
Fiftinaries) and the Decurions (or Deciniers) so many as there could be in
every city, insomuch, that also out of them, certain Levites were taken, to be
their Prefectes. If not, they were called for out of the next city assigned to
the Levites.

It is evident enough that every tribe had their own chief and principal
captain which in his own city was also of the Chiliarkes.

The universal assembly of the Tribes and families.
Moreover, in the whole, and out of the whole people, there was a chief Senate
that consisted of 70. Elders, being so elected, as the reason of the time
could bear it. For before the carrying away of the 10. Tribes it is likely
that they were chosen of the families of those 70. that came down out of
Cananie into Egypt, and of those families that were substituted in their
steedes, as in his place we have said. Besides these, (as the matter required)
the fathers of the houses of all the Tribes came together at solemn meetings.

Thus first we see, how Bertram here does summarily describe, all the sorts
of Seniors and Elders that were in Israel, and all their senates and
assemblies. Not only those that were inferior in every of the Cities and
principal Families, and in all the several Tribes among them: but also in
general of all the whole Realm and state, especially that of the Threescore
and ten Elders, that were chosen out of every Tribe as a chief standing senate
over all the other, and in what matters, not only, nor so much
Ecclesiastical, as civil and political, they had to deal with all, even from
the first Institution of them, and while these senates and seniors were in
their perfectest estate. Which estate of theirs, Calvin and our Learned
Brethren here affirm, was restored, translated, renewed, and ordained by
Christ, to be continued in his church to the worlds end, as it was, before it
was afterward corrupted by the Jews. All which senates and seniors, or any of
them, but chiefly of all the other (which our Br. urge chiefly, and indeed it
was the chief) if they or it were restored, or translated, or renewed among us:
how should not forthwith all the state, not only of the church, but of the whole
common weal be clean altered? and so (of like consequence) all other parts of
Christendom. Now to prove that these Senates had this authority. Bertram
proceeds to the practice of it.

To return therefore to the times of Iosue. Iosue seems (out of those
things, that are written, Ios. 23.2. and 24.1.) to have very well appointed
the judgments, according to the prescription of Moses Law. For, there it is
treated on the solemn meetinges. First, all the Tribes of the Israelites, or
all the Israelites, that is to say, Iosues orders for all these Elders
the Fathers of the housholdes of all the tribes, that were enfranchised with
the right of the City, or also were Citizens: are set down. Then, the Elders,
that is, the 70. afterward, the heads of Israel, that is, of the thirteen
Tribes, 13. chief capteynes. Last of all the Judges and Prefects, that is, the
ordinary judges of every city. Which consisted of the Chiliarkes, the
centurions, the fiftiniers, and Prefects of each city.

After the death of Joshua, this civil policy seems to have continued,
especially during the time that those seniors or Elders did survive, which had
seen the works of God in the wilderness, of whose number Phinees seems to
have been one, in whose age the battle was waged against the Beniamites. In
his time therefore, all the Tribes of Israel are said to have come together
unto Mitspa, that the chief citizens being before warned and assembled to the
(...) Caal, that is, to the army or universal assembly of the citizens,
concluded to give battle to the Beniamites, and had determined the same, and
had promised by a solemn oath, that they would not give in marriage their
Daughters to the Beniamites. All the self same citizens deal about the
restoring of the Tribe of Benjamin.

But (...) Gnedah, that is, all the Chiliarches, centurions, Fiftinaries,
Decurions, and Prefects, decree the War against the Iabesites, and to that
Expeditionem.
viage, (or exployte) they send 12000 soldiers. But the seniors or Elders,
that is, the other (...) Gnedah. To wit, the seventy, at the beginning in the
battle, give the council of catching the Virgins of the Siloites. But, that
the seventy Elders are signified by that assembly: It appears thereby, in
that they took upon them to pacify the Siloites, if at any time the Siloites
should before them appeach the Beniamites for that rapte (or catching of their
Virgins).

This therefore seems to be the process of that story* The process of the
story Iud. 19.20.
so far as serves to our purpose. The Leuite sent the twelve pieces of his
secondary wife ( or wife then permitted of the second sort, otherwise, then
called a concubine) into all the coasts and regions or cities of the twelve
tribes. The seniors or Judges, that is, the Chiliarkes, centurions,
Fiftinariens, and decurions of every tribe, and so of every city, call a
council about this matter, among their citizens and kinreds. By whose
agreement an universal (or general council is indicted) at Mitspa, to the
which all the tribes of Israel, which are there called the Angles or corners
of the people, that is to say the provinces or tribes, etc. (Except the
Iabesites) make appearance. The Provinces therefore of the Israelites, which
otherwise are called Tribes, are present at the (...) Caal, that is, the army
(congregation) or universal Concion of Gods people, to the number of 400000.
In that universal concion (or calling together) the Leuite declares the
matter. The matter being heard, the people decree a message to be sent to all
the families and villages of the Beniamites, to deliver up the authors of that
wicked fact. The Beniamites do rather prepare themselves to battle. The
Israelites take an oath of not giving their daughters in marriage to the
Beniamites, and do thus order the battle toward, that by lot out of ten
thousand, they chose one Chiliarke (or band of a thousands) and out of a
thousand, a hundred: and o^t of a hundred, ten. To take the care of
vittayling the camp. They ask counsel of God at Silo, what tribe should
fight first. The Lord answers, the tribe of Judah shall do this. The
battle being ended: the people come together again before the Lord. They
repent them of their oath. The army being mustered, it is found that none of
the Iabesites was among them in the Beniamites War. (...) Gnedah, that is,
the assembly, to wit, the Chiliarks, centurions, etc. decrees War against
the Iasebites, and against them they send 12000. men: They return conquerors,
and bring 400. Virgins of the Iasebites. But when they sufficed not the
Beniamites: The people do more repent them of the Tribe destroyed. At the self
same time, the seventy (Elders) do decree, the catching of the Siloites
Virgins. For, there is no likelihoode, that the Chiliarkes, centurions, etc. of
the Siloites, if they had been present would have suffered this decree.

At the end of that history is annexed under it, that therefore these things
happened thus, because there was no (...), that is, no king whom the Israelites
should reverence, The necessity of a king, or one chief Governor.
and to whom (being either privately or publicly offered injury) they should
flee. But by the name of a King, he understands every such Governor and Duke
(or guide) as Moses was, such an one also as was Iosue: to conclude, such as
were the Judges, that were afterward raised up. And it is taken in that
sense, Deuteronomy. 33. 5. The scripture therefore would show, that there was at
those times no guide, that should govern all the Hebrews, and restrain them
into order, and admonish them of their duty, as Moses and Iosue had done, and
whom all the Hebrews would hear and obey: Finally, that should so hold all
the tribes in their dutifulnes, that he should execute revenge on violence
publicly committed, and punish both whoredoms and Idolatries. Whereupon it
came to pass that rather every tribe, yea and every of the Cities also, and
besides that, every private person committed every where many things that were
horrible to be spoken of, which were not publicly revenged. For that most
beautiful face of the holy common weal, which shined in the times of Moses
and Iosue, was for the most part so decayed: that notwithstanding, The
beginning of these elders corruption.
it was not utterly extinguished. For there remained in every City their own
Judges and Elders, to wit, the Chiliarkes, the Centurions, etc. As appears,
Judge. 9. 6. Where mention is made. (...) Col Baale shichm ve col Beth millo. Of
all the Lords (in French (...) gnieurs) and as our Br. call these Elders or
seniors, governors ( or as it were Lordings) of Sichem and of the family or
kindred of Millo, that is, of the Princes of the cities that governed the same,
and of the whole assembly of the Citizens of the Sichemites: (for so I
interpret (...) Beth Millo) and out of the tenth chap. ver. 18. where it is
said, the whole people, that is, all the citizens and heads of the families of
Gilead it self, together also with the princes of Gilead, said every one to
his neighbor, etc. And in the 11. chapter v. 8. The self same princes are called
the Seniors or Elders of Gilead. As also chapter 8.14. The same to be called the
princes of the Succothites. And these things are also better apparent out of
Rut. 4. These kind of princes or Eld. did so flatter the people, The Elders
flattery of the people.
that they pretermitted many things perteining to their office, which
sufficiently appears by the whole history of the Judges. Whereupon is
manifest, that the Lord was so offended with the peoples Idolatries, that he
often admonished the people by the prophets, and at length corrected them also
by the Chananites.

Thus writes Bertram even of the first state of al these governing seniors,
and of all their senates and assemblies, immediately after Moses and Iosues
time, and in the time of Phinees that was living, even when that was done,
which our Bret. these Learned Discoursers cite out of Number. 11 16. for the
Institution of the seniors and Sanedrin, that they would bring in to rule now
over us, and say: That our savior Christ in that word (Congregation, Dic
ecclesia) alludeth, unto the assembly of Elders that was among the Jews which
they called (but corruptly) of a Greek word Synedrion, which signifies a
counsel or consistory, sanhedrin, which had the hearing and determining of all
weighty and difficult matters among the Jews, the like whereof, he willed to be
established in his church for administration of government, For, seeing it was
first instituted by God, The Concion of the elders.
for government of his church in the old Law, as has bin showed before out of
Number. 11.16. Although it was shamefully abused by the wicked Jews, our Savior
Christ translateth it into his Church in the new Testament. Here was indeed
some corruption in some of those officers that flattered the people: but, the
orders and the offices, remaining as yet entire, This then is the state of
government, that in plain and express terms, our Brethren would so feign have
us, and all the Church of Christ reduced unto. So that under a name and
color, (other-where) of Eccl. Seniors we may here most evidently see, what
Deciniers, what Fiftinaries, what Centurions, what Chiliarkes, these Tetrarkes
would be: yea, which is far above all this, (if they would be like the
Seniory of the 70, what principality they aspire unto, and in what matters of
weight and government, those governors would govern like Princes, having little
commonweales of their own in every town, Our Brethr. defacing the state of a
king.
city or province. And might not this full quickly breed as horrible factes,
and foul a stir, as was here between the Beniamites and the Israelites? If
they reply, it would not so, having a general Governor, which the Israelites
did then want. And what? would they have Judges also (as they had) tohelp this
inconuenie^ce* because Calvin and Danaeus would not have the Jurisdictions of
Magistrates go by inheritance: but by election? And this Bertrame ( that
likeneth these ancient Judges to Dictators) after he has showed how those
Judges also did degenerate, and that when the people called for a King: he
says, that Samuel taking it grievously referred it to the Lord: who
comforted, his prophet, and bids him diswade the people from this purpose,
Proposito Regis iure plane tyrannico, Laying forth the right or Law of a King
plain tyrannical. Thus does Bertram also esteem, not of the abuse, but of
the Law or right of a King: and all, to recommend unto us, that first policy
and Government of the Jews.

Now, whereas Bertram here mentions that the Provinces and tribes came
together, ad (...), that is, to the assembly, which he calls again Seu
Concionem vniuersale^ populi Dei, The Congregation or Concion universal of
Gods people, which was of 400000: in which general Concion the Leuite made his
complaint to the people of his injury: of this Concion let us see also, what
Carolus Sigonius writes. Who although he be otherwise an adversary, (and
therefore not of credit or authority in our controversies) yet in this matter
not litigious between them and us: and he both commended, and his promise of
this argument expected by this Bertram: let us at least wise see him so far
forth, as he truly and clearly gathers his collections out of the holy
scriptures, Carolus Sigonius de rep. Haebrae orum lib. 6. Cap. 2.
or out of the testimonies of other ancient and unsuspected authors, wherein we
cannot justly except against him.

In his book De rep. Hebraebrum. li. 6. c. 2. de consiliis: he says: Counsels
the^ I call those assemblies, that chiefly decreed those things, which contained
the state of the whole co^monweal, as the war, the peace, the victuals, the
bounds, the institution of laws, the creation of magistrates, and such things
as are of that sort. The which is nothing else but to dispute of a singular
profit, that could not be comprehended in the law. But these Counsels, as in
other commonweals, so also in that of the Jews, were two. For either they
were entered into of all in common: or seperatly of a few, and those of such as
were the auncienter in years. If they were of all, The Jews Councels.
they called it Concionem a Congregation, or calling together of the people. If
they were of part, they called it a Senate. And this also seems David to have
understood in the Psalms. For treating of the Praises of God, that ought to be
celebrated in all and of all assemblies: poetically he makes mention, both of
the concion, and of the Senate. As when he says- I will praise thee O Lord
with my whole heart, in the Council of the righteous, and in the Congregation.
And in another place, Let them extol him in the Church (or Congregation) of
the people, and praise him in the chair of the Elders. Again, I have hated the
Church of the Malignant, with the wicked I will not sit. For the concion, he
said, the congregation, in Greek (...), synagogue, and church: for the
senate, council, or (...). Senate or consistory, and chair of seniors. He
would also have adjoined a third, if the use of his common weal which he
looked upon had permitted.

By which it manifestly appears, that these two being thus distinguished, and
so different the one from the other: and the name of Ecclesia church or
congregation, being taken for the one, that is to say, for the concion or
gathering together of the multitude, clean different from the other, that is
to say, from the senate or consistory of the Elders: It is most evident, that
if in these words of Christ, Dic Ecclesiae, tell the church he alluded
either to the ancient or to the present state of the Jews order* that he meant
not any senate, consistory, or council of seniors, but a concion, a
congregation, or calling together of the whole multitude of the people.

Now although, this so clear a reason, (the distinction being als^ confirmed
by Bertram) might seem sufficient to cut off all Caluines interpretation* and
those that follow him, applying these words clean contrary, not to the
congregation, but to the Jews Seniory: yet, let us proceed further with
sigonius for our further understanding of both these councels. Moreover ( says
he) c. 3. Three ^^ate^ of the Jews and then 3. kinds of Conciou^.
The concion of the people in the holy scriptures is commonly expounded by 2.
terms, Synagoga and ecclesia, Synagog and church, as in the places right now
alleged, it is known. For as yet, there was not that difference between the
synagog and the church, which has come between the^, since the gospel
delivered by Christ, But as there were 3. (as it were) commonweals of the
Jews (even as I have declared from the beginning,) of the whole people, of
every one of the Tribes, and of every one of the cities in every tribe:
Sigonius of the Jews Senates.
so were there 3. Concions of the people. One, wherein all the tribes of
Israel, another, whereunto all the families of one tribe, the third, whereunto
all the men of every city came together. And of this last (except we shall yet
restrayn it narrower, to all the multitude of every synagogue in every city)
is this Ecclesia, Church, Concion or Congregation whereof Christ speaks to
be understoode, if it should be referred to the Jews state and orders. Now
after Sigonius has produed this by manifold testimonies out of the scriptures,
he comes to the fourth Chapter, concerning the Senate saying:

Having expounded the Concion, we have to speak of the Senate. But this also
the Hebrews had, Three kinds of the Jews Senates.
and that, (as the people) three-folde. One whereunto the Senators of all the
people came together: another, unto the which, they that were of every one of
the tribes: the third, they that were of every one of the Cities. The Senate
of the whole people was ordained by God, of threescore and ten men, which in
age excelled others in all Israel. For so he said, Number. 11. Gather together
to me threescore and ten of the seniors of Israel, whom thou know that
they be the elders of the people, and the scribes, and thou shall bring them
unto the door of the Tabernacle of the covenant, and thou shall make them
stand there with thee, etc. to bear the burden of the people and that thou
only be not burdened. The Grecians therefore called the men that were of this
order, a Senate, ancients, Seniors, and Senators: the Council they called
Bulen, the Council place Eulenterium, the men Buletas, as ye would say, a
Counsel, a council house, and councellers.

Here (Lo) is the place that our Bret. in thi^ their Learned Discourse have
now the second time auonched for their Seniors: that our Savior Christ has
translated the Senate of this seniory into his church, in the new Testament,
although it was shamefully abused by the wicked Jews. This Seniory indeed of
these 70. was instituted of God, for the Government of his Church in the old
Law. Since therefore this is the place chiefly pretended for the order and
authority of the Governors in the new Testament, the abuses of the Jews being
only abolished: let us not only look to the Jews corruptions and abuses, but
to the institution of God, and to the good use thereof in the old Law, that
our brethren say, is here passed over in the new Testament and translated unto
us to be perpetually used in every congregation. Our Br. will be Seniors of the
highest sort.


And here I like better of our Bret. wit, (that they would chose to be Seniors
of the best and highest Senate, not of the mean or lowest) than of their
wisdom: not foreseeing how this can not agree to every Parish, except every
parish should be made a kingdom. But why not? as yt he said: Si ius violandum
est, regni causa est violandum. They must needs be like the 70. Elders
assistent to Moses, the other inferior Elders will not serve them.

But these ( says Sigonius chap. 3.) sat by the chief Prince of the
Co^mon-weale in the Metropolitan City, and being of him admitted, together
with the Princes of the people, they entered into the Counsels, of the sum (or
chief state) of the affairs. Whereupon Josephus reports that, out of the
Law: Let the King do nothing without the sentence of the Bishop, and of the
Senators. Of these Counsels, there ar^ these testimonies: in the 5. of Deuteronomy.
Moses faith: All ye, the Princes of the Tribes and the Seniors came to me. And
in the 27. Moses and the Seniors commanded the people, saying: Keep all the
commandments that I command you. Also Iosue, 23. Iosue called all Israel
their Seniors, their Princes, their Judges, and their Scribes. From thence,
under the Judges, chap. 21. the Seniors or Elders decreed, that the Beniamites
should catch the virgins of the siloites to be their wives. Then under
Solomon in the 7. chap. of the 3. book of the Kings: The Elders in the time of
the kings.
All the Elders of Israel were gathered to the King Solomon in Jerusalem. And
in the 1. chapter of 2. Chr. Ezekias the King entered into counsel with the Elders,
concerning the stopping the heads of the fountains. And albeit, the kingdom
being divided, the Senate of the Jews was chosen out of the only Tribe of
Judah and of Benjamin: nevertheless the number of the 70. Elders was preserved.
For Ezechiel in the 8. chap. said: And the threescore and ten men of the
Elders of Israel, when notwithstanding in the Age of Ezechiel the 10. Tribes of
Israel were in Assyria. And Jeremy in the 19. named the Elders of the people,
Take an earthen bottell of the Elders of the people and of the Priests.

Neither only did this Senate flourishe while the kingdom stood: but also
the kingdom being overthrown, after the Jews return out of the captivity
of Babylon, the same was restored. The Elders since the captiui tie.
For in the 1. of Esaias it is written: I will restore thy Judges and thy
Counselors as in the ancient time. And in the 10. of Esdras ( which place we
have heard cited by Danaeus,) Every one that shall not come within three
days, according to the counsel of the Princes and of the Elders: all his
substance shall be forfaised. And the 12. of the first of the Machabees:
Ionathas the high Priest of the Nation, and the Elders, and the residue of the
people of the Jews. And in the first of the 2. book: The people that is at
Jerusalem, and the Senate, and Judas to Aristobulus the Master of King
Prolomeus, sends greeting. And in the 11. King Antiochus to the Senate of the
Jews, and to the other Jews. And in the 14. To Simon the Bishop, and to the
Seniors, and to the whole people. And Saint Luke 22. The Seniours of the
people: being called in Greek, the Presbytery (or Eldershippe) of the people.
Josephus also shows, that in last times of the City, Florus the Procurator
of Jury calling unto him the Princes of the Senators, Sigonius.
and the Senators, and the Senate, he said that he would depart out of the
City. And he adds, that with the Temple the Court also was set on fire,
which Court he calls, Buleuterion, the Counsell-house. But although this
Senate for consultation sake remained always: The Kings authority besides the
Senate.
notwithstanding we have to understand, that the Kings which have had the
Commonweal in their power, were not thrall unto the Laws, although they made
Decrees without the authority of the Senate, as those that were in chiefest
authority, not such as God had prescribed, but such as their selves wished.

Moreover, that the Tribes had every one their Senators, different from those
that were the Senators of the Common People, it is more probable by
conjecture, than certain by authority: For although it be written in the 20.
chap. of the 4. book of the Kings. All the Seniors of Judah and Jerusalem were
gathered together to the King Josias: and in the 30. of the first book, David
sent gifts of the Pray^, to the Seniors of Judah his neighbors: and 19. of
Hieremie, God said, I will destroy the Counsel of Judah: notwithstanding it may
be, that they that were the Seniors of Judah were all one with the Seniors of
the people. But without doubt, every one of the Cities had gotten their
Senators, separate from those whom we have spoken of. Whereupon are these
speeches, All the Seniors of Judah and Jerusalem, were gathered together to the
King Josias. And Josephus lib. 2. The Seniors of Jerusalem took it
greeuouslie, that the brother of Iaddi the Bishop, married a stranger. And
Judges 11. the Seniors of Galaad proceeded to take Iephthe for their aid, and
said unto him; Come and be our Prince. And in the 8. He took a child of the
men of Sucoth, and asked of him the names of the Princes and Seniors of Sucoth.
And Ruth 4. Booz taking ten men of the Seniors of the City of Bethleem said
unto them, etc.

Thus does Sigonius divide the Seniors into three sorts, The Se^niors of all
the people, the Seniors of every Tribe, and the Seniors of every City. And
if Christ had meant any of these Seniors, it is far more likely, that he
should have meant this last sort, if not some yet of lower degree than these,
of every Synagogue of the City, than the highest of all, that sat with the
Prince in Counsel, and had the consultation of all the sum and principal
points of all the Churches and Commonweals affairs: which were the manifest
endaungering of her Majesty's estate, Cap. 5.
and the clean altering of all the Commonweal.

In the next Chapter Sigonius proceeds to their Judgments, saying cap. 5. We
have spoken of the Counsels, in which chiefelie the Cities profit is disputed
upon. After which we have to speak of the Judgments, wherein the singular (or
particular) equity is defined, that could not either be provided for, or
prescribed by the Law. But these judgments, the Greek Interpreters of the
Bible, have now and then translated them (...), now and then (...), to wit,
respecting the double force it self of Judgments: in which condemning and
acquiting is contained, which by these two words Judgment and Justice or
justification they expressed, as we have showed before.

Furthermore, among the Hebrews there were two Tribunal seats, of the
Judgments, the one in every of the Cities called (...), The Synedrion at
Jerusalem.
the other chiefelie at Jerusalem named (...), which the Latin Interpreter
translated Judgment and Counsel. Whereupon in S. Matthew, Christ says;
Every one that is angry with his brother, shall be guilty of Judgment. But
he that shall say Racha, shall be guilty of a Counsel. But that the Judgment
was an other thing from the Counsel: David in the first Psalm shows, when
he said: Therefore the wicked shall not arise again in Judgment, neither
the sinners in the counsel of the righteous.

And here comes in our (...) corruptly called Sanedrin, that Calvin and
our Brethren apply Christ's words unto. Which Synedrion was the Judicial
Consistory of the seventy Elders, that with the Prince as Counselors, had
the government of all the policy of the Jews. But because the other called
(...), was the Judgment of every City: if Christ had meant to have alluded
to the Jews orders, and to have translated and established the same or the
like in every Congregation among the Christians: is it not more likely of the
twain, he would have taken that which was the Judgment of every City: than
the (...), which was only in Jerusalem the head City, a chief Judgment to
over rule all the other.

But yet for our further resolution, let it not be tedious to hear also
Sigonius testimonies at large, Cap. 6.
for both these Judgments of these Seniors. Let us first ( says he, chap. 6.
treat of the Judgments of the Cities, and then of the Counsel of Jerusalem,
when they were instituted and confirmed, who they were that entered into them,
who were Governors of them, where they came together, and to conclude, in what
order they took notice of the causes. I say therefore, that the Judges of the
Cities with their Princes, which in Greek were called (...), introducers,
informers, What elders the Judges of the cities were.
or teachers of the writings, or of the Law written, ( or as we might call
them Masters of the Rolls, which were after called Scribes) were instituted of
Moses in the Wilderness, first by the authority of Iethro his Father in law,
and afterward by commandment of God.

For when Moses the first year in the Wilderness sat to hear causes, he
was warned by Iethro his Father in law that he should spare that labor, and
appoint wise men, skillful and prudent, to judge in his steed, and reserve to
himself only the understanding of matters that were of more importance. He
therefore appointed them the Princes (of whom after shall be spoken) Tribunes,
Centurions, Governors of fifty, Governors of ten, or as the Greek setts them
out, Chiliarks, Hecatontarks, Pentecontarks, Decadarks, to be introducers of
the causes to the Judges, or preferred them to be Grammatoisagogeos, the
Chauncelors, or the Primitories, or the enterers in writing of the actions.
Exodus 18. And choosing valiant men out of all. Israel, he appointed them
Princes of the people, Tribunes and Centurions, and Captains over fifty, and
Captains over ten, which should judge the people at all times. Wherefore,
after the 40. year, rehearsing to the people the acts that he had done, he
alleges in the first of Deuteronomie, I said unto you, I am not able alone
to sustain your businesses, What princes the Elders were, inferior to the
Synedrio^ Elders.
and burden, and brawlings, give ye out of your selves, wise men and skillful,
and whose conversation is approved in your Tribes, that I might place them to
be Princes. Then ye auns^ered me; It is a good thing that thou will do. And I
took wise men, and noble out of your Tribes, and appointed them to be Princes,
Tribunes and Centurions, and Rulers over fifty, and Rulers of ten, which
should teach you all things. And I commanded them saying: Hear ye them, and
judge ye that which is righteous, whether he be a citizen, or be be a
stranger, let there be no difference of persons. Ye shall as well hear the
small as the great, neither shall ye accept the person of any whosoever,
because it is the judgment of God. But if any thing shall seem difficult unto
you, refer that to me, and I will hear it. But the Graecians have it more
plain and more apt to unfold the manner of these Judgments: And I appointed
them to rule over you Chiliarkes, (or Rulers of thousands): Hecatontarks, (or
Rulers of hundreds): Pentecontarks, (Quinquegenariens or Rulers of fifty):
Deacharks, or Rulers of ten): and Grammatoisagogists, (or the enterers in
writing, or inrollers of the pleas,) unto your Judges. For in steed of that
which the latin interpreter translateth, which should teach you al things:
the greek rehearses it, (...), to the informers in writing unto your Judges (
the text it self is, and Governors to your tribes. Afterward the law of God
came hereunto, wherein concerning these judges it was enacted chap. 16, in
these words, Thou shall ordeine unto thee, Judges and Masters in all thy
Cities, which the Lord God shall give to thee, according to the Tribes. And
they shall judge the people with righteous judgment, neither shall they wrest
the judgment, neither shall they acknowledge the person of any, neither shall
they take gifts.

And in this place for Masters, the Greek sets out, Grammatoisagogeos, the
informers in writing (or of the Law written. This Law Josephus so rehearses,
that he shows, the Judges were also chosen by lot: Let those also which by
lotte have come forth to judge, be in chiefest honor in the cities, and let no
reproaches be spoken in their presence. Let the judges have the right of
pronouncing that which they think, except that any shall show that they have
received rewards to judge, or shall allege any other cause of wrong
judgment.

But as Moses ordained them, The Elders in the time of Iosaphat
so afterward king Iosophat confirmed them in the kingdom of Judah, as is
declared in the 19. Chap. of the second book of Chronicles, He ordained
Judges of the land, in all the dedefenced Cities throughout all places. And
commanding the Judges, he said: Take heed what ye do, for ye exercise
not the judgment of man, but of the Lord. And whatsoever you shall judge,
shall redound upon your selves. Let the fear of the Lord be with you, and
do all things with diligence. With our Lord GOD there is no iniquity, nor
accepting of persons, not desire of rewards.

After this, These Elderships restored after the captivity.
the judgments being disturbed in the land of Babylon, the Jews when they
returned into their Country, as they did other matters, so they restored
these. Which thing that it should come to pass, Esaie Chap. had forewarned,
when as he uttered these speeches of God: And I will restore thy Judges as
they were before. And after that, the king Artaxerxes commanded that it should
be so done. For so he wrote in the sixth of Esdras: Ordeine thou Judges and
Scribes, that they might judge all the people. For he called them Scribes,
whom we have named Grammatoisagogeos, the informers of the writings or
written Law. Whereupon (that they were restored) the Psalmist rejoiced (as
says Saint Athanasius) which when the city of Jerusalem was reedified, and
the judgments restored, even as it was foretold of the Lord, breaking
forth for joy, he song in the Psalm. 121. I was glad in those things that
were spoken to me, we will go into the house of the Lord, our feet standing
in thy Courts O Jerusalem. Jerusalem which is built as a City, whose
participation is in it self. For thither the Tribes ascended. The Tribes of
the Lord the testimony of Israel, to confess the name of the Lord, because
they set the seats there in judgment, or, into judgment, as the Greek has
it, the seats upon the house of David. And so afterward even until the
last times of the Jews.

But these Judges seem to have been chosen out of the body of the Senators of
every city. From whence the Synedrian Elders were chosen.
Even as from the first times also among the Romans, the judgments were
executed of the Senators. The Law it self in many places teaches it. Deuteronomy.
19. If the smiter shall fly into one of the foresaid Cities, the Senate of
that City shall send and take him out of the place of refuge. And in 21.
When a corpse is found, and the slaier shall not be known, the Senate of the
City shall go out and measure from that place, etc. Whervppon Ruth 4. ^ooz
taking ten men of the Seniors of the City of Bethleem, said unto them: Sit ye
here and be witnesses. The people that was in the gate, and the Seniors
answered, we are witnesses, and before them he took the possession of
Elimelech. Moreover Philo in lib. de Iudice. gathers out of the Law four
conditions of good Judges, etc. Furthermore, that the Judgments were exercised
in the gate of the Cities, that was called the gate of Judgment: the Law,
Deuteronomi. 21. declares, etc. and 25. and also Iosue 8. etc. and Ruth 4.
etc. Proverbs 22. and 31. and Psalm. 126. etc.

These Judgments were made in this manner. He that desired to commence an
action against another, resorted to one of the Princes of of the Judges, which
were called Grammato-isagogei, the Scribes, or informers of the writtes or
writings, and showed forth his cause, and requested of him that he would
bring it in unto the Judges. But if he received the controversy (for he might
also reject it) he brought in the same at a day appointed before the Judges.
Whereupon he received the name ( Introductoris) of an introducer, etc. But the
Thalmudistes have showed that the matter was handled on this wife; They that
demanded the Law, came to the Judges of their City: who, if they heard them
not, they went to them of the next City. But and if so be, that neither yet
they hearkened unto them: then they went unto the Judges of Jerusalem, which
sat in two gates. After whom, from them, if that yet they obtained not their
purpose, they fled to the Council, the which they called Sanhedrin. Their
words (such as are rehearsed by Petrus Galatinus, Petrus Galatinus of the
process in the courts of judgment.
a man in time past an Hebrew) are these.

In the beginning there was no controversy in Israel, but the house of the
Judgment of the threescore and ten Judges, sat in diverse places. For one of
the houses sat in the gate of the Mount, that is, of the Temple: but another
in the gate of the Porch. As for the other houses of the three and twenty
Judges, fate in every of the Cities of of Israel. But when any thing was to
be demanded, it was demanded of the house of Judgment, which was in the
self same City. If they heard it, Dicebant, they declared it (or gave
sentence thereon): but if not, they came to that order that was in the next
City. Who if they heard it: they declared it unto them (or gave sentence). If
not, they went to that order which was in the gate of the Porche of the Lords
house, and said, Sic exposui, and sit socij mei exposuerunt: sic docui, and
sic socij mei docuerunt, Thus have I showed it, and thus have my fellows
showed it: thus have I taught, and thus have my fellows taught it. Who if they
heard it: they declared it unto them. If not, then both these and those went to
the Consistory Gazith, wherein the Sanedrin sat from the morning till the
evening. But in the Sabbothes and first days they sat in the wall.

Thus far the Thalmudistes. And thus far also Sigonius, for the judgments
of the Seniors in every City. Whereby again we perceive the authority that
these Seniors had. The next and seventh chapter is all of this Senate, that
Calvin and our Brethren say, Christ alluded unto, and has translated unto us.

But the Consistory Gazith ( says Sigonius) which the Graecians have named
(...), and Chair, the Latins Council, the Thalmudists Sanhedrin, was the
ample (or honorable) Tribunal (or judgment seat) of all the Judges, both in
number and in dignity, in that City which the Lord has chosen and decreed,
to be the head both of holiness and of the Empire, that is, first in Silo, and
afterward at Jerusalem, or else, first in the Tribe of Ephraim, and afterward
in the Tribe of Judah.

In that Council it was established, that those things which could not be
defined of the Judges of every of their Cities, varying in their sentences
concerning the Law, or concerning the fact, Petrus Gala^tnus collection of the
Thalmudists concerning the Sanedrin.
should in conclusion be referred hereunto.

But now being about to treat of this Tribunal, I will first show forth
all those things, that are declared of the Thalmudists. And then I will add,
what I my self have found by reading in the holy Writers. Thus therefore
have they in diverse places.

In the time of Moses by the commandment of God, seventy Elders of ancient
years and tried in knowledge were chosen out, which should be Coadiutors of
Moses himself, in the government of the people, unto whom it pertained both
to declare all the difficulties of the Law, and to define them, and also in
weighty matters and hard causes to give judgment. Of whom is written, that
in the Deuteronomie: If thou shall perceive that a difficult and doubtful
judgment is before thee: arise and go up to the place, which the Lord thy
God shall have chosen, and there shall thou call upon his name.

As for these they were called by the term Sanhedrin, and they sat in the
Consistory Gazith, to judge the judgments of the lives, and they were called
Meokekim, that is, Scribes, or Lawe-makers, because that whatsoever they
delivered, and wrote, was holden of others as a Law. The College of whom
represented the Scepter, given of the holy Ghost to the house of Jacob. And
the scepter it self depended on the^. Whereupon not only they that were
resiant under the kings and Captains (or Dukes) exercised the power of
judging, but also while there was no king nor Duke extant among the Jews,
nevertheless the authority of them endured.

But there were 4. manners of putting to death delivered to them. To stone them,
to burn them, to occidere.
wound them to death, and to strangle them. Whereupon their use was, that when
they had destroyed any bodies life, The authority of the Synedrian Elders.
that is, when they had judged any to be slain: all that day they tasted
nothing. Moreover, the Judgments concerning money or goods mooueable, were
made by three Judges, the Judgments of the lives by three and twenty. But
none judged the Scepter, or a false Prophet, or the high Priest, but the house
of the 70. Judges. Neither did they go forth to war, except according to
the mouth (or sentence) of the house of the Judgment of the 70. Judges. Nec
addebant Ciuita^^, neither increased they the city (or indenized any) nor the
salaries (or stipends) of the Temple, except by them. Neither made they the
Sanhedri^th, that is, the meetings (or Sessions) of the Judges for the Tribes,
but by them.

The great College was of 71. Judges, the less of 23. But the 70. Seniours
were those, of whom (it is said Number. 11. Gather to me threescore and ten
Elders, and Moses one. Their lesser Sanedrion, assembly, (or meeting) of them,
could not be ordained, but of the assembly (or meeting) of the 70. that were
the greater. For those 70. Judges ordained the assemblies of the other Judges,
which in other Cities and places round about governed the people, howbeit on
this condition, that every Assembly of whatsoever Region it were, should be
under the Assembly in Jerusalem, and in the place called Gazith. But the
Judges were chosen with the imposition of hands, The Elders chosen with
imposition of hands.
insomuch that five were necessary for the doing of that office. But these
Sanhedrins, Herod the King took away. Other after that were substituted, but
without the power of blood, (or of life and death) whereupon they answered
Pilate, It is not lawful for us to kill any man. The power of the Sanedrin
diminished in Christ's time.
From thence forth, for their false judging of Christ, they were expulsed out
of the Consistory Gazith, forty years before the Temple was burned by the
Romans, and they sat in Hamih. But it was not lawful, De Capite agere, to
deal with matters of life and death, except in Gazith. As it is Deuteronomy. 17. And
thou shall do^ according to the word of the mouth, They lost their place and
dignity after their falls judging of Christ.
that they shall show unto thee out of that place. And again, Thou shall
arise and go up to that place. At the last, al these Judges also were again
killed of the Romans.

And these things verelie have the Thalmudists, who challenge to themselves an
assured knowledge of these things, whereof Petrus Galatinus is the Author.
But unto those things which they have written, The Romans destruction of
these Elders
having found them out as it were with their eyes, we adioyne these things,
out of the holy Treasuries of the new and old Testament, and besides out of
the Monuments of Josephus, by the which we shall lay forth the institution,
confirmation, right and power of this Council, First of al therefore it
appears, that this tribunal (or judgment seat) was ordained of God, that
from the judgment of the judges, they should come to the council of the
seniors and of the priests, as it is written. 17. Deuteronomy. For Moses speaks
there by the praescription of God unto the people: But if so be thou shall
perceive a difficult and doubtful judgment to be before thee, between blood
and blood, cause and cause, Gods ordinance, Deuteronomy. 17. of these Elders power in
judgment.
Lepry and not Lepry: and thou shall see the Judgments of the judges within
thy gates. To v^ry, arise and go up unto the place which the Lord thy God
shall choose, that thou might there call upon his name. And thou shall come
to the priests of the Leuiticall stock, and to him that shall be Judge for that
time, and thou shall ask it of them. Who shall show unto thee the truth of
the Judgment. And thou shall do whats^euer they shall say, that rule the
place, which the Lord shall choose. and they shall teach thee his Law, and
thou shall follow their sentence. Neither shall thou swerve from it, to the
right hand nor to the left. And whatso^uer shall be proud, refusing to obey the
Priests commandment, which at that time ministers unto the Lord his God:
that man by the decree of the Judge shall dye.

Out of these it appears, that this Judgment was committed to the king, to
the priests, and to the Elders of the people. For they were the chief that
ruled the place that the Lord had chosen. Josephus.
Josephus therefore does so rehearse this law, that he makes chief mention
of the senate. For then he wrote: But if the Judges want knowledge to pronounce
of the matters brought before them: let them send the whole cause into the
holy City, and the Bishop, and the Prophet, and the Senate, shall pronounce
that, that seems unto them. But afterward Moses names the Judges them
selves, whom we have spoken of, preests, saying in the 19. chapter. If a lying
witness shall stand against a man, accusing him of trespass: they shall both
of them stand before the Lord, and before the priests, and before the Judges
that shall be in those days. But Josephus cites it of the priests
themselves, in his second book to Appion, when as he wrote: Josephus li. 2. ad
Appionem.
The Priests were ordained of Moses the viewers of all things, the Judges of
the controversies, the punishers of the condemned.

Moreover Moses himself, in the counsel took knowledge (or hearing) of his
cause, that gathered sticks on the sabbath. Leuit. 15. For so says Philo. 3.
De vita Mosu. They took the man and brought him to the Prince, about whom in
the Counsel sat the Priests, Philo. li. 3. de vita Mosis.
but all the multitude was present on the Sabbath day to hear them. But Moses
not knowing what punishment the man deserved, asked counsel of God, who
answered, that he should be stoned to death.

By this it appears that all the parties that sat in this Sanedrin, except
the Kings and the Princes persons were Teachers of the Law and and word of
God. Yea, in all the other inferior Seniories they were noble men that only
were joined to the Teachers. But as Moses ordained this tribunal, so afterward
Iosaphat King of Judah ordained, as he also confirmed the judgments in the
cities. For thus it is written in the second of Paral. He appointed also in
Jerusalem, Levites, and Priests, and Patriarchs, out of Israel that they
should judge the cause of the Lord to the inhabiters thereof, and commanded
them saying: thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord faithfully and with a
perfect heart. Every cause that shall come unto you of your Brethren which
dwell in their cities, between kindred and kindred, wheresoever the Question
of the Law, of the ceremonies, of the justification (in the Greek translation
it is, of the precept, commandment iustifications and judgments) He declared
unto them, that they should not offend against the L. And least wrath should
come upon you and upon your Brethren. Doing thus therefore ye shall not sin.
But Anainas your B. shall govern in those things which pertain to God, Zabadias
the son of Israel, which is Capten in the tribe of Judah, shall be over those
works which pertain to the offices of the king. The Masters, (in Greek the
Scribes) The Levites shall be before them.

Into this counsel therefore, as it appears, there entered the king, with the
Princes of the people, What manner of persons the Elders were in the Sanedrin.
and the 70. seniors of the people, and the Bishop with the princes of the
priests, and the scribes, that is the doctors of the Law, as is easy to see
out of the Gospels, where the judgment made on Christ is treated upon.
Wherefore Joseph of Arimathia a senator or noble decurion, the same man being a
partaker of the council, for it is written, that he gave not his assent with
the other to the condemnation of Christ. But I call them the Princes of the
Priests, which in 24. forms of the Priests, every one of them ruled in every
one of their turns, but the Scribes I call them, that were the doctors of the
Law, whom Josephus called Prophe^s.

Afterward the Council in the transmigration of Babylon being destroyed: when
the Jews being returned into their country, the residue of their institutions
were restored, the power of Judging in the Council was also given unto the
priests. The power of the preests in the Sanedrin.
Which thing Ezechiel. cap. 44. did fore-warne, by the commandment of Go^,
saying: The Priests shall teach my people, what difference there is between
holy and profane, and they shall Judge unto them between impure, and pure, and
they shall endeavor themselves that they may judge about the judgment of
blood, and they shall justify my iustifications, and judge my judgments, and
they shall keep my laws, and my preceps in all my feast days, that is, they
shall take notice of causes of religion and of capital matters ( that is, of
life and death) and they shall justify men, that is, absolve them: and judge
men, that is, condemn them, even as I have prescribed in the Law to be done,
where I have declared who are worthy of pardon, and who of punishment.

But some there are that think this counsel to have been chosen out of the
family of David, and that they were afterward taken away of Herod the King
Which if it be so, whether the words of the Psalm sung (as S. Athanasius
witnesses) in the restoring of the City of Jerusalem, may be referred
thereunto: because there, that is, in Jerusalem, sat the seats unto
judgment, the seats upon the house of David, that is, the seat out of the
house of David. But either the King or the Bishop called this counsel,
according as the crime brought before them either touched the City or Religion.

But the order of executing the matter was almost in this manner. He that
desired to put up the name of another, for the most part came either to the
king, or to the Bishop, or to the Princes, and declared the guilty party. Which
done they sent Ministers to take the man. The order and process in the
Sanedrin.
And if the matter required, they added a band also, received from the
governor of the Temple. And having brought him, they kept him for the most
part either in prison, or in soldiers custody, until judgment passed on him.
The whole Council being afterward called together, they gave themselves to
the understanding of the matter. As for the crime and the punishment, was of
the accusant called upon, in these words: The Judgment of death is due to
this man, because he has done this or that. But the Defendant repelled it,
with these words. The appealants accusation.
The Judgment of death is not due to this man, because he has not done it,
or because he has done it righteously.

But when the cause has been thoroughly pleaded upon, then were the suffrages
(or voices) given of the judges, and either he was condemned or absolved,
according to the number of the sentences. But when the matter was brought to
the Romans: the only condemnation was left to the Council, but the the
punishment was taken away, but, permitted unto the Roman procurator. Which
happened in the judgment of Christ. For the Council condemned Christ, and
adjudged him to death. But the people being stirred up of the Council,
demanded of Pilate the Procurator, that he might be crucified, and he gave
judgment that it should so be done.

The form of laying the accusation or of repelling the crime, as in the 26 of
Hieremie: the priests and the prophets spoke unto the princes of Judah,
saying: the judgment of death is unto this man, The fo^me of the accusation in
Jeremy and of his acquitall.
because he has prophesied against this City. And the princes said unto the
priests: the judgment of death is not unto this man, because he has spoken
unto us in the name of the Lord our God. A form of the condemnation is in S.
Math. 26. Behold now ye have heard blasphemy what seems it to you? and
they answering, said: he is guilty of death: the which thing Mark says: The
form^ of the Synedrion in co^demning Christ.
Who all of them condemned him to be guilty of death: but these things which
we have spoken shall all be more clear known, if every one of the iudementes
made after this order, whereof record is left in writing shall be showed forth.

And here he proceeds to the manifold testimonies and examples hereof in the
Scripture, and in Josephus, but especially in the new testament.

By all which it appears for this Senate or council of the 70, Seniors, (
which after the Jews mixture with the Graecians, of (...) was corruptly called
Sanedrin) what persons they were, except the King and the Princes, all of them
either priests or teachers of the Laws of God, And how they sat but in one
and the head City, assistant with the King and the princes, in all matters of
plea and controversy, of Lands and goods, of war and peace, of life and
death, etc. Nor the King could rule these matters without them, and that their
authority herein grew not so much by the late corruptions: as it was rather
thereby abridged in the age of Christ, by the Romans and by Herod.

If now our Learned discoursing Brethren shall reject all these so industrious
collections of Sigonius ( as an adversary) what proofs, Bertrams^ confirmation
of these things.
reasons, and authorities soever he avouch: let us then see, how far forth
Bertram also does confirm it. For, besides that which we have alleged out of
him, for the original and the first practice thereof, before the government of
the Kings: after the negligence of Saul speaking of David, chap. 10. Page 56.
he says:

Moreover David restored the municipall judgments altogether into their
ancient order. ^ert. de politia Iudaica, ca. 10. page 56
Howbeit, but about the last times of his reign: because, that being hindered
with wars and diverse businesses, he was content with those Judgments,
which for a great part being decayed, perseuered (but little constantly) in
every of the Cities and tribes, even from the times of Iosue, until then. But
yet so, that the more weighty causes (especially the appeals) were referred to
him, as it appears out of 2. Sam. 15.2.

But at the length, he also restored this part of the common weal, so that
unto the Levites reckoned up, he established to be firm, their changable and
uncertain offices, The Levites were the governors in the Jews Senats.
both in the holy (or Ecclesiastical) policy, and also in the civil. In the
civil policy, he is said to have appointed out of the Levites, 6000. Judges
and praefectes (or Governors). Out of the Levites, the Judges and praefectes
were assumed, for this reason: That first there should be certain out of the
Levites which should be assistors or sitters together with the ordinary and
municipall judges, that were called seniors. Who sometimes also De plane (vt
Vulgo loquuntur) Iudicarent de rebus leuioribus, should Judge after a plain
sort (as is the common saying) of the lighter matters, The matters that the
Leui^es judged.
such as were the pecuniarie, either they alone, or taking some one unto them
of the Seniors of the place or City. And moreover, that there should also be
some other, which should execute the matters adjudged. Bertram.
Or else, 1. Chro. 26.29.
(that which is indeed the more likely) they that were the Assisors of the
ordinary Judges, who also their selves took notice of the pecuniarie matters,
and judged them, and executed the matter it self that they had judged. He
ordained therefore that Chanenias and his sons, or his posterity should be
designed for judges and Prefects for the outward work, that is to say, for
the outward holy offices that we necessary for the making of sacrifices, in
the house of the Lord, or Tabernacle, in Israel, that is, among the Israelites,
that dwelt on this side Jordan, except the Tribes of Judah, Benjamin, and
Simeon. The number of these is nor prescribed.

He also ordained out of the Hebronites, Hasabias, and his brethren, that they
should govern the Western coasts, side-long (or on the side) of Jordan, that
is, on the hether-hand Jordan, as well in the business of the Lord, as in the
service or ministry, or obeisance of the king. In French, Pour le service du
Roy, that is, in the businesses (or affairs appertaining to the Royal
administration or civil policy, as shall afterward appear, This Western
coast contained the Tribe of Judah, Benjamin, and Simeon. Which Tribes of those
that are on this hand Jordan, do lie Westward. The other which are attributed
to Israel, are Northern. Hasabias and his brethren are accounted 1700 He
ordained also, How David distributed the governments and bounds of the Levites
Seniories.
that out of the Hebronites, the brethren, or the next a kin of Ierias, the
Prince of all his family, to the number of 1700. should govern the Rubenites,
the Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasses. For every matter of God, that
is, Ecclesiastical: and for the matter of the ning, that is, the civil. Of
the same family therefore were adhibited to govern the Church, and to govern
the civil policy, neuerthesse, in such sort, that there was no confusion and
permixture: as it appeateth out of those things that were restored of Iosaphat.
It seems therefore, that then, and from thence upward, even to the times of
Iosue; there were certain Ecclesiastical assemblies of the Levites, at every
one of the Synagogues of every one of the Cities, or verily at tho, e cities,
which were proper to the Levites, as in the 15. chap. we shall more at large
declare.

Thus was the state again rightly restored to the original (as Bertran says)
in David's time, and that by his industry and supreme authority. Wherein we
see what those Seniors only were, that here meddled not only with
Ecclesiastical, but civil government, to wit, all of them Levites. And such
as might teach the law. For the other, (which were the Elders of other Tribes)
dealt only in ciuill-matters, except the Prince alone, that had the
principal charge over both the Tables, though not to execute, yet to see
executed (by the persons competent in both founctions) as well the
Ecclesiastical as the civil policy. And thus as David did dispose the
regiment of these Seniors, a little before his death, so no doubt, but that
his son Solomon did all his life observe it. Solomon maintained herein David's
orders.
After whom (says Bertram) concluding that Chapter: In the time of Jeroboam
the judgments began to degenerate, especially after the Empire was divided.

But entering again into a fresh re^toring thereof in the 11. Chapter, he
proceeds, Iosaphats restoring ^he Jews Seniories.
saying: Iosaphat having taken possession of the kingdom, proceeded both in
restoring the Ecclesiastical and civil policy. To this purpose therefore he
thought it very expedient. if first of all he removed the high places and the
groves (as a little after we shall thoroughly handle it.) And then, that he
should send five of his Princes, Beuchail, Abdias, Zacharias, Nathaniel, and
Micheas, unto whom he adioined two of the Priests, and nine Levites. And he
sent them throughout all the Cities of the kingdom of Judah, etc. beginning at
Beer-sheba, and ending at the mount of the Tribe of Ephraim, to reclaim his
people to the worship of God. To confirm this, he is said to have ordained
Judges, in all the defenced Cities, City by City, that is, in every of the
Cities, or, for City and City and City. He placed the judgment in the
chiefeft Cities, to the which judgments the causes of the lesser Cities, 2.
Chro. 19.
Pages, and Islands should be referred. These Judges are to be taken in that
manner as they were instituted at Jerusalem, to wit, Ecclesiastical and
civil. So that they appointed civil judgments out of the Seniors of every
City, and the Levites are said to be adhibited, to be the governors unto
either of the judgments, to wit, after the same manner, whereby David had
assigned them to that office, as appears out of the end of the Chapter.

He also ordained Judges at Jerusalem out of the Levites and the Priests and
heads of the Fathers of Israel, partly for the judgments of the Lord, that
is the Ecclesiastical, partly also Ad Li^^m.
for plea, that is, for the civil judgment. In these words, the two
judgments, to wit, the Ecclesiastical and the civil, are distinguished. The
civil (as it seems to consist on the heads of the Fathers of the people)
seems to be the Synedrion of the three score and ten Elders. The Synedrion.
In those heads of the Fathers, we may place the Priests and the Levites: for
the institution of the seauentie themselves had their governors, which were
the Levites. But those seventy were not now taken out of those seventy
families, of whom we spoke before. But of those only that were under the
dominion of Iosaphat. Whereupon also at the length, they were chosen out of the
only house and family of David. As concerning those Judges being chosen, are
said to return unto Jerusalem: This may be so understood, that leaving the
allottme^t of their Tribe those Judges came to abide at Jerusalem, or that they
used to meet at Jerusalem, where the judgment was to be entered. It is likely
that the Ecclesiastical judgment did then consist of the Priests and Levites
only.

These two judgments were the chief and principal, whereunto the more
difficult causes were referred, as the Lord had commanded in the Law. For
the King in his exhortation set forth unto the same Judges, confirms this
sufficiently, while he says: And ye shall judge every strife which shall
come from your Brethren that dwell in their Cities, etc. The matter of either
judgment may seem to be al one, but in a diverse respect, that is to wit,
Ecclesiastical and civil, The diuer^ respect of Eccl. and civil in one and the
same cause.
according as in the same cause somewhat was Ecclesiastical, and somewhat
civil, as in a pawn divided, etc. Moreover, the high Priest was sometimes
demanded concerning the Law, that it might at length be determined concerning
the fact.

To conclude (as these judgments were the highest) they had at Jerusalem their
municipal judgment, which seems to appertain to the king and to his
officers, or rather to the Chiliarks, Centurions, etc. of that territory.
Notwithstanding so, that the whole jurisdiction should be subject to either of
those judgments. By these things therefore, this King seems rather than any
other judge or King, to have come near to the natural institution of the Law
prescribed, concerning this matter. Here again do we see a clear example,
of that Seniory which Calvin and our Brethr. do so much urge, drawing nearest
to that very institution of the old law, without the corruption that they
except against.

And they ( says Bertram) that were the governors of the supreme civil
judgment, do seem for the same cause to be those, which with the later kings
are called (...), Sarim, that is, princes, and (...) Chorim, that is,
Patricians (or noble Fathers.) That these Princes were out of the heads of the
Fathers, and out of the ordinary Judges, it appears out of the things
aforesaid, and especially, out of these things that are declared in this
restitution of Iosaphat, yea rather, The great principality of these Elders.
out of the Prophets often reprehensions, being so converted and composed to
these Princes, that they altogether respect their judgments. Verily of this
so great Empire (or principality) there seem to be extant in Jeremy most
clear examples. So that, except these Elders which our Brethren plead for,
(to be renewed after the example and pattern of the ancient laws of the Jews)
would take this Princely Empire and authority upon them: their appealing to
these ancient laws and orders, make nothing for them. But yet to see their
authority better: let Bertram proceed with his examples, though some of them
we have heard before in Sigonius.

The first (example) is extant, Iere. 26. Chap. where after that Jeremy was
condemned of the Priests and Prophets (that is) of the ecclesiastical
Co^session, or Consistory, Ierem. 2.
and of them that professed the knowledge and interpretation of the divine
letters ( or of divinity as we term it) as though the knowledge of doctrine
pertained unto them: whereupon they also which of Jeremy are called Prophets,
of Ionathas the Paraphrast are expounded, Scribes) and also was condemned of
the whole people, that is, of the ordinary advocates of the people, the
Judges, or Seniors, to wit, the Chiliarkes, Centurions, etc. Which represented
the whole people, insomuch that, verse. 9. the whole people is gathered to the
congregation or concio^. And in the 17. verse mentioned is made (...) Caal.
That is, of the gathering together, or of the universal concion it self: or
certainly, the very people their selves (that heard Jeremy) being called
together to bear witness against him, and to subscribe to the sentence
pronounced against him, and to command it to be executed, as it appears in
the end of the Chapter: and that the same was declared to the Princes of Judah
that were assembled at the kings palace, to wit, to the civil Consistory of
three score and ten Elders: Jeremy acquitted by those Elders
these kind of Princes came to the Temple, where they are said to have sitten,
at the tribunal or judgment seat, at the new gate of the Temple, and the
people being admitted thereto (according ao the manner, to wit, that we have
now declared) they heard the Prophet and absolved him also, even as though in
that their judgment they had condemned and corrected Iohakim the king
himself, which had most cruelly murdered Vrias the Prophet.

Here again is a lively pattern of the great authority in cases of life and
death for matter of religion, that the Consistory of the Elders had. Which
here notably and sincerely (by reason of some good men among them) acquitted
Jeremy according to the ancient manner of Gods law. This then is the
authority that Calvin and our Brethren pretend, Christ translated to his
Church, stretching so far, as not only to the acquitting of the Prophets:
but to the condemning and correcting even of kings and Princes.

The second (example) is Chap. the 36. where Baruch having recited before the
people, Bertrams 2. example of those Elders power. Ierem. 36.
the writing that he had writ^en out after Ieremies mediting thereof: he is
called to for the Kings palace, unto these kind of Princes, before whom he
reads a fresh that same writing. When it was read, they lay it up in the
chamber of the Scribe (or Chancellor, as the Geneua Bible translates it):
they inquiring how it was written, do admonish Baruch to hide himself
together with the Prophet. The Princes go to the king, they report to him the
sum of the writing. The King himself commands the writing to be brought to
him. And when he had heard three leaves thereof, he cut out the writing with a
Scribes penknife. And when he was besought of three of them only, that he
would not burn the book: he ceased not to burn it, as a matter that did not
displease the residue of the Princes, who also even for that point are noted of
the Prophet, that they trembled not, nor yet, rent their garments, at the
reading of that writing.

Here again, we see their great authority in this matter of doctrine, and
how the king (at their silence or consent of the writing) presumed to cut out
the leaves, and burn them in spite, as a thing that no whit displeased the
greatest part of these Consistory Princes, although that some few among them
entreated him to the contrary.

The third example is extant, Ierem. 37. and 38. where it is said, Bertrams 3.
example. Ier. 37. and 38.
that Jerusalem having been besieged of the Chaldees: Jeremy was apprehended
of Ierias a certain watchma^, at the gate of Benjamin, as though he were a
runne-awaie, and being brought to these kind of Princes, who ^ere very much
chafed against the Prophet, and having beaten him, they cast him into a most
filthy prison. Sedechias ( which was the next King ^^cceeding) secretly called
for Jeremy out of that filthy prison ( he so feared those Princes) and
remoueth him into a more gentle custody, where he continued dutifullie.
Whereupon it comes to pass, that those Princes go about to wring from the
king the sentence of deaeh against the Prophet, to wit, that the king should
consent unto his death. Pretending, that he discouraged the peoples minds,
and that he studied not for their benefit. The King answered that Jeremy was
in their hands, neither that the king might prevail against them in any
thing, as though he confessed that he was far their inferior. Which he
shows enough, when afterward he says, that he is afraid, The Elders
superior to the king.
least those Princes should inquire, what speeches he had with the Prophet too
and fro, whereupon also he faineth a lie, as though he had been to give an
account to them, of the things that he had done. By these means it is
brought to pass, that the order of the judgments thus restored: endured
until the times of the Babylonicall captivity.

This was the state of that Consistory of the Jews, which of all other our
Brethren have picked out, and urge so earnestly to have it set up amongst us,
pretending that Christ restored it, and translated it from them to his Church,
and all by the virtue of these words, (...), Tell the Church, as forcible
words in their imagination, to make this Metamorphosis of the state of all
Christian Kings and kingdoms, as ever the Papists pleaded for those words of
Christ, Hoc est Corpus meum: they for their Transubstantiation in the
Sacrament, and these for this translation in the Regiment. Pretending (as
Bertram shows hereupon) that the state was not only Monarchical, but
chiefly Aristocraticall, the government of the best men, to the which purpose
he alleges these examples. Although (God wot) these three last examples ( in
this state that he calls restored) were of men for the most part of them,
whom he might have less praised (if it had pleased him) these enemies of
Jeremy, and too much ouer-rulers of the Prince.

And also it was in part Democraticall, or the government of the people.
Whereto he alleges 1. Samuel. 14.38. etc. How the people delivered Ionathas
from his Fathers judgment. And 1. Chron. 13. verse. 1.2 and 4. How (...) Chol
Caal Israel, all the congregation of Israel, and all the whole people gathered
themselves together, and that David demanded their sentence for the reducing
of the Arc. Yea, rather than the Princes state should not be thus translated:
it must be conformed to that example also, of the Israelites state of the ten
Tribes. For they (as Bertram says cap. 12.) had their Sanhedrin too.

The policy ( says he) of the ten Tribes, The state of the ten tribes.
came very near to the civil policy of the kingdom of Judah. For it had the
king their head, and then (...) Chorim, that is, the men which were the
Patriciens or noble Fathers, which otherwise we said were called (...) Sarim,
that is, Princes, which made also the Synedrion, and chief Consistory of
Judges of that kingdom. Here the Consistory sat most commonly at the Kings
palace, such as was Iesrael in the time of Achab. It had also (...) Zechonium,
Seniors (or Elders) to wit, Chiliarks, Ce^turio^s, etc. Either of these
magistrates is so called in Nehemias. That also argues the peoples power, that
the witnesses suborned against Naboth, are said to have given their witness
before all the people. But that policy seems to be so mixed of the Regal,
Aristocratical, and Democraticall power, that was altogether Tyrannical, as
appears by the gestes of the Kings of the ten Tribes. True indeed, those
Kings for the most part of them did degenerate into a kind of Tyrants. But this
argument is but weak, that the state was mixed with the peoples government,
because the witness of the Elders was given before the people: for what witness
in so weighty a judgment, should not rather be given before the people, than
in secret, or in private? But, may we not better find fault with those wicked
Elders, which gave that judgment. And yet, what difference between these
among the Israelites, and those among the Jews, that by all means sought the
murdering of the prophet Jeremy? And if such good Elders came in the time,
while (they say) whatsoever the persons were, their state was intier, and
according to the first and ancient institution, whereunto our Breath. would
have our state translated: might not we fear also, that when these Seniors
should become such Princes, that might peradventure break out into such parts?
Which least they should do: how they might be repressed (or rather prevented)
would be better thought on, before they were put in possession, especially of
the estate, which is here so expreslie by Calvin and our Brethren challenged,
that they should be admitted unto.

The state of the Jews regiment after the captivity.
As for the state of the regiment following, in the time of the Jews
captivity, and afterward until Christ's coming, was more disturbed. And yet,
Bertram tells cap. 13. that first Darius Artaxer^es Longimanus permitted to
the Jews some part of their former power, whereby Esdras did so again let in
order the civil policy, that in the place of a king, it had (...) Pechah, that
is, a president provincial, that governed Jury under the direction of the
Persian Monarke, and of him he was sent thither. As appears out of the story
and occasion of sending Zerubbabel Ezr. 3. and 4. and out of Nehe. 5.14. In the
second place they had (...), Sarim, that is, Princes, which are often (...)
Chorim, that is, Patritia^s. And sometimes also (...) ari aueth, that is, the
Princes of the Fathers, or of the families: and these made the Synedrio^ of the
70. Thirdly, it had their ordinary Judges, the Chiliarks, Centurions, etc.
which were not only called (...) Iekonim, that is, Seniors (or Elders) etc. In
the 4. place it had the assembly and judgment of all the Citizens, this kind of
assembly is called (...) Kaalah Gedolah, that is, the great company or great
gathering together. Thus were all these orders retained so well as that troubled
and tributary state would permit it. Over whom, in all their assemblies and
judgments still were (and much more tha^ before) the Levites, the prefects and
governors of the^. Of which State ( says Bertram in the same Chap, page 69.)
To conclude, if ever that Policy of Magistrates and Judges, The special time
of the Elders government.
which our Thalmudistes do record, had place: verelie, it is to be referred
to the process of this time. For they tell, that the chief Senate of the
Hebrews, to wit, of the 70. the power which they had of the sword or putting to
death, which they had in the greater causes (such as were of the Tribe, of the
high Priest, of a false Prophet, and of Treason:) they communicated the same to
three and twenty headmen, etc. Whereby it appears what great authority,
they still retained, or had then most of all, having no King among them. And
in the next page, he says: The Presidents provincial excelled in greatest
authority, insomuch, that they had the chief government, as it appears by
those things which Nehemias did. To prove Nehemias had chief auth. that last
fact of his does argue, The auth. of Nehemias.
wherein he rejoices, that he had banished a certain man of the posterity of
Ioiada, the son of Eliazib the chief Priest, because he had married the
daughter of Sanballat the Horonite: and to prove also that he had the cheifest
government, in that he had rebuked, he had commanded to be excommunicated, to
be beaten with rods, and to be made bald, (in token of greatest reproach) the
residue of the Jews that had married women strangers. Josephus chap. 11. in
the 7. book of the Jews antiquities, Josephus antiq. Iud. li. 7 cap.
does so touch the foresaid story: that he says the elders of Jerusalem, that
is the chief Magistrates and the synedrion it self, decreed and commanded
Manasses the brother of the high Priest Iaddi, to send away and put from him
his wife an alien borne, that is, a Samaritan the daughter of Samballat etc.
Such auth. had this synedrion ( albeitnot so called among them) under Nehemias
and Iaddi, the high Priest, but Bart. says in the page following, of the state
declining after Nehemias. Nevertheless it might be that Iaddus and the other
Guides of the Jews, The high Bishops authority.
did choose one of the Tribe of Judah, that should bear the principality in
the chief Synedrion; howbeit, rather for namesake than indeed, when as all
things depended on the high Bishops.

And on this sort continued the State, till the time of the Macchabees: in
whose time says Bertram, pa. 79. Yea Ionathas (that he might the better
retain safe and sound (...), and (...), the use of their own laws, and state
of their own power): he sent Ambassadors to Rome and to Lacaedemonia, which
should renew the league with the Romans and the Lacaedemonians. But, that
their ancient policy was restored, appears in this, that the Ambassadors
expresselie signified to the Romans, that they were sent of Ionathas the high
Priest, and of the Nation of the Jews: and also by the very superscription of
the letters, which by the same Ambassadors he sent unto Lacaedemonia, which
was endited in these words. (...), 1. Match. 12.6.
Ionathas the high Priest, and the Senate (or Eldership) of the Nation, and the
other people of the Jews, send greeting to the Spartanes their brethren.

The mixed estate of the Jews common weal.
And in Josephus Ant. itq. Iud. 13. c. 9. (...) etc. Ionathas the high Priest
of the Nation of the Jews, and the Eldership and the Comminaltie of the Jews,
etc. These things do manifestly argue, what was then the form of the Jews
Commonweal, and how they were returned to that former mix Policy. For first,
Ionathas is set down, as the Prince: then the Senate, which term
comprehends the superior and inferior Judges: last of all, the people it
self. And that (in these terms) it is apparent, they did it not to the
Romans and Lacaedemonians, to make a show: it is said 1. Macchab. 12.35. that
Ionathas called together to an assembly (...), that is, the Elders of the
people, to treat of building the Fortresses in Iurier, etc. But those whom
the author of the book book of the Machabees, calls the Elders of the
people: Josephus calls (...), the whole people. So that either in their
names, come all the Citizens, which is properly called the people; or (...),
that is, the Senate, to wit, that superior Senate, which (when it represents
the people) is called the people it self.

This sense of the Senate, especially of the superior Seniors, is here very
violently by Bertram wrested (as I under correction take it) for the People.
Being the Governors of the people, and so cleerelie distinguished from them,
between the Prince and the People But his conclusion is this: Here certainly
it seems, that this former time of the Machabees, had somewhat more of the
popular state, and of the best men's government, than of a kingdom. For when
all is done, both Bertram, Calvin, Beza, Danaeus, and these our Learned
Discoursing Brethren, en^line most to this estate that most declineth from a
kingdom, And so we should quickly come to a good estate of Regiment: the
Prince being ouerruled by the Senate, and the Senate representing but the
people: and so, all comes to the state popular, Gabinius erecting of mo
Synedrins.
as it was among the Graecians and the Romans. Which in short time, would
bring England and all Christendom, into a proper state. And of this estate he
alleges further many mo instances, 1. Mat. 13.36.14.20.27 41 42. etc. Besides
still his confirmations out of Josephus. And so, less or more, the authority
of the Synedrion continued: for, by this time, (after the Gretian Monarchy, it
had gotten that corrupt Sanhedrin of Synedrion) til Gabinius subdued the Jews
under the Romans. Who (restoring Hyrcanus to the high preesthood)
distinguished (says Bertram. page 84. The nation of the Jews, into five
Courts ( or session places of these Elders) and to every court assigned his
Synedrion And here (lo) began the corruption of the state by making many
Synedrions, as our Br. now would do. The Synedrions of Jerusalem ministered the
Law in the territory of Jerusalem, Gadarens in Gaderene territory, etc. So
that ( says Bertram) now their affairs might be lawfully administered, not by
the government of one: but by the decree of the chief persons.

But now, when in this goodly estate, Julius Caesar had made Antipater the
Father of Herod, to be Hyrcanus procurator, and that these Elders and chief
persons complained to Hyrcanus, of Antipaters and his sons affectation of
tyranny: especially ( says Bert. page 85) taking occasion hereupon, that Herod
had committed many things in Galile, against the country laws of the Hebrews,
and right of the Synedrion, and that for the same, he was a little afterward
cited unto the chief Synedrion at Jerusalem: moreover ( says he) Josephus
treating of these matters, teaches* that in those times the right of that
chee^e Synedrion endured, which sat at Jerusalem, and that the dignity
t^ereof, together with the principality of the nation, was plainly restored
under Hyrcanus: etc. When it was thus in the cheifest estate, The Synedrio^
Elders slain by Herod.
Antonie setting up Herod to be a Tetrarch, and Augustus afterward making him a
King: all this state and chief power of the Synedrion was ouerthrown. For
(says Bertra^, page 86.) Herod provided, that all the Judges of the chief
Synedrion except one or two, were slain, and all other that excelled in any
authority or obtained the degree of any dignity, so that, he placed in their
steedes, whom he pleased.

After which Herod's death, when Augustus divided all that state into four
governments: there followed of necessity this distracting ( says Bertram, page
87) of the Jews kingdom into Tetrarchies, a new distinction of Synedrions,
every Tetrach (no doubt) upholding separately his own Jurisdiction. Which
occasion, we see, that Pilate greedily snatched, when he sent Christ as a
Galilean (in which doing, he verilye pleased the Jews nothing at all) unto
Herod the Tetrarch of Galilaea, whom notwithstanding, Luke calls King. Thus
have we seen, all the state of the Jews, Our Br. assertion of the Jews
Synedrion alters all the states in Christendom, and binds us to the Iu^diciall
Law.
Seniors in the Sanhedrin, so much pretended and urged by our Brethren) from
the time that their selves fetch it, Numb. 11. And before, descending down
even until Christ's time, who gave this precept Math. 18. Dic Ecclesia, Tell
the Church. In which words (they say) Christ translated the Jews Synedrion (
as it was ordained of God, but not, as it was then in Christ's times altered)
to be restored, renewed, and continued in his Church. If this be true: how
must not all the state of the Realm, and all realms Christian be quite
altered? Yea, if this be true: how did not Christ translate withal,
restore, renew, and continue the Judicial civil and politic Law of Moses?
Our Brethren pretend at the superficial view nothing but the restoring of the
Eccl. regiment and Discipline but when we come thus to the sounding of the
matter: we find it is indeed, the alteration of all the whole state. Yea, it
is little or least of all, Ecclesiastical Regiment, Discipline or policy.

I grant the Jews had also their Ecclesiastical Regiment, Discipline, and
policy, whereof Bertram treats at large afterward. But what was that to the
Sanedrin or Synedrion of the Jews, either corrupted, or in the best estate?
Our Br. pretense under the name of eccl. regiment drive at the civil regiment.
Ecclesiastical persons also did deal therein, but was not their authority
most in the cheifest matters of estate? if our Brethren mean, but the state
Ecclesiastical: why do they urge so peremptorily that Synedrion and those
Elders ( before it had that name) of the 70 ordained of God, Numb. 11.

All these therefore, duly and thus at large considered: to say now, that
Christ alluded to this order of the Jews senate, to this Sanedrin or
Synedrion among them, to this consistory and council of seniors, not so much
corrupted by their vices, as instituted and approved of God, and that Christ
translated this into the Church in the new Testament, and that to continue
while the world endure, to be established now in every Church or congregation,
either the same, or the like to this for the administration of government, and
to have the hearing of all difficult and weighty matters among us, as the
Sanedrin had among the Jews if this be (as our Brethren in the title of this
their Learned Discourse do say) a brief, and plain declaration of the desires
of al those faithful Ministers, that have, and do seek for the discipline and
reformation of the Church of England: If our Br. ask to mary this Abisag: her
Majesty then in-deed^ may quickly say, as Solomon did, Let them ask the kindom
too. For what is here left in temporal, politic and worldly matters, or in the
government and state of the kingdom, wherein these Seniors will not, have a
stroke, yea, and a negative voice? and that in every parish, Chytreus of the
Synedrion
which is clean different from the Sanhedrin. For both their less kind of
Sanedrin, either greater (as they afterward divided it) was only in one place
for all the realm. As first at Sylo, and then at Jerusalem the head city,
until these last alterations came. Where as our Br. would have the like (if
not the same) to be erected in every congregation, which is the plain
overthrow of a kingdom, and to make every congregation a kingdom in it self.
For if it be not such a Senate as was their Sanedrin, then is it not the same,
nor like the same that Christ ( they say) did here allude unto. And if it be
not, then do they plainly delude us, and wrest Christ's words, in gathering
such allusions, and building on them, and enforcing on us, this their Seniory
by force hereof. When all is done, our Br. Elders that are goue^nors and
notteachers are here also excluded except they will be Princes.
And say that here Christ also translated the same into his church in the new
Testament And yet when all is done, they must needs confess, that it is clean
different. For in both these consistories of the Sanedrin, the greater of the
70. and the less of the 23. They were all either Priests or Doctors of the
Law and teachers, the King and the Princes, or noble peers, only excepted.
So that, except they will be Kings Princes or noble Peers, all these Seniors
must not be governors not teaching, but Interpreters, Doctors, and teachers of
the Law of God, or else they be neither the same nor the like, nor fi^te at
all, to be any Seniors in this Senate.

And whereas Beza says in his Christian Confession, cap. 5. artic. 32. but we
must know, Beza in confess. Christ. cap. 5. Art. 32.
that this Jurisdiction ( he speaks of these Seniors) does not appertain to
earthly and transistory matters, and is altogether different from the civil,
as witnesses Christ, and after Christ Paul: although either of them
particularly comprehends all the faithful without exception: for all are also
thral to ^he civil Magistrate whose power also in respect is (...), an edifying
or building power, so far forth as it ought to procure peace, and (...), good
order or discipline, especially inthose things that respect the first table.
And on the other side there is none which should not be subject to the word of
God, and so of co^seque^ce unto the eccl. discipline. Howbeit (I confess) the
apostle wills, that for the cause of avoiding offense, Christians should
judge their controversies privately, without the civil magistrate. But it
appears sufficiently, that Paul which followed the steps of Christ, and of
all the saints, would not therefore withdraw any thing from the civil
jurisdiction, nor confound those things that the Lord has distinguished, but
only have consideration of the time, in the which it could not be that the
faithful should contend before infidel Judges, but that they should be thrall
to diverse slanders. For the which cause he admonishes the Corinehians, that
all such kind of controversies should rather be either once taken away, or
taken up, by domestical debating of them.

This admonition therefore of Paul, does nothing favor the furious and
giddi-brayned Anabaptists, which leave no place to the Civil Magistrate in a
Christian Church. To return therefore to the matter, there is a certain
ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but utterly distinguished from the civil.

Thus writes Beza of the Jurisdiction of these Seniors to be mere
Ecclesiastical and clean different from the civil Jurisdiction, Danaetus in
I^ag Christ. 3. part. cap. 10
Yea Danaeus also concludes as is foresaid in the 10. chapter, saying: For
although the Presbytery or Synedrion of the Jews (which was the same, Act. 22.
verse 5. and 30. and in Math. 5. ver. 22.) seems to answer to our
presbytery, judged often of certain causes: notwithstanding our Presbyteries
do not judge, and thereupon are different from those of the Jews. Because
they had partly political, partly Ecclesiastical jurisdiction both together,
Danaeus Confession for the difference of the Jews Synedrio^ and our
Presbyteries for government of civil causes.
as appears, Esd. 10 verse. v. But our presbyteries have only
Ecclesiastical: it pertains indeed to their office and function to reclaim,
if they can, to peace and concord the faithf^^^ ^leading or about to plead.
Verily they ought to exhort them to m^tuall charity, Cor. 6. verse 1. Mat.
5.25, But to sit Judges in their pleaes, they ought not, for this is the office
of the civil magistrate. Yea neither the whole presbytery, neither any part of
the presbytery, ought so much as to be chosen arbytrators, but only as private
men, if any of the presbytery be taken to be arbytrators. If this be true, than
is all this devise of translating the Sanedrin of the Jews into the new
testament and Church of Christ, or of willing the like thereof to be
established in his Church, for administration of government, quite ouerthrown.
For what the Jews eldership was, we have seen at large already. And yet there
were then also Civil Magistrates as well as now. And therefore if Christ had
translated their Sanedrin unto us, ours might have like authority, as theirs
had, notwithstanding our civil Magistrates.

But besides this in general that Danaeus here confesses, that the
presbyteries of the Jews Judged often in some causes, and mixed together the
temporal and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which our brethren mislike in the
Bishops and ministers: Chytraeus also upon the 17. of Deuteronomy. Tit. de Iudiciis,
Chytraeus in Deuteronomy. 17. titulo de Iudicijs.
does confirm the most of that, which we have showed at large out of Bertram
and Sigonius, for the Jews Judgments and Sanhedrin: saying.

Three kinds of judgments are written to have been distinguished among the
Jews, Three kinds of judgments among the Jews.
unto whom it is agreeable that Christ alludeth, Math* 5, in the declaration
of the ten commandments, setting down the degrees and differences of sins,
repugnant to the Law, thou shall not kill. And that he would declare the same
out of the form of the civil judgments accustomed to the people.

Heers he (...) of Christ's more proper alluding to the Jews orders, in th^se
things. But does he gather thereupon, that the same civil judgments, were
either translated, or the like to them established amongst us?

The first was Triumuirall, The i^dgeme^t Triumuiral of the 3. Elders.
over the which were Governors in every City, three men. In the which, money
matters, and the lighter trespasses, of bearings, of priua^e iniu^ies, of
the^^, etc. were decided. They suppose that Christ signified that Mat. ^. in
the name (...), of judgment.

Another was called, the Little Synedrium, consisting of 23. The little
Synedrion of 23.
Judges. Wherein the greater and the capital causes were heard. It is thought
that Christ Mat. 5. named that (...), H^ that ^aith to his brother, Racha,
s^albe guilty of a Counsel, or of the Synodrion.

The third was the great Synedrium, or S^nate of 70. The great Synedrion of 70.
Seniors, ordained of Moses, Number. 11. over which sat the high B. and the
Elders excelling in wisdom, virtue, le^^ning and authority, chosen out of
the Priests and Levites* and of every Tribe, were the assistants, (or sitters
with him.) Unto whom afterward by the ordinance of David, the chief of the
Royal ^ooke, which we^e called (...), ^^at is, the Kings br^thren, and
^arr^^ttiu^, that is, endowed with the right of succession, were adjoined, as
the highest Counsel of the ^^ole Commonweal, and chief Senate of the
Kingdom. To whom belo^ged the power of iudgeing the most weighty causes,
pertaining to the sum of the Co^mon-weale and of Religion, of the King and
the King^ome, of war and peace, of aunswering and pronouncing of the most
difficult controversies of opinions, and of other businesses. To conclude, of
what manner the form and i^^isdiction of this most high Senate was, to the
which they appealed from the other inferior Judgments, and in whose sentence
and decr^e they must hold themselves contented without any gainsaying, may for
the most part cleerelie be gathered, out of the reformation of the judgments
made by King Iosaphat. For these are the words of the story, 2. Paral. 19. In
Jerusalem also Iosophat appointed Priests, etc. But as in highest Sen^te of the
Jewish people, the Priests and Princes of the Families, governed together the
Counsels of the Commonweal, and the two chief Presidents were the B. which
governed the causes of religion, and the ecclesiastical businesses, and the
Kings Cousin which governed the businesses Political: even so almost is the
like form in the chief Senate of the Kingdom of Germany, consisting of 7.
Electors. whereof three are Priests or Archbishops, which ought to in^truct,
Chytreus resemblance of the chief Senate in Germany to the Saned^in.
and with their counsels and labors ought to help the Emperor, and conserve
the Co^mon-weale, concerning the laws of God for religion and the worship of
God, or the first Table of the x. Commandments: and 4. politic Princes, which
ought to instruct, and with their counsels and labors to help the Emperor, The
elders of the new Testament.
and to conserve the Commonweal, concerning the Politic Law, and office of
the Emperor, in ordeining judgments, in war and peace, in taxes, etc.

Thus more gravely (in my simple judgment) does Chytreus allude, not on these
words, How moderately Chytreus alludeth on Christ's words Mat. 5. to our
Senates.
Dic Ecclesia, to the Sanedrin of the Jews, to have the same or the like,
translated, and established in every or in any Congregation, of the Church of
Christ: for that were clean to overthrow all the States in Christendom: But
that in those places which he me^cioneth, Mat. 5. he alluded to the order of
their lowest Senate, of 3. Elders, which was in every City, and of their
lesser Sanedrin, that was of 23. in Jerusalem. not of the 70. which was the
highest, and instituted by God, Number. 11. But not, that Christ translated any
of all these Senates into him Church, or established any law thereon, for
admin^stration of government in his Church. Although he say, almost the like
form is in the highest Senate of the Kingdom of Germany. But not simply that
it is the like, and much less the same, and least of all, that it was grounded
on the Jews form, otherwise than that all Estates and Kingdoms take their
general grounds from Gods law: but we are not tie^ to this or that form, of
Senate and Judicials of the Jews. And, so have we also our chiefest Senate of
Parliament, and other Senates, Ses^ions, or Assemblie^* both of the Clergy,
and of the Temporaltie: and Coun^els and Judgments, ( in some respects) not
much unlike to the Jews Assemblies, Senates, Councels, and Judgments. And
they draw nearer a great deal to the uncorrupted orders of the Jews, and are
more fit, requisite and (...) for the State and condition of our Realms, then
these Consistories or Senates would be of these Seniors, that our Brethren call
for, and thus hale the words of Christ to press them upon us, to be
established in every Congregation, for the administration of government, in
the hearing and determining of all difficult and weighty matters amongst us,
(...) so to continue for ever, Our Breath. peremptory wresting of Christ's words.
as long as the Church continues in this world, (...) the great bondage of our
Christian liberty, by reducing us to these Judicials of the Jews, and to the
quite overthrow of ours and of all Kingdoms, by reducing this Senate of the
70. Elders into all Congregations throughout Christendom.

Having now thus far considered (as I take it) the very ground wherean
Calvin, and all our Brethren following him, would say the foundation of this
Consistory, and Senate of Elders in every Congregation, to wit, upon this
construction of these words of Christ, Dis Ecclesia, Tell the Church, that is
to say, Tell the Segniorie, Se^ate or Co^sistorie: ^et us now return to the
process, The learned disc page 88.
of our Br. learned discourse (...).

And the name of Elders does most aptly agree unto them that be Governors in
the Church now, even as it did to the Ancients of Israel* so that the Pastors
seem to have borrowed the name of Elders, especialy in respect of their
government. The name of this Consistory also in the new Testament, we find to
be agreeable with that of the Jews, whereof our Savior Christ speaks when
he says, Tell the Congregation or assembly, S. Paul 1. Tim. 4.14. Despise no^
the gift which was given thee, through Prophec^^, wish i^position of hands of
the Eldership. Where the Greek word is (...), the assembly or Consistory of
the Elders. Which word was used also by S. Luke in his Gospel, speaking of the
Consistory of the Jewish Elders, Luke 22.66. As soon as it wa^ day the whole
Eldership or Assembly of Elders came together both chief Priests and Scribes,
and brought him into their Council. In which saying, their Counsel (...) is
called (...). Also S. Paul Act. 20.5. that he had been a persec. of christians
takes witness, of the high Priest and of the whole Consistory of Elders, using
the same word (...). By which it is evident that our Savior Christ by this
word Ecclesia in that place means a Consistory or assembly of Elders, whose
authority, etc.

This is but descant on the name, and we would rather hear of the (...). The
name of Elders served to more, Bridges.
than to those of the Segniorie which were of the Sanedrin or Synedrion. And we
grant it most aptly agrees to them that be Governors in the Church new, and
those Ecclesiastical Governors to, The use of the name Elder.
and was but borrowed as well in respect of the government, as of the Pastorship
and the Ecclesiastical are as properly and aptly called Elders, as were the
civil Governors. But this communicating of the name, does not pr^^ue the same
or the like office; any more th^^ the name of Gods Minister, does prove that
the civil Princes and the ecclesiastical Pastors offices, are the same or
like, because they are both of them called Gods Ministers, Romans 13.4. and 1.
Cor. 4.1.

But here to prove that in this place Mat. 18. Christ means by the word
Church, a Consistory, Senate or Presbytery, our Brethren allege these
testimonies, 1. Tim. 4.14. Luc. 22.66. and Act. 20.5. wherein the name of
Presbytery is mentioned. But do they find the name of this Co^sistorie also in
the new Testament, to be agreeable with that of the Jews, whereof our Savior
Christ speaks when he says, Tell the Congregation, Christ alluded not to
the Jews Sanedrin or Presbytery, mentioned in the new Testament.
or Assembly? For if (as they say) Christ alluded there to the Sanedrin or
Synedrion, will they find this Consistory: that they would have to be erected
in the new Testament, to be agreeable unto that Consistory? I think our ^r.
will not find it. If they say, they mean not that this Co^sistorie is called in
the new Testament, by that name Sanedrin or Synedrion, but by the name (...)
and that that name is also agreeable to this Consistory: they told us before,
that Christ alluded to that Consistory among the Jews, that was named the
Sanedrin, of the Greek word Synedrio^, and would they now bring this
Co^sistorie to the name Presbytery? They say, that in the 22. of Luke, ver.
66. their Counsel Synedrion is called Presbyterion. And what of that? We
grant that the Sanedrin (...) called a Presbytery. But was every Presbytery
called a Sanedrin? They should prove this, that wheresoever the name
Presbytery i^, there wa^ such a Senate, Presbytery or Eldership, as was
agreeable to that which was named the Sanedrin. For we deny not, but that
there were Assemblies of Elders, and those aptly also called Presbyteries,
among the Christians in the new Testament. But that they were so aptly called
Sanedrins or Synedrions, that I deny: and much more, I deny the matter and
office of them among the Christians to be found any where in the new
Testament. And here in saying this, our Brethren still r^^ne ^n in their
woonted presupposall of this soever cited place, Math. 18. Tell the Church,
(Congregation or Assembly,) that Christ speaks of the Presbytery of the
Jews, called the Synedrion or the Sanedrin. But we have seen sufficiently,
By the name Church is not meant Senate.
that the very name of Church, Congregation or Assembly, which Christ uses,
was in the use of the Jews, Membrum diuidens, and opposite to the name of
Senate, Counsel, Consistory, Se^gniorie, Presbytery, Eldership, Sanedrin or
Synedrion. So that in n^^ing the Church, he so little means a Consistory or
Senate of Elders: that he rather seems to oppose himself herein against
those, that would restrain his speech unto a Consistory or a Senate. The
word^ of S. Paul 1. Tim. 4.14. do mention indeed a Presbytery or Eldership.
But they are so little to be drawn to this interpretation, which Calvin
makes of Christ's words, Math. 18. that Calvin himself (as we have (...)
before) in this observation on these words, 1. Tim. 4.14. Caluinus in 1. Tim.
4.14.
Neglect not ^he gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with
the impositio^ of hands of the Presbytery (or Eldership) says they that think
Presbytery (or Eldership) here to be named a nown collectiue, put for a
college of the Eld. think well in my judgment: Bezaes testimony that by those
elders were meant only the Ministers of the word.
howbeit al things being weighed, I grant that the sense different therfro^,
that it should be a name of office, does not il agree thereunto. He puts the
ceremony for the act of the ordination. So that the sense is, that Timothy
when by the voice of the Prophets, he was called into the Ministry, and then
by a solemn rite or ceremony was ordained: he was withal furnished with the
grace of the holy Ghost to execute his function.

So that this place imports no necessity of understanding the Presbytery,
more for the assembly of the Elders; tha^ for the function of the Eldership.
Nevertheless if our B. will needs have it understood, for the assembly of the
Elders: yet says Beza also upon this word Presbyterij, (...), that is, of the
order of the Elders, by the which name it is probable, that the assembly of
all those that labored in the word, in the Church of the Ephesians, is
signified, as Acts 20. d. 17. and f. 28.

For now and then these names are general, of Bishops, of Elders, Our Br.
conclusion of these Elders.
yea and that also of Deacons. See Philip. 1. a. 1. A certain fellow
translateth it Senate, as other where for the Church, he said, the
Commonweal. Thus does Beza nippe (and well worthelie) at Castalion, for this
name of Senate, in steed of Presbytery. And yet, Bezaes nip of Castalion for
the term Senate.
all this drifte of our Brethren is, to urge a Senate on this word. But Senate
or Eldership, since he makes here the Elders thereof, to be Laborers in the
word, and to be those that S. Paul spoke unto Act. 20. This then is all for
Pastors and Ministers of the word, and nothing for a Consistory, Senate,
Seniorie or Eldership of ani^ such Elders, as are altogether Governors and not
teachers.

As for the other places cited, Luc. 22. and Act. 20. were (I grant) that
Presbytery which was called the Sanedrin or Synedrion. The Presbyteries of the
Jews. Luc. 22. Act. 20.
Who, except such Elders of the people, which were such Princes (as we have
heard) in the government of all temporal matters of (life and death only by
Herod and the Romans taken from them (so well as ecclesiastical matters, were
all of them Teachers and Doctors of the Law of God. For that we heard was the
Scribes office. So that except our Brethr. would set up Consistories of Princes
and Magistrates, to govern all temporal matters so well as ecclesiastical:
how can these testimonies fit their Segniorie? Or are those Presbyteries of the
Jews, that sat in counsel against Christ, and gave license to S. Paul to
make havoc in Christ's Congregation, any example, or warrant, or approbation
in the new Testament, of any Segniorie or Consistory among the Christians?
But what are either of these to prove the words of Christ, Math. 18. To be
interpreted of a Presbytery? That our Brethren should so roundly hereupon,
(or rather so loselie) make this conclusion, saying: By which it is evident,
that our Savior Christ by this word Ecclesia in that place, means a
Consistory or Assembly of Elders. By what thing here alleged, Our Brethr.
chief evidence for their Eldership* how weak it is.
is this evident? or rather, is it not evident to the clean contrary? If our
Br. have no better evidence than this, to prove their Elders; first, all is
driven to a bare name, howbeit here is neither so much named as the bare name,
but a name that has a clean contrary sense. And yet forsooth we must
imagine, Christ meant it: for our Br. can not say, Christ said it. Although in
a matter so much urged, and of such importance, this had been requisite, that we
had heard Christ's words, and not their gathering only of Christ's meaning,
for our evidence. And yet if we should admit this meaning and all, we are never
the nearer, for any such Consistory, Senate, or Segniotie of Elders, as our
Br. pretend. Well might we set up (if not rather, ill might we set up) a Jewish
Sanedrin, and Presbytery of Princes and Priests in every parish, to rule the
whole estate thereof, as a little kingdom in it self, to the alteration and
overthrow of the whole state of the Realm: but for these governing and not
teaching Elders, The power of the keys
that our Brethr. would bring in, The learned Dis.
here is neither word nor meaning, that they are able to infer on Christ's
sentence.

But our Brethren conceauing, that they have now at least won thus much, that
our Savior Christ by this word Ecclesia, means a Consistory or assembly
of Elders: they cheerefullie proceed to their authority, and say: Whose
authority he does ratify with such power, that whatsoever is bound or loosed
by them on earth, in the fear of God, and with hearty prayer, the Lord will
bring it to pass, yea he himself will be in the midst of them, as president
of their Council, to direct their consultations to the glory of God, and to
the profit of his own Church.

Concerning that which our Brethren add here, out of the 19. and 20. verses
of Matthew. 18. the consent of two or three, Bridges.
gathered together in prayer or counsel, to have their petitions granted, and
Christ himself to be in the midst of them as President of their counsel,
so far as they do it in the fear of God, The sentences of christ Mat. 18.
ver. 19. and 20. not to be restrained to a Consistory.
and in the name of Christ: this is so little to be restrained to a Consistory
of Elders, that it stretches not only to all Provincial and general
Councels so assembled, but to al Congregations gathered to public prayer, or
to the hearing of Gods word, yea, to any particular household or persons,
though they be no greater number than there is mentioned, to encourage and
confirm them in their faith to God, and in their mutual love and unity one
to another.

As for the authority that Christ ratifieth with such power, that whatsoever
is bound or loosed by them on earth, etc. ( meaning this Consistory of the
church) the Lord will bring it to pass we confess, ( concerning the Church, of
the which before he spoke) that Christ there gave such power unto his Church:
but our question now, is not whether the power be given to the Church, as to
whom the exercise of this power is committed. Whether to the whole Churches
assembly or Congregation, or to a Segniorie of the Church, governing
discipline, and yet not meddling with teaching the word of God, or to those to
whom the Ministry of the word is committed. And albeit that neither the
Magistrate nor the Senate of Governors ( if there be any) nor yet the whole
assembly of the Congregation, are debarred from all kind of excommunicating:
yet to speak of excommunication, in his proper sense, it is the act of him
that is a Minister of the word.

Brentius writing at large on this place, not only acknowledges a kind of
excommunication made by the Magistrate, but also affirms this speech of
Christ, Tell the Church, to be indeed a good rule, but not necessary for
ever, and for all Churches.

Haec Regula, etc. (says he) This Rule which Christ in this place
delivers, being rightly understood and used, is healthful to the Church,
and brings much profit: Brentius. on Math. 18.
but being ill understood and naughtilie used, has brought much hurt to the
Commonweal, has diverse times troubled the government of the Church, and of
the Policy. Brentiu^ in Math. 18.
When as the Bishops of Rome with their unreasonable and naughty
excommunications, How these words, Die ecclesiae, have been abused.
have now and then stirred up the children against the parents, have cast out
Emperors and Kings out of their Empires, and in these days also, because the
Anabaptists see not in our Churches, the like government according to the
letter, as is here described: they think that the true Church is not among
us. Wherefore we must do our diligence, that we may understand this rule
aright, and use the same lawfully, according to the manner thereof. First,
whereas Christ says in this Rule, Tell the Church, he speaks not of such an
assembly of Christians, which consists of a great multitude of people, and
of a civil Magistracy, and wherein the civil Magistrate is not only a
member of the Church, but also the Governor and Ordeiner of the
Ecclesiastical matters. For in such an assembly, it can not be brought to
pass, that that which is said, Tell the Church, can be kept according to the
letter, without confusion. For what a confusion and perturbation of things were
that, if a man publikelie in the Ecclesiastical assembly, wherein now and
then some thousands of men do come together, should make an out-crie of
injury offered him of his neighbor, and desire that after his neighbor having
been twice warned, would not repent him, witness may be heard, and if he will
not obey the voices of the whole assembly, that he should be excommunicated?
What place would there be in so diverse wills of men, in such a company of
the multitude, either unto honest Counsels, or unto right Judgments? and
what either measure or end would there be of brawlings? But God (as S. Paul
says) is not the Author of confusion, but of peace.

Here Brentius draws near to our Brethren also in this point, that it is
not meant of every great assembly of the people. But what now, does he
conclude hereupon, that it was spoken of an Ecclesiastical Senate or
Consistory in their names? It follows: Moreover when in the Ecclesiastical
assembly there is a civil Magistrate, the office of this civil Magistrate is
to punish wicked deeds according to their Laws, and that by the severity of
his administration, he remove offenses out of the way. Such as sometimes was
the administration of the Kings in the Church of Israel, of David, Solomon,
Iosaphat, Ezechias, and of other godly Kings.

That therefore Christ says, Tell the Church, A small assembly w^ting a
civil Magistrate.
is not be understood of a great assembly of the Church, wherein there is a
civil Magistrate, and one that for his vocation, labors to defend the
public honesty of life; but is to be understood of a small assembly,
whereof the Magistrate is not a member, and wherein the Magistrate either has
no function, or else is holden, as though he were a private person: such an
assembly as was the company of Christ. For few accompanied Christ in his
Ministry among the Jews, and among these few, there was no public
Magistrate. The occasion of Christ's sentence.
Among such therefore being few, the rule may be holden, according to the
letter. For it appears, that Christ was moved to the prescribing of this
rule, on that occasion, that although they were few that followed Christ, yet
now and then there arose even among them, so great brawles for matter of most
small importance, that one of them odiouslie accused another before the civil,
either Jewish or Ethnicke Magistrate, to the great offense of the Gospel. As
also it happened afterward among the Corinthians, of whom Paul writes, saying:
Does any of you having business with another, sustain to be judged under the
unrighteous, and not rather under the Saints?

Christ therefore reprooueth his contentious companions, and prescribes unto
them such a rule, which may be kept only in private assemblies, and among
private men. That is to wit, that thou should not by and by accuse him that
has sinned against thee, before the Magistrate, especially the Magistrate
being a stranger of thy religion, but thou should first of all admonish him
privately. Then, if being so admonished, he proceed to do thee injury: thou
should take unto thee 2. or 3. friends, that they may admonish him of his
injury, and exhort him to repentance: last of all, if he will not yet so leave
of his doing injury: thou should tell it unto the whole assembly, and
desire that the assembly, would interpose their authority.

That this rule of Chr. serves only among private me^.
It is manifest therefore, that Christ in this rule, makes not a general law
for the Church of all times, and for that assembly which also consists of a
great multitude of men, and whereof the civil Magistrate is a part, and the
Governor: but only for the little Church of his own time, and for the
assembly of a few men, and those private. For otherwise also he gave some
precepts, that were temporary and not perpetual, such as those are, Go ye
not into the high ways of the Gentiles, and enter ye not into the City of the
Samaritanes. And, Possess ye not gold nor silver, etc.

This sentence cannot be understood of heinous sins.
Moreover when this rule is said, If thy brother shall offend against thee, etc.
it is not to be understood of every kind of sin: for it can not be understood
of gross and heinous mischiefs, such as are these, homicide, adultery, and
other of that kind. For in these, a threefolde admonition has not place: but
it is necessary that these mischeuous deeds, for public example sake,
according to the calling of every assembly, so soon as ever they are found
out, should be punished.

Neither should space of sinning be given to the wicked doer, Brentius.
until a triple admonition may be made. For what discipline were that, if that
any should have slain a man, that he should not be punished before with
excommunication, till that after the first admonition, he had killed another?
And another after the second, and another after the third. And so might an
Homicide kill 4. men, or ever he should be holden for an Ethnicke or a
publicane. Neither did saint Paul him self admonish the Corinthian
whore-monger, The Incestuous Corinthian.
but commanded him streightway, so soon as ever it was known, to be cast out
of the company of the faithful: This rule therefore is not to be understood
of every kind of sin, but only of civil controversies, which private men
have among themselves.

What then does this rule pertain nothing at all to the present assembly of
the Christians, which consists as well of a public magistrate, as of private
subjects? verily it pertains much unto us. But for the manner thereof, and
for the condition of these times. For if thou haste against another a civil
action or controversy, it is an discourteous and hard part that thou should
straightwayes hale him into the public Judgments: but charity requires that
if the cause be such, that thou may not pardon thy neighbor without
Judgment: first of all admonish him thou thy self, or else some other friend
in thy name, of the injury, that he go not still on to do the same, but that
after his measure he make amends for it. But if so be nothing be obtained,
thou should take unto thee two or three friends, whereby thou might
seek all means, that he may leave off from doing thee injury. Last of all,
if so be thou shall not yet profit any thing: what ought to be done? The last
remedy is to tell the ordinary magistrate and not to constitute an Eccl. Senate
Is the cause to be brought to the whole Church of that place? Here certesse,
the letter can not be observed, which is spoken in this place, Tell the Church.
For what a confusion and disturbaunce of the orders were this? but the cause is
to be deferred unto those certain Judges, which out of the whole body of the
Church are lawfully chosen into the Magistracy, whose sentence also is to be
expected. So that there is no necessity, that we should constitute a new
Eccl. Senate, but use that which before was appointed in the policy.

But what, of the wicked deeds that are more heinous? In these, the order of
this rule can-not be observed, whether the church be only private men, or
have a Magistrate. But that so soon as ever they shall be set down, and found
out: they must be punished either with Excommunication, or casting out of the
city or congregation, or else with some other punishment according to their
ordinary Laws. For this altogether is sought for, that offenses might be
taken out of the way. But with what penalty or with what punishment they
should be taken away, Excommunication.
that must be judged by the public Laws and ordinances.

Thou will say therefore, since that there is in these times a politic
Magistrate in the Church, is there now no place of Excommunication? verily
there is, as well of public as of private. For the public excommunication is
that penalty of the Magistrate, wherewith the wicked person is openly defaced
in the mouths of men, and is cast out of the City, or is cast into the prison,
and for some space of time is fed with Bread and Water.

And such an Excommunication also may be done in the Church, when as, if any
by public and lawful judgment, is condemned of a wicked fact, and at the
Magistrates commandment is cast out of the Church, and is forbidden that he
shall haunt any public banquets, neither that he be admitted to honest or
worshipful offices, etc. It is private, A private and Ecclesiastical
excommunication
when the Minister of the Church does privately admonish the sinner, that he
receive not the Lords supper, except he repent. etc.

Thus gravely, and with great judgment and weighty reasons, writes Brentius
of these words. Neither making this rule to be general or perpetual,
otherwise then in these senses and cases, and in the matters of worldly and
civil contentions, and to be judged and punished (if no private means will
serve) not by constituting any Ecclesiastical senate of Seniors in every
congregation, but by the ordinary civil Magistrate. As for the Censure of
Excommunication ( though in such a sort, the punishments of the Prince may be
called an excommunication) yet if it be an exclusion from the Sacraments, it
is properly the Act of the Minister, and that good, To whom the proper and
Eccl. exc. does pertain.
not only though it be public, but private also. As he says further on these
words, Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind upon earth shall be
bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose, etc. In this sentence Christ
strengthens first the Judgments of private men, if the Church shall not have
a public magistrate. For when men are wont tobee stubborn, it may come to
pass, that he that fails in his cause, before the Church of private men,
and is judged an Ethnike and publicane, may contemn this judgment, and think
himself nevertheless to be an inheritor of the kingdom of Heaven, although
he be cast out of the assembly of these (as he thinks them) vile or base
persons.

But Christ strengthens their authority, and affirms that their sentence
is approved also in Heaven. Furthermore he strengthens also in this saying,
the public judgments of them, that are in lawful Magistracy, that we may
manifestly know, that their Judgments are not of men, but are the
Judgments of God. According to that of Paul: he that resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God. And verily, Christ in other places with the
like sentences in Math. 16. and John. 20. chapter confirms the authority of
the Ministry of preaching the Gospel. But in this place, he confirms the
judgments of private men, or of Magistrates, against the contemners, that the
same should be ratified before God in Heaven. Here lo, is the ratifiing
whereof our brethren speak, but hereupon he concludes thus:

But all these things are to be understood of a right and lawful judgment,
and of that sentence which is given in the ministry of the church according to
the Word of the Gospel, and in causes forinsecall, according to the public
and ordinary Laws. For if the sentences of the Judges, or Ministers, strive
with these, it is none before God, how greatly soever thou shall be condemned
before men. So that here he concludes with these two excommunications, Two
kinds of Exc. ciui^ and Eccl.
a civil and an Ecclesiastical. The civil, either in these private men's
small assemblies, or in the public Magistrate. But the Ecclesiastical, to
pertain only to the Minister, and to be in the Ministry of the word of God,
such as was mentioned before Math. 16. And afterward again, John. 20.

And verily, if we shall search the ground of this Eccl. Exc. ( what abuses
soever be or have been, or may be by the Ministers or by any other not
Ministers, committed therein (which I take not upon me to defend, and may
easily be helped without the supply of this Seniory, and good provisions there
are in that behalf): yet that the act of the proper Ecclesiastical
Excommunication, should be executed by such Ecclesiastical governors, as are
not Ministers nor teachers of the Word: I can not yet see, how it may be
sufficiently warranted, or how it may stand with the nature of this spiritual
and Ecclesiastical censure. For if this power of binding and loosing, be the
same that is called the power of opening and shutting, called also the power of
the keys: then it cheefely consists in the Ministry of the Word. For what
is the key, but Gods Word? Yea, if it be the same that consists in
remitting and retaining of sins toward God, what other power has the
Church thereof, than by the prenouncing of Gods Word? So that, our Brethren
must either make these Seniors to be Ministers of Gods Word: or else they
must grant, that in this place Christ means not such a Seniory of Governing
Elders, as are not Ministers of the Word.

But here says Calvin. Hic locus non omnino. etc. Call in Mat. 18.
This place is not altogether like that place which is above written, Chapter
16. c. 19. But it is to be understood in part a little different. But we
make them not so diverse, that they have not much affinity between themselves.

This first of all on both parts is alike, that either of them is a general
sentence, and the power of binding and loosing is always the same, that is to
wit, by the word of God, the same commandment, the same promise. But they
differ herein, that the former place is peculiarly of the preaching which the
Ministers of the word of God do exercise. Here it pertayneth to the Discipline
of excommunication, which is permitted to the church. There, Christ would
avouch the authority of the Doctrine: Here, he constituted Discipline, which
is an appendant unto doctrine. There, he said that the preaching of the
Gospel should not be frustrate, but that it should be a quickening or a
killing savor: here he affirms that although the wicked do scorn the
judgment of the church, notwithstanding it should not be vain. This
distinction is to be holden, because, there, it is simply treated upon the word
preached: and here, upon the public censures and Discipline.

Although I do not altogether deny this difference in respect of the object
matter, The ministry of the power of the word pertains to the Minister in
the expounding the word.
wherein the subject person has diverse times, on diverse occasions, and diverse
ends to deal: yet since Calvin here himself makes the power of binding
and loosing, the promise also, and the commandment, to be all one: and the
same to consist all only by the ministry of the word: although the occasion
or purpose of Christ in the former place, Math. 16. be more for ratifying the
Doctrine of the word, when it is taught or preached, than for ratifying the
public censures and Discipline, being only the appendants to the Doctrine:
Yet this lets not, but rather proves so much more, that he to whom the
execution of both, or either of these actions, (being both of them powers of
the word, and ministerial pronouncings of the same word) does appertain,
ought to be his self a Minister of the word. And thus does Calvin himself
afterward also confess, Call. in Mat. 18.
saying: For neither does Christ avouch authority of (or unto) his church,
whereby he should diminish his, or his Fathers right: but rather whereby he
may establish the majesty of his Word. For even as before, he would not
confusedly establish every Doctrine whatsoever, but that which proceeded out of
his mouth, chap. 16. c. 19: So neither says he in this place, that every
Judgment whatsoever shall be stable* The Minist. are publishers of Gods word
and setters forth of his judgments.
and ratified, but that wherein he himself is president (or governs).
Neither that only by the spirit, but also by the Word. Whereupon it
follows that men bring no prejudice unto (or hinder not) God, while they
pronounce nothing but out of his mouth, and stood only to execute faithfully,
that which he has commanded. For although Christ be the only judge of the
world: yet would he have in the mean season, ministers to be the publishers
of his Word. and then he would have his judgment to be of his Church set
forth. So, that comes to pass, that it derogateth nothing from him, that
the ministry of men comes between, but that he only loses and binds.

And h^ere Marlorate co^texteth out of Bucer: Hereupon it appears, how
proposterously or rather how naughtily some gather out of this place, that the
Church can do any thing, but cheefely can make laws of religion, which whos^
despises shall despise Gods Laws. Whereas Christ disputes here nothing of
the power of making Laws: but of brotherly admonition, of exhortation,
reprehension, correction, and of taking away offenses, and of the judgment of
the church, which in all things thought to follow the word of God, that it
be not so much an humane as a divine judgment. And again Marlorate n^teth
out of Calvin, saying: Whereupon we see, how the spiritual jurisdiction of
the church, which punishes sins out of the word of God, is the best help
of health, and foundation of order, and bond of unity. And concluding the
ratification of their sentences, he says: For they have the word of God,
wherewith they condemn the froward, How the froward are punished, and the
repenta^t received by them that have the word of God.
they have the word wherewith they receive into favor the repentant. But err
they cannot, neither dissent from the judgment of God, because they Judge not
but out of the Law of God, which is not an uncertain nor earthly opinion, but
the holy will of God, and an heavenly Oracle. ^ith therefore all this
jurisdiction of the censure and discipline of the Church, consists in the
Ministry of the word of God, and besides the sentence pronounced,
comprehends admonition, exhortation, reprehension, and all out of the word of
God: And these persons are public officers, and their doinge^ public doings:
how are not these the public ministers of the word, and meddle with the
public teaching of the same.

But this more plainly appears by Christ's own words. For when Christ had
said, Tell the Church (howsoever they understand there the name of church)
when he comes afterward to set down the manner, how Excommunication
should be used: he straight turns his speech to his Apostles, saying:
Verily I say unto you, whatsoever things you shall bind upon earth, they
shall be bound also in Heaven* and whatsoever you shall loose upon earth,
shall be loosed in Heaven also. So that this place directly is turned to the
Apostles, both in Math. 16. And here the 18. and Ioh. 20 and so, the power and
promise thereof continuing, continues directly in those only, that are the
successors of the Apostles. That is to say, that are such, as of whom S. Paul
says, 1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man so esteem us, as Ministers of Christ, and
dispensers of the mysteries of God. And of such only is Excommunication (
being taken as this spiritual Censure of the Church) to b^ pronounced, and of
none other kind of Elders.

For proof now of the continual practice and approbation hereof: let us see,
both how the Church of God used it among the Jews before Christ came, and
how in Christ's time, and in the primitive Ch^^ch* and ^^t^rward in the time
of the ancient and holy Fathers, and also now lastly in this light of the
Gospel, what are the judgments of the best learned of our brethren hereupon.

And first (as we have showed before ^ut of Brentius) t^ere was and is a
diverse acceptance of this name Excommunicating. Wher^pon Aretius among other
divisions of Excommunications, good and bad, greater and lesser, outward and
inward, has this division: Let us therefore divide it from the head after this
manner. There is one Excommunication civil, another Ecclesiastical. The civil
is that that is exercised in politic matters against offenders. Aretius 2.
part problem. Tit. de Excom.
etc. And on the Hebrew names ther^^f, and the Greek name among the Jews, in
and before the time of Christ, he says: in Ioh. chap. ^.12. and 16. He that
was excluded, is said (...) that is, to be made an Alien from the public
assembly. Such were abominable and odious to the residue of the Jews, Civil
and Eccl. Exc.
until they were reconciled. In the ninth chapter he says, that it was
ordained of the Jews, that if any man confessed him to be Christ. (...), that
is, he should be cast out of the synagog. In the 12. chap. that many of the
Princes believed, but they confessed him not, least they should be made (...).
And in the 16. chap. They shall make you (...), that is, out laws and unworthy
of their assemblies. Hereupon excommunication may be called (...). In the old
Testament it is (called) Masger, a shutting: for he that was of Moses shut
out, was bound as it were with many Laws.

Besides that, he which was bound^ with any certain fault, was holden under
the penalty to the which he was bounden: you have the example Number. 12. where
Miriam the sister of Moses for the crime of rebellion, is excluded by the
commandment of God 7. days out of the camp. Let her be shut out seven days
abroad, (...) cherem among the Hebrews is anathema. That is, a penalty
inflicted of God, as Mal. 4. Least I come and strike the land, cherem, that is,
anathemate (with a curse suspension, or separation). The same word signifies a
thing consecrated to God, and sequestered from the public use, as it is said of
the spoils of Ierico, that Achan received (...) Minha-cherem, that is, of the
spoils condemned of the Lord by a curse, of setting apart, or suspending.

Syntagma Tit. de clauibus.
Wigandus and Matheus Iudex in their treatise called Syntagma, or corpus
doctrinae, on the title de clauibus in veteri testamento, of the keys in the
old Testament, do say: First, that there are such keys: Although in the new
Testament Christ institute the keys by a solemn manner, Matthew. 16.18. and
Ioh. 20. notwithstanding in the old Testament also, there was a power of the
keys pertaining to the church, and to the Ministers thereof, as appears by
the things following. What were the kinds* That there were two keys, the one
binding, the other losing* appears out of Esa. 22. I will give (or lay) upon
his shoulder, to wit, Eliachim, the key of the house of David, and he shall
open, and there shall be none that can shut, and he shall shut, and there shall be
none that can open. And examples to the Prophetical writings do witness. For
Caine in the 3. of Genesis is excommunicated. But David is absolved of Nathan, and
the types or figures of thrusting out of the camps the lepers and polluted,
and receiving of the healed and purged by sacrifice, Number. 4. Leuit. 13.
concerning the binding key, or Excommunication: what are the names thereof? The
binding key in the Prophetical writings, is called Anathema. Number. 21. Deuteronomy.
7. etc. Malediction and detestation: Number. 23. Deuteronomy. 27. crying out woe: Hosee.
7. casting out of the land: Genesis 4. taking away out of the midst: Deuteronomy. 13.
The definition is this. The key bynding is a power ordained of God, The
definition of the Eccl. binding.
committed to the church and to the Priests, of denowncing the wr^th of God to
notorious and polluted sinners, and of shutting them out of the society of
Gods people, and of forbidding other their society and company, until either
by the Magistrate they be taken out of the way, or else by repentance, or by
the prescribed sacrifices, they shall be purged and received etc.

And afterward coming to the Ministers, he says: the Ministers of
excommunication were the Priests, and the church approving it Deuteronomy. 27. the
Levites shall pronounce and say unto all the men of Israel with a high voice,
accursed is the man that makes a gra^en and ^ moult^n Image, the abomination
of the Lord, the work of the artificers, and sets it in a secret place.
And all the people shall answer Amen. In the second book of Esdras, chap.
13. Eliasis the priest separateth the strangers from Israel.

And likewise for the other Key of losing: The key absoluing is a power
ordained of God and committed to the Priests and Prophets, The definition of
the Eccl. absoluing.
of pronouncing to sinners being penitent, the remission of sins, for the
Woman's and Abraham's seed and the son of David, that is for the Messiah. etc.

The author and the Ministers are these: Either God himself immediately has
denounced the forgiveness of sins, as Genesis 3. When he sets forth
the promise of the VVomans seed, he does nothing else, bu^ tha^ ^ee might
absolve Adam and Eve from their sin. etc. Or else by the Patriarchs, So
Genesis 30. God says ^o Abimelech of Abraham* etc. Or else, by the Prophets.
The second of Kings 12. Nathan said to David, the Lord has translated thy
sin. etc. or else, by the Prees^^* which offering sacrifice^ expiatory, for
the people, (...) for their sins, and afterward blessed them, which what was
it ^^so (...) a denunciation of the forgiveness of their sins? Leui. 4.5.6.
and 9. Leuit. 19. And the Priest shall pray for him and for his sin, and it
shall be forgiven him, and his sin remitted, and Number. 6. Speak to Aaron and
to his sons: thus shall ye bless the children of Israel, and say unto them
the Lord bless thee and keep thee, the Lord show his face unto thee, and have
mercy upon thee. This wa^ the state of Excommunication and absolution in the
old Testament, denounced by the ^outh of the Minister of the word. For to whom
the Absoluing belonged, the Excommunicating belonged also. The steps whereof (
says Aretius) are in the new Testament, Ioh. 9.12. and 16. For although that
Discipline was administered then of wicked men, notwithstanding it is for an
argument of the antiquity. And in the old time the Institution was honest and
profitable. This corruption Christ corrected, when he drew back this
Discipline to his Church. Math. 16.18. Ioh. 20. The Apostles also used it
laudably, as it is, 1. Cor. 5.1. Tim. 5. Whereby also it appears, that (...)
the wicked Jews used it in Christ's time, The censure of Exc. renewed by
Christ. Mat. 16. John. 20.
Christ reducing into his church, the old Institu^ion of God for
Excommunicating and absoluing: he committed this spiritual censure to such
only as were spiritual Ministers of the Word, Howsoever the other that were
not Ministers, did allow and approve the same. And this sentence. Math. 18.
Being over ruled by the other before Math. 16. (...) John 20. coming after,
and put in practice by these examples. 1. Cor. 5. And 1, Tim. 5. ^here S. Paul
being a Minister of the Word, pronounces the sentence and the Judgment: If
the use of the other Apostles be to be leueled by these examples, it is
clear, that in the Apostles times (though the Church (...) thereunto) the
action was (...) by such only as were Ministers of the Word of God.

What the practice was of Excommunication in the Primitive church succeeding
the Apostles, partly appears by that we h^^e cited out of Tertullian, saying:
There are also exhortations, chasticementes and the Divine censure. Tertul. In
Apolog. cont. Gent. cap. 39.
For judgment is there given with great w^ight, as among those which are
certain that God beholds them. And it is the chief fore-iudgement of the
judgment to come, if any shall so offend. If any be banished from the
communicating of prayer and of the meeting together, and of all the holy
partaking, every of the approved Elders have the Government.

Here is Excommunication mentioned, and the Government to appertain to every
of the approved Elders. But in adding withal the public prayers and
Exhortations, that he ^nne^eth to the government of these Elders, it is
apparent, that he meant none other, but such as were Ministers of the Word.
Which we have also showed yet more play^^, in his book De Coronae militis,
Ext. in the Eccl. history.
where after he has spoken of Baptism received Sub antistitis, under the
Bishops and Prelates: speaking of the Lords supper, he says: Nec de aliorum
manu quam Praesidentium sumimus, Neither receive we it at the hands of any
other, than of the governors. So that he makes these Seniors and Governors,
to be all one with the prelates and Ministers of the Word and sacraments.

Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 24. tells, Wherein Victors exc. was reproved.
how Victor Bishop of Rome Excommunicated the Churches of the East, For
keeping their manner of celebrating Easter day. Wherein although he greatly
abused this power of binding: yet if he had rightly with discretion used it
within his bounds, Irenaeus nor any other did reprove him but only for his
rash ouer-reaching himself in the same. For, ( says Eusebius) Irenaeus also
writing with the other Bishops of France over whom he had the government (
for he was Archbishop of Lions, Anno Domini 169.) does in-deede confirm it,
that the Mystery of the Lords resurrection should be celebrated on the
sunday: Notwithstanding he reprooueth Victor, that he did not well, to cut
off from the Unity of the body, so many and so great Churches of God, that kept
the custom delivered to them of the ancient time.

And to show this better, that when he used this power better, he was not
misliked for the use thereof: Eusebius says afterward in the last chap. of the
fifth book. What Exc. by Victor was allowed.
But how can they lay a slander unto Victor concerning this, since they knew,
that Victor expelled from the communion of the Church, Theodorus the tanner,
which was the prince and Father of this their impiety, which durst first at
Rome auouche, that Christ was but only a man. For if Victor (as they say) did
so believe: how did he cast out of the Church Theodorus the inuentor of this
blasphemy? So that Eusebius approves this doing of Victor for his
Excommunication of this heretic.

I here pass over all the Canons and decrees mentioned in the councelles, in
the names of the Apostles and of diverse ancient Bishops, because their credit
may be called in question, though diverse of them mentioning the
Excommunications, ( made only by Bishops and sacerdotall priests) be no
doubt of great antiquity. Only I note that, which Eusebius records of the
Emperor Philip. Eusebius li. 6. cap. 25.
Of this man ( says he) It is reported unto us, that he was a Christian. And
on Easter day, to wit, even in the Vigilles, when he would have been present
amongst them, The Exc. of Philip the Emperor.
and communicated in the mysteries, he was of the Bishop of the place not
suffered, before he had confessed his sins, and stood among the penitent
persons. Neither by any means could he have leave to receive the mysteries,
except that before he had by repentance purged himself of those manifold
faults, that were reported of him. It is said therefore that he gladly
received that which was appointed to them by the Proestos (or Bishop),
Theodosius of Excom.
approouing that he had a godly fear, and a Faith of Religion, most full of
works.

The like we read of the most Noble Emperor Theodosius, in the
Ecclesiastical History of Theodoretus Lib. 5. Cap. 17 Where having declared
in the former Chapter, how Theodosius had in his fury caused his Soldiers to
make a Massacre of 7000. people in the City of Thessalonica, for the revenge of
an insurrection there made, wherein some of the Emperors Justices were stoned
to death: he shows, how the Emperor afterward being come to Millaine,
when he would have entered into the Church after his wonted manner, Ambrose
forbad him, laying the heighnousnesse of his fault before him, and willing him
to depart, and submit himself to this bond of Excommunication that he
inflicted on him. With these words ( says Theodoretus) the Emperor being
moved, Theodore^us li. 5. cap. 17.
(who being brought up in the holy doctrine, knew what were the offices of the
Sacerdotall priests, what were the offices of the Emperors,) he returned
with sighs and tears into the Court, etc.

For the which fact (although perhaps somewhat more rough than needed, unto
so penitent a Prince) not only Ambrose, but also Theodosius, is of all writers
highly commended.

Generally, whatsoever Heretics or other malefactors in any of the general or
provincial Councilles be condemned, by the Censure of Excommunication, it was
done by such Bishops, Priests, or Elders, as were Ministers of the Word of
God. Neither do any of the Fathers ascribe the denuntiation of this spiritual
Censure (in the proper sense thereof) to any other, Cyprianus vt sup^a.
than to a Bishop or to a minister of the Word. We have seen in Cyprian,
how, although he promised that he would do nothing, (in receiving those
that were fallen from the faith into the lapse of Idolatry, Iunii
ecclesiasticus, cap. 3.
and so became abstenti, that is, Excommunicated, to be admitted on their
repentance to the communion and peace of the church) without the consent of
his College of Elders, which as withal we have found were all ministers of
the Word and Sacraments, ( Which Iunius himself in his Book called
Ecclesiasticus, Capitulo 3* treating on these. Seniors: confesses to be Corpus
and Collegium sacerdotum, A body or corporation and College of Sacerdotall
Priests. Yea in that case, although he promises not to receive them, without
the consent also of the Deacons and of the people: yet the action of
Excommunication and absoluing of them, he still makes it proper tohim self,
being the Bishop, and to such only as were ministers of the Word.

Hierom. in Math. 16.
Hierome upon that saying of Christ to Peter, Math. 16, I will give thee the
Keys of the kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever etc. August. of excom.
This place ( says he) the Bishops and the Priests not understanding, take
upon them somewhat of the Pharisees pride, to think that either they may
condemn the innocent, or loose the offenders. When as with God, not the
sentence of the sacerdotall Priests, but the life of the guilty is sought out.
We read in Leuiticus of the Lepers, where they are bidden to show them
selves to the Priests. And if they have the Leprie, then of the sacerdotall
Priests they are made unclean. Not that the sacerdotall priests make them
Lepers and unclean: but that they have the knowledge of him that is a Leper,
and of him that is not a Leper. And that they may discern who is clean, or
who is unclean. In such sort therefore as the sacerdotall Preeste makes the
Leper clean or unclean: so here also either the Bishop and the preeste or
Elder binds or loses, not those that are either innocent or offenders: but
according to his office, when he shall have heard the diversities of the
sins, he knows who is to be bound, or who is to be loosed.

Saint Augustine being complained unto, that Auxilius being a young Bishop had
made such a rash Excommunication, Aug. ad Auxilium epistola. 75.
as Hierome here spoke of: writes unto him in this manner. Augustine to his
most dearly beloved Lord, and worshipful or reverend brother, and fellow
sacerdotall Preeste, Auxilius. Our renowned Son Classicianus has grievously
by Letters complained unto me, that he has sustained of your holiness the
injury of accursing. Declaring that he came to the church, accompanied with the
appearaunce of a few persons convenient for his power, and dealt with you,
that you should not against his health (or safety) favor them, who by
periuring themselves on the Gospel, sought aid for violating of their faith,
even in the house of faith. Whom notwithstanding, considering what ill they
had done, he says that they were not taken thence by violence, but went out of
their own accord. And hereupon your honor is so offended with him, that by
the making of your Ecclesiastical acts, he with all his house, is stricken
with the sentence of the Curse Which Letters I having read, being not a little
moved with thoughts, tossing me with great vexation of heart, I could not
hide it from your louingnesse, that if you have your opinion of this matter
tried out by sure reasons or testimonies of the Scriptures: you would
vouchsafe also to teach us, how the child may rightly be accursed, for the
Fathers sin, or the wife for the Husbands, or the servant for the Lords,
or any in the house also not yet borne, if it should be borne in the same
time, that the whole house is bound with the curse, so that it could not in
the danger of death be helped by the washing of regeneration.

For this is not a corporal punishment, wherewith we read that some dispisers
of God were slain, together with all theirs, which were not partakers of the
same ungodliness. Then in-deede to the terror of the living, the mortal
bodies were slain, which at sometime ve^ily should have died. But the
spiritual punishment, whereby that i^ done which is written, Whatsoever
things thou shall bind in earth shall be bound also in Heaven, Math. 16.
binds the souls. Of whom it is written, The soul of the Father is mine,
Exech. 18.
and the soul of the Son is mine. The soul that shall sin the same shall
dye.

You have peradventure heard that some sacerdotall priests of great name,
have accursed some body with their house. But if perhaps they were demanded,
they might be found not able to render a reason of the same. As for me, If any
body should demand of me, whether it were well done? I find not what I should
answer him. I never durst do this thing, when I have bin moved most
grievously, about the wicked deeds of some most cruelly committed against the
Church. But if the Lord have revealed to you, how it may justly be done: I
despise never a whit your young age, and rudime^ts (or but young beginnings) of
the Eccl. honor. Behold I am at hand, I an old man, of my young fellow B* a B.
of so many years, of my Colleague not yet of one year, am ready to learn, how
we may render a just account either to God or to men, if we punish with
spiritual punishment the innocent souls, for the offense of another, of whom
they take not, as of Adam (in whom all have sinned) original sin. For if
the son of Classicianus have taken from his Father the sin of the first
man, that is to be washed away in the fountain of baptism. Notwithstanding,
after he begat him, whatsoever sin his father committed, wherein he himself
was not partaker, who doubts, that it pertains not to him? and what then of
so many souls in the whole household? whereupon, if one soul by this
severity, whereby this whole house is accursed, S. Aug. er^or in the Infants
dying without baptism.
should perish in departing out of the body without baptism, the death of the
bodies of innumerable men, if they be taken out of the church and killed is
not comparable to this loss. If therefore you can render a reason of this
matter, would to God you would also by writing again yield it, that we also
might be able to do it. But if you can not, why should you do that by any
unadvised passion of your mind, whereof (if you should be demanded) you can
not find a right reason?

I have said these things, yea, although our son Classicianus has
committed ought, that may seem to you to be most justly punished with
accursing. Howbeit, if he has written true letters unto me, neither ought so
much as he alone in his house, to have been punished with this sentence. But
hereon I meddle nothing with your holiness. But only request that you would
forgive him asking pardon, if that he shall acknowledge a fault. But if you
shall wisely acknowledge, that he has not offended, because he is in the
house of faith, has more justly required that faith ought to be kept, least
it should be broken there, where it is taught: do that which an holy man
ought to do, that if that have happened to you, as to a man, which thing
verily the man of God speaks of in the Psalm: Mine eye was troubled for
wrath: you should cry out to God: Have mercy on me O Lord, because I am
weak, that he may reach out his right hand and repress your wrath, and
caulme your mind, to see and to do righteousness. For as it is written, The
wrath of Man works not the righteousness of God. James. 1.
But let us rather think, that because we are men, we live most
daungerously among the snares of tentations. Take away therefore the
Ecclesiastical acts that you have done, being done peradventure more on
perturbation. And let that charity come again between you, which you had with
him, while you were yet Catechumenus, a scholar, or Learner of the Catechism.
Remove the strife, and revoke peace, Least both the man that is your freende
perish to you, and the Deulll that is your foe rejoice over you. But the mercy
of our God is mighty, who also grant to here me praying, least my heaviness
over you be increased. But rather, that that which is already sprung up may be
healed, and that he would erect me by his grace, and rejoice your youth, not
contemning mine old age.

I have set down this whole Epistle, as well for the reverend style thereof,
What S. Aug. dissaloweth in this B Exc.
one Bishop thus writing to another about this matter of Excommunication: as
cheefely that we may the more fully perceive, what Saint Augustine dissoloweth
and allows in this matter. For although he find fault with this young
Bishops ouer-hasty Excommunicating of this Gentleman, and namely of his whole
houshoulde, condemning other for that, which he misse-conceyued was his fault:
yet does he not dissalowe his Censure, for that he being the Bishop did it
him self, and not others joined with him.

But he allows thereof, so it had been done deservedly, and with mature
deliberation, and gone no further than to the offending party. Yea, being done
as ill as it was, he entreats him to vndooe this Ecclesiastical act, and to
release the Censure of his Curse, ascribing the binding and the losing to the
Bishop. Although therefore Saint Augustine do often affirm, the power of the
keys for opening and shutting, binding and losing, to be given to the Church:
yet he makes the execution of the same, to appertain only, to the Bishops
and Ministers of the word.

Chrysostom likewise in the east, where he ascribes this power unto the
Church, Homilia 2. De Dauide and Saul, Chrysostom. Homil. 2. de Dauide and Saul.
speaking against them that went to the stage plays from the sermon, he
says: Verily I think that many of those which forsook us yesterday, and went
away to the spectacles of iniquity, are this day present. But I wish, that I
might openly know who these are, that I might drive them from the sacred
porches. Not that they should perpetually tarry without, but that being
corrected, they should return again. Since that the Fathers also drive out of
the doors and from the table, their sons that oftentimes offend, not that
they should be always banished from thence, but that being made better by
this chastisement, How Chrysostom. would Excom. the contemners of the word
they may return to their Fathers households company, with due commendation.
Truly, the same thing do the Pastors also, while as they separate the scabbed
sheep from the whole. That they being eased of their wretched disease, may
return again safe unto the sound. Rather than that the sick should fill the
whole flock with that their disease. For this cause we desired also to know
these. But although we be not able to discern them with our eyes, the word
notwithstanding, that is, the son of God will know them, and will easily
persuade them by reproouing their conscience, that they should return of
their own voluntary, and willingly, teaching that he only is within, which
can give a mind worthy of this exercise. As on the contrary, he that living
corruptly is partaker of this congregation, although he stand here present in
body, he is cast out and is removed hence, more truly than those that are so
shut out of the doors, that they may not be partakers of the holy Table. For
they being expulsed according to the Laws of God, and tarying without, are yet
of good hope, if so be they will amend their faults. They are cast out by
the Church, that they may return again with a pure conscience. etc.

Here where he says they are cast out by the Church, yet he wishes that
he might openly know them, to the end, that he might denounce the sentence
of Excommunication against them, and do as the Father with his disobedient
Child, and as the shephearde with his infected Sheep. So that this Censure by
these comparisons, does properly belong to the Spiritual Father and Pastor of
the people. But for the better and more full consideration hereof: Let us see
what Chrysostom says in his seventy Homily, against the custom then of
hiring Women mourners for the dead, which Homily he also inserteth into his
Homilies on the Epistle to the Hebrews, Homilia quarta ex Capite secundo Where
he also mencioneth Presidentes, and after that he had wished them all not to
be taken away by untimely death, he says: God grant this, and this I wish
for, and I beseech the Presidentes and you all, that ye pray to GOD one for
another, Chrysostom. of Excom.
and make this your common prayer. But if so be (which God forbid, and grant
not, that it should happen) that the bitter death do come: (I call it bitter,
not of the own nature thereof, for death now is not bitter, differing nothing
from sleep: (but I say, bitter death happens in respect of our affection) and
any shall hyer these Women mourners: believe me that speak it, (I speak none
otherwise than I may, and as I am affected, be offended who so list (I will
interdict them from the Church, and that for long time, even as though they
were Idolaters. Chrysostom. in Homil. 70. and homil. 4. in Hebr. 2.
For if Paul call the covetous man a worshipper of Idolles, much more him that
brings in, upon the faithful departed, the things that appertain unto
Idolaters. To what purpose, I pray thee, do thou call the Elders and the
singers? Do thou it not that they should comfort thee, and that they
should honor the departed? Wherefore do thou than deface him? Wherefore
do thou prosecute him with public ignominy? Wherefore do thou play
upon a stage? We come to declare the Philosophy of the resurrection, teaching
all men, and those also that are yet not stricken, that by the honor rendered to
the dead, when as the like shall happen unto them, they bear it out
courageously. And thou bring forth Women, which so much as lies in them
mar all our dooinges. What is worse than this mockery and derision? what is
more grievous than this uneven dealing?

And here by the way note these Terms of Presidentes, whom he joins with
the people, and of Elders that should comfort the mourners, whom he joins
with the Psalmistes or singers, The Praesidents and Elders of whom Chrysostom.
speaks.
( that he says were called for at burialls) whom also he joins with
himself, saying: We come to show the philosophy of the resurrection, and
to teach all men. Whether these were not such Elders, as James wills the
sick to call for before his death, and were called for again at the funeralles,
to make Exhortations and instructions, to comfort and teach the living, that
are assembled at the burial: it appears plainly, they were teachers of the
word, and not Governors, Praesidentes or Elders that were not Teachers. If our
Brethren say that those forenamed praesidents were the civil Governors of the
people: then again they make nothing for our Brethrens Ecclesiastical and not
teaching governors or Elders of the Church. But whatsoever they were, that the
Ecclesiastical censure of Excommunication belonged to Chrysostom himself
being their Bishop, and to such only as are Ministers of the word: Let us see
further, how Chrysostom does proceed.

Be ye ashamed and adradde. But if you will not, we will no longer suffer
you, to bring into the Church such pernicious customs. For those (says Paul)
that sin reprove them before all^. And we forbid by you those wretched
women ( that is to say, we charge you, not to suffer them, or, to tell them of
this our prohibitation) that they never be present at the deaths of the
faithful, nor at the bearing forth of them. For fear we compel them to
bewail in very deed their own evils. And least we teach them not to do
these things in other folks, but to lament their own calamities. For whereas
also, a Godly Father has a prodigal son, he not only admonishes him that
he join not himself unto wicked men: but also he terrifieth him. Lo therefore
I both charge you, and them by you, that ye neither call such together,
Chrysostom. ^hreat again to Excom*
neither that they come unto you. And God grant that this word may do some
further good, and that these threats may prevail. But if so be (which God
forbid) we shall be contemned: we shall at length be compelled to bring our
thretninges into dooins, chastising you with the Ecclesiastical Laws, and
them with such correction as shall be fit for them.

But if any being arrogant shall contemn let him hear Christ even now also
saying: If any shall offend against thee, go thy ways and reprove him
be^weene thee and him alone. Matst. 18.
But if he shall not hear thee, take unto thee one or two. And if so also he
shall resist thee: tell the Church. And if he shall also dispyise the Church,
let him be to thee an Ethnicke and Publican.

If therefore he command me so to shun him, that has sinned against me,
when he will not hear: Judge you, how I ought to account him, that shall
sin against himself, and against God. For you would not contemn us, if
we proceed so mildly against you. But if any man shall contemn these our
bindings that we make, Christ again shall correct him, saying:

Whatsoever ye shall bind upon earth shall be also bound in Heaven: and
whatsoever ye shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. For if we
also be wretched, and of no regard, and worthy of contempt (as in very
deed worthy we are) notwithstanding we revenge not our selves, nor wrecke
our anger. But think of your salvation. Be ye ashamed, I beseech you, and
blush* For if a man bear with his friend that contendeth with him more
earnestlye than is meet, considering his meaning, that he does it of good
will, and not of insolency: How much more should he bear with his Teacher
when he reproves him, nor speaks these things of a tyrannical authority,
nor as though he were appointed in place of a Prince, but as susteining the
care of a Father. For we speak not these things as though we would brag
of our power. For how can we speak these things, with this mind, that desire
not to come to the experience of the things we speak of, but with grief and
mourning?

Pardon me, and let not any man despise the ecclesiastical band. For he that
binds, is not man but Christ, which has committed this power to us, and
has made men the Lords of so great honor. For we verelie would be willing to
use this power only to losing, yea, rather we would that we neither had any
necessity of that: for we desire that we might bind none. We are not so
miserable and wretched, (although we be very vile) but if we be compelled,
pardon us. For neither of our own accord or willingly, but rather mourning
more for you, we lay the bonds upon you. And, If any man cont^mne them, the
time of Judgment is at hand. The residue I will not utter, least I should beat
your minds down right. For this is the thing that we chiefly desire, that we
might not be drawn into this necessity. But if we shall come to it, we will
fulfill our office, and cast the bonds upon you. And if any shall break them,
The B. separate authority in excom.
I shall do that is my duty, and then am I clear, and thou shall give an
account to him that commanded me to bind.

But tell thou me, if the King sitting in presence, one of the Sergeants
standing by, be commanded to bind one of those that stand in the row, and
to lay fetters on him, but he not only thrust him back, but also break the
bonds: is it the Sergeant that has sustained the injury, or is it not much
more the King, that did command it? The excommunicator such a person as may
teach.
For if when any thing is done against the faithful, he account the same done
against himself: how much more, when he which is appointed to teach susteineth
injury, will he be moved, as though he himself had sustained the contumely?
But God forbid that any of them that are in this Church should come into the
necessity of these bonds. For as it is a goodly thing not to offend, so is
it profitable to bear the rebuke thereof. Let us therefore bear the
reprehension, and let us endeavor never to offend: but if we shall have
offended, let us sustain the reproouing. For, as it is good not to be stricken,
(which notwithstanding if it shall happen, it is necessary to lay a medicine
to the wound): even so it is here. But God grant that we never need any such
medicines, for of you we hope better things, and such as appertain unto
salvation, although we speak thus. We have spoken perhaps more vehemently,
but to your greater taking heed. For it is better, that I should be accounted
of you bold, cruel, and insolent: than that you should do those things that
please not God. But we trust in God, that this our admonition shall not be
unprofitable. But that you shall be so changed, that these speeches shall be
turned into your praises and commendations.

By this it cleerelie appears, that not only the keys of knowledge, and
opening the word of God: but the keys of this discipline and Censure of
excommunication, appertained chiefly to the Bishop, and to Teachers of the
word, and not to a Segniorie of such Governors as were not teachers, Melancthon.
joined with him. And as this was the practice of the Churches Excommunication,
in the days of these holy Fathers: so, cutting of all the later corruptions of
the ages following, especially in the time of the Popish tyranny, that most
tragically abused these keys, and continues and increases those abuses of
them: Let us come to the Protestants, and to our Brethren themselves in the
reformed Churches, and see their judgments also in this Discipline.

When the late Trident Conuenticle had falsely burdened the Protestant Churches,
that we gave this power of the keys to all Christians indifferently: Kemnitius
answers, in his Examination of the sixth chapter saying: Kemnitius in exam.
Trident. Con^. To. cap. 6.
This Chapter has two parts, the first disputes of the Minister of
absolution, to whom appertains the ordinary ministry of the keys. The
other part treats what absolution is. So far as pertains to the first
part, the matter may be dispatched in few words. For in the Examination of
the tenth Canon of the Sacraments in general, those things that pertain
heereunto are expounded. For although the keys be delivered unto the Church,
as the ancient Fathers do well set forth: notwithstanding we think, that by
no means every Christian ought or may indifferently, without a lawful
calling, usurp or exercise the Ministry of the word and sacraments. But as
in case of necessity the old Fathers say, that every lay man may minister the
sacrament of baptism: so also Luther said of absolution, in the case of
necessity where a preeste is not present*

Melancthon in his common places, Tit. De Regno Christi. Moreover says he) we
must also consider this, Melanct. in locis com. de regno Christi.
that the pastors have the commandment of Excommunicating with the Word,
without bodily force, those that are guilty of manifest crimes. And in his
annotations on his common places, he says: But after that we have known the
true church by those signs that he have spoken of: that power whereof Christ
speaks Mat. 16. and 18. and also John. 20. is to be applied to this only
church. For neither has Christ given that power to his enemies, whom he
commands to be excluded out of the kingdom of heaven, Melanct. in a^not.
locorum com.
according to that saying: he that believes not shall be condemned: but unto
this only assembly that has not only his word, but also interprets it
rightly, and according to the proportion of the faith, not overthrowing the
foundation which the Apostles have laid, and before them the Prophets. For
neither said he to Peter, as to the son of John, I give to thee the keys of
the kingdom of heaven: but because he had said thou art Christ the son of the
living God. Therefore the B. of Rome claims to himself in vain the keis of
Peter, since that he is most unlike to Peter, and not a minister of Christ, but
of Antichrist. Of who^ it is written, that about the last time, he shall be
reproved with the spirit of Gods mouth. Neither ^id Peter vsurp the power of
binding and losing to himself alone any more to himself than to other, but
judged the same to be common to him with all the apostles, and the whole church
which professes the same word. Save that for order sake, he commits the
public administration of the keys to certain, and to fit persons, that they
should either absolve me^, or not absolve the^, with this choice that Christ
him self has ordained, and that he should rightly distribute the word of God
etc.

Thus does Melancthon grant that this power is committed to the church: but
the dispensation of the power, is committed to the right distribution of the
ministers. And not only he speaks of the power mentioned Math. 16. and
John. 20* but also Math. 18. To which purpose he proceeds, saying: The
Churches power of order and Jurisdiction
But it is usual to divide the power of the church, into the power of order,
and into the power of jurisdiction. The power of order they call the right of
teaching, and of administering the sacraments: which the prophets and thapostles
immediately received of God: the other doctors or teachers (received it) by men.
To this power we must hearken simply, even as to the voice of the gospel,
according to the commandment of God: Hear him. Howbeit, the good doctors or
teachers have liberty of ordeining times, and: of Instituting certain
traditions for good order sake. Which to obey, it is the duty of a godly mind.
The power of order.
To which mind nothing is more ioiful, than in all things to agree with the
true church, without offense of conscience. The power of jurisdiction is, when
as those which are defiled with manifest wickednesses, and being admonished, do
not desist, are excommunicated from the society of the Church, not only the
inward and spiritual society. Which excom. is made by the general voice of the
gospel: The power of Iurisd.
he that shall not believe shall be condemned: but also from the external
communion of the church, by a spiritual sentence, to the intent, the honor of
God may be less blemished, and the society of men also less ill reported.
This other power in the primitive church was more necessary, when the Ethnike
magistrates governed the cities. For there, when by the civil judgment,
punishment should have bin given upon the blasphemers, and on others openly
violating the commandments of God: the church necessarily executed judgment on
the corrupted members, without sedition, that is, without bodily force.
Excluding the wicked with the only word, and yet receiving them again, if they
were converted. But now after that they also which are the magistrates, have
embraced the name of Christ, it is be^ter and more meet for the common profit,
to bring them under the civil punishment, that manifestly lead a wicked life.
Especially when as the magistrate by name is charged that he takes away the
authors of offenses, to thend that the name of god be less il spoken of. Thus
also the offices remain distinct, that by the churches power, secret and
manifest sins be reproved, by the only word of God, but they that suffer not
themselves to be ruled by the doctrine, may be punished by the civil
Jurisdiction. Aretius.
Verelie this were a m^^t beautiful harmony of the two powers, if it were
kept: but in this extreme confusion of all things, and heedlesnesse of
Princes, there is not so much as hope of ordeining this harmony. This only
thing remains, that the King of Kings come, and purge his Church for ever
from all offenses.

Thus complains Melancthon, and distinguishes of these powers. But he would
so little have the Eccl. jurisdiction of excommunication, to be used by
governing Seniors that were not teachers: that he would either have them
teachers, or else their jurisdiction to be but civil, and the mere punishment
of the Christian Magistrate.

Aretius in locis com. part 2. de excomm.
Aretius in his Commonplace thereon, says: Excommunication is an exclusion of
some body that professes our Religion, out of the company of the faithful
in holy and profane matters, being made in the name and power of Christ, by
the ordinary Ministers of the Church, the residue of the Church consenting,
The definition of excommunic^tion.
and being made for the cause of amending the sinner, and of delivering the
Church from the contagion of the sin. And afterward proouing the parts of
this definition, coming to the 5. part, By whom it ought to be administered? he
says; We answer out of the definition: By the ordinary Ministers, the
residue of the Church consenting. We would have the Ministers ordinary,
because except their vocation be lawful, the discipline of the manners shall
be frustrate. For Christ has delivered the same to the Apostles, and for that
cause to their lawful successors, and therefore they labor here in vain,
whom the lawful succession does remove. And furthermore, that the discipline
be administered of the Ministers, as Ministers, that is, that they use the same
by Ministry or service, not by Empire or rule. In which matter, how greatly
in Popery they offended, is not here to the purpose to declare. The Minister
is the excommunicator, and the Church consents.
We add, The residue of the Church consenting: least the Minister would
exercise dominion of his own will. Christ Mat. 18. bids, Tell the Church,
not the Ministry only. And Paul would not the incestuous man to be
excluded by his authority alone, but the Church of Corinth being gathered
together 1. Cor. 5. Cyprian declares it to the people, if any were to be
received, doing the same (no doubt) in those that were to be excommunicated.
Epist. 16. li. 3. You being present and judging, all shall be excommunicated.
So in another place, for those that were fallen, he entreats the people that
the peace might be given them. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 39. says; Every of the
approved Seniors do govern, having gotten a just honor, not with money, but
with testimony, for no matter of God consists on price, etc.

Here Aretius makes excommunication to be necessarily made by ^he ordinary
Ministers. And that we might know wh^ these are, Cyprianus*
he adds, that Christie delivered it to the Apostles, and to the successors
of the Apostles. And therefore those that labor here, to have other Ministers
than Teachers, labor in vain, because they are removed from the lawful
succession, and their discipline is all frustrate. This being set set down for
the Minister, where he adds, the residue of the Churches consent; and thereto
applies this testimony of Christ Mat. 18. Tell the Church, not the Minister
only: he makes no especial Senate of ecclesiast. Seniors, but puts
altogether in this general name, The Eccl. Senate of Governors not teachers
rejected.
the residue of the church. Neither gives he them herein a joint Ministry
with the Ministers, that the excommunication should be made by all the residue:
but that it should be done by their consent. So that if our Br. fearing
confusion in the peoples consent, would have a Segniorie to represent them, and
to whom their consent should be compromitted: yet beyond consent they have
nothing to do, more than the residue of the Church and people have, whom (as
they say) they represent: except they will be Comministers of the word, and
successors of the Apostles. And this does the very example 1. Cor. 5. ( here
also alleged) excellently well declare. The example of Saint Paul. 1. Co^. 5.
Where Paul was the Minister and the Judge, and the People gave their consent to
his Judgment. Howbeit, if they had not consented, that had not defeated the
virtue and power of S. Paul's Censure, as we have already at large seen.

And likewise the dealing of Cyprian, in receiving of them that were
excommunicated. The words of Cyprian in this alleged 16. epist. li. 3.
writing to the people in his absence from them, are these. Cyprian. epist. li.
3. epist. 16.
That you do mourn and bewail the falls of our brethren; of my self withal
I know it, and do bewail it, and I suffer and feel that, which the blessed
Apostle says: Who is weakened, (faith he) and I am not weakened? who is
offended, and I am not burned? And again, he put in his Epistle, saying; 2.
Co. 11.29 1. Co. 12.2^
If one member suffer, the other members also suffer with it: and if one member
rejoice, the other members also rejoice wish it. I have compassion therefore,
and mourn together with our brethren that have fallen, and overthrown
themselves in the trouble of persecution, and trayling with them part of our
bowels, they have with their wounds brought unto us sharp greef. To whom God by
his divine mercy, is able to give remedy. While notwithstanding they should not
think that any should be done hastily, unadvisedly, and out of hand, least if
the peace should be usurped rashly, the of^ence of Gods indignation should more
grievously be provoked. The blessed martyrs have written letters to us
concerning some, beseeching that their desires maybe examined, when as we shall
begin to return to the church, peace being before of the Lord given to us
all. All their desires were examined, you being present and Judges.

Aretius.
Thus writes Cyprian, not that the persons were Excommunicated, they being the
Judges of their Excommunication: How farthe people had to deal for their
consent of restoring to the C^urche in Cypria^s time
but as they were ipso facto Excommunicated by their grievous apostasy: so the
fault being so heighnous and offensive to the people, no marvel if Cyprian
would not permit, that they should be received into the Church, before the
offended people their-selues were content. And for this cause they had made
before their requests, unto the people, that they might on their repentance
be received. And the people examined and Judged their requests to be
reasonable. But because it lay not in them to admit them: both they and other
that had been constant in their persecutions, whom Cyprian calls Martyrs,
wrote unto him being their Bishop, that he at his return unto them, would
receive them. Which although Cyprian of himself were willing to do, yet he
makes this his conclusion: I pray them that they would patiently hear our
Counsel. Let them expect our return, and when as by the mercy of God, we
shall come unto you, calling together more of our fellowe-Bishops, according to
the Discipline of the Lord, and the presence of the blessed Martyrs, we may
examine the Letters and the requests. And to the confessors I have written
Letters, which I have commanded to be read to you.

So that Cyprian writes not to the people for them, as though the people had
had the chief authority or any power herein: but contrariwise, the people
had written to him, that whereas, neither they, nor the Martyrs among them, nor
yet the Priests without him, could receive them, he (having the chief power
hereof) would vouchsafe to do it. Whereupon, he writes this Epistle, to
stay their desire herein, till it might be done more orderly at his coming to
them.

This therefore being no ordinary matter, wherein so many Bishops should
appear, to the more solemn receiving of these so grievous lapsed persons:
whereas diverse of the Priests or Elders of Carthage had already received
these offenders, and administered the Sacraments unto them: He complayneth
hereof, saying: I hear notwithstanding that certain of the Elders, neither
mindful of the Gospel, neither thinking what the Martyrs have written to us,
neither keeping to the Bishop the honor of his sacerdotall preesthoode, and of
the Chair: have begun already to communicate to them that are fallen, and to
offer for them, (to wit, the public prayers) and to give them the sacrament
of thanksgiving. When as they ought to have come by order to these things.
Whereby it appears that these Elders were Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments, and yet distinct from those which after he calls Bishops, that
should all be joined with him, in the receiving of these so great offenders.

As for that Aretius adds of the seniors mentioned in Tertullian: I ask no
better witness than Aretius himself, even the leaf before, Beza.
what they were. Where he says, (after the example of S. Paul, Excommunicating
Alexander and Hymenaeus) Postea vsi sunt illa pij Episcopi, vt videre est apud
Tertullianum. Apolog. cap. 39. Afterward the Godly Bishops used it, (to wit,
Excommunication) as is to see in Tertullian. etc.

Beza himself that refers Christ's words to a translation of the Synedrion
from the Israelites to the Christian Church, Beza in confess. Christ. cap. 5.
artic. 43.
) in his Confession, Cap-5* De Ecclesia, Artic. 43. says: Secondly, we must
know, that this power rests not upon man's ordinance, but upon the express
word of God. For this is part of the jurisdiction of the Keys delivered to
the Apostles, and to all true priests (or Elders) in the person of the
Apostles. Which Paul himself exercised at Corinth and in other places. So that
if these Presbyters, priests or Elders* be not such as use the keys delivered
to the Apostles, and do it not in the person of the Apostles, as their
Successors: it is not the true Ecclesiastical Excommunication by Beza his own
Confession. But they be not the Apostles successors, if they be not teachers
of the word and ministers of the sacraments as Paul says: 1. Cor. 4.1. Let a
man so esteem us as Ministers of Christ and Stewards of the Mysteries of God?
And therefore, of good consequence it does follow, that the sentences of
Excommunication made by such Seniors, as are not teachers, nor Ministers of the
word and sacraments, is no lawful Excommunication, nor is the power of the
keys that Christ delivered. Gellius Snecanus de Disciplina ecclesiast. 1.
methodi part. fol. 437 says; Thirdly, by the Institution and promise of
Christ, Math. 18. ver. 18. Gellius Snecanus de disc. eccl. 1. methodi part.
fol. 437
Whatsoever ye shall bind. etc. is as well added to this Discipline, as to the
Ministry of the word. Math. 16. ver. 19. We may call it the binding and the
loosing key of the kingdom of heaven, in respect that it is a part of the
Ecclesiastical Government. For by the Figure of the keye, is signified the
administration of the Church, as appears by conferrence of places. Esaias. 22.
ver. 22. I will give, or I will lay the keye of the house of David upon his
shoulder. And Math. 16. ver. 19. and cap. 18. verse 19. Hereupon we learn, that
this Discipline is not to be administered according to our private affections,
but according to the use in the scripture prescribed, of the keys of the
kingdom of Heaven. For Christ ratifieth only those things, that are bound
and loosed with his keys of the Ministry of the Gospel. We may amplify
the same more largely, by the figure of the keys, and of their signification.
Math. 16. ver. 19. Mark. 16. ver. 15. Preach ye the Gospel. etc. And John 20.
ver. 21. etc. From the example of Peter unto the citizens of Jerusalem. etc.

Whereby it is plain, that this key consisting in the Ministry of the word,
is committed to those only, that are the Ministers of the same word. This do
his examples prove yt he alleges, for proof, why this government of the
presbytery is called spiritual. Snecanus.
Whereby ( says he) sins are punished not by bodily force, but by the
Ministry of the word. The testimonies which he adioyneth Romans 12.1. Cor.
12.1. Tim. 4. and 5. Was have sufficiently considered, that they enforce
nothing for any other Elders, that meddled not in teaching and ministering the
Word. The examples which he alleges, to prove that this Spiritual
Discipline may be exercised, without the offense of the politic Magistrate,
d^e all of them prove, that the Ministers of the Spiritual Discipline,
should be^ Ministers of the Word.

First, from the example ( says he) of the distinct function of Moses and
Aaron: The examples in Snecanus.
and of all the Godly kings, that never mingled themselves with the Sacerdotall
offices. Yea Moses respecting the ordinance of God, by the counsel of Iethro
his Father in Law, ordained severally by themselves, civil judgments. Exodus
18. ver. 25. Describing in other places, what were the proper offices and
Judgments of the Priests, in spiritual causes, distinct from bodily causes,
Deuteronomy. 17. ver. 9. As also the Scripture. 1. Paral. 9. ver. 22. and Ezech. 44.

This two-folde order the godly King Iosaphat observes also distinctly, who
expressly 2. Chron. 19. ver. 5. etc. Commanded all the judgments or
questions of the Law, of the commandment, of the ceremonies, etc. to be
referred to the Levites and Priests. Least any might except that Moses
constitution dealt on sacrifices, not on judgments. Secondly, from the
punishment of King Saul, sacrificing against the commandment of God. 1. Sam.
15. And of king Ozias stricken with lepry, because he usurped the priests
office. 2. Patal, 26, verse 16, etc. The extraordinary examples of
Melchisedech, Samuel, and Heli, are not to be drawn into use, contrary to the
Law. Thirdly, from the office and use of the Priests and Levites, denouncing
the blessings to the keepers of Gods commandments, and the cursings to the
not keepers. Deuteronomy. 27, and 28, Fourthly, from the special power and ministry
of binding and loosing, which Christ committed not to the civil Magistrate,
but to the Ministers of the word in the new Testament, Math. 16. Who also
commanded significantly, that they that are not obedient, should be showed to
the Church, The Presbytery are the Ministers of the Word.
that is, to the Presbytery, not to the Magistrate, Math, 18. So that, even
here where he expounds the Church for a Presbytery. Yet he makes this
Presbytery to be only of those, that are the Ministers of the Word.

Fifthly, out of Paul 1. Cor. 5. ver. 4, and 12* Which (so far as pertains
to the present business) of all other most evidently teaches by two
arguments, that the presbytery was different from the judgment of things that
pertain to the use of this life. First, from the order of the time* For that
the use of coming together and of judging, was rec^yued in the Corinthian
Church, before the Epistle of Paul was written, it is apparent out of his own
words: The Presbytery del^ in spiritual matters their punishment was by the
Ministry of the word.
You being gathered together in the name of the Lord. Again: Do ye not judge
of those things that are within. But speaking afterward, chap. 6. of private
controversies, he says: Appoint you arbiters. Not, ye have appoin^ed, in the
preterperfect tense. Moreover, of the diversity of the spiritual things, and
civil controversies: for when he forbids them to go to the Magistrate, in
those things that pertein to this life: how would he have granted it in
spiritual things? That assembly was a singular ornament of the Church: but
this judgment of corporal things, is turned to a reproach unto the Corinthians.
Insomuch that he adiudgeth each one of the basest, to be mere enough
thereunto. Besides that, ^. Cor. 10 refelling the slanders of the adversaries,
for the severity of his former Epistle, and for his rebuking the fornicator:
he distinguishes the Ministry of the word, and the reuengement with carnal
weapons against the disobedient.

Thus does he still continue in proouing this Segniorie to be mere spiritual,
and their authority wholly to consist in the Ministry of the word.

Sixtlie, out of 1. Tim. 5.19. and 20. whereupon it manifestly appears, that
even then there was an order already appointed at Ephesus, over which Timothy
was the Governor. But that these 2. ver. the 19. and the 20. Against an Elder
receive no accusation, except in the mouth of 2. or 3. witnesses: and them that
sin reprove openly, that the other may fear. are spoken of such Elders, as
are pastoral Elders, we have at large before proved, eue^ by the confession
of Calvin and Beza: therefore this place, not only makes nothing for not
teaching Elders, but also proves a manifest standing and appointed
superiority, in the Apostles times, among the pastoral Elders, as we have
seen.

Seuenthlie, unto these approaches the use of the Apostolical Church, The v^e
of the Apost. Church, for excom. only in Teachers
which continued many years sound without the help of Kings and Princes. Yea in
the more purer Primitive Church, under the Christian Empero^s, the use of the
keys remained apperteining to the Ministers of the word and Elders of the
Church, distinct from the civil Magistrate.

Here Snecanus tells not how the Church flourished without the help of
Christian Princes, which he showed before was one of the Anabaptists chief
arguments: but that the use of the keys was not helped by them, but perteined
only to the Ministers of the word, not to Elders, not teachers.

To conclude, the things aforesaid are confirmed, by the distinct properties
of their government. For the civil Magistrate punishes crimes with external
punishments only, as with fines of money, imprisonme^ts, etc Insomuch that
oftentimes it punishes also the very poenitent, by reason of their civil
transgressions, not correcting in the mean ewhile, the impoenitent which do not
publicly disturb the peace. It stops indeed now and then an evil, The eccl.
discipline by the word of God and instrument of the voice.
that it creep not further abroad: but the evil lurking within, it helps
not. But the discipline eccl. executes her power against sinners, by the word
of God alone, and by the instrument of the voice: and acknowledges none among
the citizens and members of Christ, but those that repent them. And is so far
off from compelling any against their will, that it accepts the repentance
of none, unless it be voluntary. And indeuoreth chiefly in this, that
offenses might be removed, and the repentance of mind performed before God,
and those that are fallen, to be reconciled unto their neighbor, and to the
Church. Finally, that the holy things may not be polluted, being cast to dogs
and swine. How the charge of both the Tables but not the administration of all
matters contained in the^, belong to the civil Magistrate.
This double limitation is reciprocallie to be observed: for as it is not
lawful for them that attend on the Church in spiritual things, to arrogate
any thing to themselves of the civil power: so also is it not lawful for the
civil Magistrate to pass his bounds. The Magistrate is indeed the keeper of
either table, and ordained of God the chiefest member of Christ. Howbeit the
administration of things in those matters that directly respect the
conscience, do not therefore perteine unto him. For it belongs to God to
prescribe in the church, how the consciences should convert themselves by
repentance, it belongs not to the Magistrate: to who^ it belongs to teach
and to administer the sacraments, it is their parts also to take notice and to
judge by the word, of them that are the despisers of the doctrine and of the
sacrament, so far as pertains to the controversy of the law (or right),
although the execution of the fact in politic matters, do apperteine to the
civil Magistrate. What can b^ plainer spoken than this, to prove that these
Seniors either must not deal with this spiritual discipline of excom. or they
must be such Presbyters, Priests or Elders, as be Ministers of the word and
sacraments.

Danaeus in his Christian Introduction, 3. part, in his treatise, De potestate
Ecclesiae, Daneus in Christ. Isag. 3. part. de potestate eccl. cap. 48.
cap. 48. concerning the author of the power of the keys, says on this wise.
Moreover this thing it self, is able to establish and ratify this power of the
Church, against the slanders of al men, as though this power were a certain
tyranny, besides the word of God, usurped of the Pastors of the Church. The
power of the keys pert^ines to the Pastors.
In which words, he plainly makes this power, to belong, by the institution
of God, to the Pastors of the Church. Thirdly ( says he) this is to be
objected against the bitings and scoffs, and rebellions of obstinate persons,
to wit, that it is given to the Church of Christ himself, being God, and not
of men, neither yet has this power been usurped of the Church. Here therefore
is this saying in force, He that despises you, Luc. 10.16.
despises me. Mat. 10. For it is not man that binds, but Christ. Chrysostom.
in the Epist. to the Hebr. ( whose sayings thereon we have seen at large
already). and it is in the Canon, Nemo contemnat. 11. quaest. 3. Moreover, the
charter of this power and jurisdiction, Danaeus.
which pertains to the church, remains in writing in 2. Eua^gelists, as two
public Notaries, and Secretaries of the highest King, to wit, Matthewe and
John. Matthew. 18. v. 18. Io. 20. v. 23. To whom agrees that, which is in Ier.
chap. 1. ver. 18.

Here Danaeus joins unto Mat. 18. all these testimonies Luc. 10. Ioh. 20. ^
Ier. 1. which are all spoken of the Ministers of the word. Luc. 10.16. Ioh.
20.23.
That in Luc. 10. ( to the which matter also, that in Mat. 10. agrees,) was
spoken to the comfort of the disciples, being sent out to preach. Concerning
that of the keys given to the disciples, Ioh. 20. Calvin in Ioh. 20.
Calvin himself says: After that Christ has appointed, and ordained Legates
to be sent into the world, he now more significantlie and expreslie describes
the office or ministry of the^, Remission of sins not separate from the office
of Teaching.
and in few words co^prehendeth the sum of the Gospel. For this power of
remitting sins, is not to be separated from the office of teaching, and is
annexed to it in one co^text. And as for that of Ier. 1. v. 18. Ier. 1.18.
Behold this day have I made thee a defensed City, and an iron pillar, and
walls of brass, against the whole land, against the kings of Judah, and
against the princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and against ^he people
of the land. Tremelij a^not. in Ier. 1.
As this was only spoken to the prophet, so Tremelius expou^ds these words,
wherein they should be understood, Behold I set thee, that is, I confirm thee
in this thy function, that thou should stand firm against the obstinacy of
these me^, The Geneua note.
and should continue vnbroke^ and immoouable. And the very note in the
Geneua Bible, observes on this word, an iron pillar: signifieng on the one
part, that the more Satan and the world rages against Gods ministers, the
more present will he be to help the^. And this does the text it self, eue^ in ye
ver. next going before, declare, where God says? Thou therefore gird up thy
loins, and arising up speak unto the^, all the things that I co^mmand thee.
Be not afraid at the sig^t of the^, least I strike thee before their faces. So
that this encourageme^t of God, was only for the Ministry of his word.
Bulling. in Ier. 1.
And very well notes Bullinger thereon: He declares to the Prophet what should
be his office, that thou should (I say) speak unto them. He constituteth him
therefore a Prophet, that is, a Preacher, whose office should be to speak unto
the people. And what now he should speak, he expressly signifies, All things
that I command thee. All things (I say) not only some things. Neither shall
thou dissemble any thing, neither shall thou bring the things that seem good
to thee, but that that I command thee, Mark, the things says he that I
command thee, not that other command thee, or that seem good to other. These
things agree with this commandment of the L. which the L. This sentence is
spoken of a Preacher.
Jesus himself has prescribed, and in the last chap. of Mat. said, Teaching
the^ to keep al things that I have commanded you, etc And on this comfort to
him, he says: For howsoever tyrants would seem to set the preachers at
naught, yet themselves witness, that they are afraid of the servants of god,
who^ they have contemned, Herod feared John, and Achab Elias, etc. If now
these testimonies of Danaeus, be ^it for those to who^ this power of the keys
belongs, who sees not, that it is proper only to the Ministers and
Teachers of Gods word?

Danaeus in Christ. Isag. 3 pa^^. cap. 50.
In the 50. cha. Danaeus comes directly to the party to who^ the keys are
given. But ( says he) this power or jurisdiction of the keys is given unto
the whole Church, and therefore to all and singular the Apostles and true
Pastors of the Church, and that indeed equally: but not only to Peter alone
and to his successors, or to himself principally or chiefelie, as some say,
but unto other by a communicating made from Peter. It is given therefore unto
the whole Church her self, howbeit the same is exercised by the B. and Prelates
of the Church, Excom. exercised by the B and Prelates.
in her name, consent, and conscience. Aug. in 50. Homil. homil. 50. Heerupon
(to confute the Papists error, that would make all this power to be given
principally to Peter, and to be derived from him) he faith: The first reason
is the authority of the scripture. For Christ speaking to all his Apostles,
The power of the keys not given to Peter only, but to all the Apostles.
not only to Peter alone, says in the plural number, What sins soever ye
shall bind upon earth, etc. Math. 18. v. 18. The same Christ after his
resurrection, Omnibus hanc eandem potestatem confirmanit quoque, confirmed also
unto all of them this self same power, not only to Peter alone: for upon whom
he breathed the holy Ghost, to them he said; Whose sins soever ye shall
remit, etc. John 20. ve. 23. If now the power given Mat. 18. be the self same
power that given Io. 22. and the power given Ioh. 20. is the power of teaching
and preaching the word of God, The power given Mat. 18. is given only to
Teachers.
and as Calvin says, is not to be separated from the office of teaching: how
follows it not, that whosoever have this power given them Mat. 18. must be all
Teachers of the word of God? And how then do our Br. give this power to such a
Senate of Elders* as are not Teachers?

The 2. reason ( says Danaeus) is drawn from the things that are necessarily
annexed. Thus, wheresoever is the true Church of God, there the gates of hell
do not prevail, there is remission of sins, there is the fountain of grace
open, and also equally appears out of the word of God. Therefore whersoeuer
the church is, the other equally accord thereto, that are the Churches gifts,
and follow the same. Zach. 13 v. 1. Among the which chiefly is this power of
the keys: for by it, the remission and retention of sins is denounced. The
power mentioned M^th. 18. is the same mentioned Mat. 16.
Christ said of the Church universally, The gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. Whereupon it is rightly gathered, that this power of the keys
pertains to her, and that indeed universally. Math. 16. v. 18. For the mean
whereby the gates of hell do not prevail against the Church, is the self
same power. If this also be the self same power mentioned Math. 16. which
Calvin also ascribes to the Ministry of the word, saying: Here Christ
begins to treat of the public office, that is, of the Apostleship, whose
dignity is adorned with a double commendation. For Christ says, that the
Ministers of the Gospel, are (as it were) the porters of the Kingdom of
heaven, because they bear the keys thereof. Secondly he adds, that they
are endued with a power of binding and loosing that is effectual in heaven.
The similitude of the keys, is aptly fitted unto the office of teaching. This
again manifestly proves, that the exercise of this power belongs only
to those that are Teachers of the word.

To conclude ( says Danaeus) Paul himself that used this power both in
binding and also in loosing, 1. Cor. 5. and 2. Cor. 2. 1. Tim. 1. verse. 20.
used the same by his own right, in respect he was an Apostle, not by a right
granted him from Peter, or by delegation of this power made to him of Peter,
Gal. 2. verse. 8. Therefore it appertained to Paul, The power of binding and
loosing pertains to Pastors.
as much as to Peter. But if as much to Paul, then as much to other Apostles
also, yea and unto their successors, that is, unto every of the Churches, and
to the Pastors of them, since that Paul calls himself the least among the
Apostles, 1. Cor. 15. verse 8. and 9. Wherefore we must doubt no whit, but that
this power was given of God unto the Church, and not unto Peter alone, and
also that it was equally given to every of the Pastors and Churches, that
they may have and keep sound and obedient to the word of God, the flock of the
Lord committed unto them. This reason is again a good argument, that the
exercise of this power belongs only to the Ministers of the word, not
only from the example of Paul in the places here cited, and of the other
Apostles, but also of their right and interest therein, and that in respect
they were Apostles; and to the successors of the Apostles, in respect of their
succeeding therein, in teaching the doctrine that they planted. But those that
are no teachers, are no successors of the Apostles: therefore the exercise of
this power belongs not to them. And if Paul so well as Peter, The power of the
keys is several to the Apostles, and to Pastors.
and every one of the Apostles had this power in their own rights, and
Pastors likewise in their own rights: and their rightes and offices be severed
from those in the Churches that be not Pastors nor Teachers: then had Paul and
Peter and every of the Apostles, and in succession from them, every Pastor
and Teacher, a power and right herein by him self, separate from all other in
the Churches.

And to this accords the testimony of S. August. which Daneus here cites:
Erogat^ rem me posuit Dominus, etc. Aug. sermon de tempore 164.
God has set me to be a layer forth, not an exactor, notwithstanding where we
may, where place is given, I cease not: where we know, we reprehend, we rebuke,
we accurse, Aug. attributes not exc. to any Elders not teaching.
we excommunicate, and notwithstanding we amend them not. Why so? Because He
that planteth, nor he that waters is any thing, but God that gives the
increase. Who is this, that he ascribes this accursing and excommunicating
unto? Is it to any that are not Teachers? Is it not to them, that he says,
do also reprehend, and rebuke, and plant, and water? And is not that by
preaching or teaching the word?

Danaeus for the Elders exco^.
And if Danaeus had set down the sentence more full, the words that ^o before,
would have declared it: Behold ( says Aug.) I say unto you, behold I cry unto
you, I clear my self. God has set me to be a layer forth, etc. And the words
also following immediately after: I that now speak, that now admonish, what
need is there, but that God hear me for you, that is, in your hearts? Briefly
I say, and I commend it unto you, and I terrify the faithful, and I aedifie
you. Thus does he still join teaching and preaching with his accursing and
excommunicating. And even there, he so threatens them that kept concubines
besides their wives, that he makes the sinner to say, O holy Bishop, thou
have made my concubine an harlot. Did I say so ( says Augustine) the Apostle
cries it out, and I have incurred the blame, etc. Thus does S. Augustine
threaten them with his excommunicating: but he teaches and reprooueth them
withal. As for such as are not, as he was a Teacher, and open reprehender of
sins, he ascribes not the action of excommunication to them.

Moreover, in 52. chap. says Danaeus: Therefore as the King being sick obeys
as he is a man, the Physicians, although they be his subjects: and as he that
saileth obeieth the Mariners, because he has not the government over the Sea,
nor over the diseases: so does he also obey the Pastors, because the highest
Magistrate Politic, has not any law over the heavens. Wherefore in this
power to be exercised, the Pastors and Prelates of the Church, have also over
the chief Magistrate a right and power, in respect that they arethe faithful
Ministers of God, and Dispensors and Pastors of the whole Church. Hie. 1. v.
10. What can be plainer spoken than this, that this right and power to
excommunicate, belongs to none that be no Teachers? The examples that he
alleges, of Nathan reproouing David: John Baptist reproving Herod: Fabian
repelling Philip: Ambrose excommunicating Theodosius: we have either seen
before, or they are apparent, that they al confirm the Censure of the Minister
only of Gods word.

And in the 53. chap. Fourthlie ( says Danaeus) it is the office of the
Bishops and Prelates of the Church, to intend unto the word of God, to remove
the offenses of the Church, to seek the lost sheep, to gather the dispearsed.
For thus do Ezech. 34.37. and Zach. 11. ver. 16. describe the office of
Pastors. In the 54. cha. he treats again of purpose, By who^ this power of
the keys in the Church ought to be exercised. Cap. ^^.
And he moves the question, whether by all the People; or by the whole
College of the Presbytery. And after he has set down their opinions, that
would have it exercised of all the people, D^naeus assertions for the eccl.
Senate.
he says: But we say and teach thus out of the word of God, and the
discipline of the ancient Church: first, that in every Church there ought to
be chosen an Ecclesiastical Senate* which is named by the consent of all the
people.

This, (by the way) agrees not with that, Danaeus for the Senate.
which Danaeus affirmed before, in the 10. chap. that, the second kind of
Presbyters, Priests or Elders, was wont to be ordained in every greater City
only, wherein there was a large and populous Church, and a great number of the
faithful. Danaeus iarring and reconciling.
And here he speaks of every Church. Except we shall reconcile Danaeus thus:
that there, he speaks of Elders, not Teachers: and here, of such as are al
Teachers of the word.

But that Senate ( says Danaeus) ought chiefly to consist of Pastors or
Bishops, and Presbyters, or those that we call Super-vigilants, as before also
we have declared. This Senate Paul calls (...), 1. Tim. 4. ver. 14. We
before have called it the College of the Presbytery, The Presbytery.
or the Consist.

This also have we showed even by Calvin, that it necessarily infers no
such College, but may be well understood, for the office or function of the
Presbytery, Priesthood or Eldership.

But Danaeus so calls it, Because ( says he) it consists chiefly of those
persons, to wit Presbyters, Priests, or Elders, that is, Danaeus assertion that
the Senate may consist of Deacons.
they that are in the Church called Presbyters, Priests, or Elders. For it may
also consist of Deacons, if the Church so think it good, or if the number of
Presbyters in that place be small.

Here again Danaeus cas^eth to our Brethren a fresh bone to gnawe upon. For
if none of these offices in this Tetrarchie that our Br. would erect, may be
joined together in one person: how shall it be lawful for a Church, to have
the Deacons to be the governing Elders, yea the whole Consistory of these
governing Elders, (if they so think good) to consist of Deacons? And why not
then the same to be Teachers and Pastors? And so all to be resolved into one,
if they shall think it good? at least, if the Church shall think it good, ( as
our Church does) there is no necessity of these governing and not teaching
Elders.

We say therefore ( says Danaeus) that unto this Senate Ecclesiastical, or
College of the Presbytery, the moderation, the administration, Cap. 54.
the adiudging, and the exercise of this power of the keys does apperteine,
Danaeus assertion for the College of the Presbytery.
and of consequence, this power ought to be exercised by the Pastors and
Presbyters, Priests, or Elders of the Church, as by men advanced thereunto of
God, by the consent and suffrage of the people, that is, of his Church, etc.
The administration, and dispensation therefore of this power of it self, and
in consideration of the exercise thereof, pertains not to every one of the
people, but to the Presbytery, that is, to the Pastors, and Priests or Elders
of the Church howbeit the right and authority thereof pertains to the whole
Church, because that that is done by them, is done by the whole Church.

This is Danaeus judgment for this power. Which being thus set down, in
coming to the proves heerof, yt better to see what kind of Presbyters or
Priests all this while he means, Danaeus.
he proceeds saying: But by these reasons, Danaeus reasons and proves of his
assertions.
is our sentence proved. First, unto them, that is, to the Pastors and
Presbyters, Priests or Elders, pertains the Churches regiment, as to the
public Advocates and Proctors of the Church. Therefore they are every where
called (...), Governors or Guides, in the Epistle to the Hebrews chap. 13. and
chap. 1, verse. 24. They are first saluted of Paul to the Philippians. Danaeus
first reason for the Presbyrie.
Paul directs to them the Epistle that he writes to the whole Church. And
Paul lays down the alms among them, 1. Tit. 1. Therefore to them the care,
the meddling, and the administration of the right and matters of the Church
does apperteine. But this power, and the meddling and exercise thereof, is a
part of the Eccl. regiment: therefore the same also pertains to them.

This Argument grounded on these 4. testimonies, does not only admit well
enough, Danaeus testimonies al for such Elders as are Ministers of the word.
that these Presbyters, Priests or Elders, may be also Ministers of the word:
but each one of the^ expreslie proves, yt such they were. As first, that
which is here cited, Hebr. 13. Hebr. 13.7.
Remember (says the Apostle) your Governors or Guides, which have declared
unto you the word of God. Here are no other Governors or Guides named, than
such as are the Teachers of the word. The Guides were Pastors
And what lets, but that after also, using the same term in his
salutations, Salute all your Guides and Governors: he means still such Guides
and Governors, as in the 7. verse before, he bad them obey, that is, the
Teachers of the word.

Phil. 1.
As for those that S. Paul saluteth first, in his Epistle to the Philippians,
he plainly calls them Bishops. The B were Teachers.
And what Calvin understands by the name of Bishops, to wit, the Ministers
of the word: we have heard sufficiently already. And to take our Brethrens
own confession in this their learned discourse, page 23. and 24. where
treating of Pastors to be al one with Bishops, they say; The same thing is to
be observed in the name of Bishops, used by S. Paul, Philip. 1.1. where he and
Timothy send salutations unto the Bishops and Deacons of the Church, which
was in the City of Philippi: which Bishops were the Elders or Pastors. So that
by our Brethrens own testimony, this proves nothing for any not Pastoral
Elders.

As for the next testimony 1. Tim. 1. mencioneth no Elders or any Eccl.
Governors, 1. Tim. 1. The Elders were Teachers.
that were not Teachers. Timothy himself to whom he wrote the Ep. was a
teaching Governor. And all the other were Teachers good or bad, that there he
speaks of. As I besought thee (says S. Paul) to abide still in Ephesus, when
I departed into Macedonia, so do, that thou may command some* that they
teach none other doctrine. And ver. 7. They would be Doctors of the Law, and
yet understand not what they speak. So that, whatsoever these were, yet they
took not upon the^ any eccl. government without teaching, nor any other there
mentioned, except peradventure Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom S. Paul
excommunicated, Danaeus reasons for the Senate.
did take upon them to be eccl. Governors, and not Teachers. But were they
Teachers or no, it appears they were blasphemers.

The Elders that S. Paul mencioneth, Tit. 1. what they were, Tit. 1.
our Br. also in this their learned disc. page 24, do say: The Elders were
Teachers.
Likewise unto Titus 1.5. he calls them Elders, and immediately after,
describing the qualities of such as were meet to be ordained Elders, he
calls them Bishops, etc. And again, page 35, He requires that he be such a
one, as holds fast the faithful word according to doctrine, and that he also
may be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and improoue them that gain say
it. Here our Br. apply these testimonies to Bishops and Pastors. By Danaeus
reconcilement to our Br. the Co^sistory must be all of Pastors.
And Daneus brings them in to prove the Elders of the Consistory. How can
we reconcile our Br. and Daneus, but that the Elders of the Consistory, mu^t
be al pastoral Elders at the least, and Teachers of the word? But our Br.
require a Consistory of eccl. Governors that are not Teachers: and therefore,
all these testimonies do clean confute the^. But let Danaeus proceed,

For why are they called the Bishops of the Church, why the Prelates, Danaeus
c. 54.
or those that are preferred, but that we should understand, that the
government of the Church pertains to them, and is of them to be administered?
Act. 20. ver. 18. And therefore they their selves not every one of the people
are called together, if the Church be to be warned of any matter, or if any
thing be to be deliberated upon in the Church, they by reason of their office
come together, and deliberate, as it appears, Act. 20. ver. 17. and 21. ver.
18: 15. ver. 22. to them also it is to be deferred, if any thing be to be
done, or to be treated upon in the Church. Act. 11. ver. 31.

Of what function these Elders were in the places here cited, Act. 20.
we have already seen at large That they were Ministers and Teachers of the
word. As for them mentioned Act. 20. it is both in the text apparent, The
Elders were Teachers.
and (besides Calvin and all other Interpreters;) our Br. in this their
learned Page 21.22.33.51.52. and 57.
Discourse bear us witness: in all which places, they apply the name of
Elders still to Pastors. The 15. and 21. of the Acts do mention also (as we
have seen, both by the text it self, and by Calu. gathering thereon) still such
Elders, as were Teachers of the word. As for those mentioned Act* 11. being the
same that are spoken of Act. 15. and 21. the consequent is evident what they
were. Act. 15. and 21. The Elders were Teachers.
Act. 11. The Elders were Teachers.
So that here yet, no Elders appear that are no Teachers.

The second reason is ( says Daneus): Danaeus 2. reason 3. part. ca. 54.
To the Pastors and Prelates of the Church apperteineth the cure, the view,
the knowledge and the judgment, concerning the manners of every of the
faithful. And this jurisdiction is a part and appendant of that view and
care: therefore this care and watchfulness is proper also unto them. Whereupon
it follows, that unto them this administration does properly belong. For
why are they called watchmen? Danaeus reason for the Presbytery.
Ezech. 3. verse. 7. Why are they bidden to have the care of the Church? 1. Pet.
5. ver. 2. Hebr. 13.17. Why are they called (...), as I said before? For these
titles are not given of the holy Ghost in vain unto them.

These titles ( we grant) are not given them in vain, since therefore they are
all titles belonging to Teachers and Ministers of the word, more properly in
the Eccl. functions, tha^ unto those that are not Ministers nor teachers of the
word. It is more likely, that in these places (where these titles be given)
are meant Teachers and Ministers of the word. The 3. of Ezechiel ver. 17. is
clear for a Teacher. Ezech. 3.17. speaks of a Teacher.
Thou Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel,
therefore hear my word at my mouth, and give warning from me, etc. The
testimony of 1. Pet. 5. ver. 2. besides all other Interpreters, 1. Pet. 5.2.
The Elders were, Teachers.
the very Geneua translation has this marginal note: By Elders he
understands all them which preach, teach, or minister in the Church. And
least we should understand it of other Ministers than of the word; our Brethren
themselves in this their learned Discourse, page 22.25. and 32. do still apply
the same to pastoral Elders. As for the testimony Hebr. 13.17. we saw how it
was to be expounded, Hebr. 13.7. speaks of Teachers.
by the 7. verse, for those Guides that are Teachers of the word. And the name
fitteth very well, for so by S. Luke also S. Paul is called, Act. 14. (...),
the guider of the word.

The 3. reason is ( says Danaeus) it apperteineth to them to judge out of the
word of God, Danaeus 3. reason for the Presbytery, that they be expounders of
Gods word
the factes and life of men, and to weigh the manners of men, and to mark the
fruit of the Gospel: to whom the explication and treaty of the same word of
God, and of the Gospel by the commandment of God, does apperteine: but they
are those that are contained in the name of the Presbytery, and Prepositors
and Prelates of the Church: whereupon it is manifest, that unto them therefore
belongs this power properly and chiefly, whereby this judgment is made. 1.
Peter. 5. ver. 2.1. Tim 4. ver. 11.6. ver. 2.

What can be plainer spoken than this, that these Elders of the Presbytery
ought to be Teachers and Ministers of the word? 1. Tim. 4. and 6. for Teachers
and Exhorters.
And these testimonies also do as expres^ie prove it. The first of Tim. 4.
ver. 11. Declare these things and teach them. And 1. Tim. 6.2. Teach and exhort
these things.

The 4. reason is, ( says Danaeus). Danaeus 4. reason for the Presbytery,
Saint Paul's exc. 1. Cor. 5.
The use it self of things, and the examples of the Apostles, and of the
Primitive Church do confirm it. For Paul while he uses the power of the
keys, against the incestuous Corinthian, he asks not every one of the
people their sentence (or opinion): but only denounces to the Church of
Corinth, and to the assembly, that he which deserved, was excommunicated. 1.
Cor. 5. ver. 4.2. Cor. 2. ver. 10. And declares the same to other to whom
that care perteined. Paul in deed does communicate to the people, and
denounce his judgment, that either the Church should assent or dissent. But
he himself with the Seniors pronounces of the matter, and claims the first
and chiefest parts, in the exercise of these keys unto himself, and to the
other Pastors.

Although here Danaeus add this, more than the text has, or gives, that he
himself with the Seniors did pronounce of the matter: Danaeus addition to the
text, Paul first did the act his self, and then did intimate it to them.
for the text is plain, that he himself, and by himself, without any
Seniors of theirs, did pronounce, and denounce it to the Corinthians, not, that
he was to be excommunicated, but that he was excommunicated ( as Danaeus says
well therein) chose they, whether they would assent or dissent. Their dissent
could not revoke the excommunication already denounced. But admit, that Paul
did it with any other Elders joined with him: yet neither were they among the
Corinthians, nor Elders of that Church. If any joined with Paul what those
were.
But whosoever they were, if there were any, still he makes them no other than
pastoral Elders. Wheruppo^ ( says Danaeus) it comes to pass, that we must
conclude, that the administration, exercise and power of the keys, which is
both in binding and losing, Danaeus conclusion for Presbytery makes all for
teching.
is properly and first of all to be referred to the College of the
Presbytery, or Prelates of the Church: notwithstanding the same is had of the
Church, which they ought in the Chur. to exercise with the consent, notice and
approbatio^ of the Church. Hereunto I refer that which Aug. writes, Sermon.
18. de verbis Apostoli: If any man suffered a slander of his brother, that is
of a christian, he ran to the B. to the end he might clear himself of the
slander. All this again makes the more, that the dealing herein apperteined
to those Elders only that were Teachers and Ministers of the word. But (
says Danaeus) that the power and arbitrime^t of the eccl. Ce^sure perteined
not to any one: appears eue^ of that, that the eccl. regiment should the^ be
tra^sformed into a mere tyranny, or into a politic Kingdom. Therefore
neither the B. neither one Eld ought, or can alone, exercise that power, but
together at the length with his eccl. Co^sistorie, as appears out of the old
discipline. Siritius in his 2. Epist. he lived in the Age of Ambrose. In the 2.
Council of Carthage, the 2. chap. And in the 4. the 22. and 23. chap. Cypr. in
his 12. Ep. In the first Council of Antioch. chap. 23. this self same thing is
confirmed.

This is another question* Whether any one Bishop or Minister may
excommunicate, Whether one B or minister may excom.
or no? The question is now between our Brethren and us, whether (one or mo)
there ought any other to exercise this Censure of the Church, than such Elders
as are Ministers of the word. But, to consider this conclusion of Danaeus, we
deny not, How we allow of the B joining with other in excom.
nor mislike of the Bishops joining with many, where the weightines of the
matter so requires, and where many of these ministerial Elders may
conveniently assemble, and adioyne themselves unto him, or where any such
College or Co^sistorie of the^ were. Howbeit, yt the B. nor any other Eld.
being a Minister, ought or can exercise this power alone, but that either the
Eccl regiment should be transformed into a mere tyranny, or into a politic
ki^gdome: Danaeus showed here no cause or reason of this saying. And we have
great reason to think contrary, Danaeus wrong assertion, and with out proof.
for that S. Paul denounced the excommunication against the incestuous person.
Though Danaeus, says he joined with him Elders: yet the text mencioneth none.
Yea, it is clean contrary. Paul speaks of his own action in the singular
number: I have judged him. The text here for S. Paul's exc. alone.
And the like he says of Alexander and Hymenaeus: I have delivered them to
Satan. 1. Tim. 1.20. And yet S. Paul can not be said heerin to have
transformed the Eccl. regiment into a more tyranny, or into a Politic
kingdom. These therefore are ouer-hard speeches, if there be no other default
in the excommunication, but only in the number of the denouncers of it, or
judging of it, so that in the matter it self, it be not Clauis errans, a wrong
key, or in a wrong lock, or the key writhed and wrested, but ordered
advisedly as it ought to be. Neither is this any thing like the Popes
tyrannical claim, Not the number of the persons, but the use or abuse of the
power is material.
but cleene against it, if every B. have this power as much, and as
primarilie, and plenarilie as he: and where one rules, and rules rightly, it
is no tyranny. Neither if it were tyranny in one, would the number help it in
many. For so it might come to 30. or to 10. tyrants for one tyrant, as it did
in Athens and in Rome. But all lies in the parties using or abusing of this
power. And if any draw near, if not to a Politic kingdom herein, Pretense
of shunning a Politic kingdom.
but rather to a Politic government of many: they might rather be suspected,
that would draw it from the Ministers of the word of God, to so many
Politic men that are not Ministers of Gods word: and draw the discipline also
to so many Politic matters, that it might be feared, in steed of doubting a
Politic kingdom, we should fall into a far worse estate, and overthrow both
Church and Kingdom too.

But here I wonder what Danaeus means, to allege for proof of the ancient
discipline, Danaeus approouing Pope Siritius Epistle.
this Epistle ( whether true or counterfeit) of Pope Siritius. Will our Br.
allow of those Epistles? Then not only these Presbyteri are more often called
Sacerdotes: but neither may they, nor Deacons, marry: nor, if they were
married before, might company any longer with their wives, after their entry
into the Clergy: nor could be admitted at all into the Clergy, if they had
before married a widdowe: no nor any might be ordained into the Ministry,
without the witting and consent of the B. of Rome. What a tyranny would this
bring in, so directly to bring in credit and authority these suspected
Epistles? And wherefore in the end must all this be done? Forsooth, because
Dan^eus finds in one of his (if his) Epistles, these words.

Facto ergo Presbyterio, etc. the Presbytery therefore being made, it is
evident, 2. Epist. Papae Siri^j.
that it is contrary to the Law of our (that is of the Christian) doctrine.
Whereupon we following the Apostolical precept, Danaeus allegatio^s for the
Canons.
because they declared it in another sort, than that which we received; it is
manifest, that this is the only sentence made of all, as well the Priests, or
Elders and Deacons; as also of the whole Clergy: that Iouinian, Auxentius,
Genilis, Geminator, Felix, Plotinus, Martianus, Ianuarius and Ingeniosus, who
are found to be the kindlers of new heresy, and blasphemy, that being
condemned for ever by the sentence of God and our judgment, they should
remain out of the Church. Which thing not doubting but that your holiness
will keep, I have directed unto you these writings, by my Brethren and fellow
Elders, Crescent, and Leopard, and Alexander, which by their fervent spirit,
can fulfill the religious duty of the faith.

Here is an excommunication made by a Presbytery; The Presbytery was of
Sacerdotall Priests.
but what that Presbytery was, and of what Presbyters, Preests, or Elders it
consisted: both the words do declare, where he calls these men,
Compresbyteros, his fellow Elders; and a little before, speaking of the same
writing, which he^re he condemns in the Heretics, he says: It was detected,
Iudicio Sacerdotali, by the judgment of the Sacerdotall priests. For although
he join all in the consent of the judicial sentence: yet were not the
Deacons, and all the Clergy any of that Presbytery. But by the Presbytery
he means Compresbyteros; such Priests as himself was. Neither is it marvel,
if all these were assembled to the excommunication of them, The highest Censure
of excom.
whom they call blasphemous Heretics: for this excommunication was of the
highest degree, being a condemnation for ever, as Siritius says: which Danaeus
after ward calls Anathema maranatha. And therefore it follows not
thereupon, that although this was not made by the B. himself: that therefore
there was no excommunication made by the B. or by by any Priest himself at
all?

But to prove this excommunication of the Bishops joined with the Presbyters,
to be ever so used, Danaeus adioyneth to this Popes Epistle, the decree of the
2. Council holden at Carthage about this Pope Siritius time, Council. 2. Car^.
cap. 2.
wherae chap. 2. are these words: Aurelius the Bishop said, when in the
Council past before, Danaeus proof for excom. to be made by the Presbytery.
it was treated of the moderation of continency and chastity, these 3.
degrees were by consecrations annexed in a certain writing unto chastity, I
say, Bishops, Priests or Elders, and Deacons: it so pleased them (as it is
meet) that the holy Bishops, and the Priests of God, and also the Levites, or
those that attend upon the divine sacraments, should in all things be
continent: that they may simply obtein of God, the things they pray for, that
that which the Apostles have taught, and the Antiquity has observed, we also
should keep. It was said of all the Bishops; it pleases al, that the Bishops,
the priests or Elders, and the Deacons, or those that handle the sacraments,
being kepers of shamefastnes: do abstein themselves from their wives. It was
said of them all, It pleases us, that all, and of all those that serve at the
Altar, shamfastnesse be kept.

Here is a goodly Decree, that Danaeus cites, to prove that no
excommunication should be made without a Presbytery. It is a world to see, how
our Br. are so bent to erect this Presbytery, that they can scarce find any
sentence me^cioning Presbyter^s, Our Br. great ouershooting to prove their
presbytery.
Presbyters, Priests, or Elders, though it make clean against them, and
against God and all: yet forsooth, this very name is so catched up, to make a
show of Antiquity for these Elders, that it seems, if ever our Br. have
ouer-shot themselves, it is in this their humor for this Presbytery. What is
here (for so excellent and godly learned men, to have alleged this tyrannical
Decree, or rather this very doctrine of Devils, in this superstitious Council,
against the law of God, against the lawfulness of Bishops, Elders, and Deacons
marriage, and against the very Antiquity of the Church, which they pretend?
^ind yet what is there in this Decree, to infer that this power, and Censure
of excommunication, apperteineth only, and always to a Presbytery joined
with the Bishops?

But since Danaeus has alleged this Cou^cill: let us see how this Cou^cill
directly (even in this matter of excommunication) makes clean against him.
This counsel alleged by Danaeus, makes clean against him.
For in the 8. chap. following, it is said: Alipius the B. of the Church of
Tagasta, the Legate of the Province of Numidia, did say: Neither must that be
praetermitted, that if perhaps any Priest or Elder, which is corrected, or
excommunicated of his B. being puffed up with swelling or pride, shall think
that Sacrifices are separatelie to be offered unto God, or shall believe that
any other altar should be erected contrary to the eccl. faith and
discipline: let him not go unpunished. Valentinus of the first seat of the
Province of Numidia, said: The things that our brother Alipius has
prosecuted, are necessarily agreeable to the eccl. discipline and faith.
Declare ye therefore what thereupon seems good unto your louingnesse. Whether
if any Priest or Elder shall make a scisme against his B he should be
accursed? It was said of all the Bishops: If any Priest or Elder shall be
excommunicated, or corrected of his Prelate, he ought to complain to the
Bishops adjoining, that his cause may be heard of them, and by them he may be
reconciled to his B.

Here both we see what these Presbyters, Priests, or Elders were, to wit, such
as celebrated the L. supper: The Presbyters ministered the S^craments. The B
himself excom. the Priests.
and also, that upon just occasion, the B. himself might excom. eue^ these
Priests or Elders. And if we may gather an argument, of absoluing or
reco^ciling to the Church, which is equivalent to exco^municating, we might
have seen before in the 4. chap. that not only a Bishop by himself, but also
any particular Priest or Elder, in some cases, might do it: Aurelius the B. (
that prop^^ded the decree against Bishops, Priests and Deacons wives, which
Danaeus cites) said: If any man shall be in danger, and shall desire to be
reconciled to Gods altars, if the B. shall be absent: the Priest or Elder ought
to take counsel of the B. and so at his commandment to reco^cile the party
that is in danger. If the Priest or Elder can absolve the repe^tant party, at
the commandment of the B. being absent: is it not likely the B. could do it
himself being present? And if the B. or any one Priest could thus absolve:
could neither Priest nor B. by themselves, not have excommunicated the said
party, being a manifest and notorious offe^der? So yt by examining this
cou^cil further, it makes more against Danaeus in this point, tha^ for him.
The like Decree unto this, for a Priests absoluing and restoring a penitent in
the absence of the B. is also in the 3. Cou^cil of Carth. cap. 32. 3. Council.
Cart. cap. 32.
These Cou^cils being about the time of Siritius, which Siritius was in the
time of Ambrose ( as Danaeus confesses, and Ambrose himself without any
Presbytery joined with him, exco^municating the Emperor Theodosius: how is it
not apparent, that in those days a B. by himself might excommunicate, and his
exco^municatio^ holde^ for good and lawful? But Danaeus to confirm it better,
that a B. might not excom. by himself, adds the 4. Council of Carth. chap.
22. and 23. where it is said: Danaeus proof out of the 4. Council of Carth.
cha. 22. and 23.
that a B. shall not ordeine Clearks without the Council of his Clerks, and so
that he seek the assent, the sufferance, and the testimony of the Citizens.
Again, that the Bishop hear the cause of none, without the presence of his
Clerks: otherwise the Bishops sentence shall be frustrate, except it be
confirmed by the presence of his Clerks. What is here that the Bishop may not
by himself excommunicate? The former chap. is only of ordeining Clearks: and
yet, it does not take the power of ordeining from them, but it manifestly
gives the power thereof unto him. Though in ordeining a Priest, the Council
say, that all the Priests present should lay their hands also on the head of
him that is ordained. But the B. hand only on a Deacon, etc. chap. 3. and 4.
etc. As for this Decree chap. 22. is but of the Clearkes counsel to the B. And
though they say also, he should seek the assent, sufferance, and testimony
of the Citizens: yet in the action of ordeining, they have no power. As for the
23. cha. requires only the presence of the Bishops Clerks, in the process
of his judicial sentences. But this proves not, that they join with him in
the authority of the Judicial proceeding and giving the sentence. How the
Priests were present, when the B. gaue^ the judicial sentence.
There is no Judge can iudiciallie hear and determine any causes temporal,
but he must have his Clearkes and Registers about him, to witness and record
the same: but neither their presence, nor yet their inrolling of the acts,
gives them any authority in the Judgment. He is Dominus Iudex for all their
presence. And that does the 28. declare, saying: The unjust condemnation of the
bishops is void, and therefore to be retracted of a Synod. But what is this
to excommunication, it is said even in the next Decree to that Danaeus here
cites chap. 24. that the sacerdotall priest making ^ speech or preaching in
the Church, he that shall depart out of the audience, shall be excommunicated.
Might neither the priest nor the Bishop, if they saw any person to use this
doing, and obstinately maintain the same. pronounce this sentence of
excommunication on him? But that the Bishop might so do in this and in other
grievous crimes, we may well conclude by the 55. chap. of that Council: The B.
exco^municating with out the Priests.
that a Bishop shall excommunicate those that are the accusers of their
Brethren: and if they shall amend their fault he may receive them to the
Communion, not to the Clergy. Here ^o, is the excommunication and absolution
made by the Bishop, without any joined with him in these actions, were they
present at the doings never so much. And that this was allowable by the
ancient custom of the Church, Council. Elib. cap. 53.
the Council of Eliberis, holden almost an 100. years before any of these
Councils, approoueth the excommunicating made by a Bishop himself, saying,
chap. 53. It pleased them all, that every one should receive the Communion of
that Bishop, of whom being in any fault he was Abstentus, that is, put back,
separated or excommunicated. But if so be any Bishop shall presume to admit
him, he being not yet willing or consenting, of whom he was deprived of the
communion: let him know that he shall answer these causes among the
Brethren, with the danger of his estate.

Concerning Cyprians Epistles, we have perused them already meetlie well,
Cyprian concerning the B. authority of the keys.
to examine what the presbyters were which Cypian mencioneth and we have still
found them, Ministers of the word and Sacraments. In none of his books of
Epistles any 12. Epistle touches this matter. I grant, that in reconciling
of Heretics and those that were fallen to Idolatry, he used to take the advice
of his priests, of his Deacons, of his Clergy, and of all the people. But this
proves not that he never restored any otherwise. When he confesses, that
not only a priest, but a Deacon also may in necessity, restore the baptized
penitent to the churches peace. But whomsoever Cyprian adjoined to him in any
solemn reconciliation: he reserueth the power and authority of loosing to
himself.

As for the first Council of Antioch, Council. 1. Antioch. cap. 13.
which was elder than those of Carthage before cited, in the 23. chapter it is
thus decreed: It is not lawful for a Bishop to make unto himself another
successor, although death approach upon him. But if any such thing should be
done, the same constitution to be void. But let the Ecclesiastical law be
kept, which is on this wise, that a Bishop ought not to be made otherwise, than
with a Synod and Judgment of Bishops, who after the death of him that is
departed, have power to promote him that shall be worthy. What is here to
abridge the authority of a Bishop, that he cannot excommunicate any offender,
without the consent and joint action with him, of a Segniorie? Where if Danaeus
had but looked to the ver^^ next chapter: he should have found another manner
of matter, where the Council says in the words following, concerning the
authority of him that is ma^e Bishop: Cap. 24.
Those things that perteine unto the Church, must be kept with all carefulnes,
and with a good conscience, and faith, that is in God, who considers and
judges all things. Which are also to be dispensed by the judgment and power
of the Bishop, to whom the people is committed, and the souls that are
gethered together in the Church. But to come nearer to the present purpose, for
excommunication. The 4. chapter says: Cap. 4.
If any Bishop being condemned of a Synod, or a Priest, or Deacon of his own
B. shall presume to meddle in any thing concerning Priesthood, or the holy
Ministry: it shall not be lawful for him any more, The B himself may excom.
to have hope of restitution, neither any place of satisfaction, but all that
communicate with him, to be thrust out of the Church: especially, if they
obstinately communicate with him, after they have known the sentence
pronounced against him. What can be plainer spoken than this, that the Bishop
himself may excommunicate.

And in the 5. chapter: Cap. 5.
If any Priest or Deacon contemning his B. shall separate himself from the
Church, and privately by himself gathering the people together, shall dare to
erect an Altar, How directly this Cano^ is against our Breath.
(or Communion Table). And albeit his B. exhorting him, and once and twice
reuoking him, he shall remain disobedient: let this man by all means be
condemned, nor let him hope at any time to obtain help, or to receive his
own honor. And if so be he shall persist to disturb and solicit the
Church: let him be repressed by the outward powers, as a seditious person.

And in the 6. chap. Cap. 6.
If any man be excommunicated of his own Bishop: he ought not to be received
of others, before he be first reconciled to his Bishop, etc.

And in the 12. chapter. If any Elder, or Deacon of his own Bishop, Cap. 12.
or if any Bishop of a Synod, shall perhaps be condemned, etc Thus does this
Council also (which Danaeus cites) prove, The B. exe. of a Pastoral Elder.
that upon just occassions, a Bishop himself may excommunicate, not only
such among the people, but also among the Pastoral Elders, as be notorious
offenders.

Now, when Danaeus has thus far proceeded, on the parties that should
exercise this power of the keys given to the Church: Danaeus proves for
Christ's ^ words Mat. 18. to be meant of a Presbytery of the Churches P^el.
he comes at length, chap. 55. to this sentence of Christ, Mat. 18. v. 17.
Tell the Church. Where traueling to comfort them that hold this word Church, to
be simply meant, for the People: he pleads that it is meant, for the
Prelates of the Church. And at length he comes to this conclusion, with this
saying of Ambrose, in libr^ d^ dignitate Sacerdotali. cap. 3.

Danaeus for the Presbytery
That which pertains unto all, ought to be done of all. True it is, howbeit,
according to the diverse vocation of every one in ^he Church of God. Ambr. de
dignita^e saecerdotali. cap. 3.
By reason whereof, the people are not equal to the ecclesiastical Prelates.

So also Chrysostom lib. 3. de Sacerdot. beyond the midst of the book:
Baptism is given unto the Church. I ask therefore, to whom pertains the
administration thereof, and to have the power of baptising? Does it pertain
to every one of the people? No: but to the Pastors alone. And yet this gift is
given to the whole Church; as also i^ the power of the keys. But even as when
Baptism and the holy Supper of the Lord, is administered in the Church, the
force of Baptism and of the Supper is expounded to the people, The power of
the ke^es is given to the Church in such manner as the Sacraments. are given.
who all of them seeing it, the seal is added to the healthful promises of
God: and so the people is confirmed in their faith, and each one of the people
is taught and aedified.

To conclude, when these things are done, the Church out of the holy Supper,
and out of Baptism, feels and receaueth the fruit, which it ought to
receive: even so, when hypocrites, and wicked ones are cast out of the Church,
or when that the poenitent are received, the same is done, the whole people,
and each one of them withal, perceiving it, and consenting to it: the
authority of Gods word is ratified, the reformation of manners in the Church
established, and the purity of doctrine is conserved. Which when it is done,
the Church, and every one of the Church, receaueth the fruit that they ought
to receive, out of that power of the keys that is granted to the Church. By
this reason therefore, these things, the Supper of the Lord and Baptism, and
the power of the keys, are of God given to the whole Church: the
administration whereof notwithstanding apperteineth not unto every one, but
unto them only, that are lawfully called in the Church to do these things.

Thus have we seen at large the judgments and reasons, pro and contra, of all
these excellent men, for these Elders, and for their authority in this
ecclesiastical Censure. Let us now return unto the learned Discourse of our
Brethren.

The learned discourse. Page 89. and 90.
Therefore in every Church there ought to be a Consistory of Elders, or
Governors, which with the Pastor may take charge of ecclesiastical discipline,
and good order to be observed in the Church, to the punishment of vice, and the
advancement of true virtue. These, if they govern well, as Saint Paul does
testify, are worthy of double honor, both that honor that is due to godly
men, and that which is due to good Governors.

Bridges
The premises that our Brethren have set down, infer no such conclusion.
Yea, Our Br. conclusion 1. Tim. 5.
had the words of Christ alluded (as our Brethren would threape kindness on
us that they do) to the old Sanedrin of the Jews: yet could they not press
this conclusion so far, T^is concl^sion of ou^ Br. not yet inferred by any
of all these premises.
by any proportion, that there ought to be a Consistory of Elders, ^or
Governors in every Church.

For the Jews had not such a Sanedrin in every Synagogue, nor yet in every
Tribe, but one throughout the whole Realm for all. Neither yet had they in
every Synagogue such Senates nor Assemblies, as are here by our Brethren
mentioned, Luc. 22. and Act. 20 although they were nothing comparable to that
Consistory of the 70. Elders, appointed by the Lord, Numb. 11.

But why do our Brethren here say, that this Consistory may take charge of
Ecclesiastical Discipline? For if they ought to be such, Our Br. conclusion of
their may, ought to be and they may do it.
they ought to do it. But since they only conclude, that they may do it:
why conclude they not also, that there may be such a Consistory of them, and
there may not be? As for some to take the charge of Ecclesiastical
discipline, it is very necessary, and it ought indeed so to be.

But our question is, what is meant by ecclesiastical discipline, and what
manner of Elders they ought to be, Eccl. discipline and the charge thereof.
that ought to take the charge thereof. As for good order to be observed in the
Church, to the punishment of vice, and the advancement of true virtue: this we
grant must of duty be done. But as our Brethren conclude, it may be done by
this Consistory in every Church: so I conclude, The observing of good order.
it may then be done by other.

Yea, if we shall examine the state of every Church or Parish better, how it
may be done by such a Consistory in every parish Church: neither I, nor I
think our Brethren can devise it, without the alteration of the whole State,
and of the Princes supreme Government, and of all the Magistrates authorities
whatsoever throughout ye whole Realm. The danger o^ erecting ^hese
Consistories in every parish.
And therefore I would thus rather conclude, it may better be done (all things
considered) by any other means, than by erec^ing Consistories in every
Church, of these governing but not teaching Elders, or Governors.

Whether Saint Paul meant of any such Governors, we have already heard
how it is in question. Neither can those our Brethren that so think, and
favor that Interpreta^ion most, enforce a necessity of such governing Elders,
that altogether were not Teachers.

Bullinger in his 5. Decade, the 5. Sermon, De Ministris verbi Dei. Bulling
Dec. 5 s^rm. 5 de m^n. ^er. Dei.
Who when he comes to entreat of Presbyters, Priests, or Elders, deriuing
them also even from the Senate of the seventy Elders, among the Jews,
ordained by God, Numb. 11. And citing also this testimony of S. Discipline.
Paul, 1. Tim. 5. concludes thus: Erant ergo alij quidam, etc. There were
certain other therefore in the ecclesiastical office, Elders not continual
Teachers.
who al^hough they did not teach continually, as did the Bishops,
notwithstanding in all their businesses, they were present with those that did
teach. So that, he excludes them not from teaching, but from continual
teaching.

And as for the double honor that S. Paul speaks of, I take it not as our
Brethren do, to be of 2. kinds of honor in these 2. respects: the one, that
which is due to godly men; the other, that which is due to good Governors. Our
Br. vnproportionate distinction of good man, and good Governor.
True it is, there is an ordinary distinction between bonus vir, and bonus
ciuis, a good man and a good citizen: but not so aptly, between bonus vir,
and bonus Magistratus: a good, or godly man, and a good Magistrate or Governor.
But the relation is rather, bonus Subditus, and bonus Magistratus: a good
Subject, and a good Governor. Howbeit I think (as I have showed before) S
Paul meant simply, that he which took greater pains in the word, which he
calls, laboring in the word, was worthy double; The plain sense of the
double honor 1. Tim. 5.17.
that is, the greater honor.

Our B. now having thus far proceeded in the proof of their Senate, or
Consistory of Elders, enter here into another discourse, which they call the
end of discipline, and say as follows.

How necessary it is that Discipline should be in the Church, to keep men in
awe from offending, The learned discourse. Page 90.
and to bring offenders to repentance, to avoid the infection of sin, within
the Church, and the reproach that grows by neglecting the punishment of sin,
among them that are without the Church: we think needless to stand long in
proouing, the matter it self is so apparent, and has such plentiful
testimonies in the Scripture.

Herein I am of our Brethrens opinion: only wishing this plain dealing in
them, Bridges
that speaking of the necessity, use, and end of discipline; they had set
down some definition or description thereof, that we might certainly have
known, what they meant thereby. But now we must collect their meaning, by those
peece-meale sentences that do follow.

And especially, let the reasons of S. Paul 1. Cor. 5. and 2. Cor. 2. where
he purposelie entreats of eccl. discipline, be weighed. A little leaven
sowreth a whole lump of dowe. The learned discourse. Page 91.
For infection: Ye are puffed up, where ye should be sad and ashamed. For
ignominy: We deliver him to Satan, to the destruction of his flesh, that his
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord. For repentance, Public
reprehe^sio^ of many, which being godly refuse to eat with such a one, 1.
Cor. 5.
is profitable both to drive himself to repentance, and to keep other in order,
2. Cor. 2.
for fear of like punishment. Where this disc. is not, no marvel if all
wickedness ouer-flow, to the dishonor of God and of his Gospel, to the
destruction of many, and corrupting of more, to the greef of the godly, offense
of the weak, incorageme^t of the wicked, and reioising of the aduers. It should
seem by the collections of these reasons, Discipl. of excomm.
which they would have to be weighed, that our Brethren here by the name of
discipline, Bridges
mean most especially, the order about excommunication. The discipl. of excom.
Which though we have more than once already both seen and weighed
sufficiently: yet let us once more weigh again with them, the reasons that in
these places S. Paul alleges. It is no doubt, but S. Paul had many and
weighty reasons, The weighing of Saint Paul's reasons, in excom. the
incestuous person.
moving him to excom. that incestuous person among the Corinth. and to have
them obey his sentence of that offenders excommunication. And if we should
weigh his reasons on this fashion, as our Brethren would have us: we might
weigh many more, which there also he uses, and in better order (as I suppose)
than our Brethren very slightlie and preposterouslie (setting aside their
learned Discourse) do weigh them. For, the reason that our Brethren make, for
ignominy, ( as they term it) is both set by S. Paul before that, which they
term, for infection: neither are the words in that sort set down by S.
Paul: if we must needs go to weighing of them.

S. Paul entering into this matter, first begins with those reasons that
might lay before them, the heinousness of the fact, and horror of the sin,
saying; The^e is alt^gether heard of among you fornication, and such
fornication, as is not among the Gentiles named, insomuch, How S. Paul laid
forth the crime to the Cor.
that it is, for one to have the wife of his father. Which words being weighed,
contain many weighty reasons. From the nature of the sin, that it is,
fornication. From the public same thereof; that it is al^ogether heard of:
that is to say, a great and constant same, and not a muttering rumor, of an
vnknow^n, or but suspected fact. From the persons, among whom this fact was
done, and the same diuulged; among you, that are the Church of God, and are
called Saints in Christ. From the degree and greatness of this fornication;
that it was such, and is not so much, as named or allowed among the very
Heathen. From exaggerating the crime, and moving them to abhor the same, by
specification and laying forth of the fact, the manner and circumstances of it;
insomuch, that one should have his fathers wife, etc. And then comes in that,
which our Brethren would have us to weigh, for their second reason, saying: Ye
are puffed up, where ye should be sad and ashamed. The 2. reason that our Br.
g^ther out of S. Paul's words.
Although by weighing these words better, we find them to be other tha^ are the
Apostles words, which are these; And ye are puffed up, and have not rather had
mourning, that he which has done this work, might be removed from among you:
persuading them to the detestation of this fact, not only with the reason of
ignominy; but with the consideration of their own grievous sin also, in
being puffed up, either boasting in sin, as do the wicked: or in foolish
confidence, thinking themselves safe, and not considering the horrible sin
unpunished, but rather maintained amongst them. And also from the nature or
concomitances of true repentance, reproouing them that they mourned not, The
exco^. weighed 1. Cor. 5.
for such a sin committed in their Church.

Now, when Saint Paul had used all these reasons, which likewise infer many
other: then he shows, what he himself had done in thi^ matter. I verelie
being absent in body, but present in spirit, have already, a^ present,
adjudged (or condemned) him that thus h^th done.

And here now, since our Brethren will needs have us fall a weighing the
reasons of Saint Paul: S. Paul asc^ibeth the action of excom. to him self.
let us weigh also his words, and reasons of his doing, in the chastizing of
this offender. First, that he says, he himself, and none of their Church with
him, nor of any other that we read of, took upon him the remedy and
correcting of this matter. And he utters this word Ego, I, very
emphaticallie, as with great and singular authority.

Secondly, how far did he thus alone proceed herein? To the only
considering, misliking, and mourning for it, or reprehending of this vice or
vicious person? Nay, he goes further, even to the very pitche and pithe of
the matter, How far S. Paul went alone without them in this excom,
for he says, that he judged or condemned him. And the word imports, as
solemn a Judicial sentence pronounced against him, as was requisite in so
weighty a matter. Neither says he, that he would stay from this Judicial
sentence, till they had assembled themselves together, and examined the matter,
and found him guilty, and then given their consent or license to the Apostle,
to proceed to judgment against him: no, says S. Paul, I, even I have of my
self done it already, yea, both without your leave, consent, or witting of my
doing: and also being absent both from you too, for any bodily presence;
and yet shall my Judicial sentence, be as effectual, as if I my self had
been present with you, or, as if the offender had been present here before
me.

Howbeit, because it stood them upon, to take notice both of this man's
offense, and of their own fault, and also of Saint Paul's doing: to obey this
Censure of the Apostle, to amend their default, and to execute the punishment
that Saint Paul had inflicted upon this sinner, Saint Paul proceeds
further, telling them what now he would have them to do herein, How far
forth Saint Paul charge the Corinth to proceed after his doings.
and says unto them: In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you being gathered
together, and my spirit, with the power of the Lord Jesus, to deliver that
manner of man unto Satan, to the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit
may be safe, in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

These words our Brethren make the third reason, which they call (as I take
it) for repentance. I say, I take it; because, if we should follow the Printers
poynting of the reasons that they allege, if should indeed have (as they say)
neither rhyme nor reason. Our Br. 3. reason.
But ascri^ing that unto the Printer, not to our Brethren: yet, their altering
again of the Apostles words, is not the Printers, but their own fault. Not
only to say, In the day of the Lord: whereas the words are, 1. Cor. 5.
In the day of our L. Jesus Christ: which though it be not to the matter now
in question, yet, Our Br too far altering of the text.
to say, we deliver him to Satan, as though they joined with the Apostle, in
pronouncing the sentence of the excommunication; that is here no light fault
in our Brethren, and material to the present purpose, if we should exactlie
weigh the same. Albeit, in some respect of the execution, I allow these words,
we deliver him to Satan: because, though Paul himself had alone pronounced
the sentence without them; nevertheless, the same was executed by them,
assembled in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, as he commanded them, and
with the power of the Lord Jesus, his spirit was present with them at the
doing.

Now when S. Paul had thus prescribed unto them what they should do, then he
goes again unto his reasons, and for that they had not dealt any thing at
all against this offender, but rather boasted, either of his fact, or of their
security: S. Paul reprooueth them, saying; Your boasting is not good. And
here at length, he comes in with that, which our Brethren make the first
reason, for infection: Our Br. collectio^ of S. Paul's first reason.
A little leaven sowreth a whole lump of dowe. Although the Apostle also,
utters the same in an other manner, than here our Brethren do, to wit, by
way of question: Know ye not, that a little leaven s^wreth the whole lump? And
so he proceeds ^o a number of other reasons: saying, Purge therefore ^e old
leaven, that ye may be a new sprinkling, as ye are vnl^auened. For Christ
our Paschall Lamb, is offered up, etc.

Thus, if we should fall to weighing the Apostles words, and reasons; we
should find, that our Brethren which will them to be weighed, did not their
selves weigh the peyse of them so deliberatelie, either as they might, or as
they ought to have done. For then should they have found, that the only
Censure of the Apostle, would have weighed down all their light reasons, which
they conceive, of a Consistory among the Corinthians of ruling and not
teaching Seniors, that were joined with S. Paul in the authority of examining
and excommunicating this offender. Which Seniors had so little any especial
authority in this matter, or in any other, Nothing in either Epistle to the
Co. to prove any Consistory of such Elders.
among so many matters mentioned in that whole Epistle, or in the other
Epistle, written to these Corinthians: that in weighing withal, to whom these
words, and both the whole Epistles were written: it is enough to prove (for
any express word we can find in them, or any necessary argument we can
gather on them) that the discipline of excommunication which S. Paul used, or
willed the Corinthians to use, may be used well enough in our Churches, without
any such Consistory of Seniors, to be joined in authority with the Pastors.

As for yt which our Br. add, that, public reprehe^sion of many, which being
godly refuse to eat with such a one, Discipl. of excomm.
is profitable both to drive himself to repentance, and to keep other in
order, for fear of like punishment.

I grant this is true. But, that S. Paul meant those many, to be the Elders of
a Consistory, Public reprehension may be without this Consist*
and withal, such Elders, as were ecclesiastical governors and reprehenders,
but not teachers: and that this public reprehension of many, if it were not
of the whole Church, might well enough be made by the public Minister, before
them al, or in their name, and so be a public reprehension of many, to drive
him to repentance, and terrify other: and that refusing to eat with such an
one, might not, yea, ought not, to be of all and every one, but of such a
many, meaning such a Consistory of Elders, that I utterly deny.

And therefore, that which follows: Where this discipline is not, no marvel
if all wickedness ouerflowe, to the dishonor of God, and of his Gospel, to the
destruction of many and corruption of more, to the grief of the godly
offense of the weak, encouragement of the wicked, and rejoicing of the
adversary,

Since the discipline of this Segniorie that our Brethren would bring in, is so
clean different (as we have seen) from the discipline that the Apostle used
herein, among the Corinthians: we have great cause to take good heed, least
these dangers might happen to us, not by the want, but rather by the
admission, Our discipl. of excom. is nearer to S. Paul's, than is our Br.
discipline.
of this their governing and not teaching Seniors discipline. And if we permit
those, which in the Ministry of the word succeed the Apostles, when any
such notorious sinners, as this person was among the Corinthians, shall offend,
to proceed against them, as S. Paul did against him; and the Minister to
notify his proceeding to the whole Church: and they with all obedience, to put
in execution those sentences of excommunication, and to shun such offenders
company, and not to eat with them, but rather publikelie to reprehende them:
this discipline is not to be misliked. And our order of excommunication, ( if
it be not accidentally abused by any particular person or occasion) is in
law, and effect, the very same.

As for this devise of a governing Segniorie of not teaching, but of dumb
Presbyters, Priests, or Elders, to be raised up in every Church or Parish,
to have the power and authority of this ecclesiastical discipline, as it is
nothing like the Apostles practice: so our Bretherns unnecessary sturres for
it, The manifold dangers by this Seniorie.
has bredde many troublesome events: and it is to be feared, would soon
bread more and greater, to the manifest danger both of her Majesty's
Soueraignitie, and so, of her sacred person: to the altering and innouating of
the whole State, to the disquieting of the orders established in all the
Realm, and in every Church: and then what follows, but as our Br. here
conclude? To the dishonor of God, and of his Gospel, to the destruction of
many, Excom. for light offenses.
and corrupting of more, to the grief of the godly, offense of the weak,
encouragement of the wicked, and rejoicing of the adversary: and therefore (in
my opinion) this Seniory were a great deal better suppressed, then erected.
Now upon these premises our brethren thus conclude: Let us therefore proceed,
in setting forth the authority of the Pastor with the Elders, The learned
disc. page 91.
which is, first to punish offenders, and bring them to repentance, or else to
cut them clean from the Church, as rotten and infected members.

This conclusion, inferring the authority of the Pastor with the Elders
aforesaid (these Elders being not yet sufficiently proved, Bridges.
to have any such authority, or to be any such Elders at all) is a weak
conclusion? the Bishop or Pastor may do all this well enough without them,
except our brethren shall have better proves to infer them, then as yet we
have heard any. But now, as though they had already clearly proved these
Seniors, and their authority, they proceed from their persons, and from this
their authority, to the offenses wherefore this authori^y should be put in
practice.

But here ( say they) we have to enquire, for what offenses the Church may
proceed to so sharp a punishment: for God forbid, The learned disc. page 91.
and 92.
that the sword of excommunication should be drawn out, to cut off the members
of our body for every small disease that is in them, but only where the
disease is deadly, and the members rotten thereby: for we ought as hardly to be
brought to excommunicate any of our brethren, as we would have a leg or an
arm cut off from our body.

God forbid ( as our brethren say very well therein) we should proceed to so
sharp a punishment, Bridges.
How hardly we should proceed to excommunicate.
that the spiritual sword of excommunication should be drawn out, to cut off
the members of our mystical body in Christ, for every small disease that is in
them. Yea rather, now and then in some principal members of the natural body,
though the disease be deadly, and the members rotted thereby, yet to cut them
straight way off, were to hasten the present destruction of all the body. We
grant therefore, that we ought to be brought very hardly to excommunicate any
of our brethren, especially such principal parts among them, as may endaunger
their whole estate. Howbeit, this resemblance herein, of cutting off a leg
or arm from the mystical body, The difference of cutting a part of the
natural and mystical body.
and from the natural, is very different, even from the principal point of
that excommunication, that we speak of, and that is in use among us. For if we
cut off a leg or arm from the natural body, it is done, both for utter
despair that it can never be healed, and we are assured, that being cut off,
it can by no natural or artificial means, except my^aculous, be ever again
joined to the body, but is utterly without all life, and for ever in this world
destroyed, till the resurrection of the body in the life to come. The Popish
Excomm.
But it is not so in every Excommunication, except only in the highest and
extremest degree, called Anathematization, which is seldom, Difference of
anathematization, and Excom.
or not at all in use amongst us. Whereas, in the ordinary Excommunication, it
is not an absolute spiritual cutting off the mystical member: but such a
conditional cutting off, only from these, and those respects: that it is done
not only with hope, but also even to the end and purpose of amendment, and of
restoring. Although therefore the separation be of more importance and danger,
in respect of the more excellent object, and subject matter: notwithstanding
for the foresaid respects of hope and purpose, it can be hardly justified, that
we ought as hardly to be brought to Excommunicate any of our Brethren, as we
would have a leg, or an arm cut off from our body. But herein we yield unto
our Brethren, that though this spiritual cutting off may easilier be done,
then the natural, in the foresaid respects: notwithstanding we ought most
hardly to be drawn unto it, and in some principal persons (all things duly
pondered) not to cut them off at all. Hereupon, our Brethren conclude further:
Therefore the Popish tyranny is detestable, which thundreth out their
pretended Excommunication for every trifle, The learned disc. page 92.
yea such as are no sins, as non payment of a little money, where it is not
deteyned of fraud: non appearance, where men otherwise have necessary
impediments, as though it were but a small matter to put men out of the
protection of Christ, and to deliver them to the tyranny of Satan, and to
deprive them of eternal salvation, and to cast them into everlasting damnation.

We detest the Popish detestable tyranny, and errors in their
Excommunications, Bridges.
so well as do the most zealous of our brethren. Howbeit, it is meet our zeal
herein be tempered with discretion. I grant there were great abuses among
them, The Popish abuses of Excomm.
in abusing so great a censure in so trifling matters: notwithstanding their
detestable tyranny in Excommunication, is not so much for proceeding so far
in their light causes, as for their erring in the most weighty, and for
Excommunicating the true professors of the Gospel (as the Pharisees did Christ
and his Apostles) while they themselves maintain most gross errors, and
plain heresies, besides most horrible, and notorious vices, and so are
altogether unfit to Excommunicate any at all, but rather to be themselves
Excommunicated: and not so much as knowing what this power is, and how far
forth man is the minister thereof, they not only presume to Excommunicate
those that offend not, but whole Realms, and all Princes, over whom they have
no charge nor jurisdiction. We need not fear the Papists Excomm.
But the best is, that we have no cause to fear the thundering of their
Excommunications, but rather to rejoice the more, feeling how graciously
(blessed be he therefore) the Lord turns still their curssings into blessings,
save that we pity (so far as stands with Gods will) this their mad spite,
The vices Excommunicable.
and furious b^indnesse against the Gospel of Christ, and the true professors
of it. Leas^ therefore ( say they) we should use such unreasonable rigor, The
learned disc. page 92.
the spirit of God teaches us, what manner of sins deserve Excommunication.
1. Cor. 5.11. 1. Cor. 5.11.
If any that is called a brother, be an whoremonger, or a couet^us person, or
an Idolater, or a selanderer, or a dr^nkard, or an extortioner; with such a one
see that ye eat not. These offenses therefore and such like, are to be
punished by Excommunication. And also an obstinate Heretic, that will not
repent by admonition, is worthy of this punishment. Tit. 3.10. 2. Tim. 2.16. 1.
Tim. 1.20. 2. John 10. and 11. Tit. 3.10. 2. Tim. 2.16. 1. Tim. 1.20. 2. John.
verse. 10. and 11.


Whether Saint Paul's words must needs in that place be understood also for
Excommunication, ( though diverse do so take them) might be called in question,
since men might shun such an offenders conversation, Bridges.
and not eat with him, 1. Cor. 5.11.
although the person were not yet so proceeded against, as by the censure of
Excommunication, to make him understand, how much they abhorted his
wickedness, as we have seen in Brentius, Bucer, and other Protestants
judgments. But if these be the vices that our Brethren will always have to be
prosecuted by Excommunication, how many shall run in danger of these Seniors
censure, The vices for which the Seniors should Excomm.
2. especially under the general name of covetousness: notwithstanding these
sinners, (namely, obstinate Heretics) that will not repent by admonition, we
grant, are well worthy of this punishment; though the Apostle also name it
not, in that place to Titus. Tit. 3.10.
As for S. Paul's testimony 2. Tim. 2.16. where he says to Timothy, Tim. 2.16.
but profane voices of vanity pass over them, is neither spoken, nor meant of
Excommunication. 1. Tim. 1.20.
The next place here cited, 1. Tim. 1.20. is apparently enough spoken of
Excommunication, of whom, is Hymenaeus and Alexander, The Apost'l his self
Excomm. Hymenaeus.
whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme. But
here is no Seniory mentioned, but only Saint Paul's own act, without the
authority of any Consistory joined with him. And as concerning the 2. Epistle
of John. verse 10. and 11. 2. John ver^. 10. and 11.
If there come any unto you, and bring not this learning, him receive not to
house, neither bid him godspeede, for he that bids him godspeede, is
partaker of his ill deeds. Neither does yet this sentence infer any
necessi^ie of Excommunication: for although all those persons be
Excommunicable, and their sins deserve Excommunication, and they may be said
also, to be before God, or ipso facto, Excommunicated, yet are they not so
accounted to the Church, till the sentence be published against them. Howbeit,
The learned disc page 93.
I will not stand with our Breethren upon this point.

And not only ( say they) these great and notorious sins deserve this
correction, but also lesser crimes increased with contumacy and contempt of the
Churches admonition, Excom. for the lesser crimes.
become worthy of the same castigation. Therefore says our Savior Christ of
private offenses, Math. 18.15.16. etc. Matthew. 18.15.16. etc.
If thy brother sin against thee, go and repr^ou^ him between thee and him
alone: if he here thee, thou have won thy brother, but if he here thee not,
take with thee one or two, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every
word may stand: if he disobey them, then tell the Church: if he disobey the
Church, then let him be to thee as an heathen or publicane. The Apostle S.
Paul likewise 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. etc. concerning those that were idle, 2 Thessalonians.
3.6.
and walked disorderly, will have all gentle means used to bring them to
labor and good order, but if they would not be reformed for any admonition,
he commands them to be separated by excommunication.

Here our brethren themselves come down to lesser crimes, yea even to the
private offenses between brother and brother. Bridges.
Were they not afraid, Our Bre. confess. of excommunication for lesser crimes.
least they should return their own words on their own selves, that it were
popish and detestable tyranny, to arise to so high a censure, for so mean
offenses? as though it were but a small matter, to put men out of the
protection of Christ, and to deliver them unto the tyranny of Satan: to
deprive them of eternal salvation, and to cast them into everlasting
condemnation? Did they not fear that this also might be accounted unreasonable
rigor? no (say they) because these lesser crimes are increased with contumacie
and contempt of the Churches admonition, and therefore become worthy of the
same castigation: and may contumacie then and contempt so increase the crime?
Contumacy and contempt may aggrauate the crime.
And were not our brethren here again afraid of iumping with the Papists?
for what other thing do the very Papists allege, for the most part of their
excommunications, more then contumacie and contempt? Yea, but (say our
brethren) this contumacie, and contempt is of the Churches admonition. In
deed, so says Christ in the place here cited, Math. 18.17. If he hear not
the Church. But can our brethren here understand by the nam^ of Church, some
few persons, chosen by the Church, and may not the Papists do so to? have not
they also their Consistories, and that, many of them, of mo persons then one?
yea, if the Church choose one man, (as for example, their Bishop or Pastor,)
before whom those matters should be heard, debated and decided, does not the
contumacy, and contempt against that one man, increase the sin, as well as
the contumacie and contempt against any other persons, that the Church may
choose to this purpose. I speak not in defense of the Popish excommunications,
not acknowledging them (as they stand now in open resisting of the truth
revealed) to be the true Church: Why the Popish Churches excom. is no true
excomm.
so that they being now neither of, (nor properly in) the true Church, can not
rightly expel others out of the true Church, in, and of which their selves
have no pa^^, for all their craking of the bare name, and therefore their
Excommunications are of no force. Co^tumaty.
But if in deed they were (as would God, if it pleased him they were) of, and
in the true Church, ( as by the grace of God, his name be blessed for it, we
are) and in lesser crimes the contempt, and contumacie of the Churches
admonition, given by a few persons chosen by the Church thereunto, be worthy
excommunication: then, where the Church has chosen but one, that is to wit, a
Bishop, to execute her authority in those matters: the contumacy and contempt
against his just and lawful admonitions, is not so much against that one man,
as against the Churches, and so, is worthy of the same castigation.

This testimony here rehearsed Matthew. 18.15.16.17. Matthew. 18.15.16.17.
I trust we have already sufficiently showed, how it makes nothing at all for
any such Seniors as our brethren before alleged it for, and much less for any
their authority of excommunicating, nor prescribes any certain order, in what
manner, or by what persons any Excommunication should be made, against the
offenders, which there it speaks of, as we have heard thereon the diverse
judgments, not only of the ancient Fathers, but of our best brethren.

As for the 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. etc. the Apostle has these words: 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
We command you brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks inordinately, and not
after the institution that he received of us: And in the 11. verse. Verse 11.
For we hear that there are some among you walking inordinately, working not
at all, but be busy bodies. But to such we denounce, and beseech in our Lord
Jesus Christ, that laboring with silence, they eat their bread. And in the 14.
verse, Verse 14.
But if any obey not our word, note him by an Epistle, and have no company
with him, that he may be ashamed. What kind of persons he seems here to
note, and what fault he finds in them, I ouerpasse. True it is, he would have
them first induced by all gentle means, but if thereby they will not be
reformed, he yet commands them not here to be separated by Excommunication,
though they have well deserved it. Neither yet in this solemn denouncing, ^oth
he Excommunicate any, but would have them write unto him of such inordinate
persons, insinuating that he himself would Excommunicate them, as he had done
with the incestuous person at Corinthus, and with Hymeneus Alexander and
Philetus. But now our brethren fores^eing, that this is nothing to the
fortifying of their Seniory, they return to that point to answer the
objections made against it.

But it may be objected ( say they) that hitherto appears not so great use of
this Consistory, The learned disc. Page 94.
why it should be thought necessary for Excommunication: neither does S. Paul
make mention of it in all places, where he speaks of Excommunication.

In good time be it spoken, not only it may be objected, Bridges
but it is objected, Our Objection.
that hitherto appears not so great use of this Consistory, why it should be
thought necessary for Excommunication, or for anything else: having been so
little, or not in use at all, for any necessary proof, or use thereof, and the
Church of Christ, having continued so many hundredth years utterly without it.
As for all these examples of Excommunicating the incestuous person, Hymenaeus,
Philetus, Alexander, etc. or any other testimony of Saint Paul here
mentioned. What is here either necessary, or likely that may be referred to a
Consistory? Neither will we so much object this, that Saint Paul makes no
mention of it, in all places where he speaks of Excommunication, but that he
makes no mention of it in any place where he speaks of Excommunication. And
here let us mark our Brethrens confession, for if this may be objected that
hitherto appears not so great use of this Consistory, that it should be
thought necessary for Excom. then all that hitherto is alleged, may be thought
unnecessary to infer this, and this appearing, that it may be so thought, of
all that hitherto has been alleged: let our Brethren look better to that,
that is to come, to allege such proves, as whereby it should be thought more
necessary. But to these objections, say our brethren, we answer, that
although the simple institution of Christ, The learned disc page 94.
and approbation of the holy Ghost, should suffice us to think it necessary:
yet there are many necessary uses thereof to be alleged.

And to this answer we reply: if this place can be showed and proved so to
be, Bridges.
where this simple institution of Christ, and approbation of the holy Ghost was
made* Our Brethrens answer to our objection.
( speaking of the state of the new testament, and since the time of Christ's
incarnation) it shall suffice us forthwith, simply to think it necessary. But
if this be rather supposed and threaped upon us, then showed and proved unto
us, our Brethren have to pardon us, if we think it not so necessary, or rather
to ask pardon of God, that dare thus without plain, and manifest proof,
pretend the simple institution of Christ, and the holy Ghostes approbation of
it. But to our further satisfaction, to prove this, they tell us, that there
are many necessary uses thereof to be alleged: let us therefore hear also
these so many, and so necessary uses.

The learned disc. page 94. and 95.
For whereas our Savior Christ ( say they) commands in private offenses, the
matter to be brought before the congregation, except you understand thereby,
the congregation or assembly of Elders, there shall follow horrible discord
and confusion thereby. For admit a man might accuse his brother unto the whole
multitude, yet how should the whole multitude admonish him, and exhort him to
repentance?

Our Brethren here take upon them, Our Brethrens answer.
to prove many necessary uses of this Consistory, besides Christ's simple
institution thereof: and do they now for these uses, begin with that, Bridges.
which they make his simple institution? and what have they alleged for
Christ's institution, Our Brethrens confusion of the uses and institution of
this supposed Seniory.
simple or compound, but only that saying of Christ, Math. 18.17. tell the
Church? which though it be but a simple argument of theirs, to prove any
institution at all of this Consistory: yet what dealing shall we call this,
simple or double? to tell us, they will show the uses of it, besides the
institution: and when they come to show them, they allege that which they
pretended before, to be the very institution. But now coming to these words of
Christ, what reason inforceth, No confusion in understanding Christ's words,
Math. 18.17. in the plain and literal sense.
that we must understand by the Church or Congregation, the Congregation or
assembly of Elders in the Church? does any horrible confusion and disorder, or
any other inconvenience follow, by understanding here the Church or
Congregation, in the plain and simple sense thereof? Our Brethren do admit,
that a man might accuse his brother unto the whole multitude. Yea, there is no
need to put the case thereon, and say, admit a man might do it: for why may he
not do it well enough? and in admitting this, they admit withal, that these
words, Tell the Church, may be well understood of the whole multitude, without
any disorder or confusion, for one may speak to a whole multitude, and every
one may well understand him.

But say our Breethren yet, ( where Christ goes further: If he will not hear
the Church) how should the whole multitude admonish him, and exhort him to
repentance? very well (say I) without any necessity of this Consistory. For
both their Pastor can do it in their name, or any public Officer, How the
Church may admonish the offender.
or the Church may do it, without any horrible confusion or disorder, at
several times, and by several persons, either all, or the most of them, or by
some one person appointed thereunto, which may well be called the Churches
admonition, although they have no such Consistory of Elders among them.

Again, of these notorious offenses that are worthy of Excommunication, some
are openly known, The learned disc. page 95.
so that they need no trial, as the adultery of that Corinthian. 1. Corinthians.
5. foam are in controversy, 1. Cor. 5.
and are to be examined, concerning which, Saint Paul warns Timothy, that
he admit not any accusation against an Elder, but under two or three witnesses,
and charge him before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and his elect Angels,
that he do nothing through rash, or ouer-hastie judgment, and that he do all
things without partiality, or affection unto parties. 1. Tim. 5. chap. 19. and
21. verse. We see here manifestly, Notorious offenses.
a necessary use of the Eldership: for how is it possible for the whole Church,
to examine and discuss such difficult controversies? therefore it behooves the
Church to have such ordinary delegates, as may and ought to apply their
diligence unto such matters.

Bridges.
This division of offenses does again both implie a contradiction to it self,
in saying: of these notorious offenses that are worthy of excommunication, some
are openly known, so that they need no trial: some are in controversy, and
are to be examined: for if they be not openly known, how are they notorious?
if they be notorious, how be they (...) openly known? And also this division
does clean overthrow the necessity of our brethrens Consistory. For where
they say, some are openly known, so that they need no trial, as the
adultery of the Corinthian, 1. Cor. 5. it follows, that these notorious
offenses are out of the examining and discussing of such difficult
controversies, Our Brethrens evil division of offenses.
so that the Church has no need of such Delegates, to apply their diligence
to such matters. And if the saying of Christ, Matthew. 18. be not of such open
offenses, till they be opened by complaint, then are not Christ's words to be
draw^^ to such matters, but are rather to be referred unto this other some,
that they say are in controversy, and to be examined: concerning which, S.
Paul warns Timothy, that he admit not an accusation against an Elder, etc.
and that he do nothing through rash, or ouerhastie judgment, and that he do
all things without partiality, etc. but in all these warnings, Saint Paul
adioyneth no Consistory of governing Elders unto Timothy in the admitting and
judging of these things, but gives him, No necessary use of this Seniory.
as this great charge, so the doing, and accomplishment of the same. Therefore,
we see here manifestly, ( quite contrary to that which our brethren conclude
thereon) no necessary use of the Eldership, or that, it behooves the Church to
have any such ordinary Delegates, as may, and ought to apply their diligence
unto such matters, when the Bishop or Pastor ( as here Timothy was) is willed
to do, and (no doubt, did, as he was willed) may examine, and discuss such
difficult controversies, and may, and ought to apply his diligence unto such
matters. Moreover ( say our Brethren) to ouersee the Church for matters
pertaining to order and discipline: The learned disc Page 96.
how can the multitude ouersee themselves, or the Pastors only, which have a
principal care of doctrine to attend upon?

The Church may ouersee, and be ouerseene by her overseers: as for the Pastors
only, Bridges
we say not, they are the only overseers: for althou^h the several Pastors
have their special oversight of the people, Overseers now without these
Seniors.
in the^r several charges, and have a principal care of doctrine to attend
upon: nevertheless, as they may have a care also, though not so principal, (
as Timothy had, and yet his principal care was of Doctrine: The necessary
form of Excom.
) so may they well have other higher overseers over them, both Bishops and
Magistrates, and the Prince the Principal over them all, without any such
overseers among them, as this Consistory that our Brethren would erect.

And to the second part of the objection, that Saint Paul does make mention of
the Eldership or Consistory of Elders in all places, The learned disc. page
96. and 97.
where he speaks of Excommunication: we answer that it is not necessary he
should so do. For whereas our Savior Christ has prescribed a form
thereof, that he which obeys not the Congregation should be Excommunicated:
and that in other places he makes sufficient mention both of the Elders and
of the assembly, we ought to understand that his purpose is, to observe that
form to the vttermoste. And although he do not always make express mention
thereof, yet must we not imagine, that he meant to alter or change the same.

Having thus answered to the former part of this objection, that there is not
so great use of this, consistory, Bridges.
why it should be thought necessary to Excommunication: they now proceed to
the second part of the objection: which they propounded, The answer to the
second part of the objection.
that S. Paul does make no mention of the Eldership or Consistory of Elders in
all places, where he speaks of Excommunication: they answer, that it is not
necessary be should so do. And their reason is this. For whereas our savior
Christ has prescribed a form thereof, that he which obeys not should be
Excommunicated* and that in other places, he makes sufficient mention, both
of the Elders and of the assembly, we ought to understand that his purpose is
to observe that form to the vttermoste.

Hereunto I reply, first that this part of the objection, is of their own
^r^ming and therefore, they may answer it, as they please. How we make the
objection, otherwise than they set it down to our Br. more advantage.
We object it thus, that Saint Paul does not make mention of this Eldership
or Consistory of Elders, in any place where he speaks of Excommunication:
therefore, (by any thing that we can gather out of Saint Paul) it is not
necessary, that they should have authority with the Pastor to Excommunicate.
If they now can show it (not in all places) but in any one place, which is a
great deal the larger offer of us unto them: they should easilier overthrow
our objection. Which since they can not do: It is the greater overthrow of
their assertion: The objection taken as they put it.
But now to take the objection as they object it, not for any, but for all
places: why might it not be well said, that if in all places, where Saint
Paul speaks of Excommunication, he not only makes no mention of this
Eldershippe or Consistory of Elders, but also makes such mention of the
Bishop or Pastor, that it may be fully done by him: Does it not
sufficiently follow them, that their joining in authority with the Pastor is
not so necessary?

But they add a reason, why It is not necessary, that S. P^^le should^ in all
places make mention of this consistory of Elders. Our Br. reason why S. Paul
mentions not a consistory in all places. Our Br. reason a petitione principij.
For ( say they) whereas our Savior Christ has prescribed a form thereof,
that he which obeys not the Congregation should be Excommunicated: What is
this to authorize this consistory of Elders? But they still h^ry (...) their
former broken string, of the allusion of Christ's words, that by the
Congregation, is not meant simply the Congregation: but the Congregation of the
Eldership, or Consistory of Elders in the Congregation. But sith not only no
necessity ( as we have seen) dr^^^th th^^^ plain words of our Savior
Christ, Tell the Church or Congregation, to this allusion: Yea, we have seen
how hardly they can be draw^^ thereto, sith the words Congregation and
Senate, are (as membra diuidentia) words divided, S Paul's words not referred
to any order prescribed in Christ's words.
and opposite the one to the other: and withal, Christ neither sets down
any form at all of Excommunication, either who should be the dooer, or in
what order it should be d^n^: what necessary argument can our Br. gather
hereupon: that Saint Paul's (...) where he mentions Excommunication, ought
alw^ies to be understood, that his purpose was to observe that form to the
vttermost^, that our Savior Christ prescribed? And yet good reason, that no
wor^^ of S. Paul should be understood, to break any form that Christ
pr^scribed. But if those words of Christ, prescribe no form, and (...) of
other matters than S. Paul's words now and then be, where he ^^keth mention
of Excommunication: how shall we so understand Christ's words, except we would
wrest them and mis-understand his words of purpose? As for S. Paul, we
grant, he makes mention both of Elders, and of the assembly of Elders in
other places: but what is this, (...) this present purpose of Excommunication:
S. Paul mentions assemblies of Elders.
or of such Elders, or (...) assembly or Consistory of Elders, Governing and
not meddling with the word, and yet meddling with Excommunication or absoluti^^
(...) of the cheifest parts of the word? Cannot S. Paul speak of Elders, nor
of assemblies in any place, S. Paul neither speake^h of Elders, nor that they
always did Excom.
but it must n^eds be understood for (...) Elders, and such Consistories of
them? Yea, can he not sp^^ke of Excommunication in any place, but because he
speaks of Elders, and ^ss^^bl^^^ i^ ^ther places, that therefore we ought to
understand that his purpose was, that those Elders and assemblies do always
Excommunicate? and that his purpose is to observe that form to the uttermost?
No necessary form and perpetual rule prescribed how to Excom.
If o^r (...) ^^n prove that either Christ, or S. Paul, who had the spirit of
Christ, (...) ^own any necessary form and perpetual rule thereof: then we
grant that although he always make no express mention thereof, yet must we
not imagine that he meant to alter or change the same. But if he set down no
such necessary form, nor any rule thereof. Yea, i^ that (which is much more)
neither Christ, nor S. Paul, nor any other of the Apostles or Evangelists, make
any mention at all of such a Consistory as our Br. do urge nor these or any
other their words, No express mention or necessary inferrence of this
Consistory in Christ's or the apostles words.
can of any necessity be drawn so to be understood: then not only we are free
from the necessity thereof: but let our Br. look^ unto it, with what conscience
they dare use the names and words of our ^^^^^r Christ, and of S. Paul, to
the necessary inferring of this Consistory, and of this surmised authority of
them.

In the first to the Corinthians the fifth verse, it is manifest, that albeit,
he desired nothing more, than that the incestuous adulterer should be
Excommunicated, The learned disc Page 97.
and therefore determined of him for his own part, as absent in body but
present in spirit: yet he acknowledges that he could not be
excommunicated, without the consent of the Congregation, being gathered
together in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Co^. 5.4. 1. Cor. 5.4.
Likewise when he should be received again, he was to be pardoned, not only
by him, but by them also. 2. Cor. 1.10. 1. Cor. 1.10.


Although I dare not say as our Br. here (me thinks) over boldly do, that S.
Paul desired nothing more, Bridges.
than that the incestuous adulterer should be Excommunicated: For, Our Br.
ouerbolde words of S. Paul^ desire
how he wrote thereof with anguish and tears, it appears, 2. Cor. 2. verse
4. and many other things there were, (which we may well think) he desired
much more, than the giving of that incestuous adulterer unto Satan; which he
was rather driven to do, than that he had any great desire to do it:
nevertheless, (to set ^^^de the desire of S. Paul thereunto) how can our Br.
justify this, which h^^e they conclude? saying: and therefore determined of him
for his own part, as absent in body, but present in spirit: yet he
acknowledges that he could not be Excommunicated, without the consent of the
congregation, being gathered together in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
1. Cor. 5.4.

Had not S. Paul pronounced the sentence of that judgment on him before,
verse. 3? Paul's Excom. by himself and in his absence.
and this he had done so far forth without their consent: that it was also
done without their knowledge, being absent in body from them, though in spirit
present with them, that is (as I take it) wishing himself among them. And
this his Judgment, being absent, he accounted as auaylable (for the effect of
the matter) as if he had been present with them. The words are plain: I
verily absent in body, but present in spirit, have already judged him that
thus has done, even as if I were present.

True it is, that in this fourth and next verse immediately following, (which
our Br. cite, for the solemn publication, an^ execution of this his former
sentence,) he wills them, saying; When ye are ga^hered together, and my
spirit, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that such a one, 1. Cor. 5.4.
with the power of the Lord Jesus Christ be delivered to Satan, to the
destruction of the flesh, that his spirit^ might be saved, in the day of our
Lord Jesus. That is to wit, The sense of S. Paul's words.
to exclude, or pronounce that man excluded, out of the Congregation, which is
the mystical body of Christ, and so to be under the power of Satan, to the
intent, that he being thus punished in the flesh, by this bodily exclusion, it
might make him sorrowful to repentance, and so redound to the salvation of his
soul. Now to the execution hereof, it being requisite that they should give
their consent: he wills them to gather themselves together so to do. Which
thing notwithstanding he desires not of them, How far their consent was
requisite for the execution of S. Paul's ^^ntence.
that they would vouchsafe to do: but he flatly commands them to do it.
And therefore he says. 2. Cor. 2. For that also have I written to you, that I
might know the trial of you, whether ye were or no, obedient in all things.
So that this is true, that Saint Paul could not excommunicate him without
their consent. For although he thus tried them and commanded them to put his
sentence in execution: yet had his sentence been good and effectual before
God, though not so reputed of them, if they had not obeyed him, nor consented
unto him.

So that, in this sense, the Church that is, The Churches authority in the
Excom.
the multitude, (I grant) has a duty of consent, to the approbation and
execution of the Bishops or Pastors sentence of Excommunication, whereby, when
they percei^^ he has not abused the authority of the keys committed unto him,
they obey the same, or denounce solemn notice thereof unto the party, and so
repute him, reprove him, and avoid him.

And in this respect, where our Brethren say: Likewise when he should be
received again, he was to be pardoned, not only by him, but by them also: How
far forth their pardon was requisite.
2. Cor. ver. ver. 10. So far forth as offense was given to them, and that
they had obeyed and approved Saint Paul's Censure: their pardon also of him (I
grant) was requisite. And therefore Saint Paul said before, 2. Cor. 2. verse
6. etc. 2. Cor. 2. verse. 6. etc.
It suffices to such an one, this rebuking, which is made of many, insomuch
that c^ntrariwise, ye should rather forgive him and comfort him, least
peradventure he that is such a one, should be swallowed up with too much
heaviness. Wherefore I pray you, that ye confirm your charity to him. The
diverse manner of S. Paul's, and of their action, in the offenders pardon.
For therefore also I wrote to you, that I might know the experiment of you,
whether ye be obedient in all things. And heer^ comes in this sentence that
our Brethren note: But if ye have forgiven any thing: and I also. For, I also,
if I have forgiven ought, for you I have forgiven it, in the person of Christ,
that we should not be circumuented of Satan.

So that their pardoning of this man, and S. Paul's pardoning of him, were not
concurrent in one respect, nor after one manner, nor of one matter in the
pardon. They had not this Ministerial office of binding and loosing, nor the
keys of shutting and opening, Hymenaeus Philetus, Alexander,
in the person of Christ, which S. Paul had, to denounce in Christ's name, the
sin to be forgiven him, and the man to be reconciled to Gods favor: this
pardon, in the person of Christ, S. Paul gave, and not they. What and how S.
Paul forgave.
They forgave only the scandale and offense toward them. And this is that S.
Paul desires them to pardon him. For it lay in them to do it, both to
receive and comfort him, they being members of the body, What and how they
forgave.
whereof he was reunited to the head. And in this sense, I hold well with
our Bret^rens saying, that when he should be received again, he was to be
pardoned not only by him, but by them also. But what do they now conclude
hereon?

And therefore, if so high an Apostle, could not by his private authority
excommunicate that Corinthian: The learned disc. Page 97.
we must not think that by his private authority, but by consent of the Church
of Ephesus he excommunicated Hymenaeus and Alexander, although he do not make
express mention of the consent of the Church in that place. 1. Tim. ^ 20.

Our Brethren conclude not herein indifferently. They require of us to show
some express testimony of Scripture, Bridges
where the censure of Excommunication was executed by any one person or
Minister of the Church? Our bretherens eluding of the manifest scirpture by
coniecturs of other places.
we show it in S. Paul's excommunicating Hymenaeus and Alexander. Besides the
Excommunication of Philetus and this Corinthian. Here they r^ply. We must not
think, that by his private authority, but by the consent of the church of
Ephesus, he excommunicated Hymeneus and Alexander, although he do not make
express mention of the consent of the church in that place. If this answer
shall be counted sufficient: what manifest and express testimony of the
s^ripture, may not be thus eluded?

But why should we not think, that S Paul did it by his own authority? For
as for these captions words, The captions term of private authority.
his private private authority, I reckon not on them; for he did it in the
person of God and by his apostolical and Ministerial authority, which was
public and not private, notwithstanding proper to him self, and to such as
were of the Apostleship, and ministers of the word, as he was. Does S. Paul
make mention any where else, of the Churches consent in these men's
Excommunication, taking consent of the Church, How the Churches might consent
in the Excommunic^tion of Hymenaeus, Al^xand^r, and ^hile^us.
( as our Brethren herein do,) that he could not do it at all, except they
had consented, and given their suffrages before hand, that he should do it?
for otherwise, we deny not, but that they consented. Howbeit, their consent
came after the thing was done, or at the most, it was not the authorizing of
his doing, but an allowing of it, because it was their duty so to do, seeing
that he abused not his authority, nor erred in the exercise of the same Which
if he had done; Singular authority.
then might they justly have disobeyed his doing. As they mig^^ also refuse
the doctrine of him that preached any other Gospel. And yet, it follows not
thereupon, that in preaching the pure and sincere gospel, the Church had joint
authority with the Preacher, to preach the same. But why would our Brethren
have us thus to think?

If so high an Apostle could not by his private authority excommunicate that
Corinthian: We must not think, that by his private authority, but by consent of
the Church of Ephesus, he Excommunicated Hymenaeus and Alexander, although he
do not make express mention of the consent of the Church in that place.

This conclusion runs upon their former assumptions, Our Br. conclusions on
their own assumptio^s.
that S. Paul could not by him self Excommunicate that Corinthian. Whereas
that place mencioneth not at all, what he could or he could not do in that
matter, but only what he did, and would have them to do. And if the other
place, 1. Tim. 2.20. concerning the Excommunication of Hymenaeus and Alexander,
be to be measured by this place, 1. Cor. 4. Then as we have seen, how both he
him self could, and did Excommunicate that Corinthian, both in their Churches
absence, and they being not made privy of his doing, Our Br. referring the
other Excommunication to this. 1 Cor. 5 do yetmore confute themselves.
till he had done it, and written to them thereof, willing them to solemnize and
denounce the public execution of the same: which if they would not have done,
had no whit impaired the bertue of his censure, but aggrauated an other
offcence in them. And therefore in measuring the Excommunication at Ephesus, by
that at Corinthus: our express instaunce of S. Paul's Excommunicating by
himself, in the absence of the congregation, and the congregations duty of
obedience afterward, in approouing, obeying and consenting to the same, is a
good instance that neither the whole Congregation, nor any Seniory among them,
had any necessary joint authority with S. Paul in the inflicting of this
censure.

So likewise where he speaks to Timothy in the singular number, The learned
disc. page 98. 1. Tim. 2.20
concerning the hearing and determining of matters pertaining to Discipline, we
ought to acknowledge that he teaches in Timothies person the duty of Elders,
and never meant to give to Timothy, an absolute or singular authority, to be
Judge in those matters, without consent of the Eldership, whereof he makes
mention but a little before.

To conclude therefore, the Pastor with the advice and consent of the Elders,
has authority to hear and examine matters, perteining to Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and as the case requires to Excommunicate offenders, and upon
their repentance and amendment, to receive them again into the bosom of the
Church, approved by the word of God.

Those testimonie^ likewise where Saint Paul speaks to Timothy in the
singular number, give unto Timothy, though no absolute, yet a singular
authority, Bridges
not singular ( I grant) as though he should single out himself to do all
things alone: but singular in preeminence above all, What single authority S.
Paul gives to Timothy.
which preeminence was allonely in Ephesus, singular and proper unto Timothy.
And this has Beza himself, even where he speaks against the usurpation of
the Popish Bishops and Pastors, confessed, saying, a^^^e have also heard
before, on these words of the Apostle: against an Elder receive no accusation,
etc. Moreover we must note, out of this placc, Bezaes confession of the
singular authority of one.
Timothy in the Ephesine eldership to have then been the (...), that is, the
Bishop, as Iustine calls it, not that he did all things as he list: but,
which according to his godliness and prudence, moderated all things, that all
things might be well done and in order in the assembly.

Neither is this any hindrance hereunto, that S. Paul teaches in Timothies
person the duty of Elders: but rather confuteth our Brethrens shift, in
saying, that Timothy had a prerogative as an Evangelist, and proves that
such Elders as Timothy was, (that is to say with Beza and Iustine, such
Bishops) notwithstanding his prerogative of Evangelist, have a like singular
authority as Timothy had, concerning the hearing and determining of matters
pertaining to Discipline.

And if (as here they say) Saint Paul in Timothies person, taught the duty
of Elders: then should these Elders, whose duty is here taught in the
person of Timothy, be such as should be aunswerable to the person of
Timothy, and not such Governing Elders, as are no Teachers. And so says
Calvin on these words, 1. Timoth. 5. verse 21. I testify before the Lord.
etc.

This protestation was interposed of Paul, not only as in a matter most
weighty, but also for the great difficulty thereof. For there is nothing
more hard, than to exercise Judgments with such equity, that neither thou
art moved at any time with favor, nor give entry unto suspicion, nor art
moved with tales, Timothy in his Ecclesiastic^l judgments, represented only
the person of Pastoral Elders.
nor yet art ouerstraight in rigor, nor look on any other thing in all
causes, than the cause it self.

For from thence (shall spring) an equal right, when the eyes are shut unto
the persons. But we must remember, that under the person of Timothy, all
Pastors are admonished. So that this admonition comprehending the dignity, and
the duty of an ecclesiastical Judge, the same is here made unto Timothy, and
in his person, only unto such governing Elders, as are Pastoral elders. In
whom their teaching, though it be done publicly, All jurisdiction of one is
not Antichristian.
is notwithstanding their singular authority: as Saint Paul also gave unto
Timothy singular precepts ther^of, and ^et in Timothies person, he gave those
precepts, to all Bishops and Pastors, wherein no other kind of Elders,
ordinarily nor the congregation, do^ join with the Bishops or Pastors in the
authority of teaching, though in obedience and consent of hearing. And so in
these matters, concerning the hearing and determining of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and judicial causes, he gives Timothy, and (in Timothies person)
other Bishops and such superior pastors as he was, the charge and authority of
a righteous Judge. But the Judges authority is singular to the Judge, and not
communicated with other, no, though they sit on the Bench with him as his
assistantes, but such only as are of his function, Judges as he is, and
joined in the same commission with him: How this authority was, and was not
singular
therefore S. Paul gives to Timothy, and (in his person) to Bishops, and such
Pastors, a singular authority, in hearing and determining of such matters. Not
singular ( I grant) as though none might hear them but he alone, or that he
might ask no counsel or consent of any other: for such singularity were
rather a deharre, than a grant of authority, or were an insolent abuse
thereof. Neither so does any Judge, if any assistants be on the bench with him.
But the Judge only has the chief authority, and that is, his singular
authority, though not absolute.

As for the Eldership whereof Saint Paul makes mention a little before: We
have heard also Caluines opinion thereon, that it may be as well understood in
that place, for the office of the Eldership, as for any consistory or company
of the Elders. And therefore upon the uncertainty of that Word, they can build
little certainty for their consistoriall Elders.

The conclusion which here they make, depending all upon the premises, is no
further to be granted, than the premises do infer.

The learned disc Page 98. and 99.
In steed of which, Antichriste has set up a tyrannical Jurisdiction of one
Bishop to be judge of Excommunication, which is practiced neither for causes
sufficient, nor by sufficient authority, insomuch as it has been already
testified by the Scripture, that the power of Excommunication is in no one man,
no not in an Apostle, but is common to the whole Church, and ought to be
executed by lawful delegats of the Church also.

The tyrannical jurisdiction that Antichriste has set up, we no more
acknowledge, Bridges.
than our Brethren. But, that all Jurisdiction of one B. to be Judge of
Excommunication, which is practiced for causes sufficient, not only to want
sufficient authority, but to be called tyrannical, and set up by Antichriste:
Is not truly spoken nor Christian like. Except they will make S. Paul
Antichriste. As for that which they have already testified by the Scripture,
does manifestly confirm, that one man (as the Apostle, and Timothy, and in his
person, Slanderous speeches.
Bishops and pastors in like manner may execute the power of excommunication.
For although this ecclesiastical power be given to the Church, as likewise the
civil power is given to the assemblies and congregations of men: How the power
of Excommunication is given to the Church.
yet is neither of them common to the whole Church ( as our Brethren here say)
but is proper to those persons, in, or of the Church, and of the assemblies of
men, which persons are of God or man lawfully called thereunto. Neither are the
persons that have the practice and executing of the power of excommunication,
to be so properly calle^ the Churches delegates, as Gods delegates or Ministers
in the same, and represent God therein, not the Church. But, admitting it be
common to the whole church, and yet ought only to be executed by lawful
delegates of the church: if that whole particular church, The Excommunicator is
more properly Gods delegate than the Churches.
do make him that is their only Lawful Bishop, to be also their only Lawful
delegate, in executing the power of Excommunication, and do not delegate a
number of more with him: then, by their own confession, some one man, and that
the Bishop may alone execute the authority and power of excommunication.

But so much that usurped authority presumes, that the Bishop as an
absolute owner thereof, The learned discourse. Page 99.
commits it over to his Chauncellor or Archdeacon, and the Archdeacon to his
Official, and he to his register, and he again to his substitute, and his
substitute to his servant man or boy as it happens, in so much that a learned
Preacher, may be excommunicated by a foolish boy. If this matter seem not to
require speedy reformation, God has blinded our eyes, that we can not see the
clear light of the Son shining in our faces.

These terms of usurpation, presumption, and to be as an owner, and as an
absolute owner of this authority: Bridges
are speeches (considering the untruths, and reprochfulnesse of them) little
bese^ming learned preachers. And much less, the other, of committing this
authorty to Registers, and to substitutes, and to the Substitutes servants,
man or boy I verily believe, thad our Brethren, (if they were well apposed)
could not prove any such Excommunication to be made. Which in-deede if it
were done, is no Excommunication at all, Slanderous speeches.
if it be not rather their bare surmise. But perchance, at the fourth or fifth
hand, they heard of such a thing, and they by and by (for the good liking and
opinion they have of Bishops, their chauncellers, Archdeacons and Officials,
Charitas non est suspicax,) did believe it. For the tale carried great credit.
Some boy told them* that some servant told him, that some Substitute told
him, that he had heard it told of some Register. But who the Register,
Substitute, Servant, man or boy was or is; that we must go look, as the boy
says to his dog, seek out. It is proof enough for our Brethren, that some
boy told them, that he heard say so. And therefore, as a matter now out of
all doubt, it must in all have to the press, and be confirmed in print with
this exclamation: Insomuch that a learned preacher may be excommunicated by a
foolish boy.

If a foolish boy had written this, it had been the more tolerable. But
should such Learned Preachers in the name of all the faithful Ministers, Our
Br. unequal dealing in this slander.
that have and do seek for the reformation of the Church of England, in this
their Learned Discourse of Ecclesiastical Government, thus solemnly allege
such boyish slanders? or if there should by corruption have happened any such
like thing, should they thus heighnously burden or challenge the state and
authority of the Bishops, for such an abuse, or odd escape stolen out: which
our Bishops do no less detest, than do our Brethren their-selues, No
likelihood in this slander.
and would punish and reform, if they can name the parties, and prove the
offense? but that (I think before hand) they can not do. Nay, there is no
likelihood of any such matter. We suffer not either Official, or Archdeacon,
or Chancellor, to excommunicate any, without a Minister of the word joined with
him, do denounce the sentence of Excommunication. And can then a Register, yea
the Registers substitute, and the Substitutes man, or the man's boy,
Excommunicate ( I will not say, Preacher, learned or unlearned,) but any one
man or women in all England?

I deny not, a boy may write the sentence and form of words, and counterfeit,
or clap to the right seal also of the office, and may pack with the sommoner
to carry it forth, If such an abuse were, it were no com.
and so there might happen by such ill dealing, a show and terror of
Excommunication. But, as this is not any Excommunication indeed (and therefore
our Brethren say not truly, that the authority is thus committed from one to
another, that a learned preacher may be excommunicated by a foolish boy) so
when it should come to aunswering in the court, it would soon be found out,
to be a mere false and (saving your reverence) knauish forgery. But if they
may discredit lawful authorities for such abuses: The state not to be
slaundered for the abuses.
they may endaunger the power and authority of all courts and offices, when
any false varlets practice such corruptions: and if there be any such abuses of
this high power of excommunication: It is our brethrens duty to make the
offenders know, and not to impugn or discredit the aucthority, by picking
such quarrels, and if such speeches may be thus freely cast forth atra^do^, on
bare surmises, or rather, on mere slanders, till they bring forth the persons:
if this slaundering seem not unto them to require, as speedy reformation, as
any such facts, if any such were committed: what? shall I return their words on
their own selves, yt God has blinded their eyes, that they can not see the
clear light of the Sun shining in their faces: verily, affection has so
dazeled at the least these our Br. eyes, that they do not (I will not say,
they will not) see the difference of the Lawful authority, and of the
accidental abuses of the same, being as plain (set affection aside) as the
clear Sun shining in their faces.

For if we look to bannish the tyranny of the Pope out of all men's hearts,
The learned disc Page 99.
we must utterly remove all his detestable enormities out of the realm, as it
was wont to be said in the common prayers of the church, in the time of K.
Henry and Edward, where as now by reteining still, all the detestable
enormities of his prerogative and faculties, and whole course of his Canon law,
the papacy is not so much banished in name, as translated in-deede from the sea
of Rome, to the sea of Canterbury, under the shadow of the Princes Supremacy,
with as heighnous injury and contumely, of the lawful authority and Godly
Supremacy of the Prince, as joined with the great dishonor of God, and the
miserable disorder of the Church. But we mean not in this place to prosecute
our just complaints, nor to inueigh against the abuse of these things, with
such vehemence of words as the worthiness of the matters deserves: but only
in setting forth the plain truth, to give a glimpse by the way of the
contrary falsehood.

Are these our Br. glimpses? what should we look for, Bridges.
if they would (as they say) with vehemency prosecute their complaints? What
foul and dangerous slanders our Brethren here break forth into. Not only all the Prelates but all the Church of England accused as good as with high treason.
that when they give but a glimpse by the way, burden all the state of the
Church and Realm of England, to retain still all the detestable enormities of
the Popes prerogative and faculties, and the whole course of his Canon Law.
And that the papacy is not so much banished in name, as translated indeed
from the Sea of Rome, to the sea of Canterbury.

With what conscience can our Brethren affirm these things? is not ye Popes
Supremacy a pre^rogatiue of his detestable enormities? which being banished
out of the Realm and Church of England: how can it be said, that all the
detestable enormities of his prerogative, are still retained? and whereas, to
retain the prerogative of the Popes Supremacy, is high treason: what is this
any other, than to accuse all the Church and Realm of Eng. besides themselves,
to be high traitors against her Majesty?

And what a like slander is this, that we retain his faculties, yea, the whole
curse of his Canon Law? If this be true: then does the Realm and Church of
England, as much acknowledge the Supremacy of the Pope, as ever it did. Which
if it do not, then is this a most untrue and shameful slander. The verse
Papists their selves are able to control them* and all the world may see
the clean contrary. Yea, Our Br. own conuincing themselves of this their
slaundering of v^.
how agrees this with that which their-selues have confessed, and prefixed in
the Preface of this their Learned Discourse, for our acquitance against this
slander? that the substance of religion, has in diverse assemblies abroad and
at home, bin dispatched and resolved, and now publicly maintained, for our
true and holy faith. If the whole course of the Canon Law be still mayntayned,
which has many errors, superstitious, Idolatries, and open blasphemies: how
maintain we the true and holy faith? and if papacy be but banished in name and
not in-deede: how do our Brethren and we agree in the substance of Religion?
Do they accuse them selves herein also?

Our Br. too undutiful slander of her Majesty.
Yea, how do they not accuse withal most unnaturally, the Queens most
excellent Majesty. For, if papacy be but translated from Rome to Canterbury, It
is not gone very far from the Court. And who translated it thither? could
this translation be made without her Majesty's authority? or did that most
renoun^ed prince King Henry the eight, or that most virtuous Prince his son
King Edward the sixth, both of them Kings of most worthy memory, (whom these
our Learned Discoursers, so breefely here in their haste, snap up, by the
terms only of King Henry and Edward) make this translation of the papacy
from Rome to Canterbury, and her Majesty approve only and confirm this
translation?

Translation of Papacy to Canterbury.
But they say, it is translated thither, under the shadow of Princes the
supremacy. What mean they by this? has the Prince translated it to the Sea of
Canterbury for a shadow? or does the prince maintain or retey^e it? or does
the Princes supremacy shadow Papacy? These speeches are so dangerous, so
reproachful, so spiteful, so undutiful and not subiect-like, so manifest
untrue without all shadows, but not without as heighnous injury and contumely
of the lawful authority and Godly supremacy of the Prince: as joined with
great dishonor of God, and the miserable disorder, of most slanderous
speeches cast forth on the Prince, on the Peers; on the Prelates, on the
people, on the whole Church and Realm of England: that I much marvel that
they would ever let them escape their lips, or conceive them in their hearts:
and much more pen them in writing, and publish them in print, and commend
them to the world, with the title of a Learned Discourse Surely this a very
unlearned, unadvised, ungodly, and disloiall part. Whatsoever they had in the
gaul of their zeal powered forth on us, would God, they had never attempted,
so untruly to deface, both their and our so gracious, godly, loving and most
blessed sovereign.

Do they think to shadow themselves and to salve up all again, in saying:
Our Br. mockery of her Majesty's supremacy.
this is done with as heighnous injury and contumely of the lawful authority
and godly supremacy of the Prince?

In-deede this is more subiect-like, to be offended that any injury or
contumely should be offered, to the Lawful authority and godly supremacy of
the Prince. But when they say withal, that all the detestable enormities of
the Popes praerogatiue and faculties, and whole course of (...) Canon Law, is
now still retained: and that, the Papacy is not so much banished in name, as
translated in deed, from the sea of Rome. to the sea of Canterbury: and that,
all this is done under the shadow of the Princes Supremacy: what lawful
authority, or godly supremacy of the Prince make they this to be? And is not
this doing and saying then of theirs, a mere mockery and contradiction, with
an heighnous injury and contumelle of the lawful authority and godly
supremacy of the Prince? Yes verelie, and joined with great dishonor of God,
and miserable disorder of the Church, that ever such disordered speeches should
be suffered.

But we may soon guess, whether for these parts of the Papacy, We maywel see,
by these speeches whether for diverse points the papacy would be translated
( to wit, soule-mouthed slanders, not sparing to offer injuries and
contumelies to their natural and Sovereign Prince,) for making and imposing
another Canon Law, and a new kind of Supremacy of pastors and Seniors,
should be translated: not from Rome to Canterbury: though neither, we nor they
can well tell from whence, but whether: even to every several Parish and
Congregation. For, what could all the papists, or the Pope himself have said
more, or worse against the Prince, the Church, and the Realm of England; than
these out learned Discoursing Brethren have comprehended in these distempred
speeches?

And now, when they have thus disgorged all this choler, for very anger that
they can not have their governing Presbyters and not not preaching Priests, to
exercise this power of the keys, and discipline of the Church: they conclude,
as it were, slinging away in a chase, from further treatise of their Governors,
saying.

But we mind not in this place to prosecute our just complaints, nor to
inueigh against the abuse of these things, with such vehemency of words, as
the worthiness of the matters deserves: but only in setting forth the
plain truth, to give a glimpse by the way of the contrary falshoode.

All that our Br say, must be plain truth and just complaints: and all our
sayings and doings, are with them contrary falsehoods and abuses; All these
foul speeches are but our Br. glimpses by the way.
and yet these and al their other so foul speeches, are (forsooth) but their
glimpses by the way. What will these fellows do (trow we) when they come
directly upon us, with such vehemency of words, as ( they say, the
worthiness of the matters deserves? But since they threaten us, and as it
were, bid us expect in some other place, where belike they mind to prosecute
these complaints and inuectiues with greater vehemency: Our Br. for warning ^
greater ^^^ectiues.
we may yet thank them for this curtesse, that they give us before hand so
fair a warning. Praeuisa leuius feriunt mala. He that is full warned, is half
armed. We shall make our selves ready for the push of their vehemency, so well
as God shall give us grace thereto.

And thus with this foul blast and threatening sling, they knit up this their
Learned Discourse, of their third Tetrarke, these Governors, Presbyters,
Priests or Elders, that are all in ruling and not teaching.

And since they are not hitherto able, to allege better proofs for their
Consistory of these Elders: neither yet Calvin, Beza, nor Danaeus, ( as for
other, I account not of them more than these) I hope we shall need to fear
the less our Brethrens threats, of any greater vehemency to come, that shall
be material to the controversy.

The argument of the 13 Book.
THE 13. Book is of the last tetrarke, called the Deacons, with a Preface,
exhorting to relieve the poor: in what sort the Deacons office is perpetual:
of the first occasion of ordeyning Deacons, for the distribution of temporal
goods: of the occasion ceassing, how that part of the office is changeable: how
the office had another part remaining to be employed in the attendan^s on the
ministry of the Word and Sacraments: of the examples hereof in the first
seven Deacons, namely, Stephen and Philip, with the judgments of Gualter,
Aretius, and the Magdeburgenses hereupon: how the part perteining to
distribution of goods, was altered and joined with other functions, and not
any peculiar office in many well ordered Churches after the ordeyning of
Deacons at Jerusalem: of our Brethrens dividing the office of Deacons in diverse
parts, and whether the distributers, showers of mercy and helpers, mentioned
Romans 12.1. Cor. 12. were several and distinct offices, with the
interpretations of Ambrose, Bullinger, Beza, Calvin, and Aretius on the same:
of the good politic laws for the poores relief, and the cause that they take
not so good effect of the multitude of disordinate walkers and practisers
against the State: and whether these devises of Deacons would repress them, or
increase them: of the election of Deacons, and of tyranny and confusion:
whether the Deacons trayning up to the Ministry, be a profaning of the
office, and making the Deacons to be idolles, of the diverse names and offices
of the ancient and holy Churches that Danaeus mentions, for the attendance
on the poor: of the Collectors for the poor amongst us: of their qualities
and difference from Deacons: of the exception of Philips being an Evangelist,
and so a preacher: of Deacons to be as woorshipfull men as conveniently may be
gotten: of the manner of ordeyning Deacons: whether the Deacons consists
only in the ministration to the poor, with the judgments of Beza, Calvin,
Aretius, and Bullinger for the same: and of the playner understanding of
Ambroses words about the diverse kinds of Deacons.

The learned discourse. Pa. 100 101. and 102.
WE must therefore return to the authority of the Pastor, which he has joined
with the Elders of the Church whereof he is Pastor. The Church has always had
great care of provision for the poor, by which compassion they showed, that
they were lively members of the body of Christ, and avoided great reproach of
them that were without. For what shame is it, for them that profess, to be all
Sons of one Father, and therefore all brethren: yea, they that be members of
one body, to suffer their brethren and fellow members to lack necessaries to
sustain their temporal life: as though they that communicated in all
spiritual graces and blessings, were not worthy to take part of these
worldly benefytes, at leastwise so farre-foorth as to supply their
necessities. Therefore our Savior Christ, always commends brotherly love
among his Disciples, to teach us how ready we ought to be to distribute unto
the necessities of our brethren, which is a true testimony of our love,
declared by his own example. For although he were so poor, that he lived of
the alms and liberality of other men: yet of that which was more than served
his own necessity, he used to bestow upon the poor, as John. 13.29. to
teach them whom he has blessed with temporal riches, John 13.29.
which he refused, to enrich us with heavenly treasures, that they of their
superfluity would be content to give to the relief of their poor brethren,
which he did not neglect in his extreme poverty: to teach also them that have
but mean substance, that they ought not to be excused, but somewhat to
contribute unto the necessity of their poor brethren, when he that had
nothing at all, but that which was given, even of that bestowed part.

WE are now entering into the last office of this our learned brethrens
Ecclesiastical Tetrarchie, Deacons.
Bridges.
that is to wit, of their Deacons, Our Brethrens exhortation to relieve the
poor.
with the Discourse of whom, beginning to proceed, they first make an
exhortatorie preamble, and with milder words, than they left off the treaty of
their Governors, more charitably falling to persuasion, to tender and relieve
the poor, to the which we may the rather be moved by them, since of all this
that is here set down, there is nothing between us litigious, that might
stay us, except we should (by the way) inquire, what Elders here they mean,
What Elders here our Brethren mean.
joining in authority with the Pastor, both in the name of Elder, as we have
seen, especially by Hyperius and Beza, besides Ambrose among the ancient
Fathers, and also joining in assistence (as need or occasion requires) with
the Pastors.

As for these governing Ecclesiastical Elders, that are neither teachers nor
Deacons, our Brethren have not yet, (in the proper discourse of them)
sufficiently proved them, as I take it. But if they mean such Elders, as they
term Governors. The order of our Brethrens learned Discourse.
It makes me somewhat muse at the order of this their Learned Discourse; that
beginning to enter into the treaty of the Deacons, they promise to return to
the authority of the Pastor, which he has joined with the Elders of the
Church whereof he is a Pastor. Which return being here thus promised,
notwithstanding they suddenly make a stop, and leaving that matter, they
turn another way. And (the more to stir up men's charity and compassion to
relieve the poor) they show what great care the Church has always had for
their provision, with very good persuasions, arguments, and examples, which I
greatly commend in them, and wish o^^^s and all men to be accordingly
considered, and such as are godly, are so affected to their poor Brethren, and
to their habilities do so relieve them: and there are also very good
exhortations and provisions by the laws already provided for this purpose.
Whereunto, the example (I grant) of Christ, ought most especially to move us,
although I dare not say (as here they do) he had nothing at all but that was
given, and, that he lived of the alms and liberality of other men, but upon
that I will move no controversy. Heerevpon, they now descend to the original
institution of the Deacons.

Therefore the Apostles in the Primitive Church, The learned disc pa. 102.
thought it to be expedient, for the better providing of the poor, that
certain men should be appointed of approved godliness and diligence, which
should take the special charge of the distribution unto the poor, Acts 6.
Act^. 6.
These men were called Deacons or Ministers, because they did minister and
serve the poor in their necessities, and because the o^^^sion of the ordinance
continues always (as our Savior Christ has said) we should always have
the poor amongst us, John. 12.8. whereby, John. 12.8.
God would exercise our charity. The office of Deacons also is perpetual,
therefore the Apostle S. Paul prescribes what kind of men are meet for that
office, 1. Tim. 3.8. and in every well constituted Church, 1. Tim. 3.8.
they were ordained accordingly, as Philip. 1.1. Phil. 1.1.


True it is, that the Apostles in the Primitive Church thought it to be
expedient, Bridges.
for the better providing of the poor, that such approved men should be
appointed, to take the spiritual charge of the distribution unto them, and
that these men for this kind of ministry, were thereupon called Deacons. All
this gladly I confess: but when they conclude heereon, that because the
occasion of this order continues always (as our Savior Christ said) we
should always have the poor amongst us, How the office of Deacons is
perpetual, and how not.
whereby God would exercise our charity, that therefore, the office of the
Deacons is perpetual, meaning this office, to distribute unto the poor, in
such manner as the Apostles appointed those Deacons to do: that argument of
Danaeus, ( from whom I think they have it) follows not, Danaeus in Christ.
Isag. part. 3. lib 2. cap. 11.
because the having of the poor always, nor the exercise of our charity
toward them, was not the only, nor the chiefest occasion, of the orginall
institution of those Deacons. But the chief occasion was this, that whereas
the Christians then at Jerusalem, in that time of the Primitive Church, The
occasion of ordeyning Deacons.
having all, or the most of them sold their lands or houses, and given them in
common to be distributed proportionably, for the greater relief of the poor
and needy among them, because the Apostles ( at whose feet they laid down
the prices of them) could not so well attend to the equal distribution, being
so exercised in the ministry of the word, to teach and confirm the people
that daily more and more increased, whereby, the widows of the Grecians
murmured, that they were neglected in the daily ministering: upon this occasion,
says S. Luke Acts. 6.1. the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples
together, Acts 6.1.
and said, it is not meet that we should leave the word of God, to minister
unto the tables: wherefore (Breethren) look ye out among you seven men of
honest report, and full of the holy Ghost, and of wisdom, which we may
appoint to this business, and we will give our selves continually to prayer,
The first occasion of the Deaco^s institution ceased: the exercise of their
office ceased, and was alte^ed.
and to the ministration of the word. So that, this occasion perpetually
continuing, this office also of the Deacons is perpetual: but this occasion
continuing not, the Christians afterward reteyning the property of their lands
and houses, and the poor^ being by other godly means provided for, this
office of Deaconship, signifying a Ministry ( especialy as they were the^ in
practice) may be employed otherwise, both for ye attendance on the Pastors in
the Ministry of the word and Sacraments, and also to prepare themselves to
become fit Pastors afterward: whereupon, now and then, (as necessity or
occasion has served, and they found to be meet thereto) the Ministry also
of the word and Sacraments, has been permitted unto them, in the ancient,
yea, in the Primitive Church, and at the very time of their institution, or
immediately after, as appears both by Stephen and Philip, by whom, we may
judge the like of all the residue: for Stephen, so soon as ever he was chosen
Deacon, was set upon with diverse adversaries in matter of doctrine, who
disputed with Stephen, but they were not able to resist the wisdom, and the
spirit by the which he spoke, Acts. 6.10. Acts. 6.10.
Whereupon, says Gualter, Gual^^ru^ i^ Act. 6.
Et quamuis de publicis concionibus, etc. And although nothing be spoken of his
public Sermons, notwithstanding it is evident by the context of the history,
that he had these both often, and effectual, and very serious. Wherefore, by
the way and as it were by digression, we may here see, The often preaching of
S. Stephen.
that the Deacons of the Primitive Church were not altogether estraunged from
the ministry of the word: but although they were chiefelie occupied about the
dispensation of the Churches goods, nevertheless, they employed their labor
also so far as they might, in the other ministeries of the Church, that by
this means, according to the sentence of S. Paul, they might get unto
themselves a good degree. 1. Tim. 3. what a notable Sermon he made, and what a
rare and singular gift of the spirit of God in his preaching he had, the 7.
Chapter at large witnesses.

Aretius upon the 3. verse, Aretius in Act. 7. ver. 3.
of the properties that Peter required in these Deacons, says: Fourthly, he
returns again to the virtues, to wit, such as are meet for them to have.
Full of the holy Ghost: That they should have certain most sure notes of the
holy Ghost, The qualities of those Deacons.
such as at that time were, to speak with tongs that they had not learned, to
work miracles in the name of Christ, to teach boldly, in this teaching to
overcome the enemies, and such like. Also, Full of wisdom, that is, that they
be provident and wary, least they cast pearls to any dogs or swine, but teach
them that are to be taught, but chiefly, prudence was necessary for the
Ecclesiastical dispensation, whereunto they are to be called.

And on the 5. verse, Are^ius in Act. 7. ver. 5.
of Stephens disputation with his adversaries, which ( says he) was of the
Christian doctrine, he says: Stephen (no doubt) did execute faithfully and
constantly the office of a Deacon, no less then Lawrence did afterward under
Sextus, and Vincentius under Valerius, who bestowed the treasures of the Church
upon the poor. But unto these do come new virtues: first, he is full of faith,
that is, of feruencie in teaching that faith, etc. The like we read in the
eight Chapter following, of Philip, one of the same company of Deacons, whom
Aretius calls the Doctor of the Samaritanes: Deacons preached.
secondly ( says he) heereunto pertains a singular example of Philip, Philip
the Deacon called the doctor of the Samaritanes.
who happily instructed the Samaritanes. First, here may be considered who
that Philip was, for there have been that have thought him to be the Apostle,
but two strong arguments are against them in the context: first, that the
Apostles were not dispearsed, but aboade at Jerusalem, but Philip was among
those that were dispearsed, therefore it was not Philip the Apostle. Philip
that converted the Samaritanes, was not the Apostle, but the Deacon Gual^ier in
Act. 8.
Moreover, the Apostles only could give the holy Ghost, but Philip could not
do it. And hereupon, John and Peter are sent to the Samaritanes, wherefore it
can not be Philip the Apostle, it is therefore the Deacon, of whom we spoke
before, Chap. 6.

And Gualter affirming also the same, adds further. First, he teaches whose
ministry God used in converting Samaria, it was that Philip, not he that was
the Apostle, but he that before was reckoned up among the Deacons, as the
ancient writers of the Church do testify with one consent, chiefly
Epiphanius, writing of Simon and of the Simoniacks: for although the parts of
the Deacons were to bear the care of the common goods of the Church, When
there waxed less use of dispensing the goods at Jerusalem, the Deaco^s were
employed to the ministry of the word.
and of the poor, notwithstanding it was withal permitted unto them, to take
on them the preaching of the Gospel, if at any time necessity so required, the
which we have hitherto seen in Stephens example. And perhaps, there was not so
great use of Deacons at Jerusalem, when the Church was dispersed with the
tempest of persecution, and therefore they which before dispensed the public
goods of the Church, gave themselves wholly to the ministry of the word. Yea,
and Paul admonished afterward, that the Deacons by ministering well, should get
unto themselves a degree unto a greater function. 1. Tim. 3. The Deacons
ministered the Sacram. It perteined to their office of Deaconship.


And as the ministration of the Sacraments follows the preaching of the word,
so Philip baptized those whom he had by his preaching converted. Neither is it
noted, that they did these things by reason of any other office annexed unto
them: but as Gualter notes very well, that in generally, as they had gifts
competent, and occasion convenient, it was not impertinent to their office of
Deaconship, so to employ themselves.

Whereupon also, the Magdeburgenses note, Centuria 1. lib. 2. cap. 7. page 508.
saying: Magdeburg. Centuria 1. lib. 2. cap 7. page 508.
Other were Deacons. The office of these was to minister to the Table at
Jerusalem, so long as the community of goods was there, The office of the Deac.
to teach and minister.
Acts. 6. but nevertheless, that they also taught and showed forth signs,
appears out of Stephen, Acts 6. and Philip, Acts 8.21. and every where in
other Churches, it was the office of the Deacons to teach and to minister. And
the same Magdeburgenses in the title, Deratione acforma gubernationis, page
510. do say: Magdeburg. page 510.
These were the works in common of the Apostles, and Prophets, Pastors,
Doctors, Priests, Deacons. They taught the Church purely and sincerely
concerning every of the head points of the christian doctrine, The D^acons
order of teaching, excommunicating, and ministering the Sacraments.
etc. and that Deacons also taught, appears out of the 6. and 8. of the
Acts, they interpreted the holy Scriptures, etc. they delivered the
Catechism, etc. they did cut the word of truth rightly into the Law and the
Gospel, etc. they used the form of sound words in teaching, etc. they used
also in teaching a simple kind of speech, etc. they studied to keep the
purity of doctrine, etc. they opposed themselves sharply against false
teachers and Heretics, and confuted their false opinions. For Stephen, Act. 6.
confuted them that were in the synagog of the Libertines, etc. they preached
repentance, that is, they reproved and blamed sinners, for the Apostles, Act.
2.3. and 4. did openly object unto the Jews this sin, and for the same
reprove them, that they had killed Jesus of Nazareth the just and holy one, the
son of God, and the Messiah, and Stephen Acts. 7. calls them murderers,
and betrayers of the Messiah, etc. And so they proceed, to Excommunication, to
Baptism, to the Supper of the Lord, etc.

Whereby it manifestly appears, that notwithstanding the foresaid occasion of
ordeyning the Deacons, to ease the Apostles in the distributio^ of the Church
goods, and attendance on the poor: yet did their office stretch further, and
as occasion served, they did also these things, which at that time were proper
to the Apostles, and to the Bishops and Pastors that they ordained. And if
there had been no other use at all of Deacons, then that aforesaid, upon
occasion whereof they were first chosen, except that order of the goods given
in common to the Church, to be distributed to every person proportionably, and
namely to the poor, had continued, which it did not, that part of the Deacons
office might have then ceased, as Gualter notes well, How that part of the
Deacons o^fice that perteined to distributing alms, began to ceas^e.
how in the time of the persecution immediately succeeding, it did cease, at
what time, they that had the gift thereto, gave themselves to the preaching of
the word, and ministering the Sacraments, where Bishops and Pastors wanted: and
therefore, where Bishops and Pastors were, it is the more likely, that they
ministered in the attendaunce on them in doing these things: and I see not, but
that they may still so do, except our Brethren can persuade the people to such
an order for their distribution of their goods in common with themselves unto
the poor, as was then used in the Apostles times. And yet even then also, as
occasion and fitness of the Deacons may benefit the Church, they may preach
and baptize, as Stephen and Philip did: which ministeries, The Ecclesiastical
offices not so precisely distinguished in the Apostles times.
our Brethren make proper only to such, as at the least were Pastors. But in
the Apostles times, we see that these ministeries were not so precisely
distinguished, but that one sometimes might well deal, without note of
confusion, even in the function and ministry, that more properly perteined to
another.

Deacons office altered. 1. Tim. 3.8.
Neither is any thing to the contrary, in the testimonies here cited 1. Tim.
3.8. 1. Tim. 3.8.
Likewise Deacons must be honest, not double tongued, nor given to much wine,
neither to fylthie lucre. In which words is nothing to this purpose. But if
they had gone but to the very next words in the verse following, they should
have found matter sufficient, that Deacons had to do further, then to minister
the distribution to the poor, even by Beza his own testimony, as we shall
see (God willing) afterward.

As for the salutation of S. Paul, Phil. 1.1. to the Bishops and Deacons at
Philippos, Phil. 1.1. The Churches in the Apostles time had not all of them
Deacons, and yet were well ordered.
proves not that Deacons in every well ordered Church were ordained
accordingly. For as in Jerusalem it self, the chief and mother Church, there
were for a while (until this occasion fell out) no such officers, and yet we
can not well say, it was not a well ordered Church during that time: so Act.
14. verse. 23. it is said of Paul and Barnabas, Acts. 14.23. Beza in Act. 14.
that Elders are taken for Deacons.
when they had ordained with the hand, Elders unto them according to the
Church, and had prayed with fastings, they commended them to the Lord, on whom
they believed. Here is no mention at all made of Deacons, except we shall
understand the word Elders ( as Beza would have it) for Pastors, Deacons, and
other Governors of the Church, saying only for proof hereof, for here, as
often otherwhere, the name of Presbyter, Priest, or Elder, is generally taken.

Neither do we deny, but that it is so taken, and more generally also, in
diverse places, which shows, that their understanding of that place of S.
Paul, If Elders may be taken for Deacons Act. 14.23. so may they be also taken.
1. Tim. 5.17. the Elders that govern well, 1. Tim. 5.17.
are worthy of double honor, especially those that labor in the word and
doctrine, which words, if they will needs understand, of two kinds of Elders,
distinct in function and office, why may it not be as well there understood for
such Deacons, as were ministers of the word and sacraments, as for their
imagined governing Elders, that are altogether no teachers?

And so does Hyperius out of Ambrose, (as we have seen before) expound that
place, Qui been praesunt presbyteri. In this place, the term of Presbyter,
Priest, or Elder, includes the reason of office, not of age. But they are
called Presbyters, Priests, or Elders, by a general and common name, all they
that minister in the Church, the which thing also we have given warning of
before. For the Bishop also himself is called a Presbyter, Priest, or Elder,
as Ambrose witnesses. Howbeit, every Presbyter, Priest, or Elder is not a
Bishop, of all these therefore his speech is here, that are inferior to the
Bishop, whom Ambrose reckneth up in every City, two Deacons which administer
the word and sacraments, and 7. Deacons that minister to the tables,
distributing the goods of the Church. Whereby we see all their groundworke
fails, consisting on the expounding that place, for such Governing Elders,
that they make to be another distinct and middle function, between Pastors and
Deacons. Division of Deacons office.
And that these Elders may be well enough understood for Deacons. And also
that some Deacons, such as were ^it thereunto, were admitted to the Ministry
of the word and sacraments: the other were attendants on the Bishop and on the
Ministers. Both of whom here Hyperius says, that S. Ambrose also calls
Deacons. But Elders or Deacons they were all in their sorts attendant
chiefelie on the Ministry of the word: or their selves (as in the end we
shall see) the very Ministers and Pastors of it. Now, although in this sense,
we may admit here also, Act. 14. Bezaes interpretation for Elder, to
comprehend also those, that properly are called Deacons: yet in this place, I
allow rather the judgment of Calvin, which we have seen before, that by
Elders there are only meant such as were pastoral Elders.

Also after the ordeining of the 7. Deacons, this office was divided into
diverse parts, as necessity showed diverse occasions. The learned discourse. Pa.
103
For some were appointed for the collection and distribution of alms, as Romans
12.8. Romans 12.8.
And some for attending upon the sick and impotent among the poor, as in the
same pl^ce, Let him that distributeth, do^ it with simplicity; and let him
that shows mercy, do it with cheerefulnes. Which kind of deaco^s, 1. Co.
12.28. are called Helpers: 1. Cor. 12.28.
and for the service of this office were appointed diverse poor old widows,
who as they were maintained by the Church, so they served the Church,
attending upon the other poor, who being sick and impotent, had need not
only of things necessary, but also of service and attending. 1. Tim. 5.5. 1.
Tim. 5.5.


This division of the office of Deaco^s, appears not in any of the places
here alleged. Our Brethren cited before, Bridges
page 3.17.33. and 84. thi^ testimony Romans 12.8. for the diversities of diverse
offices of the Ministry. And throughout this their learned Discourse, Our Br.
division of the Deacons office.
they treat upon them severally, dividing Doctors from Pastors, Pastors from
Governors, Governors from Deacons: and so made up their full Tetrarchie, by
these 4. distinct offices. And still they give one part of this testimony,
Romans 12.8. to every office. To the Doctors, Let him that is a Teacher, attend
on his teaching: To the Pastors, Let him that exhorts, be diligent in his
exhortation: To the Governors, Let him that rules, do it with diligence. And
do they now, when they come to the latter part of the sentence, huddle up
these two parts of the sentence remaining, together into one several function
of the Deaconship, and make them to be two diverse and divided parts of one
office: Let him that distributeth, do it with simplicity: and let him that
shows mercy, do it with cheerfulness?

Diverse Interpreters do expound these words generally. He that gives, in
simplicity: He speaks it ( says Ambrose) unto him that gives with a good
mind, Ambr. in Romans 12.
that he shall ever have helps at hand, the spirit procuring it.
Distributers and shewers of mercy.
So that unto him that gives simply, there shall be no want: as Solomon
says; He that gives to the poor, shall not want. He therefore gives
simply, which does it not in faining, that men may give him praise:
Distributers and shewers of mercy taken generally.
but that by the same he may obtain to be accepted of God. He that governs
in carfulness: He speaks of him that takes the care to rule the Brethren,
according to his fidelity, to take watchfulness and authority, that he may
do them good in the matter wherein he is careful* having fruit in them whom
he rules. He that has mercy, in cheerfulness: He says also, that he
which according to his understanding, shows mercy with a cheerful mind,
not as though it were wroong from him against his will, is grounded and
strengthened of GOD, so that in this matter he suffers no weakness, knowing
that it is said of Solomon, Do good while thou have occasion, etc. And in
this sort do all the ancient Fathers understand it generally.

Bulling. in Romans 12.
In like manner, plainly and simply does Bullinger expound these words: He
now that is set over the works of the poor, or he to whom have happened notable
riches, let him do his business simply, that is to say, with greatest
diligence and faith without fraud; or else, le him give to them that have
need, not for glory, or for subtlety, with hope of obteining better things:
but simply, and without all evil deceit. Furthermore if any, rule or
exercise any other ecclesiastical office, or excel in Magistracy: let them
administer all things industriouslie with greatest diligence. Of which thing
also, Iosaphat in the 2. of Paralip. 19. Moses also Exodus 18. and David in his
Psalms. But if any be endued with the gift of mercy and pitifulness: let
him remember, that a cheerful giver is approved of God. Hereto accords the
proverb, (...). That is, But yet of all gifts, the mind is the best. Again,
that excellent saying of Seneca, in his second book De benefic. That is an
unthankful good turn, that sticks long fast between the hands of the giver.
Thus says Bullinger, according with the ancient Fathers. Wherein not only he
and they make these 2. to wit, the distribution, and the showing mercy, to
general gifts, not distinct offices, and much less, only ecclesiastical:
but also the gift of governing, to be a general duty, required of all civil
as well as ecclesiastical Governors. And not any such eccl Governors, as our
Brethren make the third persons in this their Hierarchicall Tetrarchie.

I grant that Beza thinks otherwise, saying on these words, He that has
mercy: Beza in To. 12.
This verily seems to stretch more largely: but when as Paul treats of
ecclesiastical functions, this cannot fitly enough be taken for the mercy,
that al they which have given their name to Christ, are bound to perform.
Furthermore, when as he distinguishes this man from him that distributeth: I
assent unto them, Diverse Interpretations of To. 11.
which suppose that Paul by a proper kind of speaking, understood by them
that have mercy, those that were appointed to care for the poor, such as for
the most part were the widows, Act. 6.1. 1. Tim. 5.9. This is but Bezaes mere
supposall, and assent to these or those Interpreters, as he best fancieth, in
so indifferent an Interpretation, of different opinions.

As for his reason, it is but weak. For though Saint Paul spoke before of
some diverse functions or offices, or rather of diversities of gifts: The
weakness of Bezaes reason.
yet it follows not of any necessity, that all his words are still to be
so understood, either for diverse officers, or only for offices and officers
ecclesiastical. Notwithstanding, this is clean contrary to these our learned
Discoursers, that one office had diverse parts of this distribution. Albeit for
my part. I like better of these our Discoursers opinion, than of Bezaes, that
one ecclesiastical office, might have diverse parts thereof. But, that these
words are to be only understood of the office of Deacons, and the parts
thereof, more than of the other offices: in that point, as these our Brethren
agree not with other excellent Writers; so is it again as free for us to
dissent here from them. Calvin says on these words, He that gives, in
simplicity: Calvin. in Romans 12.
Out of these latter members we cleerlie behold, that here is set forth unto
us, what is the lawful use of Gods gifts. By those that distribute, of whom
he speaks here. He understands not them that give of their own, but
Deacons, which are over the public goods of the Church to be dispensed. But by
those that have mercy; the Widows and other Ministers, that were set to the
oversight of tending the sick. For they are 2. diverse functions to lay forth
things necessary to the poor, and to employ their labor in the handling of
them. Peter Martyr says on these words, He that has mercy, in
cheerfulness: This seems to be the office of Widows, and of old men, which
were nourished in the Church, to the use, that they might take the care of
strangers, and of sick persons. Gualter, calling them Almoners, says the
same: I think that the Apostle speaks of them, that were peculiarly
designed, to exercise the offices of Christian mercy: such were the Widows
and the old men, which were nourished in the Church, chiefly to the end, that
they might enterteine needy strangers, that they might serve the sick, and be
present to any, that had more need of mercy and of others help, than other
had. Which place at this day they obtein, that are set over Hospitalls, and
that serve in them.

Oleuian also says on these words: He that has mercy: It was an other
office in the Church distinct from them that administered the Deaconshippe of
the poor, which were appointed to serve the poor, the aged and the sick*
such as for the most part were the Widows 1. Tim. 5.

Women Deacons.
All this, as they herein dissent from the ancient Fathers exposition of
these words, and from diverse of our late no less excellent Writers: so these
our learned Brethren herein dissent from them, which make these takers of
mercy, to be an other distinct office from the Deacons, and not to be the same
office that the Deacons is, being distinguished only in the parts thereof,
The Author of the fruitful Ser. upon Romans 12 page 34.
Yea, that Brother of ours, which made, (as he terms it) the fruitful
Sermon, upon this very text, does thus distinguish the^: Officers occupied
about their other necessary duties, divided into Deacons, rulers, attenders on
the poor. And page 34. These members are either Doctors to teach, Pastors to
exhort, Elders to rule, Deacons to distribute, attenders upon the poor people
and the sick: or else, the People and Saints which are taught, exhorted, ruled,
and receive alms and relief. These are all, no more, no fewer. These are very
resolute speeches: and yet, as cleerelie as the Author of that Sermon would
carry away the matter, he can not resolutelie set down, what office these
shewers of mercy had: but only, that either they were attenders upon the
poor people, and the sick; or else, the People and Saints which are taught,
exhorted, ruled, and receive alms and relief.

What certain office, or officers, are here distinguished: when all the
people and Saints which are taught, etc. are comprehended? So that while there
is such variety in the judgments, both of the old and new Writers
hereupon, and all or the most of them, that our Brethren esteem^ most, are in
this point so clean contrary to this our Brethrens learned Discourse: we may
the better be borne withal, if we admit not this their division of the Deacons
office, into these parts. For then, must we not only have men, but women also
to be ordinary and necessary eccl. officers, The eccl. discipline of women
Deacons necessary and perpetual by our Brethr.
that is to say, Deaconesses, or Deacons. Which term in Greek though Saint
Paul use of a woman, Romans 16.1. saying: I commend unto you Phoebe our Sister,
(...), which is a Minister of the Church of Cenchres: yet does he so little
mean that she was a Deacon in that signification, wherein the word Deacon is
appropriated to an ecclesiastical office in the Church: that the Geneua
translation dare not English it a Deacon, no nor yet a Minister, but a Servant,
such as the Widows were, that Saint Paul speaks of 1. Tim. 5. ver. 9. and
10. But these he calls Widows not Deacons. And he gives such general rules
to Deacons, as are not competible to Women, and are flat forbidden to those
Widows. Let the Deacons (says he) be the husbands of one wife, and such as
can rule their children well, and their own housholdes. 1. Tim. 3.12. But of
the Widows he says: But refuse the younger widows, for when they have begun
to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry. 1. Tim. 5.11. To avoid which
thing, he said before, ver. 9. Let not a Widdowe be taken into the number,
under 60. year old. But the Deacons have no prescription of their age. Yea,
Hospita^s.
if a young man (as Timothy was) might be an Elder of the word; much more
might a Deacon be a young man. The poor and impotent therefore, may be
attended upon well enough by other men, as by Almoners, and Masters of
Hospitalls, and other Widows, and officers, as it is yet in Hospitalls and
Almes-houses, Hospital^ and alm^ houses
although those officers be no ecclesiastical officers, and much less
Deacon^, in the proper acceptance of the name. But if now this office of
Deacon, as here they say, was divided into diverse parts, as necessity showed
diverse occasions: then, the poor, sick and impotent, being otherwise
charitablie provided for: why may not, (as necessity of occasion likewise
serves) the Deacons be employed unto other parts* as the very first
Deacons were employed?

And as uncertain as we see the exposition is, what gift, or office, or what
action, or part of gift or office, What is meant by helpers 1. Cor. 12.28.
Aretius in 1. Cor. 12.
is certeinlie meant by these that showed mercy, in the 12. of the Romans: so
is the other testimony, here likewise by our Brethren cited, 1. Cor. 12. ver.
28. as Aretius notes on the word (...), Helpers: Some interpret it of them
that sailed with him, and the loss is only of the ship. But other
interpret it of the Church, such as is of Deacons, Widows and Seniors, which
either lay out the alms to the poor, or take the care of strangers, and
attend on the sick, and the like officers, that take the charge of Hospitals.
And as vncerteinlie says Bullinger: He said Helpers and Deacons, Bulling. in
1. Cor. 12.
to wit, he understood the stewards of the poor, or else all those that help
in ecclesiastical businesses.

These offices being instituted by the spirit of God, The learned discourse.
Pa 104 and 105
for the necessary use of the Church, which use still continues, ought also
to be retained among us. For we see, for want of these offices, what great
inconveniences are among us, concerning the poor. For although there be very
good politic laws made for the provision of the poor, yet small relief
comes thereby to the poor indeed: at least wise many abuse the relief
which they receive, which comes of this, that there be not in every Church
or Congregation, such Deacons as t^^^olie Ghost has appointed, which should
take a special care, and employ a great diligence, for the provision of the
poor: not only some to gather and distribute, but also to see it well
employed on the poor, and to employ the poor, that live of the alms of the
Church, to the relief of their fellow poor, which are more impotent than
^hey, as it was used in the Primitive Church. And above all things to beware of
them that walk disorderly, and labor not, if they be able. Of which kind of
people, when there is so great multitude in this land, that they do even
ouerflowe the Countries, and have been known to be practisers of great
matters against the State: it is marvel, that neither by Politic, nor by
Ecclesiastical law, Politic laws for the poor.
they are brought into order, and set to labor, or else (as S. Paul
prescribes) so that they should not eat, until they be willing to labor. 2 Thessalonians. 3 10.

Bridges.
I deny not the reteining still among us the office of Deacons, nor deny that
the office was instituted by the spirit of God, for the necessary use of the
Church; How some part of the Deacons office cease.
either restraining the use to that present state of the Church then, or
understanding necessary, for expedient and convenient. But I deny, that that
necessary use which then was the occasion thereof, does in all his parts
still continue. Which if it do not, (as we have seen the proof,) or continue
but in part: then may this office, if not cease, yet continue but in part. And
that use which was necessary then, ceasing afterward, and so not necessary:
some part of the office may cease also.

The inconveniences concerning the poor.
As for the inconveniences among us concerning the poor, they arise not of
this, that the Deacons are not employed to the care of them: but on other
occassions, which would still fall out, howsoever the Deacons were employed,
except there be other helps for it, than the Deaco^s are able to supply.

The good Politic Laws for the provision of the pore.
They confess, there be very good Politic Laws made for the provision of
the poor. If these Politic laws be very good: then is there no such
necessary use, to employ the Deacons thereunto. Neither do these very good
Politic laws, commit the disposing of the poores provision unto the Deacons.
And how then can they be very good laws, if it were necessary by Gods law,
that the Deacons should always dispose the provisions for the poor? They must
therefore either eat this word, and say, the Laws are not very good: or
else, that this provision for the poor, does not so necessarily apperteine
unto the Deacons.

Yet ( say they) small relief comes thereby to the poor indeed, at least
wise many abuse the relief which they receive. Why the laws for the poores
provision being good, the poor are smallie relieved by them.
And I am of the same opinion. But again, whereof comes this? Which ( say
they) comes of this, that there be not in every Church or Congregation, such
Deacons as the holy Ghost has appointed, which should take a special care,
and employ a great diligence for the provision of the poor. It is very true,
that where such Deacons are, as the holy Ghost has appointed, and that they
be employed to this care: they would for their parts, use great diligence, and
do all that they can to remedy these inconveniences. Nevertheless, since it
has pleased the holy Ghost also, to give us Christian Princes, under whom we
need no such joining of our goods in community, as then they did, but every
one enjoy his own in propriety: and, by whose authority, very good laws
and provisions for the poor, ( as is here confessed) be already, or may be
made, and officers appointed in that behalf: as the inconveniences arise and
are ^spied, they may still by the same authority be reformed, as well, (...)
walkers.
or better than now by the Deacons, in this alteration of the occasion, to the
making of the^. For so that the poor be well provided for, if the Deaco^s be
employed to the attenda^ce on more principal things: what hurt is this?

And if the good Laws, be well executed, the Deacons attendance shall not
need: if they be not well executed, If the good laws he well executed the
Deaco^s attendance shall not need. And if they be not executed, the Deaco^s
attendance will not help it.
the Deacons attendance can not help. Let the good provision have good
execution, and the Deacons may be better employed: else lay not the fault on the
employing the Deacons, but on the not executing of the good Laws. Otherwise,
though the Deacons were employed only to the attendance on the poor: yet
might these great inconveniences, and greater arise, and increase among us.
Neither were all the Deaco^s very good, among those that were first chosen at
Jerusalem. Yea, though the Deaco^s to be chosen, were every one of the^ never
so good: yet must these inconveniences be helped, not only by the officers
that should distribute the alms; but as much by the persons that should give
the alms, especially by them that are in authority to make good laws and
provisions for the matter.

And let this be provided, that with the very good Politic Laws, which
either be made, or may be made, the people also may be made willing, ready and
liberal to contribute; and then, for appointing of fit officers, to be
Collectors and Distributers of the contributions, it will not be so great a
matter.

But where they say, It was used in the Primitive Church, to employ not only
the alms on the poor: but also employ the poor, The very maintenance of
these deacons, would take up a great part of the pores relief.
that live of the alms of the Church, to the relief of their fellow poor,
which are more impotent than they: these speeches would have been made more
plain, and some proof alleged.

In the mean season, were it not better to have these officers, that should
take such a special care, and employ so great diligence for the provision of
the poor, to be such, as should not be chargeable to the Church themselves:
than such, as must make the collecting and distributing, to be their whole and
only function, and so must also their selves, (as good reason is) for their
labor and reward, be altogether maintained on the charges or alms of the
Church: whereby the less remains, to be employed on the poores relief.

But they (not so much regarding this) give a straight charge unto these their
Deacons, Multitudes of walkers disorderly.
above all things to beware of them that walk disorderly, and labor not if
they able: and withal, they complain of so great multitudes of such kind of
people in this land, that they do even ouer-flowe the Countries, and have
been known to be practisers of great matters against the State.

If they mean, such as are roges, vagabondes, and idle beggars: we grant the
multitude is too great, Practisers against the State.
and yet they have been, and are meetelie well weeded out. But, for the Deacons
to beware that they bestow not the Churches alms on them; would be a forrie
help unto the matter, The Deaco^s taking heed would little help except they
might punish.
except the Deacons might also have the Law in their hands to punish them.
But the governing Elders permit not this unto the Deacons, but retain it to
themselves, as a matter perteining to government and discipline.

Well, yet whosoever shall be the punishers: great reason it is, that such idle
beggars, and loytering roges should be repressed, especially such as shall be
found to be practisers against the State, either of great or little matters.
But do these our learned discoursing Brethren find fault with the poor
roges, for practicing great matters against the State? How can they condemn
them of this crime, and their selves blush not? Is not the government of
Ecclesiastical matters, matter of State, and great matter too? How our Br. can
for shame speak against the^ that practice great matters against the State.
And are not they Practisers and Discoursers against the Bishops and Prelates,
against the Ecclesiastical laws established, against the Common book, yea,
against the supreme government of her Majesty in the authorizing of these
things? And can they for very shame open their mouths against the poor
snakes, those loytering beggars; their selves being practisers of so great
matters, and so direct against the State? Do they think they may practice
these great matters, better than the other; because the other are poorer, and
they are greater and richer? I think the more danger to the State, the
greater and the richer that they be?

And I think, if these Elderships and Deaconries in every Congregation were
set up: Greater danger by these devises of more practisers in State matters and
not laborers in their callings.
for one loyterer that we are now pestered withal, or for one poor man that
we now have, or for one practiser against the State: we might fear the
breeding of greater multitudes in this land. For State matters we may guess by
these Discoursers; as for the loytering poor, that for sooke the labor of
their vocations, while they have busied themselves overmuch in these State
matters, a great many already have felt the experience, of whom my self
know diverse, that poor zealous souls, have brought a shilling not to nine
pence (as they say) but to no pence, and would be full glad now, in place of
governing Seniors, to be made Deacons, that they might become Collectors, and
distribute some share to themselves of the Church goods, having spent their
own in idleness, if not on other as ill unthriftiness.

It is marvel ( they say) that neither by Politic nor Ecclesiastical law they
are brought into order, and set to labor. And is it not as much marvel, that
they should think to bring them into order by a new devise, without all
Politic and Ecclesiastical Law? Yea, it is as much marvel, that neither by
Politic nor by Ecclesiastical Law, these learned Discoursers, neither bring
themselves, nor are brought into order, to refrain these their most dangerous
practices against the State, Bringing such persons to order.
and against all Politic and Ecclesiastical law and order. Verelie (as Saint
Paul prescribes) that those loyterers should not eat, until they be willing
to labor, 2 Thessalonians. 3. So should not these Discoursers, Our Br. marvel that
such persons can by no Law be brought into order.
for all their vaunt of learning, be suffered to write and speak in this
vnorderlie order, what they list to prescribe, until they could bring better
proves for their devises, or be brought to live in better order, under the
politic and eccl. laws, according as the law of God prescribes.

But now to return to the election of Deacons. Concerning the form of
choosing of Deacons, we may read at large. Act. 6. The learned disc. Pa. 105
106. and 107
That they were chosen by consent of the whole Church, and had the approbation
of the Apostles. And because we may not think there was any confusion in that
blessed company, we must needs confess, that which has been heretofore
declared, that there were even in that Assembly and first Church at Jerusalem,
certain Elders appointed, which in the name and by the consent of the rest,
had the disposition of such matters: as appears by many places of the Acts
of the Apostles, where the Elders are named with the Apostles: as Acts.
15.4.12. etc.

But especially concerning this matter, of the distribution unto the poor, we
read, that when the Church of Antiochia, was so well disposed, as to make a
Collection to be sent unto the poor Brethren, that dwelt in Jury, they sent
unto the Elders, by the hands of Barnabas and Saul, Act. 11.30. Act. 11.30.
By which it appears, that the Elders had the dispotion and appoynting of
such, as should distribute it unto the Congregation, which were the Deacons.
For it is agreeable to reason, that he that should do any service in the name
of all, should be chosen and approved by the consent of all. For the
regiment of the Church, as it ought to be farthest off from all tyranny: so
ought it to be as far from confusion and disorder. Tyranny is avoided, when
no one man (contrary to the ordinance of Christ) shall presume to do any
thing in the Church, without the advice and consent of others, that be godly
and wise, and authorized by the consent of the Church: confusion is prevented,
by the grave counsel and orderly assembly of Elders, unto whom the Church
has committed her authority.

Concerning the form of choosing Deacons, we find no rule, Bridges.
and but this one example, at the first institution of them, Act. 6. I grant,
The form of choosing Deacons. The form that our Br. prescribe diff^re^t from
the form that was first used Act. 6.
that those 7. first Deacons, ( on the occasion cited in the text) were chosen,
not only by the motion of the Apostles, but by the looking out and choosing,
not by the consent only of the whole multitude. Howbeit, that none should
afterward be chosen, except in that form, to wit, for the Bishops or pastoral
Elders succeeding the Apostles, to propound the matter to the whole multitude,
and then the whole multitude to look out among themselves sit persons,
Election of Deacons.
and so to choose them to be Deacons: neither the text has any such
prescription of that form, The reason to suppose the election was made by a
Consistory of Elders.
nor it seems that our Brethren would have them to be so chosen, but only
by the Pastors and Consistore of their governing Elders. And what reason
moves them heerevntoo? Forsooth, because we may not think, there was any
confusion in that blessed company.

Is not this rather a reason to the contrary, that because the company was so
blessed, and that there was no confusion among them: therefore that company
even of the whole multitude ( as the text plainly says) might the better
look about them, and so choose them?

So that there is no necessity, that we must needs confess that ( which here
they say) has been before declared, We may with as good reason var^e from our
B. fo^m as our Br ^arie from the plain scripture.
but has never yet by them been proved, that there were even in that
assembly, and first Church at Jerusalem, certain Elders appointed, which in
the name and by the consent of the rest, had the disposition of such matters.
Although we deny not, but that there were even in that assembly certain
Elders among them. Yet for this matter, the text is so plain, that they also
must needs confess ( except needless they will writhe the text) that the
whole multitude themselves, (not certain Elders in the name and by the consent
of the rest, did choose those 7. first Deacons. Since therefore, this election
of Deacons to be made by such Seniors as our Brethren urge, is not according to
this first example, and they allege none other for this matter: we are so much
the easilier acquittted, that if it be lawful for them to vary from this
only example of the whole multitudes election: then may we also vary from
the election of such governing and not teaching Elders, of which we have no
example at all in the Scripture, for Deacons elections.

The examples that our Br. allege are nothing for them.
As for the example that here they allege, Act. 15. besides that we have
proved out of Calvin, that it is all for Elders meddling with the word: it is
nothing for the election of Deacons. Neither yet that example of the collection
for the poor at Jerusalem made in Antiochia, and sent unto the Elders, by the
hands of Barnabas and Saul. Act. 11. ver. 20. Both Barnabas and Saul were
Elders of the Word, and (as we have showed out of Calvin) so were the Elders
at Jerusalem also. Those ( says he) are called Elders, in whose hands the
government of the Church was, among whom, the Apostles were chief. Which
Elders, that they dealt with the controversies of doctrine, and therein were
examples unto all good Pastors, we have seen at large, on this very example
that our Brethren here allege, Act. 15. And this, collection for the poor,
Act. 11. is so little tied to the Deacons necessary distribution, even where
these 7 Deacons were first appointed: that the Elders also might distribute it,
to whom it was sent. For, it appears not hereby (of any necessity) that
the Elders were to read liver it to the Deacons to be distributed unto the
Congregation. Yea, Tyranny.
it appears so little, that Beza is feign here to drive the name of Elders,
to Deacons. So that if here the Elders and the Deacons are all one, then do
not our Brethren truly say, that the Elders had the disposition and appointing
of such, as should distribute it unto the Congregation, which were the Deacons.

As concerning the reason that they allege; For, it is agreeable to reason,
that he that should do any service in the name of all, The weakness of our Br.
2. reason from doing service in the name of all.
should be chosen and approved by the consent of all: I hold well with it,
that it is agreeable to reason, but not always, and in every public office,
necessary, especially that he should not be chosen otherwise, but by the
consent of all, in whose name he should do any service. For although the
Deacon, in collecting and distributing, or attending on the poor, or on the
Minister, or Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, do not service in the name
of all, and so is to be acquitted of this reason: yet, imagine he did his
service in the name of all, comprehending by all, not the Seniors only, but
jointly or severally every one: if it be agreeable to reason, that he that
should do any service in the name of all, should be chosen and approved by
the consent of all: and why then should he be chosen and approved by the
consent of a few Seniors, whereas he should be chosen by the consent of all?
If they say, by all, they mean not every one, but the greater or better part,
and that the greater or better part must give their consent unto the Seniors:
although this be agreeable to reason, that where election is to be made, the
party eligible may be elected by the greater and better part, though it be so
far from the consent of all, that within one, the one half dissent from his
election, and yet it may be called the consent of all, because the greater and
better part drowneth the other: nevertheless, why may not all, or the greatest
part, The consent of the greater part.
for the avoiding of factions in elections, compromit their consents unto some
one approved man among them, as well as unto some few men among the^, to make
these officers in their names, as we see the like is done in many other
offices in the Co^mon-weale. But as an exception against this, they say: For,
the regiment of the Church, as it ought to be farthest from all tyranny, so it
ought to be as far from confusion and disorder.

This again I grant them. But do they make this to be tyranny, if any one
man being a lawful public officer and Governor, Our Breath. wrong and
dangerous definit^o^ of tyranny.
do any thing himself by virtue of his office, wherein he joins not al, or
a number of other in the name of al, in joint authority of that action with
him? If they count this tyranny, they will make all the Apostles tyrants. But
they say it is tyranny, when one man contrary to the ordinance of Christ,
shall presume to do any thing in the Church, without the advice of others that
be godly and wise, and authorized by the consent of the Church. If he do it
contrary to the ordinance of Christ, they say somewhat to the purpose.

But where prove they this ordinance of Christ, that a Bishop or a Pastor,
that a Prince or a Magistrate (for these words of theirs stretch generally,
to the doing of any thing in the Church by any one man, though it be not
Church matters, nor he an Ecclesiastical person, yet if he do it not only
without the advice, but though with the advice, yet without the consent, or
though with the consent, yet without the authorizing of the Church, that then
it is tyranny:) they have not yet showed any such ordinance of Christ.

As for the words of Christ that they have alleged, Math. 18. implie no such
ordinance, ( as we have seen) and should be much wrested from the matters that
he there speaks of, to all things that should be done in the Church. This
therefore is too lauishlie cast forth, and would not only overthrow in
Ecclesiastical matters all elections and constitutions: but the very
preaching and administration of the Sacraments, besides the power and
authority of all Christian Princes, in doing many other civil actions, The
overthrow not only of the B but of the Princes state
done in the Church, though not Church matters, that if any one man shall
presume to do any thing in the Church, if they were not authorized by the
people, or did the same without the advice, yea, not authorized by the consent
of the Church ( understanding by the Church, an assembly of Seniors in the
peoples name) they were all but tyrants, and all their doings were mere
tyranny. Were not all Christian Princes, by these rash words, brought to as
hard streights, as the poor Bishops?

As for confusion on the other side, is prevented ( they say) by the grave
counsel and orderly assemblies of Elders, Prevention of confusion.
unto whom the Church has committed her authority. And may it not be
prevented as well, and perhaps much better in some estates, parts, and cases of
the Church, if the Church ( which withal she may as eas^lie do) committed her
authority in these things, to some one grave and godly person, as to some few
or many persons: as when a whole Realm choose one to do many actions for
them, is this tyranny? And may not dissension and confusion arise among an
assembly of Elders also? Yea, may not confusion arise in the Church about the
committing of this authority unto this assembly, and about the choosing of
them? yea, and tyranny also when they are chosen. For tyranny is not always
the misgouernment of one: but now and then of more, and of an assembly also. As
the 30 Tyrants in Athens, and the 10: at Rome, declared the experience. And the
Regiment called (...) even the government of a few, though in name
distinguished from Tyrannis, yet in effect may be all one, if not far the
worse the more Tyrants there be: but the peoples confusion worst of all. And
verelie, The Deacons trayning to the Ministry.
we may as well fear a tyranny in these Seniors governing and not teaching, or
a confusion among them, and a ready way to great confusion and division
between themselves, or between them and the people, or among the people for
them: than we need fear any tyranny in a godly and wise, either Prince or
Bishop, or any confusion or disorder in the people, that are obedient to their
wise and godly Government.

By this it may easily appear, The learned disc. Pa. 107 and 108
what great defaulte there is in our Church, where those that are said to be
ordained Deacons, never purpose in their life to execute any part of a Deacons
office: neither are chosen for that end: but only that within a short time
after, they may be made Priests or Ministers, nothing in the world differing
from the superstition of Popery: where the office of Deacons, was conferred
only as a step unto Priesthood. As though it were necessary, that every
one which is ordained an Elder, should first be a Deacon, and yet when he is
made a Deacon, he is but an Idol, yea scarce an Idol of a Deacon, having no
resemblance at all unto a Deacon indeed, but that he is a man. This profaning
of Gods institution, God will not always suffer unpunished, especially when
it is not maintained of ignorance or infirmity, but defended against
knowledge, and upon wilfulness.

Our Brethren complaining of the great default in our Church for Deacons,
should not their selves commit so great a fault, Bridges
as to burden the^ all in general, with so apparent an untruth; that those
that are said to be ordained Deacons, never purpose in their life to execute
any part of a Deacons office* neither are chosen for that end. For, although
there be not now such use of this office, concerning the distribution of goods
to the poor, and attendance on the tables, as was then in use: yet, The
purpose of the Deacon to be trained up to the Ministry of the word is no
praphaning of the office
seeing that Stephen can not be said to have gone beyond the bounds of his
office in preaching the word, being but a Deacon, ( for, other public
Ecclesiastical function, we read of none that he had, either before or after:)
if he then that is now made a Deacon, have the purpose (as many have) by the
grace of God, to become afterward a Preacher or Minister of the word, and in
the mean time, purpose withal for a while, to give his attendance on the
Ministers, that they may the better employ themselves in the Ministry of the
word of, and their selves learn to become the readier to be made Pastors: can
it be truly said of these, that they never purposed in their life to execute
any part of a Deacons office, neither are chosen for that end?

But they say, this differs nothing in the world from the superstition of
Popery, where the office of Deacons was conferred only as a step unto
Preesthood.

Deacons Idols.
That this was not Popery ( understanding Priesthood, not as the adversaries
understand it, for a Sacrificing Ministry) although we have seen
sufficient proof out of Gualter, Aretius, the Magdeburgenses, and Hyperius out
of Ambrose, that teaching and ministering the Word and Sacraments, ( as the
parties were able, and occasion served) was a part also of the Deacons office:
notwithstanding, let us here see further, what Kemnitius says thereon.

Kemnitius 2. p^^t. exa i^. ^rident. Council. de sacr ordin. super Can. 2.
And because ( says he) the Apostles did afterward, take out of the Deacons,
into the Ministry of teaching, those that were tried, as Stephen and Philip:
it is gathered, that this is the use also of these degrees or orders, that they
should be prepared and tried before in the lesser, that afterward the more
weighty offices of the Ministry, might the safelier and with more profit
be commended unto them. And this is that which Paul says, 1. Tim. 3. Let
them be first tried, and so minister. And again, They that in the Deaconship
have ministered well, shall get unto themselves a good degree.

Thus notably says Kemnitius even in confuting the Popery yt was used in the
abuse of this office. This therefore can not be called Popery, nor ought to be
misliked, to make it one end, and that an excellent end and purpose of making
Deacons, to be a step unto the Priesthood or Eldership in the Word and
Sacraments. And so (understanding necessary, for convenient or expedient) it
may be well avouched, that it is necessary, that every one which is ordained
a Priest or pastoral Elder, should first be a Deacon.

The words of our Brethren following, And yet when he is made a Deacon, Our
Br. calling of Deacons Idols.
he is but an Idol, yea scarce an Idol of a Deacon, having no resemblance at
all unto a Deacon indeed, but that he is a man: are but words of passion, which
the appearance of the truth, yea, the contradiction in the words themselves,
do sufficiently confute. For, if he be made a Deacon, then he is a Deacon, or
else he is not made a Deacon. And how is he become an Idol? Is there any
Idolatry committed unto him? Or, whereof is he an Idol? They say, he is
scarce an Idol of a Deacon. Do they mean, by scarce an Idol, that he is not
an Idol? For, quod vix fit, non fit. Or, that he is somewhat an Idol of a
Deacon? But how is he any part an Idol of a Deacon, if he have not indeed
so much as any resemblance at all unto a Deacon, but that he is a man? What,
and are all men Idols too?

But as though there were herein a great profaning of Gods Institution: Gods
institution of Deacons not profaned.
they tell us, how God will not suffer it unpunished, especially when it is
not maintained of ignorance or infirmity, but defended against knowledge, and
upon wilfulness. They should have first proved, that we profane Gods
institution of the Deacons office, and then brotherly admonish us of these
threats. God be praised, Deacons instirution not profaned.
considering the state and times of the Church now, our use of this office is
not profane, but holy. If any profane it, it is a personal, not a real
profanation. So did Judas profane the Apostleship, and Nicholas the
Deaconship. We using it no worse, than to the end and purpose, to make it a
trial and preparatiue, or as they term it, a step unto the Priesthood, or
Eldership of the Word: for any thing that they allege to the contrary, we
need so little fear their threats of Gods punishment in this behalf, that we
rather hope in God, to continue it with his favor and blessing.

Nevertheless, if any error can be showed and proved; for my part, I may
err of ignorance and infirmity, but by Gods grace, I will defend none against
knowledge and upon wilfulnes, so it be cleerelie proved out of the word of
God, not of men, be they never so famous. For if they bring men, as Calvin,
Beza, Danaeus, etc. Whom I confess, in all thankfulness, to be in many and
great things, most singular instruments of Gods glory, in this our age: yet
(as we have seen) we may well oppose them to their own selves, or as
easily reject them, as admit them, alledg^^g not the scripture it self, but
their only interpretation of it, except they firmly prove their
interpretation. Now on these slender premises, our Br. very loosel^e
conclude, saying:

Therefore, the Collectors are more like to Deacons a great deal, The learned
disc. Pa. 108 109.110.
than those that the Bishops make Deacons. For, first they have after a sort,
election of the Church, whereas the other have but the approbation of one man.
And secondly, they gather and distribute the common alms unto the poor,
which the other never think of. But yet we may not allow them for lawful
Deacons indeed, because they are not always endued with such qualities, as
the Apostle requires 1. Tim. 2. 1. Tim. 2.
For they ought to be men of good estimation in the Church, full of the holy
Ghost, and of wisdom that should be chosen. Act. 6. For, as it is an office of
good credire, so ought the person to be of good reputation. Therefore says
Saint Paul, that those Deacons that Minister well, 1. Tim. 3.13.
do get unto them selves a good degree, and great liberty in the faith, which
is in Christ Jesus.

Insomuch, that Saint Paul himself does salute in special words the
Deacons, next to the Bishops or overseers in the Church of Philippi. We read
also what worthy men were chosen to be the first Deacons: as Stephen the first
Martyr, and Philip which afterward was an Evangelist, Philip. 1.1.
when the Church was dispersed through the persecution raised about Stephen.
So that every ignorant contemptible person, is not to be allowed unto this
office: but as godly, wise, and worshipful, as may conveniently be found in
the congregation, may not think themselves too good to minister unto Christ,
Collectors.
in his members, and in the name of the Church.

The election also of our Collectors, is too profane for so holy an office. We
may read in the History of the Acts, Act. 6. with what gravity, Act. 6.
reverence, and religiousnesse, the Apostles ordained Deacons, with prayer and
imposition of hands. For these and such like causes, although the ordinary
Collectors have some resemblance, with the Deaconship of the Church: yet we can
not in all points allow them for Deacons: whose office truli^ consists only
in ministration to the poor, as we have showed, in that they be Deacons.

Bridges.
If the Collectors be more like to Deacons, and that a great deal, than those
that the Bishops make Deacons: then have our Brethren less cause to find
fault, The likening the collectors to the Doctors
that not only they want Deacons, but they want those also, that are any
thing like, but have no resemblance at all unto them. And yet, let them take
heed of that they said right now, of Gods punishing the prohaning of his
Institution, resembling it thus to a profane office. I speak in comparison of
Deacons, though we have no other parts thereof, but these before mentioned.
And if that part of the Deacons office, for great and good considerations,
according ^s the State of things are now under Christian Princes, and men's
disposition in giving alms, be committed to those whom usually we term
Collectors and Church wardens: what offense is this? So that, the poor may be
the better provided for: and the Ministry, and those that should be tried
and prepared thereunto, be less troubled and hindered with such collections and
distributions: and if we retain the name of Deacons, for those that exercise
themselves in the one part, of this attendaunce, trial, and preparaunce, to
the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and use not the name of Deacon in
these Collectors, or the like Officers: is this such a matter?

Danaeus in his Christian Introduction, writing of Deacons, tells how those
that were first called Deacons: Danaeus in Christ. Isag. part. lib. 2. cap. 11.
were afterward called Proctors of the poor. Sozom. lib. 8. cap. 12. and
Stewards. Chalcedon. Council, cap. 25. and 26. But afterward there were diverse
sorts of these, according to the diverse manner of things, and of the poor, to
whom they were deputed. Some therefore were called Nosotrophi, the nourishers
of the sick: other, Orphanotrophi, the nourishers of the fatherless: other,
Gerontotrophi, the nourishers of the aged: other were called, Oeconomi,
Stewardes or Bayliffes, The office of Deacons altered by the holy ancient
Church.
as appears, Ex titulo de sac^^sanctu^ Ecclesijs, and de Episcopis and
Clericis lib. 1. codicis Iustiniani.

If therefore, the holy Churches, Bishops, and Clerks, did in those days,
convert these Deacons into those offices, and leaving the name of Deacons, gave
them these peculiar names, according to their peculiar charges and offices:
what great matter is it now, Alteration of Deacons.
if these matters for collecting and distributing the alms for the poor, and
the attendants also on the poor, which ( as Danaeus says) were called
Parabolani, which were chosen to cure the diseased body of the poor weak
ones, be appointed in stead of the Deacons, to such and to the like officers?

As for the election of the Deacons, whether it be ^one by all, many, few, or
one, it is not of the substance of the office. H^wbeit, The election of the
Deacons. Collectors not allowed for Deacons.
though our Brethren think herein, these Collectors to be more like the first
Deacons, yet they allow them not for lawful Deacons in deed. No more do we,
although some part of the office and business that was then, the Deacons be
now by the foresaid Canons of the holy Churches, the Bishops, and the Clergy,
and by the Imperial sanctions, and also by the laws and lawdable customs of
this our Realm, committed to such persons and officers as we call Collectors,
or by other names. But what reason allege our Brethren, for their disalowing
of them? because ( say they) they are not always endued with such qualities as
the Apostle requires, 1. Tim. 3. Our Brethrens reason of disalowing the the
Collectors to provide for the poor.
This reason is not sufficient from the qualities of the gifts and habites of
the mind, to the qualities of the offices, and functions of the persons. F^^
though the Apostle require, and they their selves ought to be endued with all
such qualities of the mind, as are requisite to the quality of the office:
yet, if any be an hypocrite, and deceive them that chose him, rather on hope or
appearance, then on knowledge, as the Apostles, and all the Christians were
deceived in Nicholas ( as it is constantly reported) yet was he (being not so
endued) as much a Deacon and officer in the nature of the office, as was
Stephen, and Philip, and the rest, that were so endued. Yea, Judas was a very
Apostle, whom Christ knew to be a Devil, and yet he chose and made him an
Apostle: and if such horrible vices be no privation of the offense of these
offices, till they be as actually deprived, as they were first interessed: much
less may we say, that a man is not a lawful officer, The difference between
the essence of the office and duty of the officer. The gifts of the Deaco^s.
if he be not always endued with such qualities, as the Apostle requires:
for, the Apostle requires those qualities, not so much in respect of the
essence of the office, as the duty of the officer.

They say, the Deacons ought to be men of good estimation in the Church, full
of the holy Ghost, and of wisdom, that should be chosen. Acts 6. for as it
is an office of good credit, so ought the person to be of good reputation.

To this I agree, understanding these words, Full of the holy Ghost, according
to the measure of the holy Ghosts gifts, answerable to our time. As for the
wisdom and knowledge that both Peter and Paul require in them, was not only
about the dispensation of worldly goods, but much more about the mystery of
the faith, that as need and occasion served, The Deacons qualities.
they might dispense the same. But our Brethren allege this against the
Collectors for the poor, as though they were unwise and contemptib^e persons,
The defaming of the Collectors for the poor.
either of none, or of no good estimation, and therefore no Deacons. Though we
allow not such persons to be Deacons, nor so much to be Collectors for the
poor, yet can we no more allow of these contemptible speeches to be thus
generally bestowed on the office of the poor Collectors, if they were not of
good credit in the Church, the Church would not, or should not credit them to
receive the Collections, neither can we allow of their argument. If ye have
judgments says Saint Paul in matters perteyning to this life, 1. Cor. 6.
appoint them that are contemptible persons in the Church, and if contemptible
persons may be appointed judges in matters perteyning to this life, when our
Brethren limit the Deacons office only to the Collection and distribution of
the goods and alms for the poor, How a contemptible person may be a
Collector for the poor.
and attendance on the sick and impotent persons, which are all matters
perteyning to this life, why may not a poor contemptible man, if of honest
conversation, though of small reputation or estimation in respect of
worshipful calling or wealth, for S. Paul means not by contemptible, a man
for unworthiness deserving to be contemned, be as well a Deacon, that is, a
minister or servant to collect and distribute these things, as to be a judge of
them?

And here our Brethren allege that very sentence, 1. Tim. 3.13. which we have
seen out of so many Protestant interpreters, 1. Tim. 3.13.
how it serves to prove that the office of Deacons was not only for collection
and distribution of alms, or attendance on the poor, but also a trial and
preparatiue to the higher calling of the Pastorship, as God willing, we shall
yet further see anon.

The other testimony here cited, Phil. 1. verse. 1. insomuch that S. Paul
himself does salute in special words the Deacons, Phil. 1.1.
next to the Bishops or overseers in the Church of Philippi, is nothing against
us, but much against themselves. Have not they alleged this testimony, page
24. for Pastoral Elders? and how chance then that they place their governing
Elders, next these Pastoral Elders, that they call Bishops, and not rather the
Deacons before them, confessing themselves, that S. Paul does salute them in
special words next to the Bishops? had they rather follow the order of Danaeus
in placing the Deacons, then the order of Beza? if they had, how chance they
prefer in their Tetrarchie, the Governors before them, and place not the
Deacons also next the Bishops? What? and will they now recant, and with Beza
make their governors Bishops? what constancy, and what order is in these
things?

The examples also of Stephen and Philip, are both against them, whom we
confess to be worthy men, and that none but worthy men are worthy to be chosen
Deacons, if it fall out otherwise, Exception of Evangelists.
it is in that defect, wherein, if very Apostles themselves were deceived (as
it is said of Nicholas the convert, and afterward a pervert) much more may
other be deceived, being nothing comparable to the Apostles, and hypocrites
being more cunning now, then Nicholas then was, to nicholl and cousin even the
most watchful persons.

But (as we have showed) Stephen the first Martyr was a preacher of the word,
and Philip ministered the sacrament of Baptism. Stephen and Philip preachers
and m^nisters of the Sacraments. Exception of Stephens Euangelistship.
But they except against Philip, that he was afterward an Evangelist. And why
do they not except it as well for Stephen, as for Philip? I am sure, if they
could allege but the like testimony for Stephen, as here they snatch at for
Philip, we should be sure to hear of it. But they can not prove that ever
Stephen was an Evangelist, understanding the word, for a distinct function or
office. But if Stephen might preach, and of consequence, minister the
Sacraments, why might not all the residue of the Deacons preach as lawfully as
Stephen, though we should except Philip as an Evangelist? and yet it was no
more debar in him, then in Stephen, or in the other. For if Stephen might
preach, being no Evangelist, but only a Deacon, why might not Philip too, were
he Evangelist, or not. So that to make an exception, by reason of his being an
Evangelist, were but a sophistical evasion.

And yet, if we shall examine the matter better, I think it will be ouer-hard
for them to justify these words: Philip, which afterward was an Evangelist,
when the Church was dispersed, Whether Philip were an Evangelist when he first
preached and baptized.
through the persecution raised about Stephen. Can they prove that he was an
Evangelist then? In deed it appears, Acts 21. verse 8. that he was an
Evangelist, and entering ( says Luke) into the house of Philip the Evangelist,
which was one of the seven, we abode with him, but this was many years after
that time, when the Church was dispersed through the persecution raised about
Stephen: but this Philips preaching and baptizing, was immediately after that
persecution, for so says Luke, Acts 8. verse 1. etc.

And at that day, there was a great persecution raised against the Church,
Acts 8.
which was at Jerusalem, therefore they were all scattered abroad throughout
all the Regions of Iudaea and Samaria, except the Apostle^, and religious men
dressed Stephen together, and they mourned sore for him: but Saul made hauock
of the Church, and entering into houses, and drawing thence men and women, he
cast them into prison, and they being dispersed, went about preaching the word
of God, and when Philip came into the City of Samaria, he preached Christ unto
them. Whereby it is manifest, that upon that Persecution, Philip was one of
them that being so dispersed, presently fell to Preaching.

Philip Evangelist.
And here upon says Calvin, verse 5. Luke said, that they all preached the
word of God, now he makes mention of Philip alone, both because his preaching
was more fruitful and effectual, than the preaching of the rest, etc. Who
the rest were, (that Luke says, were all scattered abroad, and being
dispersed, went about preaching, except the Apostles:) Luke tells not, but
the name all, comprehends (no doubt) besides other that were Elders of the
word, the other Deacons also that were Philips fellows.

As for Philips Euangelistship, the text, Acts 21.8. does not infer any
necessity, that he was Deacon and Evangelist both together at one time, which
being admitted, notwithstanding is not material, except to confute our
Brethren further, that these offices are not so distinct, but that they may be
both at once in one man, without confusion. Howbeit, understanding it as
Calvin notes thereon: Calvin on Act. 8.
by this we may easily gather ( says he) that that Deaconship was an office
which continued but for a time, because otherwise it had not been lawful for
Philip to forsake Jerusalem, and to go to Cesarea: and in this place he is sent
before us, not as a voluntary forsaker of his office, but as one to whom a
greater and more excellent charge was committed. The Evangelists in my
judgment, were in the midst between Apostles and Doctors, for it was a
function next to the Apostles, Philip promoted from a Deacon to be an
Evangelist.
to preach the Gospel in all places, and not to have any certain place of
abode, only the degree of honor was inferior. For when Paul describes the
order of the Church, he does so put them after the Apostles, that he shows
that they have more roomth given them where they may teach, than the pastors,
who are tied to certain places: therefore Philip did for a certain time
exercise the office of a Deacon at Jerusalem, whom the Church thought
afterward to be a meet man, to whom the treasure of the Gospel should be
committed.

By which testimony of Calvin it should appear, that Philip was not
Evangelist while he was Deacon, but that his Deaconship ceased, when he was
promoted to be an Evangelist, after his effectual preaching was tried, in that
extraordinary occasion of his dispersion, being but yet new made a Deacon, and
so (as S. Paul says, in the testimony that our Brethren before cited, of
those Deacons that minister well) he gate himself a good degree, and great
liberty in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

The consequence that they gather heerevpon, for the former part thereof,
saying: so that every ignorant contemptible person, is not to be allowed unto
this office, is for the truth of the matter, a good part of a good conclusion,
but no whit for any part of the matter in question. For, we defend not that
every, The qualities of Deacons.
or any ignorant contemptible person ( understanding contemptible, as they
here do, far opposite to men of good estimation, good credit, and good
reputation, in virtue of life, Deacons worshipful.
or that want all, or any of these qualities, ought to be allowed unto this
office. As for the other part of this consequence, but as godly, wise, and
worshipful, as may conveniently be found in the congregation, may not think
themselves too good, to minister unto Christ in his members, and in the name of
the Church. This is too far concluded: not, but that they should be godly,
and wise, but, that it is neither necessary nor expedient, that as worshipful
as may conveniently be found, should be made Deacons: neither Saint Peter,
Acts 6. nor Saint Paul, 1. Tim. 3. among all the qualities of Deacons that
they mention, reckon up worshipful.

I deem not, but that there are many worshipful, and (as we term them)
right worshipful to, both wise and godly, yet were it not fit they should be
made Deacons. For, although they say, as godly, wise, It is not necessary that
the Deacons should be as worshipful men, as may conveniently be found.
and worshipful, as may conveniently be found, yet there is no conueniencie in
it, to seek out persons of such worship for this Ecclesiastical office. And
what mean they hereby, to have as worshipful persons, as conveniently may be
found, to be made their Deacons? would they promote our Gentlemen, Esquiers,
and Knights (for these we call worshipful) unto this office? But as
worshipful men as they would have to be made Deacons, they must be under those
presbyters priests, or Elders, that they call governors. Gentlemen, Knights,
and Esquiers, made Deacons.
And what persons should these governing priests, or Elders be, that are no
teachers, but only governors? what should they be, as godly, wise, and
honorable, as may conveniently be found, when those that must be made the
Deacons under them, must be so worshipful. What manner persons the governors
should be above these Deacons.
But our Brethren said not so much of these governing Elders: but page 84.
where they described what persons they ought to be, they said: First, that the
Elders be elected and chosen by consent of the whole congregation, men of
godlynes, and wisdom, in whom the whole Church reposeth, etc. Here for
these governors qualities, is but godliness and wisdom mentioned. But they
will here have the Deacons to be both godly, wise, and worshipful, and in
deed, in most congregations, there are some worshipful: so that, for
worshipful, in most congregations, we need not want Deacons. But of honorable
there is not such store among us, and yet say they in the same page 84. There
ought to be in every Church a Consistory or Seniorie of Elders or governors,
which ought to have the hearing, examining, and determining of all matters,
perteining to discipline and government of that congregation. So that those
Seniors in the congregation, being perhaps neither honorable nor worshipful
yet must they be the governors, and the worshipful being made the Deacons, The
pro^otion of these worshipful Deacons.
must be governed under them. But in conclusion, be they worshipful, or be
they honorable, Deacons, The Collectors office.
governors and all, must be under the Pastors, and the Pastors must be all
equal with the Bishops, and every one of them a Bishop too, and this should be
the promotion of the worshipful Deacons to be made their governing Seniors,
and think themselves well promoted too. And why not? should they think
themselves to be too good, to minister unto Christ in his members, and in the
name of the Church? No in deed, there ought not any to think themselves too
good, to minister unto Christ, were it in a mean officer: were it but (as
David said) to be a dorekeeper in the house of the Lord. Howbeit, considering,
that God has vouchsafed to call them either to a higher, or to an other civil
Ministry under Christ, or to such vocations, as that withal they can not, or
it is not so fit they should intend, to the attendance of such contributions
and distributions of money, their calling and worshipful estate is not to be
embased heereunto, Albeit peradventure some would the gladlyer dispense a while
with their worship, to be come with all their hearts such Deacons, as to have
the collecting, distributing, and dispensing of the Church goods in their
fingering. Of which worshipful Deacons, I am afraid, that there be already,
some somewhere too many, and somewhat too busy in these devises.

The election also of our Collectors, they say, is too profane for so holy an
office. The Collectors office to profane.
And why then do they so profanely liken it thereunto? only because in this
part thereof, concerning collecting and distributing money, there is some
likeness: not considering the difference in the other parts, but making them no
parts at all of this office, as to be trials and preparatiues unto the
Pastorship, which S. Paul requires, even in the testimony that they cite, 1.
Tim. 3.13. (...), 1. Tim. 3.13.
for they that have ministered (or Deaconed it) well, get unto themselves a good
degree: which (as we have seen) is also understood for the degree of the
pastoral Elder, though Calvin expound it, only for greater honor. As for the
gravity, reverence, and religiousnesse, wherewith the Deacons were ordained of
the Apostles, Our manner of ordeyning Deacons.
was good and goodly. We also use prayer, and imposition of hands at the
ordeyning of them, with gravity, reverence, and religiousnesse, which
religiousnesse and imposition of hands, argues more, (and more holy) uses of
this office, tending to religion it self, than the only collecting or
distributing of worldly goods reaches unto. And therefore, we conclude thus
far, with these our Brethren, that for these and such like causes, although
the ordinary Collectors have some resemblance, The Deacons office consists
not only in the ministration to the poor.
with the Deaconship of the Church, yet we can not in all points allow them for
Deacons. Thus far we agree, save that in this resemblance, they presume too
far, to enter comparison with our Deacons. But in that which follows, we
flatly dissent, when as they say, whose office truly consists only in the
ministration unto the poor, as we have showed, in that they be Deacons. The
part of a Deacons office.
This indeed they have said (in effect) before, but showed it they have not
by any one necessary proof, testimony, or example thereof, and thereon, I put
me again to the indifferent readers verduit. Neither must they think here to
carry away the matter thus by anouching it (for the more persuasiue credit of
the reader) with this asseueration truly: for, it is not truly said of them,
but very untruly ( be it spoken with their reverence) that the Deacons office
consists only in ministration unto the poor, in that they be Deacons, This
not truly spoken.
for besides the manifest examples not only of Philip, in whom they find a
shift, that he preached not, in that he was a Deacon, but in that he was an
Evangelist, which shift serves them not in Stephen, and besides all the most
clear testimonies before cited: yet because our Brethren stand more perhaps on
the testimony of Beza, let us see also what Beza says heereto, who upon 1.
Tim. 3. verse 8. and 9. says thus: Beza in 1. Tim. 3.8.
Deacons, these are they that have the care of the poor, of whom we have
spoken, Philip. 1. and oftentimes in other places, holding the mystery of the
faith, that is, the Evangelical doctrine, which truly is indeed called (...),
a mystery (or secret) because flesh and blood reuealeth it not. For some of the
Deacons parts were also in teaching, Some of the Deacons parts consisted in
teaching.
so often as it was necessary, as appears out of Stephen and Philip. If this
be true, that Beza here, (with the like asseueration, truly, that our Brethren
use) does thus expressly avouch, that there consisted, or were, nonnullae
etiam parts diacon^rum in docendo, some parts also of the Deacons in teaching:
and that such teaching, as these examples of Stephen and Philip do infer,
Bezaes testimony conuicte^h these discoursers of untruth.
which is plain preaching: then is it not truly here said by these our
learned discoursing Brethren, that the Deacons office consists only in the
ministration unto the poor. Neither does it any whit avail, to come in with
this cautele, saying, in that they be Deacons, as though they might do it in
some other respect, but not in respect, that they were Deacons, for, Beza
cutteth off that quirke also, and flatly says, that some of the Deacons parts
consisted or were in teaching. And although Calvin upon this place, ver. 9.
say, Calvin on 1. Tim. 3. ve^se 9.
that they have not the office of teaching ( which we deny not, understanding
it for the ordinary office of teaching, as is the Pastors) nevertheless (
says he) it were too absurd, that they should sustain a public person in the
Church, If the Deacons should not be trained up to preach so often as need
should require, they should not do their parts.
and be rude in the Christian faith, especially when as there happens
oftentimes a necessity of giving warning, and of comforting: nisi pantibus suis
deesse velint, except they will fail to do their parts, so that, by Calvin
also, although they be not ordinary teachers by their office of Deaconship, yet
it pertains to the parts of their office, to give the^selus also to the study
of teching, and knowledge of the mystery of the faith in doctrine, and of
public admonishing and co^forting, which are principal points and parts in
^uery preacher, that as often as there is need, Two kinds of Deaco^s.
and that (he says) happens oftentimes, so oftentimes may the Deacons teach or
preach: yea, if they should not, or could not do it, they should fail of their
parts: and how then, is not this a part also of the Deacons office?

Aretius likewise writing on this place, says: He gives precepts of Deacons,
Aretius in 1. Tim. 3.9. The Deacons office under the Bishop.
in whom he requires those virtues which he attributes to a Bishop, and
therein certain virtues specially. Moreover, I understand Deacons after the
Bishop, that is, a chief inferior minister of the Church, which is put to the
Bishop in teaching and administering the Sacraments, in writing also, and in
caring for other things, as to visit the sick, to attend on the alms for the
poor, etc.

Here, if he should mean a Pastor, then he makes a Pastor not to be equal,
but to be inferior to a Bishop, if he mean not a Pastor, but simply (as he
says) a Deacon: then he attributes three other parts, and that principal
parts, teaching, ministering the Sacraments, and writing, to the office of a
Deacon: besides, visiting the sick, and attendance on the alms for the poor.
Aretius in 1. Tim. 3.12.
And on the 12. verse, he says: In the fifth place, he speaks of another kind
of Deacons, that is to wit, which administered the Church goods: these were
first ordained of the Apostles, Acts 6. Hereupon it seems, that every where
in other Churches it was observed, that certain Deacons, chosen out of the
Elders, should attend on the Ministers, unto whom, the treasury of the Church
was committed: these had the care of the poor, of the strangers, of the
widows, of the fatherless, of the sick, and distributed unto them according
to the proportion of the goods, Deacons of two kinds, the former kind we
have, the other is mere civil.
and the counsel of the Elders. Hereupon, Ambrose thinks, that in every
City there ought to be one Bishop, two Deacons of the first kind, which
withal should sometimes teach, and 7. of the second order, which should
procure or have the care of the Church goods. We have Ministers, and two also
of the first kind of Deacons, but of the second kind none, because that part is
made civil, and administered of the politic magistrate, thus says Aretius.

Bullinger also upon the same place, 1. Tim. 3.13. writes thus: Deacons,
Bullingerus 1. Tim. 3.13. Ambrose. Two kinds of Deacons.
which also Ambrose thinks are the Ministers of the Bishops, and as it were a
member and spring of the Bishops: these verily are found in the Scripture to be
two kinds or functions: for some being governors of the Churches treasury,
bear the care of the poor, as is to see Acts, Chap. 6. of whom also this
place in all points may be expounded. But other, study learning, honest
disciplines, and the holy Scripture, and therefore are continually exercised in
holy things. So that sometimes being preferred to the Ecclesiastical Offices
of the Church of God, they do very much profitte: for, of these, some are
chosen the Bishops, or the Priests, Ministers of the Churches. It was also
received in the time of the Prophets, The Deacons trayning.
to nourish up young men unto the holy mysteries. The history of Samuel is
known. Deacons trained up for the Ministry as in the old time were the
children of the Prophets
It is delivered also that there were schools both in Ierico which Helizaeus
governed, and also in Ramoth Galaad. The Scholars of these Schools were
called both Nazarei, and the Sons of the Prophets. Every where in the
Prophets there come to hand, notable shows of these things. And verily, we
should not well provide for Religion and study of Godliness, without
discipline and such kind of Schools. Forth with therefore, from the infancy
of the Christian faith, the Apostles being the Masters and the authors,
excellent wits began to be nourished, and men to be brought up, of whom
there was hope that being planted of our ancestors, they would in time with
doctrine and life adorn the Church Ad Ma^ura segetem. Hype^ius in 1. Tim. 3.
unto a ripe fruit.

To the same effect, though somewhat differing, and more at large, writes
Hyperius, alleging likewise S. Ambrose for these two kinds of Deacons: as we
have already seen. But (be it spoken in all due reverence of so notable men):
they somewhat (me thinks) mistake S. Ambrose in this matter, whose words are
these. He that commands Deacons to be chosen with so great care, whom it
is apparent to be the Ministers of the sacred Priests: what would he have
the Bishops to be? but (as he says himself) unreprovable, Ambrosius in 1.
Tim. 3.
not having public traffike, filthy or vile gains. For he knows, that men
do therefore traffike, that they might get gains. But he says, that these
gains are filthy, if under the Godly profession, they study for gains. For
when he makes show of himself to be pure, he is found out to be filthy.

But after a Bishop, he sets under him the ordination of a Deacon.
Wherefore? nisi quia episcopi and Presbyteri vna ordinatio est, The B. and the
Elder of one order, but ^he B. superior i^ dignity.
vterque enim sacerdos. But because, the ordination of the Bishop, and of the
Presbyter, (Preeste or Elder) is one, for either of them is a sacerdotall (or
sacred) Preeste. But the Bishop is the first, that every Bishop might be a
Presbyter (Priest or Elder) but not every presbyter (Preeste or Elder) a
Bishop. For he is the Bishop, which is the first (or chief) among the
Presbyters, (Priests or Elders. To conclude, he signifies that Timothy was
ordained a Presbyter, (Preeste or Elder): But because he had no other before
him, he was a Bishop. Whereupon he shows also, in what manner he should
ordeyne a Bishop for it was not right or lawful, that the inferior might
ordeyne the greater. For no man gives that that be has not received, etc. And
anon after, he says: Let the Deacons be the husbands of one wife, governing
well their children and their own houses. For they that have ministered well,
get unto them selves a good degree, and great confidence in the faith which is
in Christ Jesus.

Ambr. of the Deaco^s office.
Those things that he spoke of less, in the ordeining of the deaconship, he
has now set them under, and also shows that they ought their selves to be
the Husbands of one Wife, to the end that they may be chosen to the
Ministry of God* The deaco^s behavior that they might be chosen in^o the
ministry.
that have not gone beyond the constitution of God. For God decreed one Wife
unto a man with which wife he should be blessed. For none is blessed with the
second. Who if they govern their children well and their houses, that is,
their servant and domesticalles, they may be made worthy of the sacred
preesthood.

I set not down these words of Saint Ambrose, that I allow of his opinion
against the second marriage, Ambr. error in marriage.
or prohibition from the use of the first, in those that are Deacons. But I
allege him, to show how he is here misse-vnderstoode, to make two kinds
of Deacons: Whereas in very deed here he properly rather acknowledges but
one kind of Deacon, which he calls the Minister or attendant on the Preeste
or Elder. He says in-deede: But now there ought to be seven Deacons, Ambr.
declaration of the Elders and Deaco^s offices.
and some few Presbyters (Priests or Elders,) that throughout the Churches
there may be twain, and but one Bishop in a City. So that, he makes here
but two distinct kinds of Ecclesiastical ordeyninges: the one of the
Presbyters, (Priests or Elders): the other of the Deacons.

As for the Bishops, he makes them to be of the same ordeyning, that are the
Presbyters, Priests or Elders, but the difference to be in the dignity of
them. That the Bishop is the first or chief above all the rest, and but one
Bishop in a City: whereas the Elders are more, and all in dignity inferior to
the Bishop. And these Elders not to be Governors not meddling with teaching,
but sacred or sacerdotall Elders, both teaching and ministering the Sacraments.
As for the Deacons, he makes them all, and always so attendant on the
Ministry of the Bishops and Sacerdotall Elders, and so continually given to
Prayers: that he would have, though to be married, yet altogether to abstain
from their wives. Which though it were a great ouershooting in so holy a
father, and direct contrary to the state of matrimony, and to the law of God,
and to the examples of all the holy ancient Priests, Prophets and Apostles,
and of the Bishops and Pastoral Elders (as we have seen): yet it clearly
shows, how these Deacons were employed, not only in the ministration unto
the poor: but also in the attendaunce on the Bishop and on the Pastoral
Elders in the divine service, and upon necessity or occasion, to exercise the
same their selue^ also.

In so much that Hyperius calls the Pastoral Elders, and all under the
Bishops by the name of Deacons, though he distinguished Deacons into two
kinds.

All which Testimonies, both of this ancient Father, and other so notable late
writers, duly considered: it appears, that this here is not truly said of
our Brethren, that, truly the Deacons office consists only in ministration
unto the poor, in that they be Deacons.

And this is all, that their Learned Discourse discourses on these Deacons.
From whom they now proceed to another Learned Discourse, concerning Synodes.

The argument of the 14 Book.
After all the four Tretrarches have all their several and joint offices and
authorities assigned unto them: our Brethren here enter the treatise of their
Synods and assemblies. First of the arising and repressing controversies, and
of calling the aid of Synodes thereunto. Of the promise of Christ's presence
Math. 18. Of the Pastors authority with the Synod. Of the authority of
calling and directing Councels: and of the authority in determining
controversies. Of the example in the assembly of the Apostles and Elders, Acts.
15. And what the multitude did in that assembly. Of what persons a Synod
consists: of the order in that assembly observed. Of the pre-eminence of one
above the residue, and whether this pre-eminence be of order only, and not of
authority. Whether James his pre-eminence continued not but for the time only
of the Synod. Of the Presidentes of Councels, and of the Prolocutors
authority. Of the several and ioynt-authoritie of Bishops and Archbishops.
Of the supremacy of Christian Princes over Counselles. Of Bezaes grant for
this supremacy of the Prince, and for the superiority of Archbishops and
Metropolitanes, and with what conditions. Of the authority of Provincial
councelles, and that the matters lawfully decided in them, are not to be
revoked or controlled by inferior persons. The rules of determining ceremonies.
The avoiding offenses. The Pastors knowledge of comeliness, order, and
aedification. How far the laity may herein inform the Pastors. The Pastors
dealing herein toward the Elders that are not teachers. Our Br dealing herein,
especially against christian Princes. The christian Princes authority in
ceremonial constitutions. How the Prince is under and over the Pastors in
these matters. How our Brethren reject the Pince from having authority in
making any Eccl. Constitutions with the Synodes, because Synodes were holden
before there were any Christian Emperors, and of the force of that argument. Of
the Christian Princes before Christ's coming, and since his coming, but
before Constantine the great, of the prefiguring their authority til they
came. Of the slander for absolut^ authority. Of Bezaes aunswers to this
reason that there were no christian Princes. And of the authority that Beza
allows to Princes over Synodes. The unity of ceremonial constitutions. Of
our Brethrens reasons against uniformity in ceremonies, as feeding and clothing
young and old alike, and as compelling men of ripe age to suck the dugge, to
were biggins, to carry rattles, and other childish bables. Of Caluines rules
for uniformity in ceremonial constitutions. Of our brethrens reason against
it, that the land is not yet wholly converted to Christ. Our brethrens
assemblies for new orders to be appointed, and how they should afterward be
kept. Of the difference between necessary and not necessary matters. Of the
sign of the cross at baptism. Of baptising in the Font. Of kneeling at the
communion. And of wearing the Surplesse. Whether the recusant ministers be
displaced only, or cheefely for these ceremonies. Of those ministers
commendation by our brethren. For their most diligent preaching, their most
fervent praying* and their most reverend Ministration of the Sacraments.
Lastly of the pure caeremonies that the council should ordeine expedient for
the time and persons, and the punishing of the breakers of them.

WE have declared before that there is a double authority of the pastor* the
one joined with the Elders of the Church, The arising of controversies.
whereof he is pastor: The learned disc. pa. 111.
the other with the synod or holy assembly whereof he is a member. Of the
former, we have entreated hitherto. Now it follows that we speak of the
later.

WHen our Brethren began to enter into their Learned Discourse of these last
Officers in their Tetrarchie, to wit, the Deacons: Bridges
they said page 100. We must therefore return to the authority of the
pastor, which he has joined with the Elders of the Church, whereof he is
pastor. And here now (after their Treatise of Deacons,) telling us of the
double authority of the pastor, Our Br. their se^ues, given other parts to the
Deacons, than the administration to the poor.
the one joined with the Elders of the Church whereof he is pastor: the other,
with the synod or holy assembly, whereof he is a member: of the former we
have entreated hitherto, now it follows that we speak of the later: except
their Deacons be pastors, or at least have some part of their office and
authority joined with the pastoral Elders of the Church: I would feign
learn how these sayings hang together, but to pass over this, let us come
now to the later authority of the pastors, that with the synod ( they say)
follows.

There arises oftentimes in the Church diverse controversies, The learned disc.
Pa. 111
which cannot be otherwise expressed, pertaining to the state of the whole
Church, then by a general assembly of the pastors of that Church, which is
called a synod, or General counsel.

That diverse controversies oftentimes, and to oftentimes, arise in the Church:
with hearty grief thereat, and with present experience, Bridges
we cannot but confess it and lament it. And if license be permitted thus, to
preach and print what every one please, in Discoursing upon the
Ecclesiastical Government: when will controversies cease, if not, increase
daily more and more? but what mean they by this? can not these controversies
be repressed, nor yet expressed otherwise* The arising of controversies and
repressing of them.
than by a general assembly of the pastors of that church, which is called a
synod or general counsel? Can they not be so much as expressed without a
synod, nor without a General counsel? How could they have arisen into
controversy if they had not been before expressed? Yea, the light and truth
of them, by other means also then by a synod, and that a general Counsel,
may both be expressed, and the controversies of them repressed too, The
Synodes aid.
as many have bin oftentimes, by the Learned Discoursers writings of the
Fathers.

And what mean they again, by these words: There arises oftentimes in the
Church diverse controversies, which cannot be otherwise expressed, perteining
to the state of the whole Church, than by a general assembly of all the
Pastors of that Church, which is called a Synod or general Council?

If those controversies pertain to the state of the whole Church, why say they,
that they can not be otherwise expressed than by a general assembly of all
the Pastors of that Church? Our Br. intricate speeches.
Are all the Pastors of that Church, where the controversies pertaining to the
whole Church do arise, the whole Church? or do they mean, that a general
assembly of all the pastors of that Church, which Church is called a Synod or
Council, is the whole Church? and are they also the Pastors of the Synod; or
rather Pastors of their particular and several Churches: and as they said
better, before, but members only of the Synod or holy assembly? and so do
they say, this is a Synod or general Counsel? Every general Counsel may be
called a Synod: but every Synod cannot be called a general Counsel. These
things, (me thinks, beit spoken under their correction) might have been, if
not more Learnedly Discoursed: yet more clearly expressed, that we might have
better understood their meaning, and so we might give them (if need be)
further answer.

Also there be diverse cases, wherein several Churches are driven to pray the
aid of the Synod, The learned disc. pa. 111. and 112
where matters can-not be determined among themselves. For this cause the
holy Ghost has ordained these holy assembles, with promise that they being
gathered together, in the name of Christ, he himself will be among them.

In case this our Brethrens platform were in place: we should then have more
than good store of these diverse cases, Bridges.
in every several Church, and might soon be brought into such a doubtful
and pitiful case, that we should be driven to pray the aid not of the
Synod so much, as of any body, if any but God allonely, in so diverse cases
could relieve us. But now, put case, that in diverse cases, the several
Churches are driven to pray the aid of the Synod, The several Churches driven
to pray for aid of the Synod.
where matters cannot be determined among themselves: will the several
Churches be all of them content, with whatsoever that Synod shall determine,
of whom they pray aid?

Disagreements of Synods.
And what if the Synod can not agree among themselves? and some determine
this way, and some that way? or one Synod determine the clean contrary to
another? when shall the cases be fully determined among them? and has it not
been so? I speak not against Synodes or Counselles, general or Provincial,
Christ's presence.
of which there is, and has been in the Church, for determining of diverse
cases and controversies, very needful, and very excellent use and remedy.
The suspicious eue^ts of our Br. Synodes.
How soever Gregory Nazianzene said, that he never saw good effect in any.
But I speak only of the state of them, as our Brethren would have them
ordered, and for that, when every several Church had set up this
Ecclesiastical Government and tetrarchie, that that they have here in this
Learned Discourse prescribed, when we should have diverse cases, and diverse
controversies, diverse ways still arising: It is not their Synodes that could
determine, appease or stop them, if they made them not more diverse and
contentious then before, or raised not diverse controversies and cases more
among them.

The holy Ghost ( I grant,) ordained holy assemblies. And the promise, that
they being gathered together in the name of Christ* he himself will be
among them: The promise of Christ, Mat. 18. He descends to particular
assemblies.
stretches also unto the holy assemblies of Godly Synodes and Councelles. But
did not our Brethren here apply this sentence of our Savior Christ, Mat. 18.
Page 81. Unto the several assemblies and consistories of the Governing Elders?

Yea, that place descends down even to two or three, and that also
wheresoever. And yet may two or three, yea their consistory in their several
Churches or assemblies, by this their own confession, have diverse cases among
them, that (I perceive) all they may be so cumbred withal, that they may be
driven to pray the aid of the Synod, and may not a Synod, yea, a general
counsel disagree, or agree, and not conclude in diverse cases: and grant they
be gathered together in the name of Christ, and that he is among them too:
Howebeit, according to such measure of his grace and knowledge, that perhaps
they may not have all cases revealed unto them, or not agree upon them. And yet
are Synodes and Counselles a very excellent good means, if they be gathered
together in his name indeed, and that it please God to open also those cases
unto them* But now to let us understand further, of whom this Synod shall
consist, and who shall determine these cases and govern the same: they
proceed and say.

With the Synod, the Pastor has authority to determine, concerning the
regiment of the Church. Wherefore we have to inquire, The learned disc. pa.
112. and 113.
of what persons a Synod does consist: for which intent we find in the
history of Acts. 15.6. That when a great controversy arose concerning the
ceremonies of the Law, whether they were to be used, by those Christians that
were converted of the Gentiles: the Apostles and Elders came together to
consider of this matter: and that the people was not excluded, appears by the
twelfth verse, the whole multitude, being persuaded by the arguments alleged
by Peter, held their peace and quietly heard Paul and Barnabas, Authority in
Synodes.
declare what signs and wonders, God had wrought by them amongst the
Gentiles. And least ye should understand the multitude in that place, for
the multitude of the Apostles, it follows in the 22. verse. Then it pleased
the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church to choose certain men etc.

By which scripture we learn, that the Synod^ consists principally of
pastors, Elders, Teachers, and men of Wisdom, Judgment, and gravity, as it
were of necessary regents. For, although the whole multitude came together,
yet the Apostles and Elders came together to inquire, and consider of the
matter in controversy, the multitude heard, and for their better instruction
and modesty, submitted their consent, unto the determination of the Apostles
and Elders. All men's reasons were heard. For there was great disputation, but
the authority of Gods word prevailed, good order was observed. So, after the
matter was thoroughly discussed, by the godly arguments, alleged by Peter and
Barnabas and Paul, the controversy was concluded, by the sentence of James,
to whom that prerogative was granted, not of singular authority, but for
orders sake.

Here are three points touched by our Brethren. First, for the Pastors
authority. Bridges
Secondly, of what persons the Synod consistes, and thirdly, who has the
prerogative therein above all the residue. And first, for authority of the
Pastor, they say: with the Synod, the Pastor has authority to determine, The
Pastors authority with the Synod.
concerning regiment of the Church. They begin here (me thinks, under
correction) very preposterously, with the authority to determine in the
Synod. Whereas more orderly, they might have begun, with the beginning of the
Synod, and who has authority to summon or call the same. By authority of
which summons, they ought to assemble and meet together at time and place
assigned, The superior authority of calling Councelles.
and to direct them an order to proceed by. For, if the several Churches and
Bishops thereof, be (as our Brethren say) all alike equal in the authority of
these things: then has no one among them any authority to prescribe these
things to any other, and much less to many other, or to all the several
Churches and Bishops in a kingdom. The godly and ancient Emperors and Kings,
had the chief parts of this authority in their Dominions, over all Bishops
and Churches, in the old time. The ancient Emperors authority herein.
All the four general Councelles were summoned, and assigned both time and
place, yea and the reverend manner of their proceeding void of frivolous
contentions, by the godly Emperors, Constantinus, Theodosius, Martianus, etc.
Besides diverse provincial counselles.

All which, is here not expressed, but suppressed by our Brethren. And I
marvel what they mean hereby. Determining in Synodes.
Is it to put the Christian Prince out of this authority, and to take and part
it among these tetrarkes, or to give it to some one or few among them, besides
the Prince, the Prince having so fair presidents to show for it, in the
foresaid examples, yea, in the pattern of the old Testament, by Moses, Iosue,
Samuel, David, Solomon, Iosaphat, Josias, etc.

But of this we shall (God willing) anon see further, what they give or leave
to the Prince, when we shall come thereto.

And since that here, we must skip over all the beginning and process of the
synod or council, and come to the determining or ending of it, and the
controversies in it: Let us see, upon whom our Brethren will now bestow this
authority. The Pastor ( say they) has authority to determine. Whom mean
they here by the pastor, any one pastor alone: for that they say the pastor,
not the pastors, or have the pastors only this authority? No (say they) but
with the synod. And has the synod then, the authority of determining with
the pastor? To whom^ the authority ^o determine does belong.
they said before, that in their several consistories, the Elders or
Governors had both the hearing, examining and determining of all matters
pertaining to discipline and government of the congregation, page 84. and the
matter here in hand is also of the authority to determine concerning
regiment of the Church.

But what if the doubtful and diverse cases be of doctrine, and not only of
the Regiment of the church? shall the Elders or Governors that are no Teachers
nor pastors determine then those cases ( as they say here) with the synod the
pastor has authority to determine? whom mean they by this word synod,
which here they do thus distinguish from the pastor, though in this authority
they join the one with the other?

Wherefore ( say they) we have to inquire, of what persons a synod does
consist.

This indeed is the second point here touched, and it is necessary to be
considered. For if the synod should consist of such persons as be pastors:
then they can-not say, the pastor has authority with the synod, the pastors
themselves being the synod, for that were as much as to say, a man has
joint authority with himself.

And did not they their selves confess before, even on the other side of the
leaf, that a general assembly of all the pastors, is called a synod or
general council? is it called so? and is not so? and if it be so, How is not
the assembly of the pastors themselves the synod it self?

But of whom now (if not of the pastors,) do they make a synod to consist?

For which intent ( say they) we find (...) Acts. 15. That when a
controversy arose concerning the ceremonies of the Law, whether they were to
be used, by those Christians that were converted of the Gentiles: the apostles
and the Elders came together to consider of this matter. The assembly of the
Elders. Acts. 15.


Although this coming together of the Apostles and Elders, were not such an
assembly as usually we call a Synod or Council, and as our Brethren also
use the same term, for the assembly or coming together of the Elders of
diverse several Churches: but is spoken of the coming together of the Elders
of the church of Jerusalem: yet I accept of this example, and it is very fit
for the office of the persons, of whom not only the assemblies of several
churches, among themselves, but also of Synodes and Counselles does consist.
Wherein besides the Apostles, is mentioned the coming together of the Elders.

And although in this example, there be a great diversity of the case,
between matter in controversy concerning the regiment of the church and
concerning the use of the Law, Matter of doctrine and of discipline
which is no small point of Doctrine: yet since they bring this controversy
arising for Doctrine, to be an example, for the like determining of the church
regiment: I am content also to admit it.

The Elders Act. 15 were Pastoral.
The Apostles ( say they) and Elders came together to consider of this matter.

True it is. But these Elders ( as we have seen by Caluines own collection
on the same) were pastoral Elders: and therefore the considering of this
matter did properly belong unto them. But, had the people any joint
authority with them in the consideration thereof?

And that the people ( say they) was not excluded, appears by the twelfe
verse, What the multitude did at the assembly.
the whole multitude, being persuaded by the arguments alleged by Peter, held
their peace and quietly heard Paul and Barnabas declare what signs and
wonders God had wrought by them amongst the Gentiles.

Here appears as yet nothing to the present purpose: either to prove of what
persons the Synod consists, or that the synod and the Pastor have joint
authority in determining of the controversy.

Who are meant by the multitude.
And least ( say they) ye should understand the multitude in that place, for
the multitude of the Apostles, it follows in the 22. verse. Then it pleased
the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church to choose certain men etc.

This caveat, that we should not understand the multitude in that place, for
the multitude of the Apostles: is not material. For, although by the name of
the multitude in many places may well be understood the people, and not the
Apostles: yet in that place, why may not both the Elders and the Apostles be
comprehended.

Yea, Peter also, that spoke before, and James that spoke after, The multitudes
dealing. Acts. 15.
and all that were there in presence, except only Paul and Barnabas that
declared those signs and wonders. When as the text says after Peter's oration:
Then all the multitude kept silence, and heard Barnabas and Paul decl^re what
signs and wonders God had wrought by them among the Gentiles. Acts. 15.12.
What is here, but hearing and keeping silence while the other speak? upon
which words says Beza: But understand by the name of the multitude, not the
whole Church, which as yet was not wholly joined to them: Beza in Act. 15.12.
but the whole assembly of the Apostles and of the Elders, as appears above
out of the sixth verse. Whom he distinguishes from the Church, Our Br. flat
contrary to Beza.
verse 4. and annone after verse. 22. So flat contrary herein, these our
Brethren are to Beza. He says, that by the name of the multitude in that
place, the Apostles are comprehended, and not the whole Church or people: and
he commands the reader so to understand the word Multitude, for the
Apostles and Elders: and they say, least ye should understand the multitude
in that place, for the multitude of the Apostles it follows in the 22. verse,
etc. Which very verse also Beza cites to his understanding, and so, they
implie two or three plain contradictions all at once, against Bezaes assertion
and his reasons.

But since Bezaes authority can prevail no further, let it go as our Brethren
here will have it, and let us understand the word Multitude, in that place, not
for the Apostles, but for the people.

that of this? have the people joint authority with the Pastors in determining
of controversies? they say, it follows in the 22. verse. Then it pleased the
Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, to choose certain men. etc.

What is this to the purpose, for the authority of determining the controversy?
Can they gather hereupon, that because afterward, The people dealt not i^ the
determining of the controversy.
the whole Church liked well of the determination, and agreed that those
Letters should be sent, wherein the matter before determined was comprehended
and that to this writing, and sending, and choosing of the me^sengers, they
also gave their assent: that therefore they had joint authority or any interest
in determining of the controversy? If our Brethren think they had, because not
only the Letter is written in all their names, verse 23. The Apostles, the
Elders, and Brethren, unto the Brethren that are at Antiochia, etc. But also
that the decree it self runs jointly in all their names, verse, 28. It
s^e^eth good to the holy Ghost and to us, that we should not lay any more
burden upon you, bes^des these necessary things: To this Beza answers in
23. verse: On these words, and Brethren: saying: The vulgar translation
omitteth the copulative conjunction, Beza in Act. 15.23.
and that naughtily. For the Apo^tle^ and Elder^ are here man festly
distinguished, from the r^st of the assem^^^e, when as notwithstanding the
Epistle is written in the common sentence and name of all, that is to wit, the
whole matter is holden for ratified in the common assembly of the whole church,
after that (...) the decree or determination of Apostles and Elders was passed
before.

Calu. in Act. 15.22 and 23.
Calvin likewise upon these 22. and 23, verses, says: The modesty also of the
common people is gathered by this, because, after they had referred the matter
to the judgment of the Apostles and the rest of the Doctors and Teachers: they
do now also subscribe to their decree. Here Calvin says, the Apostles and
the rest of the Doctors or Teachers, speaking of them whom the text calls
the Elders. So that, here the Elders are not governors which are no teachers,
No such Elders governors and not Teachers as our Br. conceive Acts. 15.
but teaching governors, which had the Judging, decreeing, and determining of
this case in controversy, in which autho^itie the people did not intermedle,
but only did modestly subscribe thereunto. And on the other side ( says
Calvin) the Apostles did show some token of their equity, in that they set
down nothing concerning the common cause of all the godly, without admitting
the people. For assuredly, this tyranny did spring from the pride of the
Pastors, that those things which appertain to the whole Church, are subject
(the people being excluded) to the will (I will not say, to the lust) of a few.

Here he worthily reprooueth the pride and tyranny of the Popish Pastors in
utterly debarring of the people, and yet imposing on the^^ what decrees they
pleased. Which thing (God be praised) it is evident, that we do not, but so
far as this example warranteth, do in like manner admit the people to
understand: our proceeding and decrees in the Synod or Council; The peoples
consent and obedience to the Pastors decrees.
whom also it becomes not to disobey, (except they find the decrees to be
against the word of God) but to submit themselves in all modesty unto the
authority of the decrees, that the Pastors ( for so again he calls the
Elders, whom before he called Doctors or teachers) shall have determined about
any controversies, so far as concerns the common cause of all the Godly.
But what do our Brethren gather hereupon?

By which Scripture ( say they) we learn, that the synod consists
principally of Pastors, Elders, teachers, and men of wisdom, judgment and
gravity, Of whom our Br. make the Synod to consist Four kind of persons,
Pastors, Elders, Teachers, men of wisdom. etc.
as it were of necessity regents.

They are now come to the point, whereof they said before, that they had to
inquire, of what persons a synod does consist. And here they make it to
consist of four kinds of persons, Pastors, Elders, Teachers, and men of
Wisdom, Judgment and gravity.

By Pastors, we have seen already what they mean, and also by Teachers. But
what mean they here by these Elder^ that are placed after Pastors and before
teachers? Whether the Elders not teaching, Necessari^ Regents.
whom they called Governors, are placed in he third place of the Tetrarchie;
that, they tell not. But if they mean them by the name of Elders, Whom they
mean here by Elders.
whereas Calvin by Elders understands Pastors and teachers: then are they
very pregnaunt Scholars, that by this Scripture can learn that, which this
scripture ( even by Caluines teaching) does not teach them.

But where are our Deacons here become? what are they shrunk in the wetting?
or are they excluded out of the Synod, Deacons mentioned in the Synod.
which before made up the full tetrarchie? or are they included in this last
indefinite sort, men of wisdom, Judgment and gravity? But these are not
named as any officers at all, but generally they are called men: and therefore,
more likely, that by this name of men, they mean the people or the whole
multitude, which ( they said before,) was not excluded.

But though these men have no special office: yet are they here adorned with
three excellent qualities, Wisdom, Judgment, and gravity, Who are meant by
the men of Wisdom, Judgment, and gravity
wherein commonly the common people of the whole multitude does not excel,
except some rare and odd persons among them, namely, in the diverse cases and
controversies of doctrine: or be-it but in these controversies of
Ecclesiastical Regiment, and such like. Yea, would to God the Pastors, Elders
and Teachers, not only such as are for the most part, but also (besides that I
wish unto my self) wo^ld God that even such as these our Brethren, that have
compiled this Learned discourse of Ecclesiastical Government, were so well
furnished in these three points, as they, and we all should be. For (I hope)
when they say thus in general, and even of wisdom, Judgment and gravity,
that they do not so mean the people, that they separate these three virtues,
from the Pastors and teachers.

But how now shall the synod consist of all these four sorts of persons,
whether they exclude Deacons or include them? forsooth say they, Necessary
Regents in the Synod.
the Synod shall consist of these, as it were of necessary regentes.

What, and shall all these four sorts be Regents? and necessary regents, the
whole multitude, people and all? And that in the authority of determining the
diverse cases of the Churches regiment, and the diverse controversies of
religion? For, such matters were handled in the assembly holden at Jerusalem.
Acts 15. But both Calvin and Beza have debarred them of this: yea, our
Brethren (when it comes to the pinch,) eat this word again, and conclude
clean contrary, saying:

For although the whole multitude came together, yet the apostles and Elders
came together, The order of the Synod.
to inquire and consider of the matter in controversy.

A ha, (Brethren) go to then, they came not together all, but here are two
kinds and ends of their coming together. Wherefore the Pastors, wherefore the
whole multitude came together.


The apostles and Elders came together to inquire, and consider of the matter
in controversy.

What, and no further?

Yes, and to give the determination of the same.

Yea forsooth, this is indeed a Councel-like and authentical coming together,
whereupon a Synod does consist. But wherefore then came the multitude together?

The multitude heard, and for their better instruction and modesty, submitted
their consent unto the determination of the Apostles and Elders.

And was this then all that the multitude had to do herein? what is this to
the authority of determining? nay it reaches not here so far by this their
limitaiion, as to the authority of inquiring or considering of the
controversies. But, since it is said before, that, with the Synod, the Pastor
has authority to determine concerning regiment of the Church: How our Br.
confute themselves.
and the people or multitude have nothing to do herein, being not Pastors,
Elders nor teachers: it plainly follows, that the people or multitude are
none of those persons, of whom a Synod does consist. Which is the thing that
our Brethren here would prove, and yet in discussing the matter, clean
confute it self.

But they say, all men's reasons are heard.

The ^earing of all men's reasons.
And good reason too, (say I) that all their reasons should be heard, that
spoke and reasoned. But who were they? any that came, not to determine, nor yet
to consider, nor so much as to inquire of the matter; but only to hear to
submit their consent? is their necessary regencie come down to this
submission?

Well say they, there was great disputation.

And who (say I) disputed? Calvin, on these words: and when there was great
disputation, The disputation. Calvin.
answers* though there were choice made of grave men, and such as were
teachers of the Church, yet could they not by and by agree.

Gods word prevailed Good order observed. The controversy concluded by James
his sentence.
But ( say they) the authority of Gods word prevailed.

And we grant, so it ought always to do.

Good order ( say they) was observed.

So would it not (I fear) if the orders that our Brethren would have, were
in practice.

So (say they) after the matter was thoroughly discussed, by the Godly
arguments, alleged by Peter, and Barnabas and Paul, the controversy was
concluded, by the sentence of James. The authority of determining.
And were any of these discussers of the matter, such Elders as withal were
not teachers? but how was this done, that they conclude here, the controversy
was concluded by the sentence of James?

They said before, with the Synod the Pastor has authority to determine.
For, although it be good reason, that the Pastor should not determine without
the Synod, yet, by their proouing hereof by this example, James is made the
Pastor in this Counsel, How the Synod joins with the Bishop or chief
Pastor in the determining.
and so by their own consequence, that a Pastor and a Bishop are all o^e.
James is also made the Bishop, and the controversy being concluded, after all
their discussing, by his sentence, the sentence being the final, resolute, and
judicial, determination, he has authority therein above them all, and then
of consequence, though the Synod join with him in the consent of the matter,
yet joins it not with him in the authority of determining, or judicial
denouncing the final determination of it. But to stop this, they say, to
whom that prerogative was granted, The bishops prerogative and singular
authority in determining.
not of singular authority, but for order sake. Ergo, he had herein a
prerogative, and if a prerogative, then it was above all the residue, and if
above all the residue, then was it singular in him.

But not ( say they) of singular authority.

If of any authority at all (as they confessed before, the Pastor has
authority) then of singular authority, else, no prerogative.

Yea, but (say they) that prerogative was granted to him.

And I grant that also, for had it not been granted him, How the Bishop has
his prerogative.
it had not been authority, but usurpation, and therefore the grant
confirms the authority.

Yea, but (say they) it was granted but for orders sake.

All the better (say I) that it is for orders sake, and even therefore, How the
prerogative was granted.
and go no further, for all the Pastors to be equal in authority, is to bring
all Synodes and Counselles, and all cases and controversies arising in them, or
to be determined by them, both in matter of Doctrine, and in the regiment of
the Church, into all disorder and confusion, The good order and disorder of
Synodes.
which our Brethren beginning now a little better to perceive, and to yield yet
somewhat at least heereunto, they are driven at length to confess and say: The
learned disc. pa. 113.114. and 115.
And this place does admonish us to entreat somewhat of the preeminence of one
Elder or Pastor above the rest. We confess, that in every assembly or
company, some one of necessity must have this prerogative, to order and
dispose the same with reason, or else great confusion is like to follow. But
this government is only of order, and not of authority, as to propound
matters to be decided, to gather the reasons and consent of the rest, and so to
conclude, etc. as we see in this place James did, of whom also we read, that
he had this preeminence, The preeminance of one.
Acts 21.18. etc. and we may gather the same, Galath. 2.9.12. not that James
had greater authority in his Apostleship, than Peter, or Paul, or John, or any
other of the Apostles, but because he was chosen of the rest to have
prerogative of order, which some one must have in every assembly, and such was
the prerogative at the first, which was granted sometime to the Bishop of
Rome, and sometime to some other Bishops, to be President or Prolocutor in the
general Counselles, being chosen thereto for the time, by consent of the
rest, as the Prolocutor is chosen in our Conuocations, that are called with
Parliaments. Therefore, as it were an absurd thing for our Prolocutor in our
Convocation, to take upon him to be a controller of the whole Synod, and to
challenge that office to him and to his heirs for ever: so unreasonable is the
authority that the Pope claymeth over general Counselles. One therefore is to
be chosen by consent, to be as it were the Prolocutor or moderator of order,
but not authority in every assembly, whose prerogative must so be tempered,
that in all things tyranny be avoided, which we see by experience easily
creeps in upon proud natures, to whom, if you grant an inch, they will be
ready to take an ell, according to the proverb.

Bridges
Concerning the preeminence of one Elder or Pastor above the rest, we have
sufficiently seen already at large the proof thereof, against the proves
that our Breethren have before alleged, Our Brethrens confession of one
Pastors preemine^ce above the rest.
for Pastors to have no superiority over their fellow Pastors, but be all of
equal dignitienitie and authority, Page 23. etc.

Yet hee^e now at length in their treatise of the Synod, they say this place,
meaning Acts 15. does admonish them to entreat somewhat of one Elder or
Pastor above the rest. Thanks be to God, that they will yet acknowledge, be it
but this place, only, to admonish them of it. And yet, if they search the
Scripture somewhat further, they shall find more places than this, to admonish
them of this preeminence, if they will take admonishment by them, as, not only
that (which their selves have here noted) in Peter and John, besides James,
Galath. 2. but also in the authority above other Pastors, that Saint Paul
gives to Timothy and to Titus, and Saint John to the Angels of the seven
Asian Churches. But to leave these and other places, being before touched:
since now they are content to take admonition only of this place, Acts 15. to
entreat ( as they term it) somewhat of the preeminence of one Elder or
Pastor above the rest: let us hear what this somewhat amounts unto.

We confess ( say they) that in every assembly or company, some one of
necessity must have this prerogative, What preeminence it was.
to order and dispose the same with reason, or else great confusion is like to
follow.

This is a good confession and a pretty somewhat to begin withal: first, that
among all the other assembled, The points contained in our Brethrens confession
of preeminence.
a prerogative above the rest, belongs not to some many, or to some few, but
allonely to some one.

Secondly, that this prerogative of some one above the rest, is not to be in
some assemblyes, as in the assemblies of Synodes and Counsels only, but in
every assembly or company. 1 One over the rest.

2 In every assembly.

3 It must be so of necessity.

4 To order and to dispose the company.




Thirdly, that it is not voluntary in every assembly or company, neither
yet of decency or conueniencie only, but it must be so, and that of plain
necessity.

Fourthly, that this preeminence and prerogative of some one in every assembly
or company, stretches not only to declare, to move, to persuade, to examine,
to discuss and to determine, but also to order and dispose the assembly or
company, that is, not only to set them in their places, but to direct and
appoint unto them, how to demean themselves in all their actions.

Yea, but (say they) to order and dispose the same with reason.

God forbid else (say I) for it were unreasonable to ouerrule in any thing
against reason, Reason, the limitation of the disposing.
which were with more reason to be called disordering and dissoluing, then
ordering and disposing, if without reason.

Well then (say they) all this must needs be confessed, or else great
confusion is like to follow. Confusion if it be not thus.


And is this then our Brethrens free confession? though in very good reason, (
if they will confess the truth) they mu^t of necessity confess no less,
though they will confess no more: and how then did they say before (speaking
of the name of Bishops) that it is never used in the Scriptures, for such
Bishops, as claim and exercise dominion over whole regions, and all the
Pastors of the same, but only for those that be Pastors of every several
Congregation, How contrary this confession is to our Brethrens former
assertions.
having no superiority over their fellow Pastors, but be all of equal
dignity and authority? page 22, 23. for (to remitte the defense of their
superiority over whole regions, to the proves before alleged) how have not
our Brethren abused so many places in the Scripture, as they cite heereto in
this their Learned Discourse, from the foresaid 23. page, till the 29.
concluding thus: these testimonies of Scripture directly condemn the
authority of one Pastor above another? likewise, page. 80. that the Ministers
are equal among themselves. May they not be assembled and joined in a
company among themselves? and is there no assemblyes or companyes of Pastors,
The preeminence restrained.
but only Synodes or Counselles? Is there not some daily standing and
continual assemblies and companies of Pastors, as in Colleges, and in
Cathedral and collegiate Churches? or are these no longer to be called a
company, then they company in one place together? The consequence of our
Brethrens confession.
And how then is there not a daily, standing, and continuing dignity and
superiority of this preeminence and prerogative, in some one Pastor over all
the rest of his fellow Pastors, and so, not all of equal dignity and
authority? yea, his continuing this prerogative ( as our Brethren here
confess) must needs be, or else take away this standing and continuing
prerogative or preeminence of some one, from among those companies of the
Pastors, such as are, (besides the Prouosts, Wardens, Presidents, and masters
of Colleges) the Bishops in their Cathedral Churches, and the Deanes in their
Chapters: and quite disorder, yea, clean dissolve all those companies, whereby
great confusion is like to follow ( as they say) or rather, to use their former
words, it must needs follow of necessity: and who are the authors of this so
great confusion?

Now, when they have made this free confession, for a good beginning, Our
Brethren beginning to revoke their former confession.
and that we should look for their like proceeding, and so might hope that we
should soon come, (for effect of matter, though we differed in terms) to
some more effectual agreement in these controversies: they suddenly start
back after their former manner, and as though they were afraid, that they had
already confessed somewhat too much, they begin (with restraints and
limitations) to pinch, and in effect to deny that, which they have before
confessed. But this preeminence ( say they) is only of order, What they mean
by preeminence of order.
and not of authority.

What mean they here by this, that it is of order, and only of order? for,
we would not have it, though they would offer it, to be a preeminence of
disorder. They said before, that it was to order and dispose the same, to
wit, the assembly or company. Is this, only to set them in their seats,
rows and fourmes, one before or above, another behind or beneath, and
themselves highest? or do they mean, by this preeminence of order, that he
has a dignity above all other in the company? for, How there is no
preeminence of order in the pastoral ministry. The superiority of
jurisdiction in the authority of dignity.
I think not, that they mean here, the common distinction, of the power of
order, and power of jurisdiction, which were to give them more than we strive
for, or then we grant to any Bishop or Archbishop, who are distinguished by no
preeminence of order, but are all of one and the same order of the presbytery,
priesthood or pastoral Eldership, even with the poorest and simplest Pastor in
the Church. Howbeit, in the authority of dignity, even in the same order of
the Pastorship, they have not equal jurisdiction. And therefore, except that
warily we understand these words, our Brethren in seeking this starting-hole,
to shun the Bishops lawful preeminence of authority, Preminence of order.
do unawares give more indeed, in giving some one above the rest a preeminence
of order, than if they said in plain words, How our Brethren denying the
less, con^esse the greater.
that they gave him a preeminence of authority: and so, strayning a gnatte,
swallow a camel. And yet, how has not this some one above the rest,
preeminence of authority: if his preeminence be authorized? yea, what lawful
preeminence can it be, if it be not of authority, and of good authority too?

But now, to specify these their doubtful speeches, they add these
instances: as to propound matters to be decided, to gather the reasons and
consent of the rest, and so to conclude, and is this all? or is the ordering
and disposing of the assembly before mentioned, either to be added unto these,
or contained in these? but take these, or any other, wherein this some one
Pastor has preeminence above the rest, do not these argue a greater authority
to do these things, then any other in the company have? if we should consider
but these three things, as first, to propound matters to be decided, if it
perteyneth, and that of necessity, to the prerogative of some one, and so, it
be not lawful to every one, although he be one of the Synod, assembly or
company: how then can any other orderly besides him, or without his leave or
assignement thereunto, propound any cases or controversies, either of the
doubts of doctrine, or regiment of the Church, to be decided? is not this a
very great authority? neither is it a mean authority, to gather the reasons
and consent of the rest, which some Emperors themselves have done in general
Counsels. Albeit, Bezaes words in his Confess. cap. 5. artic. 29. seem to give
more, not only in gathering the company together, so that he must have
authority before the Synod begin, but also in that he says, Collegas mittat in
suffragia, he should send his colleagues, to the giving or taking of the
voices, and not himself to do it, as the scrutators do.

But specially this third point, that his preeminence reaches also to
conclude, which comprehends the determining, judging, and ending of the
matter. And all this authority, or as they call it, preeminence and
prerogative, they confirm by this present example: as we see ( say they) in
this place James did. The example of James.
And not only in this place but they confirm it further, saying: of whom
also we read, that he had this preeminene, Acts 21.18. etc. and we may
gather the same Galath. 2.9.12.

All this is very true (as we have seen before) and withal, Our Brethre^s
proo^ of a continuing preeminence.
it clearly proves, that James having still this preeminence, at all the
times mentioned in all these places, his preeminence endured not only the time
of a Synod, and so ceased, but was permanent in him, whether they had any
Synod, James his continuing preemine^ce
or had none. For, what mention of any Synod at Jerusalem is there at that
time, when as Saint Paul says, Gal. 2. ver. 9. James with Cephas and John
gave him their hands? which (as Calvin upon the 1. verse of the same Chapter,
Gal. 2. says) was at Paul's second coming to Jerusalem, mentioned Acts 11.
verse 30. rather than at the assembly. At the time when Paul acknowledged
James his preeminence, there was no Synod called. Caluinus in Gal. 1.
Acts 15. Scarcely can any man avouch for certeintie ( says he) whether he
understands that voyage whereof Luke makes mention, Acts 15.2. yea rather,
the context of the history leads us unto the contrary part: for, it is
there recorded, that Paul came to Jerusalem four times: of his first coming,
we have already spoken, ( he means Gal. 1. verse 18. and 19. where Calvin
also said of him, Qui Ecclesiae Hierosolymitanae praefuerit, which governed the
Church at Jerusalem.) His second coming was, when as he with Barnabas carried
the alms collected in the Greek and Asian Churches, according as is contained
in the end of the twelfth Chapter ( where Luke speaks of Barnabas and Paul's
return from Jerusalem to Antiochia) whereof, that I should understand this
present place, many reasons move me, for otherwise, it would of necessity be,
that either the one or the other, ( he means Luke or Paul) should allege a
falsehood, No Synod holden at Jerusalem, when James notwithstanding continued
his preeminence.
etc. So that, at neither of these two times, there was any Synod holden at
Jerusalem, and yet at both those times, James continued in this preeminence,
who still so continuing till this assembly, Acts 15. and after also, till the
time here mentioned, Acts 21. verse 18. where says Saint Luke ( speaking of
Paul's coming to Jerusalem the fourth time,) And on the morrow, Paul went
with us unto James, and all the Elders were present. Here was an assembly
also, or company of Elders, albeit, not any Synodall assembly, but he
speaks of the Elders only of the Church of Jerusalem, The definition of a
Synod. D^naeus in Christ. Isagog. part. 3. lib. 3. cap. 35.
whereas, a Synod ( as Danaeus defines it, lib. 3. christ. Isag. cap. 35.) is
a lawful and holy assembly of christian men, coming together from out of
diverse churches and regions, etc.

Whereby it is manifest, that this assembly, or company of these Elders at
Jerusalem, thus still continuing, and Saint James all the while, being the
Ruler and Ecclesiastical Governor of that Church: this is but a mere fancy
of our Brethren, wherewith they beguile themselves and others, that James had,
and some one likewise must of necessity have this preeminence, during only the
time of a Synod: and the Synod dissolved, The argument following on these
examples.
the preeminence ceasseth: whereas, clean contrary, they should rather reason
thus: the assembly or company of the Pastors in Jerusalem, did still
continue: but there must be some one of necessity that must have the
prerogative or preeminence above the rest in every assembly or company of
Pastors: therefore, there was some one at Jerusalem, whose preeminence and
prerogative above the rest, did still continue, which being well considered,
Continuing preeminence.
does clean ouer^hrow all that our Brethren have said before, and do say
here, for the equality, and against the superiority, among the Pastors.

When they have now confessed this preeminence of some one Pastor, and this
example of James for proof of the same, they make exception yet again, and
say: Not that James had greater authority in his Apostleship, then Peter, or
Paul, or John, or any other of the Apostles: The superiority of one among the
Apostls, was not in respect of the Apostleship.
and we also do readily yield heereto, in this respect of their office or
function of the Apostleship. But because ( say they) he was chosen of the rest,
to have prerogative of order, which some one must have in every assembly.

And this we accept also: but this prerogative of order, could not, but be a
superior dignity in the same order: and also, there was an ordinary
assembly, or company of pastoral Elders abiding at Jerusalem, The
prerogative of order, contains a superiority of dignity.
as (besides the places that we have seen already) appears further, Acts
1. verse 14. Acts 2. verse 46. Acts 4. verse 23. and 32. Acts 5. verse. 12.
and 13. Acts 6. verse 2. Acts 8. verse 14. Acts 9. verse 26.27. and 28.
Acts 11. verse 12.18. and 22. Acts 12. verse 17. The ordinary assembly in
Jerusalem.
As for the 13. and 14. Chapters following, Luke shows, that the like
standing assembly of Elders, whom he calls Prophets and Teachers, was also
at Antiochia, The like standing assembly at Antiochia.
Acts 13. verse 1. and Acts 14. verse 27. and 28, and so be descends to the
15. Chapter, expressing the assembly at Jerusalem, which our Brethren call a
Synod, neither do we disallow their so calling of it.

Now then, if this prerogative of some one above the rest, must be in every
assembly: and every congregation is an assembly, besides a Synod, and some
Congregations may be of more Pastors than one, as our Brethren would have the
most to be at least of two, The ordinary assembly or company of many Pastors
in some churches.
and many are already of many, as Cathedral Churches and Colleges. And our
Brethren allege for the example of many Pastors in one Church, Saint Paul's
calling for the Elders of Ephesus to Miletum, which ( they say) were the
Pastors of Ephesus, page 23. and thereto, page 24. they allege also Saint
Paul's salutation, Philip. 1. verse 1. how then follows it not, that either
we must dissolve and disperse all these standing assemblies and companies of mo
Pastors than one, in one Church or Congregation, except only in Synodes, The
consequence of our Brethre^s grant
or else that we must of necessity admit (by admitting that one must have the
preeminence and prerogative of order above the rest, in every assembly of
Pastors) a standing and continuing inequality of dignity in the Pastors?

And such ( say they) was the prerogative at the first, which was granted
sometime to the Bishop of Rome, and sometime to other Bishops, to be president
or prolocutor in the general Counsels, being chosen thereunto for the time, by
consent of the rest, as the Prolocutor is chosen in our Conuocations, The
Presidents and Prolocutors.
that are called with Parliaments.

This also (be it spoken with their reverence) is not altogether true,
concerning Synodall assemblyes, or general or provincial Counsels. For
although there be an other standing and continuing preeminence of order (
understanding order for dignity and authority) of some one Pastor in a
Church, The Presidents of the Counsels.
City, Diocese, or Province, above other Pastors, which preeminence is
Episcopal, or Archiepiscopall, as we have before at large most clearly
proved, and which is in deed our far greater controversy: yet
notwithstanding, to speak now only of Synodes and Counsels, where Bishops and
Pastors of diverse Churches are assembled to determine controversies, he that
was President of the Counsel, was not such an one, as was chosen thereunto for
the time, by consent of the rest, as the Prolocutor is chosen in our
Conuocations, The Prolocutor calls not the Counsel.
that are called with Parliaments, since our Prolocutor, or chief speaker in
our name, ( for so the word imports) both he and all the residue, are called
together by an higher Ecclesiastical Ordinary, as by our Bishops in their
Dioceses, and they by our Archbishop in his province: and he is appointed so to
summon and call us all together, at time and place assigned by our Sovereign,
who being thus assembled, then indeed we chose our Prolocutor, as the Laity
chose their speaker, to moderate our actions in our Synodall assemblyes, and to
do (as is aforesaid) in the Counsel, etc. Howbeit, this debarreth not, but
that any one man in the Synod or Counsel, as he has an other peculiar
charge, so he may have an other peculiar prerogative and preeminence, The
several superiorities of Bishops and Archbyshops.
in his several Church, City, Diocese, or province, by virtue whereof, the
Bishop may assemble a Synod of the several Pastors in his Diocese, and an
Archbishop, of the several Bishops and Pastors in his province, as it was
before the Emperors ( having many Christian Provinces under them) became the
open professors of Christianity. The superiority to call the assemblies, was
before the assemblies were made.
For, how were the Synodes and Counsels then called, but by some one among
them, that had a continuing and standing preeminence above the rest, before the
calling of those Synodes and Counsels, and much more before the assembling of
them.

But now, when as there was one Sovereign Prince or Emperor Christian, over
all, or the most of these Christian Provinces, the which was publicly
professed first in so high an estate, by Constantine the great, The supremacy
of the Christian Princes over Counselles.
by whom, Counsels began to be more general: then the Prince having a
general charge, and highest sovereignty over all his Provinces, both
summoneth the General, and sometimes the Provincial, to designing the time
and place of their assembly, and appoynteth them such a President, as he
thought meet, if we may call the President and the Prolocutor, all one.

The Princes supremacy.
Upon which point I will not stand, although, I think herein also, might be
a great difference. Even as we see in the Parliament, the Speaker in the Lower
house, and the Lord Chance^ our in the Higher, Difference of President and
Prolocutor.
neither of them may so properly, as may the Prince, he called the President.
Although (I grant) we may well call them Praesidents under the Prince. And so,
in the first general Nicene Council, Constantinus sat himself, How the
Emperors sat in the Councils.
though not as taking upon him any Ecclesiastical authority, in the debating
or determining; yet as chief Ruler, Moderator and President, to ouer-see and
govern their actions, to ratify and establish their Decrees. The Emperors
grant of the Presidentship in the Cou^cils.


And thus (I grant) this prerogative was granted sometimes to the Bishops to
be President, or (if our Brethren will have it to be all one) to be Prolocutor
in the general Councils: but this was granted not by the Council, but by the
Emperor, which he granted of his own prerogative and pre-eminence, whether
the rest of the Bishops and Pastors consented yea or no, thereunto: or choose
some one among themselves and in their names, whom they might more properly
call their Prolocutor.

And for the proof hereof, both for general Councills and Synodes
provincial; to satisfy our Brethren: Beza in his Confession cap 5. art. 12.
says; Beza in cons. Christ. cap. 5. art. 12.
All things ought to be done well and orderly in the Church of God, and
therefore Councils ought also to be called lawfully. The chief office of the
Christian Magistrate.
But it is evident, that it is the chief office of the Magistrate, to preserve
the tranquillity of the Church. If therefore, there be any Christian
Monarch, this burden lies on him, so often as present necessity does
require, even as also in the ancient Church, it was done without any
controversy, until the ambitious Patriarchs, and chiefly the Patriarch of
Rome and Constantinople, disturbed all the Policy. But if (as we now see it)
there be many Princes (...), that have government within themselves, or of
their own, it is their office to join themselves together, with their
chiefest endeavor unto this matter, being so godly and so holy.

And again in the 15. Article: As in the old time, the universal Synodes
were gathered together, Beza ibid. art. 15.
by the commandment of the Emperor alone, before the Bishop of Rome cast down
the very Crown of the Empire under his feet: so likewise no man doubts,
The ancient authority of the Emperor over the Cou^cil.
but that either the Emperors themselves, or else they whom it pleased them to
choose, had the government of demanding and collecting the Suffragies (or
vows), as it may appear out of the Acts of the old Synodes. For what does
so much become the fosterers of the Church, as to interpose their authority,
that God may be worshipped in peace and tranquillity. Bezaes grant to Chr.
Princes more than our Br. (...).


Whereby we see, that Beza grants not this, where godly Christian Princes
are, unto the Synod or Council, to choose by their consent a President,
Archb. superiority
to have the pre-eminence of ordering and disposing of the same: but says it
pertains either to the Prince himself, or to such as it shall please him to
choose and set over them.

And as he says thus for general Councils, so in the 22. Article he says
also, for National or Provincial. What in the old time was ordained
concerning the gathering together Provincial Synodes of (or by) the
Metropolitanes, Bezaes grant to Metropolitanes over Provincial and national
c^unsels.
does abundantly appear out of the old Canons. Neither yet are we those,
which if the ruins of the Church were repaired, would think either this, or
any other not unlike order to be refused. But here we require two things in
principal, that is to say, that no tyranny be again brought into the
Church, as though the holy Ghost were tied to any certain Seat or Person;
and then that al things be referred to aedifying, the old Canons being
revoked (or called again) unto this end.

These words of Beza are worth the weighing, which not only show that the
provincial Synodes were in the old time called together by the Metropolitanes
or Archbishops: Bezaes allowance of Archbishops: and the conditions thereof to
be revoked or retai^ed.
which implies, that then there were such Metropolitanes or Archbishops, in
the Church, in that old time thereof; and that by the old Churches Canons,
they had Canonical authority hereunto: and so, there was both a standing and
continuing pre-eminence of authority in some one Bishop above the pastors in a
Diocese, and also of some one Archbishop above the Bishops in a province, (
which is all clean contrary to these our Learned Brethrens premises:) but
also, and that which is more to be marked of our Brethren, than all this
comes unto: that Beza himself (upon certain conditions) both allows of all this, and of the bringing the same again into the Church, and then much more
of retaining it. Yea, his conditions being granted, he speaks not only in
his own name, but in all ours, (and I hope in all our Brethrens too) that we
are not the men, that would or should so much as think, If Archb. were simply
forbid, no conditions would help.
those old orders and Canons, for the Metropolitanes or Archbishops
authority, to call provincial Synodes to be refused. In which words he does
plainly allow their authority to be in it self good and lawful. Which if
it were not, but simply, unlawful, all the conditions in the world could not
make it lawful: there is no agreement betwixt light and darkness, Archb.
lawful by Bezaes confession.
Christ and Beliall, no conuention, no conditioning nor indenting, and
therefore, in admitting the Metropolitanes authority upon condition, it is as
much (before the conditions be propounded,) as to grant, that in the own
nature thereof, (and but upon the contrary to those conditions) it is not
unlawful.

Bezaes conditions of allowing Archb.
Let us see therefore what are Bezaes conditions.

If the ruins of the Church ( says he) may be repaired (or renewed.)

This (being rightly understood) is a very fair condition, Conditions to the
Archb.
and we gladly accept thereof. Hoping that all the substantial parts of the
ruins, either are repaired among us, or might have been long ere this (with
the good pleasure of God) if our Brethren themselves had not more hindered the
repayring of the ruins thereof, than our adversaries that decayed it, 1
Condition of reparing the Churches ruins.
were able to do. Yea, let our Brethren join with us on this condition, and
then we trust in God, it shall the sooner and easilier be performed.

Howbeit, because the condition is yet so uncertain, How this condition is no
sufficient debar against the office of Archb.
that a good and lawful thing should not be refused upon such general words,
as the repayring the ruins of the Church: for so, they might still pretend,
that one thing or another were in decay, and thereupon still refuse to retain
this old order, which were a mere mocker^e: nor one good and lawefull thing is
to be refused, for the decay of an other, except the same also be decayed, and
so be refused till it be repaired: Beza therefore (seeing the inualiditie of
this, as yet too general a condition) draws nearer to the special points,
that he requires in this condition, for the admittance of this old order and
Canons, for the authority of Metropolitanes.

But here ( says he) we require chiefly two things, that is to wit, that no
tyranny be again brought into the Church, etc. 2 Condition that no tyranny
be brought into the Church.


This condition with all our hearts we again like of, and detest all
tyranny both in Metropolitanes, and in all other: but as Beza in this
condition, does again acquit the Metropolitanes dignity in it self, to be
no tyranny, for else, to say he thinks it not to be refused, so that no
tyranny be brought in, The accepting Archb. with this condition proves that
the office is not tyrannical.
if he think the dignity it self to be tyranny, is but again another
mockery and elusion: and then, thinking that of it self it is no tyranny; it
is again no sufficient stoppage against the interest of a right, for the
incroching of a wrong. Some will abuse the Pastors, Presbyters, or priests,
office, yea, it has been most blasphemously abused by the Papists. and the
Princes office also by turning it into tyranny. And yet we must not
thereuppon, except simply against the princes and the priests offices and
lawful authorities. The tyrannical abuse of the Pastors offic.
And although the Metropolitanes dignity and office were but an order of men:
yet since Beza approues it in it self, for a lawful dignity and office in
the Church: yea, we have the practice of it approved, even from and in the
Apostles times: therefore the ground of the argument is all one in all
lawefull vocations, authorities, The ground of the Metropolitanes is of God.
powers and dignities, omnis potestas est a Deo. And therefore, remove or
debar the tyranny a Gods name, but do not under pretense of tyranny,
remove or debar the office.

But yet Beza very well therein, least he should again seem to give us the
slip, with exception of the general name in the word tyranny: does
particularize this tyranny unto us.

Metropolitanes allowed:
As though ( says he) the holy Ghost were tied to any certain Senate or
person.

The tyra^nie in Metropolitanes that Beza excepteth against.
Indeed this was a foul and most dangerous tyranny, not only oppressing
the body, but intangling the conscience, and an injury to the holy Ghost.
Under which pretense the Pope abused all Princes and Churches. But the
Bishops and Metropolitanes authority in our Church (God be praised) neither
claims, The tying of the holy Ghost to a or person.
nor uses, nor admits, any such tyranny, nor any other tyranny, that
any can prove to be indeed tyranny. As for this foul and erroneous tyranny,
we utterly with Beza and our Brethren, renounce and accurse it. And therefore,
for any thing in this exception, we may retain our Metropolitanes with good
conscience.

Bezaes 3. condition of all things referred to edification.
But there is yet another condition behind: And then ( says Beza) that all
things be referred to edifying.

If he mean all things that can by reason of this dignity, he says well. For
it is not meet to burden this dignity and the officers therein, with other
things, and much less with all things, and therefore to refuse them, if all
things be not referred to edifying. This again proves that Metropolitanes
and edification may be joined.
But then as before, we may hereby also see, that this office or dignity it
self, is no hinderance to edification. So that, if there be any hinderaunce
to edification, it comes rather of this fault, that all things be not
referred thereunto.

But what is this to the office or dignity it self of the Metropolitan? For,
if it can by no means be referred to edification, then how can Beza say, he is
not the man that does refuse it, so it be referred to edification? Is not this
plain, that he means, there is a good use of it, which may very well be
referred to edification? Our Br. are not the me^ tha^ Beza says, he and his
are in acknowledging Met^opolitanes.
And so do we accept it, and not otherwise. And if our Brethren will be the
men, that Beza here says he and his are; let them then acknowledge with him at
length, that they are not the men that (on these conditions) do think the old
Canons, for gathering Synodes together by Metropolitanes, is an order to be
refused. If now they dare say thus with Beza, for their parts; we for ours,
will join with them, in these conditions.

Danaeus in Christ. Isag 3. part. lib. 3. cap. ^8.
And to continue them the more, in this opinion of Beza; let them turn also to
that, which Danaeus likewise has on the same matter, in the third part, and 3.
book of his Christian Introduction, the 38. chapter. Wherein (after he has
spoken of the calling of general Councills, The calling of Prouincial Councils
perteined to Metropolitan B.
principally apperteining unto Princes, descending to Provincial, he says.

But if a Provincial Council only be to be called together: in the old
time that matter and care perteined only unto Bishops, that were
Metropolitanes, and not unto the Magistrates themselves, although they were
godly. The cause why the Fr. refo^med Churches kept not the old order.
At this day, because in the reformed Churches, there are no Metropolitanes,
especially in the French Churches: that cure pertains to all the Ministers
of the Word of God, in every of the Provinces, who (...) letter^ ought to
^dmo^ish and stir up one an other; The tempering this authority.
except that by the consent of the brethren, that care of calling together a
synod, be specially committed to any man of the Church of that region or
province. Here he again tells, what was the ancient authority o^
Metropolitanes or Archbishops.

And although he do set down another order among the Pastors ( howbeit, not to
be allowed neither, but by the godly Magistrate, if there be any such (...):)
How Danaeus allows or disalloweth herein either the civil Magistrate or
Metropolitan.
yet the reason that he allows this unto the Pastors (...), is not that he
difalloweth the authority herein of a Metropolitan Bishop over them: but that
(he says) there are none such in the reformed Churches ( meaning in their
countries) and therefore he restrayneth his words, especially to France where
they are all popish Bishops and as yet adversaries to the Gospel. And in such
case, he refuses also even the chief Magistrate, being ( as he says)
unfaithful, a wolf and persecutor of the Church, that his commandment is
not to be expected, no nor yet their purpose made known unto him, of a
general Counsel to be holden among them, least he seel^e to destroy them. So
that, he refuses neither the Princes, nor the Metropolitan Bishops
authority, if the persons be faithful. Yea, in ^^eede and for want of the^,
he says, that this pre-eminence of one may be committed to some other person.

The conclusion that our Brethren infer: Therefore as it were an absurd thing
for our prolocutor in our convocation, Our Brethr. conclusions.
to take upon him to be a controller of the whole Synod, and to challenge that
office to him and to his heirs for ever: so unreasonable is the authority
that the Pope claims over general Counselles: All this conclusion we freely
confess, and also in part the other conclusion that follows.

One therefore is to be chosen by consent, to be as it were the prolocutor or
Moderator of order, but not of authority in every assembly, whose
prerogative must so be tempered, that in all things tyranny be avoided.

This pre-eminence and prerogative which they call of order, can not be but of
authority: The pre-eminence and prerogative of order is also of autho^itie.
is the preheminenence and prerogative of the prolocutor in the convocation, or
of the speaker or L. Chauncellor in the parliament, of no authority? This
therefore is but mere dalliaunce of nice terms, to say he has pre-eminence
and prerogative of order not of authority. For what authority so ever it be,
or how far so ever it stretches, or is abbridged; yet, such as it is,
authority it is.

As for the tempering of this prerogative, that in all things tyranny be
avoided: we like well of it. The tempering of this authority.
And it is the thing that Beza before excepted.

But what mean they hereby? Should it by and by be tyranny, if it be
authority? The Synods authority.
Is there no differ^nce with our Brethren i^ this pre-eminence, between
authority and tyranny? Yea rather if it be of authority: it is not of
tyranny.

Which ( say they, meaning tyranny) we see by experience easily creeps in
upon proud natures, to whom if you grant an ynche, they will be ready to
take an ell, according to the proverb.

The incroching of our brethren in ^hese things
This proverb indeed is so true, that we smartly abie the experience
thereof. At the first, our Brethren striued for apparel, and when some
favorable forbearance of them, was for quietness sake, winked at herein; did
they stay there? No. But from thence they have proceeded so far; as that now
not only the authority of the Bishops; but the whole Communion book must
be turned out. Not only the exection of Consistory Governors in every
congregation, must be brought in, but the Princes supremacy must now give
place unto them. Yea, of an inch that they desired before; what a number of
else do they now challenge and shall we conclude (as they do) that this is
the tyranny which easily creeps in, upon proud natures? No, I will not
conclude so peremptorily for charity and reverence sake, against our
Brethren, The danger of this incrocking.
but I conclude thus far, that this their incroching from one matter to
another, and to so important and dangerous matters, is not good, nor indeed
sufferable. And it is more than high time, that it were (by all godly and
Christian means) repressed.

The learned discourse. pa. 115. and 116.
But let us return to the authority of the Synod, which consists in
deciding and determining such matters as can not otherwise in particular
Churches be concluded, either because they concern the common state of all
Churches, or because they lack sufficient authority in some one Church.
First therefore the lawefull Synod has to consider, if any controversy of
doctrine do arise, that it be determined by the word of GOD: For in the
controversy of byndinge the Gentiles, to the observation of the ceremonial
law, was a matter of faith and doctrine.

For the authority of the Synod, ( understanding the same to be a synodall
assembly of pastoral Elders) we grant, Bridges.
it consists especially in deciding and determining such Ecclesiastical
matters, The Synods authority in deciding controversies
as can not otherwise in particular Churches, be concluded. And (among other)
we allow also of these reasons, either because they concern the common state
of all Churches; or of all Churches of that Diocese, Province or Realm: or
because they lack sufficient authority, and perhaps sufficient knoweledge in
some one Church to decide and determine them. And thereupon we also conclude,
that when the Synod has in such godly manner, (...) is aforesai^^, decided,
determined, Renocatio^ by inferiors
and concluded such matters: Matters lawfully decided in councels provincial,
not to be revoked by inferior persons.
that then it is not lawefull for ^^y particular Church of that Diocese,
Province or Re^lme; and much less, to any particular Ministers or Pastors;
and least of al, to any of the people and lay men: to call those matters so
decided, determined, and concluded, a fresh in question.

Of which thing if our Brethren shall well bethink them; it will (I hope)
dissua^e them* from the renewing of ^any of those self same controversies,
that in our lawful Synodes ( having had sufficient authority thereunto) have
been already after the foresaid godly manner, decided, determined and
concluded. Or if any of these controversies have not yet so expressly been
proceeded upon, they may at all times (by Gods grace) be so decided and
determined, to the trial whereof, we are always as ready as our Brethren,
if they would then h^ld themselves sufficiently contented, with the sufficient
authority of the lawful Synodes deciding, determing, and concluding of them.

And hereupon, we join again with them, The determination by Gods word.
in condition of this their own conclusion. That, first therefore, the lawful
Synod has to consider, if any controversy of doctrine do a^se, that it be
determined by the word of God.

I^ this most willingly we subscribe. But where they add* For, The
observations of the ceremonial law, were not properly matters of ^aith and
doctrine.
in the controversy of binding the Gentiles to the observation of the
ceremoniell law, was a matter of faith and doctrine: as we also grant this,
that in that controversy was a matter of faith and doctrine: and a doctrine is
also to be learned in all the ceremonies: so with all, we may not grant, that
all the observations of the ceremonial law, were properly matters of faith
and doctrine: except we should confound ceremonies and faith, shadows and
substance, things transitory and permanent altogether.

Secondly, it has to determine of the use of the ceremony, not of will
without reason or ground of scripture, The learned disc. pa. 116. and 117*
but upon necessary causes of avoiding offense and similitude of
superstition, of bearing with the weak, of order, and comeliness, and
aedification. So did the synod of the Apostles and Elders, command for a time
abstinencie from meat offered to Idols, otherwise l^wefull in it self, for
offenses sake, and for avoiding of all pollution of Idolatry, Act. 6.20.29.
And forbearing the weakness of the Jews in abstinencie, from eating of
blood and of strangled, which was forbidden by God before Moses time, to teach
that childishe age of Gods people to abstain from cruelty, as in Genesis 9.4.
such ceremonial constitutions are but temporal, and so long are to be
retained, as the cause continues, for which they were made. So that if the
weakness cease, or be turned to obstinacy, Determination of ceremonies.
they are no longer to be retained.

For this second point of the Synodes ^uthoritie, we likewise grant as much,
Bridges.
that it has to determine of the use of ce^emonies, not of will without reason
or ground of scripture. The Synods authority in determining ceremonies.
Neither have done, or do our Synodes determine any use of ceremonies, to be
used among us, of will without reason, or without ground of scripture: but
either they have good ground of scripture, or good reason, or both for them.

Necessary causes.
But ( say they) it must also be, upon necessary causes of avoiding offense and
similitude of superstition.

So far as the causes shall be found indeed to be necessary causes, they
say well, Taking offense and mistaking superstition.
I con^esse. But here again, we may not debar the authority of Synodes
determination of the use of ceremonies, for the avoiding of every particular
persons taking offense, or mi^taking the similitude of superstition.

Bearing with the weak.
They add also, of bearing with the weak.

And this likewise (I grant, that no small consideration is to be had in the
Synodes determination, of bearing with the weak.) Howbeit, we must understand
wherein, and in what manner they be weak, and how far forth they are to be
borne withal. For otherwise, they may still pretend weakness, to cover
wilfulness. May not the Synod determine, that it is lawefull to eat so much
as an egg on Friday, because some will take offenc^ and pretend weakness?

But it is a good hearing, that our Brethren are become so careful, to have
offenses avoided, and the weak borne withal. Would God they would not give so
great offense as herein they do, both to ^he weak and strong, Our Brethr.
offense that herein they have given.
with their unnecessary striving for ceremonial matters, against those
things which our lawful synodes, with the corroboration of the Prince and of
the whole Realm, have already determined and concluded. Wherein our Brethren
do not only offend the synod, the realm, the Prince, in rejecting their
lawful authorities herein: but even for the weak ( the special consideration
of whom they here pretend) they have been through these contentions the
greatest occasion, that many which were before but weak amongst us, have now
not doubted any more of our ceremonies, but of our faith and doctrine. Yea,
where many were more than half won and metely well come on: they are now
clean lost, and utterly revolted from us, when they see that we will not
stand to the determination no not of our own Churches synodes, nor to the
authority and decrees of our own Prince. Is this our Brethrens consideration
of avoiding offenses, and of bearing with the infirmity of the weak.

Order comlines and aedification.
As for consideration of order, and comeliness, and aedification: it is
neither orderly, nor comely ( in my opinion) for any private and particular
Ministers, to control and preindicate the determination, The Synods authority.
of a whole godly Synod ( such as I hope ours are) that has already
determined and concluded, what is order, comelines and aedification in these
things.

Paphnutius in-deede did gainsay in Priests marriages, and prevailed against
all, or the most part, of the famous Nicene Council. But that was done in the
Council, and in the debating of the matter, Paphnutius his gainsaying the whole
council.
before any decree determined and concluded. And also, though they had never so
fully determined and concluded it, with all the authority that they had, since
it was flat against the word of God, and an error in Doctrine: he might and
ought, to have spoken against it. In which case, not only we, but the Papists
themselves, as Gerson, Panormitane, and others do grant that we must more
believe one man never so simple, yea, a lay man, more than the Pope, or than a
general council, where he brings the manifest Scripture against them. If our
Br. can do so against us, and not wrest the Scripture: we yield presently.

But in those ceremonial matters, that are neither of faith and Doctrine, nor
are this way or that way commanded in the Scripture, but left to the Church
of Christ to use, with these three cautions of order, and comeliness, and
aedification: Particular persons or congregations not to co^trol herein the
Synods decree^
when a godly Synod has already debated, determined and concluded, what use
of them tends best to these three ends, and wherein the state of that Church
may be best ordered, adorned and edified: it is not then and in those matters,
sitting with the duty of any such lay or ecclesiastical persons, to
control that conclusion of the Synod. If our Brethren said so late before on
the other side of the lease, that it were an absurd thing for our prolocutor in
our convocation, to take upon him to be a controller of the whole Synod: How
much more is it an absurd thing, out of the Synod, and after the Synod, for
a meaner person than our Proloc^tor, to take upon him not only to be a
controller, but a defacer and oppugner of the whole Synod, and a canceller of
all their authority and determination? Our Br. former conclusion. Page 76
against themselves.


How much better shall it be for our Br. to call to their remembrance their own
conclusion, where before they speak also of ceremonies, page 76. saying there:
But to conclude, it is the duty of every true pastor, to observe those
things, that are concluded by the lawful authority of the Church, concerning
ceremonial matters for order and comeliness sake and for aedification, and
not to control public order by his private judgment, except upon great and
weighty causes. Although in deed, while they be but such ceremonial matters,
and they are concluded ( as they say) by the lawful authority of the Church (
and if lawful, The Churches lawful authority not to be impugned.
then have they not gone beyond their bounds) there can no causes be so great
and weighty, that should make any true pastor to set up him-self, against this
lawful authority of the Church. For if he do, he does it unlawfully and
not like a true Pastor.

When the assembly or Synod of the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem ( which
our Brethren here allege for an example) did command for a time abstinencie
from meat offered to Idols, (otherwise lawful in it self) for offenses sake,
and for avoiding of all pollution and Idolatry, Our Br. own example. Acts.
15. against themselves.
( which the Evangelist notes, Acts 6. Luke 15. ver. 20.29. Had it then been
lawful for any particular Minister or Ministers, to have rejected the
authority of this decree, or to have kept it and broken it at his or their
pleasure? and if this be an example to follow, though not to compare in like
authority, with this most holy assembly and decree of the holy ghost, but as
all good Synodes may take example from hence: Now then is it now lawful for
any private ministers, to reject the authority of a lawful Synod, and the
caeremonies, rytes and orders therein decreed, and by the Princes and the
realms authority already established?

They say, the Apostles and Elders commandment was but for a time. The Synods
commandment for a time.
But could their authority have reached to the forbidding that meat for any
time, which was otherwise lawful in it self, during all the time of the
Christian liberty? and can the authority of no Synod now, restrain our Br.
for any time to forbear that, which otherwise is lawful in it self, but that
they will needs use still their liberty in caeremoniall matters? or will they
be the prescribers of the time for their continuance?

But they say that decree was made, for offenses sake, and for avoiding of all
pollution of Idolatry. The avoiding offenses and pollutions.


So it was, I grant. But that pollution of Idolatry was not in the meat it
self, nor the offense so much in the strong as in the weak. And yet the
strong obeyed this decree, only to avoid the weakes offense. The strongers
forbearance for the weakers offense.
And to this end that the strong in faith should not abuse their liberty, by
offending the consciences of the weak. Saint Paul has a notable treatise at
large thereof, 1. Cor. 10. 1. Cor. 10.


Admit therefore, that any of those caeremonies being in themselves
otherwise lawful, because they have been offensiuelie abused, and
Idolatrouslie polluted: yet, the abuse and pollution being expreslie
abolished, and only a good purpose and use of them decreed: the same are as
much (besides, for the goodness of the purpose and use) for the very
authority of the decree, to be for the time as far forth received, as the
other meats being otherwise lawful in themselves, yet being for good
purposes and uses of them, by the authority of the decree for the time
forbidden, were then and for that time to be refused.

But that was done also, say they, for the forbearing the weakness of the Jews
in abstinencie, from eating blood and strangled, which was forbidden by God
before Moses time, to teach that childish age of gods people to abstain from
cruelty. As in Genes. 9.4. The Pastors knowledge.


Although the time before the coming of Christ, be called of the Apostle,
Gal. 4. ver. 3. a childish age* Gal. 4.3.
when we were Children (says he) we were in bondage under the rudimentes of
the world: yet, when the fullness of time was come, and Christ revealed,
received and the Gospel established: Our Br. calling of the Apostles times,
the Churches childish age
in calling still that primitive age, a childish age, we must take good heed
that the Papists and other Heretics take not advantage by these speeches,
that say, the Church of Christ in the Apostles times, was but as weak as a
Child or babie, and afterward grew to ripe perfection.

And albeit (I grant) these temporary degrees were made cheefely in respect
of some such persons among them, that were but weak, and as it were of
childish age, in the knowledge of Christ and the Christian liberty:
notwithstanding, even for these weak childrens sake, the strongest and all
(for the time that those decrees were in force) were bound to obey them.

And that private person which publicly had broken or controlled these degrees
of the Church in these caeremoniall matters, (which only for this expediencie
were decreed, though the matters otherwise in themselves were such, as might
lawfully have been broken or controlled,) had greatly offended: even so,
whatsoever these caeremoniall matters (that we and our Br. do now strive
for,) are otherwise in their own nature free and indifferent, and so might be
received or refused) or have otherwise in the use of them been abused: yet
being now by the Church of God, decreed to be well used, and that, with
express cautions against all the former abuses of them, and that with full
freedom of conscience, wherein the Christian liberty most consists: what
private person soever should attempt, publicly to break or control them,
should offer manifest injury to Gods Church. If we be the Church of God ( as
I hope we be) that thus have decreed them.

They say, such caeremoniall Constitutions are but temporal.

Neither do we go about to make them perpetual.

And yet herein, we must note also a difference, Difference of temporal
constitutions.
from those Constitutions that were no longer in force, then for a certain
time, as the absteining from blood and strangled: and those that may
perpetually be kept, if there be perpetual causes of them.

And this their selves confess, that they are so long to be retained, as the
cause continues sor which they were made.

And they say true herein. But, since the cause of the making of our
caeremoniall constitutions does continue: how are they not then to be still
retained, until the cause shall cease, or that by the same authority, whereby
they were ordained, they be also a^tered or removed?

But (say they) so that if weakness cease, or be turned to obstinacy, they
are no longer to be retained.

If the weakness ( say I) cease generally, or generally be turned to
obstinacy: The weakness ceasing or turned to obstinacy.
that were in-deede another matter. But if weakness cease in some and remain
in other, or in some but not generally, or in the most part, nor generally be
turned to obstinacy, but in some: then, the cause of the Law (respecting not
particulars) does not cease, and therefore, the caeremoniall constitutions
decreed by the lawful Synod, are still (as before) to be retained.

Also for order an comelisse, and best aedification, the Synod has to
determine, what shall be observed in particular charges: as of time, place, The
learned disc. pa. 117.
and form of preaching and praying, and administering of the Sacraments. For
who should be able to know what order, comeliness and aedification
requires according to Gods word, but they that be teachers and preachers of
the same unto all others? For it is absurd, that they should be taught by
such these smaller things, as ought to learn the truth of them in all
matters.

Understanding the Synod in his proper sense, for the orderly and lawful
assembly, not of this or that particular City, Shire or Diocese, but of the
whole Province, Bridges
Realm, or state: and withal, not preiudicating the supreme authority of the
Christian Magistrate: The Provincial Councels authority to determine.
I grant, that the Synod has to determine for order, comeliness, and best
aedification, what shall be observed both in particular things, and through
out the whole state. As, not only of the time, place, and form, of preaching
and praying, and administering of the Sacrament: but also of Discipline, and of
Ecclesiastical Regiment, to the ends aforesaid.

As for the reason here alleged, For who should be able to know, what order,
comeliness, and aedification requires according to Gods Word, The knowledge
of the teachers and Preachers in order, comeliness and aedification.
but they that be teachers and preachers of the same unto all others: I allow
the same no further, than by comparison, that they which are the Teachers and
Preachers of the same unto all others, have better cause to know in general,
what order, comeliness, and aedification requires, (according to the Word of
God;) than any other have.

But to say simply, as here our Brethren do, who should be able, so much as
to know it, but they that be Teachers and preachers, etc. is a great deal
(me thinks, under their correction) too presumptuous a question. The
knowledge of many that are not public teachers and Preachers.


May not a man be able (by Gods grace) to know thus much, as, what order,
comeliness and aedification requires according to Gods Word, except he be
his self a Teacher and Preacher of the same unto all others? Yes verily, and
to know much more, even in the greatest controversies of Doctrine, as (God be
praised) there are many godly learned, both men and women among us, that are
not unfurnished with such knowl^^ge. Yea, what were the teachers and Preachers
at first them selves. Did they take upon them to teach and preach the same
unto all others, before they had the knowledge hereof? or did they teach and
preach immediately upon their getting knowledge? or was the knowledge suddenly
by inspiration given them, with their entering into this function? as S. Paul's
words to Timothy may be understood. Despise not the gift that is in thee,
which was given thee by prophesy with the laying on of hands of the Eldership.
1. Tim. 14. And yet Timothy was able to know these things before, insomuch
that S. Paul says to him, 2. Tim. 3.15. And that thou haste known the holy
Scriptures of a child.

And some men can excellently d^clare their knowledge also of these things
before. The Synod, preaching with more eloquence and knoweledge too, than many
of these our Learned Discourses; and yet be no Preachers of the same unto all
others.

But what is their reason, that they imagine, The reason that makes our Br.
think none can know these things but teachers and preachers
none is able to know these things, but teachers and Preachers of the same
unto all all others?

For ( say they) it is absurd, that they should be taught by such in these
small things, as ought to learn the truth of them in all matters.

To an humble minded man and glad to learn, this is no absurdity. A godly and
learned Preacher may either be as ignorant, or not so skillful, expert, or
provident in some things, (yea, The Pastors may be to seek in some small
things.
now and then in some of these small things) as some other may be, that are no
Preachers. And if controversies of them be moved in the Synod, consisting of
Pastors, it is a sign, that all the Preachers have not such knowledge of them,
but that they also may be to seek and learn. Yea, the smaller things they be,
the Preachers may perhaps have less imployde themselves, in the study or
search of of such small things, or not remember themselves so well, as an other
less learned, which is no preacher, may. And a lowly spirit will not disdain
to learn great matters of his inferior in learning, though he be no Preacher.
Moses learned of Iethro, how to dispose his judgments more orderly, both in
small matters and in great.

Neither is there indeed (if the Preacher set aside all haughty conceits, of
his own singular doings and devises) any absurdity at all or shame herein,
but that it may beseem him well enough, and he were better then he is,
sometimes to take notice and to be taught of some godly, wise learned and
experient men, that are no Preachers, yea, and of some women too now and then,
not only in some such small things, but also in matters of great importance: as
Judith taught the Elders and Pastors of Bethulia. Although (I grant) they
again ought to learn of the Preachers the truth (of Gods word) in all matters.

Neither in these diverse kinds of teaching is any absurdity, so long as their
manner of teaching is not opposite nor that these la^ persons be take upon
them, How the l^ytie may teach the Clergy.
as an ordinary office, nor do it of arrogancy, and controulment, nor do it
as public teachers and preachers unto the public preachers and teachers of
them, nor do it to defaceand blemish the estimation or authority of their
teachers and preachers, nor do it in all things, but in these things. Which
here their selves confess, are but small things: being done in this order,
they ought to take no scorn to be reueuerently remembered, or to be taught of
them: were it never so true: that they which are no teachers and preachers,
ought to learn the truth of them that are teachers and preachers, in all
matters: which notwithstanding thus again generally to avouch, is a great over
ouershot. For there are many, and those good matters besides religion and Eccl.
matters, and there is also a truth of them, and yet men are not bound to learn
the truth of them, only at the mouth of the preacher: no, nor the preacher is
bound to know them; or can, or if he could, ought to teach them And therefore,
this again, is too largely spoken for all matters, and seems to proceed of
too great a reach, and too high a liking of themselves, and too much
incroching upon others. But what now is their conclusion hereupon?

This authority therefore cannot be granted unto any civil Christian
Magistrate, The learned disc. pa. 117. and 118
that without consent of the Learned Pastors and Elders: yea against their
consent (of whom, as in some respect he is a feeling member) he may lawfully
make caeremoniall Constitutions, whereby the Church must be governed in mere
Ecclesiastical matters.

Bridges
Is there no mean, but the drift of this conclusion must needs he directed
against the Civil Christian Magistrate? how chance our Brethren did not
look a little nearer among themselves? All the drift of our Br. conclusion is
beer against the Christian Princes authority.
and then they should have seen how they had thoroughly paid, and clean
overthrown their Governors, that are not teaching Elders, whom they make to
be a great part of the Synod, in examining and determining Ecclesiastical
causes and Ecclesiastical regiment, and that the pastors can do nothing
without them. But when this question comes blustering in: Our Br. words
directly ouert^row their own governors.
Who should be able to know what order, comeliness, and aedification
requires, according to Gods word, but they that be teachers and Preachers of
the same unto all others? Dare these Seniors now peep out their heads, and
say like Governors indeed: who should? we should. You? what are you? we?
wit ye well, we are the Governors of all the Ecclesiastical Discipline and
regiment. Tush, tush, are ye teachers and preachers of the same unto al others?
No indeed, that we be not, we can not preach nor teach? but we can rule the
matter, with you that be teachers and Preachers. The Prince excluded.


No, no, go seek your rule and Government in other matters. If ye be no
Teachers and preachers, ye meddle not here. No, wit ye well again, ye^ are
not able, and much less worthy, so much as to know, what order, comeliness,
and aedification requires according to Gods word, and so, least of all, to
examine, decide and determine the same. What, ought not you, (though ye be
Seniors and governors) to learn of v^ that are your teachers and preachers?
we tell you plainly and roundly at a word, It is absurd, that they that are
(teachers and preachers) should be taught by such, in these small things (
and it were much more absurd in greater things) as ought to hear and learn
the truth of them in all matters. Lo, How these big and lofty words have
utterly blanked, and given check mate, to these our governing Elders that we
not teachers and preachers.

But whust, we pray you, no more of this, for we meant not this, against our
governing Elders, though they be neither Preachers nor teachers, but we direct
it altogether against the Civil Christian Magistrate.

Yea forsooth (my learned Brethren) macte virtu^e, now ye show your selves
indeed. Yerke at the civil Christian Magistrate, Our Br. dealing against the
civil Christian Magistrate.
and ever (so far as ye may do it with safety) spare not, but still come in
with one byous ^ling or another at the prince. For, this is plau^^ble to the
people, as though ye were no accepters of persons, in daring to speak almost
any thing, against the civil Christian Magistrate.

And does your teaching and preaching tend to this, that for fear the civil
Christian Magistrate should teach you, (though he preach not to you) another
lesson, you would have it though^ absurd that they should teach you, that
should be taught by you ( as here you say) in all matters: yea, that they are
not able to know what order, comeliness and ediffcation requires according to
Gods word, except they themselves were teachers and preachers?

I looked all this while, when yet now at the length, our Br. would begin, to
enter (in this their Learned Discourse) into the proper treatise of the Civil
Christian Magistrate. Which treatise before, page 8.9. and 10. they put back
and would not speak of, till they had fully made all this their Learned
Discourse of Ecclesiastical government, for their whole tetrarchie, first, of
Doctors, then of pastors, after that of Governors, meaning Seniors, and lastly
of Deacons. And now when they have thus at large, (as they themselves tell
us) Learned^e Discoursed on all these their four tetrarches: they begin a new
treatise here of Synods, but with the civil Christian Magistrate they yet
deal not, except in certain odd gleekes. Howbeit now, there is good hope,
that they will remember them, and begin a little to bestow some part of their
Learned Discourse on that authority, which they will leave to them. And a good
beginning (as they say) makes a good ending. But, do they begin with the^
after this fashion^ well then, in the name of God, let us yet go on with them
in considering, what here they now begin to grant unto them.

How our Br. here begin to draw to the treatise of the Princes authority.
This authority therefore ( say they) can-not be granted unto any civil
Christian Magistrate, that without consent of the learned pastors and Elders,
yea against their consent (of whom, as in some respect, he is a feeling
member) he may lawfully make ceremonial constitutions, whereby the Church may
be governed, in mere Ecclesiastical matters.

What is here toward the setting forth of the Civil Christian Magistrates
authority in Ecclesiastical matters? so much as it is, this is rather against
it, then any thing for it. We have long expected, what yet at last or at least,
(after every of the Tetrarches, had his several and joint authority
portioned out unto him) they would leave in remaynder to the authority, of
the civil Christian Magistrate. And they begin now to tell us on the negative
part, what cannot be granted to him: not on the affirmative, what can or
should be granted. And wherefore do they begin with this negative?

When God declared the 10, commandments of the two Tables, Exodus 20. He
delivered both the first precept, and the most of the rest, negaliuely, because
(as all the interpreters note) we are so faulty in the contrary. Do our Br.
begin their treatise of the Prince with this negative, for any such cause? does
the Civil Christian Magistrate, whom God has placed over us, Her Majesty
slaundered by these suspicious negatiues.
(which is principal over all the Churches of the realms of England and
Ireland, is now, God be blessed for it, and long may be, our most gracious
Sovereign Queen Elizabeth) taken upon her, without the consent of the Learned
Pastors and Elders), yea against their consent, to make any ceremonial
constitutions, whereby the Church must be governed in mere Ecclesiastical
matters? Let our Brethren take heed, that they do not in their Learned
Discourse cast forth before her subjects and all the world, any such
slanders on her Majesty, which they are never able to prove. Can they show
but one such caeremoniall constitution?

And yet, what the civil Christian Magistrate can do, ( and that not De facto
but De iure, can rightly do) is another question. Dare they stand to this,
that the Civil Christian Magistrate can make no ceremonial constitution, The
Princes authority in ceremonial Constitutions.
neither for time, place, nor form of preaching nor praying, nor administering
the sacraments, nor for order, comeliness, nor edification, without the
consent of the Learned Pastors, and Elders: yea, if they would not consent,
against their consent also? If they should be urged with this questi^^* The
pastors consent.
I think it would say sore unto our Learned Br. for all their Learning.

Did Moses make all his caeremoni^ll Constitutions with their consent that were
Pastor^ and Elders? And what consent can they show of the pastors and Elders,
for all the caeremoniall constitutions that David made, or Solomon after him?
indeed I think they did not dissent, but that the making or efficacy of them
relied upon the confirmation of any their consent given thereto by their
suffrages or voices: how can they prove it?

And likewise since the coming of Christ, how will they prove that all the
good imperial Constitutions and sanctions, of the ancient godly Emperors in
Ecclesiastical matters, and about the state of the Church, had the express
consent of the Bishops and pastoral Elders, in the very enacting and making of
them* but howsoever all they were made, let them name if they can but one, that
has been made in her Majesty's time, either against or without the consent of
the Learned pastors and Elders of our Church.

I deny not, but that they have been made, both without and against the
consent of some Pastors and Elders, and those Learned too, for, Against what
pastors consent or Constitutions have bin made.
we grant Learning to the adversaries, though their Learning be blinded with
erroneous affection. And they pleaded on the self same negative string against
the Prince, which our Br. here do, that this authority can not be granted to
any civil Christian Magistrate, without and against their consentes, being
then (such as they were, for fault of better) the Pastors and Elders of the
church, and that had ye greatest stroke al^^ (as they took upon them) in these
matters. And yet for all their reclaiming to the contrary, the civil
Christian magistrate ( God be praised) did it, and did well too, mauger all the
dissents, and against the consents of them all.

But our Brethren mean not here, the Popish Pastors and Elders, but the
protestants. And can they prove that her Majesty made any caeremoniall
Constitutions, whereby the Church must be governed in mere Ecclesiastical
matters, without and against the consent of the protestant Pastors and Elders
of the Church? Whom our Br. mean by learned Pastors and Elders.
but yet all this will not reach home, to serve their turn. And why? because,
by these pastors and Elders, they cheefely mean indeed themselves, whom in
the first front of this their Learned Discourse, they call the faithful
Ministers: and here the Learned pastors and Elders. For, as for those Elders
that are governors, and yet not Teachers and preachers: we have heard how in
their last words, they have handled them, for having any authority in the
Synod.

But where were these our Br. then, when her Majesty with the consent of the
protestant pastors and Elders then living, did make at her first coming to the
supreme gouern^ent of this our Church, these caeremoniall Constitutions? for
perhaps the most of them that are most busy now, were then but in the shell
(as they say) or but young batched. And must all these Constitutions, The
constitutions depend not on the consent of the Pastors to come.
that these Pastors ( which are since come, in the places of some of the
Pastors then,) do not now consent unto, be all of them unlawful
constitutions? and must the very Princes authority also be called now in
question, and so flat denied, that it cannot be granted, because it was
without or against these Pastors and Elders consenting that now are, and that
then were not Pastors and Elders? were those Constitutions no longer good, than
those Pastors lived that consented to the making of them?

And what should we think now, if any other were made a new, by the Queens
Majesty ( if at least, they would grant her thus much authority, that thee
might make such caeremoni^^^ constitutions as should not be against them, but
with the consent of these Pastors, and Elders now) would this how, and these
new Constitutions be firm and unviolable? Yea, if it should please the
Pastors that shall come after these, to give their consent also unto them. And
so we must run on in infinitum, while the world lasts continual
changing, or at least, continual dependaunce on the Pastors and Elders
consent: or else, all former constitutions are cut clean off. For, if those
that our Brethren shall now consent unto, be good against those that shall be
Pastors to come hereafter: then may these caeremoniall constitutions which have
been made by her Majesty heretofore, with the consent of her Learned Pastors
and Elders, that were them, good and strong against these our Brethren, that
pretend to be the Learned Pastors and Elders now. Her Majesty's authority
now, is as great as it was before.
And why cannot her Majesty do as much now, as she could then? And can she
not maintain those now, that so lawfully she could and did make them?

And what has she made since, or of late, but that wherein she had, and has
the consent of the Learned pastors and Elders of the Church? And if our
Brethren do not consent unto her Majesty, and to the other Learned pastors
and Elders of the realm consenting. This (no doubt) cannot be but a greef unto
her Majesty, and to all us (with consent herein to her auth.) that any true
and loving subjects unto her, and dear Br. unto should thus dissent both from
her and us. Notwithstanding, this is no sufficient debar, against her
Majesty, but that she had and has full authority under God, with consent
both of other civil Christian Magistrates under her, and with the consent of
the chief and most part of the Learned pastors and Elders of the Churches,
whereof they have the several charges Ecclesiastical: and she (God contiue
it) the Civil, general, and supreme Government over all them, and in all
causes as well ecclesiastical as political, to make lawful ceremonial
constitutions, whereby the Church both may and must be governed. Synodes before
Christian Princes


What our Brethren mean by these terms, that they knit up this section
withal: whereby the Church must be governed* in mere Ecclesiastical matters:
Mere Ecclesiastical matters.
is somewhat a doubtful and captio^s speech. But if they mean by mere
Ecclesiastical matters, such matters as they speak of before, that is to say,
time, place, and form of preaching, and praying, and administering the
Sacraments: I see no reason to the contrary, if it were lawful for
Constantine, and other godly ancient Princes too design both time, place, and
form of proceeding, unto the general Counselles, and most famous assemblies
of Bishops and Pastors in their Dominions, though the Bishops and Pastors did
not first give their consent hereto, The designing of time, place, and form of
proceeding to general Councelles and other ceremonial constitutio^s
but afterward obeyed it, and so consented, when the Emperoures had before
designed it: but that, with as good reason, the Princes having the consent and
that before-hande, of all or the most part of those Bishops and Pastors: they
may lawfully with their consent, appoint both times, and places and forms also
even of preaching and praying, and administering the Sacraments. Yea, many of
the sanctions that the Emperors have made (and the making of them is good and
authentical) are of matters a great deal more mere Ecclesiastical, as we
shall be ready (God willing) to show a great number of them, if our Brethren
shall desire to see them.

As for the reason that our Brethren here include in this Parenthesis (of
whom, as in some respect he is a feeling member. The Prince termed a feeling
member of the Pastors.
This is but a weak reason, to debar the authority of the Civil Christian
Magistrate, in making caeremoniall Constitutions. For though in some respect,
the Prince is but a feeling member ( as they term him) yet is he under Christ
( in some respect) the principal member, and repr^senting (in some respect) a
far higher estate, then any, or than all the Pastors do^else, let them deny
with the Papists, that the Prince is next under Christ the supreme governor
in Ecclesiastical and temporal matters, which they cannot say of any, or al
their Pastors. Pastors and B. and all are in some respect under the Prince.
If they shall recommend the pastor in this respect, that he represents
Christ in his E^clesiasticall Ministry, (which the Prince though he also do
in his ciuil^ Ministry, yet in that respect is the inferior)
notwithstanding, in that some respect, of the Princes supreme government, both
Bishops and pastors and all (as Chrysostom says) are under the Prince.

And what then (when men shall read this) will they think of these high and
lostie speeches, that our Brethren here make the Christian Sovereign prince,
a feeling member of the pastors and Elders? If they had said thus, that the
Christian prince is a feeling member of the Church, not meaning as the Papists
do, by the Church, only the Pastor^ but the whole corporation of it; or
actiuely to feel and sound the Pastors by governing of them, then had their
meaning been plain and good, but their argument had been never the better.
But, that the Prince is made (as a part subjected to them) a member of the
Pastors and Elders, is too far to advance themselves above the Prince, and
above the church and all. For if the Prince be a member of the Pastors and
Elders: then much more all those are so, that are under the Prince. And if in
joining here the Pastors and Elders, The Prince brought under these Pastors and
Eccl. governors.
they mean by these Elders their Eccl. governors that are not teachers: then
in saying Pastors and Elders, of whom the civil christian Magistrate is a
member, they bring the Prince under those Governors also, and they being 2.
several functions; we shall have 2. heads, like a spread-eagle, whereof all
the people are the body, and the civil Christian Magistrate is in some respect
but a feeling member. But what respect he can be a member to them both: that
let them expound it. in I have but little feeling of it.

And yet is this also as darkely spoken, as the other is presumptuous, to call
the Prince their feeling member. What feeling part they make the Prince to be.
For though it be somewhat, that in the word feeling, they give him life and
sense at least: yet, whether they compare the Prince unto the hand, wherein
the sense of feeling is most sensible, or to any other inferior part or
member, that must also be referred to their further exposition. In the mean
season, these speeches being so offensive, to any that have any feeling in
them, I marvel that they which cry out so much of the titles of Lord and
Archbishop do under pretense of these titles, Pastors and Elders, thus exalt
them selves, and in respect of themselves, thus debase the high authority of
the civil Christian Magistrate, that they make him their feeling member. But
to confirm this, they proceed, saying:

It is out of all controversy, that before there were any Christian
Magistrates (for we will not speak of Sergius Paulus Proconsull of Cyprus, The
learned disc. pa. 118.
because he was but a Liefetenant of the Roman Emperor) this authority was
proper unto the Synod.

If Donatistes, Anabaptists, or Papists had repeted this reason, I would
less have marueiled. Bridges
For this argument is the common refuge of all these three most pernicious
Heretics, and enemies to the authority of the civil Christian Magistrate.
When the Emperors made laws against the Donatistes, and they used this reason
against the Emperors, Saint Augustine answers them thus, Non inuenitur,
etc. 23. Q. 4. Non inuenitur.
There is not found an example in the Evangelical and Apostolical writings,
that any thing was craved of the Kings of the earth, for the Church, against
the enemies of the Church, who denies that it is not found? But as yet,
August. in Epist. 48. ad vincentium.
that prophecy was not fulfilled* And now ye kings understand, and be ye
learned that judge the earth, serve the Lord in fear. For as yet, that was
fulfilled, Christian Princes prefigured.
which is said a little before in the same psalm, Wherefore did the Gentiles
fret and the people imagine vain things? The Kings of the earth and the
Princes came together in one, against the Lord and against his Christ, (or
his anointed). Nevertheless, if the factes forepassed in the prophetical
books, were figures of things to come: in that King which is called
Nabuchodonozor, Nabuchod. figured the states of the Kings after Christ.
either of the times was figured, both that which the Church had under the
Apostles, and that it now has. In the time therefore of the Apostles and
martyrs, that was fulfilled which was figured, when the King whom we have
mentioned, did compel the Godly and the just to worship Images, and commanded
them that refused, to be cas^ into the flambes. But now is that fulfilled,
which a little after was figured in the same King, The times figured of Kings
persecuting.
when as he (being converted to honor the true God) decreed in his kingdom,
that whosoever blasphemed the God of Sydrak, Misak, and Abednago, should
suffer due punishments. The former time therefore of that King, did signify
the former times of the infidel Kings, which the Christians suffered for the
wicked. But the later time of that king, The times figured of faithful setting
forth godly constitutions.
did signify the times of the later Kings, that are now faithful, which the
wicked suffer for the Christians.

Thus says S. Augustine against the Donatistes, that used this argument
against the Laws and decrees of the Emperors, that in the Apostles times there
were no Christian Princes, that Christ appointed not Princes, but Preachers to
meddle in matters of Religion: and at this day the Papists and Anabaptists
furbish over a fresh the same arguments, and will our Brethren now gather up
once again, the off-scourings of these their rotten reasons, to furnish their
Learned Discourse of their Pastors and Elders, in their assemblies and Synodes,
against the lawful authority in Ecclesiastical matters, of the civil
Christian Magistrate?

But we have scene this reason before sufficiently confuted by Gellius
Snecanus, a principal favorite of our Brethren, to whose further confutations
I remit them. Who confuteth also this exception of Paulus Sergius, which namely
here our Brethren put back* and will not admit.

But their reason is over weak, Because he was but a liefetenant of the
Romayne Emperor. Paulus Sergius the Emperors liefetenant.
For, if he were the Emperors Lifetenant: he represented to them where he was
liefetenant, the cheef authority of the Emperor himself, even as much as
Pilato, Festus or Felix did in Jury.

And if the people did obey him before he was a Christian, did his
Christianity among those people that were conuer^ed likewise, over whom he
still governed, diminish his authority? but what mean they hereby? do they
reject all arguments for proof of the authority of the civil Christian
Magistrate, if they be not as mere Monarkes as was the Emperor? Our Br.
argument from mere monarkes.
what an advantage were this given to the Anabaptists, and what a number of
Snecanus examples were hereby defeated?

And yet does not this argument hold, that because this authority was proper
to the Synod, before there were any Christian Magistrates, and ^o, The arg.
from the Synodes auth. then without the Prince, to the same now is a false and
most dangerous argument.
the Synod then decreed all such caeremonial constitutions without, yea
against the consent of the civil magistrate, because ( as they say) there were
not then any Christian Magistrates, that yet it so remains still proper to
the Synod, to decree all such caeremonial constitutions, without, yea, against
the Civil Magistrate, being now become a Christian Magistrate.

But they can-not do so now, the state of the Prince being the principal
party over them, and agreeing in faith with them, as they could do them, or
rather could do them otherwise. So that, all the case is clean altered, by
this so great an alteration. And now, if they will not have the civil
Christian Magistrate to decree any such caeremonial constitutions without and
against the Pastors consent: is it meet the Pastors should on the other side
decree any such constitutions, without and against the consent of the civil
Christian Magistrate? what an arrogancy were this in them, and what an injury
offered to the civil Christian Magistrate?

But as they can show no such Caeremoniall Constitution in force among us,
made by our gracious sovereign, against or without the consent of sufficient
store of our Learned Bishops and Pastors: so, they can show none made by our
Learned Bishops and Pastors, (whereby the Church of England must be governed)
without the consent of our most Christian sovereign and chief Magistrate.
No, God forbid, that ever we should contend with so godly a Prince.

And would God, our Brethren would not so far presume herein, having such a
blessed Prince of her Majesty as they and we have, to contend thus to get
unto them selves the only or chief authority to call Synodes, to decree
caeremoniall constitutions, to prescribe laws, to frame modilles, and to lay
plot-fourmes of Ecclesiastical regiment and Christian Discipline: to set
forth new books of Common Prayer, of the divine service and administering
Sacraments, of ordeining Ministers, of making new manners of marying, of
Excommunicating the offenders by new governors* of burying the dead without all
accustomed orders: of altering parishes: of deposing B. of making al Past. to
be equal: of bringing in new officers: of disposing all the Clergies livings:
yea of limitting the authority of the civil Christian magistrate: and
commending al these things unto the subjects, in the title of Learned
Discourses, and faithful ministers, and to do all this and many things mo,
(besides those that yet we see not so plainly opened) both without and against
the consent and authority of their most dread and Christian Sovereign: yea
verily, Constantius Caesar.
to her great grief and no small danger, both of her royal estate and
person. But as though all were clear and safe, our Brethren still go on,
against the civil Christian Magistrates authority, saying.

Which authority we know to be granted to the Church by our Savior
Christ, practiced by his Apostles, The learned disc. pa. 118. and 119.
continued by their successors three hundred years, before there was any
Chris^ian Emperors (for we receive not Philip for a Christian Emperor, and
long time after there were Christian Emperors, even as long as any purity
continued in Religion, until both Emperors and Synodes were thrust out of all
lawful authority, which they ought to have in the Church, by the tyranny of
Antichriste.

I grant the Synodall authority to be granted to the church by our Savior
Christ, to be practiced by his Apostles, and to be continued by their
successors three hundred years, Bridges
not before there were any Christian Emperors: but before there were any such
Christian Emperors as only proclaimed the maintenance and profession of the
Christian faith, as Constantine and his successors did. For, Constantius
Chlorus the Father of this Constantine the great, is commended by Eusebius lib.
8. cap. 14. in these words: Not long after, Constantius Chlorus a Christian
Emperor. Eusebius. lib 8. Eccl. hist. cap. 14.
Constantius the Emperor (passing all others throughout his life, in clemency
and goodness toward his subjects singularly affected toward Gods word)
ended according to the Law of nature, the common race of his mortal life.

Leaving behind him his natural son Constantinus, Emperor and Caesar, to
supply his room. And was first related of them ( meaning the Heathen) into the
number of the Gods. Enjoying after his death, all imperial honor and dignity
due to his person. In his life he was most benign, and of most bountiful
sovereignty among all the Emperors, who alone of all the Emperors in our time,
governed most graciously and honorably, during the whole term of his
reign, showing humanity and bountifulness unto all men, no partaker by any
means with any presumptuous sedition raised against us, he guarded the Godly
about him in security without sentence of gilt and without all contumelye, he
destroyed no Churches, he practiced no impietye that might be prejudicial
to our Religion.

He obtained a blessed life, and an end thrice happy. He being Emperor alone
ended this life both gloriously and peaceably, in the presence of his natural
son and successor, who also was most prudent and Religious. His Son
Constantinus being proclaimed full Emperor and Caesar by the army, (and long
before by God him self the universal King, became a follower of his Fathers
piety in Christian religion. All this his commendation writes Eusebius who
was also living in his days.

And to confirm this he tells also lib. 1. De vita Constantini cap. 11 How
he feigned that he would, put all the Christians, which would profess their
religion, out of their offices and prefer the Paganes. But when they which
were Godly Christians gave up their offices, and chose rather to leave their
honors, then to leave their profession of the Christian faith: he embrased
them, and those which offered to deny Christ to keep their dignities, he
utterly removed from his person, affirming that they would never be faithful
to the Prince, which were unfaithful to God. Whereby it appears that he was
a true and Godly Christian Emperor.

Whereupon Eusebius concludes, that not only he himself, but his subjects
also, did enjoy by him a pleasant conversation in holiness, and devotion
toward God. He banished out of his Court Idolaters and dissemblers in
religion, and he received and judged those most worthy to be about an
Emperor, which confessed Gods truth, commanding such to have the guard, both
of his person and Dominion. He served and worshipped the only true God. He
condemned the multitude of the Gods that the wicked had. He fortified his
house with the prayers of holy and faithful men, and he did so consecrate his
palace to the service of God, that his household was a congregation within his
palace, having Gods Ministers, and whatsoever is requisite for a Christian
Congregation.

And although our Brethren peremptorily do say, we receive not Philip for a
Christian Emperor: yet we have heard how Eusebius, tells, that though at
the first he was not of the Church of Christ so received by reason of his
notorious sins: nevertheless on his repentance and confession, he was at
length received into the assembly of the Christians at Rome, even as a
Christian, and of consequent as a Christian Emperor, Philip a Christian
Emperor.
except the Christians would have denied him to be Emperor, because he was
become a Christian. In-deede he could not (such was the iniquity of the time
then) make open profession of his Christianity, or if he began it, he was too
soon cut off. But this impediment was no debar unto his right, if he had
had such time and occasion as had Constantine.

But had there been no Christian Emperors before Constantine the great: yet
were there in other Countries mo Christian Princes, besides those that were the
Emperors of Rome: yea, to go no further, than this our own Country, was not
here King Lucius a Christian, besides other Christian Princes after him? Lucius,
To which Lucius also (as we find in aunci^nt record^ thereof) a letter was
written by Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, The letter of Lucius a Christian king in
this Island a 100 year before Constantine
anno. Dom. 202. in these words following:

You required that we should send you the Roman and Imperial laws, that you
might use them in your kingdom of Brytannie. But those laws we may disprooue,
and not the laws of God. You have of late through the goodness of GOD,
received in your kingdom, the faith and law of Christ: you have there in
your kingdom both the Testamentes, out of them by the grace of God, and the
advice of your Realm, take you a law, and thereby Govern patiently your
kingdom. You are in your kingdom the Vicar of God, The Christian king is Gods
vicare
according to the saying of the kingly Prophet, The earth is the Lords and his
fullness is the whole world, and all the dwellers therein. And again, thou
have loved righteousness and hated iniquity, wherefore GOD (even thy God)
has anointed thee with the oil of gladness ab^ue thy fellows. They are the
kings children, The kings pre-eminence, authority and charge.
Christian Nations and people of your kingdom, that live and consist under
your protection, peace, and kingdom; according to the scripture, eu^n as the
Hen gathers her chickensvnder her wings. The people and Nations of the
kingdom of Brytannie is yours. Such as are divided, you should gather them
together unto the laws of Christ, unto his holy church, unto peace and
concord. And you should cherish, mayntaine, protect, govern and defend them
from the injurious, from the malicious, and from the enemies of them. VVoe to
that kingdom whose king as a chil^e, and the Princes ea^e early in the
mourning. I do not call the king a child, for his youth and minority: but for
his folly, iniquity and madness, according to the kingly Prophet: the
bloudthirstie and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. By
eating we shall understand, gluttony: by gluttony, luxury: by luxury, all
silth, wickedness, and mischief, as says king Solomon: wisdom will not
enter into a malicious soul, nor inhabit in a body thrall to sin. A King
has his name of governing and not of his kingdom. So long shall you be a King
as you rule well. Otherwise, you shall not so be named, but loose that name,
which God forbid. God grant that you may so rule your Realm of Brytannie,
that with him (whose Vicar you are) you may reign everlastingly.

Whereby it appears both that there were civil Christian Magistrates before
Constantine, and also what authority in making Ecclesiastical laws and
constitutions, with the consent of the Pastors, was the^ attributed unto them,
in so much that Socrates says in his Preface to his first book of the
Ecclesiastical Histories: that, after the Emperors began to embrace the
Christian religion: the Ecclesiastical matters depended much on them: (...)
Princes authority.
yea, the chiefest councels have been, and are called together and appointed by
the^. But now, had there been no Christian Prince all that time of three
hundred years: had this been any debar to their authority, if there had
been any? Nay rather, how do not our Brethrens own words confute themselves.

And long time ( say they) after there were Christian Emperors, even as long
as any purity continued in religion, until both Emperors and Synodes were
thrust out of all lawful authority, which they ought to have in the Church,
by the tyranny of Antichrist.

Ah ha, go to then, after the Emperors were become Christians they had
authority, and it was a lawful authority, and they ought to have it in the
Church. The authority that the Christian Princes had.
And how were they thrust out of it, if they had it not? If they mean not
this, of their authority in Church matters: how then do they say: they were by
the tyranny of Antichrist, thrust out of all lawful authority which they
ought to have in the Church? Since they are not yet, by the tyranny of
Antichrist thrust out of all lawefull authority, but chiefly of that which
they ought with the synod ( and in some things above the synod) to have in
Church matters? And if their authority had continued (in possession and
practice) so long ( as here they say) any purity had continued in religion:
then had not the Emperors and other Christian Princes, been yet thrust out.
For, (thanks be to God) among so many pollutions, errors, Idolatries,
superstitions, ignorances, and other infinite abominations of Antichrist; yet
still some purity continued in religion, and ever shall do, against which the
gates of hell shall not prevail. Or else, neither the Church of God and
kingdom of Christ, nor the invincible truth of his Gospel, were eternal.
All these speeches therefore are too inconsiderate, for so Learned a discourse
as is pretended.

The learned disc. pa. 119.
But we find not in the scripture, this authority granted by Christ to civil
Magistrates, which in his, and his Apostles time were not, nor any promise that
when they were, the Synod should resign it unto them.

We find in the scripture, so much authority granted to civil Magistrates,
as we ascribe unto them; Bridges.
or as her Majesty claims. Example, Moses, Iosue, Samuel, David, Solomon,
Asa, Iosaphat, Josias, Ezechias, The examples of the Princes supremacy in the
scripture
etc.

But they except, it was not granted by Christ.

I answer, this is the common exception of the adversaries, and also of the
Anabaptists, both of them drawing it from the Donatistes, as we have seen.
But it is most untrue. For, understand by the name of Christ, the eternal
Deity of the son of God, and his regiment in the Church, before he joined
our humane nature to his divine nature; as Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 10.4. The
Chr. Princes before Christ's coming.
They drank of the spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock was
Christ: so was this authority even then granted by Christ, unto those
Christian civil Magistrates in his Church.

They reply again, as they did before, against the christian Magistrates, that
yet they were not in his and his Apostles time.

And I answer again, they were in his time, that is, in the time of that
regiment of his Church, before that fullness of time, Christian Magistrates
before Christ's coming.
wherein God sent his son made of woman, as Saint Paul speaks, Gal. 4.
ver. 4. Christ had his day (and a day is a time) even in the time of Abraham,
and in all times. And yet, if at any time there were not in his Church civil
Christian Magistrates, as at many times ( we grant) there were not, both
before the time of his coming in the flesh, The want of such persons at some
times, is no bar to the right at all times.
and after; yet is this right of so strong interest, that time can not plead
prescription against it. And since we can prove, that the civil Magistrate in
the Church of Christ, had, and had lawefully this authority in
Ecclesiastical matters, before the time of Christ's taking our nature on him:
let them show, that it ceased utterly, or was lost, or is abridged by Christ's
coming: and then they shall say some what to the purpose. Which if they can
not do: then the want of furnishing the place for a time disanulleth not the
right for ever. And therefore this is but a mere babbling (saving Brotherly
reverence) and loss of time, if it be not much worse, to use, and thus still
to beat upon, these cauilling, false and sophistical arguments of the old
Scismaticall Donatistes, of the new libertine Anabaptists, Our Brethr. still
renewing of the Donatistes, Anabapt. and Papists arguments against christian
Princes.
and of the Roman Antichristian adversaries, which they make in their
treacherous books, against the supreme government of Christian Princes. And
yet, we have sufficiently showed before, especially out of Gellius, that there
were civil christian Magistrates even in the Apostles times. Yea, how those
also whom our Brethren misconceaue, to have been Eccl. Governing and not
teaching Elders; Gualter thinks them to have been (in those times of
persecutions) their civil christian Magistrates, Judges and Governors, that
they chose among themselves, till the higher Magistrates, Princes and Monarkes,
received the public profession and maintenance of Christianity.

But they say besides, there is not any promise made in the scripture, that
when they were ( become) christians, the Synod should resign it unto them.

What talk they of the Synodes resigning to the civil christian Magistrate,
The Christian Princes have not their authority by the Synod^s res^^nation.
the authority that in the right of his office is due unto him? As though the
Magistrate had it by their resignation, or as though they before had usurped
the Magistrates authority? No doubt, but yt those persons in the synod, which
exercised (in defect of the Magistrates any part of that authority that is
competent unto them; (...) of Christian Princes.
when their higher powers, and sovereign Magistrates became Christians;
yielded all due authority unto them, without the synod resigning from them
selves that authority, which properly appertains to the synod. The promise
of the Christian Princes authority.
And fo^r this authority that we acknowledge to belong to the civil Christian
Magistrate: there was and is extant in the scripture, fair record even of
promise for it. Which as we have seen before out of S. Augustine; so, because
they press still on the same argument that the Donatistes did: it may suffice
to repress them with Saint Augustines answer, and his proves of the promise
for the same out of the scripture, who says, Aug. in Epist. 50. ad Bonif.
Epist. 50. ad B^nif. quod enim dicunt, 23 Q. 4 si Eccl.
etc.

For when as they that would not have just laws to be constituted against
their impieties, do say, that the Apostles desired not such things of the
kings of the earth: they consider not, that then it was another time, and that
all things are to be done in their times. All things to be done in their times.
For what Emperor did then believe in Christ, that might serve him in making
laws for piety against impiety? where as yet that prophetical saying was
fulfilled; Psalm. 2.
why did the Gentiles frette, and the people imagine vain things? the kings
of the eart^ stood up, and the Princes came together against the Lord, and
against his Christ. But as yet, that was not done which in the same Psalm is
said a little after, and now ye kings understand, be ye wise that judge
the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him with trembling.

How then do kings serve the Lord with fear? How kings serve the L. in
fear.
but in forbidding with a religious severity, and in punishing those things,
that are done contrary to the commandments of the Lord? For he serves
otherwise, for that he is a man: and otherwise, for that he is a king. The
kings service of God as he is a man, and as he is a king. Ezechias.
For that he is a man, he serves in living faithfully. But, for that he is
also a king; he serves in enacting (with a convenient vigor) laws that
command just things, and forbid the contrary. Even as Ezechias served in
destroying the groaues and temples of the Idolles, and those high places that
were builded, contrary to the commandments of God. Even as Josias served,
Josias.
he also doing the same things. Even as the king of the Niniuits served, The
king of the Ninevites.
in compelling the whole City to pacify God. Even as Darius served, Darius.
in giving it unto Daniel into his power, to break the Idol; and in casting
his enemies to the Lions. Even as Nabuchodonozer served, Nabuchodonozer.
of whom we have alreadi spoken, in forbidding by a terrible law, all that
were placed in his kingdom from blaspheming God. In this therefore kings do
serve the Lord, so far forth as they be kings, when they do those things to
serve him, that none but kings can do.

Since kings therefore did not as yet serve the L. in the Apostles times, but
as yet did imagine vain things against God, Christian Princes care.
and against his Christ* that all the foretellings of the Prophets, should be
fulfilled, impieties could not then indeed be forbidden by laws, but rather
be exercised. For so was the order of the times rolled about, The time of
persecution. Ioh. 16.
that both the Jews killed the preachers of Christ, thinking they did a duty
to God, as Christ foretold, and the Gentiles fretted against Christ, and the
Martyrs patience overcame them all. But when tha^ began to be fulfilled, Psa.
71.
which was written, and all the kings of the earth shall worship him and all
Nations shall serve him: what man (that is sober in his wit) can say to kings?
Have not you care in your kingdom, The king ought not to think the care of the
first table pertains not to him, less than the second.
of whom the Church of your Lord is holden, or is oppugned. It pertains not
in your kingdom unto you, who will be either religious, or sacrilegious: unto
whom it cannot be said, it pertayneth not unto you in your kingdom, who will
be shamefast, who will be unshamefast. For, when free choice is given of God
unto a man; why should adulteries be punished by laws, and sacrileges be
suffered? Is it a lighter matter, for the soul not to keep her faith to God;
than for a woman not to keep her faith to her husband?

Thus does Augustine prove that this authority of the Christian Magistrates
and Monarkes, in making constitutions and laws for Eccl. matters as well as for
temporal, though it were not accomplished in the Apostles time, yet it was
prefigured, prophesied, and promised that it should be afterward fulfilled: and
in convenient time it was performed.

Therefore it remains, The learned disc. pa. 119.
that it be showed by them that defend that this absolute authority is in the
civil Magistrate, by what spirit, or revelation, or scripture (if there be
any that we know not:) for we would be glad to learn, how this authority
was translated from the Church (in which it was once, lawfully vested) unto the
civil Christian Magistrate.

I know none of us that defends that an absolute authority is in the civil
Magistrate. Bridges
And therefore it remains not in us to show any thing for that, which we
defend not. If we defend it, Our brethr. slander of absolute authority.
let them name the man, and show the place, and let the party defend
himself as he can. And I would learn of them also, by what spirit, or
revelation, or scripture (if there be any that we know not) they can so
untruely burden their so gracious Sovereign, to take upon her an absolute
authority? Or to sclaunder us their Brethren, that we defend that this
absolute authority is in the civil Magistrate.

They say they would be glad to learn, how this authority was translated from
the Church (in which it was lawfully vested) unto the civil Christian
Magistrate. And can they prove then, that the Church was ever lawfully vested
with this absolute authority? For my part, I am of contrary opinion, (...)
authority.
nor ever yet learned ( for all the Papists harp much upon some what the like
string) that the Church of God ever had, or took upon her, any absolute
authority, in any Eccl. matters whatsoever, and much less do I learn, that
it was translated from the Church, unto the civil Christian Magistrates.
Howbeit (I trust) they will give us leave to learn thus much, The authority
over synodes that Beza allows to Christian Prin^es.
as even Beza himself out of the word of God, shall teach us to be a lawefull
authority and a needful, of the civil Christian Magistrate, joined with the
Synod in these matters.

Beza in the 5. Chapter of his christian confession in the 15. article, before
cited, for the Princes calling the general councels or synodes, and for making
the Presidents or Governors of the same; first he alle^geth some objections to
the contrary, The objections in Beza to the con^rarie.
that the Princes government is different from the Ministers of the word. And
that it is for many causes a most perilous thing to throw the councels under
the authority of Princes. For that thereby the ambition of them that would
gratify Princes is so kindled; and on the contrary the simplicity of many
terrified, with the unwonted presence of the Princes; not to speak of that
which would God were not true, that there have always been but few Princes,
that have bin endued, with so much both learning and godliness, as is
necessarily required, for the moderating of such actions, or that think they
ought seriously to consider of these matters. When as rather (by a certain
calamity of the world, as it were fatal) they use to be intentive either to
every body, or to hearken rather to the evil than to the good.

Notwithstanding all these objections to the contrary, Beza says: but it
seems not very difficult to answer these arguments. Princes not to be so
separated from the ministers as though they were profane.
First I judge, that heed must be taken, that we so discern not the Princes
of this world, from the ministers of the word, that we should also separate
them, as though they were profane. Which was the first st^ppe, whereby the
papisticall tyranny mounted up into this top, from whence it can now
scarsely be thrown down. But when as no man can deny that Princes ought
principally to care, that the ministry of the word should proceed on his
course without offense, unto whom (I pray you) should it rather appertain, in
the greatest tempests which oftentimes are stirred up of the Ministers
themselves, to call the Churches together, and to ouersee that in their
assembly, all things be done well and orderly, Bez^es answer to our Brethr.
obiec^i^^ that there were no P^^nce^ in the Apost^es time.
and that even with their presence to conf^rme the good and terrify the evil?
But there were no politic Magistrates that governed the assembly of the
Apostles, and of the first Churches: I grant it. For whom would they have
called? Neither do I think, that the Church depends on their edictes or
authority: but this I say, that me thinks he deserves worse of the Church,
that would deprive the Church of the help of the present Magistrates so often
as it is granted of God. Bezaes grant to Christian Prince..
For (I confess) that indeed the office of the civil Magistrates is one
thing, and of the Ministers, another: if ye regard that that is the proper
office of every one of them. But I say, The office in several and in common
of the Prince and of the synod.
that this is a commune office of them both that they should study for the
Churches peace, and indeed so, that they (so often as it pleased God to
furnishe the Churches with this benefit, that they may have a godly
Magistrate) should be the chiefest keepers of good order: and that these out of
the pure word of God should freely and holily, as it were the mouth of the
Lord of which the godly Magistrate asks counsel, should constitute all
things, The Prince^ confirming of the councels decree^.
whereunto the Princes should afterward so subscribe, that they should also
by their authority confirm among their people, that which shall be ordained
out of the word of God, and that they command it to be straightly observed.

If any require examples whereby it may be confirmed. I will answer, it
seems to me that David, Solomon, Ezechias, Josias, did not otherwise with
the Elders of the Church of Israel. And it clearly appears, that all those
that were the faithful auncientes even every one of them, did not think
otherwise concerning the governing of the bounds of the civil power and of
the Ecclesiastical ministry. I think therefore it must be looked unto, not
that the presence of godly Princes be excluded, but be circumscribed in their
bounds, Bezaes circumscribing the Princes bounds in the Counce^
that here they should remember they must do far otherwise, than if they
sat in their throne, either in hearing civil controversies, or in enacting
laws. When as they be in the synod, not that they should reign, but that
they should serve. Not that they should enacte laws, but the same being
expounded out of the word of God, by the mouth of his ministers, they should
set them forth to be observed, both of themselves and others.

But if so be any shall say, it is danger, Bezaes objections against the
ancient synode^ as flattering the Prince^. Mo offenses in the councels by the
Princes absence, than by his presence.
least any entry by this means should be made open to ambitious wits: I
answer that is true indeed. As it appears by those foul and flattering
synodall acclamations, such as were fitter for the Theaters plays, than for a
synod: but I answer, (besides that it cannot be, that all discommodities can
be provided for:) experience it self does show, that an entry is opened to
far greater offenses by the Princes absence, than by his presence. For, what
will not ambitious, light and rash men dare to do; (of which sort too many
have always been found among the ministers themselves) except that they be
kept in awe in their of^ice, with some reverence of the Magistrate being
present, so often as that is granted of the Lord. (...) in councels.
And how truly this is said of me, appears not only out of the Acts of
the Seleucian and Lampsacen Synodes, and that h^uokons synod of Ephesus: but
also out of the Acts of the first Nicenesynode it self.

Briefly therefore to conclude, if a general synod were to be gathered
together, since that neither all the Churches do now obey one Prince; nor the
greatest part of Princes (be it spoken by their leave) seem fit enough to
govern all this action, Bezaes devise what he would have all Princes do in
ordaining and governing a general council.
in so great controversies and discords also of minds; neither yet in the
multitude of Presidentes any thing could be freely enough and quietly
ordained: it should seem necessary, that all they which are chief
Governors, or Princes, or Magistrates of free Cities, setting aside all
ambition on either party, should by a common consent in the fear of the
Lord, determine of the number of those that should be the collocutors, and
also of the time and place of the synod, and chiefly also of him that should
be the Moderator thereof, yea and of all the form of the action, on those
conditions, that both be agreeable to the word of God, and are most fit for
restoring the concord of the Churches. This is the authority that Beza
allows to the civil Christian Magistrates and Princes concerning Synodes.

Wherein although he speak indeed some what too cont^meliouslie of Christian
Princes, and of the godly ancient Councels, and restrain too much on the
other side the Princes authority beyond his examples: yet for our parts, what
has there ever been established by any National Synod in this Realm, The
authority that Beza allows to the prince in the council, confu^eth our
brethren.
wherein her Majesty has taken further authority, for Eccl. constitution,
although the matters were but mere ceremonial, than is here set down and
circumscribed by Beza? If our Brethren will but grant thus much to the Prince;
then, as her Majesty may make laws to confirm those things that in this
order have with us bin decreed, and determined, and to command that they be
straightly observed: so would I (for my poor skill) be glad to learn, by what
spiritie, revelation or scripture, (if there be any that I know not,) both
this authority of the Prince as well before the synod is called, as jointly
with the synod assembled, and afterward in confirming the synodes acts, and
also the synodes authority it self, How our brethren ca^impugne the things
already decreed in the Synods, and by the prince confirmed.
and the decrees that they have in this manner, and in these matters, already
decided, determined, and concluded; may be still by our Brethr. (being but
private Ministers of the same National Church) called again into new
question, cancelled, contemned, condemned, and written against; and that
without any authority either of the Prince, or synod of that Nation? How our
Brethr. can warrant this, I would be glad to know for my learning, and it
would satisfy many mo, if our Brethren shall be able to show it. But they
harping on an other string, cry upon us to show that the Prince has an
absolute authority, and to this purpose they proceed, saying: No absollute
authority


Therefore, until this may be showed by sufficient warrant of Gods holy word,
we hold that the Synod of eue^y Province, The learned disc. pa. 119.
has authority to decree concerning ceremonial orders of the Church, whereof
some may be general to all co^gregatio^s, some particular to certain Churches.

If our Brethren stan^ upon our showing by sufficient warrant of Gods holy
word, this absolute authority, wherewith (by their leave, Bridges.
both uncivilly and neither so christianlike nor subiectlike as should beseem
them) they burden the civil christian Magistrate, which is (God be praised)
over us, her most excellent Majesty: we shall then never reclayme them from
their opinion, nor let them to hold still what they please. For we profess
before hand* at least, I for my part, that I can show none, nor I know of any
such absolute authority, that either we yield to the Prince, or that the
Prince claymeth in ^his our Church: but, set absolute aside, and then, that the
civil christian Magistrate has had, and ought to have some authority, and
that in the bounds thereof, a supreme authority also, we have showed by
sufficient warrant of Gods holy word, and even here not only by the ancient
Father Augustine, but also even by Bezaes own approbation and p^oues thereof,
where he minceth it most: neither can they, nor all the wo^ld elude this that
we have showed thereon, and this is it that we hold also, of the Princes
authority, concerning the calling and governing of the Synodes, what we hold
further, we shall come to it orderly afterward: but here they tell us what
they hold.

We hold ( say they) that the Synod of every Province, has authority to
decree, concerning ceremonial orders of the Church. Before, of absolute
authority, they said, they would be glad to learn, how this authority was
translated from the Church (in which it was once lawfully vested) unto the
civil christian Magis^rate. These were too high words, nor they can ever be
able to show it by sufficient warrant out of Gods holy word, that the true
Church of Christ was ever vested with absolute authority, but always reserved
that vesture, to her Lord and husband Jesus Christ. The Pope indeed, and his
Popish Church, he like a proud Prelate, and she like a malapert Ma^ame,
striued which of them should reuest themselves with absolute authority, a more
royal robe, then became them or any creature to be vested with: The Queen
says David, Psalm. 45.10. did stand on thy right hand in a vesture of the gold
of Ophir. But, least she should think her self vested with absolute
authority, he says unto her: Hearken O daughter, and consider, and bow down
thine ^are, forget also thine own people, and thy fathers house, so shall the
King have pleasure in thy beauty, for he is thy Lord, and reverence thou him:
so that she is still vested with obedience, and though with authority, not
with absolute.

(...) authority excluded.
But it seems, that our Brethren a^ better a^uised, will now let go their
former hold, that they said the Church did hold, for the vesting her with this
vesture. For here they leave out the word absolute, and say only, The
Churches authority not absolute.
that the Church has authority, which is a great deal more truly and warily
spoken than before. And yet herein also (me think^) in another point they
greatly over shoot themselves: for where they say, that the Synod of every
Province has authority to decree concerning ceremonial orders of the Church,
leaving out quite and clean the Prince, whom they include not in the name of
Synod, O^r Brethren excluding of the Princes authority from provincial
Synodes.
but making the Prince another party besides the Synod, move the question,
what is due to the Prince, what to the Synod. This is very much, if I might
not rather say, this is very little, or naught at all, to make now the
Christian Magistrate to have no authority at all, but be clean excluded. And
that is more, if the Christian Magistrate have diverse Provinces in his
Dominions, the Synod of every Province has authority to decree concerning
ceremonial orders of the Church, he or his authority, neither in all nor in
any of those his Provinces, being once so much as mentioned.

But what they mean by these speeches following, whereof some may be general
to all congregations, The Dec^ees of every or any Province, not general to all
congregations.
some particular to certain Churches, let themselves (a Gods name) make their
meaning playner: for as yet, I perceive not, (such is my bulnesse) how all
congregations are bound to observe the Decrees, concerning ceremonial orders
of the Church, that are decreed in the Synod of every Province, or, that every
Province, consisting but of certain particular Churches, has authority to
make Decrees, whereof some may be general to all congregations. What they
intend herein, I can scarce guess, except they would have all Churches and
congregations be bound to receive the Decrees of the Synodes holden in Geneua,
or in some other Province that they like better, and say, they were of the
number of those Decrees, which they made to be general to all congregations.
But, as our Synodes provincial, cannot make any such ceremonial order to
bind them, or to bind generally the congregations or Churches of any other
Princes Provinces: so have they no more authority to make ceremonial orders,
The learned disc. pa. 120.
to bind our congregations and Churches thereunto.

For, as it were to be wished, that all places might be brought to one
perfection, so is it not always necessary, that they be like in all things.
Bridges


Perfection of unity in all places concerning doctrine to be wished for*
This wish for perfection of unity in all places ( if the matter might go by
wishing) is to be liked, so farre-foorth as perfection may be wished, though
hardly hoped for in the imperfection of this life, in the Church militant, and
in the great variety of ceremonial orders, in the sundry parts and Provinces
of the same: howbeit, in doctrine, especially in the grounds and principles
thereof, it is to be wished for even as necessary: Unity (...) Ceremonies.
and although it be not always necessary, that all places be like in all
things, meaning ceremonial orders and constitutions, How farr^ it were
requisite all ceremonial constitutions in one province were alike.
whereof before they spoke: yet for all places that be of one country, state,
realm, dominion or province, it is far better that all places were alike.
For, although variety in those things, may stand with the unity of the faith,
and with the substance of our community in the corporation of the mystical
body of Christ, which is his true and holy Catholic Church, the communion of
the Saints: yet if they be knit together in one order of these ceremonial
things also, The unity of ceremonial matters helps the unity in
substantial matters.
where they live together under one Christian Magistrate, it does more confirm
them in the other substantial unity. And the variety is dangerous in one
Church or kingdom, even in these more free and inferior matters, as with
grief we see in England at this day, what destructions and contentions have
risen, and daily do rise in our Churches, that otherwise in doctrine are
united, and yet the variety of these ceremonial orders, The hurt of variety
in one Province.
has with some called in suspicion the unity of religion, and with many has
disturbed, if not broken the unity of our christian peace and concord. And
therefore excellently well are these two knitte together, Cor vnum, via vna,
one heart, one way. Zanchius noting the difference of these unities, in his
Confession of Christian Religion, Cap. 24. de Eccl. militante aphoris. 14. and
15. writes thus: Zanchius in confess. Christ. rel. cap. ^4. Aphoris. 14. and 15.
For with what things diverse peoples are gathered together into one body, with
the same things also (we believe) that they are conserved, being united, and do
more and more grow together. Wherein the unity of the Church consists for
the substance thereof.
Since therefore the gathering together of the Church, is not made nor conserved
properly by ceremonies, but by the holy Ghost, but by the word, but by faith,
but by charity, but by observance of the commandments of God: we doubt not,
but that also by the same things, the unity thereof is to be retained and
cherished. When as the Apostle also to the Ephesians, where he treats of the
unity of the Church, teaches that it consists in these things, no mention
being made of ceremonies.

In the mean season we deny not, but that unity even in ceremonies
themselves, and in the rites of every Church, Unity of ceremonies how far
requisite.
so farre-foorth as by conscience it may be done, is to be retained and to be
reverenced. For, there are two kinds of things, wherein the unity of the
Church may be: the things that are delivered in the word of God, and the
things that are not expressed in the word, such as are, many external rytes
and ceremonies Ecclesiastical. Unity of things in the word, and of things not
expressed in the word.


In those things ( delivered in the word) we believe that unity every where
and always is very necessary: but in these things, although by it self it be
not necessary, but that according to the diversity of places, and according
to the diverse consideration of the time, it is profitable to have diverse rites:
(...)
notwithstanding, where any thing concerning these matters is ordained and
received for the edification of the Church, Why unity of things not expressed
in the word, is to be kept. 1. Cor. 14.10.
there (we think) that unity also in such kind of rites, is of every body
to be retained, and the orders Ecclesiastical are not to be disturbed.
According to the Apostles rule, all things in the Church ought to be done in
order decently, and to edification, of which matters, we do very greatly allow
and embrace the two Epistles of Augustine written to Ianuarius. The learned
disc. pa. 120.


The wisdom of the Synod therefore, ought to have such regard of all
Churches, that they have special respect to every one.

Here is all of the wisdom of the Synod, but nothing of the authority of
the Magistrate: Bridges
of the Synodes such regard of all Churches, and special respect to every
one, Our Brethren here all for the Synod, nothing for the Magistrate.
that to the Christian Magistrate, there is here neither any regard, nor
respect had or mentioned, either general or special, is this the wisdom and
equal dealing of our Brethren between the Magistrate and the Synod for this
authority?

Howbeit, this also is not true, that for the special respect to every one, If
Ceremonies should be made by respecting every one either person or Church in a
Province, there should be no uniformity at all.
the Decree of the Synod in one Province, may not run in general alike to
all the Churches in that one Province. For, if every one (Church) in one
Province, may vary from another, the same may be said by as good reason, of
every person in every one Church. Also, that the Synod should have a special
respect of every one of them, and so in deed our Brethrens words may be
understood, saying, not to every one Church, but to every one? so that every
one differing from another, it were best to make no Decree at all, but let
every man do as he best liked, hand over head, without any order of uniformity
in ceremonies at all, and so, to make short, and to be partial to neither
party, to cut off all authority quite and clean both from Magistrate and
Synod in these matters, The learned disc. pa. 120.
and let all be fans caeremonies as the French says.

Wherein we of long time in England, have been carried away with an untrue
principle, that uniformity must be in all places, and things alike, as though
we would feed old men and sucking infants all with one kind of meats, or as
though we would cloth all ages in a robe of one assize: and that which is more
absurd, compel men of ripe age to suck the dugge, to wear their biggins, and
to carry rattles and other childish bables. Our church prescribes not
uniformity to any places or Churches in other Princes dominions.


If our Brethren by this long time in England, mean the time, since we have
(God be praised for it) received the light and liberty of the Gospel: then is
not this true that here they say, we have been carried away with an untrue
principle, that uniformity must be in all places and things alike: for we
prescribe not to all places, nor preiudicate any other Churches, that are not
in nor off the state of the Churches in England and Ireland: neither yet all of
them, Uniformity.
but that in some things also according to their customs and privileges, If
particular Churches might alt^r ceremonies, then were the Synodes constitutions
of no authority.
they may differ concerning these ceremonial constitutions, from the general
uniformity of our Churches.

But, were it lawful for every particular Church in England, to alter the
ceremonies decreed in our national Synodes according to their pleasure or
opinion, to what purpose need any Synod at all to be troubled about these? or
what authority at all has a Synod to make any ceremonial constitutions, if
the particular Churches of that nation be not bound uniformly to keep them?

They say, that the uniformity of these things, is, The similitude of feeding
old men and s^cking infants with one meat. The unfitness of this si^ilitude.
Our Br^thre^s similitude is against themselves.
as though we would feed old men and sucking infants, all with one kind of
meat. Although this similitude ^itteth not their purpose, since it is against,
or above nature, for sucking infants to feed on all such kind of meat, as
old men can do: neither are these ceremonial constitutions fet forth, for the
souls of the weak and simple people to feed upon, in stead of Gods word, or
that they should receive them as any part or substance of their souls
nourishment and substance, as the meat is that the infants feed upon: yet
notwithstanding in the very point indeed, wherein our Brethren should apply
it, (if they will apply it at all any thing aptly to the purpose) it makes
clean against them. For although sucking infants can not feed on all kind of
meat that old men can, yet old men can feed well enough on all such kind of
meat, as sucking infants can, for all they can feed on other stronger meats
besides. And therefore, if our Brethren will needs compare these Ceremonies
unto the meat of the weak, (although they be ordained to far other uses,
both for the weak, and for the strong also) yet, why may not the strong feed
on them in their kinds, so well as the weak may, for all they can digest
stronger meat? for, though the old men feed thereon in another manner, and
not in sucking the dugge, as sucking infants do, yet, for the meat it self,
Milk ^ay b^ eaten both of old and yo^g.
which is the milk, they may be fed both of them wellynough with one kind
of meat: and many a good old man, and young too, will not think himself ill
dealt withal, to have every morning for his breakfast as good a mess of
milk, as even a sucking infant also, for the proportion of his strength, may
feed upon.

Saint Paul writ^ng to the Corinthians, says, 1. Cor. ^. ver. 1. I could not
speak unto you (Brethren) as unto spiritual men, 1. Cor. 3.1.
but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I gave you milk to drink,
S. Paul prescribes vnifor^itie to the Cor. for all some were as babe^ among
the^.
and not meat: for ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able:
and yet for all this, Saint Paul sets down among them an uniformity in
diverse ceremonial orders and constitutions, to the observation whereof all of
them were alike bounden, albeit that all were not alike in knowledge among
them, for, some of them were Prophets, some had of them more and greater gifts
then other had, some of them were stronger in faith and grace than other were.
Although therefore this similitude may be well applied, to the diverse manner of
teaching the doctrine of the word, as S. Paul likewise applies it, Hebr. 5.
verse. 12.13. and 14. and S. Peter, 1. Peter 2. verse 2. yet neither serves it
to prove any diversity in the unity of doctrine, nor to infer any such
diversity of any lawful ceremonial constitutions, as should in any Church
impeach the uniform observation of them.

As this similitude therefore, of one kind of meat for old men and sucking
infants, serves not their turn, so much less does this comparison in their
other similitude. Or as though ( say they) we would cloth all ages in a roabe
of one assize. The similitude of clothing all ages in a roabe of one assize.


And why also do they not apply this resemblance against all the civil and
temporal laws of the realm? for, whereas there is an uniformity prescribed
in them, and that the due obedience of all the subjects in the Realm, The
overthrow of all the political orders.
little and great, young and old, according to their degrees and estates, is
alike required of them all, might they not say, this were even as though we
would cloth all ages in a roabe of one assize?

And if we may thus jest out the matter with such unfit similitudes, the unity
even of doctrine, and the universal obedience unto it, of all alike, may with
a light mock be shaken off also. The overthrow of all unity in life and
doctrine.
Are we not all bidden to cast off the cloakes of unrighteousness, to put off
the old man, and put on the new, and to be clothed with the white reins and
righteousness of Jesus Christ? and shall we thus scorn out these general
precepts, and say: whow, this is as though we would cloth all ages in a roabe
of one assize: yea verily would we as near as we could, even cloth all ages
of them in the one assize of such a dutiful obedience as is both requisite to
the kinds of these roabes, and aunswerable for their age and calling worthy:
although indeed, this be not one assize, but one liuerie, one cloth, one
color, one cognizance, prescribed to all alike, of the which every one has
his portion severed, according to the measure of his scantling.

And that which is more absurd ( say they) compel men of ripe age to suck the
dugge, Sucking the dugge.
to wear their biggings, and to carry rattles, and other childish bables.

If their ripe age be but only of the bodily age, and not the ripe age of the
new man in the knowledge and growth of Jesus Christ, they may yet be such, as
not only well enough may suck the dugge at the breast of the Church their
Mother: The ripeness or infancy of the inner or new man's age.
or, as may feed on milk again, as the Apostle speaks: but howsoever they
think scorn, or count it absurd or impossible, as did Nichodemus, yet, as
Christ said, (if they be not already) they must even be borne again, and may
be such, as of whom S. Paul says, Galath. 4. ver. 19. my little children, of
whom I travel in birth again, until Christ be formed in you. But if they be
of ripe age in the inner man, they are not compelled, either to suck the
dugge, or to wear biggins, or to carry rattles, and other childish bables, by
any their due obedience, to the uniform conformity of such rites, ceremonies,
Vnreuerent comparisons.
and constitutions, as a lawful and godly Synod, with the confirmation of the
civil christian Magistrates authority, shall think convenient and fit to
prescribe unto them: for, neither are such ordinances to be thus irreverently
(being not superstitiously prescribed) compared to such base things, neither
are they set forth, to foade or dally the people like babies, or bables, but
for edifying of them in order and comeliness. And although there be also some
use of them, for helping the weaker, notwithstanding all be not weak alike,
nor strong alike, but some weaker, some stronger than another: yet, while they
that are strong, do not glory in their strength, but in the Lord, the godly
stronger will bear with the infirmity of the godly weaker, The stronger ought
to bear with the weaker.
nor will take the advantage of all the christian liberty, which other wise
they might, and may still use in freedom of conscience, without any
controllment of those ordinances: and yet, were it but for fear of offending
the weaker (and following Christ, that would not break the broosed reed) they
will still check themselves with this sentence of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10.23.
All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: which though
they be lawful in their own nature by the law of God, yet if we must
submit our selves to an uniformity with our Brethren, to edify and win
them to greater matters, as Saint Paul says, He became all to all, that he
might win all: how much more, when to these good purposes, a godly Synod
has made such ceremonial constitutions, to restrain or compel those that in
arrogancy, disdain, or obstinacy, would not thus draw together by one rule
in one uniformity, ought the godly people, yea, although all were strong, and
none weak among us: yet, for fear of opening a gappe to licentiousnes and
disorder, or to the breach of public concord, or to the contempt both of the
Synod, and also of the Magistrate, to yield all due obedience and reverence to
the uniform observation of such lawful ceremonial constitutions. And those
(especially being private persons) as should call these uniform ordinances,
biggins, bables, and rattles, deserve to be rattled up with other rattles, for
so vnreuerent contempt and disobedience.

How much better, and with more grave aduisement than these, our learned
discoursing Breethren, writes Calvin on these Constitutions of the Church,
who in the tenth Chapter of the fourth Book of his Institutions, Section 1.
speaking of the power of the Church, in making Ecclesiastical laws, he says
even in these words. Haec potestas tractanda nunc est, etc. Calvin of the
Churches constitutions.
This power is now to be treated upon, whether it be lawful for the Church to
bind the consciences with her laws: in which disputation, the political
order is not touched, but only this is handled, Ca^uine in Inst^t. lib 4. ca.
^0. sect. 1. What constitutions of the Church are to be impugned*s and what are
not.
that God may be orderly worshipped, according to the rule that he has
prescribed, and that the spiritual liberty, which respects God may remain
safe unto us: the use has obtained, that those things are called the
traditions of men, whatsoever Edicts of the worship of God besides his word,
have proceeded from men. Against these is our strife, not against the holy and
profitable constitutions of the Church, which make either to keep discipline,
or honesty, or peace. The end of our striving, is to restreyne the unmeasurable
and barbarous Empire, that they usurp upon the souls, which would be counted
the Pastors of the Church, but in very deed, are the most cruel butchers.
Here we see, what Ecclesiastical laws and constitutions Calvin allows,
and what he impugneth. If they be such as be made for matter of the worship of
God, or to incroch upon the spiritual liberty of the conscience, Calvin
proclaymeth war against them, and so do we also, but, if they be such as tend
to any of these three good ends, discipline, honesty, or peace, Calvin
pro^esseth not to strive with any such constitutions, and such only do we
defend, and either our Brethren strive against them, or we agree so far
herein.

But here Calvin ( least the good and lawful constitutions also, should be
thought suspected, as matters touching the intangling of the cons^ie^ce,) after
he has moved the question of Saint Paul's saying, Romans 13.5. how we must obey
the Princes laws, not only for wrath, but for conscience, proprie autem, etc.
but properly conscience respects only God, as I have already said.
Hereupon ( says he) sect. 4. it comes to pass, Sect. 4.
that a law is said to bind the conscience, which binds a man simply without
men's looking into it, or without consideration had of them, as for example, How
Gods law does bind the conscience in the breach thereof.
God commands not only to keep the soul pure and chaste from all lust,
but also forbids any uncleanness of words and outward lasciuiousnes. To the
observation of this law my conscience is subject, although there were no man
else in the world alive. Even so, he that demeaneth himself intemperately,
sins not only in that he gives evil example to his brother, but he has
his conscience tied with a guiltines toward God: In matters indifferent the
conscience is free, though the body obey for avoiding offense.
in matters that are indifferent, the reason is otherwise, for if they breed
any offense: we ought to absteyne, howbeit, with a free conscience, so does
Paul speak of flesh consecrated to Idols: If any (says he) cast a scruple,
touch it not for conscience sake, conscience I say not thine, but the others.
The faithful man should sin, if before hand being admonished, he would
notwithstanding ea^e that flesh. Nevertheless, howsoever in respect of his
brother, an abstinence is necessary for him, as it is of God prescribed,
Obedience for conscience sake.
yet for all that, he leaves not to hold the liberty of conscience: we see
how this law, binding the external work, leaves conscience unbound. Now to
return to the humane laws: if they be made to this end, To what end humane
laws may be, or may not be made.
to cast a religion upon us, as though the observation of them were by
themselves necessary, we say that they were imposed upon the conscience, which
thing was not lawful, for our conscience has not to do with men, but with God
alone, whereunto apperteyneth that common difference, between the earthly
court, and the court of conscience, etc.

But yet ( says Calvin further on this matter) that difficulty is not
cleared that arises out of Paul's words. For, How princes must be obeyed for
conscience.
if we must obey Princes not only for because of punishments, but of
conscience, it seems to follow thereupon, that the laws of Princes have
dominion over the conscience: which thing if it be true, the same also must be
said of the laws Ecclesiastical. I answer: First, we must distinguish, inter
genus and species, between the general kind, and the special fourmes
thereof. For, although the particular laws touch not the conscience, yet are
we holden by a general commandment of God, The princes laws touch the
conscience in generality, though not in specialty.
which commends unto us the authority of the Magistrates: and on this hingin
(or principal point) consists Paul's disputation: the Magistrates, because
they are ordained of God, are to be prosecuted with honor: in the mean season
he teaches not, that the laws which are written of them, perteyne to the
inward government of the soul, while in every place he extolleth both the
worship of God, and the spiritual rule of living justly, above any whatsoever
decrees of men. Another thing also is worthy to be noted, (which yet depends
on that we have said before) the laws of men, whether they be made of the
Magistrate, or of the Church, although they are necessary to be kept, (I speak
of good and just laws) even therefore (notwithstanding by themselves they
bind not the conscience) because the whole necessity of keeping them, has
respect to the general end, How good laws made of the Magistrate or of the
Church, are to be kept.
but it consists not in the things that are commanded: from this order they
differ far, that both prescribe a new form of worshipping God, and ordeyne a
necessity in free things.

Thus far does Calvin show, how far the Magistrates, and the Churches
constitutions, are good and necessary to be obeyed of all alyke the christian
subjects, so far as they impose no simple necessity of themselves, nor any
necessity at all to salvation, nor directly touch the court of conscience, nor
are matter of Gods worship, from all which three points, all our Magistrates
and Churches constitutions are free, and therefore, except our Brethren will
offer them wrong, they have no just cause to refuse or impugn them.

Concord in constitutions.
When Calvin has now thus declared, how farre-foorth the Magistrates, and the
Churches constitutions are lawful and good, after he has at large confuted
the traditions of the Papists, (least rashly we should condemn all alike) he
shows again in the 27. Section, Sect. 27.
how we must take heed what constitutions of the Church we inueigh against.
But ( says he) since the most part of the unskillful persons, when as they
hear that the consciences of men are wickedly bound to humane traditions, and
that God is worshipped in vain, they with the same dash include all the laws,
All the Churches laws are not to be counted humane traditions.
wherewith the order of the Church is established, we must here also in good
time, meet with their error. Certaynely we may very soon be here deceived,
because it appears not by and by at the first show, what difference there is
between those laws and these, but I will so lay down the matter in few
words, that the likeness of them shall beguile none. This (first) let us hold,
if in every society of men we see that it is necessary there be some policy,
which may serve to nourish the common peace, Some rite or ceremony ought ever
to flourish.
and to reteyne concord: if in the affairs that are to be achieved, there
ought always some rite (or ceremony) to flourish, which that it should not be
cast off, apperteyneth to public honesty, yea, and to humanity it self.

The same is to be observed especially in the Churches, which are best of all
vpholden, with a well set constitution of all things, but then without concord,
No Churches at all without concord.
they are utterly no Churches at all: for which cause, if we will have good
regard to the safety of the Church, we must wholly with diligence look to that
which Paul commands, that all things be decently done, and according to
order. But when as in the manners of men, there is so great diversity, so
great variety in their minds, so great fight in judgments and wits:
neither is any policy firm enough, except it be settled with certain laws:
neither can any rite (or ceremony) be kept, without a certain standing form
thereof: the laws therefore that are profitable heereunto, we are so far off
from condemning them, that we rather contend, that if these were taken away,
The force of laws.
the Churches sinews are dissolved, they are wholly defaced and scattered
abroad. For that which Paul requires, can not be had, that all things should
be done decently and in order, except order it self and comeliness consist by
observations (as it were certain bounds) added thereunto. Order and
comelin^sse maintained by observations.
This thing is only to be always excepted in these observations, that they be
not believed either to be necessary to salvation, and so bind the conscience
with a religion: or that they be directed to the worship of God, Sect. 28.
and so piety be reposed in them.

We have therefore the best and the most faithful note, which purteth
difference between those wicked constitutions (by which it is said, that true
religion is obscured, and the consciences subverted, Comelines and order.
) and between the lawful observations of the Church. Either decency, or
order, or both, are the notes of difference between good and evil
constitutions.
If we shall remember unto these, that one of the two be ever set down, or
both of them together, that in the holy assembly of the faithful, all things
be decently performed, and with the dignity that is meet: that the
community it self of men be retained in order, as it were with certain bonds
of humanity and moderation. For, whereas it is once understood, that the law
is made for public honesty sake, the superstition is already taken away,
into the which they fall, that measure the worship of God by men's inventions.
Again, when as it is known that it tends to the common use, that false
opinion of bond, and of necessity is overthrown, which cast a great terror
to the consciences, when as traditions were thought necessary to salvation,
since that here is nothing sought, but that charity might be nourished amongst
us by a common duty.

These words of Calvin, do most clearly prove, a necessary uniformity of
all the people in common alike, to the observation of these ceremonial laws,
and constitutions.

And here, least any scruple or cavil should arise, about the understanding
this way or that way, of these the Apostles words, which are the general
squire of all these ceremonial constitutions, Let all things be done decently,
and in order: Calvin also expounds the true and simple understanding of
them, and proceeding, says: Caluines definition of comeliness and order.
But it is worth the labor, yet more clearly to define, what is comprehended
under that comeliness which Paul commends, and what also under order. And
verily, the end of comeliness is partly, The end of comeliness
that while the rytes or ceremonies are adhibited, which may move a reverence
to the holy matters, we should by such helps be stirred up to godliness:
partly also, that the modesty and gravity which ought to be regarded in all
honest actions, should there shine most of all. In order, this is the first
thing, that they that are the Governors should know a rule and law of well
governing: but the people that is governed, should accustom themselves to an
obedience of God, and to a right discipline, and then, that the state of the
Church being well composed, peace and tranquillity be provided for.

We will not therefore call that comeliness, wherein there is nothing besides
a vain delight: The false and vain comelines.
the example whereof we see, in the Theaterlyke furniture which the Papists do
use in their divine service, where nothing else appears, than a vizard of an
unprofitable gorgiousnesse, and an excess without fruit. But unto us, that
shall be comely that shall so be fit for the reverence of the holy
mysteries, that it be a meet exercise unto godliness, True and fruitful
comelines.
or at the least, ^reath of orders.
that which shall make a beawtifying agreeable to the action, and yet the same
not without fruit, but that it may admonish the faithful, with how great
modesty, religion, obseruancie, they ought to handle the divine service.
Moreover, that Ceremonies should be an exercise unto godliness, it is
necessary that they lead us straight to Christ. Likewise for order, we will
not set it in those toyish pomps, that have nothing but a vanishing glory,
True and false order.
but in that composition (or placing of things together) that may take away all
confusion, rudeness, stubbornness, all troubles and dissentions.

To all this again, we agree with Calvin, and desire no other, nor have (I
hope) any other Ecclesiastical laws, and ceremonial constitutions, then are
answerable in all points to this interpretation of comeliness and order,
howsoever to the honor of these our brethren, they may seem otherwise. And
here Calvin ( after he has exemplified this general rule with such
ceremonial co^stitutions as are mentioned in the scripture, which I reserve,
till our brethren anon shall lead us to the ceremony of kneeling) he
concludes thus upon the general precept of the Apostle.

Last of all, since that for this cause he delivered nothing expressly, because
these things are neither necessary to salvation, Sect. 30. Discipline and
ceremonies are to be diversely applied to edification, according to the manners
of every nation and age.
and ought to be diversely applied to the edificatio^ of the Church, according
to the manners of every nation and age, therefore it shall be meet as well to
change and abrogate those that are used, as to institute new. I confess in
deed, we must not run rashly, nor often, nor on light causes, to the making
of new, but, what may hurt or edify, charity will best judge, which if we
shall suffer to be our moderatrix, all shall be safe. But now it is the duty of
the christian people, to keep such things as are ordained according to this
rule (with a free conscience in deed, and with no superstition) howbeit, with
a godly and an easy inclination to obey them, not to hold them in contempt,
Sect. 31. Haughty disdeyne and frowardness, in violating ceremonies.
not to ouerslip the^ of rechles negligence, so far is it off, that by
haughty disdain, and frowardnes, they should openly violate them. What liberty
(thou will say) can there be of conscience, in so great observance and heed
taking? yea rather, it shall notably stand together, when as we shall consider,
that the sanctions whereunto we be bound, are not fixed and perpetual, How we
are all bound to these constitutions to observe them, though all of us have no
need of them.
but are outward rudiments of our human infirmity, whereof, though we all of
us have no need, yet we all of us do use them, because we are mutually bound
to nourish charity amongst us one to another, this we may reknowledge in the
example above cited.

What? is there a religion consisting in a woman's Carbaso.
linen kerchiefe, that it were a wicked thing to come forth bare headed? is
the decree of her silence a holy thing, that can not be violated without
heinous wickedness? is there any mystery in kneeling, in burying of a dead
corpse, which can not be passed over without great offense, that must be
purged? no such thing: Ceremonies.
for if a woman have need to make such haste to help her neighbor, In what
extraordinary and necessary cases, ceremonies and constitutions may be omitted.
Women's covering o^ uncovering their head. Women's speaking. Praying standing, or
kneeling. Buryall. The custom of the region to be regarded in ^hese things The
breach by co^^empt or contumacy of ^hese things Festival days. Manner of
building Churches. Singing Psalms. The changing of these things by every body,
is the occasion of contempt. Caluine^ re^erent writing of Ceremonies, how far
d^fferent from these our Breeth.
that she can have no leisure to cover her head, she has offended nothing, if
she run to help bare headed: and there is place where she has no less
opportunity to speak, than in an other place to hold her peace. And also,
there is nothing that lets him to pray which stands, who being let by
disease, is not able to boowe his knees. To conclude, it is better in good time
to bury the dead, than where there wants a winding sheet, or where there
are not some to carry forth the corpse, to tarry till it putrify above
ground. Howbeit, there is nevertheless in these things, that to be done, or to
be taken heed of, that the custom of the region, the ordinances, yea finally,
humanity it self, and the rule of modesty shall suggest: wherein, if by
unskillfulness or forgetfulness, any thing be done amiss, no crime is
committed: but if it be done of contempt, it is a contumacie, or proud
stubbornness, not to be allowed. In like manner, the days themselves what they
should be, and the hours, what manner building of the places, which Psalms,
what day should be soong, it makes no matter. And yet it is meet, that there
be certain days and hours standing, and a fit place to receive them all,
if there be any consideration had of peace keeping. For of how many brawles,
would the confusion of those things be the seed, if that according as every
body liked, it were lawful to change those things that perteyned to the
common state? since that it will never come to pass, that one thing would never
please them all, if matters, as though they were laid forth in the midst
among them, were left at every ones choice: but if any body grumble hereat,
and would here be more wise than he ought to be, let him see to it with what
reason he may approve unto the Lord his way wardnesse. Nevertheless, this
saying of Paul ought to satisfy us, that we have not a custom of contending,
nor the Churches of God.

Thus modestly and with great gravity, writes Calvin of these
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies and constitutions, wherein, although it were but of
a linn^n kerchiefe on a woman's head, yet, (for public order sake) he would not
have it contemned, though upon occasion or necessity it were omitted, so far
off was Calvin from this contemptuous likening of these smallest Ceremonies in
the Church, to the sucking of the dugge, to the wearing of biggins, and to the
carrying of rattles, and other childish bables, or to the scoffing at the
uniformity of them, as though we would feed old men and sucking infants all
with one kind of meat, or as though we would cloth all ages in a roabe of
one assize: for, notwithstanding (as Calvin says) they be but outward
rudiments, to help and strengthen our humane infirmity, whereof (some being of
riper age in Christ than other) we all of us have no need of them, The
Constitutions. Acts 15.
and yet (says Calvin) we all of us do use them, and why so? but that, both
because ( says he) we are mutually bound to cherish charity amongst us one to
another: and because it is not lawful for every body to change those things,
Why every particular person or congregation may not alter ceremonial
constitutions.
that apperteyne to the common state, but that they must be only changed or
taken away, by the same authority that did make them: and as they are not
lawful to every person, no more are they lawful to every particular Church to
change them, because they reach higher* even to the common state of the whole
region. And besides, if it should be suffered, that every private person, and
by the same reason, every private congregation, might change the Churches
public constitutions: since that, tot capita, tot sensus, no one constitution
would ever please all persons: this would become the very seed ( as Calvin
calls it) of all brawles and confusion, and in the end, the clean overthrow
of the Church.

These principles of Calvin being well weighed, let now the indifferent reader
judge, how truly our Brethren say of these ceremonial constitutions, wherein
we of long time in England, have been carried away with an untrue principle,
that uniformity must be in all places, and things alike. If this be an untrue
principle in these matters, then has Calvin himself helped to carry us away.
True or untrue principles of uniformity.
But (I am afraid) our Brethren (for all their learning) are alittle too much
carried away with affection, that makes them both in this matter and in many
other, mistake untrue, for true, and true, for untrue principles. But let us
now see our Brethrens reason, that they allege against uniformity in these
ceremonial constitutions.

Our land is not yet wholly converted to Christ (so great has been our
negligence hitherto) therefore there can not be such an uniformity of orders
in all places as shall be profitable for all. The learned disc. pa. 120.


This argument, although we have seen it already sufficiently confuted by
Calvin, let us yet consider it somewhat further, in the example even of these
constitutions, Bridges.
made by the Apostles and Elders, Acts 15. so often alleged by our Brethren:
for, if this argument be good, then could not they have made (as they did)
those Ceremonial constitutions, and commanded the charge of keeping them for
any time, The Apostl^ decree, Acts 15. general, and to be kept uniformly
during the time thereof
generally and with like uniformity of all the Churches, to whom they wrote
their letter and decree, saying: verse 23.28. and 29. the Apostles, the Elders,
and the Brethren, unto the Brethren that are of the Gentiles, in Antiochia, and
in Syria, and in Cilicia, etc. It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us, to
lay no more burden upon you than these necessary things, that is, that ye
absteyne from things offered to idols and blood, and that which is strangled*
and from fornication, from which, if ye keep your selves, ye shall do well,
etc. Conversion to Christ.
Were none of all those Christians in the Churches, to whom they wrote these
decrees, wholly converted to Christ? Whether all the Churches were wholly
converted.
or were all the christians in all those churches, wholly converted, or
converted all alike? and yet the decree was generally, to be uniformly kept of
all those churches. Yea, what shall we say to the Church of Jerusalem it self,
where this decree was made? were they all wholly converted to Christ? no
hypocrites, nor yet weak brethren among them? Whether the Church at Jerusalem
were wholly converted.
did not even the Elders of Jerusalem themselves, bewray the great weakness
of their multitude, when as afterward, Acts 21. S. Paul came to Jerusalem?
did they not say to Paul, verse. 20. thou see (Brother) how many thousand
Jews there be which believe, and they all are earnest followers of the law,
etc. and for these weak brethrens sakes, they counceled S. Paul to purify
himself being a Jew, according to the ceremonies of the Jews: and although
they knew the christian liberty, yet would they have S. Paul ( to avoid the
offensive opinion, that the multitude of the christian Jews had conceived of
him) to conform himself unto their weakness. All the Church of Corinth not
wholly converted. and yet all uniformly subject to the Apostls orders.
And what shall we say to the other Churches of the Gentiles? were all the
Christians in the Church of Corinthus wholly converted to Christ? and yet
notwithstanding, S. Paul ceasseth not to prescribe unto them all alike, some
ceremonial constitutions: neither was the difference of their strengths, or
weakness in their conversion to Christ, any breach or let, to the uniformity
of their observing the same.

But by this reason of our brethren, there could be no uniformity of
ceremonies, not only then with them, or now with us, By our Breeth, reason, no
land nor Church in the world should have uniformity.
in all places of the Church and land of England, but in no place in all the
whole world: for, where is the whole land or church wholly converted to Christ?
if they say, that by these words, not wholly converted, they mean not all, nor
the greatest part, but that some be not converted to Christ: then they confute
their own reason, in that the weakness of the lesser part, ought to be no
prejudice, to the making of uniform ceremonies unto the greatest part: for the
law considers rather the universal multitude, than every particular party,
and so, confessing that our land ( God be praised for it) is for the greatest
part converted, though not wholly converted, How our land is wholly converted.
in respect of every person: yet, as the greatest part is commonly called by
the name of the whole, it may be well said also, to be wholly converted. But
what mean they hereby, yt our land is not yet wholly converted to Christ? Our
Breeth. confession that for religion we converted to the whole substance thereof.
they have confessed in their preface unto this learned discourse, that for the
substance of religion, it is now publicly maintained for our true and holy
faith. If any be not yet converted unto ye whole truth thereof, how does not
this argument make the more, for uniformity in these ceremonial constit. were
it the easlier to win the^ (if by any means they may be won) by keeping an
vnforme order in those ceremonial constitutions, yt are neither ill of
themselves, The land not wholly converted.
and are but ordained to these good ends, that order and comeliness be
retained? shall we rather win and convert them to Christ, Uniformity in other
matters the rediest way to win such as are not yet converted.
both by rejecting all uniformity in those ceremonial constitutions, that
both they and we agree upon to be good and lawful, and also by rejecting all
uniformity in any other that may be devised? Yea, by this their rule, we
should keep no uniformity in any of those ceremonial constitutions, that
they their selves set forth unto us: or, is it lawful for them, to press
their Ceremonies upon us, to be observed with uniformity, and is it not more
lawful for us, having the law with us, to do the like to them, Our Breeth.
their selves urge uniformity against this principle.
so long as we urge none, nor otherwise, than serving to order and to
comeliness? if ours seem not so to them, no more do theirs seem so to us,
and we hope, and thank God, that we are also even the greatest part, and
therefore may be called the whole, that are (we trust) wholly converted to
Christ: How we are and are not wholly converted to Christ.
wholly (I mean) for substance of Religion, though in measure of faith, and
conversation of life, there is none of us all, nor yet of our Brethren, so
wholly converted, but that the best of us all come short, and oftentimes divert
from Christ, and must still be feign to cry to Christ, Convert me domine, and
conuertar, Convert me Lord, and I shall be (wholly) converted. But will
uniformity ( in those Ceremonies, that are given to help and strengthen our
weakness) hinder our Conversion unto Christ? yea rather, how will they not
greatly further it?

But now, if we be not so wholly converted to Christ, as we ought to be, Our
Breeth accusation of negligence.
although (I confess) negligence may be some part, and too great a part, the
cause thereof: yet (I fear me) our Brethrens too double diligence, Our Breeth.
too double diligence.
in disturbing the concord of the Preachers, and even in this rejecting of
uniformity in these ceremonial constitutions, giving liberty not only to every
Synod of themselves, but also to themselves in these their discourses, without
any Synod, and without yea against the authority of the civil christian
Magistrate, and much more without, yea against the whole state of the Church in
this our la^d, yea giving liberty to every particular church, and withal by
these their reasons, to every private person, according as he or she is weak
or strong, to admit or reject all uniformity, to alter and innouate as they
fancy, all such Laws and constitutions of ceremonial rites and orders, as are
by a lawful and godly Synod of the Church decreed; and by the authority of
the civil christian magistrate, confirmed, established and proclaimed, to be
universally among us, and uniformly observed. These sayings and doings of our
Brethren their selves, These sturs moved by our Breeth. a great cause that many
are not converted.
have bin, if not the chiefest, yet not the least cause, that not only our
land is not so wholly converted to Christ, as it might otherwise have been, but
that so many are wholly auerted from Christ, and become perverted renegates and
apostataes unto Antichrist, yt before these sturres between our brethren and us
began, were very well coming on, and by little and little (so far as man can
judge or hope by outward signs) might have been thoroughly won, Assemblies
for new orders.
and wholly converted to Christ, or might yet in the unsearchable riches of
gods mercies be reclaimed and reconuerted. But, firmum flat fundamentum, Deus
nouit qui sunt sui. If they be none of Gods elected, exi^runt e nobis, non
fuerunt ex nobis: they went from among us, they were none of us. But now to
our Brethrens conclusion, that they gather on these premises.

Therefore it were meet that the Overseers, and Elders of the Church, should
come together to consider of this matter, The learned disc. pa. 121.
what orders were most meet for diverse places, to bring them to the obedience
of Christ: what for the furtherance of them that are newly come, and what for
the continuance and increase, of them that are very well come on.

Here still the sovereign Prince or civil Christian Magistrate, Bridges.
is either clean forgotten, or of purpose rejected, as having no stroke at
all in these matters, except they will include the Prince in one of these
terms, The Prince still omitted
the Overseers and Elders of the Church. But they have before restrained those
titles, to the Pastors, and to those Elders who^ they call the Governors, and
distinguishing the Prince from them, they call him the civil Christian
Magistrate.

But now, what orders when they come together to consider of this matter, can
these Ouer-seers and Elders devise, that shall be most meet for diverse places:
The Elders assembly to consider of orders meet for diverse places.
if they consider not on this withal, that (if not in all places, yet at the
least in all those diverse places) they should be uniformly kept? For, to
keep diversity, or to keep them diuersely, in those diverse places, what is
it else, than to be bound in no places to no orders at all? Whether the orders
that shall be devised shall be kept uniformly.
Will they not yet at least wise, have those orders that shall be devised, for
the furderance of them that are newly come, to be uniformly kept among all
them that be such persons in all, or diverse places? And likewise, those orders
that should be devised, for the continuance and increase of them, that are
very well come on, to be kept also uniformly in all those diverse places,
where such persons be? But again, if they shall consider this better; what
certain order can here be set down, that shall be meet for the diversities of
these persons, when they still (by the grace of God) are growing up, and ware
daily and hourly of riper age and riper, and always going forward and
coming on to Christ, as to the goal and mark set before them. What? And
shall then these Overseers and Elders make the orders most fit to the
Pastors, do nothing else but still come together and daily and hourly change
their orders? Or shall these persons wear their coat still of one assize? Or
if some come on forwarder than othersome, so that they can not keep a iumpe
and meet proportion to every one; shall we have no certain orders at all,
for fear these Overseers and Elders should miss in some? See, what a
childishe reason (if I may be so bold to return the term) this is of our
Brethren that tell us of childish bables, How the new orders should kept.
to take away all uniformity of ceremonial constitutions, and all for the
difference of some diverse persons.

And yet we deny not, but that as there are diversities of persons, there may
well be diverse and several orders appointed for them; Diverse orders kept
uniformly in the degrees of diverse persons.
howebeit, to be kept uniformly by those diverse degrees of persons, for whom
they are made. For we do not in such manner (as our Brethren untruly report
of us) feed old men and sucking infantes all with one kind of meat, nor
cloth all ages in a roabe of one assyze: but such and such ceremonies, are
appointed to such and such degrees of persons, and not all to all alike,
although some of those ceremonies be of that nature, Some ceremonies may serve
both old and young.
that they may as well stretch to all; as some one kind of meat may be fed
on, even of old men and of young also, as well as of sucking infantes; and of
sucking infantes, as well as of old and young men. May not all the people in a
parish come to some one Church, in some one place, at some one time, appointed:
and there all of them kneeling on their knees (at least so many as be able)
say altogether some one appointed form of prayer, or confession, or
thanksgiving: may they not all ( at least as many as can) sing together
some one certain number of Psalms or hymns? May not all infantes, by some
one public form prescribed thereof, be Baptized alike? And some one like
public form be appointed, for all the communicantes to receive the Lords
supper after one manner? May not one form of marrying be appointed to be
used through out all the whole Land and Realm of England? If there can be
no one ceremonial law or constitution made of these things: Our br.
prescription of ordinances and ceremonies to be used in general uniformly.
how have our Brethren abused us, that have set out a book of common
prayer, wherein many of these (some one) ordinances, (being all of them
indeed but ceremonial constitutions and decrees) are set down and
prescribed to be in generally and uniformly used of all the Churches in the
Realm, so far as their authority stretches to prescribe them? For if they
prescribe them not: why do they set them out, if they regard not who use
them, and who use them not?

I see not therefore, but that even by their own example, (and much better
having utter warraunt) some ceremonial constitutions may be well decreed, for
an ordinary public and general order, to be uniformly kept, of all
Churches a like in a whole Realm, so far as other necessity or some
particular occasion, The learned disc. pa. 121. and 122
does restrain them.

The same doctrine, although not the same parts of doctrine, is to be every
where: but ceremonies, even as they be ceremonies, do admit variety; as
time, persons, and occasions serve to be diverse. Yea Christian liberty, in
them sometimes, Variety of ceremonies.
is necessary to be testified, because there are many so simple, that they
know not the difference between those things, that are necessary in the
Church, and those that are not of necessity. There be that think a Cross
or Foont (as they call it) is as necessary in Baptism, as water: and that
kneeling at the Communion, is more necessary than preaching of the Lords
death: that a surplusse in Common prayer, is more necessary, than a devout
mind: and great occasions offered to the ignorant so to think, when they see
them that preach most diligently, pray most fervently, and minister the
Sacraments most reverently, according to Christ's institution, to be
displaced of all ministry, for a Cross, or a Foont, or a Surplusse, or some
such other tryfle.

There is great difference between Doctrine and Ceremonies, Bridges
but if our Bretherens former reasons should hold, to respect the diversities
of the people: they might alter the unity of the doctrine too.

But the same parts of doctrine ( they say) are not to be every where. How
the same parts of doctrine are not to be taught every where.


This is spoken somewhat too obscurely. For, the doctrine and all the parts
thereof, are indeed to be every where, though (I grant) not all to be taught
every where to the same persons, at the same time: and so may the use of the
same ceremonies also, upon occasion be altered, or left off.

But ceremonies ( they say) even as they be ceremonies, do admit variety.
How ceremonies admit variety, and uniformity much better.


This I grant likewise, and yet again even as they be ceremonies, they as
well admit uniformity, and in some cases especially may much better admit
uniformity (even as they be ceremonies) than variety, Variety admitted in
constitutio^s ceremonial accidentally
and much nearer is it to the nature of any ordinance and decree, be it
ceremonial or otherwise, to admit uniformity than variety. For else, it
could be no certain decree. When as the variety which it admits, comes
unto them in that respect, as extraordinary times, persons, and occasions,
serve to be diverse, or as necessity it self (that has no law) enforces
the breaking of the ceremonies, How the christian liberty in ceremonies
necessary to be restified sometimes, and at all times.
all which is but accidental to them, and no prejudice to the ordinary and
general use of the same ceremonies uniformity.

Yea ( say they) Christian liberty, in them sometimes is necessary to be
testified, because there are many so simple, that they know not the difference
between those things, that are necessary in the Church, and those that are
not necessary. Things necessary and not necessary.
This we grant likewise, that sometimes in ceremonies the christian liberty
is necessary to be testified. Yea rather, at all times the christian liberty
is to be testified. And when w^^ use ceremonies most uniformly, then is the
best use withal of this restification of the christian liberty. And therefore
it yet follows not, that upon such testification made, we must never keep
any one order or uniformity of any ceremony at all.

Sometimes ceremonies altered for their sakes that knew not the difference of
necessary and not necessary things.
And yet besides, we grant this also, even for the testification of the
Christian liberty, by omitting sometimes or altering some ceremony or some
part thereof; and even for this cause also that our Brethren here allege. Yea,
although there were not many so simple, that they know not the difference
between those things, that are necessary in the Church, and those that are
not of necessity; yet, because this error might grow in them, if the
uniformity of all ceremonies were urged too precisely. Howbeit, all this
hinders not, but that for the ordinary and general use, the uniformity of
them may still remain, specially being so used, that testification at all
times or often may be made against all absolute necessities, Not only simple
persons, but learned have erred in this matter.
and all superstitions, or any other abuses of them. Which indeed is the more
needful, because this error of simple necessity, is not always only of
simple persons: but even of learned men. As we read of S. Peter, how stiffely
for a while he held the necessity of the Jewish ceremonies, after their date
was out. And how the multitude even of the faithful Jews were so affected
still unto them that S. Paul was feign for that time, to yield to the
conformity of them. And this is not the smallest error, among the most
learned of the Papists at this day.

Yea, by their leave also, I think these our Learned discoursers do chiefly
stumble at the like stone. Our Brethr. error in not knowing necessary and
unnecessary things.
Not only about the Jews Iudicialles, but for their Sanedrin and these
consistory Elders ( if there were ever any such as they pretend, but can
prove none) and for some parts of discipline and ceremonies too: urging these
things as necessary that are not necessary. Might not a man be so bold for
all these things, as to send home these speeches to the authors of them? Yea
Christian liberty, in them sometimes, is necessary to be testified, because
there are many so simple that they know not, the difference between those
things that are necessary in the Church, and those that are not of
necessity: when as we see, so notable learned men even in their Learned
Discourses, so foulely ouershoot themselves, in not considering thoroughly of
this difference between things necessary in the Church, and not of
necessity.

But to come now to the particular ceremonies, wherein our Brethren would have
this variety admitted. There be ( say they) that think a Cross or Font (as
they call it) is as necessary in Baptism, as water.

For my part, I have not heard of any such, that think so, Baptizing with a
cross and a font.
nor I ever read of any the grossest Papist, that so writes. They rather err
on the other side, in standing too much on the necessity of water, when they
make (...) the necessity even of salvation. I grant, The sign of the cross
in Baptism.
they put too great a confidence in the sign of the Cross, and many have done
and do, abuse it with foul superstition and Idolatry. But yet: all this
debarreth not, but that there was in the primitive Church before those abuses
came, and since those abuses (God be praised) have been removed from among us,
there may likewise remain, some good use thereof: being only used as a sign or
token, without any opinion of virtue in the same. For, we do not detest the
sign it self, as did Julian the Apostata, though we honor it not, as Julian
vpbrayded falsely to the Christians, that they did.

As for the font, ( for so we call it in-deede, and may well enough, Baptizing
in a font.
with out any suspicion of the term) in my opinion, is the fittest of any
ordinary place, for the baptizing of our infantes.

Now, if these caeremonies do admit variety, as times, persons, and
occasions serve to be diverse: then are they not of themselves mere
superstitious, nor yet utterly to be left off, no, though they have been (as
has the sign of the Cross) shamefully abused, If these ceremonies admit
variety, then they may be used
but these caeremonies being so used, as they are now ordained to be used, and
that with liberty of exception against the abuses, and testification of the
right use of them: they may be used still, even by our Brethrens confession
well enough, so that we will grant them, that they may admit variety: and we
are content to grant it, if they would in-deede (as here in word they say)
but admit it sometimes, and leave of the sign of the Cross in Baptism now
and then, only to remove the error of necessity from the simple, so that
they leave it not of in contempt, nor usually: Our Brethr. incroching upon the
liberty of variety.
or that the infant sometimes (as times, persons, and occasions serve to be
diverse) be not baptized in the font, but in a basyn: so they do not (upon this
permission of variety sometimes) in the end grow from sometimes to all
times, and make a necessity on the contrary, that it must not be baptized in
the font, and the sign of the Cross must not be used at all: because both the
font and the Cross have been abused. If they would not (as some do) encroch
upon this liberty of variety, but use it with discretion, when diversity
only of time, (...), persons and occasion served: there is none of our
Brethren that might incur displeasure, much less displacing by so doing.
Kneeling at the communion.


And that kneeling ( say they) at the Communion, is more necessary than
preaching of the Lords death.

If kneeling at prayer and thanksgiving be a good caeremony, it may be well
appointed to be used also at the Communion* when (besides our recording of the
Lords death) we pray unto him, that we may receive those his heavenly
mysteries worthily, ^neeling at the Communion.
and give him thanks both for the same his precious death, and for the
institution of this memorial thereof, and all the other his benefits: whereupon,
the name of Eucharist or thanksgiving, is one of the proper names of this
Sacrament.

How preaching is or is not simply necessary at the communion.
But to say, that some think kneeling at the communion is more necessary than
preaching of the Lords death, is hardly and doubtfully spoken.

If they mean by preaching that which Christ says, so often as ye shall do
these, ye shall show forth the Lords death: I grant, in that sense,
preaching is simply necessary, and so, far more necessary than is kneeling,
How kneeling is or is not necessary at the communion.
which is but necessary conditionally, and that not in the proper sense of
necessity but of conueniencie. But if they mean by preaching the free
Discourse by the Pastor, at large and at his voluntary, treating on the Lords
death, besides the ordinary form in the book prescribed: then is not
preaching at the Communion ( for any necessity thereof) any more necessary
than is kneeling; and in some respect not so necessary neither, in that an
order thereof may be easilier appointed to the Communicants, and observed of
them, than a Sermon at the ministration of the Communion, to be always so
preached by the Pastor.

How kneeling at the communion may well admit a decree of uniformity.
As for kneeling, is indeed but an outward ceremony, nor any thing
comparable to preaching, in the dignity of the action: howbeit, it is a
reverent external action, and so being easy for the most part of all the
communicantes to be performed, it may well admit a ceremonial constitution
and decree for the public and uniform observation of the same. Whereupon (me
thinks) Calvin also writes very well, even among those his testimonies that
I last cited, but I there passed it over and reserved his observation of
kneeling, with his other particular examples, for this place. Who says hereon,
Lib. 4. Instit. cap. 10. sect. 29. in these words. Calu. in Inst. lib. 4. cap.
10. sec. 29.


Of the former kind, ( that is to say of those ceremonial constitutions that
are for comelines) Paul has examples: as, that no profane banquetes be mixed
together with the holy supper of the Lord. Ceremonial constitutions for
comeliness.
That women except they cover their heads, come not forth into a public place,
and many other things are had in (...) use. That we pray kneeling and bare
headed, that we administer the Sacraments of the Lord not uncleanly, but
with some dignity, that in burying the dead we give thereto a certain
honesty, and such other things as pertayne thereto. In the other kind, (
that is to say for order) there are hours, designed to the public prayers, to
the sermons and to the mystical actions. In the sermons themselves there is
quiet and silence, and places appointed thereunto, the tunes (or singing
together) of the hymns; and days prefixed for celebrating of the L. supper,
Calvin for kneeling.
that which Paul forbids that women teach not in the Church, and if there
be any such like things. But chiefly those that conserve discipline, as the
Catechizing, the Eccl. Censures, excommunication, fastes, and the things that
may be referred to that cataloge. Al eccl. constitutions either pertain to
rites and ceremonies, or to discipline and peace.
Thus may we refer all the Eccl. constitutions, which we receive for good and
wholesome, unto two heads: for the one sort of them have respect to rites and
ceremonies, the other to discipline and peace.

Howebeit, because here is danger, least of the one part the false Bishops
should snatch a pretense hereupon, to excuse their wicked and tyrannical
laws ( he speaks of those Popish Bishops whom he before described:) and on
the other part, Sec. 30.
least there should be any too much fearful, which being warned by the
former evils, would leave no place at all to laws, be they never so holy: it
is a thing worth the labor here to testify, that (to conclude) I do allow
those humane constitutions, which are founded on the authority of God, and
which are taken out of the scripture, and so are wholly divine. How kneeling is
both an humane and divine tradition.
Let the example be in the kneeling which is made while the solemn prayers are
had. The question is, whether it be an humane tradition, that is lawefull for
every one to refuse or neglect. I say, it is such an humane tradition, as
that with all it is a divine tradition. It is of God, in respect it is a part
of that comeliness, No one form of discipline and ceremonies not particularly
prescribed to all ages.
the care and conservation whereof is commended unto us by the Apostle. But it
is of man, in respect that it designeth out in specialtie that which generally
was ordained, rather than expounded.

By this one example we may esteem, what we ought to think of this whole
kind, to wit, because the Lord has faithfully comprehended with his holy
eyes, and clearly declared, both the whole sum of true righteousness, and
all the parts of the worship of his godhead, and whatsoever was necessary to
salvation: in these he only is our Master that must be heard: but because in
external Discipline and Ceremonies, he would not particularly prescribe what
we should follow; neither judged he one form to be convenient for all ages of
the world: we must here flee unto the general rules that he gave, that what
things so ever the necessity of the Church shall require to be commanded for
order and comeliness, may be driven to them.

Thus among other these ceremonial constitutions, writes Calvin, of kneeling
at the times of solemn prayers, which are then most requisite, while we are
participating the heavenly mysteries of the Lords supper.

And therefore kneeling, though it be not necessary with any simple necessity
in it self, Wearing the surplusse.
yet as it is a reverent and divine ceremony, it is necessary, as convenient,
at the times of solemn prayer and thanksgiving, and of consequence, at the
communion, both for order and comeliness of the bodies gesture, and for
testification and edification also, of the minds devotion.

But least a surplusse here should be left out; that a surplusse ( say they) in
common prayer, is more necessary than a devout mind.

I do not think that any man is, or ever was of that opinion: For were he
never so blind a Papist, yet till he chiefly stood on his blind devotion.
And I appeal even to our Brethrens consciences, whether they think indeed
(as I believe they do not) that any man is of that mind.

But what shall the reader and and all the people think of this, that the
surplusse being here one of the ceremonies brought in for instance, to admit
variety, as times, persons, and occasions serve to be diverse, and so of
consequence, may well be used, yea, and by the correlation of this rule, should
be used ordinarily, though it admit sometimes such occasion of leaving it
off. And this also is become one of the desires in this Learned Discourse, of
all the faithful ministers that seek the reformation of the Church of
England, that the surplusse may be accounted but as a ceremony that admits
such variety. The wearing a surplusse.
And yet we see, there are many amongst them so devoted against a surplusse;
that rather than they will wear it at any time, they will forsake all the
ministry, and make great stir and trouble about it, notwithstanding the
judgment of all the reverend and learned men, that have testified ( as even
here their selves also are feign to do) the indifference of it, and of the
use thereof. But our Brethren not thinking of this contradiction between their
own writing and their doing, but thinking ( if at least wise they so think
indeed) that there be ( but what number they tell not) that think these
ceremonies are more necessary than they be: let us now see, what reason
moves our Brethren to think that there be such as do think so.

Of the occasion that some think these ceremonies are more necessary than
they be.
And great occasion ( say they) offered to the ignorant so to think, when they
see them that preach most diligently, pray most fervently, and minister the
Sacraments most reverently, according to Christ's institution, to be displaced
of all ministry, for a cross, or a font, or a surplusse, or some such other
trifle.

Every thing here that misliketh our Brethr. is but a trifle with them. And
thus they pretend unto the world, that they be displaced but for trifles, Our
Brethr. are not displaced for trifles.
But what soever these are, is all the communion book, and public prescribed
form of divine service but a trifle too? And is the civil Christian
Magistrates authority, and so, the Queens Majesty's supreme government, in
all Ecclesiastical causes so well as temporal, and of consequence, in all
these and other causes in controversy between us, Displacing of Ministers.
but a trifle with our Brethren too? and is all the superior authority of the
Bishops, all the controversies about Discipline, and the Ecclesiastical
Regiment of their tetrarchie, for Doctors, Pastors, Governors, The chief
matters wherefore our Br. are displaced.
and Deacons offices which they contend for, and all the other particular
matters in question, both in this Learned Discourse, and in all their other
treatises which they still set forth, nothing but trifles? For, these are the
cheifest matters of their displacing, which are in-deede far more weighty
matters than is the making a sign of the Cross, than is the baptizing in a
Font, or than is the wearing of a Surplesse.

If the ignorant think that they are displaced from all Ministry, only for
a Cross, or a Font, or a Surplesse, or some such other caeremonie, as they
call trifles: surely, then are they very ignorant, and our Brethren delude
the people in this ignorance, that tell them they are displaced from all
ministry, but for these causes. Although indeed, were they displaced from all
Ministry, Some not displaced but forsaking their calling.
for none other causes then such as these, admitting also that these were but
trifles too, as here they call them: albeit, some of them have voluntarily
displaced themselves from all Ministry, forsaking their calling, without
being by any others displaced: but admit also they are displaced, and that from
all Ministry, (which notwithstanding, the most part of them, or the most
learned of them, are not: and whether they are so, that compiled this Learned
Discourse, God and themselves do knows:) yet am I sure that they need not, nor
if their selves were not in greater fault of more contempt and obstinacy
against these things, Faithful Ministers should rather yield to trifles then
be displaced for them.
than the weight of these things (by their own account) amounts unto, they
neither need, nor should be displaced of all Ministry for them. For if
these things be (as they say) but trifles, when as the yielding to them might
keep themselves from being displaced: ought they for trifles to be the
occasion of their own displacing, from such weighty matters as is all the
Ministry?

So that even that which they pretend to the ignorant, yea, to the learned
and all, in this their Learned Discourse, ( to breed more odiousness to the
displacers of them) as that they are displaced for trifles, does show that
this excuse is but a trifle, (or rather an untruth,) when as the matter, the
more trifling it is, bewrays the greater obstinacy in him, that will rather
suffer him to be displaced of all the Ministry, and thereby all the people to
be utterly given over to the wide world, for any benefit at all of the
Ministry they shall have by him, or by any other of his procuring, rather then
he will relent to the Synod, to the Church, to the Realm, to the Prince, but
in any one thing, and that but such, as he his self confesses to be but a
trifle. How does not this, the more that they extenuate the matter, aggrauate
the crime, and make it (as our Brethren said, Page 93.) that a less crime
increased with contumacie and contempt of the Churches admonition, may become
worthy of the fame castigation?

But here our Brethren are so far from the acknowlegement of this great
fault, Our Br. praisiug themselves.
that to move the reader more with the indignity of their displacing, they
fall a praising them selves, that they preach most diligently, pray most
fervently, and minister the Sacraments most reverently, according to Christ's
institution. All which three points in whom they do in-deede concur, we
must needs confess deserve high praise. And would God, both they, and we,
and all the Ministry, may do our endeavors to the vttermoste of our gifts in
these three duties.

Our Br. most diligent preaching.
But if our Br. preach never so diligently, and yet cut not the word of God a
right and with discretion, (an ownce whereof is worth a pound of Learning:) if
they speak not the words of truth and soberness, as Saint Paul says to
Festus, Acts 26. ver. 25. But spend all, or the most of their preaching, in
contention about these unnecessary controversies, in Discoursing of Regiment
and matters of state, in inuectiues against their Brethren, against the
Prelates, yea, against the Civil Christian Magistrate, Discretion with
diligence.
( and all for the urging of these platformes,) it were a great deal more
commendation (in other men's opinion, than it is in their own) to be less
diligent in preaching, than some of them be. Notwithstanding, diligence in a
good preacher in-deede, is worthy both great commendation and (as Saint Paul
says) double honor.

And whereas they recommend themselves also, that they pray most seruentlie:
Our Br. most seruent prayer.
I am glad to hear of it, and God grant they do so. But why do they blabbe it
thus to all the world, with publishing it in print? do they seek the peoples
praise herein also? must the feruencie, and most feruencie of their prayer, be
blasoned thus abroad with this trumpe of their own Learned Discoursings
thereon? O that our Brethren would rather have remembered, what Christ said,
Math. 6. ver. 5. of these that seek praises for their prayings A^en dic^ vobis
mercedem habent. Howbeit, feruencie in all goodness deserves praise, and in
prayer is even the marowe of it.

But, such feruencie as condemns (be it never so sound and godly) all
prescribed form of public prayer, set forth for the peoples use and
edifying, by the authority of the true Church of Christ, and of the Christian
Magistrate, is too fiery a feruencie in my judgment. Too fiery fer^encie.


Our Br. most reverend Ministration of the same.
And as for their third commendation that they Minister the Sacraments most
reverently, according to Christ's institution. What mea^ they hereby? can they
prove that our Communion Book, the prescribe^ order whereof they refuse, both
in public baptism and in the Lords Sapper, The Synods making pure
caeremonies.
for any material and necessary parts of the Sacraments are not ministered
according to Christ's Institution? If they mislike them for any formal or
accidental part, (which is rather no part at all) as not of the substance of
them, but accedents and ornaments of comeliness and order,) do they also
minister the Sacraments, according to Christ's institution, for place, for time
and for all the manner of them (if the name of Christ's Institution may be
applied to these appendances) as, for baptizing them in rivers, for ministering
the Communion after Supper, Our ministration of the sacraments.
for sitting at a Table, or rather on the ground, and such like? if it be
lawful for them to leave all these circumstances, and yet they may be said
to minister the Sacraments most reverently according to Christ's Institution:
why should they refuse to Minister them according to the order prescribed by
our Book, except they can prove, that we minister them not in any godly
manner, but against Christ's Institution wickedlie and irreverently, which they
shall never be able to prove. Yea we minister them with all due reverence, and
in many points, a great deal more reverently then they do. And therefore for
these their vnreuerent demeanours, and obstinacy therein, against our good and
reverent orders, by order and authority of the Church and Magistrate
established, they are worthily displaced, though with grief thereat no less
to us, Our Br. the chief causes or their own displacing.
that they should deserve it, than unto them that they should feel it. But
hereby the ignorant, and all other may well perceive, that it is not as they
would bear the world in hand, they are displaced from all ministry for a
Cross, or a Font, or a surplesse, or some such other trifle, as they call
them: but for matters far more importaunt and necessary, they their selves
by their wilful contumacie, being the chief causes of their own displacing.

The Synod therefore, ought to be careful in ordeining of caeremonies, The
learned disc. pa. 122.
not only that they be pure and agreeable to the word of God: but also that
they be expedient for the time and persons, for whose use they be ordained:
and as wilful contemners of good orders established by public authority,
are worthy to be corrected, so intangling of men's consciences, or
Tyrannical coaction in these indifferente matters, must always be avoided.

Still our Brethren give the whole authority in ordeyning of Caeremonies, to
the Synod. Albeit, I gladly subscribe thus far heereto, Bridges
that in ordeyning of caeremonies, The Synods carfulness in ordein^ng
ceremonies.
( and so far as their authority to ordeyne reaches:) the Synod ought to
be careful, that they be pure and agreeable to the word of God. But again,
understanding this purity of them, in their own nature and institution,
although by corrupting the fame institution, they have been afterward defiled.
For these caeremonies that the Apostles and Elders Act. 15. did ordeyne, had
been also defiled by the Jews with great superstition of holiness in them,
and erroneous opinion of necessity, of the worship of God, Caeremonies not
utterly abolished though they have been defiled.
of the wrought work, of merit, and of preferring them above faith in God,
and the moral commandments of the Law: and yet for all those former so
dangerous abuses, yea, for all the date of them was also expired: The Apostles
and Elders, considering the weakness of the Christians ( for the most part of
ye multitude) did ordeyn those caeremonies to be uniformly and generally (for
the time) used, without any of those errors or corruptions of them. And so now
in like manner, if any caeremonies in their own nature be not evil, or be
indifferent, and were first instituted only for purposes that were good,
though the posterity degenerating have corrupted (with errors and
superstitions) th^se good caeremonies, and so made them evil: yet may the
Synod now with the authority of the Prince confirming them, not only (if
they think it best) remove and abolish those corrupted and defiled
caeremonies: but also (if they see there be needful and expedient use of
them) remoouing all the corruptions, defilings and superstitions of them, and
re^^ning them unto their first good ends and institutions, they have good
authority with the Christian Magistrates approbation, to reordeine them. And
so may those caeremonies well be called and holden, (for all their former
pollution) pure and agreeable to the word of God.

But the Synod ( say they) must not only have a care of this point in them:
but also that they be expedient for the time and persons, for whose use they
are ordained.

This I grant likewise. And even therefore we use the caeremonies now in our
Church ordained, because they be expedient for the time and persons,
Caeremonies expedient for the time and persons.
for whose use they are ordained. And contrariwise, although we improve not in
other reformed Churches their caeremonies different from ours, which our
Brethren would bring in (though their variety of ceremonies in one state, is
more to be misliked) yet we admit not those caeremonies even for this, because
they are (considering well the time and persons) not so expedient either for
our time, or for our persons, but would breed great offense to many among
us, and no less danger to the state both of our Prince and of our whole
Church also.

Our Br. caeremonies not expedient for our time and persons.
And therefore, as we hold us content with our good and lawful caeremonies:
so we accept this that here they say, wilful contemners of good orders
established by public authority, are worthy to be corrected. But, since we
may well take our orders established by public authority, for good orders,
till they can (better than yet they have been able,) prove them to be ill
orders ( I speak not of the abuses of them, but of the orders themselves,
Yielding obedience.
according to the ends and institution of them) it follows, that they being
both wilful contemners, and that is more, not only open breakers, but (all that ever they can by preaching, writing, and practicing, earnest impugners of
them, they are (by their own verdict) worthy to be corrected: although we
wish rather their amending than their correction.

And yet let them think of this, Intanglingmens consciences.
that whereas the orders that they would erect, are not established by any
public authority among us. What correction then shall men judge that they are
worthy of, who being but private persons and without all public authority,
would establish, and impose those orders upon us?

As for intangling of men's consciences, or tyrrannicall coaction in these
indifferent matters, that it must always be avoided, we hold well therewith:
neither do we know or allow of any such intanglinges or coactions, but do
as much mislike it, as they do. To what indifferent matters obedience is to be
yielded.
Howbeit, in those matters, which in their own nature are indifferent ( but
not indifferent in their use, being established by public authority:) we
affirm, that a dutiful obedience and reverence may be required, and is to be
yielded, without any note or touch of tyrannical coaction, in them that have
authority, or any intangling of men's consciences that obey them, when in the
ordeyning of them, plain exception is made, both against the opinion of
necessity, and of all matter of worship, religion, and conscience in them, and
that they are ordained only, for order and comeliness sake.

The argument of the 15. Book.
THis Book proceeds further on the Synods. First of the Synods Eccl.
Censure, for faults and controversies, and whether there would not still be as
many and worse then now there are, and that even in the Pastors also. Of our
Br. remedy by having two Pastors at least in every Congregation, and if these
two Pastors contend, of the remedy by the Synod. Of their example in the
assembly Act. 15. Of Timothies Eccl. Censure without Synodes. Of Danaeus
judgment in calling Synodes and Councels not without the Princes license. Of
the Assemblies of particular and Shire Synods, and what authority our Br.
ascribe unto them, and what danger they would breed to the whole state. How
the elections and ordainings of all the Pastors in the Realm should be made
by these Shire Synodes. Of the example that they would prove it by, Act. 14. in
Paul and Barnabas ordeyning Pastors by the peoples election. How election by
the people is not necessarily inferred on that example. How our Br. exclude
their Elders that are Governors and not teachers from dealing in these
matters. Of calling a Synod where any Benefice is vacant or Pastorship void in
all England. What the Synod; what the Congregation has to do therein.
Whether this be the right electing and ordeyning grounded on the word of God
and practiced in the Church 200. years after Christ. Whether the right of
Patrones presentations be profane and prejudicial. Whether the Bishops
giving of orders be presumptuous and full of absurdities, and of the 4.
absurdities and presumptions whereof they challenge it. First, that the Bishops
do more than the Apostles durst do, without the Churches election. The second
absurdity and presumption in giving an office without a charge of a flock. Of
the difference of giving orders and offices. Of the difference of a Constable
and Church warden from the orders and office of a Minister. Of the offices made
in respect of a place, that yet cease not their interest with the dispossession
of the place. Whether the Ministry depends on this or that place. How our
Br. were made Ministers, if they be faithful Ministers. How the name and
office of Minister and Pastor is not so altogether of act and esse, that it
admits not also a potentiall ability. Of the difference of making
Ministers without a flock and living assigned to the^, and of making Bishops
without a Bishopric. The third absurdity and presumption of vagabound and
wandering Ministers. Whether a Minister cease to be a Minister being out of
his charge. Whether the charge of the function or of the place be of the
essence of the Ministry. Whether our Ministry smells of the Popish
indelible charectar. Whether the Minister is to be ordained a new after
suspensio^ or exco^municatio^. The fourth absurdity and presumption of making
unfit Ministers and of the offense hereof, and of our Br. co^paring the^ to
Ieroboams Priests. Of the complaint hereon, and the imagined excuse by
necessity. Of the exercises of the Ministry and enforcing the Ministers to
study. The Accusation of other crimes ensuing for greater and lesser livings.
Whether the Popish Priesthood be allowed. Of the Statute for reading the
Articles, and of the officers bribings. Of old Sir John lack latin ryding about
to his Benefices, to read the Articles. Of the godly meaning of the Statute,
and whether the Statute be not directly against our Br. or no. Of the
mayntenance of the two Pastors in every Congregation, besides the Doctors, the
Confistory of the governors, and the Deacons in the same, and of the new
transposing of all the Parishes for their provision. Of the abuses (as many as
any now there are) creeping in, when they have all that they please. Of the
corruptions in the particular Synodes and visitations, by Chauncelors,
Officials, Registers, and Apparitors. Of our general Conuocations, and their
complaining of Chauncelors and Lawyers in them. Of the Bishops several place
in the Convocation, and of their authority of prohibiting to speak in the
Conuocatio^. Of subscribing to the Articles confirmed in the Parliament, Anno
1562. with the accusat^on of the Articles for gross and palpable errors, and
the examination of them. The accusation of the Bishops to exercise Lordship
over the faith, and to ouerrule all the Synod, and how this accusation
reboundeth on these new Pastoral Bishops in their Synodes.

The Synods Eccl. censure
THE Synod has further aucthority concerning discipline, to reform and
redress by Eccl. censure, The learned disc. page 122. and 123.
all such defaultes and controversies, as cannot be determined in the
particular Churches: As for example, if the Pastor himself have need to be
severally punished, where there is but one Pastor in a church: or if Elders
which should be reformers of others, have notoriously misgouerned themselves:
or if they have bin led by affection to condemn an innocent, or to justify
the ungodly: in these and such like cases, all contention is to be concluded,
by the aucthority of the Synod.

Bridges.
SO far as is warranted by evident Scripture, or is not prejudicial to her
Majesty's supreme aucthority, nor to any the good orders established in the
Churches, and Realms of England and Ireland: and with the like exception of
the right and interest due to every on^ in other states and countries: The
Sinods ecclesiastical ce^sure for faults and controversies.
I grant this further aucthority of the Synod, to reform and redress^, by
the Eccle. censure, all such faults and controversies as cannot be determined
in particular Churches.

As for the examples, that here for instancies they bring in, run all upon
their former presupposalls, of these pretensed Pastors and Elders.
Nevertheless, (by the way) we may hereby perceive, that if we should set up
such presupposed Pastors and Elders, as our brethren would have: we should so
little be free, Faults and controversies would be still as many and worse, if
not more, tha^ now there are.
either from defaultes of life, or from controversies in these, or such like
matters: that still there would be as much ado, not only to punish and
reform the people; but even the Pastors themselves and that severely, and
perhaps, more a do also, (when the aucthority of the Prince and Prelates, and
the laws established were dissolved, and dispersed to several congregations,
or Synods, than now there is.

More pastorsin a congregatio^n, mo controuersie^.
Yea, but (say they, this might be) where there is but one Pastor in a
Church.

And what if there be more Pastors in a Church than one ( for so would they
have it that there should be more) may there not fall out as great, and more
controversies too, among them twain than where there is but one? and should
not the Synod punish them both, if they were both faulty? and indeed they
have showed the examples hereof already, A lively and late example of 2.
Pastors equal in one congregation.
in some places, where of late the congregations have had two of these Pastors,
( as the saying is, vnum arbustum non alit duos erythacos) such contentions and
part-takings have bin between them, that the whole congregation has bin
thereby divided, and dissolved. Example, that congregation which (because they
could not at hoame have this Tetrarchie of Doctors, Pastors, Governors, and
Deacons, in such manner as is here prescribed,) went over not long since, into
the low Countries, there to enjoy the^. Fleeing to Synodes.
But how long agreed these their two Pastors and their other Governors? did
they not even there also (and that in short while) break forth into such
sharp contentions, that they were soon divided into two congregations of one,
and at length, the most part of them came home as wise, or perhaps wiser than
they went out, being taught by experience. (which they say (page 48.) is the
mistress of fools) to to repent themselves at leisure, for their to quick
following of these new devises.

But may these Elders also which ( they say) should be reformers of others,
The misgouerning of these new Gou^^nors.
so notoriously misgouerne themselves, that not only they may be lead by
affection, but so far lead thereby, as to condemn an innocent, or to justify
the ungodly, it appears by this, they may; and it is not unlikely, but that,
as here they put the case thereof before it begins, so, were it once begun, we
should feel to late the lamentable experience, by the notorious misgouernments
of those governors.

But say they (not for remedy to prevent it, for that were the best, to cut it
off, according to the old saying, obsta principiis, s^ro medicina paratur: but
for redress when it is done, as when the pate is broken to lay a plaster.)

In these and such like cases, all contention is to be concluded by the
aucthority of the Synod.

Here is still no authority but all of the Synod. And can nothing else, or
must none else, have aucthority to remedy these matters, but a Synod? and must
a Synod ( which is an assembly out of many particular Churches) be always
called together, Our Brethrens continual fleeing to Synod^.
so often as any contention or default happens among Pastors, or among the
Elders, in any one church or congregation?

If it be such a default or controversy ( say they), as cannot be determined
in the particular churches.

Lo, here may our brethren see and learn, The inconveniences by the want of
the jurisdictions already established.
what it is to take away the Bishops Jurisdiction in a Diocese, and in a
Province the Archbishops, and the Princes Superior authority also in a
Realm or Kingdom, for, let their Jurisdictions and aucthorities stand, these
controversies and defaultes might be punished, decided and reformed well
enough, and never t^ouble so many Churches, by calling so often their Pastors
from them, by gathering, and continuing Synodes for these matters, and so
perhaps breed more and new contentions.

But (say they) some example we have thereof. Acts. 15. where those
contentious Scismatikes that withstoode Paul and Barnabas at Antiochia, were
constrained to yield by aucthority of the Counsel, and Paul and Barnabas
restored to their credit.

We do not deny the authority of a Council, nor of that holy assembly,
and if they will so call it, a Council or Synod, whereby Paul and Barnabas
were restored to their credit, and the contentious Scismatikes constrained to
yield. The assembly act. 15.
And would God our ^rethren would consider more advisedly the force of this
Example, least in their not yiedling to the aucthoritye and decrees of the
lawful Synodes and Counsels holden in this Realm and Church of England,
about these matters which they impugn, they show themselves to be more
factious, than were those contentious Scismatikes.

But now, if we shall more nearly level these Synodes and Councels that our
brethren would have, The assembly. act. 15. was not a Synod of diverse
particular Churches.
for the determining of these controversies, and concluding all contentions,
and for the punishing of all such notorious defaults and misgouernements, to
be called together into an assembly of the Bishops or Pastors of diverse
particular Churches, comparing the same with this assembly Act. 15. of the
Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem: we shall not find, that (besides the
parties sent from Antiochia, where the controversy arose) there was any
assembly at all, either from diverse, or from any other particular Churches,
but only the assembly of the Apostles and Elders of Jerusalem. Ver. 1.
Wherein the text is clear. verse. 1. etc. Then came there down from Judea
certain men, and taught the brethren, saying: except ye be circumcised after
the manner of Moses, ye can not be saved. And when there was great dissentio^
and disputation by Paul and Barnabas against them; they ordained that Paul
and Barnabas and certain other of them, should go up to Jerusalem unto the
Apostles and Elders, about this question" that is ( says Beza) Iudices illis
ferebant Apostolos and Seniores Hierosolymitanos, Beza in Act. 15.2.
they appointed the Apostles and Elders of Jerusalem to be their Judges.

Verse. 3.
Thus ( says Luke) being sent forth by the Church, they passed through
Phoenicia and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles, and they
brought great joy unto all the brethren." But here Luke tells not, that
they brought any of the Elders of the churches, either of Phoenicia or Samaria,
or of any other Churches else, with them to Jerusalem. Verse. 4.
"And when" ( says Luke) "they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of
the Church, and of the Apostles and Elders, and they declared what things God
had done by them. But ( said they) certain of the Sect of the Pharisees which
did believe, rose up, saying that it was needful to circumcise them, and to
command them to keep the law of Moses. Then the Apostles and Elders came
together to look to this matter.

Here, when they came together, no mention is made of Churches, but of the
Church, and of the Apostles and Elders. Which Elders ( we have showed out of
Calvin) were the Pastors of the Church of Jerusalem. So that if this assembly
shall be called a Synod or Council: yet was it but a Synod or Council of one
particular Church, and the Apostle S. James being the Governor or Bishop of
that Church ( as is before proved) was the concluder and final determiner of
that controversy. And therefore, When a Synod is requisite.
where our Brethren say, some example we have hereof. Act. 15. This example
fitteth not so well as they ween, neither for the Synodes that they would
have, nor for the authority of the Synod.

But if they will decide the matter by examples, The Exam. of punishing by
eccle. C^nsure in the aucthority given to Timothy.
especially for redressing by Eccl. censure, defaultes and controversies, and
for punishing those Pastors or Elders of the Church which should be refourmers
of others, and have notoriously misgouerned themselves: Why forget they here,
how Saint Paul gave Timothy, not only authority to make Pastors over diverse
particular Churches: but also how to receive accusation against the Pastoral
Elders, and those that sin, that is (as our brethren call it) notoriously
misgouerne themselves, to rebuke them openly, that is (as Calvin exposideth it)
vt quisquis inter eos male se gesserit severe corrigatur. The first seeking of
redress^ by eccl. Cens. is of the Bish. or Archbishop not of Synods.
Whosoever among them behaueth himself ill, that he be ( say our Brethren)
severely punished. So that, if the Pastors defaults and controversies cannot
be redressed by Ecclesiastical censure, not determined, in the particular
Churches, wherein they are Pastors: why should they not first go either to the
Bishop of the Dioces; or further, to the Archbishop of the Province, as we have
seen sufficient proof that Timothy was?

But if the matter be so difficult, that it cannot yet be by them determined:
then in deed, by the authority and license of the Christian Magistrate, ( if
there be a Christian Magistrate, as GOD be praised we have, When a Syn. or
council is requisite.
if we can be thankful and obedient) a Synod or Council of many Bishops and
Pastors, may be called and holden, to refourme and redress those enormities.
Sic tamen conuocetur Prouinciale concilium etc. says Danaeus, Danaues in
Christ. Isag. Part. 3. li. 3. cap. 38.
lib. 3. Isag. cap. 38. But let the provincial Council be so called
together, that the same Synod be signified unto the faithful Magistrate of
that place whereunto it comes together, to the end that all suspicion of
Coitionis.
cluttering together or of faction, may be avoided; besides that, neither ought
that Provincial Synod to come together, Notice and leave granted of the
Christian Prince to have a Synod or counsel.
nor yet to be summoned, but that the power of calling together such an
assembly, either generally or specially, from the chief faithful Magistrate
of all that Region, Kingdom, or Common weal, whereof that Province is a part,
be before hand expresse^y or by silent yielding, granted and given unto the
Church and to the Pastors thereof.

And in deed for such great matters and controversies in Religion, and
notorious misgouernances, not only of Pastors but of the Bishops and
Archbishops themselves, ( when the matters could not be concluded, How the
general and provincial counc. were called and holden.
nor the persons severely punished in their particular Churches): many
Provincial and general Councels were called and holden, as against the
Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutichians, Monothelites, etc. Which Councels
have decided those great controversies, deposed and condemned the authors and
mainteiners of them, Particular Shire Synods
which the particular Churches could not do. Of which examples there are store
in the Ecclesiasti^all Histories.

The learned disc. page 124.
For which causes, Synodes ought oftentimes to be assembled, though not
general of the whole Realm, but particular of every Province or Shire, as it
may be most conveniently, that such things as are to be reformed may be
redressed with speed.

To this we grant with such exception as before, and it is in use also, for
such petite and particular Synodes, Bridges.
as every Bishop has in his Dioces, and in the partitions thereof,
Particular Synodes.
as Dioceses be now taken, in the Ecclesiast^cal acceptance of the word,
differing from the civil acceptance. For in the civil Law, Bernar Waltherus
lib. 1. miscell. cap. 19.
as Bernardus Waltherus notes lib. 1. miscell. cap. 19. the word Diocese is
now and then taken for a Province: as in lib. 1. c. de priua. Carcer. where,
Aegyptiaca Diocoesis, is used for the Province of Egypt. But he thinks rather
there is a great difference herein, for that many Provinces were contained
under a Diocese, The acceptatio^ of the terms, Province and Diocese ciuilly
and Ecclesiastically.
as were many Dioceses under a Prefecture. But we understand these terms of
Diocese and Province otherwise, for a Province to conteyne under it some number
of Dioceses: and a Diocese to conteyne some number of particular Churches or
Parishes, which now and then are bounded or parted in diverse Shires. And look
how the laws Ecclesiastical, and the common laws of this our Realm have
delivered unto us the distinction and acceptance of these names, ratified by
custom, in the same sense do we accept them without alteration or
contention. So that, although we have not Provincial Synodes so oftentimes,
yet have we Episcopal Synodes, Our triennall and annual Synods in every
Dioces.
and Synodes of other ordinaries, such as are thought (if they be well used)
most convenient for our state and Churches: if they be abused, the fault is not
in the law, but in the officers.

These smaller Synodes, as they have their ordinary times appointed, and are
limited for the number of the particular Churches that are in them to assemble
together: so is their authority limited accordingly.

As the Synods are limited, so are their authorities.
For, if we shall consider all the premises, what our Brethren have given unto
the Synod; If any controversy ( say they) of doctrine do arise, the lawful
Synod has to consider that it be determined by the word of God: and to
determine of the use of ceremonies page 116. And that, also for order and
comeliness and best edification, the Synod has to determine, what shall be
observed in particular charges, as of the time, place, What great authority
and in how many things is by our brethren given to the Synodes.
and form of preaching and ministering the Sacraments. page 117. That to make
ceremonial constitutions, whereby the Church must be governed in mere
Ecclesiastical matters, it is out of al controversy, etc. This authority was
proper unto the Synod. page 118. Yea, that the Church was lawfully vested with
absolute authority, and the Synod has to decree concerning ceremonial
orders of the Church, whereof some may be general to all congregations, some
particular to certain churches. page 119 and 120. The danger by these shire
Synods.
That the Synod ought to have such regard of all Churches, that they have
special regard of every one. page 120. That the overseers and Elders of the
Church should come together to consider of this matter, what orders were most
fit for diverse places to bring them to the obedience of Christ, what for the
furtherance of the^ that are newly come, and what for the continuance and
increase of the^ that are very well come on page 121. Thus the Synod therefore
ought to be careful in ordeyning of ceremonies, not only that they be pure
and agreeable to the word of God, but also that they be expedient for the time
and persons, for whose use they are ordained. page 122. That the Synod has
further authority concerning discipline, to refourme and redress by Eccl.
censure, all such defaults and controversies, as cannot be determined in the
particular Churches; To what Synod all this great authorrie is given.
both to punish severely the Pastor himself, and the Elders that should be
refourmers of others.

Here is great authority given to the Synod. And what now is this Synod that
has all this so great authority? Is it a general Synod? No. Is it a
national Synod? No, neither. But what of that, though it be not general of
the whole, but particular of every Province?

A, then is it yet at least of a Province, that has so great authority.

Nay, soft, not so, but particular of every Province, or Shire, as it may be
most conveniently.

What? and is this Synod that we have talked of all this while, a Synod of a
Shire? And do our Bre. think this may be most convenient, All this authority
given to the particular Synod of every Shire.
that every Synod of every Shire may do all these things, as seems best to
their wisdoms, one Shire one way, and another Shire another way; and so many
diverse orders of ceremonies and disciplines in every Shire, as it pleases the
Synod of that Shire to determine? Well, yet this is somewhat better than it
was before, Though this be dangerous to the state of the whole, yet better
than to abolish all uniformity.
when uniformity of ceremonies was clean condemned for an untrue principle.
For by that untrue principle of theirs, not only all the authority therein of
all Synodes was overthrown: but every Church, yea, every man (for ceremonies)
might alter or change the^ at his pleasure, for fear he might be thought to
hold an untrue principle, that there should be an uniformity in them. But yet
would this breed a meruestlous diversity, and a number of continual
garboyles and contentions in this Realm, if every Shire therein had their
Synod, which Synod had full authority to do all these things aforesaid. The
danger growing by this authority of these Shire Synodes.
Howsoever our Brethren think this may be convenient: it cannot sirke into my
dull head, but that if every of these Shire Synods had this authority: it
would soon be a sorry England, the whole Realm consisting of so many Shires,
and all the Shires ruled by so many Synodes, and all the Synodes having so much
authority, yea full authority, every one of them, as much as has the whole
in all. For, what is here left to the whole national Synod, yea, were it to a
general oecumenicall and universal council, The Synods election of Pastors.
that this Shire council or Synod cannot do, if it have all this foresaid
authority? And if one Shire then determine one thing, and another Shire
determine ye contrary: to what higher Synod shall the appeal be made? Or what
need ye other care for such appeal: Or what authority has any other Synod,
more tha^ that Synod had? And might not al be the^ in a wise pickle? call they
this a redressing with speed? I pray God send us better speed, than (I fear
me) we should find by such a redressing.

But I hope our brethren will either help us again with some more speedy
means and good devise, how we may shake of the doubts of these absurdityes
and inconveniences: or else their selves on better aduisementes of them, will
neither seek quirks to salve and color them, nor yet maintain them any
longer, but renounce them; when they shall perceive that their good meaning in
them, does nothing answer to the perilous danger of them.

Last of all, for as much as the Election of Pastors, is a great and waightye
matter, The learned disc. page 124.
which ought not to be permitted to the judgment of any one man, but
perteyneth to the Church whereunto they should be chosen, both for better
advise in choosing of a meet man, and for aucthoritye in causing him to accept
their Election: it is convenient that it be done by the judgment of the
particular Synod.

Our brethren here from the correction, return to the Election of Pastors,
Bridges.
because (say they) it is a great and waightye matter. They urge a fresh, The
Synodes election of Pastors.
that it ought not to be permitted to the judgment of any one manne, but
pertayneth to the Church whereunto they should be chosen.

I replye: that although in some Churches it may well so be, and has been,
and is, that the Church had, or has some voice, inter-est, or consent, in
choosing of their Pastors, namelye in choosing of the Bishops: as the Pastors
of all Cathedral Churches have yet some interest, in the electing of the
Bishops to their Churches, whom the Christian Princes by the prerogative of
their chiefest estate. and as Patrons for the temporalties that they have
endowed the Bishoprics withal, and for their chief charge that they have in
general, and specially of all the Churches in their Dominions, do commend
unto their elections: yet on the other side, many Churches have been and are
furnished with good Bishops, and especially inferior particular Churches with
excellent Pastors, Christ's and S. Paul's, (besides Tim. Tit. etc.) manner of
electing Pastors.
by the judgment and appointing of one man. And we have good warrant also for
the same. For not only Christ himself by his own only Judgment, did
first elect and ordain the Apostles, and all the other 72. Disciples: but also
Saint Paul elected and ordained Timothy and Titus to be Bishops, or rather,
Archbishops, of Ephesus, and Creta: Election without Synodes.
and that they (mentioning no other joined with them in the Authority of that
action) should also ordain others to be Bishops and Elders, in every City of
those Provinces. And although they except, that Christ's doing herein is above
all other: The exception of Christ's example.
yet me thinks, that it is the better Example. For, had it been absolutely
evil, to appoint any to be a teacher of the people, and to minister the
Sacrament unto them, whom the people their selves had not chosen: It is not
simply evil to appoint a Pastor whom the people before have not chosen.
then would Christ ( being but one man) never have so chosen any at all to that
office. Neither helps it their turn, that they say, the Apostles had not
certain places or bounds assigned unto them, wherein to preach and Minister
the Sacraments, as Bishops and Pastors have: for, neither the limitation of
the places, as any prejudice to the matter, nor yet the very Apostles, The
exception that the Apostles had no certain places assigned to them.
and the 72 Disciples were so left at large, by these words of Christ, Mark.
16. 15. Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to all Nations. etc.
But that both for a while, the places of their Preaching were limited unto them
before this commission. (...) also that afterward, they did portion out among
them selves certain parts and limits of the world, wherein they would
preach: and some continued still, or most commonly at or near about
Jerusalem: and James had such especial Resyance and charge in that Church,
that he is called both of the ancient and late writers (as we have seen) the
Bishop thereof.

But what shall we say to those Pastors, The Bishops and Pastors made by
Timothy and ^ Titus without calling synods.
that in every particular Church of their provinces, were made by the only
Judgment of Timothy and Titus? For, the text infers no necessity whereon
we should gather, that they were chosen and ordained by the Judgment and
aucthoritye of any other. Yea the very words of the Apostles charge, to
ordain them city by city, or in every town, ( except we shall say, he called
the Synodes to every town) plainly argue, that the making of the^ was without
Synods.

But let us now see how these sayings hang together, Our brethrens
contradiction in the election.
that the election of Pastors pertains to the Church whereunto they should be
chosen: and yet, it is convenient that it be done by the judgment of the
particular Synod, which they called before, the Synod of every province or
shire. For, whatsoever their reasons are that here they allege, both for
better advice in chosing a meet man, and for aucthority in causing him to
accept their election: yet, if the Election pertain to the church, whereunto
the parties elected should be chosen; then, either it pertayneth to both, or
not to the judgment of the Synod, be it either particular or general. For the
Synod is not the church whereunto they are chosen; except they will call a
particular church, a particular Synod.

And though they say, they give not the synod the aucthority in choosing a
meet man, but only, for better advice in chosing a meet man, and aucthority
only, in causing him to accept their election: yet does not this follow
hereupon, The Synods judgment in election.
that it is convenient that the election it self be done by the Synods
judgment. For then has the judgment of the Synod authority in the election
it self, and such authority too; that if any election of a Pastor in any
congregation be made, without the judgment, at the least of a particular or
shire Synod; it is an inconvenient election. To avoid with inconueniencie, it
must needs fall out, that so often as any Pastorship is vacant in all England;
by and by there must not only be an assembly made by that particular church,
but also a Synod be called and assembled of ye whole province, or at least of
the whole shire, for their judgment in the election of every particular Pastor
to be chosen. Whereby we should have if not in every shire, yet in most shires,
continual Synodes. But in every assembly or company, some one of necessity, (
and he a Pastor or Elder,) must have this prerogative to order and dispose the
same with reason, or else great confusion is like to follow: page 114. and how
then, must it not also follow of necessity, that there must be a continual
prerogative of one, among and over the Pastors?

But what gross contradictions these sayings implye: and that is more, what
daily molestations, contentions, dangers and inconveniences, these their so
often and continual assemblies and Synods of every shire, either with the
Princes warrant (as Dancus would have it) or without it, would breed
throughout the whole realm, although there were no other danger by their
former too too great authority, but only this their advice, judgment and
aucthority in the elections of every new Pastor that is to be chosen over all
England: The learned disc. page 124. and 125.
I refer it to the further consideration of the indifferent readers judgment.

That no one man has aucthority to ordain Pastors and to impose them over
Churches, has been before declared, by the example of the Apostles Paul and
Barnabas, who although they were Apostles, yet would they not challenge that
prerogative unto themselves, but by common Election they ordained Elders in
every Church. Bridges.
Acts. 14.23. Act. 14.23.
Timothy also received his charge, Paul and Barnabas challenged to themselves
the prerogative of ordeyning Elders No mention of common or any election.
although it were through prophecy, by imposition of hands of the Eldership.
1. Tim. 4.14. 1. Tim. 4.14.


Our brethren now to confirm this, that no one man has aucthoritye to ordain
Pastors: rub over here again their former examples, and first, of Paul and
Barnabas. Act. 14.23. Act. 14.23.
But the text is most plain, that Paul and Barnabas did challenge that
prerogative unto themselves. And as for ordeyning Elders in every church, by
common election: the testimony here cited, mentions neither common election,
nor election at all. Although (I grant) election is inferred to have
preceeded, where ordeyning is mentioned. The word (as we have often seen
before) is (...), The proper signification of the word (...)
as who say, ordeyning, by confirmation or stretching forth of the hand. The
Geneua traunslation calls this, ord^yning by election. And our brethren here,
Paul and Barnabas ordeyning.
( to express withal, whose this ordeyning by election was) do add, common
election. Beza tells us (as we have heard) of the old custom among the
Grecians and Romans in holding up their hands, and thereby giving their
voices in the Elections of their officers. True it is, that many times the word
is so taken. But does it follow, it must be so taken here: have we not heard
Caluines better interpretation, that refers it to the laying on of the
Ministers hands, and not to the lifting up of the peoples? and so, let the
word be translated for election, must it follow it was the peoples?

But it is a world to see, how the greatest learned and best of all, when they
have once diepely conceived an opinion, will draw things to their own
co^struction. For, although Bezaes travels and learning in his observations on
the new Testament, deserve in general, both laud and admiration, yet now and
then ouershootes (and that not small) do escape him, as they did Erasmus and
others before, especially in so great and difficulte a work. Nemo omnibus
horis, and (as they say) Bonus aliquando dormitat Homerus. Yea a mean person
of no great learning, that otherwise is no whit comparable, yet if he do but
mark here the contents it self, and sense thereof; may most eastly perceive
that they understand this word clean amiss. To whom the word (...) is
referred.


For to whom is this word (...) referred? to the people? or to Paul and
Barnabas? Luke says in the two verses next before; And preaching, (or when
they had preached) the Gospel to that City: and teaching (or had taught)
many, (or had made disciples many) they returned, etc. Who preached, taught or
made Disciples, and returned here? Is not all spoken of these two only, Paul
and Barnabas? confirming the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting to continue
in the faith, etc. Verse. 21.
Verse. 22.
Who confirmed them here and exhorted them? Are these words spoken of any
more, then Paul and Barnabas only? and then it follows: (...), Verse. 23.
etc. but ordeyning by confirming with the hand ( or, when they had ordained by
confirming with the hand) elders unto them, by the church, or as we english it
(throughout every Church, praying with fastings, they commended them to the L.
on whom they believed: Verse. 24.
and passing throughout Pisidia they came to Pamphilia; Verse. 25.
and speaking, (or when they had spoken the word in Perga,) they went down to
Attalia. Is it not here most apparent, that these actions, both before and
after, are still spoken of Paul and Barnabas? and wherefore then should these
words of ordeyning Elders unto them, with confirming by the hand, be
understood of the peoples ordeyning the Elders with them?

Is it because they may gather that the people prayed and fasted with them? And
for the fastings I grant, because he says with fastings, How the peoples
actions were joined with Paul's and Ba^nabas.
and tells not who fasted any more especially than other. Albeit, for
praying, it may well be ascribed for the action of making or pronouncing these
public prayers, unto one or other of these two. (...).
Our brethren may remember their own words, page 63.64. As it were great
confusion and uncomeliness, for every man to make his several prayers in the
public assemblies: so is it orderly for one to pronounce the prayer in the
name of the rest, and the rest to pray with him in silence, and to answer,
Amen. And again, as it perteyneth to the Pastor to conceive public prayers;
so it is the duty of the whole Church, in the name of the whole Church, to
join in heart with the Pastor in the same prayers.

In this sense, of the consent of their hearts unto Paul and Barnabas prayers,
The relation in the text between the ordeiners and the people to who^ they
ordained the Elders.
as the people here might be said also, to have prayed with them: so we
grant that in consent of their hearts, they may be said to have joined with
Paul and Barnabas, in the ordeyning of the Elders. And yet, this were more
hardlye spoken of the ordeyning; since in the very words of the text, is
expressed a different relation, between Paul and Barnabas on the one party,
that ordained the Elders: and on the other part, the people unto whom, they
did ordeyne the Elders. (...), says S. Luke. They ordained them with the
confirming of the hand unto them. Unto whom? but unto the people: wherein it is
manifest, that the people are clean severed from the ordeyners of the Elders,
and were only the correlatiue parties, unto whom the ordeyners did ordeyne
those Elders. By all which it is most evident, that the word, (...), has no
reference at all to the people, or to any action of them, but to Paul and
Barnabas only, and to their action. For here were as yet no Elders ordained, to
ordeine the Elders in the peoples name, since the Elders were as yet to be
ordained. But the people did not ordeyne them to themselves with the Apostles:
therefore, the Apostles only did ordeyne the Elders unto the people.

As for the use of the word by the profane writers, (as also these words
Ecclesia, Euangelium, Episcopus, Apostolus, and diverse others, have been used
prophainely) though Beza hereupon conceive, that this action was here used also
in the people by holding up their hands: Nevertheless, since that we have (and
that by Caluins own confession) already seen, that the Eccl. writers do use
the word better, for that solemn rite (says he) of ordayning, which is called
in the Scripture, laying on of hands: why should we here in this holy action
rather follow the interpretation of the profane use, than of the
Ecclesiastical? Why should we rather ascribe it, with the profane writers of
the heathen, to the common election of the common people: than with the divine
writers of the Church, to the imposition of hands, which was a sacred ceremony
of ordeyning sacred persons, used only by Gods sacred Ministers?

The Etimology of the word (...)
Neither yet, (if we shall etymologize the word (...), of (...) a band, and
(...), which is a pronouncing of the party, on whom the hands are laid, to be
made or consecrate the Pastor: or else of (...), and (...) which is, The Example
of Timothy.
to confirm or strengthen) is there any unaptness, why this word may not be
as well and much better understood, for confirming or ordeyning an Elder in
his consecrating, by laying the hand upon him, which was the action of the
Minister only: than by holding up the hand to his electing, which was the
action of ye people, in such places where they were in so great numbers
assembled, that their Suffrages could not so well be discerned, by the confused
noise of their voices, as by the holding up of their hands, for a token of
their liking of the party. But in every Church where Paul and Barnabas went,
and ordained Elders, there were not such great numbers of the faithful people,
that they should need so to signify their election by holding up their hands,
as Beza thinks.

Neither suffices it, Calvin. acts. 14.23.
( as we have seen also) that Calvin makes Paul and Barnabas the chief
moderators, least any tumult should arise among the people: I like better of
that he said before, upon this 23. verse: therefore Christ did not only send
his Apostles to preach the Gospel: but he commanded also that there should be
Pastors appointed, that the preaching of the Gospel might be perpetual and in
daily use. Paul and Barnabas do mark, that this order was set down by
Christ, when as they assigned Pastors to every Church. The assignement
therefore of the Pastors, The assigning of the Pastors to the several churches
perteyned to Paul and Barnabas.
was the praerogatiue that Paul and Barnabas here challenged to themselves.

I grant, they did it not by any imposing Elders upon them, against the
peoples liking and good wills: but that the good people gave their good assent
unto those, whom Paul and Barnabas assigned to be their Pastors. And this
Calvin himself here confesses, that Paul and Barnabas are said to choose the
Elders. Which if it be truly said, then the word (...), is spoken only of
Paul and Barnabas, and not of the people. And so Calvin confutes himself, The
peoples assent debarreth not the choosing and ordeining from the Apostles.
in gathering thereon a free election of the people. For although we may
grant, that Paul and Barnabas did not alone so choose and ordeyne them by
their private office, but that it was the consent of the^ all: yet was not only
the moderating, but the choosing, the assigning: and the imposition of hands,
( which was the action of the ordeining) was the prerogative that Paul and
Barnabas here did challenge and had, even by Caluins own confession.

The other example 1. Tim 4. ver. 14. 1. Tim. 4.14.
Our brethrens other example.
Now Timothy also received his charge, since our Brethren apply it to the
example of Pastors, I like it very well, and this withal is to be remembered.
For, Our brethen here make Timothy an example of Pastors.
when we allege Timothy as an example of Bishops, whom they also do call
Pastors: they repel this example, saying; he was an Evangelist, therefore no
Pastor: and now their selves allege him as an example for the choosing of
Pastors. And this I like also, that they say of Timothy receiving his charge,
although it were through prophecy, Supply of the Pastors rome
yet was it done by the imposition of hands of the Eldership, (...). Which
words do well expound the other word, being of the like matter and action
that y^ other were; for ordeyning of Elders. And was this a lifting up of
hands too, or any election by voices of the people?

No. But here was such an imposing of the Pastor on the people, as had the
imposition of hands:

Yea, but (say they) of the Eldership. Not of ( say I,) but with the Eldership.
And this I grant: but, does this debar Paul, that he only might not have
chosen, assigned, and appointed him, if any other Elders did in the action of
ordayning, Though other in the Eldership laid hands on Timothy with Paul, yet
might he be the only choser of him.
lay their hands also on him, with the Apostle?

Albeit even by Caluins own interpretation, (we have seen, how in this place
the name of Presbiterie or Eldership, may be as well understood, for the office
of the priesthood or Eldership; as for the persons of the Priests or Elders. By
which exposition of Calvin, it is apparent, that he might also well be said,
to have (in his ordeyning) the imposition of hands with the Eldership; although
only S. Paul alone (when he ordained him,) had laid his hands upon him. But
howsoever it was done there in Ephesus, where there were more Elders, before
Timothy was ordained by S. Paul to be the chief Elder and (...) (as Beza
calls him) the Provost or first stander. or B. of that City and province.
Yet in all the places where Paul and Barnabas traueled, Act. 14. there is no
likelihood, that they ordained there, first, other Elders to be their
Governors, that were not Pastors, and then joined those Elders with the^, in ye
Elections of the Elders that were Pastors: put as Calvin expressy says, Luke
speaks there of Pastors only. But, put the election of Pastors to the
peoples elections, and not to the Elections in the name of the people, to the
governing Elders: and then our brethren straightway cry out; this were to
breed confusion, yea, horrible confusion, whereof God is not the author. page
83.84.

These Examples therefore serve not their turn, but the oftener they turn them
up to us, they return upon themselves, with more and more manifest proves
against them.

The learned disc. page 12^.
Therefore as it has bin evidently declared before, the assembly of Elders,
consisting of grave, wise and godly men, ought to enquire, when the Pastors
place is void, where they may find a man meet to supply his room, and
therein to desire aid of the Synod. The man by such godly advise so chosen,
ought to be presented to the congregation, and of them to be allowed and
received, if no man can show any reasonable cause to the contrary. This is the
right Election, and ordeyning of Pastors, grounded upon the word of God, and
practiced by the Primitive Church, two hundred years after Christ, until the
mystery of iniquity, grew to work more openly, to the setting up of the
tyrannical kingdom of Antichrist. The Gou^rnors dealing in election


That the assembly of Elders should consist of grave, wise and godly men,
they have in deed declared before. But what are these grave, wise and godly
men, of whom the assembly of Elders should consist? Bridges.
Are they Teachers and Preachers, or are they not: If not: Our brethren
excluding of their governors from dealing in these matters except they be
pastors
then have they no authority to determine any thing in the Synod. For (as
they have also declared before. page 117.) who should be able to know what
order, comeliness and aedificatio^ requires according to Gods word, but they
that be teachers and preachers of the same unto all others? Which rule if it be
true in one place, is true in all places, and so in the particular assemblies
of Elders. Whereby it follows, that except the assemblies be of so unwise
men, that they be not able to know what order, comeliness, and aedification
requires, they must be teachers and preachers, and of consequent Pastors, as
likewise they have before declared, and thereto cited even one of their last
testimonies: page 21. by the name of Elders, the Pastors are called. Act.
14.23. where Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders by election in every
congregation. But if now, that they may be able to know these matters ( of
which the having a Pastor, is an order both of comelines and aedification
according to Gods word) these Elders themselves must be Pastors: How shall these
Elders enquire when the Pastors place is void, where they may find a man meet
to supply his room, when the room is never void of Pastors, so long as the
assembly of Elders does continue: If they continue not, much less can they
enquire for one, nor choose him, nor deserve therein the aid of the Synod for
him.

But, be the assembly of the Elders, Pastors themselves, or not; The Synodes
find fit Pastors.
can they not choose another Pastor to supplye his room, when any Pastors
place is void among them, but that they ought therein to desire the aid of
the Synod? For, wherein do they mean this therein, but of that they declared
before; to enquire when the Pastors place is void, where they may find a man
meet to supplye his room; and therein to desire the aid of the Synod? They
declared before, concerning the Pastors election, that it was convenient to be
done, by the judgment of the particular Synod, both for better advice in
choosing a meet man, and for authority in causing him to accept their
election. A Synod to be called when any Benefice in all England is void.
And ought they now to have the Synods aid also, to help them to enquire when
the Pastors place is void where they*may find a meet man to supply his room?
So that, when and wheresoever in all England, a Pastors place is void, we
ought not only forthwith to have a Synod upon that only occasion, except
the room shall stand void till some greater occasion of a Synod happen: but
the Synodesayde must be craved, before the new election, where they may find
a meet man; and in the election it self, their advise also must be had in
choosing a meet man; and besides this, their authority must be had in causing
him ( that is, The Synods dealing in placing past.
the elected party,) to accept their election; and finally, it is convenient,
that it be done also, even by the judgment of the particular Synod. How much
the synod has to deal in placing of pastors.


And then, this meet man, after all this inquiry, both of the assembly of
Elders of that particular Church, and of the Synodes aid in this inquiry,
being at last found out: and the man by such godly advice so chosen; What the
congregation has to do therein.
and by this authority so caused to accept their election: and all this being
thus authentically done and ratified, by the judgment of the particular
Synod: the man ought to be presented to the congregation, and by them to be
allowed and received.

What? and must a new allowance of the congregation be had, after all this
assembling, inquiring, aduising, and choosing of the governing Elders of that
congregation? Yea, and above them, after all the assembling, inquiring, and
better aduising, and choosing, and authorizing, and even causing the man to
accept their election, and after judgment and all, of the particular Synod?
What shall we think hereon? Has the particular congregation an higher
authority of allowing the Pastor? then have not only the governing Elders,
whom the congregation their selves have of confidence chosen, and committed
unto them their authority. page 84. but also then the whole particular Synod,
whose aid therein was desired: and must it now be ouerruled by the allowing or
disallowing of every particular congregation?

Whether the congregation ought to receive the man whom the Synod appoints to
them.
If they say, they mean not, that the man ought so to be allowed and received
of the congregation, that he may also of them be dissallowed or not received:
but that the congregation must allow him and receive him, after all these
allowances of him and authorities. What? and will they impose him upon them,
and enforce the congregation to allow him and receive him? Well may they be
compelled to receive him: but they cannot compel them to allow him, except
from teeth outward.

If they say, they mean not to cause them to allow him or receive him: but
that they ought only of their duty so to do: do they not say in plain
words, of the Synodes authority over the elected party; and for authority in
causing him to accept their election? What imply these words, but that he must
accept their election, be he willing or unwilling to accept it? And have they
more authority to cause him to accept their election, than they have to cause
that particular congregation, ( which have committed their authority to the
assembly of Elders, which assembly have desired the aid of the Synod,) to
accept the man whom they have thus elected for them?

The Synodes imposing of Pastors upon the congregation.
But they say, that they ought so to do, not simply, but, if no man can show
any reasonable cause to the contrary.

And what if no man can do this? must they thus therefore impose Pastors on
them? And is not this imposing, The Synods imposing pastors.
one of their quarelles against the Bishops? and are they now themselves feign
to come to imposing of Pastors on the congregations? All their election
defeated by any one man.


But what now, if any man can allege any reasonable cause to the contrary?
must every reason of any one man, overrule all the reasons and authorities,
both of all the residue of the congregation, and of all the governing Elders,
and of all the Synod? See, what a great stir we have here had, and still
must have, about the choosing of every Pastor in yt Realm; all the several
congregation, all the assembly of Elders, all the Synod of the Province or
Shire must meet together with all this ado: and when all is done: in comes
any one man, and he alone upon any reasonable ( though not necessary) cause,
may turn topside turuie all their doings. Our brethrens auouching of the right
election and ordeyning of Past.


And is this the right election and ordeyning of Pastors?

Yea (say they) this is the right election and ordeining of Pastors. Yea, and
grounded upon the word of God, and practiced by the Primitive Church 200.
years after Christ.

This is stoutly avouched, if now they can prove it. But can they show this
election and ord^yning of Pastors in any places, yea, in any one place in all
Gods word?

Well, what of that? It is grounded ( say they) upon the word of God? Our
brethrens election and ordeyning of Pastors is not grounded on-Gods word.


What? Are they soon grounded? What mean they by grounded? Ca^ they show us
any one rule, or but any one example hereof in the word of God? No place that
they have yet alleged, shows any such election and ordeyning of Pastors?

What Synodes assembling, inquiring, aduising, choosing, judging, and causing
of the party elected to accept their election, was there had in the electing
and ordeyning Pastors by Paul and Barnabas. Act. 14? Or what electing and
ordeyning of Pastors was there in the Synod ( if we shall properly call that
assembly, a Synod,) which was of the Apostles and Elders of Jerusalem. Acts.
15? Or does S. Paul in any of his precepts to Timothy or to Titus, command
not only an assembly of the same congregation, whereunto the Pastor should be
chosen; but also a Synod either general, or national, or Prouincial, or
particular, yea be it but of one shire, to be called and holden, at the
electing and ordeyning of all, and every, or of any Pastors for their
particular congregation?

And how then dare our Brethren for very shame, so confidently affirm, as
though it were most clear and out of all crime: This is the right election and
ordeyning of Pastors grounded upon the word of God. What a grounding is this,
of the which no one place, nor foot of ground can be found, or seen, or
heard of?

And yet, if this were the right election and ordeyning of Pastors: then all
the electio^s and ordeynings of Pastors expressed in the word of God, must
either be according unto this; 200. years practice after Christ.
or else, they were not elected and ordained aright; or else, this is not so the
right election and ordeyning of the^, but that other elections and ordeynings
of Pastors mentioned in the word of God, without these assemblies and Synods
for the doing of them, are as right as they. And then, this manner of electing (
if ever there were any such) is no necessary prescription unto other.

But our brethren not content, thus amiss to father this their electing and
ordeyning of Pastors, as grounded upon the word of God: they proceed further
to this practice of 200. years after christ. But this pretended practice also,
we have already sufficiently improued. And albeit, during the said time, The
practice of 200. years for this pretended electing and ordeyning Pastors.
and as long again in many places, the people had voices of consent in the
elections of their Bishops. Yet had they not also ye like dealing, in electing
all the Pastors under the Bishops, vnt as for ordeining they had never any part
at all theirin, neither for Bishops, nor for any other Pastors, neither during
the practice of those 200. years, nor far before, nor after, except they shall
find some odd extraordinary example, which I remember not but that were not
able to carry away all the practice of the primative church for 200. years after
Christ.

But, (to call them to the justifying of that they have avouched here) can our
Brethren be able to prove, that all the elections and ordeynings of Bishops
and Pastors, were made by the Inquiry, advice, choice, judgment, and
authority of Synodes, causing the party elected to accept their election? or
that Synodes were always called, whenever any Pastor of any particular
church was to be elected and ordained?

The learned disc. page 125.126. and 127.
By this we may plainly see, that our presentation of patrones, is both
profane and prejudicial: our giving of orders by Bishops, is presumptuous and
full of absurdities. First, because they take upon them to do that, which
none of the Apostles durst do: that is, without Election of the churches to
ordain Elders. Secondlye, that they give an office without a charge, to make a
Pastor and send him to seek a flock, where he can find it: which is as
unreasonable a thing, as if one were chosen to be a church warden, and had
never a church to keep: or made a constable, that had never a town or place
appointed, whereof he should be constable. For the name of Pastor, Elder, or
ouerseer, is the name of an office in act and essc, because it is a proper
relative, and not potentiall ability in the clouds. If Bishops as they be
now, were consecrated after the same manner to seek their bishopriks, where
they could find them, it were no greater absurdity, then it is to ordain
Pastors, and let them proll where they can for their benefices. Thirdly, by
this wa^dring (we may also say vagabound) ministry, shifting from place to
place, and in all places, to be counted a minister where he has noe charge,
it would griue a man to think what inconvenience does follow, but principally
how filthilye it stinketh of the old popish indelible charecter, from whence
it has his ground, Patrons presentation.
and neither of any reason, or of the word of God. And yet forsooth it is so
perfect, that it may abide no reformation. Fourthly, if you will see how well
the authority which they claim and practice is used of them, that only have
the choice and admission of Ministers: Look over the whole Realm of England,
what a multitude of unfit Pastors shall you find in every place? so that
Jeroboam never made worse priests of the refuse of the people, to serve his
golden calves, then they have ordained Ministers, to feed the flock of Christ
which he has purchased with his own blod.

By this that we have before perused, we can neither plainlye, nor any way
see that our presentation of patrones, Bridges.
( being used as in right and law established it ought to be) is either
profane or prejudicial, which words are very rough and hard, being spoken
not so much against such patrones as do profanely, and with the Churches
spoil, abuse their interest; as simply against all our presentations of
patrones, Prince or whosoever; and against the right and title of them although
they choose never so meet a man, or present him never so freely. For since that
(to whomsoever the right of Electing has perteyned) the principal end thereof
was to provide the Churches of meet Pastors, so that this may be provided for
and vpholden: The right of electing is not in it self profane.

And to whom is this our presentation of patrones prejudicial? Is it
prejudicial to the people? Yea rather, (if it be well used) is it not more
beneficial to them? there is no simple necessity of the peoples presenting,
nor example in the Scripture as yet alleged. But if the people had got a
right afterward, might they not again have lost their right or interest
whatsoever they had (which was rather in Cities, about the choosing of their
Bishops, than of all Pastors in every particular congregation) by abusing the
same, through their factions, immoderate and tumultuous contentions, oftentimes
ended with bloodshed, whereof the Ecclesiastical histories have many examples,
and some within the space of the foresaid 200. years?

And why might not their interest in electing Bishops have ceased, as did their
authority in many other things besides, that they had among themselves before,
while the Princes that were in chief authority over them, were as yet out of
the household of the faith, and enemies thereto? The Princes care in providing
godly Bishopes.
Which Princes afterward becoming faithful, this care especially belonged
to them, both to provide for godly Bishops, and to restrain their people from
factions, and from sedicious growing by their disordred elections. And so the
people left off by little and little, to deal in those matters when the
Christian Princes and the Clergy in the Cathedral Churches dealt therein.

And do not our Brethren in effect confess, that the people have resigned up
what interest they had, unto an assembly of Elders consisting of grave, wise
and godly men, to elect for them; and page 84.85. in whom they repose such
confidence that they commit unto them their authority in hearing and
determining such matters, If the people might resign their interest to the
Elders: why not to the Prince or to the Nobles: etc.
as without horrible confusion they cannot perform themselves: and hereto
also may be referred that which is said of election of Pastors, that the
Apostles Paul and Barnabas did ordeyne by election of the congregation, Elders
unto many Churches Acts. 14.23. because the name of Elders is common to both:
to Pastors and Governors.

If then they think, that the people may pass over this authority of
election from themselves to a few other: might they not as well pass it over
to the Prince, and repose as great a confidence in his upright doing of the
same?

But what, if upon any Conquest made, the Prince and the Nobles have reserved
among other things, How diverse ways the right of patronage and presentation
might have come.
this honor and privilege over the people conquered; or in the partitions of
Cities, Towns and Parishes, to be kept to themselves, or distributed among
the chiefest of the Conquerors? Or what, if for some notable defense and
maintenance of the people, or some benefit done unto them, they have granted
all such right, title and interest unto the Prince, to the Nobles and
Governors of them? Or what, if any Prince, or other of noble or gentle stem,
by erecting, founding, or giving some proportion of house, land or revenue, to
mainteyne the Pastors liuelode; the right of presenting the Pastor to that
Town or Village, is deuolued to him and to his lawful heirs; and so the
Parson descending of that ligne, do claim and hold by that right, to be ever
after called, and to be indeed the patron of that Pastorship, that is, to be
not only the doner of his living; but the defender of him both in the exercise
of his office, and in the liberties, rights and privileges of his Church?

To which ends and purposes, these patrones have only and no further, the
interest of choosing a meet man, The ends why patronages were ordained.
and then to present that man of who^ he has made choice, unto the Bishop,
as to the superior pastor in that Dioce^e, that upon his further trial and
examination by the Bishop whether he be meet or no; he may be admitted, or
repelled from that pastorship. And if this patron do not in sufficient time
inquire after, and provide a fitter Pastor: then the Bishop himself is to
provide one. Which matters and the reasons of them, with all other r^^hts and
orders perteyning thereto, are now showed and sufficiently provided for in the
law, both for the Pastor and the congregation, both for the Patron and the
Bishop, or from him to the Archbishop, or from him to the Prince. And should
now all these positive laws and lawdable customs, grown to the ancient
title of any, nay, of so many and so great persons rights and interests of this
presentation, be thus defaced as profane, and extorted from them as
prejudicial to the people?

I defend not, nor excuse the corrupt dealings of any patrones; but rather
heartily lament and utterly mislike the manifold abuses of them. Bishops giving
orders.
But they may be remedied by far better means, than for the wrongs done by
some; to overthrow the right due to all; and neither to spare Gentlemen, This
new devised electings and ordeinings far more indiciall then the presentation
of patrons.
Noblemen, Bishops, Archbishops, Prince, nor any, but turn all loose to the
peoples election. And yet to give them the bobbe also, to take it runningly
away from the people too, and to give the patronage or right of choosing and
presenting the Pastor to an assembly of a few, in the name of ye whole. And
whereto would this come, but to revive these old broils (in every Parish for
every Pastor) that had wont to be in Cities, about the elections of the
Bishops? And that which is more, to summon Synodes and assemble the Pastors and
Elders of every Parish at least in the Shire, to intermeddle themselves in this
matter, which are all, or the most of them as much strangers (if not more)
unto that Parish, as perhaps is the Patron to that Benefice.

If our presentation of Patrones be profane and prejudicial: verily this
election and ordeyning by their Elders and Synods, is far more dangerous
unto all the state, and manifest injurious unto many.

But their conclusion runs not only against our presentation of Patrones:
but also, that our giving of orders by Bishops is presumptuous, Our Bishops
giving orders.
and full of absurdities.

Whether our Brethren presume not over much in these presumptuous speeches, I
refer to other, least I should also be counted too presumptuous. And yet,
though I dare not presume to wage any thing with our Brethren on this point;
nevertheless, I dare resume this upon me, that, so many absurdities as we have
seen already, in the elections and ordeynings of Pastors, by the assemblies
of their governing Elders and Synodes; they shall never be able to show, Our
brethren charge our Bishops giving orders with 4. absurdities and presumptions.
in our giving of orders by the Bishops.

But here, (whether they be all, or they have more in store) they charge ours
with four absurdities and presumptions. First ( say they) because they take
upon them to do that which none of the Apostles durst do: that is, without
election of the Churches to ordeyne Elders.

Our Brethren here do not simply deny, but that our Bishops may ordeyne
Elders: but say they) not without the election of the Churches. Our Bishops
may ordeine Elders, ergo they may gen^ orders.
But this is the point we stood on before. So that if our Bishops may ordeyne
Elders, then it may suffice for their giving orders. For what is the giving of
orders else, but the ordeyning? And if they may ordeyne them to be pastoral
Elders, which is the office it self of the Ministry, and so, far more
principal than is the electing of the party, Bishops may ordeine past^rs ergo
they may elect them.
to be ordained a Minister or Pastor; or tha^ is the electing of him (being a
Minister) to a place or living, where he may employe and exercise himself in
his Ministry: why then may not the Bishops elect also, having more discretion
and skill then most commonly other have, to choose a meet man, either to the
office, or to the living? The first absurdity and presumption.


But they say none of the Apostles durst so do. And where find they this in
all the Scripture, that they durst not, or that they had any commandment not
to do it? Does it suffice, if they could allege any example, where the
Apostles did ordeyne Pastors with the election of the Churches? Whether the
Apostles durst ordeine Pastors without the Churches Election.
I think that were no sufficient proof, that they durst not do it otherwise;
or that always they did so; or that they had commandment so to do; or that
their so doing were a rule and prescription for all elections. But in very deed
they cannot show, (or at least, they have not as yet showed) so much as any
one example where they did so. All those that they have showed, the oftener they
allege them, the more they make against them. There is not one word in them,
that infers either the peoples, or in their name any consistory Elders
election of the Pastors, that the Apostles used or prescribed, in the ordeyning
of Pastors. Yea rather, both the examples, and the precepts of Saint Paul to
Timothy, are either plain (or seem to incline) to the clean contrary.

And shall we dare to say on the other side, (finding both the example here
alleged by themselves, Acts 14. and Saint Paul's precepts to Timothy and to
Titus, of ordeyning pastoral Elders to be made without mentioning of the
Churches elections,) that the Apostles durst not ordeyne any Pastors with the
Churches elections; no, we dare not say so, but that the Apostles might have
done it with them, or without them, as they thought best, having the warrant of
Gods Spirit, and as the occasion served for their ordeyning of the Pastors.
And therefore, I meruell how our Brethren durst so boldly affirm, that the
Apostles not only did it not, but durst not do it.

The 2. absurdity and presumption is the giving of an office without a charge
or flock.
Secondly, ( say they) that they give an office without a charge, and send him
to seek a flock where he can find it.

Our Brethren here begin to descant upon the names of Pastors and office.
Neither do we deny, but that the name Pastor, betokens an office, whether
we understand it as he is only a Minister of the word and Sacraments, and
so he is said to have taken Orders, or as he has a peculiar flock to
minister the word and Sacraments in, as we commonly call the Rector, Parson,
Vicar or Curate, the pastor of such and such a Church or Parish. The word
Pastor in both senses may be comprehended in the name of an office. And yet
here if we should go as strictly to work, as our Brethren do, (which
curiosity I mislike not in them, to find out all the quirkes in the world,
to beat out the truth more thoroughly) we shall easily see great differences
in the proprieties of these names and words of an office, and of an order.
Albeit they may well be taken and oftentimes are used indifferently.

But the question is here whether any office can be given, Office and Order.
and the man truly called an officer, Where to the word Office has relation.
without a charge of a place or a flock given withal unto him, whereof he is
and may be called the officer. They deny it, and I say he may, and my reason
is this.

The word office has not always relation to the charge of a place only and
that specially of a certain place, where, or of persons among whom, the
office is exercised: but of the matter it self and ^uetie, whereof the office
consists, in res^^t of which matter, the other are as it were but
accidental, which our Brethren here make all, or principal. The Prophets
were Prophets before they had any certain places were they prophesied. The
Apostles were called, and in office were Apostles, Phophets Apostels having no
certain Places.
before they were sent into any message of their Apostleship. And Saint Paul
calls all both Apostles and Pastors, Ministers. 1. Cor. 4.1. though all of
them had no certain standing places designed to them to minister in, and yet
were they all of them in the very office of the Ministry full Ministers of
the word and Sacraments, if we may so properly call the Ministry of the
word and Sacraments, an office as an order.

In deed Saint Paul says of an office, Romans 12. verse. 7. or an office, on
the office. That is to say, The difference between Office and Order.
he that has an office let him be diligent in his office. But he assigns
not any certain places and charge of flocks to all the offices that he there
reckons up. Although, as it is an old saying, so it is not untrue, Priesthood
and Knighthood are orders rather than offices. And Priesthood ( I mean not
the Popish sacrificing Priesthood, but the Pastoral Eldership) may well be
called an order, when the making of a Priest or pastoral Elder is called, the
ordering or the ordeyning of him, and our Brethren themselves do well call it
the giving of orders.

Knighthood now being likewise more properly called an order than an office:
when a man has received the order of Knighthood, The order of Knighthoode
given without giving lands fee to maintain it.
it follows not that he must be a Knight of this or that place, as were some
Knights, namely the Knights of Prussia, or the Knights late of the Rhodes,
and now of Malta: neither follows it, that he that made him Knight must
always withal give him lands and living, and yet all the better for the
Knight if he so do, and more fit for his order to have sufficient
maintenance, and though he had but xl. pound a year, which was called a
Knights fee. Howbeit, he might b^e a Knight, though a poor Knight, without
any such fee. For the order is one thing, and the maintenance of him in his
order, yea his charge to do his duty i^ his order, is another thing, and not
the order it self.

But ( say they) this is as unreasonable a thing, as i^ one were chosen ( not
to be a Knight, but) to be a Churchwarden, and had never a Church to keep; or
made a Constable, that had never a Town or place appointed, whereof he should
be Constable. Ceasing of offices.


The fimilitude (...) being a Churchwarden or Counst^ble with Church or Twone
to look unto.
The similitudes of these two offices, and of Churchwarden, and of a
Constable, are not a like to the order, or (if they will so call it) to the
office of the ministry, for because that these two Offices have a necessary
relation in them selves not only to the office, but also to the place where
the pa^tie is the officer: so that, if no place be assigned them, there is no
such officer made. To which kind of officers, the old distinction serves,
that the office and the place be distincta ratione non re. They cannot in the
act of them be separate, though they be distinguished in the reason of them.

The difference between these offices and the office or order of a minister.
And yet we see, that in some such offices, as in which besides the office,
there is joined with all a degree of honor and dignity, though the relation of
the office, in respect of the place where the office lay, does cease; as,
either the place being wasted, or possessed by another, and he dispossessed:
yet may his degree of dignity not cease or be in him utterly exstinguished, so
long as the right of the office is in him, though the exercise and action of
the office, together with the place, and other appendices of the office, be
taken from him, Some offices made in respect of place and charge, that cease
not with the dispossessing of the place or charge.
as a King, Duke, Earl, or Lord, though he loose, (be it not by his own
demerite, resignation, or lawefull deprivation) his Kingdom, Dukedom,
Earldom, or Lordshippe, but by an others intrusion or occupation: yet is he
still both called, and is in deed^, a King, a Duke, an Earl, a Lord, by reason
he still holds the right of the office, and capacity to repossesse it though
he have neither possession, action, nor exercise of it at this instante.
Notwithstanding, as it is said in the old verse on fortunes wheel, regno,
regnaui, regnabo, sum sine regno. He may be rex sine regno, even the lowest
degree of them all, and yet rex still.

Yea, to descend to baser offices also, not only a professor of liberal
sciences, but even one professing mechanical arts, or as we commonly term
him a handicrafts man, although he exercise not always the action of his
Function, nor occupy in his occupation, or as we may generally call it also
his office too: yet the office, occupation or function cease not in him, and
if now, it may be thus in so many other offices, which notwithstanding take
all their denomination even of the action and exercise of them, and of the
charge or duty therein required: why may it not, and much more, be thus in the
order or office of the minister? Does his office cease, if he be put from his
place, where he was first appointed to minister.

If his office should cease with the place, then could he minister in no other
place. Nay, then were he no minister at all any longer, so that, turn him
out of his place, A Minister cease not to be a minister, though put from his
place where he ^inistred.
and turn him clean out of his ministry, and if he be preferred to an other
place, he must be made minister again. And is worse then (as Chancer says) A
Monk out of his cloister, is not worth an oyster; for a monk is a monk
still: but the minister is become no minister, and so all his preaching and
ministering of the sacraments are a lay man's actions, and not a ministers: and
(by their own consequence) no sacraments at all, Entry into the ministry.
if he do these things where his charge and flock is not: And in deed some of
our Brethren begin to be so precise, that think it scarce lawefull to
preach, except it be in their own proper charges, though they be orderly
requested thereunto, but they need not to be squemish by this rule, for there
they are not Ministers at all if they do it.

Now if the office of the ministry it self cease not, with the altering of
the place, where they had a charge, The ministry it self depends not upon
this or that Place.
much less does the institution and entry into the office of ye ministry,
which is the ordeyning or giving of orders, depend upon or require the
necessity of a place, as it does in the office of a Churchwarden or
Counstable, or in the offices that have local honors and dignities annexed to
the degrees, or to the offices of them, as in Kings, Dukes, Earls, Lords,
etc. For these offices begin together with the places and charges annexed
unto them, but in all the offices of ministry, it is not so. And if our
Brethren will so urge it, let them look to it their selves. For I suppose,
that some of them (if I take not my marks amiss, and those too, whom
otherwise I reverence and honor) had not provisions of place and charge of
flock committed unto them, How our Brethren were made ministers.
at their very first receiving of their orders, but perhaps tarried some pretty
while after, and yet (I hope) they make account that they were ministers
before. Yea had they not bin ministers at all before, and that tried, to be
both learned, and presupposed to be meet men: they had not bin capable of
those places and Charges.

And if I should go further: what one of our Bre. were not made simply
ministers of the word and sacraments, and not ministers condicionall, as the
ministers of this or of that place, charge, or flock? although it might be
some of them were already prouides for in that be^halfe: but their taking of
orders or office of the ministry it self, depends not thereon: which it
must have done, were the place a part and that a necessary part of the
office.

They say that this their learned discourse, is a brief and plain declaration
concerning the desires of all those faithful ministers that have and do seek
for the Discipline and reformation of the Church of England. But if this be
one of the points they desire and seek for: then they desire and seek for
that, which overthrows both their own ministerye, and their faithfulness^
too. For, if this rule be true; then are they no faithful ministers, nor
ministers at all, Our brethren overthrow their own Ministry.
having received the orders of ministry otherwise, than their selves desire,
seek for, and prescribe that other should do.

But they not considering this, go forward from their examples of
Churchwarden and Constable, to prove it somewhat more Clerkelike. For ( say
they) the name of a Pastor, Elder, or Ouerseer, is the name of an office in Act
and Esse, The act and esse of a pastor.
because it is a proper relative, and not a potentiall ability in the clouds.

The name Pastor not so of act and esse, but that it admiteth also Potentiall
habi^itie.
Are all potentiall abilities in the Clouds? But our brethren were disposed
here to speak in clouds, and to tell the people of offices in Act and Esse,
of proper relations, and of potentiall abilities: be like, because they would
the world should well understand, that this is (for sooth) a learned
discourse: howbeit, all this discourse here, is but of the names of this order
or office of the ministerye. But, be they relatiues as proper as they will, and
the relation also in Act and Esse, as they term it: yet does it not follow yt
this actual and essential relation, must be so strictly related to a place,
where he must be a Pastor, or Elder, or Ouerseer, that he cannot be made
the Pastor, Elder, or Ouerseer, till he come thither his self, and exercise
the office actually: for, if there be no potentiall abilitye, but only the
very Act and Esse, thereof to be considered in the office of a Pastor, Elder
or ouerseer: then is he not a Pastor, Elder, or Ouerseer, till he do feed
or teach them, govern them and ouersee them actually. But, if heee be not
the Pastor till he come actually his self to do these actions among them:
then is all the action aforesaid in the Synod fustrate, except they go all
home with him, and ordain him only then and there, when and where he must do
the things in act and esse, that the name of his office has relation unto.

This Position overthrows all the making of Pastors in the Synods.
For ( say they) the name of a Pastor, Elder, or ouerseer, is the name of an
office in act and Esse, because it is a proper relative, and not a potentiall
ability in the Clouds. Is not this a proper valiance on the name of Pastor?
and to make it a proper relative, do they not make it withal a proper office?
Yea, see whereunto by this nice valiance on these names and terms, The gross
absurdity of this position.
this office will come: and all because it may in no wise suffer a potentiall
ability. And why so: forsooth for fear it would vapor up by and by into the
clouds, but admit this to be true; and then it presentlye follows, that
when soever the officer cease from the very act and doing of his office ( as
both upon many occasions he may sometimes do, and of natural necessitye he
must oftentimes do,) so often does he cease to be a Pastor, Elder, or Ouerseer.

But because they stand upon these 3. names, Pastor, Elder, and Ouerseer, which
they make all relatiues alike, and to have like relation unto an office in act
and esse. For the Esse, it is an other matter, if they mean the being of the
office. For, as soon as the office has begun his esse or being; then his esse
or being continues still in the office in all these 3. names thereof, although
the act in all alike be not in esse or in being, which confuteth so much more
our brethrens assertion. But that all these three names are proper alike in
respect of the Act: this again is nothing so. For, the name of Pastor
signifying a shepherd, Bishops to seek their Bishoprics.
bears more heardly upon this actual relation, than the name of presbyter,
Priest, or Elder does, which has more reverence to the office, function,
dignity or degree either in it self, or in respect of younger and inferior
persons, than it has unto any charge over them committed unto him.

As for the name of ouerseer infers the relation of an office more in act,
than does the name of Elder or of Pastor. Because, he may easiler and oftener
actually ouersee them, than he can feed them. Yet none of these names are
always so related either to act o^ to esse, that they debar all potentiall
ability in him, but that he may remit the continual exercise and act of his
office, per interstitia, with pausings and ceassings oftentines between, and
yet the Esse of his office ceasseth not, nor he to be still an essential
officer; and much less, that the esse or being of his office, yea, or the act
either of the same, should be limited and tied always to one place, or flock
or charge: yea the place, flock, or charge, to be a part of the esse or being
of the office.

But thus straightly do our brethren drive us, to tracke them in these harish
terms of schoolemens quiddities, into the which, because, I am rather brought
by them, than that I have joy to stay the reader in them; I crave and hope
for, the easier pardon. For indeed, we strive not there so much for names and
terms, as whether the order or office of the Pastor be not competible to any
man, that has not withal a charge and flock of people committed unto him at
the very instant of making him a Minister, or giving him orders: which thing,
because our Bishops do not, nor indeed can perform, nor was performed in
these faithful Ministers our brethren themselves, nor is necessary always to
be performed; while they would thus challenge our Bishops of absurdity for it;
they their selves incur all these most gross absurdities, and yet they urge
them still, with more and more absurdity.

But say they, if Bishops as they be now, were consecrated after the same
manner, to seek their Bishoprics, where they could find them: it were no
greater absurdity, then it is to ordain Pastors, and let them Prolle where
they can for their benefices.

This meriment here would have done well (among so solemn and subtle
relations of abilities, potentialities, actualities, and essenties: Our
brethrens resemblance of Bishops to seek their Bishop^icks.
) to recreate the readers spirits, if it were to the purpose. But as before,
they would have shifted off the matter, from the order of the Priesthood or
eldership, to the office of a Pastor; which yet we see serves not their (...):
so, much less both this bold, that is a Minister may be made a Minister, and
have no proper place or benefice withal assigned him, where to Minister: that
then after the same manner, a Bishop may be made a bishop; and have no place or
Bishopric assigned him, whereof to be Bishop.

Indeed, if a bishop were all one and nothing else, but (as our brethren have
said) an elder, Wandering Ministers.
pastor, or Minister of the word and Sacraments: then, to make a bishop, Our
brethrens drift for Bish. and bishoprics.
and after to let him seek a bishopric where he can find it, were no
absurdity at all.

And I doubt it shrewdly, this be not the least of many of our Brethrens
driftes, to make Bishops indeed go seek their bishoprics. For even these
our learned brethren have told us already, Page 54. of dividing the
superfluities of some places that have too much, unto the^ that have too
little. And there want not more than enough, to harken in the wind for such a
bargain, and even therefore our brethren may find the more favorites, in these
devises.

But since that a bishop, besides that he is an Elder Pastor or MInister, has
also an other office, The Bishop office besides Pastorship.
in respect whereof he has the name of Bishop. By which office he has a
superior oversight and higher charge of Jurisdiction, over a number of other
Pastoral Elders in certain particular Churches, limited and bounded for his
diocaeses: and of this we have clearly seen the practice even in the Apostles
times; and from the Apostles times, during all the times of the ancient and
holy Fathers succeeding: the contrary whereof our brethren shall never be able
to prove: who may not then see, that is not blinded with too much ignorance or
partiality; what a great difference there is in this point, between a Bishop,
and one that is but only a Minister: While the Ministers office respects the
Ministry of the word and Sacraments, in what place soever he shall be assigned
to Minister the same, and Bishops office respecting (besides this ministry
the Bishopric, that is, the jurisdiction and oversight of those Churches,
that are allotted to his Diocoese.

And can our brethren then justify this saying, If Bishops (as they be now)
were consecrated after the same manner, to seek their Bishoprics where they
could find them, it were no greater absurdity, then it is to ordain Pastors;
and let them prolle where they can for their benefices.

What mean they by this word Bishops as they be now? Bish. as they be now.
For this makes yet more against themselves. For Bishops as they be now,
have liuinges also more or less, besides the charge of their Diocoese, annexed
and appropriated unto them, which all Ministers have not, neither (I think) al
our brethren their selves had their benefices when they were first made
Ministers. And should we return such unseemely speeches on them, that they
went seeking and prowling about for their benefices. where they could find
them: No, I do think more reverently of our brethren, but I mislike their
terms, and more their argument.

Thirdlye ( say they) by this wandering (we may also say, vagabunde)
ministerye, shifting from place to place, and in all places to be counted a
minister, where he (...) no charge; it would grieve a man to think what
inconveniences do ^ollow, etc.

We like as ill and are grieved as much, at wandering ministers, Ministers out
of their charge.
namely such as wander not upon any unlawful cause, but shifting from place to
place; as any of these our learned brethren are grieved th^reat. The 3.
absurdity and presumptions is wandering and vagabund Ministers.
Al^^ough again it be no small grief, to hear them thus continue such
vnr^uerent and uncharitable terms, as Vagabund ministers, they being their
poor brethren, and ministers of Christ, not of Antichrist, ministers of Gods
word and Sacrament, not Idolatrous nor Massemonging Sacrificers. It were well,
there were none but such as were so sufficiently provided for, that they need
not wander. And the ancient Canons (as I think) are in force, that whosoever
should be made a presbyter, priest, or Elder, the bishop is bound to see him
have Titulum ( as they term it,) a Title of some stipend or pencion whereon to
be maintained; or else the Bishop that ordained him to be bound to find him.
If this be not executed, that is another matter, No Ministers to be made sine
Titulo.
and may be remedied, the Eccle. state both for the substance of the bishops,
and of the ministers dignities and offices, standing as it does. And if any
bishop were complained upon and convicted. I think he might by order of law
be compelled to find his Ministers, or be punished for making of them. But
what is this to our brethrens assertion, that a man cannot be counted a
minister where he has no charge: and if not so much as counted; then not be.
For if he be a minister, then he ought to be counted a minister.

Our Brethren said before, it was an absurdity to ordeyne Pastors, Ministers
are, and are to be counted ministers out of their charges.
and let them prowle where they can for their Benefices. But is that such an
absurdity, as is this? Yea, this is not only most absurd, and includes all
the former inconveniences: but it is clean contrary to all their own
positions hereon. For if the office of his Ministry have his esse ( as before
they called it) that is, the essence or being thereof only in that place or
congregation, where the Minister has a charge: then not only (as I said
before) being out of his charge or congregation, he is out of his Ministry,
and so a lay man, and if he preach, his preaching is no preaching: and if he
minister the Sacraments, they are no Sacraments, neither the Lords Supper, nor
yet Baptism, nor so to be counted by their own rules, any more, than if a
woman did minister them. For if those actions of his, be to be otherwise
accounted: ^hen is it by reason, that he himself is to be otherwise accounted
that did them. And if he be to be accounted otherwise; then it is in respect be
is a Minister. And if in that respect; then he is to be counted a Minister,
though out of his charge, and how true is then this our brethrens paradore,
that he is not to be couted a Minister where he has no charge?

Al these absurdities and dangerous inconveniences, with their traynes and
sequelles do so follow hereupon; The incoueniences of our brethrens position.
that many may call into question both their receiving of the Lords Supper, and
their childrens and their own baptism too, and so stagger whether they may
make full reckoning, that they be Christians yea or no, saving in the
profession of their faith. And yet they may begin to doubt in that also,
Ministers in Synodes
since that S. Paul uses this gradation, Romans 10. verse 14. But how shall
they call on him, on whom they have not believed? How shall the^ ^eleeue in him
of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and
how shall they preach except they be sent? And how is the Preacher sent, if he
go out of his charge? And so upon calling this in doubt, nay, that is more,
upon flatly denying both his sending, and the very being of his Ministry;
how do we not undo again all the former parts of this gradation? and all
because he that preached, ( as for example, I imagine it were at Paul's Cross)
preached where he had no charge. If these things be no absurdities nor
inconveniences with our Brethren; though they and I agree not herein; yet how
do they agree to their own selves?

When a Synod is called, be it either universal, national, provincial, or
particular of any Shire, Our brethren overthrow all Synodes.
( as they would have it) there to ordeyne Ministers unto the particular
congregations, or to decide a controversy in doctrine, or to determine of
discipline, or to decree ceremonies for order and comeliness: as they would
have these things to be decided and concluded in Synodes: and Synodes ( at
least provincial Synodes) to be called often: who are they that should be
called thither? Are they not the Pastors, Teachers and Preachers, as (page
117.) they said before? Who shall be able to know* what order, comeliness, and
aedification requires; according to Gods word, Pastors and Ministers in
Synodes.
but they that be teachers and preachers of the same unto all others?

But now, when all these Pastors, Ministers, Teachers, and Preachers go to this
Synod, and are there assembled, they are out of their particular congregation,
which they say is their charge: and what follows, but they must forthwith be
counted no Ministers? And being no Ministers, they can neither preach nor
teach; they can determine none of these controversies; no, they are not able to
know what perteyneth to order and comeliness, so that for that while, they
have lost both their ability and their knowledge. But no marvel of that,
when they have lost their being Ministers, and so lost themselves and all, so
long as they be out of their charges. And now where they come to make
Ministers, being no Ministers their selves; how can they make others? and in
what a pickle be we now?

But they say (and we must believe them) that they must have Synods for the
doing of all these things: but the Synod is not the flock, the Benefice or
particular congregation of them, and so not their charge: and what the^
follows hereupon, but that a man may be counted a Minister where he has no
charge? Our brethrens contradiction^
which is here the clean contrary to our Bretherens paradoxe, that a man must
not be counted a Minister where he has no charge?

Now consider, since they have auowed both these sayings; and both these (being
clean contrary) cannot both stand true, one of them must yield, and be
packing for a manifest falshoode: Contradictions.
which were best to let go? I think our Brethren when they have weighed well
the peyse of both, will rather let go this, th^n the other, and never be
ashamed (for all the learning of their discourse) to say, this was but a course
ouerslip, and that a minister is, and must still be counted a Minister where he
has no charge nor flock.

But if now to save all upright in both, they will say, he is not out of his
charge in the Synod, though it be not his flock: shall they flock us so? Do
they not by his charge understand his flock? when they say of the Bishops that
they give an office without a charge; and what is that? For footh to make a
Pastor and send him to seek a flock where he can find it? And did they not
expound this flock also to be his Benefice, in saying, What our brethren
mean by a ministers charge.
to ordeyne Pastors and let them prowle where they can for their Benefices? Do
they not here plainly mean by the charge the flock, and by the flock the
Benefice of the Pastor? And will they also make him Pastor there, where he has
no flock? And do they not make a dis^inction also page 111. of his double
estate saying, we have declared before that there is a double authority of the
Pastor, the one joined with the Elders of the Church whereof he is Pastor, the
other with the Synod or holy assembly, whereof he is a member.

So that in the Synodes he is not present as a pastor, but as a member. No, not
only he is not in the Synod as a Pastor, but he is not at all a pastor there,
and if no pastor, then no minister. For if minister, then pastor, by our Bre.
own reckoning. For they make pastor and minister all one, and that they said
before of making a pastor without a charge, here they repete, to be counted a
minister where he has no charge. So that, Our Brethrens position overthrows
all
still all comes to this reckoning, that being not minister in the Synod,
because that there he is not pastor: and he is not pastor, because it is not
his charge, nor his flock, nor his benefice: we are still at the pitch that we
were at before, that either nothing can be done in the Synod, and so we shall
have no Ministers at all, if they must be made there: or else, ministers be no
ministers still, be they in their charge, or be they out of it.

But, because our brethren should not be pressed too hard, and that it might
be thought, that yet this assertion may hold up his snowt, because that,
although it be not properly his charge, The charge of the function, not of the
place is of the essence of the ministry.
nor the charge which indeed they both mean and express: yet because the
words run so large, that he is not to be counted a minister where he has
no charge, and here he has some charge although not Pastoral: let us see
further, what our Brethren can get hereby.

Set aside the Synod it self; what is he, if he chance to be in any other
place? is he neither pastor nor minister, if he be in some other place where
he has no charge, as, beit but in the way unto the Synod* is he no
minister?

The Charge of the Function*
But perhaps they will say, that they say it not of any or of some places; but,
in all places to be counted a minister where he has no charge. And does the
number of places then make or mar the matter? ver^^y, I see not why, if he
ought still to be counted a minister in some place where he has no charge;
but that he may be counted so as well, even in all places where he has no
charge. And therefore it is not so much the charge of the place, as the charge
of the function, that is the material point indeed in a minister. Albeit (I
grant) he is ordained to have a charge also, which he must exercise in some
place, if he will not altogether be idle, though this place or that place be not
assigned unto him.

But they say, it would grieve a man to think what inconveniences does
follow, but principally how filthilie it stinketh of the old Popish indelible
character, from whence it has his ground, and neither of any reason nor of the
word of God.

It grieueth me to think, ( and I think it would grieve any man, that truly
loves our Brethren, Our ministry smells not of the Popish Character.
and neither hates them nor flattereth them) that they so much as think not
of the absurdities, contradictions, and inconveniences of these their strange
opinions that so stink in deed in the smell of all men else; that I meruell
their selves are not grieved with it, nor yet think thereon. As for the office
and function of our ministry, howsoever there may be cause of grief, either
by the foul favor of evil report and sclaunderous infamy of it, or too
evil a smell and stench in deed, by the default of some that are the
ministers: yet is not that to be imputed to the ministry; of which function
there is no cause to be agrieued or ashamed, but for us to rejoice; and for
other, specially our Brethren, if they be (as they say and I wish them to
be) faithful ministers, to think of us, as they would have us to think of
them: according to the Apostles rule, 1. Cor. 4.1. Let men so esteem (or
think) of us, as Ministers of Christ and dispensers of the mysteries of God.

So far of is our ministry ( whatsoever wretched sinners we are our
selves, and unworthy in our earthen, polluted and brittle vessels, to carry
the heavenly liquour, and precious treasure of Gods word and mysteries) so
far is it off from stinking or smelling of the false ministry, or errors of
Antichrist, and from all stench of the old ( or rather the late) Popish
indelible character: that it is not (God be blessed for it) charactered out,
with any such Balaams marks and characters, as the Popish Priesthood was, The
function and potentiall abillitie remaining till degradat^on without indelible
Cha^acter.
neither of Dylinges, nor Shauinges, nor any such order or office, nor any such
indelebilitie of the same: but that without scraping or disue^ing of the
minister, he may be disgraded, deposed, unordered, or clean deprived of his
order or office; ( as well as deprived or displaced from his Benefice) for his
demerites in false doctrine, or wi^ked life, if he shall so deserve. And yet,
till he be lawfully disgraded or deprived, from his order or office of the
Ministry; yea, though he were deprived of his Benefice. Indelible Character.
Nevertheless, he may remain in the function order and esse of a Mini^ter
still of the word and Sacraments; and in potentiall ability to the act and
exercise, yea, although he were also suspended for a time, from all the action
and exercise of his Ministry.

Will our Brethren never allow suspension, as a gentler correction, than
utter depriving or disgrading? when they allow even the excommunicated
offenders (upon their repentance and amendme^t) to be received again into
the bosom of the Church? The minister not a new ordained after suspension or
excommunication.
page 98. And shall they not be received again, as clearly forgiven, into
their former places and offices? Or do they so make him for that while, no
Minister at all, that he must be new made Minister a fresh when he is
released from that sentence of excommunication or suspension?

But why not; if he must be new made Minister do he but once set his foot
out of his charge of flock or Benefice? and is he Minister again, when be
sets in his foot again into his charge? The absurdity of our Bretherens
position.
and can he then be minister or not minister when he will? and can he make
himself minister a new, as often as he list thus to step in and out, to
and from his charge? Or who shall make him minister again, so often as he thus
starteth aside?

Truly it grieueth me; and I am even weary to think ( and I think the
reader also to hear, or to think) what an infinite number of absurdities, do
still more and more arise, on these their strange principles. Of which they
may well bestow these their own speeches, that they are indeed grounded
neither of any reason, or of the word of God.

But whether our ministry be grounded on the old stinking popish indelible
character* or (besides good reason) even on the word of God: The ground of
our ministry has Gods word and good reasons for it.
let any godly or reasonable man, whose reason is not forestalled with
affection, be an indifferent vmpere between us, in Gods name.

And yet forsoothe ( say they, in mockery of our ministry) it is so perfect,
that it may abide no reformation.

We vaunt of no perfection in our ministry. It may be good and godly; and
yet imperfect, We vaunt not of our ministeries perfection.
as we our selves and all our actions and offices are. Though our Brethren
boast too much of purity and perfection; we rather tend to it, than that we
are as yet able to apprehend it. For ( as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 13. verse.
9, and 10.) we know in part and we prophecy in part; but when that which
is perfect is come; then that which is in part shall be abolished. Would God,
both for our Brethren and for us, we were in the better part for our
ministry; and more near to perfection all of us, both in that and in all
things else, than we be.

And for our parts, we are ready to abide all due and true reformation. We
are ready to abide all true reformation.
But as for such reformations as these are, that these our learned Brethren
(which call themselves all the faithful Ministers) do desire, Multitudes of
unfit Ministers.
or rather, do not desire, but prescribe unto us, for the discipline and
reformation of the Church of England: they are so far off from any neernes to
perfection; that (forsooth, and forsooth) they would rather deforme us
altogether, than any whit reform us, or amend us.

Fourthly ( say they) if you will see how well the authority which they
claim and practice, The 4. absurdity and presumption is the use and practice
of ordeining unfit ministers.
is used of them, that only have the choice and admission of ministers: look
over the whole Realm of England, what a multitude of unfit pastors shall you
find, in every place? so that Jeroboam never made worse priests of the refuse
of the people, to serve his golden Calves, than they have ordained ministers,
to feed the flock of Christ, which he has purchased with his own blood.

It is good to see how well or ill, the authority claymed is practiced or
used; How we should look on this practice
so we see it with an intentive, and yet a single eye; discerning evermore
between the authority it self, and the practice: and in the practice,
between the use and the abuse thereof. Now, if we shall thus look over the
whole Realm of England, which (GOD be praised) is a large circuit, and
conteyneth a very great number of Pastors; it is less marvel if there be
many, not in all things so good, as their office and order does require.

Saint Paul finds fault in the Church of Corinthus, even with all the
prophets there, St. paul's fault finding with the prophets of Corinth.
( being though not all of them, yet many, the ordinary ministers and teachers
of the word) for their great disorders. And how much more (especially in this
our more corrupt age) is it less wonder, if we should see a multitude of
unfit pastors, in looking over a whole Realm, and that such a Realm as
England is? mayor est orbis vrbe, says Saint Jerome. And yet in the City
where he was at Rome, the multitude of the evil Priests or ministers and
their envy, made him forsake Rome and go to Bethelem. How some to severe
fathers have fallen into scismes by offense of the ministers lives.
Yea, for the envy of the Priests and ministers long before him, Tertullian
from growing in malecontentment with the dissolute life of the ministers, fell
so far from them, that in the end he became a Montaniste. And the too much
disliking of the corrupt lives of the Bishops, the Clergy and the Ministers in
the ancient Church, has made many too austere Ministers, otherwise excellent
learned men and straight livers, become Scismatikes, as many of the precise
nouatians and (...), or Puritanes were.

Not such great multitudes of unfit ministers as our brethren pretend.
But now, if we shall look over the whole Realm of England, what a multitude
( say our Brethren) of unfit Pastors shall you find in every place? And
indeed, what a multitude? I grant, more than we would there were, or than
there should be. For in duty, there ought none at all to be unfit. But if
we shall view the number well without sinister affection: I trust we shall
not stude (considering the whole Realm) so great a multitude, as our
Bretherens exclamation, Ieroboams Priests.
( grounded on ill will to the state of all the Ministers, and to their
Ministry it self) would make the world believe, that there is unfitness in
so many, that even in every place we should find a multitude of them. Whereas
contrariwise, though there be not a multitude of fit Pastors in every place;
yet there is some, and some good multitude in many places, God be praised for
it, and increase the multitude of them.

But they find fault, A sclau^derous compai^on of our Pastors to Ieroboams
Priests.
not only with the multitude of unfit Pastors in every place, but that also
they be so unfit, that they spare not to say: so that Jeroboam never made
worse Priests of the refuse of the people, to serve his golden Calves, then
they have ordained Ministers. etc.

Where here they speak not of so odd particular evil persons, either
degenerating from their order, or unworthy to have been at al^ ordained, or
perchance crept into the number by subornation and counterfeiting to be
ministers, and are not (as in a whole Realm, such naughty persons may be
found:) but speak it generally and of a great multitude in every place: These
bitter speeches seem rather to arise from the froth of some sharp choler, if
not very melancholy (comprehending in general the good and the bad) to
compare not only the poor ministers, that to their habilities feed the
flock of Christ which he has purchased with his own blood, to the Idolatrous
Priests that Jeroboam made, of the refuse of the people, to serve his golden
Calves: but also with like generality of all the Bishops, without discerning
who has made any unfit ministers, and who not (that the fault being personal,
might light upon the persons offending): they charge them all alike, that they
have all done, as did that execrable Apostata and Idolatrous tyrant Jeroboam,
who (being though a Prince, yet a mere lay man) took upon him to make
Priests and ministers of the rascalles and refuse of the people, whereas in
deed, neither he (had he been otherwise never so good) could make any
Priests at all: nor they (had they been never so ^^tte, learned or godly)
could be made Priests, being not of the stock of Aaron, and so in deed were
no true Priests at all.

But what do I go about, to repel this so manifest a sclaunder; the
indignity whereof, deserves chastisement rather than answer? save that our
Brethren v^^ a little point of cunning herein, Our Brethren use herein the
practice of the old Heritikes, and the papists by the ministers lives to
discredit their ministry.
from which they should the rather shun; because as ill men as was Jeroboam,
even many ancient Heretics used the same comparison. And at this day, it is
the common practice of the Papists, when they would breed a misliking of all
our doctrine, and our ministry, to undermine it, by finding fault with the
ministers unfitness in their lives and learning. And because they dare not
openly condemn all, which is their meaning; they make a show to be offended
with the multitude of the unfittest ministers.

Unfit Ministers.
I wisse, if we should thus rigge into the unfitness, and that of ministers
which are great favorites and vegers of these devises and reformations, we
could find (if not a multitude in every place, which God forbid) yet some
numbers, very unfit to be called faithful ministers, that desire the
reformation of the Church of England. Which have made such deformation in the
ministry, and therevppon being partly misliked of us, and partly either
having been punished, or fearing punishment, have fallen to take upon them a
great countenance of this our Bretherens zeal and practice that they use, to
inueigh against the Bishops, chalenging them for pride and tyranny; and
against all the Clergy and state of Ecclesiastical government now
established: The unfitness of many among our brethren to be ministers.
and these men get such great credit among many our male-contented Brethren;
that I am afraid, some of them go in the multitude and name also of these
faithful ministers, that recommend unto us this their learned discourse. Qui
simulant Curios and Bacchanalia viuunt.

But, let such pass as they are worthy: whom I rather lament, than study to
decipher their unworthiness. Howbeit, of these our learned (but missezealous)
Brethren, I think more reverently, as becomes me, and do not condemn
them all, for the multitude and number of some among them, and crave that they
would afford us the like equity, not for the defaultes of some (though a
multitude) to condemn all, and withal it self all the ministry too: for
so, we may call the doctrine also too near in question, and the whole corpse
and substance of our Church.

The learned disc. page 128.
This complaynt we confess is grievous, but the indignity of the matter
inforceth it. We know that vain excuses shall not be wanting, of
necessity, etc. But if necessity compelled them, to take such at the first:
what necessity compels them, to suffer them to be such still? For, if they
would needs admit ignorant persons to that charge; yet should they have
enforced them to study, as well as to other things, they have enforced them
unto, that in time they might have grown to be meet for their calling. Which
if they had done in 10.12. or 13. years space, a great many might have proved
excellently well learned and able to serve in the Church with great fruit and
profit; and the rest according to proportion of their time, might have come to
some mediocritie in knowledge: whereas now, as igno^aunt and as unfit, as they
were the first day, so are they still for the most part, and will so continue
to their lives end, if they may be suffered in idleness as they have been
hitherto.

Bridges.
After our Brethren have thus bitterly compared, the multitude of our Pastors
in every place, to Ieroboams Idolatrous Priests: they now go about to excuse
themselves of this so grievous a complaynt, and ^ithall, to cut off from us all
excuses.

This complaynt ( say they) we confess is grievous, Our bretherens grievous
complaint.
but the indignity of the matter inforceth it.

It is a grievous complaynt in deed (as they confess) and an heinous, both
against the Bishops, and against their poor Brether^n ministers. Our
Brethere^s confession of their complaint to be grievous.
Neither is there any so grievous indignity or necessity, that inforceth them
to complain so greeuouslie* and beyond not only the verity of the matter,
but the bounds both of charity and all modesty, and that in such grievous
manner of complaining, The extreme manner of our Bretherens grievous
complaining.
not by lowly supplication, exhibited in writing to her most excellent
Majesty, or to her most honorable Council; but to published in print to all
the whole Realm, and that without license to print it, yea against Law and
order given in such behalf so to do; and to scatter it abroad in every part
of the whole Realm, as much as they may; and that with such reprochefull
inuectiues, and notorious sclaunders: does any thing, or should any thing,
enforce our Brethren to complain in this extreme manner?

But now from this insufficient excuse of their so grievous complaynt on the
Bishops and our Ministers: they turn to the taking away from us, the refuge
and mitigation of all excuses.

We know ( say they) that vain excuses shall not be wanting of necessity,
etc.

That that is amiss, and can be so euicted; The excuse of necessity.
if our Brethren will needs become so rough, that it may deserve no modest
excuse, nor mitigation with them; we will gladly confess it, and study to
refourme it in good order. And so (God be praised) as we may, we do. And if
we ^id not, law would compel us.

But they know before hand (as they say) that we will allege necessity.
And they also before hand, will reject it, as a vain excuse.

For we know ( say they) that vain excuses shall not be wanting, of
necessity. etc.

And how know they (before hand) that we would allege necessity? Does
their mind (before hand) misgiue that there was at the first some necessity
indeed? and why might it not then be alleged?

But what mean they here, by adjoining this, etc. Do they also know before
hand, that we have some other excuses, if necessity would not be admitted? And
would they not allege them too, but suppress them, or without all regard,
or hearing, or knowing of them, shake them off before hand, as vain excuses
to? But, not to stand upon et-ceteraes: let us see what they say to necessity.

And yet they have cast off that also before hand, as a vain excuse. And
indeed if they mean it, that we should allea^^e, that necessity drove our
Bishop to ordeyne, and us allow such persons, of whom they said before,
Ieroboa^ never made worse: then, as he had no necessity, that did or ought to
have driven him to make such Priests: The excuse of necessity.
so we could not allege an^ such necessity, The excuse of necessity
but that it should be a very vain excuse, to choose and ordeyne such ( not
vain only) but most vile persons. But we are far (God be praised) both
from excusing such false and wicked Pastors, ( or rather, no Pastors at all) or
from excusing any that have made such, as they knew or suspected, to be
either an evil person in life, or altogether unfit in knowledge for the
ministry.

Notwithstanding, if we shall better consider of the matter, how for the need
and want of learned Preachers, The occasions of the necessity.
especially at that first time, when the Popish pastors were removed, and the
learned Preachers of the Gospel were the most of them destroyed, save a small
remaynder: and few of any towardness in learning endeavored themselves unto
the Ministry, but rather to other professions: and since that time also,
seeing on the one side, so many hunting and prowlling after those the Clergies
liuinges, or the fleecing of them, which for their better maintenance in
learning and hospitality they were endowed withal; and how the Clergy were
continually enuyed, pinched and pulled at; and on the other side, seeing the
innouations and garboyles of our Brethren themselves in the Clergy, to make
odious to the people both the Pastors, and also all the Prelates of the Realm;
and the peoples unthankfulness; and their own vncerteyntie; whereby the
learned sort were the more discouraged, and their friends would hardly permit
them, for these and other reasons, to enter into this function of the
ministry, so difficult in it self, so enuyous, unthankful, dangerous and
uncertain to the world; except that God even by the mere motion of his
Spirit, raised by some, and confirmed them against all these no small
tentations to flesh and blood: why may not this now go for a lawful and no
vain excuse, that when learned Preachers could not be gotten for Pastors, to
furnish all the vacant places: they were even glad and feign to take some such
other, (for supplye of this general want) as being honest and godly poor men
in conversation, found in Religion, zealous and ready to further the Gospel
to their best, though not able learnedly to preach unto the people: that very
necessity did enforce it, that is to say, this need and want of learned
Preachers caused it? Better is half a loaf than no bread. Necessity (they
say) is a sore weapon: and will our Brethren be so rigorous, not to admit
this necessity, but for a vain excuse?

But if necessity compelled them ( say they) to take such at the first: what
necessity compels them to suffer them to be such still?

If (as now they grant) necessity compelled them: then it is not a vain, but
a lawful and necessary excuse.

But if it did ( say they) what necessity compels them to suffer them to be
such still?

This is not true, that they are suffered to be such still. Orders are
appointed, both by the ancient discipline, The occasions of the necessity.
and by later degrees, t^ see that they exercise themselves in the study and
knowledge of Gods word. If the capacities of al be not such, as to attain unto
the gift of preaching, having not bin from their tender years (as was
Timothy) trained up in ^earning* yet are they not to be deprived of their
living, or deposed from their Ministry, The exercise of the ministry to
increase in learning.
having bin lawfully ordained, and by law possessed of their livings. But if
any continue in ignorance of the knowledge convenient for him, and so term it
wilful, careless, and obstinate ignorance: there are good laws provided to
correct him, yea, if his fault or defaultes so require, to deprive him.

If they say, these laws are not dulye practiced, but that some are suffered to
be such still: Although (I hope) there be not many such, yet i^ there were:
that is the officers fault, blame not the office. And yet, be officers never
so so diligent, some negligence may escape them, and we must not blame all for
some.

But they still reiecte all these as vain excuses. For ( say they) if they
would needs admit ignorant persons to that charge: The Bishops sclaundered,
that they wouldneedes admit ignorant persons.
yet should they have enforced them to study, as well as to other things that
they have enforced them unto.

See how charitably our brethren turn the matter, not as though the necessity
were for need of more skillful men: but that the Bishops would needs admit
ignorant persons. Is this our brethrens gentliest construction of this
necessity?

But they say, they should have enforced them to study.

That had bin vain indeed, if the necessity lay in the Bishops wilfulnes,
Enforcing the ministers to study and learning.
that they would needs admit them that were ignorant persons: wherefore then
should they enforce them not to be ignorant? But the Bishops by all lawful
means, do labor that they should not be ignorant. And therefore this is
neither true nor likely, that the Bishops would needs admit ignorant persons.

I grant they enforce them not with such enforcement as our brethren would
have them do; that is, to turn them out of their doors, Harrison against Mr.
Cartwrit page 23.
to go study where they may beg their bread: nor as Harrison that full
charitably, would have all the poor unlearned Ministers to be hanged up and
that in the churches and public assemblies: but otherwise (according to their
capacities and habilities) there are sufficient ordinances for that they should
be enforced to study more orderly.

But they say they should be as well enforced to study, as to other things
that they have enforced them unto. Inforcement unto other things.


What those other things are that they have bin enforced unto, because they
suppress them, I can give no certain answer, bu^ this ingenerall, That I
know of no unlawful things that they have been enforced unto. For, speaking
hereof the ignorant forte (the most of who^ have, 13. years profit.
God wot, but final living) they are but very poor men, and therefore are not
enforced with any great charge, except it be to buy some few books, and to
assemble themselves the oftener unto ye exercises of learning, which I take not
to be ye way to suffer the^ to live in ignorance, but rather to be a good and
tractable means, and if they will so call it, a^ inforceme^t also unto knowledge.

That in time ( say they) they might have grown meet for their calling.

The growing of many in the increase of learning.
And we doubt not but that many have so grown, and yet many of them, that have
and do grow daily more and more in knowledge, have not the gift of utterance
to be a Preacher. And many of them, as they grow more meet in knowledge, yet
growing withal in years, age makes them stoop, and become unable to be
preachers. Yea it oftentimes disableth many that have bin able, and that before
were good preachers. Besides many infirmities, and ye very necessities of
poverty it self, The decaies by age etc.
( which the poets called pondus ^tna gravius) presses many down, that they
can not provide such furniture of books, as were requisite in these
controversies, for a preacher not to want.

But ( say they) if they had done this, in 10.12. or. 13. years space, a great
many might have proved excellently well learned, and able to serve in the
Church with great fruit and profit.

All this has bin done, and not done in hucker mucker, but notoriusly known
and that longer space still continuing than 10.12. or. 13. yres: Yea more than
y^ space doubled, even the years of al her Majesty's reign, and much good (no
doubt) has bin done by this exercise of ye clergy. But to prescribe, that a
great many might have proved excelle^tly well learned, and able to serve in the
church with great fruit and profit; that, neither I, nor al our Br. can
determine, though we wish (with gods will) it might so have bin. But we see, that
even in ye very Universities, the nurceries of learning, and where they are
more enforced to daily and to more learned exercises, even of scholars and
youths, which are more pregnant; yet among the^, and of those also yt addict
themselves unto divinity; whatsoever they might: I cannot tell, but not a very
great many of the^, no not in 10.12. or 13. years space, have proved
excelle^tly well learned, and able to serve in the church with great fruit and
profit. The enforcing the ministers to study this 13. years.
Though (God be maysed) there are some yt do so prove, god vouchsafe also to
increase ye number of the^. But Mercurius non fit ex quolibet ligno, there are
not many of such excellency.

Now if it fall out thus among the^, in the universities: where notwithstanding
are many learned and godly preachers, The number of excellently well learned
Divines.
and more and more increase:) how much less can we make any promise of this,
in y^ country exercises, among the poor old and simple ministers, yt in 10.12.
or 13. years space, a great many might have proved excellent well learned, and
able to serve in the Church with great fruit and profit, but (God be praised
for it) though our brethren will not acknowledge it, some have reaped hereby
much fruit and profit, and are become proper scholars and preachers too.

And the rest ( say they) according to the proportion of their time, might
have come to some mediocrity in knowledge. Mediocritie in knowledge.
Accusation of crimes.


This is better said, and of this sort are (I hope) if not all, yet the most
part.

Whereas now ( say they) as ignorant and as unfit as they were the first day, so
are they still for the most part, and will so continue to their lives end, if
they may be suffered in Idleness as they have bin hitherto.

If any such Idle droanes be, and so be proved: they may by law be more sharply
ce^sured, or removed, without removing of the law for the^. The punishments or
removing of the idle and hopeless.
That an^ be suffered in idleness, and so have bin hitherto: let ye suffrers
answer it; and suffer ye shame or smart thereof, when the accusers have proved
it, but let our brethren here take heed of slanders.

Then it is a torment to think what ambitious suing, what e^uio us laboring,
what unseemly flattering, what prodigal bribing, The learned disc. page 129.
is used to attain to great dignities in the church, too far unmeet for the
modesty and gravity, that should be in christian preachers. and as for the
inferior benefices, from the fattest Parsonage to the porest Vicarige almost,
if it be worth 40. pound by the year, what Simonical bargains of Leases,
annui^ies, reseruations, exhibitions: yea notwithstanding the Act of Parliament
Anno. 13. by Antidates and other subtle conueiances, what Christian heart can
think of them, without detestation of such horrible abuses. Bridges


The crimes here heaped up together, are all personal, Our Brethere^s
undermining the law and authority by the persons defaultes*
and neither the faults of y^ law it self, nor approved by any law established
in the church o^ England. How soever any party is acquitt, or gilty, ye
authoryty of ye law remains intiere, and where it finds such horrible
abuses, clearly proved, it seue^ely punishes the^, if it be duly executed. and
therefore thus to agrauate these crimes, and to reason from them, to take away
the B. and pastors lawful authority: contains a number of fallatio^s ab
accedente, ab ignoratione elenchi, a non causavt causa, and a secundum quid ad
simpliciter. and it may as easily be retorted on our Bre. that when they had
done all that ever they could; except not only they would clean take away all
the great dignities, ( which is their drift, and which some be glad to barken
after) but take away withal the inferior benefices from the fattest
Parsonage, to the porest Vicarige also; After all our bretherens spoils* we
should have as great or great^^ faults.
yet would ther^ be corruptions and abuses still in diverse persons, though
their might be the less ambitious suings, when the liuinges were so horribly
spoiled, which indeed were a worse spoil, than any is made, and more
detestable. And yet would there be ambition still, and far peradventure worse
in another more perilous sort, than any now there is. Diogenes when he said
that he trampl^d down Platonis fastum, the pomp of Plato: it was well
answered, sed maiore fastu, but with a greater pomp then Plato had. The
learned disc. page 120.


Shall we speak here any thing of the popish Priesthood, the greatest
blasphemy that ever was: how long was it allowed for a lawefull Ministerye,
until by the godly meaning of the said Parlyament, some brande-marke of
shame, was set upon it? But how pitifullye that aucthoritye was abused, The
popish priesthood.
whereas by the same statute committed to the Bishops, in allowing of
Priests that came to do their pennaunce, by negligence of the Bishops, and
bribe^ye of their officers: the country cries out of it, and the state of the
Church, is little amended by it. Old sir John lack latin, that had not
seen some of his Benefices, a dosen year before, was carried about on his
mare, and sometimes on a carte: first to the Bishop whom he chose, if he
might for his purpose, such a one as had been a priest of his own order, and
cared least what Ministers serve in his diocoese, and then from shire to
shire, one distante an hundredth mile from another, mumbling up his Articles in
his morrow mass voice in every Church where he had living, and returned as
very a beast as he came.

Bridges.
We account the Popish Priestehood as great blasphemy, as our brethren do.

The popish priesthood never allowed of us though some parts thereof be not
utterly disaloshed.
But, how long say they was it allowed for a lawefull ministerye?

Never allowed at all amongste us* say we. For even when the mass was
abolished, their blasphemous sacrificing ministry, was abolished, for an
unlawful ministerye. And yet as unlawful as that blasphemous ministerye was,
in respect of most horrible blasphemies that it was corrupted with all,
especially their vnbloudye sacrifice: yet can we not say, that it was in all
respects merely no ministerye at all, nor had any lawful actions in that
unlawful ministry. The Pharisees, though otherwise sectaries, and mainteyning
blasphemous errors, and were the deadly enemies of Christ and his Gospel,
yet did not Christ utterly condemn their ministry, but that he said, they
sat in Moses chair, and had the key of knowledge. And so, now and then some of
the popish priests preached the truth in some things.

For if our brethren will make them but mere lay men, then are neither they
nor we any ministers at all, but mere lay men also. For who ordained us
ministers, but such ministers as were either their selves of their Ministry;
or at least were made ministers of those ministers? except they will say, the
people can make ministers: and that which is more, we must either grant, that
he which is no minister but a mere lay man, may baptize, (which our brethren
utterly have denied:) or else, that al those which were borne in the time of
that ministry, The whole ministry of the Papists not condemned but the bad
distinguished from the evil therein.
were not at all baptized, and so, not only a great many both of us and of our
brethren, are not yet baptized; but that also baptism utterly ceased in the
churches. Yea, that so, the Church and all ceased, when there was no other
ministry.

And therefore we must not utterly condemn the whole ministry but distinguish
between it and ye good therein on ye one side, and the blasphemies and all the
bad therein on ye other side, which did corrupt it. This corruption is to be
taken from it, and then the Ministry it self, which is, the office of
teaching or preaching of the word of God, the Ministration of the Sacraments of
Christ, the making of public prayers, and the governing or executing of those
things that perteyne to the public government and discipline of the Church;
is good and lawful.

Neither were any of these so excellent Ministers, Luther, Suinglius,
oecolompadius, Calvin, Bucer, Peter Martyr, and many others, made Ministers a
new: but disclaimed only and renounced all the errors, corruptions, and
blasphemeis in the Ministry which before they had received, ^s we have heard
Caluines prescription, Epist. 373. and so continued still in the office or
ministry thus repurged.

And therefore, since the mass was taken away, and all ^he other corruptions
of the Ministry, that were used in the popish priesthood; and an other
Ministration appointed as is set down in our book of public prayer, by the
godly laws of the realm and Church of England established, which was done so
soon as conveniently it could be done, forthwith after her Majesty's most
happy entrance into this kingdom: this is not truly said, that the popish
priesthood being the greatest blasphemy that ever was, was allowed for a
lawful Ministry, until by the godly meaning of the said parliament (Anno.
13.) some brande-marke of shame was set upon it.

As though the sacrificing Priesthood had continued with allowance thereof, for
thirteen year together of the Queens Majesty's reign, The Parliaments brande
mark of shame.
which was as long a time, as before they mentioned, for the enforcing of the
ministers to study. Yea, by this rule, it continues still, though disallowed:
or rather (as they say) but noted only with a brand-marke of shame set upon
it. So that this is not the taking of it away, but the continuing of it with
more shame to the parliament and to all the states of the Realm^, that have
marked it with a brand-marke of shame, and yet shame not to continue it, though
we disallow it.

And this withal is but a shameful and vnreuerent term that here they use,
in calling either the statute, or the book of articles agreed upon by all the
clergy of the Church of England, and approved in the high court of
parliament by all the states of the realm, and by the statute commanded to be
read, a brand-marke of shame.

But our brethren to mittigate the matter, say the parliament had a godly
meaning in making that statute, The godly meaning o^ the parliament.
for Priests ( that had bin made in the time of Popery) to profess their
consent to the true doctrine, agreed upon in the book of articles, by their
public reading of the same book in their benefices.

Yea verily, the parliament had therein a very godly meaning, and it was also
as godly an act ^s meaning of the parliament.

The Statute anno 13. Eliz.
But ( say they) how pitifullye that authority was abused, which by the same
statute was committed to the Bishops, in allowing of Priests that came to do
their penance, by negligence of the Bishops and bribery of their officers, the
country cries out of it, and the state of the Church is little amended by it.

There is no such crying out in the country, as are these outcries of our
brethren. If it be but little amended: yet little is somewhat. But if it be
not great: that is not to be unputed to the good law, but to the evil and
indirect accidents. The committing to the Bishops the authority for the
statutes execution.
For it was not pitiful, that that authority was committed to the Bishops in
allowing of Priests, that came ( not as our brethren here say) to do their
penance, or to have a brand-marke of shame set upon them: but the statute it
self more reverently and rightly, sets down the cause and order of their
act, saying.

That the Churches of the Queens Majesty's dominions, may be served with
Pastors of sound religion, be it enacted by the authority of this present
Parliament, The words of the Statute anno Eliz. 13. cap. 12.
that every person under the degree of a Bishop, which does or shall pretend,
to be a priest or Minister of gods holy word and Sacraments, by reason of
any other form of institution, consecration or ordeyning, than the form set
forth by Parliament in the time of the late King of most worthy memory King
Edward the sixte, or now used in the reign of our most gracious Sovereign
Lady, before the feast of the Nativity next following, shall in the
presence of the Bishop, or guardian of the spiritualties of some one diocoese,
where he has or shall have ecclesiastical living, declare his assent, and
subscribe to all the articles of religion, which only concern the confession
of the true Christian Faith, and the doctrine of the Sacraments, comprised in a
book imprinted, entitled: Articles whereupon it was agreed by the Archbish.
and Bish. of both provinces, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at
London, in the year of our lord God, 1562. According to the computation of the
Church of england, for the avoiding of the diversities of opinions, and for the
establishing of consent touching true Religion, put forth by the Queens
Authority: And shall bring from such B. or guardian of Spiritualties, in
writing under his Seal authentike, and testimonial of such assent and
subscription, and openly on some Sunday, in the time of public service before
noone, in every church (where by reason of any Ecc* living he ought to atte^d)
read both the said Testimonial and the said articles, upon pain, that every
such person, which shall not before the said feast, do as is above appointed,
shall be ipso facto deprived, and al his Eccl. promotions shall be void, as if he
then were naturally dead.

These are the very words of the statute. Wherein, what could they better have
provided, than (whatsoever they should ordeyne, for the bringing of those
persons to the more sure confession and consent of sound Religion, first,
Negligence and bribes.
to come before the Bishop or the Guardian of the ^pirituall jurisdiction in
the Bishops vacancie, Before whom the things ordained in the statute should
best be done.
in some one Diocoese where he had any ecclesiastical promotion, or living,
and there before him, declare his consent and also subscribe to all the
articles of religion, which only concern the confession of the true
Christian Faith? etc. Before whom should he have done this, if he should do it
authentically, than before the Bishop or the bishops guardian, being the public
officers, that have competent authority over him in those matters? which
withal, confuteth our brethrens equal authority of all Pastors.

If the bishops were negligent, or the officers take bribes: The Bishops
negligence and the officers bribes.
this was the bishops and the officers fault, not any default in the laws.
Wise men should not do like William Summer, strike one for another. But if the
bishops negligence and the bribery of the officers be so great, that the
country cries out of it, and the state of the Church is little amended: it is
then so much the easier to be known, who are the offenders that so pitif^lly
abused this godly meaning of the statute, and that authority committed to them
and not they to be thus disorderly cried out upon, The disorderly proceeding of
our brethren.
and that in this uncharitable manner, by inuectiue libelles, under the title of
learned discourses, to be thus discoursed upon, and with taunts and slanders
defamed to all the world, so much as lies in them. If the matter be little
amended, this is not to amend it more, but to make it worse, for this is naught
worth, but to norishe malice, suspision, and sclaunder, and yet the fault not
known, much less amended.

Let the negligence and briberies ( with true desire of reformation, as the
title of this learned discourse pretends) be iudicially in form of law
complained upon, the parties being named, (if alive) called, accused, heard,
considered, and convicted thereof, before their lawful magistrate: Our
brethere^s orderly proceeding.
and then we and all the country, would commend therein our brethrens just and
more charitable dealing, then might they better think of our brethren to be
in true meaning such faithful Ministers as indeed desired the reformation of
the Church of Englands discipline. At leastwise, whatsoever the country would
think or speak, both the party and the matter that were proved faulty, of
little might be much, and much sooner amended.

But on this fashion to deface B. and their officers, and spread about such
sclaunders and suspicions on them: all sober and godly affected may mislike it,
and all the country may cry out thereon, that it is not the part of faithful
ministers and brethren, that it proceedth neither of true zeal, wisdom,
faithfulness, Justice, or charity; nor tends little or much, to any amendment
of the right reformation or true Churches state, or of the persons, or of the
ma^ter.

But now, if we shall consider the matter better (I speak as they do, The
unlikeness of our bretherens accusations.
in general till some instance be orderlye produced to the contrary) that
they should herein so heighnously accuse the bishops of negligence, though the
lesser fault, and the officers bryberye for this matter: whatsoever the
neglience of the one, Sir John lack latin.
or the bribery of the other might do hurt in other matters: there is no
likelihood in the world, either of the one or of the other in this matter,
neither could the Bishop with his negligence, or any favor or the officers
with their bribes taking, hinder y^ proceeding, or relieve the person, or abuse
the authority, or defeat the penalty of the s^atute.

For it is so prouidently provided for, by the authority of the same high
court of parliament, that the party must not only bring from the Bishop, or
guardian of the spiritualties, in writing under his seal aute^tike, a
testimonial of such assent and subscription: but also openly onsome sunday, in
the time of public service before noone in every Church where by reason of any
living he ought to attend) the party shall read both the said testimonial
and the said Articles: and all this to be done, upon pain of loosing all his
Eccl. promotions ipso facto. So that here, no negligence or any corruption of
the Bishop, nor briberie of the officers could any whit help the party, but
that he must needs do the things, that are thus presc^ibed, to be so openly
in the face of all the Church performed.

Wherein the Bishop and his officers ar, or are not to be blamed.
Which things now if the minister did not (as he ought to do) unfeignedly, and
with all his heart, but hypocritically: that is not the Bishops nor the officers
fault; his own sin be upon his own head. But if his sin be found out, and be
not further punished, so far as the Bishop by his superior authority may
do: then hardly blame the Bishop and his officers, if the fault thereof be in
them.

As for poor old sir Ihon lack latins lack of latin, Sir John lack
latins traueling to read the articles.
that fault is not to be laid to any of our Bishops, that made him not priest,
howbeit many of our most zealous brethren, (which take upon them not only to
be faithful ministers, but to be preachers also) need not much to insulte
upon old sir John for lack of latin.

But, what an old mumpsimus have they here raked out, to make their
wondermente and spectacle of example upon, to level all those priests by,
for whom the statute in the words above cited, was enacted. Here is drawn
out (as it were an owl out of an Iuie Bush, for all the birds to howt at) an
old sir John lack latin, though he had his orders from rome a porta latina,
having as it were a tot quot of benefices on his back in a number of diverse
shires, one benefice distant a 100. miles from another miserably carried about
in a cart or on his mare bestia super bestiam, to go mumble up his articles in
his morrow mass voice, in every church where he had living, and return as
very a beast as he came. What mean our brethren to bring forth such a beast
as they have here described or did they know of any such in all England: and if
they did, and the cry of all the country ran^ upon him, and that he was by
negligence of the bishop and briberie of the officers borne out and unpunished:
then may he the eassier be known, and the other parties also (if living) to
be punished all in, time. And not for this one odd palinodie; all the Bishops
and their officers to be thus burdened with such crimes and outcries, for
abusing that authority of the statute committed unto them.

But if that, knowing no such old croust, yet in the person and description of
such an hypocrite, they would insult on all thos^ Ministers, that had before
bin popish priests, especially upon the poor, old, and simpler sort of them:
they offer a great many honest men, that are neither beasts nor Papists, too
great and too contumelious an injury, that are now God bethanked Good and
sound converted protestants.

But let us take this old sir Ihon, as they have here set him out. If now he
had so many benefices that he saw not some of them in a dosen year before:
there is express statute to have abridged his number, and laws to limite his
circuit too.

But if he held them by any law or privilege, and saw them not before in a
dosen years, nor were by necessary impediment deteyned from them, and provided
not the better in his absence for their instruction, and the divine service,
with the administration of the sacraments, and the preaching of the word of
God, to be orderly set forth unto them, by some other to supply that, which
by his infirmity, absence and ignorance he could not do him self: then indeed
the Bishop and his officers may partake the blame with him, contrariwise, if he
did all these things: what could the Bishop do against him?

But if now upon this statute for fear he should loose his benefices, this old
sir John lack Latin, were carried about on his mare, and sometimes on a cart,
so it were to do his duty, either then, or before, or after, if he were so
carried about, either for poverty, or infirmity: our brethren should not have
objected that unto him. Every one that cannot have a horse to ride on, poverty
may make him glad that he has a mate, or else he might perhaps trot on bayard
a tentoes, and he that could neither ride nor go, by reason of great age, or
other weakness, if he could neither have horselitter, couche, nor wagon, he
must have bin carried in a carte, or else tarry at home and loose his benefice,
for any remedy he had, that I know of, but howsoever his case stood, poverty
and infirmity are rather (me thinks) to be pitied than vpbraided, yea though
the man otherwise deserved no pity.

But say they he was carried, first to the Bishop whom he chose if he might,
for his purpose, such one as had bin a priest of his own order, and cared
least what ministers serve in his diocoese.

From the disdayning of poor sir John, our brethren mount up again to another
slander of the Bishop, Sclaunder of the Bishops.
burdening him also not only with the popish priesthood, and so to be one for
the popish priests purpose, as a fauorer of popery; but also to be careless
what ministers serve in his diocoese. But till they name and prove any to have
then been, or yet to be such evil Bishops: this again may go for so a foul
slander, that it deserves for answer, a due reward of so great an obloquie.

But to come down again, from the Bishops to old sir John lack Latin, that
was carried about on his mare or in a carte: if he was so poor to be carried
thus baselye about: how is it said, that he had not seen some of his
benefices in a dozen year before, and that he was carried from shire to
shire, one benefice being distante from another 100. mile, mumbling up his
articles in his morrow mass voice, in every Church where he had living?

It might have been, that this old popish priest sir John lack latin, might
have served some small cure, No likelihood of this devise of Sir John lack
latin.
or perhaps in some odd corner have got a benefice: but if he had so many, it
is not likely that he was but a sir John lack latin, if not rather, (had he
had withal grace and truth,) that he had latin enough, and silver enough
also, (if not too much) so that he needed not, to be carried about on his
mare, or in a carte for the matter. There is no probability in this tale.

But what liuinges soever he had, or having liuinges, how beastly soever he
spared his money, and rode thither on his widge beast: when he came there, if
he mumbled up his articles in his morrow mass voice; meaning hereby, Sir
John's not ^atisfiing the act.
that he did it also in such a beastely sort, that the people did not
understand him; or that he did it not in the best reverent and hearty manner he
could, but that he showed himself to do it against ye heart, and for fashion
sake only to save his living, and so returned ( if he came such a beast
thither) as very a beast as he came: this was no sufficient satisfaction, to
the intendement and godly meaning of the law. And therefore if any godly
disposed persons, were justly offended at his mockery, and manifest eluding of
the godly meaning of this act, and cried out upon him for a counterfeite, or
but orderly co^playned on his misdemeanor; they might most easily have had him
punished, and the matter amended, even with the loss of all his liuinges, for
so apparent mocking of the statute.

But now, howsoever this old sir John lack latin shifted, since our brethren
here cite this act of parliament anno. 13. And withal do so greatly commend
the godly meaning of the said parliament, Whether our brethren themselves
satisfy the godly meaning of the statute.
and pity that the authority of the same statute was abused, and would have
the priests made by the popish Priesthood ( and with good reason) to have bin
seuerelye looked unto, in the full acco^plishment of that, which the said
statute of so godly meaning did enact: since I hope our Bre. also mean as they
speak; may it please them, to consider with me, or with their pillow, a little
better of this godly meaning of the act; and of the words thereof, and then
tell me, whether that some, if not all of their own selves, might not have bin
shrewdly touched, and yet may be, by their manifest breach thereof. And for, to
begin with the entendment and godly meaning of the act, to repeat the words
again and mark them better. The words are these. The Statute Anno 13.


That the churches of the Queens Majesty's dominions may be served with
Pastors of sound religion, The godly meaning of the statute fl^^ against our
Bretherens discourse.
beit enacted by the authority of this present parliament, that every person
under the degree of a B. which does or shall pretend to be a Priest or minister
of gods holy word and sacraments by reason of any other form of institution,
consecration or ordering, than the form set forth by parliament in the time
of the late king of most worthy mermory king Edward the 6. or now used in the
reign of our most gracious sovereign Lady, etc.

Do these words and the godly meaning of them, reach only to the popish
Priesthood? do they not plainly reach also to any form of institution,
consecration or ordering of any other never so much reformed churches beyond
the sea^^, or in this realm, other than the form set forth by Parliament, in
the reigns of king Edward, and of our now most gracious sovereign Lady Queen
Elizabeth? so that the form of institution, consecration or ordering
ministers, Priests or Elders which our brethren do pretend and urge in this
learned discourse, and the form that they have prescribed in their new book of
common prayer, these words and godly meaning of the statute comprehend the^.
And what now if any protestation were ordained in any reformed churches beyond
the seas, according to their forms of institution, consecrating or ordering,
or according to that our brethren desire, and yet read not the articles, nor
were deprived: will our brethren cry out, how pitifully that authority was
abused, which was by the same statute committed to the B. by the negligence of
the Bishops, and bribery of their officers?

And although, that branch touch not so much, these our Bre. now, because it
says: which does or shall pretend, How our Brethren overthrow their own
ministry
to be a Priest or Minister of gods holy word and sacraments, by reason of any
other institution, consecration or ordering: since our Bre. (as I take it) do
not pretend to have bin ordered or made ministers by any other form, but
only; that they should, or would be made ministers by another, that is, by
the form following the Geneua order set out in their communion book ( so that
withal, it have the additions of this learned discourse, and be in a Synod)
and so escape the danger of the statutes words: yet therein they both do much
discredit themselves, in holding by that ordeyning which they desire to leave:
writing against it, and yet retaining it and calling themselves faithful
ministers, and are made ministers by the very same form, of a B. ordeining
them, How our Brethren are in danger of losing their lyuinges by the godly
statute.
which they condemn to be an unfaithful form of ordeining ministers, or
rather no ordeining at al, except Antichristian, being done by the authority of
one man: besides that, they manifestly oppose themselves to the godly meaning
of the statute.

But how soever for that point of the Statute ordained as is aforesaid, they
will flee (for holding their Benefices) from the meaning thereof, which
nevertheless they confess to be godly, Our brethren impugning the book of
articles.
to the words of the statute, that they pretend not to have bin ordained by
another form that is allowed in the statute: notwithstanding, in that part of
the statute that follows, how can our brethren excuse them selves, that they
be not in danger of this Act, if they have bene^ices? or have they not done and
do clean contrary to this their learned discourse, in agreeing to the statute
that they might hold their livings, if they have not lost them again, by
setting out this their learned discourse, and by their maintenance of these
opinions, and assertions, that are so direct against the statutes, mark the
words of the act, and (as they call it) the godly meaning of the parliament.

And that if any person ecclesiastical, or which shall have ecclesiastical
living, shall advisedly mainteyne or affirm any doctrine directly contrary or
repugnant to any of the said articles; and being conuented before the Bishop of
the diocoese, or the ordinary, or before the Queens highness commissioners
in causes ecclesiastical, shall persist therein or not revoke his error, or
after such reuocatio^ eftsoons affirm such untrue doctrine, such mainteyning,
or affirming and persisting, or such eftsoons affirming, shall be just cause to
deprive such persons of his ecclesiastical promotions. And it shall be lawful
for the Bishop of the diocoese or the ordinary, or the said commissioners, to
deprive such person so persisting, or lawfully convicted of such eftsoons
affirming, and upon such sentence of deprivation pronounced, he shall be indeed
deprived.

Now if we shall withal consider how our brethren have advisedly, that is to
say, of deliberate and advised purpose, directly in this their learned
discourse, page 135 challenged the doctrine of the said book of Articles,
saying. As was practiced in the convocation of the foresaid parliament, unto
diverse Godly and learned preachers, that offered to speak against diverse gross
and palpable errors that had escaped the Bishops decrees, Our brethere^s
advised impugning the articles and maintaining doctrine contrary thereunto.
as, for the distinction of Canonical and apocriphall books, for explication
of the clause in the article of predestination, where it is said, the elect
may fall from grace, and such like matters: how truly this is spken of that
convocation, and how truly also they have in these words, burdened both the
Bishops and the articles, of no less than gross and palpable errors, and
that in principal points of doctrine: I reserve that, till I come to the
proper place, where it is to be answered. But how have not our brethren
advisedly affirmed and (if they will stand to it) maintained doctrine directlye
contrary and repugnant, to some of the the Articles of the said book?

For to affirm and maintain that, that which is good doctrine, is a gross
and palpable error: what is that, but to affirm and maintain the doctrine
that is directly contrary and repugnant thereto: and what remains. But that
if the Bishops will not pitifully abuse that authority of the statute* that was
committed unto them; they or the ordinarye, or the Queens Majesty's high
commissioners in Ecclesiastical causes, ought to convent these our learned
discoursing Brethren before them, (if they had any names, that they might
know them) and if any of them shall persist and not revoke his error etc:
that this shall be just cause to deprive such person of his Ecclesiastical
promotions.

And besides these Articles aforesaid yt they challenge for gross and palpable
errors: how do they not also impugn the 34.35. and 36. articles of ye said
book. Yea diverse of the^ have been also conue^ted before the Bishop, the
Ordinary, or the Commissioners aforesaid, and have persisted in the contrary
to those articles* and these our learned discoursing brethren have gone
further, to put their contradictions forth to the world in print. The words
of the 34. article, which they inpugne, are these. Who soever through his
private Judgment willingly and purposelye, does openly break the traditions
of the Church, The 34 article of the traditions of the church.
which be not repugnant to the word of God, and be ordained and approved by
common authority, ought to be rebuked openly (that other may fear to do
the like) as he that offends against the common order of the Church, and
hurts the authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the consciences of the
weak brethren. If our Brethren would agree unto this article, there should
not be such troubles as there are, amongst us.

The 35. article is of Homilies. The 35. article of homilies.
The second book of homilies, the several titles whereof, we have joined under
this article, does conteyne a godly and wholesome doctrine, and necessary for
these times, as does the former book of homilies, which were set forth in the
time of K. Edward the 6. and therefore we judge them to be read in churches by
the ministers diligently and distinctly* that they may be understood of the
people.

Our brethren say, pa. 49. that a prescript form of reading of prayers, of
homelies, and such like, when they are alleged to maintain the ignorance of
unskillful pastors ( as though yt were the use they are alleged for) are but
the instruments of folish and Idol shepherds, which have a certain pretense
of Pastoral office, but in effect, are altogether unmeet for the same.

The 36. article is for Consecration of B. and ministers: The 36. article of
consecrating of Bishops and ministers.
The book of consecration of Archbishops, B. and ordering of priests and
deacons lately set forth in the time of Edward the 6. and confirmed at the
same time by authority of parliament, does conteyn al things necessary to such
consecration and ordering: neither has it any thing that of it self is
superstitious or ungodly, and therefore, whosoever are consecrated or ordered
according to the rites of that book, since the second year of the aforenamed
king Edward, unto this time, or hereafter shall be consecrated or ordered
according to the same rires, we decree all such to be rightly, orderly and
lawfully consecrated and ordered.

Two pastors in every congregation.
And is not now the greatest part of this our brethrens learned discourse, for
the consecrating, ordering or ordeyning of Archbishops B. Priests, or Elders
and deacons, directly contrary and repugnant to the doctrine and decree of this
article? How directly our bretherens learned disc. is against these articles.
and what follows hereupon? but that either our brethren must renounce this
their learned discourse; or must deny the authority and godly meaning of this
act Anno. 13* which here they have approved: or else, if the B. and other
off^cers shall not pitifully abuse that authority which by the same statute is
committed to them; they must by the godly meaning and words of this act,
pronounce them to be justly deprived; The learned disc. page 130 and 131.
yea theirselues have pronounced sentence against themselves.

But this and all other inconveniences before rehearsed, should utterly be
avoided, if we might once establish the lawful election of Pastors, according
to the word of God. It were also greatly to be wished, that it might be
brought to pass, that in every congregation, there should be two Pastors at
the least, both because the charge is great, and also for supplying the lack
of the one, if the other were sick, or absent upon necessitye, or any such
like case. Which thing were both agreeable to the example of the Apostolic
church, and also very profitable for the congregation. We do not mean this
in every parish, as they be now distinguished, but in every congregation as
they may be desposed, both for best edifieng, and also for sufficient living
for the Pastors.

Bridges.
The inconveniences that they have objected, and the inconveniences that they
have incurred: the election also of Pastors that they would establish for
lawful, against the law established: and how they have not yet proved it
by any example or rule, to be according to the word of God: all this I remitte
to the indifferent readers waighing of that we have both of us before spoken.

As for this other point, concerning the number, which they say, were also
greatly to be wished, that it might be brought to pass, that in every
congregation there should be two Pastors at the least: it is neither
necessary, nor in many places can well be brought to pass. Not, but that we
grant also, it may be well and very fit in some places, where the charge is
great, and if it could be also in all places we mislike it not, and in many
places it is so already, where the Pastor has other inferior Ministers or
Curates, which in the propriety of that living are inferior to him, as the
Vicars under the Parsons, or as the Curates having stipendes under either of
them, and yet in the order of the ministerye, all are equal. But there is no
necessary precept nor example of the Apostles, that there were or should be no
Pastors than one ordained in every congregation. Two Pastors at least in every
congregation.


And although it might be in some respe^tes very profitable ( I grant) for
the congregation; yet in other respects not very profitable not only for
that these two having equal authority, will the hardlyer agree: but also even
for the charges and profit of maintenaunces, to have at least too learned
Preachers, which they also make to be Bishops, besides the Doctor, one also at
least in every congregation, as they have said, page 15. that certain men
should be appointed in every congregation, whom he has indewed with gifts
meet for the same purpose which should employe them selves either wholye or
principallye to the study of the holy Scriptures, One Doctor also at least in
every congregation.
thereby to learn to auouche the principles of true Religion, and to repress
and beat down all false and strange opinions, etc. Whose office is only to
teach true doctrine and to confute all heresies, etc. Without applying their
teaching, etc. Page 17. so that, The Number of the governors and Deacons not
determined.
they must not be any of these two Episcopal Pastors. And besides these,
there must be a Seigniour of Ecclesiastical governors, that are Elders not
teaching, and of what number these must be, they set down no stinte, nor of
the Deacons. And all these must be maintained, At whose charges all the^e must
be maintained.
especially and altogether the doctors and Pastors, of ye Ecclesiastical
living in that parish, or if that will not stretche, then either the Parrishe
must be at the charges of their maintenance, or the Bishops, and Cathedral
Churches, and Colleges lands, wheresoever they lie in other congregations,
must be brought thither for their maintenance.

But they except, that they mean not this in every Parish, The factions
arising by 2 equal pastors.
as they be now distinguished, but in every congregation as they may be
disposed, both for the best aedification, and also for sufficient lyning for
the Pastors.

What aedification, or rather emulation and faction, this may breed, to
reduce every congregation, to I hold of this Pastor, and I of that Pastor;
when both the Preachers in a Parrishe must be in all authority equal: Jerome
testifies (as we have heard) that the Churches in the very apostles times,
did find the inconvenience. But our times have later and fresh examples, even
among our own brethren in their congregations. As for sufficient living of
the Pastors, which here they remember, when they have remembered their Doctors
also, and all their other Ecclesiastical Officers: it may hap to prove as
small a sufficiency, as he that said of the two kinds of enough; there was
much enough, and little enough. But which enough should be a sufficient
living, that is not yet determined. No, we cannot yet see that, till the
Parishes be new disposed. A new disposing of all the parishes in England.


What? and must all the Parrishes and congregations through out all England
not be distinguished as they be now, but be altered and new disposed, for
these new devises, and for these new Episcopal Pastors maintenances?

New disposing of parishes.
They may be, say they.

They may be? what a saying is this? are they disposed to dally? for if all
theother things and officers must be thus disposed: then must all the parishes
be so disposed too, for else, if the parishes new disposing has no must be but
may be; then let them say of the other things and officers also, that they may
be, but not, they must be, yea, all things considered, they must not be, for
if we stood but even upon this, that every parish should not remain as it is
now distinguished, but be newly disposed: what a danger might this breed, not
only in titles of inheritancies and other points in ^awe (for this would
make work for lawyers indeed, more then did all the altering of Abbey
lands) but such an universal innovation, and altering of all parishes and
congregations in the realm, might bring such dangers to the whole state, as I
am afraid but to think on them.

It will be objected, when we have all things at our pleasure, concerning the
election of Pastors, The learned disc. page 131.
yet will there creep in many abuses. We answer, they shall not so soon
nor so easily, nor so many abuses creep in, as now at wide wyndowes, yea,
great port gates do throongin. But if as many or more abuses (if more could be)
were crept in, yet were the case better then it is now; for we should be
sure, that GOD approves our order, though he condemn the abuses, because it
is grounded upon Gods word, whereas now he abhors both.

Bridges.
They term it right for them selves, in saying: when we have all things ar our
pleasure: Our Brethren having all things at their plea^ure.
for in very deed, set their pleasure a side, and all their reasons,
examples, and authorities, when they are throughlye considered, serve not their
turn. Only this is the strongest argument that I can perceive, they have
yet made, that it is their pleasure thus and thus to have it.

But, if it will be objected ( as they say, it will be) that when they have all
things at their pleasure, Abuses creeping in after our brethren have all
things at their pleasure.
has concerning the election of Pastors, and their pleasure also in all other
things besides, that they contend for; 'yet will there creep in many abuses:
what will it please them now to say to this objection?

We answer, ( say they) they shall not so soon, nor so easily, nor so many
abuses creep in, as now at wide windows, yea, at great portegates, do
throong in.

And we demand what warrant and assurance of this? is there any thing here,
but their bare answer, and mere promise? which may be as sure ( for ought
that yet we see) as sealed with butter, and we may believe it, if it pleases
us also to afforde them so much credit, as it pleases them to pawn so free a
promise: but for any reason to move us, here is none, but that they give as
here three promises together, that abuses shall not so soon, nor so easilye,
nor so many, creep in as now they thrung in at wide windows and port gates.
Grounds of Gods word.


Indeed considering well of all that pro and con, has passed between us in
the examining but of this their learned discourse: we need not doubt that
abuses would thrung in at wide windows and port gates ( as they say) now they
do: for when all the walls are beaten down, what infinite abuses, and worse
than abuses, may not most soon come in not only creeping, but come tumbling
in, fay^e and easily, if not rather foul and most con^usedly? howbeit, we
fear not beating down the walls, or one port gate or but portall, or but
window opened, or any hole made, by all the battery of these our learned
Brethren, except we will let them (as we do too much) discourse and take
their pleasure indeed, to dispose and transpose, to pull down^, and set vy,
all things as they please to frame them. Now, whether they fear this objection
to be too true, or in security they will grant it us, for their further
pleasure:

But if ( say they) as many, or more abuses (if more could be) were crept in: yet
were it better than it is now; for we should be sure, that God approves our
order* though he condemn the abuses, because it is grounded upon Gods word,
whereas now he abhors both.

And can our brethren at length confess this difference, betwixt the order
grounded upon Gods word and the abuses rising upon man's corruption? Difference
of the order grounded upon gods word, and abuses rising of man's corruption.
how chance then, they have grounded all their former so bitter inuectiues,
against the orders of our Ministry, upon the abuses of the Ministers? and all
to bleare the peoples eyes, to make the orders odious, because of the offensive
abuses that they pretend against the persons. But it is well, that yet they
here confess, that their own orders which they would have, are not free from
abuses; yea from as many or more abuses, than are the orders that we have. They
do well to grant this, before hand, for if their orders were admitted, we
should find it too true afterward, that there would be as many or more abuses.
Nevertheless, they set a good face thereon, that for all there were more
abuses:

Tush, what of all that, yet should our case be better, when it should be
worser, than it is now.

Yea? how can that be?

For we should be sure, that God approves our order.

And how should we be sure of this?

Because it is grounded upon Gods word.

But can they tell us in what part of Gods word this ground lies? What
grou^des of Gods word our brethren allege.
they have oftentimes told us, it is grounded on Gods word, but when we come to
seek for the words, we can never find the^, nor any necessary consequence
that they have led us unto, in all the word of God, either for any example or
commandment, that we are charged or bound to follow: and therefore this is
but their own confident presupposall. When they can prove such a ground in
Gods word for them; The pastors members of the synod.
then we will, yea we must yield, will we ^ill we, to Gods orders. But till
then; we crave leisure, that removing the abuses as well as God will give us
grace, we may keep our orders still in Gods name, except we might be better
assured of better orders, and less subject to abuses than these be.

The learned disc. page 132.
But of the authority that Pastors have as members of the Synod, we have
spoken hitherto sufficiently. By which it is evident, how all things have been
corrupted in Popery, which had at the first, any good institution, which
corruptions we also retain at this day, without desiring of any reformation.

Bridges.
To that they say, they have spoken hitherto sufficiently of the authority
that Pastors have as members of the Synod, whether it be also answered
sufficiently, to that they have spoken thereupon; I yield it to the
indifferency of the Reader.

But what is this they say here, that Pastors have as members of the Synod?
What the pastors have as members of the synod.
Indeed they used that term before, page 111. of the Pastors double
authority, the one joined with the Elders of the Church whereof he is Pastor:
the other with the Synod or holy assembly, whereof he is a member. But after
that, they said page 117. who should be able to know, what order,
comeliness and edification requires, according to Gods word; but they that
be teachers and preachers of the same unto all others? What then mean they by
these terms, that they have authority as members of the Synod? If they
mean, as all the members, and so, as the whole, that none be members or parts
of the Synod but only they: then hold they tacke indeed to that their former
claim; who should be able to know those things but they? But in so doing,
they not only quite exclude the Prince; but their governing Elders also, and
their Deacons, whom if they will not exclude from some authority, as members
also of the Synod: then was that not sufficiently spoken, or rather they gave
their Pastors more than sufficient authority in the Synod.

The corruptions in Popery, The reformation of the corruptions in Popery.
our Bishops and such as acknowledged their Episcopal authority, found out
(God be praised for it) before our Brethren came, and reformed the same; and
they now unthankfully reward the reformers of those corruptions, to afford
them this good word for their labor, that we reteyne those corruptions at this
day, and that without desiring of any reformation.

If in saying we, they speak of themselves; they are their own Judges, if, of
the Queens most excellent Majesty and of all the Prelates and Pastors, and
whole state of the Church and Realm of England: it is too evident and too
foul a sclaunder, that we reteyne at this day all things that have been
corrupted in Popery, and that without desiring any reformation.

Neither helps it that they say, Reteyning corruptions.
all things which at the first had any good institution: they have not yet
been able to prove, that by authority of any law established, we reteyne so
much as any one such corrupted thing; How we retain anyething that has bin
corrupted.
but, either have rejected it, if it could not b^^ scoured from the rust and
ranker of that corruption; or if it could, we have so cleansed and reformed
the same, to his good institution; that we may well and safely reteyne it
without desiring innovation. If any persons reteyne the corruptions still; that
is contrary to the reformation of the law, and punishable upon the lawful
proof in the reteyner. And since they do here confess, that the institutions
were good, of those things, whereof they say, we reteyne the corruptions:
howsoever we reteyne them, the institution of them, was not naught (if good)
but lawdable. And therefore, they are not utterly to be condemned; but
contrariwise, may be well retained, being reduced to their first and good
institution.

For, to begin first with our particular Synodes, good Lord what a mockery
they are of lawful Synodes, The learned disc. page 132 ^33 and 134.
being holden for no other end almost, but to gather up fees, both ordinary
and extraordinary, with daily new devises to powle the poor Priests of
their money, which they extort for seeing the letters of orders, for dinners
and such like matters. And yet a new invented pillage, whereby they compel
men to buy books of them for 4. pence, or 6. pence, which are too dear of a
penie or two pence, and not only such small ware, but also great books, being
such as every Parish is appointed to buy, must be bought of them for two or
three shillings in a book derer, then it may be bought in Paul's Churchyard:
yea otherwhiles though the Parish be furnished of them already, they are not
authentical, except they be bought at master Chauncelors and Official, at
master Registeas hands. As for reformation of any thing in the Church, there
are indeed many presentiments, and men sworn to present matters, but little or
none amendment at all does follow. So that it is a common saying in the
country, when the presentment is once received they shall never hear more of
it. Soon after the visitation or Synod the petite bribing Sumner rides forth
laden with Excommunications, which he scatters abroad in the country, as
thick as hayle-shot, against this Parson, or that Vicar: this Churchwarden,
and that Sydeman, whom he himself when he came to summon him to the Synod,
for a Chief or a gammon of Bacon, had undertaken to excuse for non appearance.
But when he is once excommunicated, there is no remedy, but he must trudge
to the Chauncellor or Official for absolution, who after he has once
absolved his purse of a few groates* gives him his blessing and sends him
away. And this is the Image of our little or particular Synod.

Particular Synods.
To begin first with our particular Synodes, good Lord what a bold and open
sclaunder is this, Bridges.
that (whatsoever these corruptions are, which here they heap up against the
officers) they dare not shame to say; that the particular Synodes are holden
for this end, Corruptions of pa^ticuler Synods.
yea for no other end almost, but to gather up fees both ordinary and
extraordinary, with daily new devises to powle the poor Priests of their
money?

Ordinary fees of officers.
It cannot be denied but that in such Synodes there are, and must needs be,
where there are ordinary officers, some ordinary fees, except there be
ordinary stipends provided, that the officers may be otherwise allowed for
their acts, their payues and charges, if they would have any officers at all,
to enact or record the things done or decreed in their Synodes. Yea, the very
Pastors themselves must have (as they said before) a sufficient living. And
were it well said of any e^uying the same, because the Pastors must even of
ordinary have sufficient lyuings, that therefore a sufficient living is the
end, The ends of livings, offices, and fees.
or there is no other end almost, but that, of having Pastors? whereas indeed
that is no end at all of the Pastorship, but a necessary or convenient
concurrence and appendix annexed thereunto. And even so is it in the fees of
the officers both in Synodes, and all other public actions of the officers.
For if there were no other ends of them; both their fees and the offices could
not continue, nor ever had begun.

Neither helps it the matter, that they say not simply, Synodes are holden
for no other end at all: but that they are holden for no other end almost:
for, although almost never reached home; and so, it appears, that they are
holden for other ends, if they had been as willing to show them, as to show
these things that here they pick quarrels withal: yet, if they had so done,
they should have showed, that the gathering of these fees, in very deed were
no ends of Synodes at all, but allowances assigned unto them, that traveled
in the Synodes, to the ends that Synodes were and are ordained for. The fault
of the officer and not of the office.
And if any officer ( as I grant many officers do) shot at other ends, and
made his fees his end: so also may any other officer do, Pastor or whosoever.
But this is the fault of the man, and not to be imputed to the matter.

Our Brethrens pity on the poor ministers.
But it is a good hearing (if they mean good sooth) that our Brethren yet now
at the length begin to have some pity on the poor Priests, whom for the
greatest part of this their learned discourse, they have coursed and
recoursed, withal the most dispitefull reproaches that they could devise; and
some would have them hanged, and some would have them turned out a begging: and
now forsoothe, they begin to smoothe them, and pity the poor Priests, that
they should ^ee polled of their money. Shall we cry, good Lord what a
mockery is this? But there is no Priest so poor nor simple, that may not
perceive their mockery both of him, Our Brethrens mockery.
and of the good laws and lawful orders of the Synods? Yea, Faults in
Officers.
how they would mock them even with that Sophistical deception, which their
selves last noted, of not discerning, between the lawful order and the abuse
thereof.

And here (to make the Synod the more odious, Extorting money for ^e^ing
letters of Orders.
they begin with the accusation extorting money for seeing the letters of
orders.

But for plain and simple answer hereunto: for the ordinary and ancient
accustomed fees of ^egisters, or other fees by law rated and set down, as are
thought reasonable; there is great reason, that without all scoffing, grudging
or detracting, they should be paid unto them, seeing that the office of a
Register in making and keeping authentic records, is a good and necessary
office. And even this among all other things, that our Brethren here first
begin to be offended withal, to call for, to see, and to record, yea, The
duty of lawefull fees in Registers etc.
even at every Synod, such of the Ministers letters of orders, as they shall
think requisite, which is a matter of no small importance.

If any Registers do abuse themselves therein, Our brethren loath to show
their letters of orders.
namely by extortion ( as here they are burdened) name the Register, prove the
extortion in time, place and manner competent; and the Law has provided
ready remedy. This general complaint on all, we know not by whom, is not
lawful. But belike they would either have no Registers, or they should have no
fee, or above all things, the letters of orders must not be called for, nor
scene: for in that, tangis vlcus, if our Brethren must be driven to show how
they were made Ministers, by authority whereof they take themselves for
Pastors. This is even as when the Pharisees Math. 22. were driven to show the
penie that convinced them, either they must clean overthrow all this their
learned discourse, and disclayme all these devises of their Pastorshippe; or
else they shall show themselves to be no faithful Ministers nor true Pastors,
yea to be utterly no Pastors or Ministers at all, nor to have any lawful
authority to teach or preach, nor to be capable to hold any Ecclesiastical
function or living, which would be a shrewder loss unto them, than all the
Registers fees ( for all his extorting) amounts unto.

But by their leave, the Register must not leave still to call for the letters
of their orders, both to see that they have them, and that they be recorded,
and that in their still presenting of them, they still acknowledge, that they
hold all the lawfulness of their entry into their calling and function by the
testimony of them: so that if they shall now pretend to be Ministers, and
teach and preach and hold living, by that order that themselves cry out upon,
and yet reteyne it: all the world may see this great unfaithfulness
perpetually remaining in record against them. I speak not this to approve the
manner of ordeyning in the Popish time (of the which sort the most of our
Brethren are not) the corruptions in which orders they have publikly renownced
and disclaimed: and yet the exhibiting of the^ also, for the good part in the^,
is necessary, and thereby they also are known, how they were called into the
Ministry.

Buying of Books.
From letters of orders they come to dinners, and ( say they in general) such
like matters. For dinners and such like matters.


If they be no worse matters than di^ners, they are no ill matters. But if
they were no better, they might have dined at home. And is it not good reason,
if their dinners be there provided, they should pay for their dinners, or
provide otherwise, or kiss the post, for ought that I perceive, except any
wi^sbestow their dinner on them. What a toy is this, to help to furnish up
their learned discourse, to pick a quarrel at the Synodes, for the Priests
paying of money for their dinners? Let them go reckon rather with the Tapster
or the Host, than trouble their learned discourse on Synodes, for dinners and
such like matters.

From dinner they come to selling and buying of books. Selling and buying of
books.


Neither is this worthy their learned discourse, nor yet can be much ^misse,
if ought amiss at all, so that the buyer have ware worth his money. Call they
this pillage?

Yea, say they, whereby they compel men to buy books of them.

I do not think that they compel any: for if they list, they may buy them
in other places. So that this is but a gentle compulsion to buy the books of
them. Although, to appoint some books meet for them, and to compel them to
have such books, is both lawful and convenient. If they may have them there,
it is their more ease that buy them, and if they pay a penie or two pence more
for the reddinesse of them, and for his charge that provided them, let them
look to that, a fool and his money is soon parted. And must this also be
inserted into this learned discourse?

No meruell if they forget not the greater and dearer books, when they
remember a book of a groate or two pence? But belike, some of these our
Brethren met with a hard hukster, or else they are over hard handed, if not
worse affected, to any of those books, of which, if they might set the price,
though the book were well worth two or three shillings, would they not yet
think it too dear of a penie or twopence? Lo, how easy a matter it is to
find a stick to beat a dog; to pick a quarrel at every small offense,
when one is disposed to cavil.

If the book be necessary for the Parish, or for the Pastors, why should
they not be compelled to have it? If they have it already; this is not true,
that they can be compelled to buy it again, of these or those men. If they
think they may have it cheaper in Paul's Churchyard; they may send thither for
it, none can let them. If any compel them, or extort more than it is worth:
their complaynt may be hard in other places, and the party offending, (be he
master Register, or master Official, or master Chauncellor never so much)
may be punished for it. The present^e^^s not ^eformed.


From the books, they come to the presentiments, with the which they seem to
find no fault, Presentme^^^.
that there are many presentiments and me^ sworn to present matters, but they
find fault with this, that for reformation of any thing in the church, little
or none amendment at all does follow. And I confess, that here they say
some thing, for little amendment, but not, for none at all. But still, this
fault is not in the Law, nor in the Synod, but either in the people that ware
worse and worse, or in the Officer that is negligent, and perchance also
corrupted. And if the fault be found to be in him: there are laws also
provided to refourme him.

As for the common saying in the Country, The presentment no more heard of.
when the presentment is once received, they shall never here more of it.

It may be, that some may say so, and it may so fall out in some matters and
in some persons, but in all, it cannot be true, nor for the most part. Let
them inquire after it, and they shall find it far otherwise. But I will
defend no man's fault, nor yet mine own; and by some negligence or ignorance,
without any corruption, Reformation of faults*
some faults perhaps may not be reformed, that have been presented, or all
men's humors are not satisfied, in the manner of refourming the same. Some count
it no reformation, if it be not reformed as they imagine it should be. But,
id possumus quod iure possumus. As for the reformations which our Brethren
would have (in the conteyte of many other, that are as godly learned and wise
as they, and of great experience in the sequel of such matters) where little
amendment is now; would bring a great deal less amendment, if not rather,
it would clean mar all.

Next to the presentiments, they fall a quarreling with the Summoner, The
Summoner caryinge forth the citations and exco^muications.
for giving warning to the parties presented to appear and answer, or for
their not so doing, and for giving notice to them, that they hau^ incurred the
censure of excommunication.

But here, howsoever the Summoner also may abuse his office, with petit bribing
(as they term it): yet is not his office all unnecessary. And even by the
poor Summoner they may perceive, that the common saying in the Country, is
not very true, that when the presentment is once received, The presentment
heard of.
they shall never here more of it. For belike they hear somewhat more, when
they hear of Citations, and perchance hear themselves summoned, and again
after that, when they hear other news, that for their contumacie besides
their other notorious crimes, they stand excommunicated, and if the
excommunications be scattered abroad as thick as hayle shot, the country were
very thick of hearing, if they hard not of them.

And if the Summoner ( notwithstanding al his promises for a Cheese or a gammon
of Bacon) could not excuse the party for non appearance: then bribes avail the
less, Bribes not preuayling.
and Master Chauncellor and the Official are the less corrupted and more
commendable, when that the offender being once excommunicated, General
co^^^^^ions.
there is no remedy but he must trudge to the Chauncelor or Official for
absolution. Neither does his absolution consist ( as they, to make it odious
and contemptible, scoff out the matter) in absoluing his purse of a few
groates. It was meruel they raised it not from few to many groates, and yet
good reason, if he be able, that he should smart so far, even by the purse
also, as to satisf^e the duty of the fees, that are by law appointed to the
officers? But this is most untrue, that his absolution and releasing from the
bond of excommunication, that in mockery, they call, the giving him his
blessing ( which term they might as well use, if it had been the action of
their whole Seniorie) is the absoluing of the purse, or consists on paying of
money. Whereas indeed, he was neither excommunicated, nor is absolved, for
money: but as he was excommunicated for the encreasement of his fault with
disobedient contumacie; Absolution not for money.
and contempt, for the which lesser sins deserve this correction as our
Brethren page 39. confess: so is he released of the same, and restored to his
state, upon his humble and penitent submission, and serious request. Yea, if
the case so require, upon his public acknowledgement and declaration of his
hearty repentance, with some demonstrances and notes, of humbly susteyning
open rebuke and shame, in the face of all the congregation. With what
conscience now, The learned disc. page 123.125.136. and 137.
can our Brethren (against their own knowledge, in things so manifest) knitte
up this matter, saying: and this is the Image of our little particular Synod?
and is this the Image also, of our great faithful Bretherens, little faithful
and sincere dealing?

Our general conuocations having a more show of good order, but in effect
little better. For first they are stuffed full of Popish and profane
Chauncellors, and other Lawyers, which being mere lay men, and unlearned in
divinity, Choosing of Clearkes of the convocation house.
by their own law ought to be no members of the Synod: and yet these will
bear the greatest sway in all things. The Bishops, as though they were greater
than the Apostles, must have their several conuenticle, whereas the Apostles
and Elders came together with the whole multitude. Acts. 15. and as they are
severed in place, Act. 15.
so will they be higher in authority. So that whatsoever is decreed among
them, that must be called the determination of the whole Synod. So that no man
must be suffered to speak any thing against it, be it never so reasonable or
agreeable to the word of God: yea, whosoever will not subscribe to all such
things as they decree, must be excluded out of the convocation, as was
practiced and threatened in the convocation at the foresaid Parliament, unto
diverse godly and learned Preachers, that offered to speak against diverse
gross and palpable errors, that had escaped the Bishops decrees. As, for the
distinctions of Canonical and Apocryphal books, for explication of the clause
in the article of predestination: where it is said, that the elect may fall
from grace, and such like matters. If this be not to practice Lordship over our
faith: to set down decrees of Religion, which must be accepted of all men,
without either reason or testimony of the Scripture to prove them, and no man
permitted to show any reason or Scriptures, that inforceth his conscience to
the contrary, but only to hang upon the authority of Bishops: let some other
declare what Paul means, 2. Cor. 1.4. where he denies, that he would
exercise any Lordshippe, 2. Cor. 4.
over the faith of the Corinthians.

For although their decrees were never so perfect, yet it were an example of
Tyrannical dominion, neither to give reasons to satisfy the ignorant
themselves, nor to hear or confute that which might be alleged against them
by others; but for a few Lordbishops in comparison of all the Convocation, to
sit by themselves and order all things at their pleasures, as though the
Gospel sprang first from them: or had come unto them only; if sauoureth
nothing so much as of Popish tyranny: whereas otherwise it is well known they
are not all of the best learned, nor all of the longest study, nor all of the
soundest judgment, nor all of greatest zeal, nor all of best example, and
therefore not meetest to be the only determiners in Ecclesiastical matters,
to the prejudice of the whole Synod. Wherefore it is greatly to be desired,
that our Synodes also, which are so far out of order, may be reformed
according to the Scripture, and the example of the Primitive Church, that all
things may be done with such modesty, gravity, and judgment, as they were
by the Apostles and Elders. Acts. 15.

From our little or particular Synods, Bridges.
our Brethren come now to our general conuocations, Our general conuocations.
of which they yet confess, that both they have a more show of good order,
and are in effect though little, yet somewhat better. And here to prove this
little better, they say:

For first, they are stuffed full of Popish and profane Chauncellors, and
other Lawyers.

Is this their little better good order in effect, that they spoke of? Our
Brethrens contumelious speeches of Chauncelors and Lawy^^s.
If this were true, it is much worse, than before they made the little Synodes
to be. Before we had but trifles, here is worse stuff if the conuocations are
stuffed full of Popish and profane Chauncellors and other Lawyers. And if they
be stuffed with them, then belike there is some store of them. But can they
name and prove any such Chauncellors or Lawyers, as be admitted to be
members of the Synod, to be popish and profane? If they can; it had been
very well none, that at such times as the Conuocations were holden, they had
(by these our Bretherens intimation) been detected and examined, that if they
had been so convinced, they might have been avoided, removed, or punished. If
they can name none, nor prove any to be such persons, Chauncelors and Lawyers.
then is this too profane, too uncharitable, too vnprotestant-like a
sclaunder, and the more at randon that these foul speeches are thus cast
forth, so much the worse and more suspicious. Or is the very name and office
of Chauncellor or Lawyer, accounted of them to be profane and popish? Or do
they mean it of Chauncellors only, and not jointly of Lawyers? And are all
Chauncellors then popish and profane? These speeches (saving our Bretherens
reverence) are not only ras^, but dangerous, against many worshipful and
right honorable personages, that have the name and office of Chauncellors, and
are yet neither profane nor popish, but godly, sincere, religious, and very
great favorers of the Gospel.

Chauncelors or Lawyers in our conuocation^.
As for our Conuocations, are so little stuffed full of Chauncellors or
Lawyers, that we have there very few of them. And if we have some of them
for their counsel and experience in the law: I think it no such matter of
offense, but rather expedient, they being such, as are known to be of sound
Religion, and not popish, or infected with any other known error: and not
profane but virtuous and holy in life and conversation. Me thinks rather,
we might be glad, to have some such Chauncellors or Lawyers amongst us,
because of their better experience in Ecclesiastical regiment, and in devising
laws, orders, and decrees, than we our selves are so well able to conceive,
whose only or principal profession is Divinity.

But say they, of these Chauncellors and other Lawyers: which being mere lay
men, and unlearned in Divinity, by their own law ought to be no members of
the Synod.

Whether our Chauncelors or Lawyers in conuocations be more lay and unlearned
in diuitie then our bretherens governors.
If they spared not before to call them popish and profane, no meruell if they
call them mere lay men and unlearned in Divinity. But see here the
indifferency of these our learned Brethren. When they speak of their
governing Elders in every congregation, they forsooth are not lay men, but
persons and officers Ecclesiastical. Although they be Gentlemen, Merchants,
Artizanes, Farmers, Husbandmen, or what trade soever. These are forsooth, no
mere lay men, but Presbyters Priests or Elders. And who made them so? The
Pastor and the Parish have chosen them to this office. And can their choice
make a mere lay man, not to be a mere lay man: and cannot the choice of all
the Pastors in a whole shire, nor the approbation of the whole provincial
Synod, make a Chauncellor or other Lawyer to be no mere lay man, in respect
of the Ecclesiastical office that they chose him unto, as well as could that
particular Parish or congregation?

Yea, but (say they these Chauncellors and other Lawyers) they are unlearned in
Divinity.

our brethen^ obiecting to chauncelors and Lawyers
I meruell that our Brethren even for very shame, would have ever objected
this unto them; knowing what great learned men many of their Seniours must
needs fall out to be, in many Parishes, whom their late old sir John lack
latin would soon appose, The Bishops several place.
for he yet at least could read his Articles, but they could not read a
letter on the book. And yet these men because they be Seniours, must be
counted learned in Divinity, that the (...) learned (...)ninitie.
and how got they on a suddayne, all this learning, by inspiration with the
election of them to the Seniorie? or came it by virtue of their Eldership? As
though learning in Divinity were even tied to their Consistory.

As for Chauncellors and other Lawyers Civil or Canon (for I take it that they
speak not so much of the Temporal Lawyers) these are mere lay men and
unlearned in Divinity. What a strange and high conc^yte is this of
themselves, still boasting in the top of every leaf of their learned
discourse, and often of their grave wise and godly Seniours, with contempt of
others, if they favor not their devises, be they never so learned men?

If they say, though they be learned men; yet in other things, not in
divinity. Is it not more likely, that they be or may be, far more learned
in Divinity too, professing the study that is even next unto Divinity, and
in a great part consists on Divinity, than those Temporal men, that are
altogether or for the most part trained up in worldly matters and in
mechanical occupations, and have little mind or leisure and less helps of
fearing to imploye themselves in any deep study in Divinity, yea many of
them utterly unlearned? What a great vanity is in this dealing?

And yet these ( say they, meaning Chauncelors and other Lawyers) will bear
the greatest sway in all things in our Synodes.

These bear little sway ( GOD knows, and it is apparent) at most, Chauncelors
and Lawyers bear not the greatest sway in our conuocations.
no more than does any other particular man in them. But in their Synodes (
though they speak clean contrary therein unto themselves) yet these their lay
rather than Ecclesiastical Elders, either should bear the greatest sway of
government, or let them lay aside the prerogative of this name of Governors,
which title they make more peculier to them, than either to the Doctors or to
the Pastors.

But now after the Chauncellors and Lawyers, which in our Conuocations or
general Synod are very few amongst us, except withal they be Ministers of
the word and Sacraments, or else Deacons: our Brethren must here (there is no
remedy) have yet another fling at the Bishops.

The Bishops ( say they) as though they were greater than the Apostles, must
have their several conuenticle.

If the Bishops have a lawful superior dignity, more than the other
Priests or pastoral Elders have, The Bishops several place in the
convocation.
as before at large is proved: why may they not also have a superior place
several by themselves, to consult upon matters, that are meetest to be
propounded in the whole Synod? Does it therefore follow herevppon, that they
take upon them to be greater than the Apostles, or but comparable to them?
Several place.
What a frivolous argument is this? but what reason have they for it?

Whereas ( say they) the Apostles came together with the whole multitude.

The Apostles example Act. 15.6.
Nay, soft (Brethren) put up these words again, for this time and place, with
the whole multitude, in your purse. Add not to the text. The words are these,
Act. 15. verse. 6. Then the Apostles and Elders came together to look to this
matter. I grant, he names afterward, all the multitude, ver. 12. And yet it
seems that he meant there, none other, but all the multitude of the Apostles
and Elders, that he said before, verse. 6. did come together. Although
afterward for the sending of chosen men to carry their decree, The Apostles
were several by themselves and yet joined with the Pastors and the multitude.
it is said, verse. 22. that it seemed good to the Apostles and Elders, with the
whole Church; although the whole multitude of the whole Church came not
together about that controversy. But it may appear, the Apostles and the
other Elders with the multitude were so in one place together, that
nevertheless Luke testifies, Acts. 5. verse. 13. saying: and of the other
(meaning, besides the Apostles) no man durst join himself to them. And
therefore if our Bishops have their several conuenticle, or place of coming
together by themselves, what have they therein that the Apostles also had not:
and yet it follows not, that if the Apostles had no several conuenticle or
meeting together, that they make themselves greater than the Apostles; or make
any comparison of greatness with them.

But they acknowledge themselves far inferior, as in gifts, so in dignity
also of their function. Yea, in the order of their Pastoral Eldershippe or
Priesthood it self, they acknowledge themselves to be but equal and and all
one, even the greatest of them, not only with the meanest in the convocation;
but with the poorest Priest in England. Albeit, in respect of their lawful
superior dignities, they may well have a superior and several conuenticle or
meeting place, notwithstanding oftentimes, both they and all the residue of the
convocation, do jointly also in one place assemble altogether.

And as they are severed ( say they) in place, so will they be higher in
authority. The Bishops higher in thoritie.


And good reason too, since (as we have seen) it is, not in respect of any
higher authority in the order of the Eldership: but of their higher authority
of jurisdiction in the Ecclesiastical regiment.

So that whatsoever ( say they) is decreed amongst themselves; that must be
called the determination of the whole Synod.

I meruell that our Brethren shamed nor feared not, to stuff their learned
discourse, The decrees ar^ of the whole synod not of the Bishops ^^lie.
with so many manifest untruths. It is most evident, that nothing is or can
be decreed in the name of the whole Synodes determination, without the whole
Synod ( comprehending at least, the greatest number for the whole) have
decreed and determined the same. Speaking in the convocation.


So that ( say they) no man must be suffered to speak any thing against it,
be it never so reasonable, or agreeable to the word of God.

This is another most great and manifest untruth, sclaunderous to the
Bishops, and reproachful to the whole Convocation. There is none of the
house, but that may in any matter, that is propounded to be debated upon;
yea, any other though not of the house, being known to be a reverent, How
every o^e of the house may speak in the convocation.
godly, wise and learned person, either of the Ministry, yea in some cases,
though he were not any Ecclesiastical person, yet might he also, be freely
admitted (according to the ancient Canons) to speak before the house, in such
sort and manner as the order of the house requires, for those that be or
should be learned men, to speak their mind in the Latin tongue (for fear
some young Sir John lack latin would be over busy) and so to reason freely
pro and contra, observing always that modesty and reverence, which beseems
the assembly of grave and learned men. And in this manner, many have
propounded, and reasoned upon diverse matters; as those that are ancients in
the Conuocations heretofore, can witness.

Yea ( say they) whosoever will not subscribe to all such things as they
decree, must be excluded out of the Convocation, as was practiced and
threatened, in the Convocation at the foresaid Parliament, unto diverse godly
and learned Preachers, that offered to speak against diverse gross and
palpable errors, that had escaped the Bishops.

Our Brethren having so often broken the squire of truth in these matters,
do here wax bold to rappe out untruths now by huddles. What one Preacher
has been excluded out of the Convocation, for this, that he would not
subscribe to all such things as the Bishops among themselves have decreed?
None excluded the house for not subscribing to the Bishops d^cree*
Or can they bring any instance but of such one threat made unto them? And
albeit a threat differs from the putting it in practice: yet this also is a
notorious sclaunder. There was no such thing either practiced or threatened at
any time in our Conuocations, namely at that time they mention (which I
remember well, and so do many others) when some speaking in English began to
be over busy, and to use disordered behavior with vnreuerent terms, they
were by the Prolocutor as moderator commanded to silence, or else to depart
and not to disturb the house, nor alter the lawdable orders thereof, except
they would, and that in seemly modesty speak in Latin: which these godly
and learned Preachers that our Brethren commend, liked not to do.
Nevertheless, other being indeed godly and learned Preachers, did very
reverently and with great learning discuss those matters. And so with general
consent either of all, or (which sufficed) of the most and best part,
Subscribing to the articles.
those Articles were condescended upon and approved for good and sound
doctrine. And so I hope will stand, for any thing that our Brethren, or any
other shall ever be able to say against them. Whether the book of articles
conteyne any errou^.


As for any (and much less) diverse gross and palpable errors that escaped
the Bishops: I remember none, nor can learn of any. The Decrees contained in
the articles aforesaid, are published to the open view of of every man, if our
Brethren as yet can burden them with any gross or palpable error, or with
any error at all, though not gross nor palpable, or but with appearance or
suspicion of error, it were worth the hearing. But if there be no such error
in them, who are then worthy the punishing, or at least worthy to acknowledge
with repentance and reuoking this so great a sclaunder? Our Brethrens own
acquittaunce for the truth of our religion.
For it touches not our Bishops and the Convocation only; but, being
established also as is aforesaid by act of Parliament, and so the professed
doctrine of all the Realm and Church of England: how are we not all hereby
defaced, to maynteyne gross and palpable errors, and that in no small points
of doctrine?

If Papists had said this, it had been less meruell, which hate our doctrine
and count it stuff full of errors and heresies too. But they never were, nor
are, nor ever shall be (God willing) able, to prove that we mainteyne any one
error in any one article of doctrine, but agree in all the substance of
Religion, with the true and sincere word of God. Yea our Brethren their
selves bearing us witness, who in the Preface of this learned discourse
confess, that for the substance of Religion it is resolved, and now publikly
maynteyned for our true and holy faith.

How could this be true, if those articles, namely these which here they note,
being matter of faith, and publicly maynteyned and resolved, by all the Church
of England to be true and holy, were gross and palpable errors? But to
show both unto them, and to all the world (least the Papists should take
hold hereon, when they hear of this our own Bretherens accusation, which
will be even meat and drink to them, being glad to feed upon such
sclaunders, that as we are sound (GOD be blessed for it) in all other
articles of doctrine; so in these we maynteyne no error at all, but a most
sure and sincere truth: let us come to the view of these two Articles, that
here they mention for example.

The distinction of the Canonical and Apocryphal boo^es.
As for the distinction ( say they) of Canonical and Apocryphal books.

Although this be a matter wherein good and godly Fathers have had some
difference: yet for our Bishops and Conuocations decree thereon, I see not
how our Brethren shall be able to find, that we hold any error in that
matter. It is the sixth Article, the words whereof are these.

Holy Scripture conteyneth all things necessary to salvation: The book of
articles not erroneus.
so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby; is not to
be required of any man, that it should be believed as an article of the faith,
or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation. In the name of the holy
Scripture, we do understand those canonical books of the old and new
Testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church.

Of the names and number of the Canonical books. Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus,
Numeri, Deuteronomie, Iosue, Judges, Ruth. The names and number of the
Canonica^l books.
The first book of Samuel. The 2. book of Samuel. The first book of Kings.
The 2. book of Kings. The 1. book of Chroni. The 2. book of Chroni. The 1.
book of Esdras. The 2. book of Esdras. The book of Hester. The book of Job.
The Psalms. The Proverbs. Ecclesiast. or preacher. Cantica or songs of Sal.
4. Prophets the greater. 12. Prophets the less.

And the other books as Jerome says the Church does read for example of life
and instruction of manners, The numbe^ and nam^s of the Apoc^yphall books in
the old test^ment.
but yet does it not apply them to establish any doctrine. Such are these
following. The 3. book of Esdras. The 4. book of Esdras. The book of Tobias.
The book of Judith. The rest of the book of Hester. The book of Wisdom.
Jesus the son of Syrach. Baruch the Prophet. The song of the 3. children. The
story of Susanna. Of Bell and the Dragon. The prayer of Manasses. The 1. book
of Machab. The 2. book of Machab.

All the books of the new Testament, as they are commonly received, we do
receive and account them for canonical.

This is the whole article, especially for the distinction of Canonical and
Apocryphal books. And is there any gross and palpable error, or any error
at all in this distinction, that any godly and learned Preacher should have
offered to speak against in the Convocation? Well, if he could not be suffered
to speak then: let him do it yet, doing it in seemly order. Yea, if it be a
gross and palpable error that all we grossly maynteine in this distinction
he is bound to show it orderly, comiter monstrarier viam erranti, if he will
be a faithful Minister. And if we cannot be able to defend this distinction,
we will then (by Gods grace) yield it to be an error and forsake it. But I
meruell, if it be so gross and palpable, that we cannot yet feel nor
understand it, which were indeed a great grosnesse in us all. But because, I
confess my self to be but gross, that cannot so quickly find out this
palpable error: nevertheless since that it is palpable or may be groped ( and
yet out learned Brethren will not vouchsafe to set it down) I will therefore
grossly grope after it, if perhaps I may find it, and give others warning of
it. For (by the grace of God) we shall not be so gross, as defend any error,
if we may find it, and perceive that it is indeed an error, that is to say, a
wrong and false opinion.

The canonical scripture
Is this gross error in these words: holy Scripture conteyneth all things
necessary to salvation, so that whatsoever is not read therein nor may be
proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it should be believed
as an article of faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation? In
what words this gross error should lie.
I trust, they will acquit this part of the article from all error. Neither is
it properly of the distinction of Canonical and Apocryphal books, which are
to be accounted of the one sort, or of the other; but of eithers validity or
inualiditie in the articles of faith, and matters requisite or necessary to
salvation.

What then? Is this gross and palpable error, for the distinction of
Canonical and Apocryphal books in the words of the article following? In
the name of holy Scripture we do understand those Canonical books of the
old and new Testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church.
What gross and palpable error, or any error at all is in these words, that we
do understand those books in the name of holy Scripture, of whose authority
there was never any doubt in the Church? Is there any reason to the contrary,
why we should not understand these books for holy Scripture?

The books that were never doubted of
If they replye, that is true indeed, for those books: but not for those
books only: then are these words also of the article acquit by their own
mouths. As for the so understanding of them only, to be accounted in the name
of holy Scripture, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church: this
article has no such word, as this word only, nor any such meaning. Yea,
least their meaning or words might be misconstrued, they go also particularly
to work, and book by book till which is to be understood for the holy or
canonical Scripture, and which not, in the old Testament. Some of the
canonical doubted of.
And in the new Testament, they have reckoned all for Canonical.

If they yet replye, that diverse books of those which the articles name and
understand for the holy and canonical Scripture, have bin doubted of: I
grant it, and the articles do confess as much in these plain words. All
the books of the new Testament, as they are commonly received, we do receive
and account them for canonical. Do they not here plainly enough infer, that
there has been some doubt and not receiving of some of them, when they say, as
they are commonly received, so do we receive them, though some do not so
receive them? And will our learned Brethren be so ^^remptorie, that if they
had not so fully or clearly expressed their meaning in the former words, they
will not give them leave to be their own expositors, but be so cutted and
short with them, that they may not tell out their own tale, but a word and a
blow, or ever they have told half their tale, to cry out by and by, error,
error, yea, gross error, and palpable error?

Ha brethren, ye are a little to hasty to be Parrish Priests: The apocrpha.
ye give too short and too sharp a judgment in this matter. Our Brethrens to
quick censure.
Take the whole article together, to confer the later words with the
former, and if a word escape incommodiously: What? my Masters, will ye take
vauntage of every syllable? or if ye will needs pry so narrowly: go to it
then hardlye and spare not. I mislike not your industrye therein, spy (a Gods
blessing) every mote in your bretherens eyes, and note every tittle in their
writings, and weigh their words even in the Goldesmithes balance. Yet, when
ye have all done, ye confess your selves, it is but a escape, whereas indeed,
weighe it well and truly, it is not so much. But admit it were a escape, will
ye make a mountain of a mole hill, that it is a gross and palpable error?
Verily, whether we shall weigh the words with grave and indifferent
judgment, as we ought to do: or but even grossly or slightly consider of
them, except our opinion be too grossly forestalled against them, we could
never give so gross a judgment of them, as, for a gross and palpable error
to condemn them: for in very deed, there is no error at all in them.

But it may be (such is my gross pate) that yet we have not light upon this
gross and palpable error, indeed there are other words also, especially
these after the cataloge of the Canonical books in the old Testament.

And the other books (as Hierome says) the Church does read, for example of
the life and instruction of manners, Ieronimus in prefarione^ in libros Salamo*
but yet it does not apply them to establish any doctrine.

Is there any thing here that our Brethren can challenge of error? Is the
sense of Hierome cyted amiss? Or is Hieromes sentence it self Erroneous? The
words of Hierome in his praeface on the books of Solomon are these: as
therefore the Church reads indeed the books of Iudeth, Tobie and the
Machabies, but receaueth them not among the canonical Scriptures: so also it
may read these two volumes ( he speaks of Jesus the son of Syrach, and
the book of wisdom) to the aedification of the people, not to confirm the
authority of Ecclesiastical opinions, or decrees. Or are they offended that
yet thus much should be given to the apocryphal Scriptures, that they should
be read at all in the Church, for a dification in example of life and
instruction of manners: but to be utterly neglected or defaced, as some have
not spared to bestow, very gross speeches on all the apocriphall Scripture?
The e^^^matio^ of the ^poc^phall books.
but because this again, is not so much for the distinction of Canonical and
Apocriphall books, as for the estimation of them, I think they mean not of
any gross or palpable error in these words. If they do (by the grace of god)
we shall the ea^^ier clear them, by the testimony of many, whom our
brethren (I hope) will not burden with so gross speeches. Especially when the
whole French Church in their confession, goes as far forth herein, as we
do. where having reckoned up the whole Canonical Scripture of the old
Testament and the new, In (...) confes^ion (...) 1 de sc^iptura page 10.
agreeing in all the particular books with us; in the fourth article they
say. These books we acknowledge to be canonical, that is, we have them as
the squire and rule of our Faith, and that not only by the common consent of
the church but also much more by the testimonye and inward persuasions of the
the holy ghost, by whose suggestion we are taught to discern them from other
Ecclesiastical books, which as they may be profitable, nevertheless they are
not of that sort, that any article of the faith may be established out of them.

To whom accords the confession of the churches of B^lgia, or the low
Countries. Who after their like enumeratio^ of the canonical books in the
five and six articles, say on this wise. These only books we receive as
holy and canonical, upon which our faith may stay, be confirmed and
established, etc. Moreover we make a difference between these holy books,
and those which they call appocrypha, that it to wit, because the appocryphall
may indeed be read inthe church, and it is laweful also so far forth to
take instructions out of them, A^t. 6.
as far as they agree with the canonical books. Howbeit, they have not that
authority and force, that any opinion of the faith and christian Religion can
be certainelye builded on their testimonye. So far is it off, that they can
infringe or diminishe the authority of others.

And if after these, I may allege any private man's confession; I commend the
Reverend Zanchius. Who in his confession, chap. 1. Aphorism. 4. after the
like particular rehersall, that our Articles make, of the books canonical and
not Canonical in the old Testament: he says.

Thus much of the old. But out of the new Testament we except none. For
although there be some of them, of which it was doubted in the old time:
notwithstanding even they also were afterward no whit less acknowledged than
were the other, to be the writings of the apostles, unto whose judgment we
also subscribe. Of the former sort, are the Gospels, after Matthew, Mark,
Luke, John: the acts of the apostles, the Epistles of Paul, the former of
Peter, the former of John. Of the later sort are, the Epistle to the Hebrews,
the Epistle of James, (...)
the later of Peter, the second and third of John, the Epistle of Jude, the
Apocalypse. For although they may seem after a kind of sort, to be of a
certain greater authority, of the which it was never doubted, than those of
which sometimes it was doubted: notwithstanding, we believe as well the one as
the other, even as the certain word of God. As for the Apocryphal books that
are contained in the Bybles volume: we give them the first place after the
Canonical. And therefore we use only the Canonical books, Aphoris. ^.
to prove the opinions (or decrees) of Faith, and with the Fathers we teach
that they are to be used: as for the other, we think that they have no small
authority to confirm afterward, those things that already are proved. Thus
writes Zanchius agreeing with our articles* And heereto also he quoteth,
Hierome in Praef. in Salo. Cyp. in Symb. page 377. conc. Load* cap. 59.

But what need I labor thus, to clear our Article hereupon: when the Geneua
Bible it self, has as much as this comes too, saying: the books that follow
in order after the Prophets, unto the new Testament, are called Apocrypha,
that is, books which were not received by a common consent to be read and
expounded publikelye in the Church, neither yet served to prove any point of
Christian Religion, save in as much as they had the consent of other scriptures
called canonical to confirm the same, or rather whereon they were grounded:
but as books proceeding from godly men, were received to be read for the
advancement and furtherance of the knowledge of the history, and for the
instruction of Godly manners.

Is not this as much here as is in any thing contained in these words of
our books article, for the use and credit of the Apocriphall books? and
wherein then for these words, does lie such gross and palpable error, as
they burden this article withal? The 1. and 2. book of Esdras.
for nothing remains now therein, not examined, but the enumeration of the
books themselves, which are counted of us for Canonical, which for
Apocryphal. And do not these Articles keep the same account, both for the
number and for the Books of both sorts, that all these aforesaid, and the
very Geneua translation does? except they will take aduaunta^e herein,
Hieronimi p^satio in 1. Esdras.
that where the Geneua calls Ezra and Nehemiah ( as Zanchius calls them the
two former of Esdras) our article reteyneth still the usual calling of them
the first book of Esdras, the second book of Esdras, because it treats
also much of Esdras, But I trust that our Brethren will not in any wise
accounte of that for a gross and palpable or any Error at all, considering
how ordinarilye it has gone by these names, and in Ieromes preface he
says, Neither let it move any body that one book is of us set forth, nor
let him be delighted in the dreams of the third and fourth book, Because
also among the Hebrews the speeches of Esdras and Nehemiah are straightened
into one Volume, etc. As the books and matter we keep just reckoning if their
offense be, because we count none Appocryphall in the new Testament: what do
we otherwise, than Zanchius does? Than the Geneua Testament does? yea than the
French, the Heluetian; and the Dutch reformed Churches do? (...)
and therefore, where these gross errors and palpable should be in this
article, they are so gross and palpable, that we can yet neither see nor feel
them. When our brethren can show and prove them, I for my part (will by
Gods assistance) wilfullye defend no known error.

Now since we cannot find this, let us come to their second instance, which
is, as they say:

Our Brethrens 2. challeng of of the book of articles for gross and palpable
errors.
For explication of the clause in the article of predestination, where it is
said, that the elect may fall from grace, and such like matters.

Whether it be negligence, or wilful perverting, that I know not, but I
conster it rather to the gentler fault: notwithstanding, for those that
profess themselves to be faithful Ministers, and to set forth a learned
discourse, and thus grosselye to burden the articles, yea one of the chiefest
articles in doctrine, agreed upon by all the learned Clergy of the Realm,
and aprooued by all the authority and states of the realm, with gross and
palpable error, and to charge the Article with an evident untruth: if this
discourse may vaunt of learning, yet I would with that the learned
discoursers were a little more faithful Ministers, least this part thereof
might of any be termed, not a learned, but a lewd and indiscreet discoursing.

The 17. article of predestination and election.
Where it is said in the article of predestination, which is the seventeenth
article; that the elect may fall from grace, or any such like matter in that
article, the words of the article are these.

Predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of GOD, whereby (before the
foundations of the world were laid) he has constantlye decreede by his
Counsel secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he
has chosen in Christ of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting
salvation, as vessels made to honor. Wherefore they which be endewed with so
excellent a benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose by his spirit
woorking in due season: they through grace obey the calling: they be
justified freely: they be made sons of GOD by adoption: they be made like
the Image of his only begotten son Jesus Christ: the walk religiouslye in
good works, and at length by Gods mercy, they atteyne to everlasting
felicitye.

As the Godly consideration of predestination and our election in Christ is
full of sweet, pleasan^, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such
as feel in themselves the woorking of the spirit of Christ, mortifying the
works of the flesh, and their earthly members, drawing up their mind to high
and heavenly things, as well because it does greatly establish and confirm
their faith of eternal salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it
does fervently kindle their love toward God: so, for curious and carnal
Pastors, Election.
lacking the spirit of Christ, to have continually before their eyes the
sentence of gods predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the
devil does thrust them either into desperation, or into rechlesnes of most
unclean living, no less perilous than desperation.

Furthermore, we must receive gods promises in such wise, as they be generally
set forth to us in holy scripture: and in our doings, that will of God is to
be followed, which we have expressly declared unto us in the word of God.

This again is the whole article of predestination and election word by word
set down. as it is in the book. And now, what one sentence, or but one word
is here, that our brethren can prove to be erroneous; not gross and palpable
( as they say) but to have any spice never so covertly conveyed, Nothing in
this article of Predestination and Election but sound doctrine.
of any the least error in the world: if our brethren be of sound judgment
in this article, ( as I hope they be) Or what doubtful speeches are there in
this article, that need explication, for fear they might be understood
erroneously: But where are here these words, that our brethere^ have by name
burdened this article of predestination withal: saying, for explication of the
clause in the article of predestination: where it is said, that the elect may
fall from grace, and such like matters?

May not our brethren be ashamed, so grossly and palpablie to fall from this
grace of telling the truth so oftentimes before, but specially here, in so
great a matter, challenging one of the principal articles of our religion for
gross and palpable errors or untruths, and their selves to fall intoso open,
so untrue and foul a sclaunder:

But to help our brethren as much as we may, with the true clearing of our
selves, from so great and dangerous a sclaunder, (for our brethren harp here
about some thing) they mean be like in the 16 article, which is not (as they
say) of predestination, but, of sin after baptism, where it is said thus.

Not every deadly sin willingly committed after baptism, is sin against the
holy ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore, the grant of repentance is not to be
denied, to such as fall into sin after baptism. The 16 article of sin after
Baptism.
After we have received the holy ghost, we may depart from grace given, and
fall into sin, and by the grace of God (we may) arise again, and amend our
lives, and therefore they are to be condemned, which say they can no more
sin, as long as they live here, or deny the place of forgiveness to such
as truly repent.

Here indeed this article says, that after we have received the holy,
ghost, we may depart from grace given, and fall into sin, and by the
grace of God we may arise again and amend our lives. And is there any
error, or any darkness, or doubtfulnesse, or suspicion, or inclination to
error in these words? Departing from grace.
for, although they speak here generally, and mention not the elect, of whom
they speak in the article following, which we have already perused: yet
neither speak they of falling from grace, which word, falling, might perhaps
be construed of them in the harder sense, as though they were destitute of all
grace and clean void of the spirit of God: neither the words nor the sense
tends to any such matter, but are only these: that after weehaue received
the holy ghost, we may depart from grace given, How we may depart from grace.
and fall into sin, etc.

Now, whether this be understood of the Elect, or not: may not such as are
not of the number of the Elected, be truly said also to have received the
holy Ghost, in the gifts of some graces of the holy Ghost given unto them?
The Apostle says, 1. Cor. 12. No man can say Jesus is the Lord but by the
holy Ghost. Diverse graces of the holy ghost may be given to those that are
not elected.
And yet says Christ. Matthew 7.21. etc. Not every one that says unto me,
lord Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven: but he that does the will
of my Father that is in Heaven, and many will say to me in that day, Lord,
Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied, and by thy name cast out Deuilles,
and by thy name done many great works: And then I will profess to them: I
never knew you, depart from me, ye that work iniquitye. And yet those
that received these gifts of working miracles, etc. They were graces given
the^ of the holy Ghost. And Saint Paul calls them Charismata and
spiritual gifts, the administration, operation, and manifestation of the
spyrite, the diversities of whose gifts he reckons up, as we have seen, 1.
Cor. 12. And did not diverse of the Corinthians depart or fall from the true
use of these graces of the holy Ghost? As we may also say of Demas and
others. And even of the apparent reprobate, says Saint Paul, Hebrews, 6.
verse. 4. For it is impossible that they which were once lighttened, and have
tasted of the heaue^lye gift, and were made pertakers of the holy Ghost, and
have tasted of the good word of God and of the powers of the world to come,
if they should fall away, should be renewed again by repentance, seeing
that they crucify again to themselves the son of God, and make a mock of
him. So then, understanding these words even for those that are not of the
number of Gods elected; nevertheless they may be such, as God has imparted
great graces of the holy ghost unto, and yet they depart and fall from grace.

But now (which is the better and playner sense) because the Article mencioneth
rising again: understanding these words for the Elect of God so far as man
can gather by outward tokens: How the elected may depart or fall from grace.
yet may the Elect depart from grace, though not wholly and finnally, as do
the reprobate. For example, David and Peter departed from grace, and fell into
grievous sins: yet not so, but that some sparks of grace, though overwhelmed
for the time still remain in Gods elected, till God by his spirit reclaim
them to repentance. Saint Paul writing to ye Gallathians, to whom as to gods
elected. chap. 1.3. he wishes grace and peace from God the Father, and from
our Lord Jesus christ says unto them, verse. 6. I marvel that ye are so soon
removed away unto another Gospel, from him that had called you into the grace
of christ, and chap. 3.1. etc. O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you,
that ye should not obey the truth, to whom Jesus christ before was described
in your sight and among you crucified? This only would I learn of you,
received ye the spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith
Preached? are ye so foolish that after ye have begun in the spirit, ye would
now be made perfect by the flesh? have ye suffered so many things in vain?
etc. Had not these lost the grace of God, and S. Paul reclaimed them to
repentance;

And so christ says to the Angel ( or B. of the church of Ephesus, apoc. 2. I
know thy works, and thy labor; and thy patience, and how thou can not
forbear them which are evil, and have examined them which say they are
apostles and are not, and have found them liars, and thou have suffered and have
patience, and for my name sake have labored and have not fainted. Here are
the great graces reckoned up. But what follows.

Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first
love, remember therefore, from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the
first works, or else I will come against thee shortly; and will remove thy
candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. And is not this even as much
as here is said in this article; after we have received the holy ghost we may
depart from grace given and fall into sin, and by the grace of God, we may
arise again, and amend our lives?

And therefore, there is no error, nor any suspicion of error in this saying:
nor (as though it were doubtfully spoken) any need of further explication:
except our Bre. would even seek to pick quarrels at words, to make the^ seem
suspicious, that are sound and plain enough: or except they be of a contrary
opinion to this article, thinking that if they once have received the holy
ghost and his grace, they be so pure and sure ever after, that they can never
sin: at least, they can never fall into any notorious sin. But although I pray
both for them and us, that we may not depart from grace, by falling into any
such grievous, and notorious sin: yet much more, that we fall not into that
presumptuous sin, that we should be so puffed up in co^^^it of our purity, as
to think we cannot depart from grace, and fall into sin, and notorious sin
also. For so our Bre. should themselves, maintain a most gross and palpable,
The state and confidence of the elected.
yea a most dangerous error and condemned heresy. For although we must not
waver in doubt betwixt fear and hope, distrust and faith, for our salvation,
but have a firm hope and full confidence, in ye ^ternal good purpose promises
and mercies of god in christ ( as ye very first words of ye article of
predestination and election witnesses yt we are of the number of his Elected
to salvation, whereof god has vouchsafed us good tokens, besides the pledge of
his spirit, certifieng our spirit, that we are the sons of God, and if sons,
heirs: etc. yet except the spirit help our infirmityes we should quickly
fall into great temptations and enormities. And therefore we are willed for our
part to work our salvation with fear and trembling, to pray that we enter
not into temptation, and ever to check our presumption with these and such
like sentences: If we shall say we have no sins, we deceive our selves and there
is no truth in us, yea, that the just falls seven times a day, and yet
rises again, etc.

But I hope our brethren are not sotted in this gross error of ye anabaptists,
neither we (God be praised) do allow of the other gross errors o^ ^he
papists, that the elected can finally and utterly depart from grace. But,
firmum stat fundamentum, deus nouit qui sunt sui.

Neither is there any error in any of these our articles, nor any of the other
articles of the book. And therefore, I marvel that they say, diverse godly
and learned Preachers offered to speak against diverse gross and palpable
errors that had escaped the Bishops decrees. Our Brethrens sclaunder of the
Bishops for diverse gross and palpable errors.


If there were any so gross, that they were palpable; and so many too, that
there were diverse of them: and that (naming for example, these two matters)
they conclude with this generality, saying, and such like matters: though we
have cleared our selves sufficiently herein, and are (by the grace of God)
ready to enter, either into the apology of our selves, or to make the
acknowledgement of all those diverse errors, and disclaim them, when they
shall be specified and so proved: yet is not this well done of our brethren, to
burden us with any, especially with gross and palpable errors, and those
diverse, and not so much as name them, that we might see them, and forsake the^.
For this leaves in the readers mind, a shrewde suspicion, of further errors
in these articles.

But we crave (in the fear of God and in the testimony of a good conscience)
all men's good opinion, in this behalf toward us, till our brethren, or any
other, be he Papist, Anabaptist, or whosoever, shall burden us expressly with
this or that error by name: and then, if we cannot throughlye clear our
selves, let them condemn us, but till then, christian charity ought to hold us
giltlesse.

And of these (I trust) we have sufficiently acquit our selves; as for other,
we are to answer in our defense, when we shall have heard their accusation.
But and they be such as these, (because they tell us before hand, and such
like:) I hope in God we shall do well enough, and had those matters that they
suppress, bin worse than these, I suppose they would not have opened these*
and folded up those on this fashion. But if they be forth coming, we need
not long to here of them we shall have them, I warrant you, with a
recumbentibus, all in time, in the mean time, welcome be the grace of God. But
let us now see, how our brethren conclude, and rattle up our Bishops for these
articles, and for all the other matters that they have charged them with.

If this ( say they) be not to practice Lordship over Faith: The articles with
proves.
to set down decrees of religion, which must be accepted of all men without
either reason or testimony of the scripture to prove them, The learned disc.
page 136.
and no man permitted to show any reason or scripture, that enforces his
conscience to the contrary, but only to hang upon the authority of bishops:
let some other declare, what Paul means, 2. cor. 4. where he denies that he
would exercise any Lordship over the Faith of the Corinthians.

Our brethren show here a manifest proof* how true that Article is, which
they say, was set dow^e by the Bishops and the convocation, that the elect
may depart from grace, For I account of our brethren, Bridges.
as of the number of Gods elected. Yet, if they had not in this their learned
discourse departed or fallen to much from grace, would they, or could they
have so fallen from the truth herein by such untrue and notorious sclaunders,
thus to seek the utter disgracing and defacing of the Bishops? have they
proved, or can they prove any one article or decree of Faith and Religion,
wherein the bishops have taken upon them any such Lordeship, or any Lordeship
at all over our Faith? does not even the very former article of these two last,
cyted by our brethren themselves against the Bishops, for the distinction of
the Canonical books, fully discharge the Bishops of this sclaunder? that holy
Scripture conteyneth all things necessary to salvation, so that, whatsoever is
not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man,
that it should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite or
necessary to salvation.

Do they, which with their brethren in the convocation do set down this
decree for faith and Religion, practice Lordeship over our faith, Article 6.
or set down decrees of religion which must be accepted of all men, without
either reason or testimony of the Scripture to prove them, and no man
permitted to show any reason or Scripture, that inforceth his conscience to
the contrary, but only to hang upon the authority of Bishops? When the
Bishops in most plain words renounce all such authority, and refer it
only to the canonical Scripture? who may not see, (if he will not wilfully,
of too too much affection blindfold himself) the appearance of this sclaunder?

But our Brethren say, The articles briefly set down without their proves
and testimonies.
they have set down the decrees without either reason or testimony of the
scripture to prove the^. I grant it, yt for some, they have so done, neither
is it the nature of brief and su^marie Articles which in Synodes are agreed
upon, after that they have bin by reason and Scripture clearly proved, and
are apparent: to have them set out with their proves annexed to them, which is
another point beside the Articles. In the ordinances Ecclesiastical of the
Church of Genena, and the orders of the schole of the said City, set out in
french An. 1578. of the which many are of faith and religion, and in their
summarie of the Christian Doctrine annexed, do they still adioyne their proves
by reasons and testimonies of the Scripture. Articles not erroneous.
And have not all the most ancient councels (which are greater than our
conuocations) in all their articles and decrees, kept the self same order,
most briefly and plainly, to set down the naked article by it self? and so
thus have they set down also the articles of their creedes. And so is the
summary of our Faith commonly called the Apostles Creed, set down in most
short, plain and simple words and sentences, without annexing the reasons or
testimonies of Scripture that confirm them. For when these (...), or
principles, gathered as capital conclusions, and resolutions of the scripture
are thus set down, if they be not such, nor have the clear proof and
ground of Scripture for them, they will quickelye appear in this their
nakedness, and quickelye show their shame to all the world, as do the
Papists decrees which they set forth, so soon as ever they come to the
touchstone, to be examined and proved by the Scripture, they molter away, and
resolve to vanity.

Let our brethren now (a Gods name) take this our book of articles, and
whette all their wits, and with all their learned discourses set upon it,
examine and try it peecemeale through and through every sentence word,
syllable and title in it, if they find any thing contrary to good and sound
reason, yea, contrary too our dissonant from the Canonical Scriptures: then
say, our Bishops practice Lordeship over our Faith, and set down orders of
Religion which must be accepted of all men, without either reason, or
testimony of Scripture to prove them, and no man permitted to show any reason
or Scripture, that inforceth his conscience to the contrary, but only to hang
upon the authority of Bishops.

But if they cannot find any thing in these decrees, orders, and Articles,
nor any could find it then, nor could ever since, nor ever shall be able (and
there was then in the convocation, liberty enough, and has ever bin since,
and still is, being used in that lawefull and reverent manner that is requisite
for, the treaty of such matters) which yet could never, nor, I hope, shall
ever be convinced of error: then let our brethren (for very shame or rather
for love of truth) yeilde, and revoke these soul sclaunders on the Bishops,
and indeed on all the convocation, and on all the realm and Church of
England, that has established the allowance of these articles: or rather on
the Articles themselves, which they sclaunder to be decrees of Religion
without either reason or testimony of the Scripture to prove them, and that
they only hang upon the authority of Bishops, and so are mere doctrines of
men, and that they are Errors gross and palpable. Thus through the sides of
the Bishops, are these Articles and our Faith and Religion wounded by these our
Brethren, as though not only our Bishops, but all the Clergy, the realm,
the doctrine and all, were as ill or worse than the Papists, Satisfying the
ignorant.
so far has this immoderate beat of their inconsiderate zeal, inflamed
their passions and patience against the lawful authority of the Bishops.

Now, when our Brethren have thus in their eager pursuit of the Bishops
authority, raised up this soul sclaunder on the decrees: yet at length
beginning to think better of the matter, and that it might be, some body
would perhaps take the pains, to search these Articles, since they were
defamed of so gross and palpable errors, and to be without reason, nor
grounded of the word of GOD: and in perusing of them might find them, (as
they are indeed) to be most clear and sound from all Error, and many of
them (where reason is required) having excellent reasons also annexed, and all
to be altogether grounded on the word of God, whereof they were but sums
and Capital principles: so that, if this their sclaunder, upon the present
view of them would vanish away* though it would cast a gross and palpable
myste of error, to him that would barely on their credit believe them: Well,
yet for all that, have at the Bishops one flyng more, and it be but for a
parting blow, or for a friendly shaking hands at the farewell.

For (say they) although their decrees were never so perfect.

Then, say I, their sclaunders were very shameful.

Yet ( say they) it were an example of tyrannical dominion, neither to give
reasons to satisfy the ignorant themselves, nor to hear or confute that which
might be alleged against them by others, but for a few Lord Bishops,
incomparison of all the convocation, to sit by themselves, and order all
things at their pleasures, as though the Gospel sprang first from them, or
had come unto them only; it sauoreth of nothing so much as of Popish tyranny.

This is no less notorious a sclaunder, than the other? There is none of the
Convocation house, How any in the convocation house may be heard.
but in the debating of any matter propounded, may be throughlye heard,
behauing himself in such order as i^ ^oresayd. Neither would the Bishops
disdain either then, or at any other time, their selves to satisfy the
ignorant. But whom mean they by this ignorant, that should be brought into
the convocation house, or come before the Bishops there assembled? would they
have it that every ignorant person of the common people, should come before
the Bishops, and desire of them the satisfaction of their ignorance? or do
they mean themselves the faithful Ministers, that have in this their learned
discourse, How our brethren of^e^ed to be satisfied.
made a brief and plain declaration ( as they called it) concerning the
things that are their desires? and will they then acknowledge their ignorance
in these matters? and desire the Bishops to satisfy them with reason, this
were a good hearing if they would thus do. Though they were not chosen to be
any of the house, yet and they would so do, as they were never denied; so
would I v^dertake they should be easily admitted, Satisfiing our Brethren.
to come even to the Bishops themselves and there in due manner to acknowledge
their ignorance, desiring to be satisfied with reason given by the Bishops unto
them. They should find the Bishops reasonable enough, without any tyrannical
dominion over them: or if the Bishops would use any insolency or tyranicall
dominion, they should not be suffered, upon due complaint, and proof thereof.
But what reason would satisfy them, that cannot so much as speak of these
matters, without vaunt of every speech of theirs, to be a learned discourse:
yea, that cannot speak in print upon advised deliberation, but in such a
choler, and with such inte^perate speeches as these are? Is it likely these
learned men would acknowledge their ignorance, and would desire to be
satisfied, or be satisfied indeed with reason, as they ought to be, if they
might have reasons by the Bishops themselves given unto them?

Yes, that they would, if the Bishops would hear them, or confute that which
might be alleged against them by others.

Ah, then I perceive, there is a further drift in this desire, than to
acknowledge their ignorance, and desire to be satisfied with the Bishops
reasons given unto the^? For now on a suddeine, their ignorance is turned to
knowledge and to such knowledge, that they profess beforehand, the Bishops must
hear them what? to confess their ignorance, or to desire to learn the
Bishops reasons?

No, but the Bishops must hear, or confute that which might be alleged
against them by others.

So that, they must needs dispute with the Bishops themselves, and with no
meaner persons of all the convocation house, and if the Bishops will not hear
or confute that, whatsoever it be, which might be alleged against them by
others; then the Bishops use tyrannical dominion.

But would they be contented, if the Bishops would confute them; yea, if they
confuted that, that might be alleged against them by others?

But when would these others say, they were confuted? they reckon before hand
to confu^^ ^uen whatsoever it were without al exception, which might be
alleged, be it never so strong reason, or never so firmly grounded on the
word of God, by the bishops or by any others: were they never so many or never
so excellently learned, if they be against them, they believe they will allege
that against them that will confute them quite and clean. And all this they
must be heard thoroughly, till they have done it.

Must they so? and what if they were never able to do it?

Not able quoth he? doubt ye of that? that they were not able to confute all
the Bishops? if they be but heard till they have done speaking, their very
sayings a^e confutations of all that might be alleged against them by others,
either the Bishops, or all the whole convocation.

What? do our brethren mean to be heard thus: they challenge here the Bishops
hard, for sitting by themselves, and ordering all things at their pleasures,
as though the Gospel sprang first from them, or had come unto them only:
Confuting the Bishops.
but howsoever the Bishops would attempt thus to order all things, which if
they would, could not be suffered, neither indeed do they, nor attempt to
do; yet if we shall look better into the matter, how far of are our brethren
from playing all these parts? they have hitherto urged many things, and some
upon their own mere conclusions and bare words: How ^ar^e of our brethe^en
are from those parts wherewith they burden the bishops.
yea, we have not hitherto in all this learned discourse, heard one true and
substantial proof out of Gods word alleged for the Doctors to be debarred
from preaching; for the Pastors to have no superior among them, in any
standing dignity, authority and government of Jurisdiction; for a consistorye
of Ecclesiastical Seniors, that may not teach but govern only, to be
elected in every congregation: for the Deacons not to meddle with teaching, but
only with the care of the poor and of the collections and distributions: for
the excommunications to be made by this consistorye of not teaching Governors:
for ye Pastors to be made in Synodes only, after they are elected by the
people with holding up their hands: and that they cannot be made Ministers
but of this or yt place; and cannot be counted Ministers being out of that
place. And that where such preachers are not, there can be no public prayers
nor sacraments administered, etc. What one of these points; and a number more,
has bin proved by any one clear testimony, or necessary consequent of the
Scripture, or by any one substantial reason for the proof of them: and what
else in effect is this, than but to order all these things at their pleasures?
And when they take on with all the Bishops, as though by their former
industries and labors, they their selves had not received this light of the
Gospel, which God be praised we have, if we can use it thankfully: or as
though they were not by the Bishops made Ministers of the Gospel, if they have
any Ministry at all thereof, and be not mere lay men: is not this, even as
though the Gospel (so far as the light of these controversies comes (unto
and their Ministry thereof, sprang first from them, or had come unto them
only, if not to our Bishops, nor to any of our conuocations, nor to all the
clergy of our Church of England but only to them that set these things
abroache? and what now? shall we conclude on them, as they do on the Bishops;
it sauoureth nothing so much as of popish tyranny? whereof sauoreth this?
first, to put back the Princes supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes, till all
their Eccl. tetrarchie be parted among them, in such manner as we have already
heard; and then, to pull down all the dignities and authorities of
Archebishops, Bishops, and all other Ecclesiastical superior Prelates. And to
set up themselves, every one to be a full Bishop in his own several
congregation; The state of our brethrens new pastorship.
what though not Lordeship in name, but M. Bishop, yet in rule and authority
over all in his congregation to be even a Lordeship: to suffer no superior
Pastor over him in his jurisdiction, but each one equal to the best: and he,
as though he were in his terrytorie even another new little Pope sitting in
his pontificalibus, The true pastors description.
with his consistory of governors, as though it were a College or Senate of a
new kind of Cardinals, as the hingins that hold up the doors of
Ecclesiastical regiment and discipline: with a new mixte kind of governors
semi-secular, and dimi-ecclesiasticall Seniors, to sit by the themselves round
about this Episcopal Pastor, over ruling all the congregation, yea, whosoever
were inhabiting in ye parish, Knight, Lord, Earl, Duke, Prince, Queen, King,
or Emperor; they must all of them, for all discipline and Ecclesiastical
regiment, be ouer-ruled by him, and by these his Governing Elders sitting about
him. Of what sauoureth this? Of dominion? of Popery? of tyranny? of
confusion? of pride? of ordering all things at their pleasures? besides what
dangers else, or worse tha^ yet we see not? if our bishops should thus
retallie these things unto our Brethren, would they not (trow you) pay home
the reckoning?

But as though they were not yet on even hands, but that there were a great
odds in this reckoning; Our Brethrens accusation of our Bishops.
and as though the Bishops were not to be accounted comparable; nor for
Learning, Study, Judgment, Zeal, Example, they were so worthy of their
authority, as these our Brethren are, to have this new kind of Eccl.
government: they object unto the bishops their non sufficiency in these
things.

Whereas otherwise ( say they) it is well known, they are not all of the best
learned, nor all of the longest study, nor all of the soundest Judgment, nor
all of the greatest zeal, nor all of the best Example, and therefore not
meetest to be the only determiners in Ecclesiastical matters, to the
prejudice of the whole Synod.

As for this conclusion, we shall come to it in his turn. This comparison in
the antecedent, is somewhat odious, to vpbraide to the Bishops, that they are
not all of the best in these things, as though there were some other in the
Synod, better herein than they. Belike they mean those diverse godly and
learned Preachers, Our Brethrens commendatio^ of themselves
that they said before before, offered to speak^; or else some other of
themselves, that they would have to be also of the Synod. For, although it
were a pretty policy, to commit us together among our selves, with an
emulation against our bishops, as not so learned, etc. as they would have us
of the Convocation house, think our selves to be: yet they lightly give not
this to ^^y of us, to be counted either learned, or studious, or sound in
judgment, or of great zeal, or of best example. But they oftentimes commend
themselves for all these things, to be godly, wise, grave, and zealous men;
they are those that Preach most diligently, pray most feruentlye, and
minister the Sacraments most reverently: they are the faithful Ministers
that seek the Churches reformation; and still, look up to the top of every
leaf, and there hangs up this Iuie Garland to toll on the reader, A Learned
discourse of Ecclesiastical government.

As for our Bishops, tush, for them, it is well known, Defacing our Bishops.
they are not all of the best learned, nor all of the longest study, nor all
of the greatest zeal, nor all of the best example.

I pray you brethren, of what sauoureth this? Surely it sauoureth not all of
the best learning neither, ( in my judgment) if not rather of that learning,
whereof Saint Paul says, scientia inflat. Well (how unsound soever they
shall accounte my simple Judgment) would God their learning sauoured a little
more of lowly humility, and of Christian charity than it does; to think
better of other their brethren in these qualities, namely of their betters,
than of them selves.

And yet, if one shall examine these qualities particularly; Learning.
what cause have they to vpbrayde their Learning to the Bishops? Iwisse, they
may easily enter comparison with many of these our Brethren. And if they
should all be measured by this Learned discourse, might not these words
return to their Masters? that neither they are all of the best learning:
except they have better learning, that they keep yet in store for an after
reckoning.

And as for long study in the most of them, Long study.
there need no long study for an answer. All the world may see that, in
the years of the students do not their selves in their preface confess? If
any shall object, that the grave authority of Archbishops and Bishops, shall
receive a check, whilste they are brought to deal with those, whom they judge
few, young, unlearned, and not comparable to themselves: but now they dare
compare both in long study and in learning too, with the B. and give the check
too, as young as they be, yea (in their opinion) to give the^ check-mate, and
that with a pawn.

But what said they there to this objection? did they not say: let us grant
the great difference which they make of years and learning* yet the speech
of Elihu, gives them sufficient answer, that this understanding is not tied
to such outward respects, but to the revelation of Gods spirit. Here (as it
were) they renounce they vaunt of long study, in which they could not for
shame, make any comparison, and therefore they fly to the example of young
Elihu, and to the revelation of gods spirit; as though their learning, and
these platformes, came by revelation to the^ on a sudden. and do they now upon
ye smattering of a little learning; or for the small time, beit of their
earnest study, come in as it were vying withal the B. making exception of
none, but object to them all, that they are not all of the best learned, nor
all of longest study?

But what need long study, for great or best learning among them, when their
governing Elders in every congregation, shall go for men learned in divinity,
that have little leisure to study long, or perhaps at all? and every Pastor
holden for a learned divine andfor a learned Preacher, although he were but new
made a Pastor?

And as for sound judgment, they measure yt, after their own judgment and
conceit, Our Bishops accusation.
esteeeming every man's judgment, albeit he be of never so long study or
great learning, Sound judgment.
to be no sound judgment, if it sound not soundly in their forestalled
Judgment.

As also their over great and preposterous zeal condemns all the Bishops,
and all us their brethren in the Gospel of Christ, to be but Popish and
without all zeal, if we yeilde not straight way to them, in all the devises
of these new platformes.

And no marvel then, if the shoue in this among the residue, that the Bishops
be not all of the best example. Would God, both they and we, and all our
brethren were, if not of best, yet of better example than we be. For to say
the truth, The best example.
the better of both, yea the best of us all therein may be amended.
Nevertheless though it be an offense unto the weak, and a steyne unto the
authority: yet not so, but that the authority it self is good, and may
stand even in those persons, that are not all of best example; no, nor all of
the greatest zeal: nor all of soundest judgment: nor all of longest study:
nor all of the best learned neither: but, if the Bishops were in these things
inferior to some other, or to them, or any of them have any defecte therein:
yet ought not out brethren thus to insult upon them, being their fathers that
made them Ministers of the Gospel, and having authority over them in the
Church: were it but for the reverence and dignity of their authority, except
indeed they were open enemies to the Faith, or manifest wicked in the example
of their conversation.

It should better (me thinks) beseemeour brethren, to follow the shame
fastness of Sem and Iapheth, than the shamelessenesse of Cham, in deriding and
revealing his fathers shame.

But what do I speaking this of those Children that are grown into such
disdain, that they will not acknowledge them to be their Fathers?

If they say, that in these words they do not thus accuse them all, in saying:
they are not all of the best learned, nor all of the longest study, nor all of
soundest judgment, nor all of greatest zeal, nor all of best example?

What then do they mean by these so intricate speeches? because they still
place this word all so cunningly in the middle, that as it may be called in
question, whether they referred it to these matters as when we say a thing is
not all of the best, that is to say, it is but mean or base; not all of the
soundest that is to say, rotten or corrupted; not all of the longest, that is,
but short; not al of the greatest, that is but little: or else, that they
refer the word all, not to the matter, but to the persons; as they are not
all of the best, that is to say some of them are not of the best: and so for
the residue of these qualities.

In which later sense if they shall mean it, that though they be not all of
the^ of the best learned, yet some of the^ are of the best learned, of the
lo^gest study, of the soundest judgment, of the greatest zeal, Determining
in Synods.
and of the best example: as it is apparent, and they cannot for very shame
deny these things, or the most of them, in some of our Bishops: why then do
they not follow those fewer some, than thus for some not so good in these
things, to shake off all. And yet it is well known also, that there are many
other (God be praised) besides the Bishops, that may compare with any of these
our Brethren the learned discoursers, in any, yea in all these things. But
their quarrel is here pretended only, or chiefly at the Bishops, concluding
against them upon these premises:

And therefore not meet to be the only determiners in Ecclesiastical
matters, to the prejudice of the whole Synod.

This conclusion we may safely admit, Determining Ecclesiastical matters.
were the Bishops never so excellent. It is not meet, neither do they, nor
can they, take this upon them, which were indeed to the prejudice of the whole
Synod. Nor the Synod receives this prejudice by them, nor gives such
authority to them, to be the only determiners in Ecclesiastical matters.
For, every one that is any particular member of the whole Synod has both his
deliberatiue and determinatiue voice, except we shall speak of such
determination as recollecting all their several determinations, pronounces
publicly the sententiall and final determination of the matters, in the name
and authority of them all, as James did, being Bishop of Jerusalem. And yet
neither so, all the Bishops do it: but one and the chiefest among them, as the
full resolution of the whole Synod.

But how will our Brethren clear themselves of this, whereof they accuse our
Bishops? for they pretending to be Pastors, and that Pastors and Bishops be
but al one: they will then be Bishops, every one that pretends to be a
Pastor. Now, though these Bishops admit their governing Elders to come to the
Synod, and to be parts also of the Synod with the Pastors, saying, that the
Synod consists principally of Pastors, Elders, Teachers, and men of
wisdom, judgment and gravity, as it were of necessary regents: page 113.
And hereto they urge the assembly, Act. 15. the Apostles and Elders came
together to consider upon this matter, etc: yet when they come to the
determination even where they say page 117. the Synod has to determine what
shall be observed in particular charges, as of the time, place, and form of
preaching, and praying, and administering of the Sacraments: they so make
themselves to be the only determiners in all Ecclesiastical matters, that
disoayning any other should so much as know them, they say.

For who should be able to know what order, comeliness, and edification
requires, according to Gods word, but they that be teachers and preachers of
the same unto all others? for it is absurd that they should be taught by such
in these small things, as ought to learn the truth of them in all matters.
The Pastors determining.


Do they not here (make their Ecclesiastical Governors and Elders to be no
teachers, and yet principal parts, whereof the Synod consists, and necessary
regents; How our brethren deal in synods with their own governors.
and yet when it comes to the regencie indeed, to be clean excluded from
all regencie and determining of these matters, except they should determine
that they know not: What shall we say then? whatsoever is decreed amongst
them, that is to say, among these Bishops, that must be called the
determination of the whole Synod. So that no man must be suffered to speak any
thing against it, be it never so reasonable or agreeable to the word of God.
page 135. Tush, what reason you any longer of reason, or of agreeableness to
the word of God? Have ye not your answer already? Who should be able to
know what order, comeliness, and edification requires according to Gods
word, but they that be teachers and preachers of the same unto all others? Our
Brethren^ words returned home.
What? and will you take upon you to be teachers and preachers, because ye are
Ecclesiastical governors, and because ye are parts whereof the Synod
consists? or are ye so cranke yt ye be necessary regents? What of all this?
we tell you again, that since ye be not teachers and preachers, and so no
Pastors nor Bishops: It is absurd that they should be taught by you, which
ought to learn the truth of us the Pastoral Bishops in all matters. And
therefore, whosoever of you all will not subscribe to all such things as we the
Bishops decree, must be excluded out of the Convocation.

If this be not to practice Lordship ( though not over the faith ( yet over all the Synod, and over all the Churches, in these matters, no man being permitted
to show any reason or scripture that inforceth his conscience to the contrary:
no not their Governors themselves to quitch, for fear they should here be
snatched up for halting: but only to hang upon the authority, of these new
vpstart Pastoral Bishops: let some other declare, what this means, and how
far this differs from tyrannical dominion, and from ordering all things at
their pleasures, as though the Gospel sprang from them, or had come to them
only. It sauoureth of nothing so much as of Popish tyranny: ( except of
somewhat worse) whereas otherwise, it is well known that they are not all of
the best learned, but many of them very simple scholars: nor all of longest
study, but mere children (or no students in Divinity) even the other ^ay: nor
all of soundest judgment, nor able to judge of many controversies, nor to
judge of or sound to the depth of these, nor al of them sound, nor soundly
agreeing together in judgment of them. Nor all of the greatest zeal, though
it be the greatest thing in them, but according to knowledge not so great as
testie: Nor all of the best example, but some good, some bad, and one with
another as all other men, and what follows?

And therefore not meet ( how feign soever they would, Preiua^ce^^ the synod.
and take it he^evpon them) to be the only determiners in Eccl. matters, to
the prejudice of the whole Synod, and of all the governing Elders, Whether our
Bishops or these Pastors do more prejudice the synod.
that are parts of the whole Synod with them. So plainly in all these things
do our Brethren even in their own words, with a very little windlasse turning
the^ home again, while they would power out all these reproaches on our
Bishops, reaching short of them, spill them by the way, and all to defile and
beray them selves therewith. As for our bishops, as they neither take any such
authority in the Synod upon them, over the Pastors, as these Episcopal
Pastors take upon them over their governing Elders; and so our Bishops
prejudice not the whole Synod, nor any part thereof, as they do theirs; nor our
Synodes find themselves prejudiced or agreeued with the authority of our
Bishops: but both our Bishops and our whole Synodes find themselves
sclaundered, injured, defaced, and so, much prejudiced by these speeches and
devises of our Brethren.

As among other, this conclusion following is a great sclaunder of them:

Wherefore, it is greatly ( say they) to be desired, that our Synodes also
which are so far out of order, may be reformed according to the Scripture
and the example of the Primitive Church.

That our Synodes are so far out of order, as our Brethren pretend, (except
they have some fresh proves to come) they have not yet proved it. This is but
an apparent untruth and infamy of them. The refourming of Synodes according
to the Scripture and the example of the Primitive Church, so far as the
Scripture gives either rule or example of them, is already in practice, if
our Brethren would be thankful to God for it. As for the particular abuses,
they may much more easily be reformed, than by such Synodes and Councels as
are here devised.

That all things ( say they) may be done with such modesty, gravity and
judgment, as they were by the Apostles and Elders. Act. 15.

Yea forsooth, this at length, is a good final conclusion and determination of
this matter. I am glad our Brethren yet after all these ruffling storms, Our
brethren^ conclusion.
end thus caulmelie, with this wholesome advice of modesty, gravity and
judgment. Which three points if they had all this while set before them, at
least wise, if they had followed them: they would never thus lauishly have
defaced all our Synodes and Conuocations, with all the Bishops, the Pastors and
other officers in them, albeit there had been some defects or abuses of them,
which might with modesty, gravity and judgment be well reformed, the laws,
and orders of them already established (with the Bishops, Pastors and officers
authorities reserved) remaining intier and still continuing.

The argument of the 16. Book.
IN this last Book (after their profession, that they have now set forth the
whole Ecclesiastical Ministry, with all the duties and authorities
perteyning to these four tetrarches) they here grant, that the place
requires, to treat of the Civil Magistrates authority in Ecclesiastical
matters.

First, of the right understanding the title of the Princes supremacy, and how
far forth they will move no controversies thereof. Of their grant to the
Princes supremacy over the Ecclesiastical persons, with their cautions of the
Popes supremacy, and of Princes casting off the Popes yoke. Of the Princes
supremacy also in the matters Ecclesiastical, and of the Pastors supremacy
therein above the Prince, and of the Popes presumption in these matters. Of the
Princes authority in making laws of Ecclesiastical matters, and of their
exception for not confounding the Princes and the Pastors offices, and of the
Pastors consent. Whether the Princes authority reach no further, than to make
civil laws for Ecclesiastical matters. And how far the Pope also allowed
Princes to make such laws. Whether the Princes authority stretch not to
their dealing in the making of Ecclesiastical laws, but only for the charge
to observe them, that by the Clergy are already made, and for the bodily
punishment of those that violate them: whether this be any more than the very
Papists and the Pope grants, and whether even this also do not touch these
learned discoursers. Of the authority and dealing of the ancient Princes
besore Christ's coming, and of the Christian Princes since his coming. Of our
Bretherens reverence to the ancient Christian Princes in the Roman Empire,
and in the Kingdoms of France, Spain, and of this our Britanie. Of the
Emperors authority and dealings in Ecclesiastical matters in the greatest
Councels, and of their Ecclesiastical sanctions. Of the French Kings
authority and dealing in the same. Of the authority and dealings of the Kings
in Spain. Of the authority and dealing of the Kings in England, and of the
Ecclesiastical laws of the ancient Saxon Kings. Of the Princes dealing
herein by the advice of their learned Clergy, and whether their advice infer
their sole superior authority. Of the Princes service of God their father,
and serving the commodity of the Church their mother. Of the testimonies of
Esa 49.23. Psalm. 2.11. 1. Tim. 2.2. and of the Papists and our Bretherens
applying the same. How far the ends and benefits of a Prince do stretch:
and how the Prince is both a child, and yet withal a foster father or Nurse
unto the Church.

All which being declared for the authority of the Prince: our Brethren make
their Epilogus of all this learned discourse.

First concerning their own persuasion for this prescribed form of
Ecclesiastical government, to be agreeable to Gods word, and co^senting to
the example of the Primitive Church. And of their auouching that they be able
so to prove it: and of their promise that when occasion shall serve, they will
prove it so to be. Of their solemn protestation why in the mean time they
set forth this learned discourse, and what they seek herein. And of the true
way to reformation. And of their moving them that be in authority, to put this
prescribed form in practice. And of their offering up their books hereof unto
the Parliament. And how this doing is clean contrary to the chiefest positions
in this learned discourse. And of renewing again these controversies by
disputation. And of the event of this form if it should be embraced. And of
their desire that either this form prescribed, or if not this, yet the like
may be received: and how uncertain this desire of theirs is: and how we may or
may not see and judge what is the uttermost of their desires herein. Of their
sclaunders of the present state, and that we are the adversaries of Gods
truth, and how we be hinderers of their proceeding to reformation. And of
this learned discourse to be their public testimonial to the present age, and
that the posterity may know that the truth in this time was not unknown, nor
vntestified, concerning the right regiment of the Church, and whether this can
be known hereby, yea, or no. Of their disordered speeches against our regiment
of the Church, and whether it be received of the most part of Popery, and how
this redoundeth on our Brethren. How they accuse theirs and our godly fathers
of neglecting in this point for delivering our Ecclesiastical regiment to
their children without contradiction, and how prejudicial they complain that
this is unto them. Last of all of their conclusion by prayer to God, for the
pacification of these matters.

AND now that we have set forth the whole Ecclesiastical Ministry, The whole
ministry.
according to the word of God, The learned disc. page 137.
with all the duties and authorities that perteyneth unto it: the place
requires that we should also entreat of the authority of the civil
Magistrate in matters Ecclesiastical.

Thanks be given to God, that now at length our Brethren here confess (for
I hope they say it not for a vaunt) that they have set forth the whole
Ecclesiastical Ministry with all the duties and authorities that perteyne
unto it. So that, Bridges.
if now either they themselves or any other among them, add any thing, or
alter any thing, The whole ecclesiastical ministry and all the duties and
authorities pertaining.
of the duties or of the authority of the Ecclesiastical Ministry: then is
either this or that convinced, not to be the whole Ecclesiastical ministry,
nor all the duties and authorities that perteyne unto it, as here they say
this is. But we have seen in perusing this their learned discourse, in how
many things, and those of moment materially perteyning to the Ecclesiastical
ministry and to the duties and authorities of the same, how they have often
altered and varied one from another, and run into plain contradictions,
besides a number of other, and other manner of points, that I could gather and
set down, and (GOD willing) shall at large, The diversities of our Bretherens
disc^^ries.
if our Brethren shall call for them: only now I note a few of those, that
this learned discourse has led me unto: And therefore, either their other
discourses, or this their learned discourse is not altogether as here they say
according to the word of God.

And now, since that they have discoursed and set forth the whole, and all that
they could or would, for their Ecclesiastical ministry, and all the duties
and authorities perteyning unto it: I beseech thee which art the Protestant
reader hereof, in the fear of God, bearing thy self even indifferently (as to
those that on either part, though dissenting in these matters the one from the
other, yet in the substance of Religion and unity of faith, are both of us thy
dear and true Brethren in Christ, The re^ders duty in these controversies.
because we on either hand may favor too much our own parties, and be carried
away in the heat of our disputes) that thou will vouchsafe (so near as God
shall give thee grace and an understanding heart, to be a true Judge, and an
upright vmpeere, between all them (God knows who and how many) that call them
selves, all the faithful ministers that seek for the discipline and
reformation of the Church of England, on the one party: and even poor mine
own self (God wotte) in this action, on the other party: and between their
learned discourse ( as they entitle it) of Ecclesiastical government, and my
unlearned (as I confess) and course answer thereunto: The treatise of the
princes authorithie.
setting aside (for the while) all favor and partiality, (which disturb a
clear judgment) even as GOD shall help thee, and be thy true Judge, and so I
commit and commend it to Gods good speeding, and to thy indifferent reading,
weighing, and judging of it.

Our Brethrens entry into the treatise of the Princes authority.
And here now, when our Brethren have thus to the full, discoursed on the
whole Ecclesiastical ministry, and all the duties and authorities that
perteyne unto it: at length they begin to find some leisure, to bethink
themselves of the Christian Prince, and to give him yet some remaynder at
least, in the last lapping up of all this learned discourse. So that, if the
Christian Princes have not the blessing before hand so plentifully powered
forth, as upon Jacob, to have the dew of heaven and fatness of the earth,
and to be Lords over their Brethren and honored of their mothers children:
yet as one borne out of time (as they say by three hundred years) and coming
later, they shall not yet be clean forgotten, but shall have at least a
portion of Esaus blessing so far forth, that they shall have also a dwelling
place in the fatness of the earth, and somewhat also of the dew from heaven
above. Yet they shall have their living by the sword: but they must serve
their Brothers, Our Brethrens dealing with Christian princes in these matters.
till they get the maystrie, and break their Brothers yoke from their necks.
And if they hold not themselves content with this blessing: let them go
further and fare worse, they get no more here. For, their Brethren have come
before them, and gotten away the blessings from them. All the whole government
of Ecclesiastical matters, is given and parted into four parts, and is made
a fair tetrarchie, of Doctor, the Pastor, the Governor, and the Deacon, these
four have forestalled in their several shares and Jurisdiction, the
government, and ordering of all Ecclesiastical matters. But yet since there
is a fifte part of something left, and reserved for the Christian Prince: let
us see what that portion is, and how our Brethren will also ordeyne and
dispose thereof.

And now ( say they) that we have set forth the whole Ecclesiastical
ministry, The learned disc. page 138.
etc. The place requires, that we should also entreat of the authority of
the Civil Magistrate in matters Ecclesiastical.

The place required this long before. But let us now take it while it is
offered, least no place at all be left to the Christian Princes.

Of the title of the Princes supremacy, if it be truly understood, we move no
controversy, but that it does properly apperteyne to the civil Magistrate to
be the highest governor of all persons within his dominion, so that the
sovereign Empire of GOD be kept whole.

If the authority of the Christian princes supremacy be good; Gods sovereign
Empire.
the title expressing the same authority, is good also. And so, vise versa; if
the title be good, the authority of the princes supremacy is likewise good.
Bridges.
But what mean they by this caution, that they say, The title of the Prince^
supremacy.
of the title of the Princes supremacy, if it be rightly understood? For if
they deny the understanding of it, as her Majesty and her predecessors, and
the Parliament, and the whole Realms and Churches both of England and of
Ireland do understand it, then do they flatly deny that supremacy which her
Majesty claims and has; and that both her Predecessors, her Majesty's most
renowned Father claimed, recovered, and had: and which also her Majesty's most
godly Brother claymed and had: The understanding of the title of supremacy.
and that the Parliament and the whole Realms and Churches of England and
Ireland do owe, acknowledge and yield unto her Majesty, as they did before to
her foresaid most noble predecessors. And how then do they move no
controversy of it? Which to call in question, considering withal (besides the
manifest right in the law of God) the danger of the penal laws of this
Realm provided by statute, were very dangerous for the^ to do: besides the
evil offense and example to the Papists, that would gladly lie in the wind for
such advantage, that some of the Protestants themselves should now begin, to
move controversies, first of the title, and then of the authority of the
christian Princes supremacy in Eccl. matters, and then of the understanding of
it, as though it had bin all this while not rightly understood, or but
ambiguously, which is so clear, both in the matter it self and by the statutes
thereon, and by diverse that have written and set forth the same plainly
against the wrangling Papists, and by open declaratio^s in arraignments of
those that have worthily suffered for their obstinate denial of the same: that
almost no controversy is made more clear and plain than is the understanding
thereof. And do our Br. come in now at length (after all their putting back the
speaking of it) with granting to it, with this exception: If it be rightly
understood? Then I perceive they move controversy also of it for the right
understanding thereof. Well, what then? For we would not have them yield to it
otherwise.

If it be rightly understood ( say they) we move no controversy of it, but
that it does properly* Our Brethr. exception of Gods sovereign Empire.
appertain to the civil Magistrate to be the highest governor of all persons
within his dominion, so that the sovereign Empire of God be kept whole.

This is a very good understanding of y^ caveat, so that the sovereign Empire
of God be kept whole: God forbid that should be violated, invaded, or any jot
thereof diminished by the Prince. Neither does her Ma. or did her most worthy
father or brother, take upon them, or we acknowledge any other supreme
government. And therefore, for our Brethr. her Ma. loyal subjects, to cast
forth such exceptions unnecessarily, and where no cause is, Gods Empire entire.
thereby although to move no controversy, yet to engender suspicion, that her
Majesty, her Father, and her Brother, claymed the title of supremacy otherwise,
than that the sovereign Empire of God might be kept whole, this being one of
the chiefest causes of their and her claim, even that the sovereign Empire of
God might be kept whole: or that we do otherwise yield to any supremacy of the
Prince: this is neither here in them, or in any other dutifully done, but
injurious both to her Majesty, and to all her obedient sub^ects that do yield
it.

But since they will needs here make this exception, protesting that they
move no question of the title of the Princes supremacy, if it be rightly
understood, and that this right understanding is only this, so that the
sovereign Empire of God be kept whole: go to then, and let us also have this
rightly understood withal, so that, none of all these four Tetrarcks, Doctor,
Pastor, Governor, nor Deacon, for whom they contend, be understood to be God:
nor their Empire, for Gods Empire.

If they say, this can not well be granted; because, though they be not God
personally, Gods empire kept whole by the Princes supremacy.
nor so their Empire Gods Empire, yet they be God representatiuely, as Gods
Ministers, and deputies over his household, and so their Empire or authority is
Gods Empire, because it is Gods ordinance, and therefore, Gods Empire is still
by them kept whole: does not all this fit the Prince also? are not Princes in
that representative sense called Gods? as David says, Psalm 82. God stands
in the assembly of Gods, and judges among Gods: and, I said, ye are Gods: and
so God himself said to Moses concerning Aaron, He shall be as thy mouth, and
thou shall be to him as God, Exodus 4. ver. 16. and Romans 13. It is said of the
Prince, he is Gods minister, and his power is the ordinance of God.

Our Brethr. grant of the Prince to be highest over the persons.
But our Brethren have yet another restraint, for they will grant all this in
manner aforesaid: howbeit, they go no further here than for the persons, for
which they will move no controversy, but that it does properly apperteyne to
the civil Magistrate, to be the highest Governor of all persons within his
dominion. And do they here acknowledge then, in this understanding the title
of the Princes supremacy, nothing else but that it does properly appertain to
the civil Magistrate ( meaning the sovereign Christian Prince) to be the
highest governor of all persons within his dominion? Well, this is yet far
more than the blind and rebellious Papists will grant: Howbeit in some respect
they will grant thus much also.

But shall the Prince be governor likewise of them, that properly must be called
Governors?

And why not, if he must be above the Pastor also, which is above them?
Howbeit, all this is granted here, as yet no further than for the persons.

No is? This is but half of the title of the Princes supremacy. The Eccl.
Governors.
Where is the matter wherein this supremacy does consist, that is to say, in all
matters or causes so well eccl. as te^porall? How far our Brethr. grant the
Princes supremacy over their Eccl. governors.
This is the material part of this title, and no less necessary than other of
the persons, and is the chiefest point of this controversy betwixt the Papists
and us. And do our Br. now begin to stay here another while at this? The^ we
may make a fair piece of work. What, is this part forestalled up already by
any of the former tetrarkes?

Indeed they said very suspitiously to the matter, page 84. Therefore there
ought to be in every Church a Consistory or Seignory of Elders or Governors,
which ought to have the hearing, examination, and determining of all matters
pertaining to discipline and government of that congregation.

Yea (but say they) that sentence goes further: which authority of theirs,
nevertheless, ought to be moderated.

Or else (say I) farewell clean the Princes supremacy in all eccl. matters; if
these Governors authority in all matters, pertaining to discipline and
government of that congregation, be not moderated, and y^ well moderated.

Yes (say they) it ought to be moderated, that their judgment may be rightly
accounted the judgment of the holy Church.

Yea but (say I) how is it moderated, that it do not debar the supremacy of
the Prince in all these matters?

Which thing ( say they) consists in these 2, points, first that the Elders
be elected and chosen by consent of all the congregation, me^ of godliness and
wisdom, in who^ the whole church reposeth such confidence that they commit unto
the^ their authority in hearing, and determining such matters, as without
horrible confusion they can not perform themselves.

Why, but all this while, what is this to any point of the Princes authority in
all this matter? Is there no better prouiso, for the Prince, in the 2. point of
moderating the authority of these governors in Eccl. matters?

The 2. point ( say they) for moderation of the Elders authority in such sort,
that their sentence may be the sentence of the Church, is this: that when the
Consistory have traveled in examining of causes pertaining to Eccl discipline*
and agreed what judgment ought to pass upon the matters, they propound it to
the whole multitude, that it may be confirmed.

Yea? is all the wind in that door? Still* the whole multitude? The whole
Church? The whole congregation? As though all the authority in Eccl. matters
comes from them, as from the spring, and flows to the^, as to the Sea. They
make the governors, which governors must with the Pastors make all the laws,
must hear and determine of all matters pertaining to discipline and to
government of that congregation: and when they have so don, al must be again
referred to that congregation, and to the whole multitude of them, that it may
be confirmed by their consent.

Supremacy over all persons.
What, and must it not come a little higher after them, to be at least
propounded also to the Prince, that it may be also confirmed by his consent?

No, no, no, beware that of all things: if it be once confirmed by the
multitude of that congregation, it has passed all his confirmations, and can
have no more godfathers, except it come to a Synod.

But there we have already heard how the Prince has sped, except that now we
shall hear of any more. For there are some matters yet left to the Prince for
his supremacy to consist in, or else (besides a bare title it is mere
nothing, no not of the persons neither, unless withal it be in some matters.

Our Brethr. reservation of the Princes supremacy in the matters.
Well, but they will not yet tell us of these matters til afterward. But thus
far they have acknowledged for the persons, that the Prince is the highest
governor of all persons within his dominion. Would not this have bin very well
and necessarily joined together unto it, to know in what matters he is the
highest of all the persons? Or else they may move what controversy on the
supremacy they shall please, or clean deny it. But since they will stay a
while upon the supremacy over all persons in the Princes dominions, and that
with this prouiso, if it be rightly understood, so that the sovereign Empire
of God be kept whole: let us stay also to go together with them, and consider
what stop or limax this is that stays them here in their proceeding from the
persons to the matters.

But herein rests all the doubt, how this is truly to be understood, and that
shall we best understand by the contrary: The learned disc. pa. 138. and 139
namely, by the usurped tyranny of Antichrist. For Antichrist did challenge
unto himself all authority both that which is proper to God, and that which
is common to men. Therefore that the Pope claymed to be the only head of the
Church, from which the whole body received direction, and was kept in unity
of faith: this was blasphemous against Christ, and therefore may not be usurped
of any civil Magistrate, no more than by the pope. Likewise, where he
chalengeth authority to alter, change, and dispense with the commandment of
God, to make new articles of faith, to ordain new Sacraments, etc. This is
also blasphemous and ought not to be usurped of any civil prince: on the other
side, where he chalengeth authority over all princes, and so over all the
Clergy, that he did exempt them from the civil jurisdiction, this is
contumelious, and injurious against all Christian kings. And therefore every
prince in his own dominion, ought to cast off the yoke of his subjection, and
to bring all Eccl. persons unto his obedience and jurisdiction. Here have we
the first part of the title of supreme government over all persons.

If all the doubt rests herein, how this is truly to be understood, that the
sovereign Empire of God may be kept whole: Bridges
then is the supremacy that her Ma. holds, and that we acknowledge, due, and
properly appertains to the Prince, without all doubting of the matter. The
Clergies temporalties.
And if our Brethren will acknowledge all that supremacy unto the Prince, save
that supremacy, which is proper to God, and save that supremacy, or rather
tyranny which the Pope challenged and usurped, The Christian Princes supremacy
far different from the Popes.
or which is agreeable thereunto: we should soon agree herein without moving
any controversy or doubt of this matter. Yea this should soon decide al our
other controversies. For first we confess with our Brethr. that this
Antichrist the Pope did, and does challenge unto himself all authority both
that which is proper to God, and that which is common to men. But so does not
her Majesty challenge, nor acknowledge any other authority, but that that is
due and properly appertayning to the Prince under God, and common only to
those persons, or rather peculiar to them, that under God are the chief
Sovereigns in their Dominions: We confess also with our Brethr. that this
Antichrist the Pope, claims to be that only head of the Church, from which
the whole body received direction, and was kept in unity of faith: this his
claim was (and is) blaspemous against Christ, and therefore may not be usurped
by any civil Magistrate, no more than by the Pope: Neither does her Majesty,
or ever did, neither did her foresaid most royal Father and Brother, claim or
usurp any such authority over us, or we acknowledge any such authority in
them.

We confess with our Brethren likewise, where he ( meaning this Antichrist the
Pope) chalengeth authority to alter, change, The blasphemous challenge of the
Pope.
and dispense with the commandments of God, to make new articles of faith,
to ordain new Sacraments, etc. this is also blasphemous and ought not to be
usurped of any civil Prince: Neither does her Majesty, or did her foresaid
most noble Father and brother vsurp, or challenge any such authority, or we
yield it.

Calvin indeed did at the first so mistake it, that the most noble Prince K.
Henry the 8. took upon him the like authority, and therefore wrote against
it very inconsiderately. But afterward both in K. Edw. and in her Ma.
perceiving no such authority given or taken: he took no such offense at the
claim of their authority, but approoueth the same, and in all due manner
writes to them.

We confess also with our Br. on the otherside, where he (to wit, this
Antichrist the Pope) chalengeth authority over all Princes, and so over all
the Clergy, that he did exempt them from the civil jurisdiction, this is
contumelious and injurious against al Christian kings. Neither does her
Majesty, or did her foresaid most noble Father and brother challenge any such
authority over all Princes, nor over all the Clergy, except a due authority
over al such inferior Princes ( because some states in the Realm may be
included in the name of Princes under her Ma.) and over al those of the
clergy, which are within her Ma. dominions, and are her lawful subjects:
neither exempteth she the Clergy from all the civil jurisdiction, (...) and
these Tetrarkes yoke.
nor offreth in this her authority any contumely or injury, to al or against
any christian Kings, or against other Sovereigns in their Dominions: neither
do we acknowledge any other, than such as is a lawefull authority in her
Majesty.

And here as her Majesty is free, and her title and authority right and due,
in her own dominions over all under and vassaile Princes, in or of the same
dominions, The Clergies holding their temporalties of the Prince.
and over all the Clergy also, in or of all her Majesty's dominions
aforesaid, concerning the civil jurisdiction, whereof so far as the Clergy
hold any portion, or any other civil privilege, prerogative, franchesse, or
immunitie, they hold it and reacknowledge it, in all due obedience and
thankfulness, as derived from the munificence of her Ma. and her royal
Progenitors. So let our Brethren herein take heed, how they and their new
Clergy of consistory governors in their Sanedrins, under pretense of
enquiring, examining, determining, judging, and punishing all offenses in their
several congregations, encroch not upon the Princes civil jurisdiction. Our
Brethr. governors incroching on the Prince.
For this also is contumelious and injurious both against her Majesty's
authority, and against al christian Kings and Princes, and against the most of
the civil Magistrates, Judges, Justices and officers, under the chief and
sovereign Princes, besides the Eccl. Prelates and their officers.

And therefore ( we conclude as our Brethr. here do) every Prince in his own
dominion, ought to cast off the yoke of his (to wit the Popes) subjection, and
to bring all Eccl. persons unto his or her obedience and jurisdiction. And we
conclude a little further, that in the number of these Eccl. persons, Every
prince ought to cast off the yoke of the Popes and of these new tetrarks
subjection.
the Prince ought to bring in ( presupposing there were any such) all this new
kind of Doctors all these new Bishops in every parish, all these new
Governors, and all these new Deacons in every congregation, in his or her
dominions, under his or her obedience and jurisdiction, and to cast off the
yoke of their subjection: which if they ought to do, then let our Brethr.
again take heed, how they impugn the obedience and jurisdiction of her
Majesty, and her laws established, and cast among her subjects such
repugnant discourses as this is, vaunt they never so much therein of Learning.

Here have we ( say they) the first part of the title of supreme government
over all persons.

And thus far both our Brethren and we agree, concerning the persons.

In matters or causes Eccl. likewise, the Pope does not only presume against
God, The learned disc. pa. 139. and 140
as we said before: but also against the lawful authority, given by God unto
men. For he forbids Princes to meddle with reformation of Eccl. matters, or
to make any laws pertaining to causes of religion, aunswering them, that those
things do appertain only to him and the general Counsel. But when he
comes to debate any thing with his Clergy, then al laws and knowledge, The
Princes supremacy in Eccl, matters.
are enclosed in the closet of his breast. When any general Council must be
holden, all that they do receives authority from him. For except he do allow,
it is nothing. And he is so wise, that neither with the Council, nor without
the Council he can err or think amiss in matters Eccl. when as it is not
only lawefull, but also necessary for Princes, if they will do their duty,
to look to the reformation of religion, and to make laws of matters
Ecclesiastical. But so that we confound not the offices of the Prince and
Pastor. For as it is not lawefull for the prince to preach nor administer the
Sacraments: no more is it lawful for him to make laws in Eccl. causes,
contrary to the knowledge of his learned Pastors. For as these three parts of
the pastors duty are granted to him by God, preaching, ministering of
Sacraments, and Eccl government: he may no more take from a Pastor the third,
than he may the two first.

They are now come from the persons, to the matters or causes Eccl. wherein and
how far forth, Bridges.
they will acknowledge the title and authority of the Princes supremacy. The
Princes authority for Eccl. matters.
All this that our Brethr. say here against the popes claim of supremacy for
matters or causes Eccl. the same say we. And we gladly accept that which our
Brethren do condemn, in the popes presumption and usurpation both against God
and man, and his forbidding princes to meddle with reformation of Eccl.
matters, or to make any laws pertaining to causes of religion, aunswering
them, that those things do appertain only to him, and the general Council.

And here we beseech our Brethren, confessing thus much against the pope, Our
Brethr. speeches against Princes dealing in eccl. matters.
( as it becomes good subjects to their prince) to advise themselves
withal, of their former unadvised speeches. page 9.10.84.85.117.1^8.119. in
which places besides their hard terms of Christian princes, do they not
give(under the name of the Church and her authority) the knowing, the hearing,
the examining, the determining, the judging and the punishing, of all matters
and causes pertaining to discipline and government of the Church, either to
their pastors and teachers, or to the Seignories of their governors? And what
differs this from forbidding princes to meddle with reformation of Eccl.
matters, or to make laws pertaining to causes of religion, aunswering them,
How our Brethren inc^rre the l^ke dealing that they rep^chende in the Pope for
n^i^sing Princes and the Cl^^gie.
that those things do appertain only to them, and to their consistories, and
to their particula^ Synodes, or general Council?

But when he ( say they meaning the pope) comes to debate any thing with his
Clergy, the^ all laws and knowledge are enclosed in the closet of his breast.
And is this any more, than to say not only to the Prince, but also to their
own consistory governors, of whom their Synodes consist, as well as of
themselves, page 117. who should be able to know what order, The Pastors
supremacy in Eccl. matters.
comlines, and aedification requires according to Gods word. but they that be
teachers and preachers of the same unto all others? For it is absurd that they
should be taught by such in these small things, as ought to learn the truth
of in all matters. This authority therefore can not be granted unto any civil
Christian Magistrate, that without consent of the learned Pastors and Elders,
yea against their consent, of whom as in some respect, he is a feeling member,
he may lawfully make ceremonial constitutions, whereby the Church must be
governed in mere Eccl. matters.

Since therefore they turn all this against the Prince, is not this as much, as
when they come to debate any thing with their Clergy Governors, that the^ all
laws and knowledge is enclosed in the closet of their breasts, both from the
Prince, and from their own Clergy and Eccl. Governors? Is not this as much,
as when they hold their general Counsels, or Provincial, that all the
authority must come from them? For except they do allow it, it is nothing.
And how far differs this from the Popes conceit, that they also are grown so
wise, that neither with counsel, nor without the Council they can err or
think amiss in Eccl* matters? Had they a general Council of all those, that
they call the faithful ministers, that composed this Learned discourse of
Eccl. government? Well, yet there is here some good hope, that when our Brethr.
shall have better bethought the^ of these things, which they mislike in the
Pope, debarring the right and interest of Christian Princes: the very vggly
sight thereof will be as a glass unto the^, to see and mislike their own
speeches and doings, in taking upon them, though not the very same, yet so
like presumption and usurpation, especially so many, and so little states, as
they are, far inferior to the Pope, and at the very first peeping out of
them, yea before they are come to that they would have, thus to insult not
only on the Bishops, and to come and set out laws, before themselves are
called unto such authority: but also thus to blemish and deface the Christian
Princes authority, to abase and debar it, to examine, and determine, yea to
encroch upon the right and interest in these matters of all Christian Princes,
and of their own most godly and gracious Sovereign.

But since the sight of their own description of the Popes presumption and
usurpation, does begin here to make them stoop somewhat to the Princes
supremacy, Our Brethr. own sayings rightly returned on themselves.
let them now in good time likewise remember their own sayings, page 77. and
78. where speaking also of the Pope: whose intolerable presumption ( say they)
as we have long since banished out of this land; so we wish that no step of
such pride and arrogancy, might be left behind him: namely that no Elder or
Minister of the Church ( mark these your own words well, good Brethren, and
turn them not so off against our Bishops, that ye forget your selves) should
challenge unto himself or accept it, if it were offered unto him, These
Governors and Pastors not in Script.
any other authority, than that is allowed by the spirit of God, but chiefly
to beware, that he usurp no authority, which is forbidden by the word of God.
For wherefore do we detest the Pope, and his usurped supremacy, but because he
arrogateth the same unto himself, not only without the warrant of Gods word,
but also clean contrary to the same?

Now if the same reasons and authorities that have banished the Pope, do serve
to condemn all other usurped authority, that is practiced in the Church, why
should not all such usurped authority be banished as well as the Pope? we can
allege against the Pope and rightly, that which S. John Baptist did answer
to his disciples, No man can take unto himself any thing, except it be given
him from heaven, Ioh. 3.27. and that saying of the Apostle to the Hebrews, No
man can take upon him any honor in the Church of God, but he that is called of
God, as was Aaron: in so much, that Christ himself did not give himself to be
an high Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee. He says in another place, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the
order of Melchizedech.

Now seeing these rules are so general, that the Son of God himself was not
exempted from them, but showed forth the decree wherein he was authorized: by
what rule can any man reteyne that authority in the Church of God, that is not
called thereunto by the word of God?

All these words have our Brethren alleged triumphantly against the Bishops,
whose authority we have seen to be thoroughly grounded on the word of God. But
for their Consistory Governors, to whom they give such great authority, we
have as yet after all this shuffling, Our Breath. Governors and Pastors and
their elections, have no proof in Gods word.
coniecturing, pulling, and haling of the Scripture, of the ancient Fathers,
and of the old Churches practice to found it upon, we could not yet find upon
better view thereof, so much as one good and substantial proof or authority
for it, or the example but of one such man. And as for their Pastors, if none
be Pastors, but such as are ordained after the form by themselves set down,
Page 125. saying: this is the right election and ordeyning of Pastors grounded
upon the word of God: when we come to search better in the word of God, we
find not one Pastor so elected and ordained. And as for their selves, these
faithful Ministers, Our Breath. unthankfulness to the Bishops.
none of them neither that I can learn of, were so elected and ordained, and
so, they have either no right calling nor authority at all, but are mere
intruders, yea, mere lay men, or else that authority that they have, they
have it of the Bishops, and of their authority that gave them authority, and
now they reward them well for their labor, that would eat them up that
brought them up, as did the wolf eat up the Goat of whom she sucked, or
rather as God complayneth, I have nourished children.

Princes making laws.
Yea, they are grown now so cranke on this little authority, that they fall
unto prescribing, abridging, limitting, and setting down laws, even to their
sovereign Princes. Our Breath. prescribing laws to the Prince.
But quo warranto, by what new authority they can do all these things, against
all these states and degrees of men, in all these matters, though it be beyond
my authority to examine them, yet, because it is beyond my learning, I would
but gladly know it, if they can teach it. But since they begin here to relent
somewhat to the Princes supremacy, without further ripping up of former
matters, except they begin again to shrink back, after their former manner:
let us take them now in their good mood, and most joyfully we accept this our
Brethrens grant which here they yield unto, that it is not only lawful, but
also necessary for Princes, Our Breath. yielding to the Prince to make laws for
Ecclesiastical matters.
if they will do their duty, to look to the reformation of religion, and to
make laws of matters Ecclesiastical. Yea forsooth, this is another manner of
matter, than we heard of any yet of our Brethrens mouths, toward the
reformation of these things, that it is lawful and necessary for Princes,
besides their looking to it, even to make laws of Eccl. matters, so indeed
did Moses, Iosue, David, Solomon, and other good Princes, The examples of
Princes that made such laws.
before Christ's coming, and so did Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian,
Martian, Zeno, Justinian, and diverse others godly Princes, since Christ's
coming, and such Eccl. laws have we in this Realm, of the ancient Bryttish
Kings heretofore: and even so did some Kings also since the Conquest, make
some such laws of Eccl. matters, for all their authority was much impugned,
incroched upon, and in the end ^ppressed, by the intrusion and tyranny of the
Pope, till God moved the heart of that most heroical Prince King Henry the
eight, and after him, of his most virtuous son King Edward the sixth, who both
of them regayned this supreme authority, and thereby made many most godly and
excellent laws, for the reformation of religion, and of Eccl. matters, and so
(the Lord be glorified for her) our most excellent Sovereign Lady Queen
Elizabeth, ( whose days God long prolong in all felicity) very dutifully,
carefully, and religiously, to the uttermost of her power, has done, and does
look to the reformation of religion, and to make laws of matters
Ecclesiastical, if our Brethren would on the other side do their duty, and in
thankfulness be contented with her Majesty's reformation of religion, and
with the laws Eccl. that her Majesty has already made, yielding their
dutiful obedience, in the reverent accepting and observing of them. If now our
Brethren would thus hold on, in the acknowledgement of the Princes authority,
we should soon agree, and (as they say) move no controversy neither on this,
Our Breath. restraining of they granted before to Princes.
nor other matters. But this confession that comes thus in a good mood upon
them on a sudden, it is too good to continue long. For straight they begin
(for fear they might seem to have granted the Prince too much) to come in
and pinch it on the back with new conditions and prouisoes. Restrain of
Princes making laws.
But so ( say they) that we confound not the offices of the Prince and of the
Pastor. Well, if there follow no worse than this, we accept also of this
exception, provided again on our part (to fall to indenting on even hands) so
that they rightly understand this term of offices: for, her Majesty never
attempted, nor the Statute admits any such attempt, of confounding these
offices of the Prince and the Pastor: would God (and it were his will) our
Brethren themselves were as far off, from confounding of these offices, and
that they and their new governors would encroch no more upon her Majesty's
royal office, and on the offices of her officers under her, than she or they
do upon the office of the Pastors. But now, least we should yet houer in
suspense, what they mean here by these offices, that should not be
confounded, they specify the same, and say: Laws made contrary to the Pastors
knowledge.
For as it is not lawful for the Prince to preach, nor administer the
Sacraments, no more is lawful for him to make laws in Ecclesiastical causes,
contrary to the knowledge of his learned Pastors. I thought by little and
little the wind would turn about, and sit ruffling again in his old place:
what need these caueats here so suspiciously cast out, as though these
offices, or at least some of them, were confounded, or in hazard to be
confounded by this supremacy that her Majesty claims, or that is yielded to
her? whereas neither the Statute gives her Majesty any such authority, as
whereupon any suspicion of such confusion of these offices should arise: nor
her Majesty, or her father, or her brother, did ever by this title, claim or
take upon the^ any such thing, as either to preach, or to administer
sacraments, or to do any other actions properly apperteining to the Bishops, or
to the Pastors, or to any other Ecclesiastical officers: neither yet did make
any laws in Ecclesiastical causes, either contrary to the knowledge, or
without the knowledge, and the consent also; but with the knowledge, advice,
counsel and consent of her learned Pastors, Her Majesty's lawful making lawe^
for Eccl. matters.
and (so far likewise as reaches to their Eccl. authority) with their
determination, resolution and decree thereon: which thing since her Majesty
has so done, satisfying all these caueats and exceptions: how follows it
not, by our Brethrens own confession, that it was and is lawful for her so to
do? yea, that it was and is necessary for her Majesty, if she would do, as (God
be praised) she has done, and her duty, to look to the reformation of
religion, and to make laws of matters Eccl.? and how then (if our Brethren
will look to themselves, and to do their duty) is it lawful for them any more
than for the Papists, to disobey, to deface, to control, to impugn, to
violate, to alter the laws in Ecclesiastical matters that her Majesty has
thus made? If they think she made them contrary to the knowledge of her
learned Pastors, because they take it that it is contrary to their knowledge,
Her Majesty's laws not made contrary to the Pastors knowledge.
if they were not Pastors at all when her Majesty made these laws: or if that
they which be Pastors now, either be not, or renounce to be such Pastors, and
of such ordeyning, Princess laws in Eccl. matters.
as her Majesty, and the Laws of the Realm, acknowledge to be Pastors: or if
these our Brethren be no^ Pastors of such learning and knowledge as they
pretend, nor of any such number or estimation, as the other learned Pastors in
her Majesty's dominions are, is she bound to take such knowledge of them, that
when all those whom she acknowledges to be her lawful Pastors, both the most
and most esteemed, both the best and best learned of them, have consulted
upon, and consented unto, have agreed upon, and decreed also the same laws,
that yet it shall not be lawful to her Majesty, ( because of the dissent of a
few other, whom she knows not to be her Pastors) to make any laws at all of
Ecclesiastical matters, or to look to the reformation of religion? why might
not the Papists use this reason, The Papists used the selfsame reason that
our Breeth. do against the Princes laws.
as well as our Brethren, to debar her Majesty's right and authority
herein? yea, did not they use the selfsame reason, pleading, that they were
the Pastors of the Realm, and so her Majesty's Pastors also, and that she
could not look to the reformation of Religion, nor make laws of matters
Ecclesiastical, contrary to their knowledge and consenting? for at her
Majesty's first entry into her reign, as she carefully looked ( before all
other things) to the reformation of Religion, and to make godly laws of
Ecclesiastical matters, so the Popish Pastors, which then were most in number,
and greatest in power, and were in duty her Pastors also, if they had
performed their duty dutifully, which they did not: neither can we deny, but
that they, or many of them, were learned also, if they had had grace
aunswerable to learning, and had submitted their learning to truth, and not
deteyned others in blindness of ignorance, to maintain their errors: was it
not lawful therefore unto her Majesty, to look to the reformation of
religion, Her Majesty's laws against the Papists errors.
and to make laws of matters Ecclesiastical, because it was contrary to
their acknowledging, and to their consenting? yes, she performed all this,
mawger their withstanding, and she did well, yea, most excellent well in her so
doing: not yet (as the Papists cried out, and still cry) that she did
contrary to the knowledge of her learned Pastors, for they accounted none to
be learned Pastors, nor at all to be Pastors, but themselves. But her Majesty
did these things, with the consent of those that were both Pastors, and her
Pastors too, and her learned Pastors: and even by learning it was tried, and by
the better learning of her better learned Pastors, vicit veritas, the truth had
the victory, and Popery was confounded. And so her Majesty made her laws of
Ecclesiastical matters, and reformation of Religion, with the consent of her
learned Pastors, and established them with the approbation and authority of
all the states of the Realm and Church of England, and has (God be praised)
happily continued, till now of late, (as though we had not enough to do with
the continual maligning, sclaunders, and practices of the Popish Pastors, and
their adherents) we fall out unhappily among our selves: and as her Majesty's
godly and learned Pastors joined then with her Majesty, against the Popish
Pastors, in displacing them, with all their errors, and superstitious
Ecclesiastical laws, and reformed religion, and made these laws
Ecclesiastical that are now as yet in force: Our Breath. dealing against her
Majesty's laws in Ecclesiastical matters.
so a new kind of Pastors begin a new stur, and are weary of these
Ecclesiastical laws, and of this reformation, and of all these Pastors:
calling themselves the faithful Ministers that seek the reformation of the
Church of England, and would try these matters again by learning, and so
(among other their books and writings thereon) have now at length set forth to
all the realm, this learned discourse of Ecclesiastical government: and her
Majesty must now revoke all the reformation and Ecclesiastical laws, that
she has then and since made with her learned Pastors that then were, and begin
afresh, both to turn out all those Pastors, for no right ordained Pastors, and
to make new laws of Ecclesiastical matters, and a new reformation with their
consents, that say they be now her learned Pastors, and on these conditions
they will admit her title of supremacy, On what conditions our brethren will
admit her Majesty's supremacy.
and her authority to do these things, or else not. If her Majesty now shall
hear of this, what may she think thereon? how may she comfort her self, and
warrant her actions in all things that she has done already? for if they were
well done, they may well continue: if they may not well continue, but must be
undone, it is an argument they were not well done. But her Majesty, though this
be no small grief unto her, to have all her doings thus ripped up again, by her
own subjects, and professors of the same Gospel that she professes: and
though it be no small triumph to the adversaries of the Gospel, and argument
for them to descant upon against her Majesty, and against both our Brethren
and us, and all true Protestants: yet, let not her most excellent Majesty be
disinayed hereat (though indeed it be a great corsie) but when her Majesty
looks on the grounds of the matter, and not on the unthankfulness and
mutabilitie of men, Her Majesty's comfort against these dealings.
and lifts up her eyes to heaven, from whence comes her salvation, how
mightily God has blessed and defended her, and prospered these things under
her hands, her Majesty shall receive a greater comfort, and confirmation
against all the treasonable practices of those her deadly adversaries of the
one party, and all the dangerous innouations of these her ouer-zealous
subjects on the other party, and repress them both in justice and mercy, with
safe continuance and good success (God willing) of all her Majesty's
reformation and laws that she has made of Ecclesiastical matters hitherto,
with the knowledge and consent of those that then were, or yet are her learned
Pastors. And except these our new Pastors, that would be, have any better
learning, not yet revealed, than is contained in this their learned discourse:
the learned Pastors that are now in place, and in Pastoral authority, will
(by Gods grace) maynteyne and defend by truth and sound learning, their
authorities, and the Ecclesiastical laws that her Majesty has made with
their knowledge and consents, welynough I warrant them. Our Pa^tors defense of
her Majesty's authority and laws against these new Pastors
And let our Brethren, to begin withal, look to this point better. For since
they grant it is her Majesty's authority to make Laws of Eccl. matters, so
that she take from the Pastor none of these 3. offices, Preaching, Ministering
the Sacraments, nor the Eccl. Government from them: the Queens Majesty having
made her Laws without doing any of these three things, nor having taken from
the Pastor the third, any more then the two first: Let them look to it, both
how they disobey the Laws she has made, and how they cast forth such
suspicious sclaunders on her Majesty, as though in making her Laws she did
take the Pastors Ecclesiastical government from him. The learned disc. pa. 141.


By this it appears, how far it is lawful for Princes to intermeddle with
causes Ecclesiastical: namely, that it is the cheifest point of their duty, to
have special regard that God may be glorified in their dominion, and therefore
they ought to make civil Laws, to bind the people unto the Confession of the
true faith, and the right administering and receiving of the sacraments, and to
all Ecclesiastical orders, that they being instructed by the word of God,
through the ministry of the preaching of the same, shall understand to be
prositable for aedifying of the Church of Christ, and the advancement of the
glory of God. If any shall offend against the Laws, whether he be a Preacher
or hearer, besides the Ecclesiastical censure, which he should not escape,
he is also to be punished in body by the civil Magistrate.

They have not yet, either by these, or by ought else before spoken, made it
appear, Bridges
how far it is lawful for Princes to intermedle with causes
ecclesiastical. And how their supreme authority therein (which is far
higher then only intermedling) stretches. As for the things which here (as a
recapitulation) they set down: are nothing so much as they granted before.
For although they say, that it is the cheifest point of their duty to have
especial regard, that God may be glorified in their Dominion: yet that does
not show what especial authority they have therein, and how far forth
they have it*

If they say, that they do this in the conclusion following these words: And
therefore they ought to make civil Laws, All our Br. grant of making laws
of Eccl. matters, is turned only to civil laws.
to bind the people unto the Confession of the true faith, and the right
administering and receiving of the Sacraments, and to all Eccl. orders. What
have they granted here to her Majesty, but the only making of civil Laws?
and thus the conclusion (when all comes to al) is not so much, as that they
granted before, or at least, made us a show thereof. And yet they made to
great dainty in the grant thereof, with so many exceptions: which grant
notwithstanding we gladly accepted at their hands, The ancient Princes
intermedling.
and made much of it: that it is not only lawful, but also necessary for
princes, if they will do their duty, to look to the reformation of
religion, and to make laws of Ecclesiastical matters, so that we confound
not the offices of the Prince and the Pastor. Here every man that means no
subtlety, would straight have thought, that as the pastor has some part of
looking to the reformation of religion, and of making Laws of matters
Ecclesiastical, pertaining to the office of a pastor, distinct from the office
of a prince: so the prince also has some parts of looking to the reformation
of religion, and of making laws of matters Eccl. pertaining to the office of a
prince, distinct from the office of a pastor. And that, although the parts of
either of their offices be distinct, yet in the very looking to that
reformation of Religion, and to the very making of those Laws of matters
Ecclesiastical, they both of them dointermeddle, which is the term that their
selves even here do use.

But see now what a fair gift our Brethren have here granted. It is lawful
and necessary for Princes to make Laws of matters Ecclesiastical. What
Laws? Forsooth, they ought to make civil laws, to bind the people unto the
confession of true faith, and the right administering of the Sacraments, and to
all Ecclesiastical orders. Yea forsooth, in this last and third point, lies
chiefly the question, of making laws. What intermedling in Eccl. matters our
Br. allow to Princes.
But have they any stroke in making laws of any those Eccl. orders? No, but
only that they being instructed by the word of God, through the ministry of
the preaching of the same, shall understand to be profitable to the edifyeng of
the Church, and the advancement of the glory of God, should bind the people
to them. What? should they make civil laws, to bind the people to them,
before that they be made laws and orders Ecclesiastical? or how can they be
made laws and orders Ecclesiastical? does the scripture make all the laws
and orders Ecclesiastical that are made? or is the ministry of the preaching
of the same, a sufficient instruction for the Prince, to take them for
Ecclesiastical laws, because they put him to understand, that they be
profitable for edifying the Church of Christ, and advancement of the glory of
God? so that, what they shall say as profitable heereunto, that is a law, or
he must so take it? or else, still I demand, who had the authority to make
those laws and orders Ecclesiastical? except they shall say, they were all
made before there were any christian Princes, The ancient Princes intermedling.
which was their former refuge. Albeit, Moses, Iosue, David, Solomon, etc. will
ouerreach that shift, for they had a stroke even in the very making of
Ecclesiastical laws and orders them selves, and not only in the making of
civil laws for Ecclesiastical laws and orders, to bind the people unto
them: and so had also diverse Christian Princes since Christ's time: The Popes,
and our Brethrens allowance to Princes.
many of whose laws, are Ecclesiastical laws themselves, and Canons of the
Church in the Canon law, and not only civil laws made, to bind the people
to keep the Canon laws, or Ecclesiastical orders: and such also are diverse
laws of the ancient Bryttish and English Kings in this Realm, and the
Epistle of Eleutherius himself (if it be his) gives Lucius no less
authority.

But is this all that our Brethren will allow to Christian Princes, and no
further authority than this? yes: If any shall offend against the laws,
whether he be Preacher, Our Breath. allowance to Princes for bodily punishments.
or hearer; beside the Ecclesiastical censure, which he should not escape, he
is also to be punished in body by the civil Magistrate. And is this again all
that we shall get more than before we got, for the supreme authority of the
Christian Prince in Ecclesiastical matters? and what more is here granted to
the Prince, than the very Papists, yea, than the Pope himself (as proud and
injurious to Princes as he is) will grant unto them? to make civil laws for
the defense of the laws Ecclesiastical, that he and his Clergy only do
make, making the Princes to be the only punishers, and as it were, their
executioners of justice upon them, The Popes allowance to Christian Princes.
that shall offend against their laws. This they can well allow and like, that
Princes should have authority to punish the offender in body, besides the
Ecclesiastical censure, which the offender shall not escape at their hands:
and for this cause they call the Emperor the Churches advocate, and the Pope
himself yielded this title to King Henry the eight, to be called the defender
of the faith, and will our Brethren yield no better supremacy, nor greater
authority to christian Princes, and so to her Majesty, than the Papists, and
the very Pope will offer to yield her, so that her Majesty will but make civil
laws to bind the people to their laws, and Ecclesiastical orders, that the
Pope and his Clergy shall make, and that if any shall offend in body against
his laws, whether he be Preacher or hearer, besides the Ecclesiastical
censure, which he should not escape, he is also to be punished in body by the
civil Magistrate? all this does the Pope offer to all the Princes in their
dominions, that have not cast off the yoke of his subjection, but live in
greatest servitude under him, and yet our new Pastors make all this mincing, to
grant but thus much authority at length unto their Princes. But now, if they
will bear so hard a hand, that we shall get no more authority for the Prince,
and so, for her Majesty, but bare and hardly this, which would make a man to
marvel, that they which so often talk of her Majesty's supreme government in
Ecclesiastical causes, have now brought it from a supremacy, to such an
inferioritie, that the Pope will offer as much authority to Princes, to
maintain his errors, as these Pastors will offer to maintain the Gospel: yet
I marvel the less, considering all things: for they have great cause to be
afraid, to grant the Prince but thus much. For, The ancient Princes laws.
have the Prince but this authority over all the persons, that if any shall
offend against the laws and orders Ecclesiastical, or against the Princes
civil laws, made to bind the people to them, whether he be Preacher, or
hearer, Our Brethren incur bodily punishment by their own grant.
besides the Ecclesiastical censure which he should not escape, that he is
also to be punished in body, by the civil Magistrate. If this be so, then it
stands our Brethren upon to take great heed, for howsoever they shall despise
our Prelates Ecclesiastical censure, how will they escape this bodily
punishment? Yea, how do they not pronounce this sentence thereof against
themselves? do they think that they offend not her Majesty's laws, that thus
deface them, break them, and write against them? or do they think they be not
her Majesty's Laws, but the Churches, or the Cleargies? Did not her Majesty's
approbation of them, quicken and confirm them to become Laws? and has she
made no other civil Laws also, with the whole authority of the Realm, to
establish those Laws? Or do they think her Majesty's Laws to be no Laws,
neither Ecclesiastical, nor yet Civil? so they may indeed make a wise match,
and find, that not only her Majesty's Laws be L^wes, and good and lawful
laws also, but that her punishments be punishments, and that just and severe
punishments too. But her Majesty is most merciful, and I hope they will be
more dutiful, and bethink themselves better on these things.

This we see that all Christian Emperors observed, The learned disc. pa. 141.
and 142
that when any controversy arose, either of doctrine, or of order and
ceremonies, they commanded the Clergy to consult and determine thereof,
according to the Scripture, who assembling together in counsel, obeyed their
commandment: their conclusion then by the authority of the Emperor, was
commanded every where to be observed, and those that impugned it, to be
punished. Bridges
The same order we read to be observed by the Christian Kings of France and
Spain, yea, The examples of the ancient Christian Princes authority. The
Prince^ commanded the Clergy to consult and determine on the truth of
controversies in doctrine, and ceremonies.
of this our Bryttannie also, in governing their Ecclesiastical state by the
advice of the Clergy of their dominion.

Her Majesty takes not on her, nor desires any more, neither do we
acknowledge any less authority in her, then had the ancient Christian
Emperors, Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian, Martianus, Honorius, Arcadius,
Justinian, etc. And we grant, that all Christian Emperors observed this, that
when any controversy arose, either of doctrine or of order and ceremonies ( if
the importance of that controversy did so require) they commanded the
Clergy to consult and to determine thereof, according to the Scripture: this
is most true, and it was well done of them. Howbeit, they their selves made
many good Ecclesiastical laws and sanctions, besides those which they
confirmed with their supreme authority, that by occasion of great
controversies, were consulted upon, The Emperors dealing.
and determined in general or provincial Counsels. And yet even in those
Counsels, the Emperor did not only command the Clergy to consult and
determine of the controversies, either of doctrine, or of order and ceremonies:
and when the Clergy had consulted upon, and determined the same, and had
declared their determination to the Emperor, then he allowed it, and
commanded, that every where it should be observed, and those that impugned it,
to be punished: for this indeed were no more, then (as I said before) the
very Pope himself (save for the commanding of him and them) could be content
the Emperor yet should do, so that he would intermedle nothing in the matters
themselves that are in controversy, but let him and his Clergy alone, with
the consulting and determining of all the controversies, and the Emperor only
to allow of their Decree, and to command all his subjects, whether they be
Preachers, or hearers, to observe the same, and to punish those that do impugn
it. But, (that which the Pope can in no wise abide) the Emperor went further
than all this comes to: The Emperors doing^ in the Coun^els.
for, besides that he did all those things in the Counselles, which we have
before declared, though he had also Presidents, whom he appointed according as
he thought meet, to govern the Counsel, and all the order and actions
thereof: yet now and then, (as the importance of the matter required, and other
affairs hindered him not,) he sat himself in the Counsel among them,
debated and consulted on the matters with them, and joined also with them even
in the determination of the matters themselves.

And that this is true, the Emperor Constantines own words do witness of
his own doings, in the most famous Nicene Council, and that both in the
chiefest controversy of our faith, and also in that great controversy of the
order and ceremony of keeping Easter day, after the order that we now keep
it: whereof Constantine writing his Epistle unto all Churches, as appears in
Socrates history, lib. 1. cap. 6. he says on this wise. Socrates lib. 1.
cap. 6.


When as I perceived by the prosperous and flourishing estate of the common
weal, The Empe^ours Epistle to the Bishop for the keeping of Easter day.
how greatly we are beholden to the goodness of Almighty God, conferred upon
us, I judged that above all things it behooved me of duty to foresee, that in
the most holy and sacred assemblyes of the Catholic Church under heaven,
there should one faith, sincere love and charity, uniform consent and
agreement, touching the religion and service of Almighty God, inuiolably be
retained, but sithence that the same could by no other means be settled in
sure and firm place, except all the Bishops, or the greatest part of them, had
assembled together, and that every one had given his judgment of the matters
perteyning to the most holy religion: when as for the same cause, so great an
assembly as possibly could be made, was gathered together, I my self even as
one of your number, was present together with you: The Emperors own^
confession of his dealing in the Nicene Counsel.
for neither did I refuse to join my self with you in that ministry, of
which doing, I conceive great joy: and so far were all the matters
exquisitely sought out, until the sentence grateful and acceptable unto God,
for the concord and consent of men's minds, was openly pronounced, in so much,
that nothing at all remains hereafter, that may tend to discord, or
controversy of the faith. When as at that time it was disputed upon concerning
the feast day of Eeaster, it was thought meet by the common sentence of all,
that all men every where, should celebrate the same upon one and the selfsame
day: for what could be better or more honorable, than that this feast, by which
we have the hope of Immortality set forth unto us, should be continually kept
of all men after one manner and order? etc. And so he enters into many
excellent persuasions to the Churches, to move them to forsake the Jews order,
and to join all in observing the order that he with the Counsel had decreed.
But ( says he) if these things had not been set forth by me, yet were it
your wisdoms to employ your diligence, and with prayers to wish, that for no
manner of cause, ye should be compelled to intermingle the integrity of your
minds, with the customs of wicked men. And even as Constantine the great, and
most godly Emperor, joined thus with ^he Bishops in these Ecclesiastical
causes, and in many other, so did the other godly Emperors in all the
approved general Counselles: if they were not present themselves, they
appointed Deputies, and those civil Magistrates also, The doing^ of the
Emperors deputies i^ the Counsels.
that now and then improued all the whole Counselles Decrees: as in the
Counsel of Chalcedone, when all the Counsel had decreed Bassianus Bishop of
Ephesus, to be restored, the Judges appointed by the Emperor Martian, rejected
that sentence, and appointed them to chose another, whose commandment therein
they obeyed.

And many times, the Emperor himself names the Bishops, and appoynteth the
Counsel to ordeyne them, as Theodosius did at the second universal Counsel
holden at Constantinople, when they could not agree in the election of the
Bishop of Constantinople, they delivered up a number of names for him to chose
one, The Emp^rour his self appoints the Bishop of Constantinople.
and he appointed Nectarius to be Bishop: which Emperor also, when he had
called before him a number of Heretics, by the council and advice of
Nectarius, who also was counseled thereunto Sisinius the Emperor in the
Counsel reasoned with them severally, demanding of them all whether they
allowed not of such and such godly and famous Fathers: whom when they
extolled, and said that he allowed of them, be ^^^^^^ded if they would stand to
their opinions in those controversies: whereat, when they began to vary and
stagger, The Emperor his self disputes with Heretics in the Counsel. The
manner of the Emperors approving the confession of the true believers. The
Bishops letters desiring the Emperor to ratify their decrees.
he willed them every one severally, to bring to him a copy of their faith in
writing, and then he would deliberate and determine among them all, which he
would accept and follow: whereupon, drawing out the copies thereof, they
presented them all before the Emperor: who having first made his prayers to
God, and afterward perusing and deliberating of their copies, he approved only
the right and true faith of the consubstantiation, ( or ioyntsubstantiation of
the son with the father) and tare all the other copies in pieces before their
faces, Socrates, lib. 5. cap. 10.

And when in the General Counsel at Constantinople, they had concluded all
their Decrees, all the whole Counsel write thus unto the Emperor: Sithence
the time of our assembly at Constantinople by your godly commandment, we
have renewed concord amongst our selves, and have prescribed certain Canons,
which we have annexed unto this our writing: we beseech therefore your
clemency, to command the decree of the Counsel to be established by the
letters of your holiness, and that ye will confirm it: and as you have
honored the Church by the letters wherewith you have called us together, so ye
would also vouchsafe to ratify the final conclusion of the decrees with your
own sentence and seal.

So that the Emperor ( yea though he were absent) had the ratification, or the
improuing of all the Synodall acts, as Theodosius the younger writes to the
first Ephesine Counsel: The Emperor rati^yeth or ^eiecteth all the acts of
the Counsel.
we allow of the condemnation of Nestorius, Cyrillus and Memnon: the other
acts and condemnations which you have made, we dissalow. Which Emperor also
sent to be his Deputy in the Counsel at Constantinople, about Eutyches
controversies, a noble man of his Court Florentius, writing thus unto them: We
will that he shall be present in your Synod, because the controversy is of
the faith: The Emperors Deputies doing in the Counsel.
which Florentius sitting with the Bishops, examined Eutyches in the points of
his faith, and pronounced also his own determination on the controversy,
saying: He which does not believe that in Christ there be two natures, does not
believe aright.

And in the cause against Dioscorus, Eusebius, Bishop of Dorolanu, writes unto
the Emperor Martian ( whose Supplication is set down in the Calcedon
Counsel, Act. 2. in these words: We beseech your clemency, that you will
command him to answer to the matters that we shall object against him,
wherein, we will prove him to be out of the Catholic faith, defendyng
Heresies full of ungodliness. Wherefore we beseech you, to direct your holy
and honorable commandment, The Empress, and the Emperor.
to the holy and universal council of the most religious Bishops, to examine
the cause betwixt us and Dioscorus, and to make relation of all things that are
done, to be judged as shall seem good to your clemency. The Emperor
requested to command the Bishop to examine the controversies, and to have them
referred to him as Judge.


Thus do the Bishops not only desire the Emperor to command the Counsel to
examine the matter, being a matter mere Ecclesiastical, and of faith, but
also, to command the Counsel to make relation of all their doings to the
Emperor, and the Emperor ( even as it should seem good to him) to be the
judge, and final determiner of the controversy. Now upon this occasion, this
Emperor Marcianus, and Valentinian, with the Empress Pulcheria, ( that also
being a maiden, had the government of the Empire, and chose Martian to be
Emperor in government of the same, with Valentinian and her, The Empress
together with the Emperor, summoneth the general Counsel.
) summoned a Counsel to be holden first at Nice: whether, when the Bishops
were assembled, but the Emperors could not come, they adiourned the same to
Calcedon, appoynting to be the Judges of the Counsel 24. noble men. And
afterward, when Martian, with Pulcheria, coming thither, were entered into the
Counsel, he prescribes both to the Bishops and to the Judges, an order how
they should proceed, which order they following, it is set down in the first
Act of this Counsel, that, The Emperors presumption of the proceeding in the
Counsel.
when the Judges and Senate had duly examined the causes, they gave sentence to
depose Dioscorus, and others, so that, this their judgment should seem good
to the Emperor, to whom they referred the whole matter.

In which Counsel, when they came to the setting down of an uniform Decree
of the christian faith, conformable to the first Nicen Counsel, The Emperor
and Empress in the Counsel* and the cause of their coming thither.
after much trouble that the Judges and the Emperors had to appease their
disorders, by appointing committies, to whose resolution, when all the Counsel
had consented, this being done, the Emperor, with Pulcheria the maiden
Empress, enters again into the Counsel, and after he had declared the cause
of his calling the Counsel, and of his personal coming into the same, to be
for none other end, than to confirm the faith, and to remove for ever
hereafter, all dissension in religion: when the public Notary of the Counsel
had humbly demanded, if it pleased him to hear the Counsels definition, the
Emperor having willed him to recite it openly, which done, asking of them if
every man consented thereunto, when with great acclamations and praises of him,
they answered, that it was the consents of them all, then he confirms the
same, and sets out a Statute thereupon. As for particular laws and orders
Eccl. that both he and diverse other Emperors, especially Justinian, made, I
refer them to the declaration of the civil and Canon Lawyers. There is
almost no Church matter, whereof the Emperors, namely Justinian, Justinian.
has not some Ecclesiastical constitution or other on the same: which
Justinian also, The Emperors dealings.
in the Counsel that he held at Constantinople, where he made the Archb.
Mennas President: Mennas concluding the Counsel, says, that none of those
things that are to be moved in the Church, ought to be done without the Princes
will and commandment.

Thus as we see that the Emperors had this authority in Eccl. matters, so,
grant this to be lawful in them, and this lawfulness stretches to all
Christian Princes in their dominions. And therefore, where our Brethren say,
the same order we read also to be observed by the christian Kings of France,
and Spain, yea, of this our Brittanie also, in governing their Eccl. state by
the advice of the Clergy of their dominion: it was the same order indeed that
was observed of these Emperors, which these Kings also did observe: and
because it was the same, therefore was it not the same that our Brethren say it
was, but a far greater authority and intermedling; and not only to allow
that, that the Clergy had determined, and to punish them that impugned those
orders, but also to deal so farre-foorth in joining with the Clergy, for the
very making of Ecclesiastical laws, as the foresaid Emperors had before
done, and for a while after did still continue: as we read of Constantine
Pogonatus, Constantinus Pogonatus.
who called together the Bishops to a general Counsel at Constantinople,
against the Monothelits, sitting as President with his Nobles in the same
Counsel, where the Deputy for the Bishop of Rome among other also agreed, The
Bishop of Romes obedience to the Emperor in the Counsel.
and acknowledged the Sea of Rome to be subject unto him, and humbly besought
the Emperor, to command those that took part with the Bishop of
Constantinople, to show from whence they received their new speeches, and
erroneous opinions: whereupon, the Emperor commands Macarius, Bishop of
Antioch, to answer, and in the next Session, he reasons himself with
Macarius: and in the third action, when the Bishop of Romes Legate, being there
but a party plaintise, had espied forgerie in the Synodall books that were
read, of the fifth general Counsel: the Judges (though lay men) examined and
found out the same by the Emperors commandment: and when the Bishop of
Constantinople besought the Emperor, The Bishop of Romes obedience to the
Emperor.
that the letters of Agatho Bishop of Rome might also be read, the Emperor
granted thereunto. In which letters, the Bishop of Rome shows his obedience
to the Emperor, for the effectual accomplishing of his precepts, in sending
of meet persons to that Counsel, excusing himself, The Bishop of Romes
confession that the Emperor is Christ's Vicar in carth, etc.
that he could do it no sooner, by reason of the great circuit of his Province:
protesting withal, that he sends his Legates, even for the dutiful
obedience that he owes to the Emperor. And after the confession of his faith
in the controversy, he acknowledges the Emperor to occupy here in earth
the place and zeal of Jesus Christ, and that he ought to give the right
judgment for the Eua^gelical and Apostolical truth.

Now after the Emperor had thus sitten his self in the examining and
discussing of diverse actions and sessions in that Counsel, (as at large in the
discourse thereof appears) and after his departure, his deputes, in the end
when all was done, and Macarius deposed, and the chosing of another Archbishop
in his place referred to the Emperors pleasure, and that the whole Synod
offered up to the Emperor their definition of the controversy, subscribed
with all their hands, The Emperor confirms the Counsels definition, with his
total assent.
and be seeching him to examine and confirm the same: the Emperor having
perused it, and demanding whether it were their uniform consent, upon their
confessions thereof, the Emperor answers: we have read this definition, and
we also do give our consent thereto. And even as much as all this comes to,
we read of the christian Kings both of France, and Spain, The french Kings
government of the Ecclesiastical state.
and of this our Britany also, in governing their Eccl. state, which are the
three kingdoms that our Brethren here specify. Clodoueus even the first
Christian King of France in the Counsel that he called and held at Aurelia,
when he had propounded matters for the Counsel to consult and determine upon,
Clodoueus in the Counsel at Orleance. Guntranus in the Counsel of Matiscone.
they obeying the Kings commandment, refer again their conclusions to the
Kings judgment. And this authority does Gunthranus the French King declare,
in his Edict set forth in the Counsel of Matiscone, concerning the Princes
office, in causing his people to be trained up in true Religion, and godly
discipline, protesting, this charge is of God committed unto him: wherein also
he declares unto the Bishops their office, and concludes, that it was he,
which caused the Decrees to be made, that were determined upon in that
Counsel, touching discipline and ceremonies to be defined, he confirming the
same by his Edict thereon.

Charlemaine likewise (as Nauclerus shows) in a Counsel that he called,
sitting with many of his Nobles in the Counsel, not only says, he called the
same, that they should give him good advice, how the law of God, and the
Churches Religion should be restored: but he declares also, what ordinances he
together with them had made to thateffect. We did ( says he) ordeyne Bishops
throughout the Cities, The King had the appointing of the Bishops.
by the counsel of the Priests, and of my Noblemen, and we did constitute
Bonifacius to be the Archb. over them. We have also decreed a Synod to be
called together every year, that the Decrees of the Canons, and laws of the
Church, may in our presence be reformed, etc. We have degraded the false
Priests, Deacons and Clearks, being adulterers, The Kings decree for annual
Synodes.
and fornicators, and have driven them to penance. We have utterly forbidden
all manner of hunting and hawking to the Clergy. We also decree, that every
Priest dwelling in the Diocese, be subject unto his own Bishop, and that
always in Lent he make an account, The Kings within the Churches discipline.
and show to the Bishop the manner and order of his ministry, etc.

In like manner, Charles the great calling a Synod at Arles, when they had
decreed all their matters, The french kings dealings.
they decree this withal, that all their doings should be presented to Charles
the great, that where any defects are in their Decrees, The Counsel refer all
their Decrees to the amending of the Prince.
he would supply the same by his wisdom, and if any thing be otherwise than
well, that he would amend it by hi^ judgment, and that which is well, he would
ratify and assist it by his authority. Where they say in the 45. Canon, that
for the amending of all those abuses which the Counsel found to be in Eccl.
matters, the kings mind must be known.

The like they do at the Counsel which he called at Cabellinum, especially in
the Counsel that he held at Mentz, where the Counsel craves his aid and
confirmation of such Articles as they had agreed upon, so that he judge them
worthy to be confirmed, beseeching him to cause that to be amended, that is
found to be worthy of amendment. Which Counsel also gives God thanks, that he
had given unto his Church a Governor, godly and devout in his service, who in
his time opening the fountain of godly wisdom, does continually feed the
sheep of Christ with holy food, The Edict of Charles the great, to the
Bishops and Pastors of Churches.
and instructs them with divine knowledge, etc.

And in his Edicts, set out not only to the Layty, but to the Clergy, he
writes thus: Charles by the grace of God, King and Governor of the Kingdom
of France, etc. Wherefore I thought good to move you, O ye Pastors of
Christ's Churches, ye leaders of his flock, and clear lights of the world,
that ye would travail with vigilant care, and diligent admonition to guide
Gods people, The Kings commissioners joined with the Bishops for the Churches
discipline.
through the Pastures of eternal life, etc. Therefore they are with earnest
zeal to be admonished and exhorted yea, to be compelled to keep themselves in
a sure faith and reasonable continuance, within and under the rules of the
Fathers. In the which work and travel, wit ye right well, that our industry
shall work^ with you. For the which cause, we have also addressed unto you our
messengers, The King taking upon him the correction of Eccl. ma^ters, is no
presumption.
which by our authority, shall with you amend and correct those things that
are to be amended: and therefore, we have also added such Canonical
constitutions, as to us were thought to be most necessary. Let none judge this
to be presumption, that we take upon us to amend that which is amiss, to cut
off that which is superfluous. For we read in the books of the Kings, how the
holy King Josias traveled, in going about the circuits of his Kingdom,
correcting and admonishing his people, The Christian Kings ought to follow the
examples of the good Kings in the old Testament.
to reduce the whole Kingdom unto the true religion and service of God. I
speak not this, to make my self equal to him in holiness, but because we
ought always to follow the examples of the holy Kings, and so much as we can,
we are bound of necessity, to bring the people to follow a virtuous life, to
the praise and glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And so he enters into his rules and exhortatio^s to the B. and Priests, how
they should guide their Diocesses and Churches both by reading and preaching,
and the Bishops to send forth the Priests to preach. It belongs ( says he)
unto your office, O ye Pastors and guides of Gods churches to send forth
through out your Dioceses Priests to preach unto the people, and to see that
they preach rightly and honestly, The princes charge for preaching.
that ye do not suffer new things that are not canonical, but forged of their
own mind, and not according to the holy scriptures to be preached unto the
people, yea you your own selves preach the things that are true and honest, and
that lead unto everlasting life. And instruct ye other that they do the same,
etc.

Yea Alcuinus in his preface of his treatise on the trinity, which he being
his Chaplain dedicated unto this French king, Alcuinus in praefas. lib. de
Trinitate.
being then also made Emperor, makes the Prince to have so far authority
above all other civil persons in Ecclesiast. matters, that he calls him also
a Preacher, and says, that he has, as it were a priestly office in these
things. And least ( says he) I should seem not to help and further your
preaching of the faith, I have directed and dedicated unto you this book,
thinking no gift so convenient and worthy to be presented unto you: Of the
princes preaching and priestly power.
seeing that all know this most plainly that the Prince of the people ought
of necessity to know all things, and to preach the things that please God.
Neither does it pertain to any man to know better or mo things than it does to
an Emperor, whose doctrine ought to profit all the subjects etc. All the
faithful have great cause to rejoice of your godliness, seeing that you have a
Priestly power, (as it is meet so to be) in the preaching of Gods word, a
perfect knowledge in the Catholic faith, and a most holy devotion to men's
salvation.

This authority and interest even in the chiefest Eccl. matters does that
famous Alcuinus a countriman of our own, Ludonicus pius his authority and
dealing in Eccl. matters.
acknowledge unto the Christian Prince. And the like does this Emperors son
Jews take upon him, and it was yielded unto him, both in the Council that he
called at Aquisgraue in Germany, and afterward in Italy at Ticinum: where he
giving in charge to the Bishops and Council, to consult among other matters
concerning the conversation of the Bishops, the Priests, and other Eccl.
persons, of their doctrine and preaching to the people, of writing out of
books, etc. He concludes, I am very much desirous to know and covet to
reform them according to Gods will, and your holy advise, in such sort that
neither I be found reproueable in the sight of God, neither you nor the
people incur the wrathful indignation of God for these things. How this may
be searched, found out and brought to perfection, that I commit to be treated
on by you, Ludouicus charge to the Bishop.
and so to be declared unto me. The lesser matters, which in general touch
all, but that touch some in special, and need reformation, I will that ye
make inquiry also of them, The kings of spaynes dealinges.
and make relation thereof unto me.

Whereby we see, that these Prince^ had the chief authority in those
Councelles, and both made Ecclesiastical laws them selves with the Bishops
advise and counsel, The examples of the Christian Princes authority in the
kings of Spain.
and also all the Bishops decrees and determinations depended on the Princes
ratifying. This then was the order, and not that only which our Brethren here
say, we read to be observed by the Christian Kings of France.

And even as much do we read to be observed by the Christian kings of Spain:
by whose authority* the first, second and third Council at Brachara were
called and many points for doctrine and discipline disposed. After whom
Richaredus commanded a Council to be assembled and holden at Toledo,
Richaredus in the Counsel at Toledo.
where the king sitting among the Bishops, de^lareth unto them how he called
them together that he might by the common consultation in the Synod repair
and make a new form of Eccl. discipline which had bin long time hindered by
Arianisme The which impediment ( says he) it has pleased God to put away by
my means, whereupon he exhorts them to give God thanks for his so doing,
and admonishes them before they enter into the consultation, to fast and pray
to God, that he would vouchsafe to open unto them a true order of discipline.
And so after a three days fast appointed unto them, the Synod beginning to
enter into consultation, the king comes in with his Queen and nobles, and
sits amongst them, and causes the confession of his faith, which he had
written and subscribed with his and the Queens hands, to be publicly read
before them, containing withal, his care and industry in these matters. For
the which doing the Council reacknowledgeth the king to deserve the reward of
an Apostle, because he had performed the office of an Apostle.

And when all the nobility had given up also their confessions in writing and
subscribed openly unto the^, The kings performing the office of an Apostle.
then the king commanded the Synod to go in hand with the repayring and
establishing some form of eccl. discipline, saying, that the care of a king
ought to stretch forth it self, and not to cease till he have brought the
subjects to a full knowledge and perfect age in Christ. The care, charge, and
auth. of the Prince for discipline.
And as a king ought to bend al his power and authority, to repress the
insolency of the evil, and to nourish the common peace and tranquillity:
even so ought he much more to study, to labor, and be careful, not only to
bring his subjects from errors and false religion* but also to see the^
instructed, The kings decree for the peoples confession of their faith at the
communion.
taught and trained up in the truth of the clear light. And hereupon by this
his authority, he makes a decree, and commands the Bishops to see it put in
execution, that every time at the receiving of the communion, all the people
together, do distinctly with a loud voice recite the Nicene creed. Which
being done, and that the Synod had co^sulted about the orders of their
discipline, and exhibited the same unto the king: he considering the same,
ratifieth and confirms al their doings. The Spanish kings dealings.
And first he himself, and after him all the Synod, subscribeth to those
orders.

The like we read in the Council of diverse kings of Spain afterward.
Sisenandus, that called the fourth Council of Toledo. The doings of diverse
kings of Spain in Councels and eccl. matters
Chintillanus, that called the 5. and 6. Chinaswindus, that called the seventh,
Reccessinuthus, that called the 8.9. and 10. Councels at Toledo. Bamba, that
called the 12. and 13. Egita, that called the 14.15. and 16. all which kings
of Spain, as they summoned the Councelles their selves, and commanded the
Bishops to assemble, so they sat in the Councels with them, and when the
Councels had consulted and agreed upon any Ecclesiastical matters, they offered
the same to the Prince to be ratified and confirmed. This authority had the
Christian kings of Spain, not only in governing of all ye eccl. persons, but
in making together with the Bishops* and in ratifying and confirming all their
Synodall decrees and constitutions of Eccl. matters.

And no less authority had the kings of this our Britannie also in governing
their Eccl. state, by the advice of the Clergy of their dominion. The
authority and dealings of the ancient kings in this our Britannie.
For proof whereof, we have seen the Bishop. of Romes own letter to king
Lucius, that is reputed to be the first Christian king of Brytannie. Who when
he wrote to Eleutherius then Bishop of Rome, to have the Roman and the
Imperial laws to use them in his kingdom: the Bishop returns him this
answer, (as we have seen:) those laws we may disprooue, but not the laws
of God. Eleutherius acknowlegment of the kings authority in this Realm.
You have received lately (through the goodness of God in your kingdom, the
faith and law of Christ. You have there in your kingdom both the testamentes:
out of them, (by Gods grace and the advice of your Realm) take a Iawe, and
thereby patiently govern your kingdom. You are in your kingdom the Vicare of
God, etc. In which words he plai^ely confesses, that the Christian kings
authority stretches even to the very making and ordeyning of Ecclesiast.
laws with the advice of the Realm, and so withal of the Clergy.

And that thi^ supreme authority of the king was so practiced in this land,
not only by Lucius, but also by the Christian kings that succeeded him: while
the Britains had the kingdom, which rather were not full kings, but under
the sovereignty of the Roman Emperors which being at that time the most of
them Paganes: the Princes in Brytannie had the less authority, whereby
there grew many corruptions, especially the Heresy of Pelagianisme in this
realm, till the Brytaynes were expulsed by the Saxons. And therefore, what
with the oft^n wars, either with the Romans, or with the Pictes, or with
the Saxons: little or no certain record remains, of any Councelles helden,
or of any Ecclesiastical Laws made, in the times of those british Princes.
The Saxon kings dealinges and laws*
Except we shall account Constantine the great as one of them, being the son
of Constantius Chlorus, by the most noble and Christian Queen Helena, who
being excellently learned in the tongues, wrote diverse treatises of Religion
and Ecclesiastical matters, of the providence of God, of the immortality of
the soul, of the rule of godly life, etc. As Bale reports of this Queen, of
whose husband and son we have heard sufficiently before.

But to come to the Saxon kings after they had received the faith of Christ (
for perhaps our Brethren also comprehend them in the name of the Christian
Kings of this our Brytanie:) William Lambert has much helped us, in gathering
and translating, though rather to the sense than to the words, The laws of
the Saxon kings in eccl. matters
the ancient laws of those kings, whereby we also may gather, what great
authority they had in these matters, who beginning with the Laws of King
Inas, sets them down in these words:

I Inas by the benefit of God King of the West Saxons, through the persuasion
and institution of Cenrede my father, The laws of king Inas
of Lyedda and Erknwalde my Bishops, and of all mine Aldermen, (or Senators)
and of the most ancient wise men of my people, in the great assembly of the
servants of God; I studied both for the salvation of our souls, and for the
conservation of our kingdom, that lawefull contractes of matrimony, and that
right judgments might be founded and established throughout all our dominion:
and that hereafter it be not lawful to any Senator, or to any other inhabiting
our dominion, to break these our judgments.

This preface being made, by all their advice and consentes, but (as is
aforesaid) by his authority: he sets down his Laws in Chapters, both for
Ecclesiastical and civil matters. And first he begins with
Ecclesiastical, of the form how the ministers of God should live.

First of all, we command that the Ministers of GOD do care for, Cap. 1. of
the ministers lives.
and keep the appointed form of living. And afterward we will that among
all our people the laws and judgments be thus holden.

An infant shall be baptized within 30. days after it is come forth into the
world. Cap. 2. of Infantes.
Which thing if it be not done; the default shall be punished with the paying of
30. s. but and if it die before it be baptized, he shall forfaite all his goods.

Cap. 3. of working on sunday.
If a bondseruant be put to any servile work on the Lords day, his Master
shall make him free, and his Master shall pay thirty shillings, but if he
did that work without the commandment of his Master, the servant shall be
beaten with stripes, or at least let him redeem with a price of money, the
fear of his beating. The laws of the Saxo^ Kings.


If a free man labor on this day, without his Masters commandment: let him
either be made a bond man, or pay 60. shillings: if a Priest offend in
this, behalf the penalty shall be augmented double.

The first fruits of the seeds shall be paid at Saint Martyns tide. Chap. 4.
of the first frut^ of the seeds
He that then shall not have paid them shall be fined 40. shillings, and
besides pay 12. times as much as the fruits come to.

If any man guilty of death, shall flee to the Church, he shall enjoy his life,
and make recompense according to right and law. Chap. 5. of the Churche^
liberty.
If any man have deserved beating, and flee to the Church, the beating shall
be forgiven him.

These ar^ all the Eccl. laws of Inas, which are there set down, saving
that in the next law after the Penalty of fighting in the Kings Court, he
adioyneth also the forfeite of 120. shillinges for fighting in the Church, and
in the 11. law, the forfaite of as much to him that brings in false witness
before a Bishop. His other laws are mere civil and politic. But by these we
see his supreme authority even to the making the decree it self, of the
Ecclesi. laws so well as of the temporal. As for the last decree, of killing
ones gossippe, or of the Kings godsonne, or of the son of a Bishop ( for
Bishops and all the Clergy might then marry) are mere temporal.

The next laws that Lambert translateth, The laws of Aluredus in eccl.
matters.
are of that excellent Prince Aluredus. Where first he sets down, the ten
commandments of Almighty given by Moses, Exodus 20. and from thence
proceeds to the most of the laws mentioned in the 21.22. and some in the 23.
chapters of Exodus which done, he says:

These are the laws that Almighty GOD himself delivered to Moses to be
kept. As for the only begotten son of God our salvation Jesus Christ, when
he came into the world, he openly declared that he came not to violate the
law given, but with all meekness and goodness to fulfill it. For he
delivered the discipline of true godliness. After whom, when he was
crucified, his Disciples (while they were as yet together, nor were severed a
sunder to preach the Gospel) joined unto Christ many Nations, and sent their
legates and Interpreters of the will of God to Antiochia, Syria, and Cilicia,
which were converted unto Christ from the bondage of the Gentiles.

The Apostles, and the Elders, Brethren, send greeting unto you. Act. 15.
For as much as we have heard that certain men which departed from us, have
troubled you with words, and when as they would declare unto you certain
things whereof they had no commandment from us, they have rather weaken^d
your minds with error, Aluredes laws.
than instructed then with sound and entire doctrine ^ it was thought good
unto us being gathered together, to send unto you chosen men, Barnabas and
Paul, which have adventured their life for Christ, together with whom we
have sent Judas and Sylas, who shall also by words declare the same things
unto you. For it seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you
nothing more of necessary burden, than this; that ye must abstain from those
things that are offered to Idols, and from blood and from that that is
strangled, and from fornication. And that which ye would not have to be done
unto you, ye should not do the same to others.

Out of this one precept it evidently appears, that right must be rendered
to every body: for there needs no other judicial book, save only this:
whosoever sits being a Judge upon other, that he would not pronounce any
other sentence upon others, than he would have to be given upon him self.
But where as, when the Gospel of GOD was spread abroad, many Nations, yea,
and that the Englishmen, adjoined their faith unto the word of God; many
assemblyes were made through-out the world, and also in England, there were
holden meetinges together of the Bishops and of other most notable wise men:
The imposing of pecuniarie mulctes.
and these men being informed of the mercy of God, did at the first impose
upon every offender a punishment of money, and gave unto the Magistrates the
office of taking the same, without all provocation of offending GOD, having
given them pardon before; save only upon a Traitor and forsaker of his Lord,
they thought not this (being a milder penalty) to be inflicted: which manner
of man they thought good, that he should not be spared at all, Why a
traitors punishment should be capital.
both because God would have the dispisers of himself to be unworthy of
all mercy; and also, for that Christ forgave not them that were betrayers of
him to death, but he decreed that the Lord should be worshipped before
other. These men therefore in many of their assemblies, appointed punishments
of every one of the offenses, and committed them to the monumentes of writing.

These sanctions I Alured the king, have gathered together into one, and have
put them in writing; King Aluredes own writing of his sanctions.
a great part of which, our ancestors kept religously, and mee-thinketh that
many of them are worthy, to be in this age kept of us, with like
righteousness. Notwithstanding some of them, which seemed to be less
profitable unto us, I have by the consultation of wise men provided, partly
that they should be abrogated, The kings abrogating unprofitable
constitutions.
and partly innouated. And because it might be thought rashness, for any man
to record in the monumentes of writing, many of his own decrees: and also it
might be uncertain what credit they should have with the posterity, which
thing we do highly esteem: The laws of Edw. the Senior.
whatsoever things I have found worthy to be observed in the acts of my
countryman Inas, of Offa king of the Mercians, or of Ethelbert which was the
first king of the English men that was baptized, I have collected them all.
King Alureds collection of the former kings laws
The other I have utterly omitted. And also in the discerning of these acts, I
Aluled king of the west Saxons, have used the Counsel of the most prudent of
our men, and they all liked the observation of the same to be set forth.

Thus writes Alured of his doing, both concerning his own decrees, and the
decrees of all those kings his ancestors in these matters which were not
only civil, and politic, but also Ecclesiastical, In all which though he
used the counsel and advise of the Clergy, The auth. of the other kings here
mentioned.
and of other learned and wise men; yet, as he did the action himself, so he
did it by his own supreme authority, and reckoning up all these other kings
decrees also, it argues that they in their times and dominions, had the like
authority in eccl. matters.

The Eccl. laws of Alurede, are the second, and the fifth; The eccl. laws
that Aluredus set forth.
of the privileges of Churches, the 6. of robbing Church goods, the 8. of
violating Nuns. the 16. of teaching them in dissolute manner, the 21. of
Priests that kill any man, the 29. of them that enter into religion being
indebted, the 39. of the festival and solemn days.

After this Alurede, his son Edward surnamed the elder, joining with
Guthrune the Dane, king of the east Angles, The laws in eccl. mat. of Edward
the elder, and of Athelstan king of the east Angles.
( who changing his name at his baptism was called Athelstane) do set
forth diverse Ecclesiastical Laws, which the same Guthrune and Allfred had
before made, but belike, not till then set forth, which laws were these.

Before all things they enact, that one God only should be honorably and
holily worshipped, The Princes penal laws joined to the eccl.
dispising and renouncing all the barbarous worship. And then (because they
certainly knew, that many would not be kept in the bounds of their duty,
nor obey the Eccl. discipline without them) they provided humane laws to be
written out, and they set forth the laws pertaining to Christ, in common
together with the laws pertaining to the king that by these the rashness of
them might be restrained, that would not obey the commandments of the Bishop.
This therefore did they first decree:

That the peace of the Church within her walls, and that the tranquillity

And so they proceed against them that forsake the Christian faith.

Against eccl. persons that rob the Churches: that fight, or periure And
against incest.

K. Ethel. staneslawes
If any being condemned, desire to confess himself to the Priest,

called the Peter pence; for the Church lights: for the plowe alms: ( or as I
take it alms given by the rate of their plow land) and if any Dane denied or
suppressed the divine rightes or duties.

8. and 9.
and against witches.



Next of these are the laws of Ethelstane.

The laws of Ethelstan in eccl. matters.
I Ethelstane the king, by the prudent Counsel of the Archbishop Vlfhelme, and
of other my Bishops, do very straightly charge and command, all the
Governors that are in my dominion, by the holy divine powers of God, and of
all the Saints, and for my love, that I bear to them, that before all other
things they pay the just and due tenthes (or tithes) of that that is mine
own in proper, The kings, B. Nobles, and all the subjects to pay their just
tithes.
as well of living beasts, as of the yearly profits coming of the earth,
which thing besides me, every one of my Bishops, Senators, and Governors
shall do, etc.

After Athelstane follows Edmunde.

The laws of Edmund in eccl. matters.
In the solemn feast of Easter, king Edmunde did celebrate at London a great
assembly, as well of the Ecclesiastical persons, as of the Lay, in the which
were present Oda, and the Archbishop Wolstane and many other Bishops, to
consult about the health of their souls,

The Clergies chaste life, which chastity was showed before that it debarred
not in B and Pastors matrimony.
First, they that have entered into holy orders, and of whom the people of God
ought to require the example of virtue to follow the same, they shall lead
their life chastely (as the reason of their order shall suffer) be they men or
women; which thing if they shall not do, they shall be punished according to
the rules of their orders, that is to wit, they shall forfeit all their
earthly possessions, so long as they live, and being dead they shall not be
buried with holy burial, except that they amended their manners.

Tithes, first fruts, alms.
and the money that is due for the plowe alms. He that

Reparations of churches.
Every Bishop at his own charges shall repair the house of God, and may
admonish the king, that the other Churches may be decently adorned,

Perjury and idolatry.
Whosoever forswere themselves, or make any barbarous sacrifices, except they
repent and amend their mind the sooner, they shall for ever be debarred of all
the divine services. I Edmund the King, to all that are in my Dominion and
power, young and old, do clearly signify, that I have earnestly inquired of
the most skillful of my kingdom in the assembly as well of the Ecclesiastical
as lay persons, by what means Christendom might be most advanced, and it
seemed best unto us all, that we should nourish love and mutual good will
amongst us through out all our Dominions, for we are all weary of these
continual fightinges. And therefore, we ordeyne in this manner. And so he
proceeds to Laws for these matters.

After this, follow the Laws of Edgar.

The Laws which Edgar the King, decreed in the great Senate, God to love and
himself to preserve and to benefit all his Lordship (or Dominion). And so
he also proceeds to the making of Laws Eccl. The laws of Edgar in Eccl.
^atters.
Of the rightes, immunities, and tithes of the Church. Of the manner of their
tything, to them that have a place of burial in the Church. Of the times when
the tithes of all sorts are due to paid of the Penie to Rome out of every
house. Of the Feast days and fastings. And then he comes to human and
politic Laws.

Thus did all these Saxon Kings, with the advice of their Bishops and Clergy,
make as well Ecclesiastical Laws, as temporal with the advice of the Lords
and other their officers temporal. And this they did their selves and by their
own authority, and not only allowed of that which the Bishops and Clergy
before had decreed. All which I allege not, to allow of all those their
Ecclesiastical decrees: for many of the things* (especially in the Kings
following, How farr^ these decree^ are, and are not allowable.
) were full of superstition and error, as (by Gods permission) the blindness
of the time then was: but I note them only for the point in question, of the
Princes authority, not only in making Civil Laws for Ecclesiastical
matters, but in making Laws of Ecclesiastical matters, and so, in making
Ecclesiastical Laws themselves.

And thus it continued here in England till the Danes got the Kingdom.
Neither did Canutus the Dane take upon him any whit less the dealing in
Ecclesiastical matters, than the Saxon Kings had done, but rather shows it
more lively than all the other, as appears in the collection of his Laws, as
well Ecclesiastical as temporal

The decree that Canutus King of the English men, of the Danes, and of the
Norwayes, to the love of God, to his own ornament, Canutu^ his Laws of Eccl
m^t^ers.
and to the profit of his people, enacted at Winchester, on the feast of Mid
wintertide, (or the nativity of Christ.)

First, that all men shall through out all ages honorably and above all other
things worship one God. And hold religiously the only Christian religion,
and love the king Canutus with all fidelity and obseruaunce.

The peace and honor of God, and next after the Princes.
the kings peace ought to be kept. It behooves therefore that the peace of
the Church of God, within the walls thereof, and the tranquillity delivered by
the hand of the Christian king* be ever cheefely kept firm and inuiolated.
If any therefore shall violate any of these two, (Gods Churches and the kings
peace) forfetting his Lands, he shall be put to death, except the king shall
pardon his offense. etc.

And if the Churches peace be broken without manslaughter,

The Churches orders and digni^ies to be maintained.
the orders, and the places consecrated unto God, and to give to every order
his own dignity. For let every one know, (at least he that will or may
know) that it is a matter of great weight and moment, which the Preeste must
do ^or the health of the people, if so be he shall study to please GOD
aright.

Great is the sanctifying, and more is the sanctifying (or consecrating) with
the which in consecratinge baptism and the Sacrament of thanksgiving the
Devil is driven away. Yea, the Angels keep the holy mysteries, and
depending on the Divine providence assist the priest, so often as he serves
God aright.

Which thing they do at all times when as the preeste does humbly from his
heart beseech Christ, and beg of him those things that are necessary for
the peoples life: these men therefore for the fear of God, for the dignity of
their order, are to be discerned from other men.

If therefore any man shall accuse of any crime a Preeste, living Canutus
Laws for the purgatio^ of a preeste ^ccused.
let him say Mass if he dare, and with his once receiving of the sacrament of
thanksgiving, he alone shall dash all the slander.

But if he shall be accused by three, then receiving the Communion, if so be
he dare, and taking with him two other of his own order, The Laws of Canutus
he shall wipe away the suspicion of the supposed crime.

If any man shall accuse with some special sclaunder of crime a Deacon living
after some certain form of ^eligion: Apurgation of a Deaco^ sclaundered
the Deacon shall purge himself of the crime, by taking two other with him of
his own order.

But if he have been accused thrice, he shall purge him self with six other
men of his own order. etc.

We also do bid (or pray) and do teach all the Ministers of GOD, and
especially the priests, Canu^^^ Laws for degrees of mari^ge.
that they obey GOD and love cleanness and avoid the wrath of GOD and flee
from the lake of Hell fire. etc.

Moreover we teach, and we pray, and in Gods name we command,

Let every man pay unto God yearly his rightes and his just duties

And in this order he proceeds to a great number of other Ecclesiastical
matter^, (mingling (as in these) a great deal I grant of foul chafe, but
good and badde, one with another, all show his authority in Ecclesiastical
matters. But when he comes to the nineteenth, and so forward, because the
Laws are of better matters, I will crave the readers patience further, in
setting them down also.

And let every Christian man do all those things, that are profitable to his
salvation. Let him apply himself with all his thought and care, to the
Christian faith and Religion: and whosoever will conceive in his soul and
mind those things that are n^^essarie for his salvation (as indeed it ought
to be the desire of all men) let him prepare his mind to receive the
Sacrament of thanksgiving at least thrice a year.

Receiving the Communion thrice a year
And if he will hope to find favor, let him well bestow all his words and
deeds, and dispose them orderly: let him keep his oath and faith given most
religiously. And let every man to the uttermost of his ability, drive away
from the bounds of our Dominion, all unrighteousness, and hereafter earnestly
follow the righteousness of God both in words and deeds, and so at the length
we shall all bountifully obtain the mercy of God.

Faith and life
Let us always be of a firm and faithful mind to God. Let us uphold his
honor with all our forces and abilities, and obey his will. For what soever
we shall do toward the Lord, (being moved with that faythfulnesse that
is joined with virtue and our office) that shall be to our great advantage. For
in this thing God the chief ruler and Lord of all, will be exceeding
faithful unto us, it stands us therefore cheefely upon, that they which are
Lords behave themselves rightly to their vassailes. Duties of Lords to t^eir
vass^iles.
And we earnestly admonish all Christian men, that inwardly withal their
heart they love God, that religiously they hold the right Christian faith, and
that gladly they obey their Divine Doctors, that most diligently they search
the Laws and Doctrine of God, Obedience to the Teachers.
and that they search for it often and much for their own commodity.

And we admonish that every Christian man do so thoroughly learn, Charge to
every christian to learn ^he L. prayer and the articles of their belief.
that at the least he do well know the right Faith, and can say the Lords
Prayer, and the Articles of his belief. For by the one all Christian men do
call upon God, and by the other, they profess a right faith.

Christ himself did first set forth the Lords prayer, and taught the same
unto his Disciples. Which divine prayer consists of seven petitions, the
which whosoever shall utter not faynedlie, but from his heart, None that has
not learned these things to be admitt^d to the Communion, etc.
he conferreth with God himself of all things that are necessary, either
for the life present or to come.

But by what means can any man heartily pray unto God, except he have
inwardly to GOD a right Faith? And verily he that will not learn these
things, neither shall have his part of rest with the Christians after his
death, neither shall here alive be admitted to receive the Communion, neither
shall he be counted worthy to bear the name of a Christian man, neither
shall he undertake for any other at the Font nor at the Bishops hand, except
he learn these things, and shall know them well.

We also admonish them, that each one of them studiously avoid deadly crimes
and wicked deeds. And if peradventure they have Auoidance of grievous crimes
and repentance
that by instruction of the preeste they amend it.

Moreover we admonish every one to flee filthy whoredom, and the unlawful
use of the flesh, and violating of the covenant of wedlock To flee whoredom.


Moreover we teach, them, that the fear of God be always thoroughly The fear
of Gods judgments.
that day and night they fear the punishments due to wicked deeds, and dread
the day of judgment, and abhor hell. And suppose even their ending day
approaches.

As for the Bishops they shall be the Bedels of God and the interpreters The
duty of B. and Pastors
and they must openly teach the benefits of divine matters, and to set forth
themselves to be examples of living for others to follow, whosoever will
give ear to them. For he is but an evil keeper, which with his voice at
least, if he can do no more, shall not defend the flock committed unto him
against him that comes to spoil it.

But none is so evil as the Devil himself, which always labors in this
one point, how he may most destroy men's souls. Wherefore it behooves the
pastors to be watchful and to give warning, that by their aduertisementes,
the people may have knowledge thereof. The pastors we call the Bishops, and
the priests, whose parts are with erudition and Doctrine, to watch and
defend the Lords flock, that the furious and wild Wolf do not forthwith
tear nor byte the flock of God. And if there be any that will not listen
unto the commandments of God, he has to reckon for that with God himself.
The name of God for ever be glorified, and love him, and praise him, and honor
him through out all worlds.

Thus did this Dane King here in England even at that blind time take upon
him (as it were, like a Bishop or preacher himself) to set forth these Laws
and decrees of Ecclesiastical matters. The king t^acheth all estates, Eccl.
and lay.
After which he proceeds to those that he calls his worldly laws. And
yet even among them also, he inserteth some Ecclesiastical laws: as the
3.5.36.37.38.39.40.44.46. Besides causes of Matrimony and fornication. And in
the end of all his Laws of both sorts, Ecclesiastical and temporal: he
concludes all with a religious and diuinlike charge, commanding most
straightly in Gods name all his subjects, to convert them selves whole to God,
and to ^eare their pastors, and the pastors to teach and preach the word of
God unto his people.

The Clergies advise to the K.
This authority and intermedling in the making of Ecclesiastical Laws, both
as well for the Clergy as for the temporaltie, had the Kings in this land
before the conquest. This auth. of Princes confuteth our Br. restraint thereof.
What they have had since, diverse other have set forth more largely, and I
crave pardon that I have been so large in the collecting and setting down of
these. But I have done it to this end, that we might more fully perceive this
point, that the Princes did not only make civil Laws for Ecclesiastical
causes, or for matters that by the Clergy only were decreed, that they should
be observed in their Dominions, and appointed bodily or pecuniarie punishments
for offending the same, of which sort I grant many of these Laws are, that we
have collected: but also that they themselves with the advice of their Clergy
made Eccl. Laws, The Princes doing all by the Clergies advise, debarreth not
their supreme authority.
and that mere Ecclesiastical, or altogether pertaining to Church persons, or
to Church matters, yea, to matters of religion and Doctrine. Neither diminished
it their authority any whit, that they did none of all these things without
the advice and determination of their Clergy: for always the Clergy so
conditionally determined the same before, if it were a matter but of order or
ceremony, and not of Doctrine ( which is inflexible, neither depends upon
man, either of the Prince, or of them) that the supreme authority lay still in
the Prince, so to conclude the final determination, that the Princes sentence
do knit up all the matter, and made that order or ceremony, to have the life
or force of a decree, Law, or constitution among them. And other supreme
authority than this, Her Maiest^es supremacy.
with the consultation, deliberating, aduising and determining, what
Ecclesiastical matter of order or ceremony her Learned Clergy think most
meet for ^ur time and state, to be most agreeable to order, comeliness, and
aedification, to give her royal assent to the confirmation and establishment
of the same, that it may have the full force and nature of a decree, Law, or
constitution Ecclesiastical: her Majesty otherwise never took upon her, nor
claymeth, or desires to have, nor the Statute gives, nor we acknoweledge.

And if our Brethren would grant thus much (as I hope upon better aduisement
they will not deny it) we should need no controversy in this matter, and all
these examples that we are now driven to bring forth to satisfy them, we
and they shall more cheerfully turn against the Papists, that are the
professed enemies of her Majesty, and of our Brethren, and of us.

But it will perhaps be said, that for Princes to subscribe to the
determination of Priests (as they call them) is no supremacy, but a
subjection. The learned disc. pa. 142.


We answer, it is no subjection unto men, but to God, and his word, to do
nothing in these matters, but by the faithful advise of them, that know his
will, and are bound to teach it unto all men: no more than it is, to be
counted a subjection, for a Prince in Civil affairs, to follow the advice of
wise and faithful Counselors.

We have showed before in the examples of diverse Emperors and Kings, how
Princes subscribed to their clergies determinations: Bridges
in such sort, as they being humbly requested thereunto, had in ceremonial
matters their free choice, and might have dashed all, or in subscribing
thereto, they ratified the same and made it authentical.

But if Princes were so to subscribe to the determination of Priests, ^s we
may well without error or superstition call them, that the Princes their
selves had no kind of determination in any Ecclesiastical causes, neither
above the priests, nor yet at all with them: then indeed it were no
supremacy, but a subjection. And what else do our Brethren here give to
Princes? neither do they here deny, but in plain words confess, that it is
a subjection, and so, not a supremacy: save that, they color it over with
this fair shadow.

We answer, it is no subjection unto men, but unto God.

And what else do the very popish priests answer, when they tak^ from the
prince his authority, and bring him in subjection to their pope, and to the^
selves, but that this subjection, is a subjection not unto the^, as unto men,
but to God, and to his word, and to his Church? And so under the reverend
names of God, and of his word and Church, they greatly abuse those Princes
that think their sayings to be true, and make them thrall to their
subjection, and to that which they pretend to be Gods word, and to them that
call themselves the Church men, as our Br. also have distributed the name of
Eceles. or Church persons only among their tetrarkes.

As for the faithful advise of those that know Gods will, and are bound to
teach it unto all men: We deny not, but that the Prince is again bound, to
ask faithful advice in matters of such importance as the making of Laws.
And of whom should he rather ask it, than of those that best know, or
should know Gods will, and have most experience in Ecclesiastical matters,
which is their proper profession, and should teach the same unto all men: but
this is no rebatement to that right of the princes supreme authority, by which
the matter so advised upon, should be enacted and authorized for a Law. And
this we have seen not only in all the fore-sayde examples, how for all the
princes advise with their Clergy, their authority still remained entier: but
also our Brethrens own example that here they allege, does confirm the
matter clean against our Brethren. The K. follouing of advise.


For although it is not to be counted a subjection, for a Prince in civil
affairs, to follow the advice of wise and faithful counselors, but for all
their duty of giving him faithful advise, It is no subjection to follow
Counsel.
and his duty to follow their advise yet when the matter shall come to the
making of a Law, his voice has the authority to strike up all the matter,
they determine thus it should be, and then it is he that determines thus it
shall be. So that, their determination is in-deede properly no determination
of the matter, but deliberation and aduisement, as our Brethren do here more
aptly term it, or their determination is rather of the nature of the matter
than of authorizing the same: For, the resolute determining with authority is
more properly in the Prince, if we respect the making of the matter to be a
Law in force amongst us But, if these Councellers to the Prince, will go
beyond advise, and turn their advise, into authority, and such authority,
that whatsoever they determine, that must the Prince maintain and set forth
to be observed every where in his Dominions, How the Counselors determine, and
how not.
and command those that impugn it to be punished, and that his Counselors
will let the prince to have no further authority than this: call ye this the advice of wise and faithful Counselors? well may they be wise to themselves,
but they be not so faithful as they should be to the prince, neither take they
upon them as Counselors, according to their name, but rather as Princes. But
no wise prince will so suffer them, nor any faithful Councellers will so take
upon them. And therefore, if our Br. will but mark this their own example
better, they need no better satisfaction, that although they would in the
making of Eccl. Laws be her Majesty's wise Counselors, and give her (as they
say) faithful advise therein: Unfaithful Counselors
yet if their advise shall grow so peremptory, that they will prescribe, and
the Prince must subscribe: that they will determine, and the Prince must
execute, that it shall not be good without their consent, and the prince must
not dissent from them, and that it is they that make it a law, and when they
have so decreed it, then the princes must command it to be observed every where
in their dominions, and command them to be punished that impugn it: this is
plus satis pro imperio, and were very dangerous to her Majesty and to the
whole state to admit it.

Whereby we see that if Gods ordinance were not plain in the scriptures, The
learned disc. pa. 143.
yet reason it self would conclude, that if in temporal matters, a wise
prince will do nothing of weight, without the counsel of wise men: how much
more in Gods business, which are of greatest importance, should they not
decree any thing without the advice of them that be learned in those matters.

Bridges
Our Br. have as yet showed no ordinance of God, either plain or obscure in
the Scriptures, The K. dealing by advise.
against the princes supreme authority that her Majesty claymeth, or that we
acknowledge, or for any thing that they have as yet aouched, since they entered
into this matter, of the title or authority of the princes supremacy. And
therefore having alleged nothing at all out of the Scriptures, no not the
examples, Their examples of the Empire France, Spain, and England clean
against them.
that are apparent in the scriptures, of Moses, Iosue, David etc. Which might
much have cleared the matter: but fled to the examples of the Emperors, of the
Christian Kings of France, and Spain, yea and of this our Brittannie: and
having only thus bumbased up the matter with their foresaid reasons: they are
now fallen in such a liking with these reasons, that as it were vaunting, they
say of them:

Whereby we see, that if Gods ordinance were not plain in the scriptures, yet
reason it self would conclude:

And what would reason it self conclude in this matter, against that supreme
authority and government that her Majesty claims and enjoys, Their
conclusion of reason from Counsel and aduisement.
or that we acknowledge and yield unto her? as for the reason they last
alleged, we see nothing yet, but it makes much against them, and that very
dangerously against all such aduisers, as would from aduising fall to
commanding, and from Counselling of the Prince, would seize upon the Princes
authority.

But if they will drive their reason to conclude only of counsel and
aduisement: I grant them that then it is a good reason, but it helps them
nothing in this matter, ^ea rather it makes clean against them.

It is good reason that in all the Princes temporal matters, and business of
managing the commonweal, but in Gods business ( as I grant also, Eccl. Laws
may well be so called, and that some of them are matters of greatest
importance) that the Prince should not decree any thing, without the advice
of them that be learned in those matters. Howebeit this gives not the
authority, and much less all and the only authority, of determining those
matters unto the aduisers of them, no more than it does in temporal matters (
from whence they still urge their reason by this comparison) that a wise Prince
will do nothing of weight, without the counsel of wise men. I grant, that
not only reason it self will conclude this, but that also the ordinance of
God is plain in the scriptures, for every man, namely a wise Prince, Their
reason either against all reason, or against themselves.
in all matters be they Ecclesiastical or temporal, to do nothing rashly,
but if the matters be doubtful, with good counsel and advise of them that be
learned in those matters.

Neither any good reason, nor any ordinance of God plain or not plain in the
Scriptures, wills any person taking such advise, least of all wills the
Prince on that advise given or taken, to think, that because he should do
nothing without their advise, that he can do nothing without their authority.
Neither is there any reason or ordinance of God in the Scriptures, that any
which are but aduisers to the prince, should fall from aduising him, so to
incroche upon him. And if I were worthy to advise princes. I would advise them
to take good aduisement, how they advised themselves by such aduisers, and (as
I am thus advised) me thinks it reason.

And if all princes by heathen wise men's judgments, are so rulers, that they
are servants of the Laws, The learned disc. pa. 143.
and of the common wealth: why should it be accounted for any dishonor unto
princes, to be obedient to the Laws of God their Father, and to serve to the
commodity of the Church their Mother? It is a greater honor to be the Son
of God, and the Child of the Church, than to be a Monarke of all the earth.

All princes ( I grant) are such servants of the common wealth, ( not only
by Heathen wise men's judgments, hut also by all Christian wise men's
judgments too, Bridges
that nevertheless their supreme authority in governing of the common wealth,
Princes seuaunts to the common weal and Laws.
is not one whit diminished by that service. And as for their service to the
Laws, which Laws either they have made them selves, or were made Laws before
they were made rulers, serves ( I grant also) to the maintenance of those
Laws, and to the punishment of the impugners of them: This service no debasing
of their authority.
howbeit this hinders not, but that princes have another ruling and not
serving service ( or as we may well term it) a serving rule and government,
(besides the conseruing of the Laws) even to make Laws, as our Brethren have
before confessed. Aug. in Epist. 48. and 50. and lib. 5. de ciuit. dei. cap. 24.
And as Saint Augustine excellently well does say, in his 48. epistle ad
Vincentium, And in his 50. Epistle ad Bonifacium ( as we have seen at large
before) And in his fifth Book De ciuit. Dei. cap. 24. He reckons this
service among the princes cheifest virtues, he says: that they make their
power which they have to be a servant unto the Majesty of God, How highly
good princes esteem the service of God.
most largely to spread abroad his service.

And of this service ( as Eusebius reports in the second Book of
Constantines life) does Constantine glory, saying: I reclaymed mankind being
instructed by my service (or ministry), Eu^eb. in li. de vita Constant.
to the religion of the holy Law, and I caused that the most blessed faith
should more and more grow under a better ruler. For I would not be
unthankful, especially to neglect my principal service, which is the thanks
that I owe even of duty.

Since therefore the princes service is so high and principal a service,
stretching to the making of Eccl. Laws, and to all these matters, which
service ( as Saint Augustine says Epistola 50. None can do but princes: This
service is no debar, but rather an advancement and prerogative of the
princes supreme authority in these matters. The King serving the Churches
commodity.


We do not therefore accounte it any dishonor unto princes, to be obedient
to the Laws of GOD the Father, and serve to the commodity of the Church their
Mother: It is rather the greatest honor that in this World, and in their
royal estate they can attain unto. Neither can any of their subjects,
Clergy or other, The greate^^ honor of Princes.
compare with them in the supreme degree of that authority, that only
Christian princes have herein.

But rather our Brethren would abase this authority, with telling princes
they must account no dishonor to obey the laws of GOD their Father, and
serve to the commodity of the Church their Mother: Our Br pretense of
honoring God our Father, and serving to the commodity of the Church our mother.
what laws of God the Father have they as yet alleged, either for this
matter, or for any of their tetrarches, that infer any of these new Laws,
which they all without and besides the authority of a prince, would press
both upon the prince and us: Or what one thing, that (being better considered)
serves to the commodity of the Church their and our Mother, but rather to
the great disquieting of her, in the calm harbor (God be thanked) here in
England, and to the discrediting of her name to all other Churches and peoples
round about us, and to the great hazard of her estate amongst us? And is this
the way to serve her commodity? If not rather to serve their own turns and
humors, both to the great dishonor of God our father, and to the no little
damage of the Church our mother, besides the dishonor and disobedience of our
so gracious Prince, with the trouble and endaungering of all the whole Realm.

But let our Brethren take good heed, that they abuse not Princes thus under
these high titles, of God their Father, and of the Church their mother: for,
How the Papists used these pretenses that our Brethren do
even with these terms did the Papists deceive Princes and all the world.
When they sought their own honor or profit, then they always pretended the
honoring of God their father, and serving the commodity of the Church their
mother, in whose names (as Gods and the Churches deputies) they took on them
selves to be honored, and their own commodity served, both of all Princes and
of all people, as much, if not much more, than either their father or their
mother.

It is a greater honor ( say they) to be the son of God, and the child of the
Church, than to be a Monarke of all the earth. A Prince may be Gods child, and
yet supreme governor.


And so it is indeed, who denies it? and this is also as one of the papists
blearing the eyes of princes. But any man, woman or child, never so pore or
private, may (by the grace of God) be so well enough, though he have no public
auth. at all. But can not a man be a Monarch ( though not of all the earth) but
in his own dominions, and be also the Son of God and child of the Church,
and yet with all in his own Dominions, be the supreme governor over all
persons in all matters and causes eccl. so well as temporal? The Prophecy of
Esaias. 49.


Of this honorable subjection to God and his Church, Esaias prophesies,
Chapter, 49.23. The learned disc. pa. 143.144. and 145.
Kings shall be thy nourssing Fathers, and Queens shall be thy Nourses. They
shall worship thee with their faces toward the earth, and lick the dust of
thy feet, and thou shall know that I am the Lord. The Prophet means, that
Kings and Queens shall be so careful, for the preservation of the Church,
that they shall think, no service too base for them, so they may profit the
Church of Christ withal. Esai. 49.23.


Unto this honorable subjection the holy ghost exhorts Princes in the second
Psalm, after that they have tried that they prevail nothing in striving
against the kingdom of Christ: Be now therefore wise O ye Kings, be
learned that judge the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice to him
with trembling, Psa. 2.10.11
declaring that it is a joyful service to be obedient to Christ: yea, to
serve God is indeed to reign. And especially it is to be noted, where S.
Paul commands prayers and supplications, to be made for the conversion of
Kings unto the knowledge of the truth, and their own salvation, that he
alleges this reason, That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, 1. Tim.
2.12.
in all godliness and honesty under their protection. A godly and honest life
we may live, under enemies of the church and persecutors: but a peaceable and
quiet life in all godliness and honesty only under a Christian prince. This
thing therefore the Church most humbly desires of the prince: for this end the
Church continually prays to God for the prince: in this respect the Church
most obediently submits her self unto the prince as a child to his Nursse,
that both Prince, and people may honor God in this life, and after this life
reign with Christ everlastingly.

We shall now have after these reasons, some testimonies of the scripture
alleged: Bridges
but if we shall still hold us to the point in controversy, whether the
Christian prince has authority with the advice and counsel of his learned
clergy, All these 3. cited testimonies make also against the^.
to make and set forth ecclesiastical decrees and laws, for all persons in
his dominion to observe, not one of all these three testimonies here cited out
of the scripture, do gainsay it, yea rather every one of them does confirm it.

The Papists also allege this Testimony of Esaias for the superiority of the
pope and of the Church over all Christian princes: The Papists abuse of this
testimony of Esaias.
and will our Brethren abuse it likewise for their new clergies authority? but
who may not see, that even in the resembla^ces of these metaphors, a great
authority, not under, but over the Church, is given here of God to Christian
princes? yea, eue^ as much in the new testament as was in the old: but by our
Brethrens drift* they should have less. Esaias. 49.


See what an interpretation they make of this prophecye: as though the Prophets
meaning were, altogether to abase the authority of Christian princes, and not
rather clean contrary, to exalt and extol it: though withal in some
respects it be inferior. The words of Esaias not spoken so much to foretell of
Princes abasing them under the church as of governing it.
For except he had called Kings and Queens Fathers and Mothers, by what
nearer title could the Prophet have called them, than Kings to be the
nourishing Fathers, and Queens to be the nourishing Mothers of the Church?
Joseph was but a nourishing Father unto Christ: and yet says the text as well
of him, as of the Virgin Marie his natural Mother, Luke 2. verse 51. that he
was Subject unto them. So honorable is the title of a nourishing Father, and
comprehends in it such authority. Not, but that the Princes again, (in
respect that the Church is the spouse and wife of Christ) do humble them
selves as Children unto her. And so, as they acknowledge God to be their
Heavenly Father, they reacknowledge her to be their mystical Mother.

Which not only they, but every Ecclesiastical person also must do, as well
and as far forth as they, though in some other respects, the pastors are
again spiritual Fathers, even as well to the Princes, as to any other of Gods
people. And so are both the parts of this Prophecy joined together, that the
Princes superiority is declared in the former part of the sentence: Kings
shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens shall be thy Nurses: that
nevertheless in the other respect, they again be the Churches Children: and
therefore it is added, They shall worship thee with their Faces toward the
earth, and lick the dust of thy feeete. A third part of this testimony left
out, whereto the other parts be referred.


But both these parts of prophesy, are again referred to a third that
follows: And thou shall know that I am the Lord, for they shall not be
ashamed that wait for me. As though he said to the Church: Do not thou
ascribe this unto thy self, but unto me, by whom and for whom it is done,
neither let the Princes be ashamed, as though they did abase themselves in
doing this to thee: for they do it to thee, not for thee, but for me, for
whom they wait, and have respect unto: and therefore this reciprocal
obedience neither of thee to them, nor of them to thee for me, shall be any
shame or dishonor either unto thee, or unto them, nor any abasing of their
Sovereign authority over thee, for they shall not be ashamed that wait for
me. Which last words of the sentence, our Brethren clean cut off and leave
out.

And thus does Calvin himself expound the words:

For they shall not be ashamed. etc. I take this word (...), Call. exposition
of the testimony of Esaias.
for a particle causall, for it is a continuing speech, which of some is ill
cut off, and by this argument he proves it to be equity, that Princes
should cheerfully addict themselves to the Empire of God, nor b^ agreeued to
humble themselves before the Church, because God does not suffer them to be
shamed that put their trust in him. But he joins his truth with our health,
as though he should say, this shall be an amiable and pleasant subjection. etc.

So that this is no diminishing nor abasing of the Princes authority, and
therefore Calvin also called them before (upon the first words, And Kings
shall be thy noursing Fathers) Patrons, and Tutors. Whereupon ( says he) it
is to be noted, The duty of Princes above al other Christians.
that a certain singular matter is here required of Princes, besides the
vulgar profession of the faith, because authority and power is of God given
unto them, that they should defend and procure the glory of God. This
in-deede pertayneth unto all: but Kings, how much greater their power is, so
much the more ought they to employ themselves, and more studiously to have
care thereof. And this is the reason why David by name calls on them and
exhorts them to be wise, and serve ^he Lord and kiss the Son.

Psalm. 2.10
Hereupon it appears how mad their dotages are, which affirm that Kings
can-not be Christian, except they renounce that office. For these things were
fulfilled under Christ, when as by the preaching of the Gospel, Kings being
converted unto GOD, they atteyned unto this most noble degree of dignity,
wherewith all kind of Dominions and principalities are excelled, that they
should be the noursing Fathers and Tutors of the Church. The papists do
understand that Kings are noursing Fathers of the Church none otherwise, The
papists mis. understanding of this place.
then that they have left unto their sacrificing priests and Monks most
large revenues, wealthy possessions and wide demaynes, by which they are
fed fat as Hogs in a Stye. But this education tends to a far other
matter, then to glutte such insatiable gulfes. For neither treats he here
of enritching their houses, that under a false pretext vaunt themselves to be
the Churches Ministers (which was nothing else but to corrupt the Church of
God, The Christian Princes nourishing of the Church.
and to destroy it with deadly poison) but of taking away superstitions, of
remoouing all wicked and naughty worship, of promooting the kingdom of
Christ, of conseruing the purity of Doctrine, of remoouing offenses and of
purging the filthes which corrupt Godliness, and obscure the majesty of God.

If now the authority of the Prince stretches it self to all these things,
in the name of nourishing the Church, which is far above all bodily
nourishment or mayntenaunce of living: then is not the Christian princes
authority abased any whit thereby, in the making of Ecclesiastical Laws for
these Eccl. matters, but much more confirmed and increased: so that, the
prophets meaning was not (as our Br. here say the prophet means) that
kings and Queens shall be so careful for the preservation of the Church
that they shall think no service too base for them, so they may profit the
Church of Christ withal: The Princes service, Psalm. 2.
For it is no pro^i^^ at all unto the Church, for princes to abase themselves
as they have done, unto the Pope and his Ministers: who no less shamefully
abused (...) prophesy, than the Princes simply in believing of them, did
think indeed no service too base for them, that they might ( as they thought)
profit the Church of Christ withal. But the prophets meaning was rather of
twain, besides the comforting of the Church, to foretell not only the Princes
honorable reuerencing of the Church, but also that by their exaltation and
great authority above it, they should become of persecutors, (as it were)
even parents to it.

But now, if this testimony will not serve, to make Princes stoop unto their
bent: they have another at hand. Our Br. ^. testimony Psa. 2.10.11.
Unto this honorable subjection ( say they) the holy Ghost exhorts princes in
the 2. psalm: after that they have tried that they preuayl nothing in striving
against the kingdom of Christ: Be now therefore wise O ye kings, be
learned that Judge the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice to him
with trembling, declaring that it is a joyful service to be obedient to Christ,
yea, to serve God is indeed to reign.

Our Brethren where they should yet n^w^ at length, Our Br. that promised to
treat of Princes governing, are now all in Princes obeying.
according to their promise, when all their other tetrarche^ were ser^ied, have
declared unto us, how far the Princes authority in the government of Eccl.
matters stretches: they are now altogether fallen from describing unto us the
Princes authority, of which (God wot) we have heard full little yet) to the
descript^^n all of the Princes subjection. For although they commend it with
the name of honorable, yet still it is but subjection that they speak of, not
authority.

Albeit, I grant, this is most true, that it is a joyful service to be
obedient to Christ, yea, to serve God, is indeed to reign, and better than
to reign in any worldly kingdom, without Gods service: and therefore the holy
ghost ^oth well therein exhort those Princes, which have tried that they
preuayl nothing in striving against the kingdom of Christ to be wise, and
learned and to serve the Lord.

But let our Br. withal remember this, that they abuse not this exhortation of
the holy ghost, spoken to those Princes that resisted Christ's kingdom, by
applying it here altogether to the Princes that we speak of, that only are true
Christian Princes, and have already subjected their kingdoms to Christ's
kingdom. For now we enquire of godly Princes, Our Br. wrong appliyng this
testimony, Psalm. 2.
what auth. they have by Christ allowed the^, in the governing of his kingdom?
Otherwise, if they apply this sentence thus, as though her Majesty in not
submitting herself and her auth. to these their decrees and orders, did as yet
resist the kingdom of Christ: Psalm. 2.
they offer her Majesty no small (...), nor she may well abase her authority
so far: nor any other Christian Prince, that has subjected his kingdom to
the obedience of the kingdom of Christ, as her Majesty ( God be praised)
has do^n^.

Not, but that (I grant) there is still an use of this exhortation even to all
Princes never so godly, to continue in this Wisdom, learning, and service of
the Lord, But her Majesty ( God be praised) being wise and Learned indeed,
has Learned and found out a great diff^renc^, between the serving of the Lord
himself, and the serving of the servant of the Lord. How all the Clergy
are inferior to the Prince.
For although there be a service that the Prince owes to them also, in
respect that they in their divine service of Gods word and Sacraments
represent God: yet, the Princes being also the servant of God, as they again
represent him in their service: so their service is such a high and supreme
government, as (set the very action of the spiritual seruan^s divine service
aside) they are all inferior to the Princes service, and in some respects, not
only Subjects, but servant also to their Princes, and not the Princes
servant unto them. Yea, even in those divine services, which the Ministers,
Stewards, or servants of God profess, the Christian Princes, being also the
Ministers and servant of God, have an higher service, ministry and
Stewardship, in the general ouer-sight of those particular ouer-seers, to
ouer-see and overrule them to do their duties, and with their advise and
counsel, devising and determining what is fittest, to make laws and orders
with them and above them, not only to rule all his temporal subjects, but all
his Eccl. subjects too, and even him self in all due subjection to those his
Laws and orders, that he has made. And that this service of the Prince to
God, stretches hereunto, and to the Prince especially above all other: we have
heard how S. Augustine expounds this testimony* And yet because our Br. lead
us here unto it, let us again mark it a little better, whether it more infirm
and abase, or confirm and augment the princes authority, in making decrees and
laws of Ecclesiastical matters.

S. Aug. in his 50. Epistle, ad Bonifacium, upon this verse, And now ye Kings
understand. etc. How then ( says he) do kings serve the Lord in fear?
Aug. in epis. 50. ad Bonifacium.
but in forbidding with a religious severity, and in punishing those things,
which are done contrary to the commandments of the Lord. For he serves
otherwise in that he is a man, and otherwise in that he is a King. For, in
that he is a man, he serves in living faithfully. How the K. serves God as a
man, and how as a king.
But in that he is also a King, he serves in the enacting with a convenient
vigor, Laws that command righteous matters, and forbid the contrary. Even
as Ezechias served in destroying the groves and Temples of the Idolles, and
those high places that were builded contrary to the commandment of God. Even
as Josias served, he also doing the same things. The example of the Kings
service.
Even as the King of the Ninevites served, in compelling the whole City to
appease God. Even as Darius served, in giving it into Daniels power to break
the Idol, and in casting the enemies to the Lions. Even as Nabuchodonozor
served, (of whom we have already spoken) in forbidding by a terrible Law, all
that were placed in his kingdom, from blaspheming God. The service that none
can do but Princes.
In this therefore kings do serve the Lord, when they do those things to
serve him, that none but Kings can do.

If this service then be the only prerogative of the Princes authority, The
Christian Princes supremacy in Eccl. matters.
that none but the Prince can do: and this prerogative be, to make such
Ecclesiastical laws, as some of these Princes Laws were: how does not this
service plainly include the Princes supreme government in Ecclesiastical
causes? And since this service of the Princes unto Christ, consists
principally in making laws for Christ: no marvel then, if the holy ghost
exhort Princes to be wise and to be learned, and to understand, The wise
christian Prince may as well give advice to his Clergy as take advice of them.
as the most necessary thing for them, to understand the state of the
Ecclesiastical government. So that, if their Clergy forstowe to do their
duty; yet the Prince by this wisdom, learning and understanding, might as
well be able to give advise again (if need be) even to his Clergy, in the
making of many Ecclesiastical laws and orders: as to take advise of them. As
we see how diverse of the forenamed Princes did, (and that by their authority,
with the advice of wise and learned men,) both make laws of Ecclesiastical
matters, and have a supreme government in the maintenance and direction of them.

Musculus writing on these words. And now ye kings understand, Musculus in
2. Psalm.
etc. The nations and people ( says he, and much more, say I, the Clergy) are
not excluded: Why Princes are most especially called upon.
but Kings and Judges are by name called to bethink them selves, even for this
cause that they are the heads of the nations, and of the people ( containing in
the nation, Clergy and al) to whom it principally apperteineth to be subject
unto the Lord, and to give themselves to be leaders of the people that are
their subjects, unto this true obedience. For in two respects it stands them
upon to be obedient to the Lord, first because they are subject to his power,
as are all other mortal men: and then because they are made his peculier
Ministers, to this purpose, that having received power over their subjects,
they should both their selves the will of God, and cause their subjects to be
obedient to it. And Marlorate upon these words, Serve the Lord in fear,
noting out of Calvin says: Princes therefore in this place are admonished that
they shall then reign happily, Marloratus in psalm. 2.
when their power is nothing else but Gods service. That is to say, where in
commanding and bidding, they serve not their own lust, but gods will: neither
usurp that tyrannical speech, Sic volo, sic iubeo, stet proratione voluntas:
Thus will I have it, The benefits by Princes. 1. Tim. 2
thus I bid it be: it stands for reason that it pleases me. But they say: Sie
volo, sic iubeo, quia sic divina volunt as mandat, cui soli cuncta subesse
decet, thus will I have it, thus I bid it be; because this is the will of Gods
decree: He bids it be, to whom what ere he say; all creatures (will they nill
they, ought obey. Let them also note this place which deny the power of the
king and secular Magistrate (as they call him) to have ought to do in a cause of
a religion. In what matters Princes serve the Lord
For, although the kingdom of Christ be in the hearts of the believers,
notwithstanding it apperteineth to the Magistrate to have a care, that the
doctrine of the word may be retined in the Church, that Idolatry and false
worship may be taken away, that the Ministers of the church may be
commodiously maintained, and that the adversaries may be repressed, and then to
forbid the name of God to be blasphemed, and to bring to pass that such as
lead a godly life may live in safety, but the wicked persons and those that
are unquiet may be punished and restrained ned. This then is the Princes
service unto God. And is not this as much, as to make good Eccl. laws and
orders, with the advice and counsel of the wise and godly learned clergy, as
has done, and does her Majesty?

But now our brethren after they have tried. whether they should prevail by
these two aforesaid testimonies, least these should not preuail in striving
against the Princes authority in Eccl. matters; they adioyn a third unto them
out of the new testament, Our Br. third testimony out of 1. Tim. 2. for the
restraynt of the Princes supremacy.
saying: And especially it is to be noted, where S. Paul commands prayers
and supplications to be made for the conversion of kings unto the knowledge of
the truth, and their own salvation, that he alleges this reason, that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty under their
protection. A godly and honest life we may live, under enemies of the church
and persecutors: but a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty,
only under a christian Prince.

If they do it as paraphrasts, by way of some part of exposition, they add
these words well, under their protection. But in that they set them down as
the words of the text, me thinks it somewhat over bold so to cite the holy
scripture; or yet as paraphrasts, if they so limite the end of our prayers and
supplications for Kings and Princes, The Princes authority stretches further
than to protection.
which (in these three benefits that the Apostle cites,) stretches a great
deal farther than to protection only. For (as David and other godly Princes
were) they may be both protectors and procurers of the same, yea, the chief
governors and directors in the setting forth and maintenance of them.

Neither is S. Paul's exhortation to pray for Princes, to be restrained only
to the prayers and supplications to be made, for the conversion of kings un the
knowledge of the truth: but it stretches further, yea generally, as well for
those that are converted, as those that are to be converted: and as well to
give thanks for the one, as to pray for the other, and not only for their own
salvation: but that by their means, all their subjects likewise may attain to
the way of salvation. 1. Tim. 2.


He reckons up ( says Calvin) the fruits that spring unto us, out of a
principality that is well ordered: the first is a quiet life. For, Calvin in 1.
Tim. 2.
the magistrates are armed with the sword, to keep us in peace. Except they
should beat down the audaciousnes of wicked men, al things would be full of
robberies and slaughters, etc. The second fruit is the conservation ( or
salvation) that is to wit, while the Magistrates endeavor to nourish religion,
to plant the worship of God, to require the reverence of holy things. The 3.
is the care of public honesty, etc. If these 3. things be taken away, what is
the state of man's life? if any care therefore, The benefits that we have by the
Princes ministry.
either of public tranquillity, or of Godliness, or of honesty touch us, let us
remember to have consideration of them, by the ministry of whom, so excellent
things do come into us.

Thus does Calvin confess) that the Ministry of the Prince stretches as far
forth, in procuring unto us the benefit of religion, as of the other twain:
and therefore he concludes, that we must pray for Princes as well and as much
(if not much more) for this benefit, as for the other.

Yea, says he: If any man shall ask, whether prayer ought also to be made
for the Kings, of whom we receive no such thing? I answer; Why we should
pray for Princes of whom we have not these benefits
our prayers ought to tend heereunto, that they being governed by the spirit
of God, may begin to be the Ministers unto us of those good things, of which
before they did deprive us. And therefore it behooves us, not only to pray for
those that already are worthy, but we must pray to god, that of ill, he would
make the^ good. For we must always hold this principle, that magistrates are
appointed of God, as well for the custody of religion, as of tranquillity and
public honesty; even no otherwise, than the earth is ordained to bring forth
norishing fruits. As therefore when we pray for our daily bread, we beseech
god, that with his blessing he would make the earth fruitful; so in those
former benefits, we must look to the ordinary mean, which by his providence
he has appointed, etc.

Moreover here are Princes (on the otherside) and whosoever are Magistrates,
admonished of their office. For it is not enough, if that they repress all
injuries, by rendering to every one his right, and nourish peace: except that
they promoat religion, The Princes office.
and study to co^pose men's manners with an honest discipline. For David does not
in vain exhort them, to kiss the son: nor Esaias in vain denou^ceth, that
they shall be the norishing fathers of the Church. Therefore they have not to
flatter themselves, if they shall neglect to give themselves to be helpers to
plant the worship of god.

Thus does Calvin upon this place, advance and recommend unto us, the great
and most necessary authority of Princes in Religion, and not allege it to
their restraint, (as do our brethren) clean contrary to all the Godly
interpreters of this place.

A godly and honest life ( say they) we may live under enemies of the Church
and persecutors.

Very hardly (say I) and very few, except the mightyer power and grace of God
preserve them. How hardly we may lead a godly life under persecutors.
Howbeit our brethren here, do but as they did before, Page 9. where they
said: the Church of God was perfect in all her regiment, before there was any
Christian Prince, yea, the Church of God may stand and does stand at this day,
in most blessed estate, where the civil Magistrates are not the greatest
favorers. And was it not enough and to much for them, in the beginning of
their learned discourse, to have put back the treatise of the Princes
authority, Our br. renew their old defacing of the Princes authority.
till all their Clergy have all their authorities first allotted out to every
one of them, and to put back the Princes with such a contumely: but that now
also, when they should come to the place that they promised to reserve for
them, insteede of commending their authority in Eccl. matters, thus still to
abase it, and especially this greatest benefit among all other, and far above
them all, that under God chiefly flows unto us from godly and religious
Princes?

I grant it springs not from them, as from the only or principal
founteynes: for God himself and his grace that flows unto us from him, is
the chief fountain, that cannot be stopped, where he vouchsafes to infuse
it: and his word is even a fountain of life, in the preaching, teaching,
reading, meditating, believing, and obeying y^ same, sourging and flowing into
all godliness and honesty in this life, and to life everlasting. Which (though
in the elect of God) cannot by any Princes power be dried up, or vtterle
stopped, but that ye water course thereof will break forth with great force
and violence, though not of bodily resistance, but of spiritual power and
operation: yet notwithstanding, as it pleases God to use the labor in the word
of his Eccl. Ministers, for the planting and watring of his Church: so has he
ordained godly Princes, ( where he of his great mercy raises them up) to be
the chief Governors and directors, The excellent benefit that we receive by a
godly prince.
to ouersee the cundit pipes of these spiritual waters, to be conveyed into
all ye offices of the Lords house, and into all the parts of their dominions,
and to run orderly in their currents, and to remove all ye stops, and to cleanse
all the corruptions, and as need is, to repair and amend all the pipes: or else
the effects of godliness and honesty shall be greatly hindered, be spilt, or run
another way; and dishonesty and ungodliness ouerflowe.

This therefore, (if we shall respect the general course of these effects in
the Church, throughout the whole states of Realms and Dominions, rather than
some rare and particular persons,) is not so well spoken as it should be of our
Bre. that a godly and honest life we may live, In the word godliness S. Paul
understands the worship of God.
under enemies of the Church and persecutors. For the enemies and persecutors (
except god miraculously do turn it otherwise, to his glory and his elects
confirmation) are the greatest hinderers and ouerthrowers, both of honesty, and
of all Godliness. In which word godliness ( especially when the Apostle adds,
in all godliness) not only godliness of life ( as the Papists confess) which is
but all one with honesty: but (as we have showed out of Calvin) the godliness of
religion or true worship of God is most especially comprehended, as Beza also
weary well does note thereon.

This ( says he) is a most noble place, not only against the anabaptists and
all other fanatical (or mad-spirited) persons, that think the Magistrate is to
be taken away: but also against that most cruel charity ( or brotherhood of
love) of the Academikes, which of late have crept in, and yield not to
Magistrates a right, against the disturbers of true Religion: when as mention
is here expressly made (...), that is, The Princes duty before all things to set
forth true religion.
of the just and lawful worship, of which only before other things, it
behooves the godly Magistrates to be the mainteyners and setters forth. Yea, so
far forth, that so often as there should be any necessity, either to forgo
religion, or civil peace: what Princes soever would not prefer that before
this, they should wittingly, and advisedly bind themselves, with a most
grievous offense, etc.

Thus again does Beza on this sentence, commend the authority of the Christian
Prince, The peaceable and quiet life that our Bre. grant we have by Princes.
a great deal further here than do our bre. and yet I deny not, this is
somewhat, that they will yet grant thus much; that we may live a peaceable and
quiet life, in all godliness and honesty only under a christian Prince. For so
can we not do, under enemies and persecutors: for they will suffer none to live
a quiet and godly life, that are the professors of true religion, but to the
uttermost of their power, destroy them, or disturb their peace and quietness.
And how then will our bre. justify their former saying, Page 9? the Church of
God may stand, and does stand at this day in most blessed estate, where the
civil Magistrates are not the greatest favorers? Is that a blessed, and most
blessed estate: Our Bre. here confute their former saying Page 9.
when they that profess godliness and honesty cannot live a peaceable nor quiet
life? does not the Church of God stand in a great deal far more blessed
estate, where they may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and
honesty? and therefore since they confess here, and that more truly, that this
benefit is only under a Christian Prince: it follows, that their other
saying was not true: no, nor yet this: andalbeit in part, this be the truer of
the twain; yet it answers not home to the due commendation and setting
forth of a christian Princes authority, how far it stretches in matters of
Religion. For although quietness and peaceablenes in these things, is no small
commodity (for a man would give much, to buy his peace and to live in
quietness?) nevertheless, since that in these things is not the only end, nor
the chiefest end of Christian Princes, nor the greatest benefit that we
receive by them; but their help, furtherance, and supreme authority under
Christ, in setting out godly and honest laws, Our Bre. s^t not forth the best
parts of the benefits by a godly Prince.
ordinances and decrees, with the advice of their godly learned Clergy in
those matters, for ye establishment and maintenance of godly Religion and
honest life in peace and quietness, therefore our bre. do not here sufficiently
set forth all, nor the best part of the benefits, that we receive by the
authority of a godly Christian Prince: nor so much as the ancient examples
both in the old testament, and as the allowance of the new Testament, or as the
foresaid practice of ye Emperors and Kings in Christendom does allow, nor as we
our selves have both of late felt, The benefits that we receive from God by
her majesty.
in the governments, of that most Heroical Prince King Henry the 8. and the
most virtuous King Edward the 6. or that now especially (if we be not to
unthankful, in not recognizing the manifold and exceeding benefits, that
daily we all receive and enjoy from the godly reign of our most gracious
sovereign Queen Elizabeth, which now most happily reigns over us, God be
highly blessed for her, and God vouchsafe still to bless her, and give us
better grace in all duty and thankfulness to acknowledge it. Much better does
Beza, Beza in Christ confess, ca 5. act. 44.
even on this sentence also, in his confession. cap. 5. article 44. acknowledge
these benefits of the Christian Prince, saying: It remains that we treat
upon the Magistrate, to wit, one of the members of the Church, and that in his
kind, placed before the other without any exception. As that whose force is
architectonicall or building, the office therefore of this magistrate, is to
conserve the public peace and tranquillity. But when as that cannot well be
done, but that in the first place, the true worship of God must flowrish, from
the which only all true felicity springs; The chiefest office of Christian
Magistrates.
it follows that nothing ought of Christian Magistrates to be esteemed
higher, than that they have the church ordered, according to the prescript of
Gods word, the authority whereof they ought to defend and maintain, against all the froward contemners and disturbers thereof, following the example of David,
etc.

This thing ( say they) the Church most humbly desires of the Prince: for this
end, the Church continually prays to God for the Prince: in this respect, The
learned disc. page 145.
the church most obediently submits her self unto the prince as a child to
his nurse, that both Prince and people may honor God in this life, and after
this life reign with Christ everlastingly.

This conclusion is a great deal better than the premises. For in them, we
had all things still driven, to the Princes abasing of themselves unto the
Church. Bridges.
Which subjection notwithstanding, in the foresaid sense, as she is ye spouse
of Christ, and the Prince a particular person; as she is the mother, and the
Prince her child, Our Br conclusion better then all their premises.
so well as any of his subjects: we deny it not. But here now at length, our
bre. tell us another tale; how the church desires of the Prince; how the
Church not only prays continually for the Prince; but also most obedie^tly
submits her self unto the Prince, as a child to his nursse. In these words
is inferred a great authority of the Prince over the Church. Now, if we shall
see, what ye matters are, wherein this authority of the Prince over ye church
consists: all this controversy is forthwith concluded.

The doubtful re^^^ea^e of our B^e^hrens speeches.
And here, to the specifying of this point, this thing ( say our bre.) the
church most humbly desires of the Prince: what is this thing? For this end,
the Church continually prays to God for the Prince: and what is this end? In
this respect the Church most obediently submits her self unto the Prince,
as a child to his nurse, and what also is this respect? For, Our Bre. and our
grant to the prince.
we may either refer, this thing, this end, and this respect, either to the
words that went before; or to the words yt follow. If we shall refer them to
the words yt follow; that both Prince and people may honor god in this life
and after this life reign with christ everlastingly: our br. from giving to
little, may give too much, Princes the means to s^luatio^.
except they make Princes to be but as means and instruments hereunto; as also
be ye Eccl. ministers in their callings. Both of the^ the prince and they, are
ye instruments and means that God has ordained to this end, in the government
of his church, by the making of good Eccl. laws that both Prince and people
may honor God in this life, 1. Sam. 2.30^.
and of the consequence that God has vouhsafed to set down, (I will honor
them that honor me) theymay after this life, reign with Christ everlastingly.

But if we shall refer this thing, this end, and this respect, to the words,
going before, that is, a peaceable and a quiet life, in all godliness and
honesty: then are we never the hearer for the point in question, to know how
far forth, in procuring a peaceable and quiet life, in all godliness and
honesty, The pitch of the controversy between us concerning this question.
our br. will grant the authority of the Prince to stretch: whether to make
(with the advice of their learned clergy) Eccl. laws, co^ducing as well to
godliness, yt is to say, to gods true religion and worship; as to honesty and to
a peaceable and quiet life, yea or no. For this is the very pitch of the
question in controversy.

They say, that the Prince with the advice of the learned clergy may make
civil laws for Eccl. matters.

And we say, that the Prince with the advice of the learned clergy, may make,
even Eccl. laws, or laws not only for, but of Eccl. matters. They say, that
the Pastors only (though for a show now and then they join with the Pastors,
The difference between us.
those whom they term the governors) must make the decrees and laws Eccl.
apperteining to order co^lines and aedification of the church yea, who but
teachers and preachers is able to know the^? and then the prince must make
civil laws to bind the people to al eccl, orders, that they being instructed
by the word of god, through the ministry of the preaching of the same, shall
understand, to be profitable for edifying the church of christ, and to the
advancement of the glory of god. And yet somewhat further, If any shall offend
against the laws, whether he be preacher or hearer, besides the eccl. censure
which he should not escape; he is also to be punished in body by the civil
magistrate. we say, that the prince has a part, and that a principal part,
even in the very making of all these eccl. laws, orders or decrees, in that he
makes the^ by his royal consent to be eccl. laws, orders and decrees. For
till the princes royal assent, ratify them, ( if there be a christian Prince
so to do) they be but determinatio^s what should or may be done, and are
indeed rather deliberations and aduisements, than that they have the vigor and
force of decrees and laws.

So that, the Prince tarryeth not (as they say) till the Clergy have fully
decreed it for a law, and afterward by the Ministry of their preaching, they
let him understand what decrees and laws they have made: How the Prince is a
nurse
and then must he observe them, and bind his people unto them, and punish
those that offend against them: but we say, that they devise them, and he
enacteth them. They say, they should be; and he says, they shall be: and so he
makes the Eccl. laws with their aduices. This is the very point, yt if they
could they should, or rather should not, but would infringe. For in this
chiefly consists, the Princes supreme authority in Eccl. matters that we
defend, and they thus begin to call in question.

But even their own similitude does here beat them: that they say, in this
respect the church most obediently submits her self unto the Prince as a
child to his nurse. For if the Church does so submit her self to the Prince:
Our Brethrens similitude of a nurse against them.
then, as the nursse does not only procure peace and quietness to the child, in
the things that are necessary for him, but does give him suck also, and
nourishes him with milk from her own breasts, besides other things that she
provides, and not only dresseth and trimmeth up the child, but also
appoints orders and rules to others in the house, how the child should be
kept and tended: so the Prince in all these things not only for quietness and
safety of the church, nor for civil honesty only and conversation of life;
but also in feeding the Church with the milk of Gods word ( as even the very
interlineall gloss of the Papists themselves, cannot shun, but confess that
interpretation, it is so forcible against them) and how is this the feeding
them with this milk from the Princes breasts? since they their selves do not
Preach the word; but by that authority that is in the Prince to set forth Eccl.
laws, for the feeding of the people with gods word, by all such other means
besides preaching, teaching, and ministry of the Sacraments, as is competent
to their princely estate: that is to say, by making Eccl. laws, orders, and
decrees, for the norishing and governing of the Church. Though still, in
respect the Princes are but particular persons, they again are but as the
children, the Pastors their nurses; God their father; and the Church their
mother. And thus (we grant) as mutual means and instruments thereunto, they
have on all parts, this authority given them of god, that (as our brethren say)
both Prince and people may honor God in this life, and after this life, reign
with christ everlastingly. And this is all that our Bre. say, of the supreme
authority of Christian Princes in Ecclesiastical matters.

Thus have we briefly set forth a form of reformation, touching matters
Eccl. (as we are thoroughly persuaded, agreeable to the word of God, and as we
are able to prove, consenting with the example of the primitive church, The
learned disc. page 145.
building only upon the most sure foundation of the canonical scriptures: but
intending more at large, if occasion shall serve, hereafter to set forth the
practice and consent of the godly fathers in their acts, Counsels and
writings, following the same rule and interpretation of the scripture that we
have done,

And thus also have we fully and thoroughly heard, The Epilogue of this learned
disc.
what our bre. briefly or largely have set forth, in all this their learned
discourse of Eccl. government, for the form of reformation touching
Ecclesiastical matters. Bridges.


Here therefore, having now finished their whole discourse, which in the front
thereof they have entitled, A brief and plain declaration, containing the
desires of all those faithful Ministers, that have and do seek for the
reformation of the Church of England: Our Brethrens Epilogue of this learned
discourse.
They now enter into the Epilogue or small per-oration, for the knitting up of
all the matters, that in this learned discourse have been laid down.

And first, whereas (the more to persuade the reader to believe them) they say,
this form that they have here set forth, Our Brethrens persuasion that this
their form is agreeable to Gods word.
is (as they are thoroughly persuaded) agreeable to the word of God: I answer,
this is not material, what they are or are not thoroughly persuaded to be
agreeable to the word of God. For though in Christ, we wish as well to them, as
they to us: yet depend we no more on their persuasions to themselves, than
they on ours to us.

But if they could have brought, or can bring, any sufficient and clear proof
of matter, out of the word of GOD indeed, We depend not on our Brethrens
persuasion, but on their proves
that might persuade us thoroughly thereunto: If they could do that, it were
very material, and by the grace of God, we should not gaynsay it, contrary to
our consciences, but yield on all hands thereunto, and be as thoroughly
persuaded as there are. But this must be with better and firmer proves of
Gods word, than either our Bre. have yet alleged, or any other that ever I
read, agreeable or inclinable to their opinion. For, setting aside all such
persuasions of men; this persuasion must be wrought with pure matter. For till
then, they can never thoroughly persuade other, to be persuaded as they be, if
they their selves be indeed (as they say they are) thoroughly persuaded. And
although I may be somewhat easily persuaded, that they are somewhat persuaded,
that this their form is agreeable to Gods word: yet as yet, I can neither be
thoroughly persuaded, that they their selves are thoroughly so persuaded of this
form: nor that this form of this learned discourse ( let the learning, in
each man's persuasion, go as it shall) is either the discourse, declaration, or
desires, of all those faithful Ministers, that have and do seek for the
discipline and reformation of the Church of England. Our Brethrens persuasion
of our Bishops and most of the Clergy.


For first, they are not (I think) persuaded that all, or any one of our
Bishops, and a great many, if not all, or the most part of us, are so
persuaded, either thoroughly, or in part, or at all.

If they shall utterly herein reject all our Bishops and all us, besides only
themselves, as no faithful ministers: that were too arrogant a part in them
selves, and too injurious and co^tumelious to all the Ministers in the Church
of England, that are not thoroughly persuaded as (they say) they be. Yea, this
contumely and injury would in^lude many not only of their own favorers,
that yet are not persuaded at all, Our Br. persuasion of this form.
in many things contained in this learned discourse, but utterly mislike them,
and will perhaps be less and less persuaded, Our bre. their selves not
persuaded of this form but dissenting from it.
and more mislike them, when they view and consider better of the matters, of
the grounds, of the proves, and of the drifts thereof. But if they mean this
through persuasion, to be of them only that do openly profess their
coffeehouse, and are recusants and accusants of the government established
in Ecclesiastical matters, and that speak or write against it, and have set
out other books, or that have compl^tted themselves together in devising and
setting forth this form of reformation, which they call a learned discourse,
and a declaration of all the faithful Ministers, etc. which who they are, and
what number they be of, God knows, I know not: yet this I know, and it is
apparent, that diverse of them are so far from being thoroughly persuaded in
the form here set forth; that almost none of their writings and books in
many points, Our bre. condemning all ministers disagreeing from them to be
unfaithful.
and some of those very material, are agreeable either one with another, or
with this form, as by conference of them will easily appear. And some of
their diverse opinions, and clean contrary positions, we have here seen, as
occasion has served to observe the same. Yea, we have seen, how their own
selves oppugn their own selves, with diverse and contrary assertions in this
learned discourse. And then by this title of their form, that it is the
desires of all the faithful Ministers, that seek for the discipline and
reformation of the Church of England; all those different from these, seek a
wrong discipline and reformation, and are unfaithful Ministers, and call their
own faithfulness and seeking in question too.

But I verily think (God forgive me if I think amiss) where this learned
discourse is set fo^th in the name of all the faithful Ministers that desire
and seek for the reformation of the Church of England: if they would declare
their names who they be, and that they were asked their voices by scrutinie,
or might deliver the same as freely as they their selves would wish; our
scrutators when they had nu^bred al their voices, would return us a fair Non
placet. If they would not rather many of them, even openly disclayme their
consent for their parts, and profess that this form is none of their form,
nor they desire nor seek for many of these strange and dangerous matters,
that in this learned discourse are prescribed. Yea, whosoever were the writers
hereof, in the names of all the faithful Ministers; me thinks they began
even here somewhat to s^agger, and dare not in plain words for a round
conclusion say; Our bre. begin to shrink in their persuasion.
this form is plat and plain set down, and prescribed or commanded in the
word of God; and that they are thoroughly so persuaded. No, they have yet more
grace than so: and they pronounce their words more warylie, saying: it is
agreeable to the word of God. Howbeit, they deal not well in this cunning
co^ueyance of their words, that under the quarter sail of agreeable, will so
compass the wind, till they set up full sail, and thrust it upon us, not
only as agreeable; but as flatly commanded and prescribed. For if it
prescribe not, but be^ only agreeable, as here they say; agreeable form ^o
gods word.
then are not we of any such necessity bound thereto, but that we may keep
this form of Ecclesiastical government, that is already established,
Agreeabl or disagreeable to gods word.
well enough; except our Brethren can prove it to be disagreeable. Yea, so
disagreeable, that it be repugnant to the word of God: which as yet they have
not, withal their heauing and shouing, been able to do. And yet, if they
could prove it to be disagreeable: this inforceth no necessity of their
form; no, though we should also admit that it were agreeable to the word of
God: which neither yet have they been able to do, withal their eeching and
wringing of Gods word, to prove it.

But for all this, they say, they are able to prove, that their form of
reformation here set forth, is consenting with the example of the Primitive
Church.

Indeed they said not so much before, for the agreeablenes of this form to
the word of God, that they were able to prove it; but only that they were
thoroughly persuaded it is agreeable. But for all their persuasion, we have
(thanks be to God) plainly seen it proved, that it is much disagreable from
the word of God, even in every of the persons of their Tetrarchie, and in many
other great and important points: and not only disagreeable, but contrary. But
now, when they come from the word of GOD, to the Primitive Church, where they
begin to take upon them somewhat more boldly, that they are able to prove:
what now are they able to prove? any rule, commandment, or prescription of
this form? No. What our Br. say they are able to prove.
But (say they) we are able to prove it to be consenting with the example of
the Primitive Church. What? do they pass clean over all rule, commandment,
and prescription, as a matter that they dare not so much as touch, or look
after, but leap at the first choppe into example? Or does every example in the
Primitive Church make a prescription? consenting with the example of the
primitive church.
or is equivalent with a rule or commandment? or if it do not; how does it
bind us? especially, understanding the example of the Primitive Church, so as
here they do, in a separate sense from that, that is contained in the
Scripture: for so I take it, that they meant the scripture only, when they spoke
before of the word of God: and that now by y^ example of the Primitive Church
they mean ye time immediately succeeding yt time, What they mean by the
primitive Church.
that is expressed in the word of God. And yet, though they did comprehend in
ye name of the Primitive Church, the time also expressed in the word of God, or
any example in the word of God: they should hardly urge a rule, or prescriptio^
of some one example, if they have nothing else but only some such example for
it. Well might an example be brought for an instance of the practice, of some
one point or matter set forth in this form: Every example neither infers a
rule nor general practice.
but what would yt serve, for any example of all the points and matters, yt
they have set forth in this form? Can they prove a general practice of all
these, or of any one ^oint upon which they have discoursed, that the example
thereof was used universally, Our Br. wary speeches.
and in continual practice in the Primitive Church? Understand the Primitive
Church how they please; they have not yet showed us any such example. No, in
very deed not any one example, that is aunswerable to this their prescribed
form.

Yes (say they) we are able to prove this form, to be consenting to the
example of the Primitive Church.

Consenting? what mean they by that: So they told us before, of being
agreeable to the word of God, and do they now tell us of consenting to the
example of the Primitive Church? Why do they now begin so sparingly to mince
their terms, and as it were by ounces thus warily to way their words, Why our
Br. do thus now in the end restrain their speeches.
in the ending of this their learned discourse? What, is it now, in fundo
parsimonia? or are they now waxen more wise, than before in the discourse of
all their learning? They had wont to follow the matter so freshly, to urge and
press on every thing so peremptorily, that it was so, and it is so, and it
shall be so: every conjecture was a conclusion; every example was a
prescription; yea, every word a sentence, every sentence a rule, and every rule
without all exception; there is no remedy, thus and thus it must be. And now,
when it comes to the vpshot and last reckoning, I cannot tell how, all is
dashed. Or do they misdoubt, they have somewhat ouershot themselves before? And
it is good to keep some sober for an after reckoning, and therefore they now
come in, with these more circumspect terms. Well, yet when all is done, it is
either at least, agreeable to Gods word: or at least, we are thoroughly so
persuaded: or if it were not in the word of God: yet at least, it was in the
Primitive Church: or at least, there was then the example of it: or at least,
it was consenting with the example. Nay then Brethren, and ye can drive it on
thus: was it not at least, your own consent that we should imagine it for an
example, or at least, was it not indeed mere nothing? Parturiunt montes
nascetur ridiculus mus? is all this platform come now to this, that it is
consenting to the example of the Primitive Church?

Well then, if it be but consenting, and that but with example, and that but
of the Primitive Church: then, the market is well fallen, and perhaps mard, for
the utterance of these wares. And as we had before nothing but agreeable, so it
may fall out, that it is neither agreeable, nor consenting; at least, this is
manifest that agreeable and consenting is not the same. Yea indeed, this form
of reformation that our Brethren urge, is neither the same, nor agreeable, nor
consenting. And yet, admit it were consenting in matters that are not
prescribed, not only other forms agreeable and consenting, Agreeable and
consenting are not the same.
but even disagreeable and dissenting also in some points, are so little to be
condemned, that they may be very well allowed: or (to come down as they do)
they may at least, be so well borne withal, that the unity of doctrine, and
peace of God, should not be broken, nor Scismes made for them in his Church.
But since our Brethren here, after Gods word, stand upon the consenting with
the example of the Primitive Church: Our Br. dissent and disagreeablenes
what time will they limite for the Primitive Church? For if we shall
understand it (as commonly it is understood) for all the time of the
persecutions till Constantines reign? Our Br. form not co^senting with the
Primitive church.
how can they prove the form of reformation that is here prescribed, to be
consenting with the example of the Primitive Church: yea, take it for any age
after the Apostles: yea, in the very Apostles times? Can they name but one
Doctor in any place, that might not or did not apply his doctrine, and exhort,
and preach? they have not named him. Can they name any one Church, where all the
Pastors were so equal, that they had not a Bishop, or some one having a
standing superior government over the residue, if there were many Pastors in
that Church; or if they had not at al times, might not have had, as well other
Churches had; as we have seen what a number of such superior Bishops there
were in the Primitive Church? Or can they name the man, that was such a
governing Elder as might not teach, or any Church that had them, Our Brethren
can show no example in the Primi. Church for the most of their chiefest
positions.
speaking of such as were Ecclesiastical or Church Presbyters Priests or
Elders? Or if there were any such in some Churches; that there was such, and a
Consistory of them, in all the Primitive Churches? Or can they tell who, where,
and when, there were such Deacons, as meddled only with the care of the poor,
and contributions for them, or distributions to them, that did not also attend
upon the Pastors, and might not be admitted (as occasion served) either to
preach, teach, nor administer the Sacraments, nor so dispose themselves
thereto, that they might be prepared to be made Pastors? Can they show that
excommunication was so pronounced by such as were not Ministers of the word,
that all the people or a Segniorie of them in their names, were joined with the
Pastors, in the power of the keys, or for the Spiritual binding and losing?
Can they show that all which were elected and ordained Pastors, were elected
and ordained only in Synodes; and the Pastoral Elders of the word no longer
accounted Pastoral Elders, than they were only in the place where their
Pastoral charge did lie? And a number there are of such things, in this form
of reformation pretended, of which they can never show in the Primitive Church
any example; although perhaps of some things, they might show some example,
and yet that not general, nor any perpetual rule thereof, to bind all
Churches and all ages to that example.

But they do well here to tell us, that they are able to prove all this. Our
Brethren say they are able to prove it.
And why then (if they be able) have they not done it? Do they want the act
and esse, whereof they told us, page 126? And have they now in the end found
out (to dare us withal) a potentiall ability in the Clouds? Do they tell us
now (when they have finished all their learned discourse thereon) that they are
able to prove it? It had bin better if they could have said they have proved
it.
Me thinks it had been a iolier hearing, to have heard them say, we have
proved it. And I am thoroughly persuaded in this, Our Br. ability of proof
that if they had thoroughly persuaded themselves that they had proved it, they
would not have strayned courtesy to have told us, that they had proved it,
and not have said now, they are able to prove it.

But it is a sign of grace, that our Brethren have this shamefastness, that
yet they will not go thus far, A token of grace not to boast they have done
that they have not done.
as to say they have proved that, which their own consciences witnesses, and
all the world may see, they have not proved, in all this their learned
discoursing on the matter.

Well, what of that: though they have not as yet proved it; yet, what say we to
this? They are able to prove it.

Be they so indeed? Let them do it then, say I, a Gods blessing, begin when
they list, so they do it more orderly than they have hitherto gone to work.
But till then, I stand still on this; proved it they have not. And (for any
thing that they have already said) we need not doubt, but that we shall (by
Gods grace) be as well able to improve it, as they to prove it, except they
have better proves to come, than as yet we have seen any. And if they shall
be able to bring such proves as shall prove it indeed: I for my part (God
willing) as I shall be able, will be also as ready, to yield most gladly so
far, as they shall be able to prove it.

Building ( say they) only upon the most sure foundation of the canonical
Scriptures. How our Brethren have builded on the foundation of the Scripture.


That (say I) is a most sure foundation indeed, and yet withal they must
build well and surely, and with good matter, not with stubble, sticks, and
combustible stuff upon it.

But, that they have neither built the form set forth in this learned
discourse, only upon this most sure foundation; nor, where they have taken any
plot of ground out of scripture, as their foundation to build upon any piece of
this litigious frame, they have done otherwise than to enforce that platform
on that ground with no right nor propriety thereunto; nor yet have builded
thereon as good and skillful builders should have done; nor with such firm
stuff and metal as will abide the trial of the fire: I refer it to the
Surueyers of the work, and to all such as are expert in this kind of
Architecture, to give their judgments both of the whole modill of this
plotforme, and of every parcel thereof, and of all their stuff, workmanship,
and manner of their building.

But our Brethren put us in better comfort, that if all this learned discourse
will not serve; they are not minded to leave off so.

But intending ( say they) more at large, if occasion shall serve, hereafter to
set forth, Our Bre. promise to set forth the ancient Fathers of these things
the practice and consent of the godly fathers in their acts, Councels and
writings, following the same rule and interpretation of the Scripture, that we
have done.

Verily, neither this learned discourse, nor any other of our Bretherens, as
yet set forth, no, nor any thing in Calvin, Beza, or Danaeus, ( for I take it,
What our Brethren have performed.
that our Brethren have most followed these three) or any other treatise that
is extant, (at least, that I could ever see or read) does nor can prove the
form of reformation, that our Brethren have here in this learned discourse
prescribed. So that, they do well to be intending of some other piece of work:
for I see no other remedy, (to persuade us so thoroughly, as they say they are)
but that we must intend also on their further intending, when and whatsoever
they shall more at large hereafter set forth as occasion shall serve. Which
(what occasion they intend it shall be) I remit to God.

And if they shall truly set forth this that here they solemnly promise, of
the practice and consent of the godly fathers in their acts, Councels and
writings: I dare (by prevention) say thus much before hand, let me prove it,
as I shall be able, that they shall never be able to prove, that those godly
fathers followed the same rule and interpretation of the scripture, that our
Brethren have followed, What our Br. shall do if they shall truly perform
this promise.
in the form of this their learned discourse of Ecclesiastical government:
or that herein, either Calvin, or Beza, or Danaeus, and other our Brethren
have so done.

Not that I burden them as falsaries: (whom I honor as godly fathers also, and
dear brethren, with all due reverence) but as mistakers of those ancient
godly fathers, as we have partly seen already, and shall see further, by Gods
grace, when the performance of this promise shall come forth, to examine
thoroughly, Doctors.
how they interpreted or practiced the office of Doctors not exhorting nor
applying the Scriptures; to search more narrowly, how they interpreted the
rules, and practiced the office of Bishops and Pastors: and whether one among
the Pastoral Elders, were not in dignity and jurisdiction, a continuing
superior, to whom the residue yielded a propriety of the name of Bishop:
yea, whether it were practiced otherwise, Bishops and Pastors.
among those godly fathers, in any Church in all Christendom from the Apostles
times, until Constantines: yea, whether other of our Brethren themselves,
both Calvin, Beza, Danaeus, and diverse others, do not confess as much in
plain words? And therefore, if they shall hereafter when occasion shall serve
them, allege those godly fathers to the contrary, that is to wit, to prove
all Pastoral Elders to have been all in dignity and jurisdiction equal, and
Bishops all alike, one as much as another, except only for a prerogative to
some one Pastor, in some Synodall assembly: let them also intend to this,
whether they should not manifestly hale th^se godly fathers interpretations and
practice, clean contrary to their meaning and doing, yea clean contrary to
their own consciences and open assertions, that should so allege them.

To peruse likewise the writings, acts, and counsels, Consistory of Elders.
of those godly fathers, how they used their Consistories of Elders, where they
had any (as in great Cities they had) whether they were of such Presbyters,
Priests or Elders, as being Ecclesiastical persons, they had not to meddle in
public teaching, but were governors only; and not how many of those godly
fathers, but whether any of them, interpret those words of Christ, Math. 18.
Math. 18.
Tell the Church; as Calvin and our Brethren do interpret them. And further,
to consider the interpretations, writings, acts, and Councels of those godly
fathers, Deacons.
for the use and practice of the Deacons: whether besides the collections and
distributions for the poor, they might not also be employed to the public
teaching of the word of God, as occasion served, nor to the ministering of the
Sacraments, nor to the attendance in the divine service on the Bishops and
Pastors, whose proper office consisted therein. If our Brethren shall prove
all these things to have been so used, to have been so interpreted, and so
practiced, in the practice and consent of the godly fathers, in their acts,
Councils and writings, following the same rule and interpretation of the
Scripture, that our Brethren in the form of reformation prescribed in this
learned discourse of Ecclesiastical government, have done: when they shall
have performed all this, and shall, as they intend more at large, as occasion
shall serve, hereafter set it forth, that we may also be thoroughly persuaded by
it: then will I say also for these our Brethren, that they shall have better
acquit themselves than as yet they have done, yea, than any hitherto have done.
If not rather in attempting this, they shall not do, yet worse than they have
done, and worse than any other have done; if they shall be manifestly found to
wrest the interpretations, writings, practice, consents, acts and Councels, of
those godly Fathers.

What we have heard already in those godly Fathers, cited the more at large,
The godly fathers against our Brethren in all these things.
and the greater number of them, even to the tedious tyring both my self and
the reader; but chiefly to avoid all suspicion of wresting or abusing them, and
to show the greater consent of them, and the more continual and universal
practice of them: and how in all these things those godly Fathers do hitherto
appear (at least wise in my simple judgment) clean contrary to this form
of our Brethren, set forth in this learned discourse, for all these matters of
this their quadripartite government in Ecclesiastical causes, being the
greatest points, or next the greatest here in controversy: I refer all past
on both parts to God and the reader, praying the reader, till this their
promise be performed, when they shall hereafter have occasion; in the mean
time to consider better of this their learned discourse, and of this (though
not comparing in learning, but pleading for truth) my well meaning answer
thereunto.

Our Brethren having now made this repetition, what they have done, or rather
would have done; and given us this promise, what they are intending hereafter
to do: The learned disc. page 146.
hereupon they proceed to a solemn protestation, of the causes that moved
them to set forth this learned discourse.

Therefore we protest before the living God, and his holy Angels, and before
the Lord Jesus Christ, Our Br. protestation.
that shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and before the Queens
majesty our most gracious sovereign, and the whole assembly of all estates
of this Realm: Our Br. protestation of the causes of this learned discourse.
that as the whole world may playnlie see, we seek hereby not our own
profit, case nor advancement, but only the glory of God, and the profit of
his Church: so by this present writing we discharge our conscience according
to our duty, which is to show unto all men the true way of reformation, and
to move them that have authority to put it in practice, and to seek by all
lawful and ordinary means, that it may take place, that if it may please GOD
to give it good success, at this time to be embraced, we may fulfill the
rest of our course with joy.

The manner of our Bretherens protestation, I would have liked a great deal
better, to have had our Lord Jesus Christ, Bridges.
( being also himself the living God, one and coequall with the father) set
before his holy Angels, The manner of our Br. protestation.
be they never so holy.

But now, as they protest before the living God, our heavenly father, and
before the Lord Jesus Christ his son our savior, that shall come to judge
the quick and the dead, and before his holy Angels: and before the Queens
Majesty our most gracious Sovereign, and before the whole assembly of all
estates of this Realm, meaning the high Court of Parliament: so, howsoever
they may deceive mortal creatures, God is not mocked, as the Apostle says.
And therefore our Brethren have to take great heed, what they have here
protested in the name of God, (whereof says David Psalm. 111. Holy and
fearful is his name) if they mind not as seriously and religiously the
matter, as they have thus solemnly protested the name.

I speak this (which I am heartily sorry to speak) seeing this great
ouerzealousnes of our Brethren, that in their earnestnes (if they mean
earnest, or else it is a great deal worse) auowe these high speeches in the
name of God, of Angels and of men, that they can never justify before either
God or Angels, or before men. For, since they have made this great and
terrible protestation in the name of them all; and which all? All those
faithful ministers, that have and do seek for the discipline and reformation
of the Church of England: and that this is a brief and plain declaration of
the desires of all those that seek for these things, which they have here set
down in this learned discourse: whatsoever they seek hereby, Our Br.
protesting for all the fait^full ministers.
this protestation is very dangerous. All penned not this learned discourse,
and perhaps all have not seen it; yea peradventure, it is so little the
desires of all; that some may mislike many things, or some thing in it. Yea, I
my self have showed it unto some, that are even of the most earnest of them,
who at the first view have liked this book, and called it indeed a learned
discourse, and yet when I have showed them some of the principles therein; they
have upon better conference and aduisement, Diverse of our brethren misliking
these desi^es in whose names this protestation is made.
so misliked them, that they have utterly protested, that whosoever were the
compilers of it, or consenters to it, both they and many others think their
names abused, accounting themselves to be no less of the number of those
faithful ministers, that have and do seek for the discipline and reformation
of the Church of England, than any of these learned discoursers reckon
themselves to be: and yet they renounce the desire of these things.

But what need we allege hereto, the private speeches of any of our
Brethren? Vanescunt voces, litera scripta manet. See and confer our
Bretherens writings, or look but on those, that by occasion have here fallen
out to be noted, in the answer to this learned discourse, in how many, and
that no small things, diverse of our Brethren oppose themselves, to the desires
that here these learned discoursers do seek for. Yea, I believe, that if all
and ^uery of our Brethren, The variety and vncerteyntie of our br. desires.
which would claim interest in the title of this discourse, but not in the
matter of this discourse, would freely lay down all their several desires,
and the thing that every one of them does indeed seek for: their desires and
seekings would be so variable and repugnant in many vnportant matters, that we
should neither know any certentie, what they would agree upon to desire; nor
be able to determine what we might grant. And how then in this confusion and
contrarieties of their desiring and seeking, can any one man, or a number of
them, that agree upon this form here set forth, ( if indeed they had
agreed, and were not also in many things, as we have seen, clean contrary to
their own selves even in this learned discourse) make this solemn
protestation, not only for him, or for themselves, but for a number of other,
yea for all other among them, that seek, or seek not this or that?

And therefore, in my poor judgment, and as one that wishes their good
unfeignedly, A more wary protestation had bin better.
this solemn and dreadful protestation, might better have been spared, or
protested in some other more wary manner. As right now, talking of agreeable
and consenting, they were wary enough, how they tempered and set their words,
and so much more (when here they protested on this wise) stood it them upon,
to have added at least, so far as they know, or so far as they are
persuaded, believe, or hope: and not so resolutely to affirm that, which
neither they nor any, but God does know, who is the only searcher of each man's
heart, and only knows (whatsoever they pretend) what indeed they seek for
and desire.

But yet our Brethren thought perhaps, that this solemn protestation would
do well here, Why our br. conclude with so solemn a protestation.
to move the readers hearts at the closing up of all the matter: and indeed
it moved mine, and that not a little, to see them after such long daliance,
all the while of this their learned discoursing, thus solemnly in the end, to
appeal to God for witness. And yet for some part of the matter, and for some
part of the men also, What our Br. seek.
I for my part will believe them on their bare word, without this deep
protesting: though all the whole world may not playnlie see it, nor will
believe it, for all this protestation, that they seek hereby, not their own
profit, ease, They protest that they seek not their own profit. etc.
nor advancement, for if they should, they might full easelie be deceived.

Do they not rather seek their own hurt, trouble, and overthrow? Not
wittingly, I think: and yet, they may seek it, and find it too, as some of
them have done, and have now leisure enough to repent them of it. Our br. seek
rather their own and others hurt.
But if some of them seek it not; there is a shrewde likelihoode that some
other do seek hereby, their own profit, ease and advancement, a little, or
rather a great deal too much, with the hinderaunce, disquiet, and spoil of
many others. And would GOD, if they also seek not these things, Our br. are
instruments to other.
that they were not the instruments unto others that do seek them.

But if they seek not these things, what seek they then.

For soothe, Our Br. wrong seeking of Gods glory and his Churches profit.
but only the glory of GOD and the profit of his Church.

Still the glory of God, and the profit of his Church, must carry the name.
Prove it to be so, and there an end.

But what stand we seeking, what they seek? If they seek Gods glory: why do
they thus open the mouths of the adversaries, How Gods glory and truth is
defaced hereby.
to deface the glory of God, and discredit his Gospel, by these unnecessary
dissentions? If they seek the profit of his Church: what greater hinderance
to the Church can they offer, than thus to break the unity and divide the
force thereof? Than thus to cast abroad to the wide world, to the deadly
enemies, these bitter defacings and sharp oppugnings of the same Church, How
the Church is hindered by this our br. seeking.
whereof their selves profess to be the parts and members? Than thus to wound
the weak Brethren, that stand between us, and make many that were coming
on, to start back, and that were among us, to fall from us: yea, to discourage
the hearts of the strongest of us: yea, to reproach all the Bishops and
Prelates of the Church with all despites: yea, to disarme their most gracious
Sovereign, and bereave her of the best part of her supreme authority, and to
expose her Majesty to all dangers of her estate, besides those that the
Papists practice against her person: yea, to innouate and turquish all the
whole state of both the Realms of England and Ireland, the very Parishes and
all must be new transformed? While in the mean time, the professed enemy
lies houering for the advantage of all occasions, do even draw and whet
their swords, to sheath them in the bowelles of us all; except the living God
through his mighty power and superabundant mercy, did even myraculously
defend us from them. So that, If the Lord had not bin on our side (may Israel
now say) if the Lord had not bin on our side, when men rose up against us: they
had then swallowed us up quick, Psalm. 124.
when their wrath was kindled against us. True way of reformation.
Nay, when our own wrath is not yet slaked, against our own selves. And is
this to seek the glory of God, and the profit of his Church, that our
Brethren say, they seek only?

But if they seek indeed Gods glory, and the profit of his Church: let them
reclayme and leave off all these evil practices: How our Br. should indeed
seek Gods glory and the Churches profit.
and if all things be not as they would have them, yet remembering what in
common together we have, which is the principal, and which the common
adversary seeks most of all to take either it from us, or us from it, and
the roaring Lion goes a pace about, seeking how he may devour us all: let us
both without disturbance of the present state, join our selves together, and
unite all our forces against the public enemy of us both, and especially of
Gods truth; till yt (after we shall be out of all danger of that man of sin,
that great adversary and his confederates) we may parlie of these matters more
brotherlike. And then the whole world might plainly see and say, that there
were more likelihood, our Brethren did only seek the glory of God and
profit of his Church, as they protest they do. Yea, where we make our enemies
now to laugh and leap for joy, and our selves to weep and fall for sorrow:
Then should our mouth be filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy: yea
then would they say (with grief or admiration) among the heathen, Psalm. 126.
the Lord has done great things for them, and our selves confess with joy and
thankfulness, the Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice. But
if our Br. will not seek Gods glory and his Churches profit, in such order
as they ought t^ seek it, but thus unorderly: although they seek it only, and
nothing else: yet, seek they never so much, they shall never find it.

The true way of reformation
But as they protest that these are the things which they only seek: so by
this present writing ( say they) we discharge our conscience according to our
duty, which is to show unto al men the true way of reformation.

That this is the true way of reformation, is not yet proved, in all this
learned discourse. They told us they are able to prove it, and they promised
also that they will prove many things hereafter when occasion shall serve their
turn. But if this form of theirs were (as they imagine and vaunt) the true way
of reformation: what? and is this the true way of reformation too; and the
discharge of their conscience, and according to their duty, Our Br. manner of
putting their form in writing is not the true way of reformation.
to show it to all men, and that in this manner? I speak it not so much, for
putting it in writing: for so, it might well be done with more aduisement, and
be better conceived, and all times the readier to be perused and pondered, of
those that should have to consider the same; and their selves with less
ambiguities, alterings, and tergiuersations, be more straightly bound, to
justify their writing: nor only for vaunting their selves of that they had
written, to be such a profound piece of work, such a learned discourse: for
that might be, or seem but an ouerliking of their own babie, and proceed of
too good an opinion of their own learning.

But when they pester their writing with such reproaches to other their Br. and
that in authority: Discharge of conscience
when they enter into matter of state, yea deal withal states, and with
public government, and will show such matters unto all men, that concern not
all men, but is above many men's callings, to intermeddle in them, especially to
alter the laws established, and the powers of so many persons, setting up (as
they say) new Lords new laws, new Doctors, new Bishops, new Governors, new
Deacons, new Segniories, new Synods, new authorities, new Parishes, and remove
all the old, or new transpose them, yea, bring in a new supremacy of the
Prince also, with the old authority half clipped away: and to put all these in
print the more to show this present writing to al men: as who say, Be it known
to al men by this present writing, yea, by this present printing, and to do all this without any authority, or license or knowledge of the Magistrate, yea,
against the Magistrate too: if this be the discharge of their conscience, and
according to their duty, being subjects, being private persons, being
Protestants, The discharge of conscience or rather charge thereof.
being faithful Ministers, being learned discoursers: would God they would
better bethink themselves.

It is beyond my learning, and a great scruple it is in many men's consciences,
that think our Br. have set their conscience on the tenters, and much charged
it, rather then any whit discharged it, and do not according to their duty
therein; nor that this their doing, is any true or good way of reformation: but
if ought were amiss, to make it much worse, if not to mar it quite, and to
give license unto such a way, as would or might bring all things to an utter
deformation and confusion. And here it follows prettely, at the hard heels,
that might set the matter well forward.

And to move them ( say they) that have authority, to put it in practice, and
to seek by all lawful and ordinary means, Seeking means that this form may
take place.
that it may take place, that it may please God to give it good success.

What mean they here by these perilous speeches? And is this also a part of
conscience and duty, and the true way of reformation, to move them that have
authority to put it in practice? Who are these that have authority, whom our
Br. would by this their writing, The moving them that be in authority to put
it in practice.
move to put in practice, this form of reformation? Would they have any that
have authority in the Realm committed unto them by and under the Queens most
excellent majesty, to attempt this, without her majesty's authority
thereunto, whom they called before our most gracious sovereign, when they made
their last protestation?

No, we hope there is none, that in her majesty's dominions has any
authority committed unto him, will be moved by this writing, or by any other
writing or soliciting of our Brethren, to put this form in practice, without
^e have her majesty's authority so to do, Dangerous means.
she having now (God be praised, and long continue it) the supreme authority
of these matters. Neither should they that have but inferior authority to her
majesty, Offering up books to the Parliament.
yea all the Magistrates in the Realms of her dominions, holding all the
authority that they have immediately or mediatly from her Majesty, and her
Majesty immediately from God; seek any lawful and ordinary means, but
unlawful and beyond extraordinary, if they should practice that this may take
place, without her authority thereunto: especially it being with all the
direct overthrow of her chief authority. They do well to say, that they
would have them do it by lawful and ordinary means: wherein our Brethren
differ from the Papists that seek vijs and modis by all means to put in
practice their desperate resolutions. Which as God defeateth, and our Brethren
detest: so what lawful and ordinary means can they imagine, to put this their
form in practice against her Majesty's will, that may stand with her supreme
authority? Good success.
And therefore (in my opinion) this is very ill done, and daungerously spoken
of our Br. to cast forth such suspicious words, as to move them that have
authority, so to abuse it, or as though they would or should be moved to this
practice. And for my part I protest, that I like all this whole learned
discourse the worse, that in the end and conclusion of all, it should come to
this drift, which verily is not pleasing unto God, nor God will ever (I dare
warrant it) give it good success, if the wind begin once to blow in at that
door, which God forbid that ever we should see that time.

But what is the time that here they speak off? At this time to be embraced.
It should seem to be at the time of the Parliament as may appear by the last
part of their protestation saying:

We protest before the living God, etc. and the whole assembly of all estates
of this Realm.

I meruell much at this practice of our Brethren, that they are so eager in
their pursuit, to have their platformes put in practice that they see not how
they cross in this doing, O^r Brethrens offering up their Pamphlets every
Parliament do therein contrary to their own principles
their own writings. They are still at every Parliament offering up their
little books (for I forbear to call them Libels to avoid offense) of the
reformations that they call upon, unto the high and most honorable Court of
Parliament. Wherein although if we should lay together and confer, all their
books and forms of reformation, that they have offered up unto the
Parliaments; we should find great varieties, and some contrarieties among
them: yet let them agree or disagree in other things how they shall: what do
they mean herein by putting them unto the Parliament? Would they have these
controversies to be disputed upon, and determined by the Parliament? That is
clean contrary to the chief material points, of the very books themselves,
that they offer up unto the Parliament.

For except they will make all the Burgesses in the nether house and all the
Lords in the higher house to be Ecclesiastical persons, and either Doctors
and Pastors, whom also they make all Bishops, The Parliament about these
matters.
teachers and Preachers of the word and Sacraments; at least wise, such
Presbyters, Priests or Elders not teaching, whom they call Governors; if they
shall be present as any parts and members or necessary regents of the
assembly, and not only as spectatores or auditores tantum; if they shall
remain still as lay civil or politic persons: so that they can not (by
their own Canons) have any voices, at least, not determine any thing in Eccl.
matters, especially, so great and important matters as they make them. And what
would they have the Parliament then to do in these things? Nay, wha^ will they
suffer them to do: Yea, what would the Parliament do, Our Brethrens words pa.
117. against the Parliament and all that are no Pastors.
when they should find, that in the very books offered unto them of these
matters, they are prohibited to deal in these matters? Yea, how can they deal
in these matters, and allow these Pastors to come in, and take them up for
their labor, saying unto them: yea my Lords, and Masters, dare ye take upon
you, or are ye able to deal in these matters, or so much as to know them? For
who should be able to know what order, comeliness and aedification requires
according to Gods word, but they that be teachers and preachers of the same
unto all others? For it is absurd that they should be taught by such in these
small things, as ought to learn the truth of them in all matters. page 117.
and much more absurd, that they should be taught by such in greater matters.
Yea they ought to learn the truth of them in all matters.

If the Parliament once hear this thunder crack: conticuere omnes intemtique
ora tenebunt. If some one among them perhaps do reply and say:

If they will not suffer us to have any thing to do in debating and
determining of these matters: why then (a Gods name) do they put them up to
us? or what would they have us to do in them? except they will give us some
authority of them. How the Parliament may r^iect all their Pamphlets.
But they are so far from giving us any such authority: that they say, we
are not able so much as to know them. No, nor yet their own Consistory
governors able to know them, but only the teachers and preachers of the same
to all others. And what will they then allow to us?

If the Parliament hear this man speak thus: may they not think, that man
speaks reasons? and that there was little reason, in troubling them
continually with those matters, in the Parliament house, whereof they may not
(according to the liberty of that most honorable assembly) speak their mynds
in reverent manner, pro and contra freely, and no man debarred of his speech or
judgment: or else the house would better advise themselves, how they permitted
such fellows to come among them, or to bring in such bills or books among
them, of which they must be restrained of their liberty, both of speech and
judgment.

Yea, what if now another waxing bolder in the Parliament house, would tell
these faithful ministers, The Parliament not without the Prince.
that the matters contained in this learned discourse, being Ecclesiastical
matters, were to be consulted upon and determined, by those that were the
Bishops and Pastors of the Realm and Church of England, These matters to be
rather debated in the Convocation than in the Pa^liament.
and that they had a Convocation and Synodall assembly among themselves, and
that they must go to them, and be tried by the^, and be as well content to
submit themselves, to the determination of the Bishops and Pastors, lawfully
and orderly there assembled, as they would to have it tried in the Parliament,
if they were all such Eccl. persons, as were the other. And that if they would
flee from their own coat and Eccl. company, to such as were but civil and
politic persons, save that they were Christians as other of the people were:
they should give an ill example and prejudice their matters, and make
themselves and their books to be more mistrusted, as not daring to abide the
censure, of the chifest professors of those matters. Tractent fabrilia fabri.
Ecclesiastical matters to be tried by Ecclesiastical persons. And that this
is according to their own ^ositions. For who should be able to know, ( at
least wise, who ought better to know) what order comeliness and edification
requires according to Gods word, than they that be teachers and preachers of
the same unto all others? Clergy men to determine Clergy matters.
For it is absurd, that they should be taught by such in these small things, (
and much less in greater things) as ought to learn the truth of them in all
matters. And therefore go to the^, and let the^ determine those controversies.

If our Brethren shall hear this tale, and their own words thus duly
returned on themselves: may they not then think they have well helped
themselves, by putting up these matters to the Parliament? And if the
Parliament should answer them thus, should they not answer the^ aright?

But if now they had rather revoke some of their positions, and give ye
Parliament authority to deal herein, than to have them be determined by the
Bishops: The Parliaments determining without the Prince
what on the other side would they have the Parliament do, without the
authority of the Prince? Yea how chance they put not up their books and
writings first to her Majesty, and move her first: for if they accounted her
Majesty indeed the supreme governor of all persons in all her dominions, and in
all causes so well Eccl. as temporal: would they have ye Parliament decree
those things without her Majesty? Or the Parliament whereof her Majesty is the
supreme governor to determine these things without any debating of them?

Or if they should be debated upon: who should rather do it the^ the Clergy?
And have not al yt have bin assembled together already, both the Bishops, and
the whole Convocation, consulted, debated and determined already on the
matter? These matters already determined and by the Parliament ratified.
And if they would have her Majesty and the Parliament to deal further
therein, have they not done that also? Has not her Majesty ratefied and
authorized al their articles that the Convocation agreed upon? And has not the
whole Parliament also approved and allowed, and so, ratefied and confirmed all the Communion book, and (besides the acknowledgement of her Majesty's
supremacy) all the articles agreed, and decreed upon all, Ours and our
brthrens disputation.
or the most or cheifest of the laws and orders Eccl. now standing in force
and established amongst us? And would they have them revoke and cancel all
that they have done in these matters? or what else would they have the
Parliament herein to do?

If they offer to dispute of these matters, either before the whole Parliament,
or before any by the Parliament deputed, to hear the disputation between us
of these controversies; Our readiness to approve these matters, being ord^^lie
called thereto never so often.
do they hope to dispute better and with more deliberat judgment of that they
shall say ex tempore, than that they have with aduisement written, or can
write thereon? or that we can dispute worse, or not so well, as they persuade
themselves they can? Or do they think (as Aeschines said, Quid si ipsam
belluam andissetis) they shall better persuade and move the hearers of them,
more by their lively speeches than by their learned writings, and so win it
that ways? Verelie we refuse no way, what it shall please our most gracious
sovereign and her most honorable counsel, or the high court of Parliament to
appoint (if that would serve the turn) for any further trial, of renewing
never so often these matters, by disputing and calling them in question, again
and again, for (God be praised) in so good a cause we need not fear the
event: they that could so win the garland let them wear it.

But we may easily see (before the disputation shall begin) that all this
would not serve their turn in these controversies, The event of all
disputation which our brethren ref^se except their selves be d^^^^miners of
these matters.
which the word of God has not expreslie decided, but in generality referred
to these three heads, comeliness, order, and aedification. Who shall judge and
determine of our disputation? they have before hand debarred the prince, and
all that are not teachers and preachers, and both the parties in controversy
are teachers and preachers, and they say it were no reason, that we being the
parties in controversy on the one side (though we be teachers and preachers)
should be determiners and judges, what is comeliness, order, and edifieng in
these things: and may not we say the same to them again, that they being
also parties in controversy on the other side, though they be teachers and
preachers, it is no reason that they should be determiners and judges, what is
comeliness, order, and aedifieng in these things, and when shall then these
matters be judged and determined? Except we would yield to them, or they would
yield to us, or both to some other, as to her majesty and the Parliament. But
if they shall so do, they should convince themselves before hand, that the
form is untrue and false which they have alredie before hand not only auowed
to be true, but so determined alredie, and so before hand peremptorily
prescribed, both to us and to the Parliament, and to the Queens majesty also;
that we must all yield of necessity unto them.

Or whether we will yield or no, The (...) should take place.
so that they can move them that have authority to put this form in
practice, and to seek by lawful and ordinary means ( say they) that it may
take place: that it may please God to give it good success, Our br. desire of
this or the like.
at this time to be embraced: we may fulfill the rest of our course with joy.

When indeed if it should take place, or that it pleased God to give it that
success ( which they call good) at this time, or at any time hereafter, by
these means (which as we have seen) are neither ordinary nor orderly, nor
lawful, nor reasonable, nor tending to Gods glory, nor to the churches
profit, nor the safety and souereigntie of her Majesty, nor the honor of
them that have authority, nor to the custom or freedom of the Parliament:
then should our brethren also find and feel by experience the schoolemistresse
(as they say) of fools, though now in opinion they hope and are persuaded,
and would persuade us by the Theoriks of their learned discourse, otherwise,
that they should so little fulfill the rest of their course with joy, that they
should rather consume their course with too late repentance, being continually
coursed about these matters, with restless troubles and vexations.

But if our sins be the let, that this or the like, grounded upon Gods word,
The learned disc. page 147.
may not now be received: yet the present age may see and judge what is the
uttermost of our desire, concerning reformation, which hitherto for lack of
such a public testimonial; has been subject to infinite sclanders, devised
by the adversaries of Gods truth, and hinderance of godly proceedings unto
reformation. And that the posterity may know that the truth in this time,
was not generally unknown nor vntestified, concerning the right regiment of
the church of GOD: nor this disordred form of ecclesiastical government,
which we have received for the most part of popery, delivered to our children
without contradiction that our example should not be prejudicial unto them: as
the example of our godly fathers (which in this point neglected their duty)
has been prejudicial unto us.

Very well says saint James, chapter 4, ver. 1, etc. From whence are wars and
contentions among you? Bridges
are they not hence even of your lusts (or desires) that fight in your members?
Ye lust (or desire) and have not: ye envy and have indignation and can not
obtain: The cause why this desired form is not to be received.
you fight and war and get nothing, because ye ask not: ye ask and receive
not, because ye ask amiss, that you might consume it on the things that you
lust for (or do desire.) And even so for our bretherens lusts and desires, to
have this form take place and be put in practice; their selves have well
confessed, saying: but if our sins be the let that this or the like,
grounded upon Gods word may not now be received: for their sins indeed be
the let, because the things desired, and their desires and attempts thereof are
full of sins, and therefore God of his great mercy lets and stops the
receiving of this form, since it is not (as they pretend to us, or persuade to
themselves) grounded upon Gods word, and even therefore it might not then,
neither may it now, The uttermost of their desires.
nor (by the grace of God) ever shall of us be received at all.

But what is this which here they said: if our sins be the let, that this, or
the like grounded upon Gods word, may not now be received? What have we here?
This indeed is a new point. Are we come now after all this ado, Our brethrens
conclusion of their desires, that either this or the like form should be
received.
in the final conclusion and lapping up of all this form and learned
discourse of ecclesiastical government, of all this declaration, of all the
desires of all the faithful ministers, what reformation of the church of
England they seek for; after all this urging, prescribing, protesting, etc.
are we now come to the receiving of this or the like?

I had thought all this while (and so they still did bear us stoutly in hand)
that they had pleaded for this form, and would have proved that this form of
eccl. government ( which they have here set forth in this learned discourse)
had been the true way that they meant, of reformation. And now for sooth, when
all comes to all, it is not this; but it is either this or the like.

Aha, is it but so; that is another manner of matter, if it be, but either this
or the like: well then, thanks be to God, we have seen already what this is,
and what truth and force this has carried.

But what is that they say, or the like? for it is an old and a true proverb,
If it suffice to receive the like then there is no necessity of this form.
Nullum simile est idem, Nothing that is the like is the same, so that now, if
we receive the like, our brethren have here given us a flat discharge, and our
quietus est for this: and as for this, we may again give it a free passe-port
out of England, so that we receive the like, for this binds us not, but this
or the like. No, nor yet the like binds us, any more than this. But as
nothing in this did before bind us; and yet, had it bound us, the bands (as now
in the end we see) were of no force; yea, their selves have here undone ye
bands and set us at liberty, on this condition that we have the like, What is
meant by the like form.
so as yet we be free from this like also, for what this like is, that they
tell not, and how shall we learn it?

For if we look on all the forms, that any other of our brethren do also
prescribe; or on any other form in any other reformed church; they are
neither like this form, nor one like another: It is not hurtful that all
churches forms of government be not like. In substance of doctrine they must
be all one.
neither is there any hurt at all therein, though they be not alike in their
forms of eccl. government. For, so that they be not alike, but al one and the
same, in all one and the same substance of doctrine, faith, and religion; the
eccl. government, in diverse states and dominions, may differ in diverse
matters, and be neither the same, nor yet alike, without any danger to those
churches themselves, or any prejudice to the churches of other princes
countries and dominions.

But like or like not, if it may not ( say they) be received: yet the present
age may see and judge, what is the uttermost of our desire.

That (say I) is very hard for us to see, The seeing and judging the uttermost
of our br. desires.
when their own selves are not able to determine it. For although we may see
these their desires yt are set down in this learned discourse ( if they may be
rightly termed desires, Adversaries of Gods truth.
and not rather prescriptions: yet neither do we see the uttermost of them,
nor what a number (even as in the horse of Troie) lie hidden and included in
them, that yet in these beginnings are not opened, and God knows whether the
present age now living, shall see the one half or quarter of them, especially
of the uttermost of them.

Yea, what an uncertainty of their desires do they here open to the present
age; when they conclude thus, that they either desire this or the like form to
be received? Can this present age, or do theirselues in this preset discourse,
see the uttermost of these indefinit desires of the like, till they shall
further open it, or till experience the mistress of fools, shall reveal it:

They say, that the reformation which they desire, hitherto for lack of such
a public testimonial ( meaning as this learned discourse) has been subject
to infinite sclanders, devised by the adversaries of Gods truth, and hinderance
of godly proceedings unto reformation:

If our brethren have cause to take offense for sclanders ( as they say)
devised against their reformation, Our brethrens grecuous slandering of their
brethren to be the adversaries of Gods truth.
do they not see here what a foul and intolerable sclander they cast upon
all the professors of the Gospel, that are not of their opinion in this their
devised reformation, to term us the adversaries of Gods truth, that favor the
truth of God, as much (by the grace of God) even for their lives as they? Are
we not their brethren in the profession of the Gospel? Have they not
confessed, that in substance of religion we agree, and it is resolved and
publikelie maintained for our true and holy faith? Were we thus professors of
Gods truth, in the preface of this learned discourse andare we now in the
peroration of the same, the adversaries of gods truth?

Indeed, in the very first title to the book of this form discoursed upon,
they began roughly, and set it out, to serve for a just apology ( as they
said) against the false accusations and sclanders of their adversaries: there
also they mentioned sclanders and false accusations, and called us adversaries.
All which were heavy words, and a rough beginning of such as are or should be
brethren. It was but malum omen to stumble on such foul terms at the very
threshold, it did prognosticat we should have some storms, and so we have had
indeed, in passing through this learned discourse, and yet this is but a mild
book in comparison of many other of theirs, albeit our brethren have not
been very meal mouthed, but have used very broad language (God wot, and all
the world may see) too unseemly for ministers, faithful ministers, and
learned discourses, against their brethren in Christ, for no greater matters
than these are.

But we have borne them off with head and shoulders, as well, and with as much
patience and forbearance as we might, save that we have turned again now and
then for our necessary defense, and laid (I trust in modesty) before our
brethren only, how ill they have done therein, and how the most of the same
sclanders were such stones cast as could rebound.

But now, This learned discourse begun, continued, and concluded in foul
language.
when we have got out of the whole plotforme and building of this learned
discourse, bearing off all the blows and taunts in the several lodgings of
all these new Eccl. officers: and thought now on the backside of this building
all had been past and done: naie soft, we shall have like farewell to our
hansell; yea, where we were called before but their adversaries: we shall now
be driven out with another manner of peale: as not only hindrances of their
proceedings to reformation, but to all the present age, and that the posterity
may know it too, as a perpetual blot of infamy, we are now hissed out, and
cried out upon, not for their adversaries only; but for the adversaries of
gods truth, they complain of our false accusations and infinite sclanders, to
let go all their other complaints on us, this one is vnum pr^mille. To whom
shall we complain of this so apparent untrue, and withal so heinous an
accusation made on us?

It deserves indeed (for the indignity thereof) to have shaken our garment,
and with silence (as clear therefrom) to have gone our way. Our answer to this
foul sclander. 10.8.
But because it touches God and his truth, in which case we may yet at least
return and say with Christ our savior, ego daemonium non habeo: we are not
the adversaries of Gods truth: It is untruly and vnbrotherlie spoken, neither
touches it us alone, but all the holy and ancient fathers in the primitive
church, whom we have plainly showed to be of ye same opinion, in all or the
greatest of these controversies yt we defend: and in our own days and present
age, How many besides us this sclander touches.
it spotteth the fresh memory of our late godly fathers, Cranmer, Latimer,
Ridley, Hooper, Ferrar, Philpot, etc. all blessed martyrs, and all that
consented unto them: and diverse reverend and godly Confessors of later
memory, as Bishop, Iuell, Horn, Pilkinton, Grindall, Cox, Bentham, Parkhurst,
and others, which were all notably known both on this side and beyond the
seas, to be great professors of gods truth, and no less earnest impugners of
the adversaries of the truth of God.

And albeit they liked not these desires and devises of our brethre^s forms of
reformation; yet for their great learning and sincerity in the gospel, the
most notable men of late in the reformed churches beyond the seas, do highly
honor them, and think and speak well of them, giving full testimony of their
liking. Yea, both Bucer and Peter Martyr, two chief lights and pillars of Gods
church in these our last days, forsook their own countries, and all other
reformed churches, and lived under the form of reformation of this our English
church, with all due reverence both to the state than being, and to the bishops
then living, without any impugning or defacing of the^.

Yea Calvin himself (as we have showed) allows well both of the ancient
bishops and Archbishops, before the tyranny and e^rors of the pope began; and
of the bishops of these days, to continue still in their bishopriks, so they
be professors of Gods truth, Hinderance of our br. proceedings.
and not adversaries to it.

How unadvisedly then is this spoken of our brethren, and how reprochfullie to
call our Bishops and all us that join with them, the adversaries of Gods
truth? Who are the adversaries of Gods truth.
Could they bestow any fouler term upon the rankest of all the Papists, or upon
the Pope himself? For they indeed are the adversaries of Gods truth. And so S.
Paul says 2. These. 2. of that man of sin, and son of perdition, which is an
adversary, and exalts himself against all that is called God.

And this term as a parting blow, for a token of remembrance, our brethren
vouchsafe to give our bishops and us, Our hindera^ce of our br. proceedings in
this form.
to be ye adversaries of Gods truth: this is too too bitter zeal, Mors in
olla, there is Coloquintida in this pot that boils over such froth. Gods truth
is not in this accusation, no brootherhood of Christ, no link of love, no bond
of peace, no bowels of mercy, no affection of compassion, but all of passion
in this too black Rhethorike. But it suffices us to clear our selves, GOD
forgive it our brethren, and we do.

And whereas withal they burden our Bishops and us, that we are an hinderance
of godly proceedings unto reformation: this is another great untruth and
sclander. These proceedings indeed of our brethren, our Bishops and we, have
good cause both to hinder and repel. For they are neither Godly proceedings,
nor proceed as becomes either learned preachers, or faithful ministers, or
dutiful subjects; neither proceed they in any charitable and orderly manner;
neither is this form that here they prescribe a reformation, as they call it,
or (howsoever they persuade themselves) any other than a ready path to
confusion most deformed, as we have plainly seen, even where, page 84. they
pretend most to avoid horrible confusion, as they term it. And that we do not
belie this their form, with infinite, or with any sclanders, let the reader
mark, or their selves reuise better their devises, about the persons office
and authority of those presbyters preests, or elders, whom they term
governors; but they might much better in my opinion have the term of secular
preests, What d^formed confusion among us this form of reformation would
breed.
for difference of the other pastoral preests, or eccl. preests, that are the
ministers of the word and sacraments. And if they shall advise themselves of
the authority that they give them (except they will wilfully sot themselves)
they shall soon find great confusions, which upon their admittance both in the
office of the pastor, in the office of the prince, and of all officers and
Magistrates, for laws making and for laws breaking, and for all vices wherein
they would intermeddle and disturb all the eccl. and civil state, and breed
infinite contentions among the common people in every parish and congregation,
which all their devises could not help, except with putting them down, and
that were no less danger if they were once up, and therefore to avoid all such
deformations, I think it better before hand to hinder such proceedings to
reformation, and to stop them that they come not in.

I have my self heard, and so have diverse other, Deformed refomation.
the means that now and the^ the pastors of the French and Belgike churches,
The French and Belgike churches.
have made, of ye confusio^s and contentions that have cheeflie risen by these
seigniories, and yet may their state far better admit them, especially now
(God comfort them) standing as they do, than our state may, God be praised for
it. Neither does Gualter cry out so much upon this devise of these governors,
without good cause where otherwise there are godly civil magistrates.

Besides this, their equality in all places, of all Pastors, and making of
them to be all Bishops in every parish or several congregation; what a
reformation that would make, if their selves cannot see it (that perhaps would
have no superior) I refer to others better po^dering. And to join these new
Bishops and these new Governors together, to make up a consistory of them,
both these secular preests of all conditions and estates, nobleme^, gentlemen,
merchants, yeomen, craftsmen, confused together with these eccl. preests, that
are the pastors; and all these in all eccl. discipline, excommunication, and
other church matters, to draw altogether in one joint authority, whether it
might be such a yoking (for some of them) as God forbad, of the ox plowing
with the ass; Deuteronomy. 22.10.
and how fitly this would draw and proceed to godly reformation, we have
partly seen, let others think further of it, I fear the worst.

Besides the infinite troubles, about ye continual, or very often shire Synods,
for elections and ordeining pastors: besides every churches variety in matters
of ceremonies: besides ye cold lectures of the doctors, that might not exhort,
nor rebuke, nor comfort, nor apply their doctrine: but the hotter sca^blings
about ye new deuisions of the Bishops, the Colleges and the cathedral churches
lands, with all the sacrilege ( as they call it) of Abbeys, as impropriatious,
etc. al which their Deacons would look to distribute, but they shall be served
al at leisure. Besides the divisions and new boundings out of al particular
parishes and congregatio^s, besides her Majesty to be put besides her cheifest
and most principal authority: and all these things to be done, and she cannot
do thereto: besides a number of their other proceedings, for the which I
refer me to this learned discourse, and to their other treatises, which, how
well they all agree together, and when all is done, either they would have this
or the like, or we cannot tell what, nor they tell us what the like is, yt they
refer us unto: are not these godly proceedings to reformation? and are we now
to be blamed as hindera^ces to these godly procedings unto reformation? nay
rather if they will indeed blame any, let them blame themselves, for they
hinder themselves more than any other do, except that they hinder most of all
(which most of all they pretend to further) the glory of GOD, the quiet and
increase of the church by these proceedings, or rather recedings and
backslidings.

But to clear themselves hereof, they have forsooth set forth this learned
discourse concerning reformation, which hitherto ( say they) for lack of such a
public testimonial, Our bretherens public testimonial.
was subject to infinite sclanders.

This is a fair pretense, for the setting forth this their learned discourse.
But if their intendment had been indeed no further, but to have cleared
themselves from infinite scla^ders, Our brethrens pretense only t^ clear
themselue from sclander.
they should have stood either altogether or most, on that defensatiue point:
whereas their cheifest part of this learned discourse has been spent in
coursing and oppugning us, and that with casting forth far more sclanders and
accusations against us, than any matters that they were charged withal. But
(I think) they have sped accordingly, even with the only returning home
their own words, without any our sclandrings of them. It is an old saying,
Self do, self have; they could never have found greater adversaries to
themselves, than their selves are, nor greater hinderance of their proceedings,
than this their own public testimonial, Our brethrens public testimonial.
to be a testimonial beyond all exception, against them selves.

For whatsoever they have been burdened heretofore by others, their selves
have now confirmed all those reports to be most true, which before the coming
forth of this public testimonial, might have been suspected to be
sclanders: or that these things had been but the singular conceits of this
fantastical head, or of that particular person. But now that this learned
discourse is set forth, and is such a public testimonial, as contains A
brief and plain declaration concerning the desires of all those faithful
ministers, that have and do seek for the discipline and reformation of the
church of England: Let this public testimonial be thorowlie weighed, how it
concordeth with the particular testimonials, of al other that before had
written on the like argument. The disagreement of our br. testimonials
Yea, how it agrees with it self; least our brethrens testimonials in this
point, should be found like the witness of those, of whom it is said, Mark
14, 57, Many bare false witness against him, but their witness agreed not
together.

I do not compare our brethren to such a pack of false varlets; nor to go
about any such wicke^ purpose; but only for this point, that their
testimonials do not agree, and so do breed their own discredit. Besides many
apparent untruths, contradictions, inconveniences, absurdities, ambiguities,
and a number of undutiful reproaches of the pastors, of the Bishops, of the
Magistrates, of the Prince, of the whole church, state, and realm, wherewith
this their public testimonial is not only interlaced, but full fraught.
Which the present age seeing and considering; might rather reject it for an
infamous libell, unorderly crept out and scattered abroad in the name of all
the faithful ministers, and yet not one of all their names set unto it; rather
than accept it for any lawful, autentike, and public testimonial.

And as our brethren say, they meant this for the age present; so say they:
And that the posterity may know, Our brethrens intendment for the posterity.
that the truth in this time was not generally unknown nor vntestified,
concerning the right regiment of the church of God, nor this disordered form
of ecclesiastical government, which we have received for the most part of
popery, etc. Knowledge and sestification of the truth.


Lo, how our Brethren still hold out to the hard end, their boystrous
reproaches, of our disordred form of Ecclesiastical government; and that we
have received it for the most part of Popery; and it was within little, that
they said not, for all of popery, as the most part, does often times go for
all. But with them, these speeches go not for sclaunders, but for friendly
admonitions, and brotherly testimonials, of their good opinion of our state and
us.

Yea, these and all the rest are uttered, That the posterity may know.

What should they know? How to ruffle in the like Rhetorical figures? What
should they know? How these that went before them, left behind them, such a
reproachful testimonial of the present age? Is not this a fair record, and
full worthy to be commended to the posterity for a perpetual memory?

But they say, they shall know hereby, that the truth in this time, was not
generally unknown nor vntestified, The posterity can know no certain true
form by this Learned Discourse.
concerning the right regiment of the Church of God:

And how shall they know this? By this Learned Discourse and public
testimonial ( as they call it) testified by a general indiuiduum vagum, Sir
Nicholas Nemo, and all his company, of faithful Ministers? May this in law
be admitted for a lawefull record, and public testimonial of the truth?
Veritas non quaerit angulos.

Well, yet the posterity may know that the truth in this time, was not
unknown nor vntestified, concerning the right regiment of the Church of God.

Truth indeed, the truth ( God be praised for it) is not generally unknown,
especially, in this time. Yea (thanks be to God) it is known and testified
more generally at this time, than for generality, it has been known (as I
suppose) at any time, not excepting (in that respect) the very time of the
Apostles: If our lives were generally also aunswerable, to our general
knowledge, and to our public testification. Neither is in this time the right
regiment of the Church of GOD generally unknown or vntestified, but was
generally known and testified well enough, before the public testimonial of
this Learned Discourse came forth. Neither do we, or can we take any certain
knowledge concerning the right regiment of the Church hereby. Yea it should
seem, that their own selves (except in some generality, and superficial
knowledge) do not as yet know it, nor can testify what it is For, if this be
the right regiment of the Church, that in this public testimonial they
prescribe unto us: it has not only been generally and altogether unknown
and vntestified, in any time heretofore, until this time, that his Learned
Discourse came forth, An uncertain conclusion.
and before was never heard of: I mean, for this form, taking it altogether,
as it is here discoursed, except for some parcelles of it, testified of late
by others: But, for any certain knowledge, it is not yet either generally
made known and testified unto the present age, or to the posterity by this
public testimonial, nor particularly unto the testies themselves, for all
that they boldly affirm this to be the right regiment of the Church: and yet
when they have never so truly testified, and discoursed never so learnedly,
all that they can, The uncertain conclusion of al our Brethr. desires.
with all their heads laid together, their very desire in the end and sum
of all, is but either to have this or the like to be received.

But if this be the right; then either this, or the wrong, there is no like will
serve the turn. And is their desire to have either right or wrong, they care
not whether, so they may be rid of this regiment that now we have? If this
regiment seem too hoate unto them, will they leap with the Flounder out of
the frying pan into the fire? But (God be praised) they need not fry, except
they fry in their own hoate and fretting choler, at the regiment of the
Church of England under GOD and her Majesty, it is generally a good Regiment
and right enough, according to the establishment of the laws thereof, if our
Brethren would cool their ouer-hoate passions, and be thankful to God, and
under him to her Majesty for it.

As for this public testimonial of our Brethren, if our regiment of the
Church, be not right; the posterity shall never know by theirs, what is right
or wrong, or that the right regiment of the Church, was made known or
testified in this time, either generally, or particularly, or (that is most to
be desired) certainly, by such a doubtful testification of uncertain
desires, that either this, or the like, or else we can not tell what, might be
received.

As for that they call our regiment of the Church, a disordred form of
Ecclesiastical government: Our Brethr. disordred speeches against our form
of Ecclesiastical govern.
it is but their own disordred form of not governing well their minds and
tongues. Our form, both for the formal and material laws and orders thereof,
is far more formal and material, than this form of their is. Yea, if it should
come to this, or the like: what misshapen form we might happen to have, we can
not yet foretell, nor they can tell us. As for that which we have already we
know it, and we know the very worst thereof. The best of theirs is yet
uncertain.

I grant, our form is not so well ordered, but that there may, and do fall
out disorders: but those happen by the abuse thereof. And so it may be, in any
form of government never so good, by men's infirmities or corruptions,
wherewith the form it self is not to be charged. And yet I go not about to
defend our form, or to vaunt thereof for any such absolute perfection, that
it could not be altered or amended: Disorder a speeches.
what Law is there not, that man can make, but it may be, or rather is
imperfect?

As for the form that they have here set forth, ( be it spoken with our
Brethrens pardon, if they please) besides their disordered setting it forth:
the very form it self is either much disordered, Abuses disordering good
forms and orders.
or else other forms that other of our Brethren have also set forth, or that
other reformed Churches are governed by, not only in Germany, but in Heluetia
are disordered.

But be this and theirs never so well ordered: might they not through abuses
or corruptions be disordered? Or what warrant can they give us that this form
which they prescribe should never be disordered? And would they be content that
any should call this their form a disordered form, only because of the
abuses and corruptions? So that, admitting this their own form had in it
self no disorder: yet this may touch their own form, so well as ours.

But they think they have answered that already page 132. That although upon
this their form there crept in as many or mo abuses than now there are: yet
God, though he condemn abuses, would approve their order. Because ( say they)
it is grounded upon Gods word. Our Brethr. form not grounded on Gods word.
But we could there find no such ground, but only that it is grounded in their
mere fancies, it is no more grounded on Gods word, nor yet so much grounded
by many parts, as our form is grounded.

And therefore, if they may say, God approves our order, though he condemn
the abuses: then may her Majesty for her supreme authority: if any under her,
abuse her Majesty's authority: the^ may our Bishops for their supreme dignity
and jurisdiction: then may our Doctors for their exhorting and applying: then
may our Pastors for their ministry and ordeyning: then may our Deacons for
their attendance on the ministry and preparing themselves to be made Pastors:
then may our Eccl. Presbyters, Priests, or Elders, which are not altogether
debarred from teaching, though most employed in governing, much better say; for
our form of the Churches government, we shall be sure that God approoueth our
order in these things though he condemn the abuses in any of these things,
because the order is grounded upon Gods word. And so far our form of Eccl.
government is not disordered.

But they say of our form of Eccl. government: it is that, which we have
received, for the most part, of Popery.

These speeches are again very sclaunderous untruths, that we have received
the most part, or any part of popery, or that we have received this form of
popery, for the most part thereof. We have received indeed (we do confess)
at the hands of the Papists, diserse things which our Brethren can not
deny, Reasons taken out of Popery.
to be good things. Neither is the receiving of a thing that is good, from a
man that is ill, prejudicial to the goodness of the thing. Yea, although the
good thing were defiled or abused by the ill man's ill handling of it, if when
we receive it, we reject the defilinges and abuses, and reduce the thing to his
original use, or proper nature. We have received many excellent things from
the Jews, yea many notable things also from the very Heathen: but far
better, if not the best of all from the Papists. For, from whom could we have
got them else? As for their Popery, that is the Popes and Papists abuses
and corruptions. Such rye we have not received from them, reteyning the
Popery. If we have taken the good and left the badde, that ought not (as a
fault) to be vpbrayded unto us, but rather deserves commendation.

But what mean they here in these words, that we have received for the most
part of Popery? Do they acquitte us yet of some part? And why then do they
thus condemn all the whole Ecclesiastical Government? Do they it because
they say it is the most part? And yet when it comes to the trial, they shall
find it so much the less part, that indeed it is no part at all, which we
have received of the Papists, wherein any corruption was, that (considering
the establishment of them by the laws now in force) we have not altered and
corrected. So that, if now there be other abuses rising; yet properly, it is
not to be called Popery, except to Papists, that use it still in their popish
manner, and so they will do even the Sacraments also, and Gospel of Jesus
Christ: and yet may not these things, but that kind of abusing them be
called popery.

But from whence have our Brethren (to prove this form of their eccl.
Government) gotten all these arguments: Our Brethr. receiving from the Papists
their popish arguments for their Pastors government.


That the Church of God was perfect in all her regiment, or ever there was any
Christian Prince, page 9.

That the authority which their Pastors claim, was granted to the Church by
our Savior Christ, practiced by the Apostles; continued by their successors,
three hundred years before there was any Christian Emperors, page 118.

That the Christian Princes authority reaches no further, than to make civil
laws to bind the people to the confession of true says, and the right
administering and receiving of the Sacraments, and to all Ecclesiastical
orders, that they being instructed by the word of God, (through the
ministry of the preaching of the same) shall understand to be profitable
for aedifying of the Church of Christ, and for the advancement of the glory
of God. If any shall offend against the laws, whether he be preacher or
hearer, besides the Ecclesiastical censure, which he should not escape, he is
also to be punished in body by the civil Magistrate, page 141.

And again, why should it be counted for any dishonor to Princes to be
obedient to the laws of God their Father, and to serve to the commodity of
the Church their mother? It is a greater honor to be the son of God, and
the child of the Church, than to be Monarke of all the earth. page 143. and
hereto are alleged for the Princes service, and subjection, Esa 49. to think
no service too base for them, so that they may profit the Church. Ps. 2. and
1. Tim. 2.

What have we here? Is this Sanders, or Stapleton, or Feckna^, or Hosius, or
some other Papist, that speaks in these voices, and has all these Popish
arguments? Or is it not some Pope himself, that uses them against the
supreme authority of Christian Princes? If this be Jacob: may we not say with
Isaac; Come near my son, that I may feel thee, whether thou be my son
Esau or not? But what need we fear that? We wish all blessing and good to
Jacob, and that Esau should serve him. Yea, we acknowledge no son, nor
brother, but Jacob. Yea, but for all that: the voice is Jacobs voice, but the
hands are the hands of Esau?

What? And have ye then indeed (Brethren) got Esaus voice also? Or but covered
your hands with a beasts rough skin, to get the blessing? And do not those
rough hands, make the blessing worse?

Ha Brethren, Brethren, for shame burden not us herein, if we have received
some thing, concerning but the form of the Churches government from the
Papists, having cleansed the same from the roughness of it and abuse^, and
your selves in so great a matter of the Churches supreme government, have
gotten all the five fingers, yea the whole, yea the very rough hand it self
herein of Esau. Of Esau say I? Nay of all these Papists, and of the man of
sin himself, that child of perdition, that great adversary both of the King
Christ, and of all Christian kings.

And yet you think to use these arguments well against all Christian Princes
that the Pope used against them; but ye do very ill, for herein ye take not
these reasons and testimonies of the Papists, but ye take of the Popery of
the Papists. Yea, even where ye condemn the Pope, there ye both justify his
doings, and would profess to follow them. Does not your book of obedience,
page 52. and 53. break forth in these words? Although the Pope for sundry
enormities have deposed Princes by their unlawful authority: yet the reason
that moved them so to do, was honest and just, and meet to be received, and
executed by the body or state of every commonwealth. See here in what a
dangerous matter, you say the Popes reason is to be received, yea and his
doing to be executed, and that by the body of every commonwealth. And thus as
the Pope did excommunicate and pronounce Princes to be deposed, such
excommunications, and depositions would you pronounce in all kingdoms. Example
of contradiction.
Is not this a new kind of popery, if not far more dangerous* Ye say, our
form of regiment is translated from Rome to Canterbury. But this new Popery
comes directly as we see, eue^ from Rome, and would enter into every parish,
would come to our own doors, would enter into the Princes palace, would
trample down her Majesty's most principal and supreme authority, and turn
it out of doors, to place these new Parishionall Bishops, and their
Consistories of vnteaching Priests or Governors.

But this is no Popery.

That was ill, I grant, and too bad, but God grant this be not a great deal
worse. But such is our corrupted nature, when we have well amended that that was
amiss, our fingers itch, still to be mending it (as we think) better and
better, till we have made it as ill as it was before or quite marde it
altogether.

But our Brethren are further offended with our form of Ecclesiastical
government, that it is (say they) delivered to our children without
contradiction.

And why should it be delivered with contradiction, if the matter delivered, be
lawefull and good? Do our Brethren love contradiction so well, that they would
have it used in good and lawefull matters? And where no necessity is? And to
nousell up our Children also in contradiction? S. Paul teaches us another
rule, 1. Cor. 11.16. If any man lust to be contentious, we have no such
custom, neither the Churches of God. We shall find contradiction enough,
against the adversaries of Gods truth, against wicked livers, and abusers or
corrupters of the form of Ecclesiastical government establied. And yet among
the very enemies, says the Apostle, Have peace with all men, so much as in you
lies. So that, we need not contend one with another so unbrotherly about
these matters, if we shall do well: save in the necessary defense and
maintenance of the right use and authority of them; and least of all ought we
to teach and train up our children to use contradiction against their
spiritual fathers, in the Ecclesiastical government, that they deliver unto
them; for that were to make them disobedient and rebellious children to their
fathers. But less marvel it is if they have herein contradiction with us,
that have so many contradictions in these matters among themselves.

But our Brethren would have our form of Ecclesiastical government, not to
be delivered to our children without contradiction, that ( say they) our
example should not be prejudicial unto them. How our Brethren would no^sle up
their children in contradiction.


As though it were a prejudice to our children not to be fleshed in
contradiction against our form established of Ecclesiastical government,
even as Hanniball was devoted in his child-hoode to be a perpetual deadly
enemy to the Romans. So that these faithful Ministers do not think, they
can be spiritual fathers to their natural children, Our Brethrens accusation
of our godly fathers.
except they bring them up in this spiteful contradiction. And if they should
not show their children this example; they should be prejudicial to them,
and their children might degenerate, and not love contention as they do And
so, they would have contention grow by inheritance. For that will not out of
the flesh, that is bredde in the bones, cat after kind a good mouse hunt. Is
not this a godly care of fathers, and a godly education of children?

As the example ( say they) of our godly fathers (which in this point neglected
their duty) has been prejudicial unto us.

They complain of their fathers that they brought not them up thus, Our
Brethr. accusation of their godly fathers.
nor gave not them such example of contradiction, as they will bring up their
children, and give them better example by their contradiction. They accuse
their Fathers of negligence herein, and yet they call them godly. But do they
not herein accuse themselves of many great crimes, both in unthankful
accusing of their fathers for negligence; and for neglecting that matter, which
if they should not have neglected, yea, if they should not diligently have
shunned and taken heed of, least they should have given them any example, they
should indeed not have done the parts and duties of godly fathers to them, if
they had nousled them up in these contradictions. Which because they did not,
they were the more godly fathers to them, and they the worse children that
follow not therein their godly fathers godly example. But are such as ungodly
degenerate from them, and that is more ungodly, give ill example to their
children: wherein they neglect their duty, both to the honor of their godly
fathers, and to the charge of their tender children. And as this their ill
example to their children may be dangerous both to themselves, and to their
children: so this accusing of their fathers, and yet acknowledgement of them to
be godly, does convince and condemn their fathers. For, if the form of the
Ecclesiastical regiment which they have here discoursed upon so learnedly,
that they make their boast of it in the top of every leaf, to be a Learned
Discourse, be so high, so urgent, and so necessary: how do they call their
and our fathers godly, Our godly fathers neglect of this form and of no^sling
up their children in these contradictions.
having neglected their duty in so high, urgent and necessary matters? If
they may be godly, and nevertheless neglecte this their form prescribed of
Ecclesiastical gonernement, for which they contend with us their Brethren:
then is not the same so important, as they would make it to be; nor the want or
neglect thereof so prejudicial, but that we their sons may be godly also
well enough without it, as our Fathers were godly fathers, notwithstanding they
had it not, or did neglect the same.

Our fathers ^eglect of this ^o^me.
But this they say, is prejudicial unto this their form, and unto them
herein, that our godly fathers did neglect it.

Indeed it is not a little prejudicial thereunto. But it shows withal that
they accounted it not to be of that importance that our Brethren make it, nor
to be any part of their duty, which if they had, being godly fathers, they
neither would nor could have so neglected. For who were these godly fathers?
And how long have they neglected this form of our Brethren, if at least they
ever knew, or heard, or dreamed of this, or any such form like to this?
Verily even all the godly fathers that have been in any age, Our Brethr.
prejudice by their godly fathers neglect.
from the time of Christ's being here on the earth, even down till our time,
are these our godly Fathers. And this is no small prejudice to these sons,
that would now thrust these things upon us, and accuse all our godly Fathers
in neglecting their duty rather than they would leave their contradiction
against either us their Brethren, or against their prince and Magistrates, or
against their and our godly Fathers of any ages passed heretofore: that they
might leave behind them as a perpetual public testimonial to their and our
children, and to all posterity, an example of their contradictions and
contentions

And thus with this good report of our godly Fathers and with this good public
testimonial to the posterity of the age present, and with this careful
example for our children, to be nourished up in his contradiction, and to
deliver it as their inheritance to their children and childrens children while
the world continues after them: they break off, and end all this Learned
Discourse, and with this charitable affection and quiet mind to us, and to our
form of Ecclesiastical government established, they conclude yet a great
deal better, with a final wish, and (as it were) a prayer to God, Wherein so
far as the same tends to the glory of God, to the more manifest revealing
of his truth herein, to the acknowledgement of our sins and imperfections,
to the humble and hearty begging of his mercy, grace, consolation, and unity
of his holy spirit: (not to the confirming of the form that they have here
prescribed, nor to the defacing of the form of Eccl. government, already in
this his Church established:) we jointly say with them, and crave of them also
to repete their own words, and to say with us and all of us altogether with
heart and voice.

The Lord grant for Christ's sake, that we being ( all of us) so far from
( any) perfection ( in this mo^tall life, but rather, as the holy Apostle
says, Our Brethr. conclusion with prayer.
6. Hebr. being led forwards toward: that according to the commandment
of our Master Jesus Christ, we may be perfect as our heavenly father is
perfect) God may open all our eyes to see the same, ( and not be blinded in our
own conceits) and bend our hearts earnestly to labor to attain thereunto, (
by all such godly and lawefull means as is aunswerable to our vocations.) And
in the mean time, so far as we have attained, ( to be thankful to God for
the same, and under him to all them whom he has made the instruments,
whereby we have attained thereunto. And not to be weari^ thereof, and seek
innouations, but with all constant alacrity of going forward, both in
synceritie of true religion, and in sanctification of our lives, and in due
obedience to our most gracious Sovereign, and under her Majesty to all our
Ecclesiast. overseers, and civil Magistrates, and to all the godly laws Eccl.
or political, of this our Church and Realm of England) that we may proceed
all by one rule, that we may be all like affectioned to seek the glory of God
( and the peace of his Church) and to build up the ruins of his temple ( and
not to hinder the building, by controlling or defacing the builders thereof, by
unnecessary contradictions, and by devising of new platformes) but, that with
one heart, and with one voice, we may praise the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, in his holy temple, which is the congregation of Saints in the holy
Ghost, ( and praise the son also, which is the same our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, and together with the Father and the son, pray the holy ghost,
the comforter to lead us into all truth, and to sanctify both our souls and
bodies, with all holiness and righteousness, according to the rich and
plentiful measure of his grace, in this life transitory, and to glorify us
in his life eternal. All which, and all those other things, whatsoever his
blessed will and heavenly wisdom sees most requisite for his glory, for our
salvation, and for the ceasing of these contradictions, that we may be all
truly united unto him, and in him be reunited one to another, he of his
infinite mercy vouchsafe to grant: To whom ( three persons and one Almighty
God, the king everlasting, immortal, invisible, and God wise only) be all
honor and glory, all dominion and power, all praise and thanksgiving, both
now for ever and for evermore.

And so, unto this our Brethrens prayer thus a little (and I hope without
offense) augmented, I beseech them and all our other Brethren and sisters in
Jesus Christ, let us all take withal upon us the good Clerks part and
join in the closure, by unfeignedly pronouncing the Amen. Amen (good Lord)
according to thy good will. Amen. So be it.

Faults escaped.
Pagina 19, line 17, Read these. 158, l. 14, to. 163, l. 42, them. ^98, l. 11,
(...). 227, l. 26, of. 239, l. 11, sacrificer and 244, l. 38, (...)* 243, l. 2,
unlearned. 256, l. 38, is. 258, l. 12, imposed. 268, l. 11, your. 276, in
margin. antiquity. 277, l, 41, praefectum. 284, l. 13, likely. ^0. l. 31,
repress. ib. is it. 293, l 36, engendered: 305, in marg. dele of Ieromes. 323,
l. 41, returned to. 332, in marg. not Evangelists. 341, l. 5, it. 346, l. 20,
dele not. 347, l. 16, not. 348, l. 3, no long. 364, l. 37, greater. 368, l. 7,
ordain. 378, l. 27, so forth. 389, l. 13, since. 405, l, 37^ (...). 40^, in
marg. forbids not. ib. l. 39, dele from. 419, l. 6, confused. 427, l. 29,
Theoctistus. l. 31, dele Bishop. l. 33, twentieth. 428, l. 36, yea. 432, in
marg. praefatus est. 433, l. 27, and 28, superintendents. 441, l. 2, pontifex
are: and yet he. 444, l. 6, dele the. 451, marg. Math. ^3.454, l. 16, and 17,
If there had been no primacie, there had been no love of it: for, Ignoti
null^ cupidopunc; 457, l. 3, Colleagues. 467, l. 18, member. 473, l. 11, as
far. ib. l. 36, that he. 505, l. 40, haled. 526, l. 22, expel. 534, l. 21,
suffice. 541, l. 36, seal. 568, l. 15, as. 569, l. 15, that. 571, l. 16, or.
575, l. 42, principles. 610, l. 12, so. 611, l. 27. concent. 612, l. 24, the.
633, l. 34, we. 665, l. 25, no. 681, l. 32 represents. 694, l. 21, that.
703, l. 13, she. 704, l. 10, is not. 711, l. 30, Batilidis. 721, l. 15, with.
726, l. 8, no superior. 728, l. 40, of his. 732, l. 2, virilis. 740, l. 36,
the. 742, l. 5, Alexandra. 749, l. 41, powers. 759, l. 19, he. 784, l. 39,
which is. 797, l. 28, or. 812, l. 32, e^conuerso. 820, l. 29, with. 826, l. 37,
dele not. 827, l. 6, confusion. 829, l. 1. than. 830, l. 6, are not. 831, l.
13^ is. 836, l. 22, dele the hea^ing. 839, l. 5, (...). 840* l. 2. (...). 841,
l. 1, 1. Tim. 4.844, l. 9, some government in the church, separated both from
others, and from this sole. 85 1, l. 46, neither. 855, l. 42, unpreaching. 856,
l. 8. perusal. 876, l. 28, proportion. ib. margi. Theophilact. 787, l. 9,
life. 883, l. 13, the. 914, l. 13, Epistle. 922, l. 37, ye. 923, l. 40, of
elders. 924, l. 26, them. 938, l. 21, drives. 942, marg. (...). 943, l. 36,
(...). 962, l. 21, drive us. 972, l. 3, chosen counsels. 975, l. 3, dele for.
993, l. 13, whosoever. 994, l. 6, is. 996, l. 37, assessors. 1002, l. 35, they.
1003, l. 8, Sari. 1007, l. 28, (...). 1029, l. 4, that. 1037, l^ 35, any thing.
1044, l. 19, is. 1048, l. 5, (...). 1052, l. 10, mere. 1057, l. 4, confute.
1062, l. 24, and him. 10^3, l. 42, disputed. 1114, l. 33, to be. 1116, l. 27,
or she. 1120, l. 17, communion. 1138, l. 32, them. 1144, l. 2, discourses and.
1152; l. ^, all alike. 1164, l. 1, seat. l. 14, came. l. 32, confirm. 1176,
l. 26, as. 1182 l. 25, then no. 1295, l. 14, distractions. 1198, l. 28, dele
worthy. 1204, l. 13. humor. 1209, l. 36, to. 1216. l. 9, still. 1236, l. 4,
severely. 1243, l. 12, is. 1244, l. 6, which. 1251, l. 37, cry. 1254, l. 21,
dele pro. 1255, marg. proiudiciall. 1256, l. 22, without. 1261, l. 3,
reference. 1266, l. 2, no. 1287 l. 13, Seigniorie. 1317, l. 28, the. ib. l. 39,
40, Lord Bishop. 1325, l. 3, reference. 1348, l. 2, they. ^350, l. 41, seat.
1357, l. 2^, God. 1361, l. 16, be. 1365, l. 9, (...). 1366, marg. artic. ib.
marg. reference.

These lines following are to be referred unto the ends of their several
pages, as they are here quoted.
Page 212.
:thus as they ministered before by preaching: Page 700.
unto his beauty, which has there for the time bin unworthily defiled. Page
747.
here committed: Page 844.
the churches consent: yet yt the regiment is a consent of them, is doubtfully

