THE APOLOGY OF GEORGE BRISSET, LORD OF GRATENCE.

Written upon consideration of the inhumane murder of the late French king,
and sent to Monsieur Tauraine, a Counselor in the Court of Parliament of
Britain in France, Lord high Steward of the council of Nants; where the said
Noble man, with many others of account, were converted from the Church of Rome,
and become true Christian Catholics, to the great joy of all good Christians.

Translated out of French into English.

VIRESCIT VULNERE VERITAS printer's or publisher's device

Printed for William Barley, and John Baily. 1610.

The Translator to the Reader.
THis short discourse includes in it much substance, and lays open the
principal errors by which the traiterous Papists have so long governed the
commonwealth of France: showing how their reasons are badly grounded, ill
applied, and worse derived for their purpose. Therefore I wish every man would
have so much care of his souls health, as to imitate this new Convert in the
searching of Gods word: and doubtless, then many would receive true comfort,
and discern light from darkness, and be no more misse-led with that
uncharitable rule of Popery, viz. That it is not lawful for artificers, and
tradesmen, and those that be ignorant people, to search into the Book of
God. By which means these Papists have fair advantage to muffle their
scholars in any error, were it never so gross: where having their faith tied
to another man's report, they must needs stand in danger of damnation. And that
many more should not be seduced into the like opinion, here is (by an
inspiration from God) an Apology made by a French gentleman, trained up all
his time from his infancy in Popery, now reduced to the true knowledge of
God, revealed in his holy word, by searching out his salvation in the diligent
reading and meditation thereof.

AN APOLOGY OF GEORGE BRISSFT, Lord of Gratience.
WHen I had thoroughly considered (right noble Sir) how that Rome continually
strives to build up the glory of her kingdom with the blood of Princes, and to
make by the same, a legend full of sainted murderers, I grew more desirous of
my souls health then before. And that the changing of my religion, may make in
you no ill impression of me, but that you would still hold me in the same
estimation: I have here set down in writing, the motives and reasons which
have induced me so to do: entreating you to believe that I have not bin led
unto it, by any humane or worldly consideration. For I have shut mine eyes to
many fair promises and advantages, which were offered me by the church of
Rome: and have lost the love of many persons, which notwithstanding I will not
cease to honor and love; but principally your self, whose virtue and
discretion I have always highly esteemed. Which does not only give me hope,
that you will the better taste my allegations, which I have here briefly set
down: but also that many thousands hereby may return out of the mists of
Popery, into the light of truth: in the which God be theirs and my guide. And
as my soul therein has gained content, so I wish all misled believers in
that bewitching religion of popery be summoned, and call their intellectual
senses together, and examine their consciences, whether salvation consists
upon the similitude of visible things (wherein I have been in former times
nusled:) or the contemplative cogitatio^s of inward thoughts (whereunto I am now
reduced) be the better. Therefore as an induction to this my Christian Apology,
I wish all true Catholics to become true alleagiants to their Princes, and
not to let the blind Bayard of Babylon, with the vain glory of his outward
ceremonies, bewitch you. And so with honest truth to the world, and fervent
faith in Christ Jesus, I begin.

The time I was (right honorable, worshipful, and well beloved friends) one
of the number of the most zealous to the Roman religion, I had notwithstanding
this persuasion with my self; that religion is not subject to men, how great
and learned soever they be, but that they themselves are subject to religion:
also that religion is the rule of salvation given of God to men, and to which
every man ought to be subject; and that it is not lawful for any one to
exempt himself, or to change or diminish any thing therein. And thereupon
demanding of some Churchmen which I had best conceit of, if this rule was
given of God, they answered me, that it was in the sacred book of God, called
the Bible; and that there is no other book besides which may be named the word
of God. Following therefore this counsel, after I had prayed to almighty God to
give me grace to profit therein, I painfully endeavored my self to read that
book; and having chearefully read over all the Gospel, I was wonderfully
astonished to find nothing therein, concerning the most part of those things,
which had been taught me. And that it is not in the Bible commanded at all to
invoke the Saints, nor to render any service to images, nor to sacrifice
Jesus Christ, nor to pray to God without understanding what we say; and that it
speaks nothing of Purgatory, nor of Lent, nor of Masses, nor of Merits, nor of
Monks, nor of religious Orders, nor of the precedencie of the Church of Rome:
nor in brief of any of all those things, almost which were taught me in the
time ignorance blinded me; which things I then thought had been expressly
commanded in that Book of the word of God. Furthermore I found (in the same)
diverse passages which did seem to me to be flat contrary to these things.
Hereupon repairing my self to some of the same Churchmen, they answered me,
and said, that it was not lawful for me to read the holy Scripture, nor to
search after things which surpassed my capacity, but to be directed by them:
also that the Catholic Roman Church had so ordained, to whom the holy
Scriptures belongs, saying: that she is the pillar and ground of truth. 1.
Tim. 3. verse. 15. Who hears not the Church, let him be unto thee as a
heathen man, or a publicane. Matthew. 18. And that Jesus said to Saint Peter, I
have prayed that thy faith may not fail thee. Whereby it appears that the
Church of Rome founded upon Saint Peter, cannot err in the points of faith, as
they of the Roman sect affirm.

Whereupon advisedly pondering these things in my mind, I said: I believe that
Jesus Christ dyed for me, and that the promises contained in the book of the
word of God, do appertain unto me as well as to Clergymen: wherefore then
should I not presume to see these things which appertain unto me?
Contrariwise, if I had books of love, or of tales and fables, they should not
be taken from me; but now these men would bereave me of the book which they
themselves say is the book of Gods word. Add to this; if it be for none to
read but the learned, never any man should prepare himself to read it,
seeing he cannot be learned before he have read it. I had thought one had read
the Scriptures to become wise in piety; behold these men would, that one should
become wise before he had read it: wherefore then do they allege passages out
of the holy Scriptures, seeing they will not permit me to search whether their
allegations be true or not? My mind was therefore to see those places which
they did allege unto me for the authority of the Church of Rome. Now for the
first, where the Church is called the pillar and ground of truth, I find it
there, no way spoken of the Roman Church, no more then of the Grecian or
Syrian Church: there being also no appearance that the divine verity should be
grounded upon men, but much more convenient that men should ground themselves
upon the word of God. And therefore Saint Paul by these words only understood
that the church is established by God in earth, to sustain and defend the
truth against infidels, and the enemies of truth; and that these words do
represent unto the Church, her duty whereunto she is bound, and not at all her
authority. So the Church of Syria planted by Christ and his Apostles, was the
pillar and ground of truth against the Jews and Pagans; but this did not
exempt it from error. The like may happen to the Church of Rome. As for the
second place, which says: He that hearth not the Church, let him be unto thee
as an heathen man, or a publicane: by reading the whole place, I find easily
that these words cannot serve to show, that the Church of Rome which they call
Catholic, that is to say, universal, should be judge of the differences of
religion. First, because there is not any mention at all in that place of the
Church of Rome. Secondly, because the doubts of religion are not there spoken
of, but the quarrels and differences between two brethren; where also it
follows, that he speaks not of the Catholic or universal Church: for to
end the private quarrels between two brethren, we must not expect the judgment
of the universal Church. Therefore by the Church in this place, he meant the
Pastors or governors of some particular Church, laboring to appease the
differences betwixt particular persons, and that according to the rule of Gods
word. He that will not then reform and submit himself unto them, is put into
the rank of Pagans.

Now to the third text, the consequence thereof seems very harsh unto me,
Peter, I have prayed that thy faith may not fail: therefore the Church of Rome
cannot err. For the reading through this whole place of Scripture, does
evidently show, that Jesus Christ does not speak to the Church, nor of the
Church; but that he speaks to the person of Saint Peter, preparing him to the
temptation into which he forsaw, that he should shortly fall, and renounce his
Savior. Jesus Christ therefore promises him by those words, that his faith
should not finally fail in this his temptation, but that God would raise it
again from that fall; where if by Saint Peter he had meant the Church of Rome,
is it possible he should not expound himself neither there, nor in any other
place? Besides, if our faith rest it self upon these presuppositions, which is
to say, that Saint Peter has been head of the universal Church, and that he
has made the Bishop of Rome his successor, not only in the Bishopric of
Rome, but also in the charge of head of the Church; and that this charge has
succeeded ever since Christ, without varying in doctrine, and without
interruption of succession: how is it that the people can be assured thereof,
seeing that for to know it, it is necessary to have read over many histories,
both ancient and modern authors, written in latin, which they understand not?
In all this therefore am I not satisfied.

I must also confess here, that having been taught that the Church of Rome
holds, that the consecration, and the transubstantiation is not effected in the
Mass, if the Priest have not intention to consecrate, I have been seized with
fear of being an idolater, knowing well, that very often the Priest has his
intention elsewhere; or believes not himself the very thing he does; for he
may be a scoffer, or a profane person. Some there be, that in such a case
adore that which the Priest lifts up; worship bread, and call it their God, and
their Creator. This perplexity is befallen me through the reading of the
Gospel, where I have found the institution of the Sacrament little agreeing
with that which the Priest does in the Mass. 1. For there I find that all
those that were present, did communicate; but here ordinarily the Priest only
eats. 2. Also every one there receives both kinds: and Saint Paul 1. Corinthians.
11. speaking to the people, commands them to prove themselves, and then to
drink of that cup: but at this day the cup is utterly taken away from the
people. 3. Jesus Christ did not there lift up the host, as does the Priest. 4.
the Apostles did not adore the host, as the people do at this day. 5. In all
the whole institution of this sacrament, there is no mention made of sacrifice,
nor any command to sacrifice Jesus Christ for the living and the dead. 6.
Christ spoke in a language which those that were present understood. 7. The
Gospel says, that Jesus Christ took bread and brake it. The Church of Rome
on the contrary, says, that the Priest does not break bread, but the
Audience. 8. The Gospel says, that which Jesus Christ gave, was his body, (it
says also that he gave bread.) The Church of Rome on the contrary, holds,
that the bread is not the body of Christ, but that it cease to be bread, and
is converted, and transubstantiated into the body of our Savior; which is as
much as to corrupt the words of Jesus Christ. 9. I find also in Saint Matthew.
26. verse. 29. and in Saint Mark 14. and in Luke 22. that Jesus did drink of
the fruit of the vine, that is to say, wine, with his disciples; it was
therefore wine then when he drank it. 10. I have also found in the Apostle
Saint Paul in several places, as in the 1. to the Cor. 10. verse. 16. and Chap.
11. and so forward, that we break and eat bread; also he says in these
words; This is the body of Christ, and the bread which we break is the
communion of the body of Christ. But the Church of Rome denies all this, and
says, that this is not bread at all, and that we do not at all break bread,
but the figure of bread: how is it then that these appearances of bread should
be the communion of the body of Christ? 11. Finally, I see that the Gospel,
according to Saint Luke the 22. chapter, and the Apostle Saint Paul in the
eleventh chapter of the first to the Corinthians, verse 25. do prescribe unto
us, how these words, This is my body, ought to be understood. For when it came
to be spoken of the cup, in stead of that which is in Saint Matthew, This is
my blood, they term it thus: This Cup is the new Testament in my blood.
The bread therefore is the body of our Savior in the same fashion, that that
which is the cup is the new testament. Now it is not in substance, but
sacramentally, as our Savior Jesus Christ also calls it a commemoration or
remembrance. I add to this, that if the cup be the new testament, in the
blood of our Savior, as says Saint Luke; it is not then the blood of our
Lord: for the blood of our Lord, is not in the blood of our Lord. Moreover I
confess, that in the depth of my ignorance, it despighted me much to hear
some of the reformed religion reproach us, in that our Priests made God, and
after sold him for a little money in their private Masses; and I have heard
some Doctors of the Roman Church hold, and maintain, that the blessed body
of our Savior Jesus Christ might be carried away by a mouse; which were able
to make any man's heart tremble, that loved the honor of our Savior Jesus
Christ, the son of the everliving God. Likewise to disperse the blood of our
Savior into so many places, and to enclose his whole entire body into an aume
of bread, is not conformable and agreeing to the Gospel, which attributes to
him a body like unto ours, to the end he should be our brother. Now those that
allege his body glorified, do not consider at all that when he instituted
the Sacrament, his body was yet unglorified; and which is more, the
glorification has nothing changed his humane nature, but has only taken away
from it all infirmities.

I have also learned in the Church of Rome, that the sacrifice of the cross,
that is to say, the death of our Savior Jesus Christ, is our sole means of
redemption; notwithstanding the Priests say, that the Mass is the same
sacrifice of the Cross, and that they sacrifice Jesus Christ really and
effectually for our redemption: which to me seems very disagreeable. For the
one tells me, the death of Jesus Christ is the only price of our redemption;
and now they give us the sacrifice of the Mass for the same effect, which is
not the death of Jesus Christ. And it cannot be said, that the Mass is the
continuation of the sacrifice of the cross; for it should be then the
continuation of the death of Jesus Christ: and so Christ should dye continually.

Purgatory also is another piece of popery, which has turned me from the
Romish Church, since I have found it to be grounded upon this Maxim, that
Jesus Christ by his death and sufferance has satisfied for the sins commtted
before baptism, but has not satisfied for the sins committed after baptism.
For I have said with my self, this is the most important point of all
Christian religion: for it declares unto us what it is that Christ has done
for us. It is necessary therefore that this point above all others, should be
expressly and truly grounded upon the word of God: yet notwithstanding, I could
never find any thing in the word of God, that could show me one syllable for
it. Then has not Jesus Christ paid sufficiently to deliver us from Purgatory:
and if he has paid sufficiently, wherefore does not God accept of that
pain, for so much as it is worth? And seeing he does still intercede for us
in heaven, wherefore do not souls come forth from Purgatory rather at his
intercession in heaven, then through the indulgences of the Pope?

Also the Church of Rome holds, that all the faithful which shall be alive
at the last day of judgment, shall not go at all into Purgatory. Could not
God then as well free us without wronging his divine justice? Nothing indeed
that is defiled, shall enter into Paradise. But Saint John in his first
Epistle, and first chapter, says, That the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us
from all sin. Likewise, according to the opinion of the Romish Church, in
Purgatory sins are not cleansed, but are only there punished; and torments
are no purgation to make clean the spots and pollutions of souls and their
sins, but inflicting penalties: but Jesus Christ he does cleanse us from all
sin, and makes us clear without spotte or filth. And needs must it indeed
be, that it belongs to God himself to prescribe the means to work our
redemptions, and not for us to invent the way at our own pleasure. And the
means for us to apply Gods grace and mercy, is not to displaye his judgment
in tormenting us in fire. And to the same effect the holy Scriptures do show
us diverse examples of some persons received into paradise, and that have entered
into peace and glory immediately after their death, as the Thief upon the
cross. Luke 23. verse. 24. But we find not one example of any body which has
been sent into Purgatory. It has been also no small matter, to find out the
errors of this Purgatory, when I have seen by experience that this fire
burned for gain and avarice. It is not known that ever particular Masses were
sung, but for such persons as paid well for them; the poor must be contented
with the general and common prayers of the Church, of which the rich likewise
has his share; but never was it seen (at any time) that the begging Friars
would go to the burial of a poor person; and yet notwithstanding, his soul
cost Jesus Christ as dear, and is no less precious in the sight of God, then
the soul of an Emperor. The letters of indulgence and dispensation that the
Pope grants, are but for persons of rank and quality to him.

This also has greatly moved me, that is, that they teach in the Church of
Rome, that a man cannot be assured of his salvation.

Whereupon I said to my self, shall I remain in such a religion, in the which
after I have laid a foundation of merits and satisfactions, and also bought the
same pardons of others, in the end of all I know not whether I be the child of
God, or a limb of the Devil? What kind of religion is this that teaches
such doubtfulnes? Where on the contrary, by the whole volume of the Scripture,
God exhorts us to put our trust in him, and to fly unto him with full
assurance of faith; and he tells us, that we may have boldness by access
unto him in assurance of faith through Jesus Christ. Consider with me also
(beloved) that the commandments of the Romish Church are much more reverenced
then the commandments of God. There they teach, that the Church of Rome gives
authority to the holy Scripture, that is, as much as the ordinances of men
authorize the commandments of God. To eat flesh upon good friday, they say,
is a far more greater sin, then to commit murder or adultery. and yet it
was the friday upon the which our Savior Christ did ordinarily eat the
Paschal lamb. To blaspheme the name of God in this age of the world, is
(amongst them) accounted for a light matter; but to speak evil of the Pope,
especially in Italy or Spain, is a burning matter, and unpardonable. At Rome
the Jews hold a religion, which teaches, that Christ is an impostor or
iuggler; but to say that there is no Purgatory at all, is a crime worthy of the
Inquisition. Now every Bishop in our country of France can give absolution in
crimes and offenses committed against Gods laws; but none can absolve sins
committed against the Pope, or his laws.

This triple-headed Potentate does teach many things contrary to the law and
the Gospel. First, God says in the 20. chapter of Exodus: Thou shall not make
to thy self the likeness of any thing which is in heaven, or earth: Thou
shall not bow down to them, etc. But in the Romish Church they paint the holy
Trinity, they kneel down before the images of Saints. Secondly, God says in
his law, Six days shall thou labor. The Pope says, Thou shall not work
six days, but thou shall keep such holy days as he enioyneth thee in the
week days to observe. Thirdly, God says by his Apostle, 1. Tim. 3. verse. 2.
A Bishopmust be the husband of one wife, having his children under obedience
with all reverence. But the Church of Rome commands, that a Bishop should
have neither wife nor children. Fourthly, God commands by his Apostle, 1.
Cor. 10. If any of them which believe not, call you to a feast, whatsoever is
set before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake. The Church of
Rome contrariwise says, when you shall be invited to the houses of heretics,
eat not of all that which shall be set before you in the Lent time, or upon
fridaies. Fifthly, God says by his Apostle, 1. Cor. 14. It were better in the
Church to speak few words with understanding, then ten thousand in a strange
tongue. The Church of Rome on the contrary, say all their Service in a language
that is not understood. And so in many other points.

If any one allege unto me the multitude of professors, I say that Christ
Matthew 7.13. would have us enter by the narrow gate, and says, that the broad
way wherein the multitude do walk, is the way to destruction. Therefore if in
the reading of the word of God, I meet with any difficulties, I resolve with
my self neither to be judge nor interpreter: and that which remains clear
and plain, is sufficient to instruct and save me. And truly since I conformed
my self, to the true religion of our Savior Jesus Christ, I have learned now
to believe no longer by the faith of another. Nor truly is any man saved by
attorney; which makes me earnestly to exhort all Romish professors to do as I
have done for their own saluations: and to think severally upon these things,
that their souls may be delivered out of captivity; that we may together
glorify God upon earth, being desirous to be glorified by him in heaven.

And now to you, you Romish Catholics, as you term your selves, you that
have nusled me long in ignorance; now that the true light has opened mine
eyes, I will as plainly lay open, and set abroad your superstitious practices,
which now to my souls sorrow, I have been witness of. First, ye never came in
with your miters, robes, and rings, by the door, as did the poor Apostles;
but by the window, like robbers, thieves and murderers, with Simon Magus, and
such like. Never was your proud power of our heavenly fathers planting, and
therefore at the last it must up by the roots; ye must in the end be
destroyed without hands: Dan. 8.
inuisibly shall ye be stricken, 2. Maccab. 9.
as was the great tyrant Antiochus: 2 Thessalonians. 2. Heb. 4.
with the mighty breath of Gods mouth, which is his invincible word, shall your
false kingdom be consumed. This reckon I to be sufficient to declare you both
to God and man, most spightfull traitors unto those that will not be wilfully
blind. And to prove you spiritual thieves, is the purpose of my writing: for
proof whereof I need not to seek further then into your own open acts. How
long have ye kept the eternal testament of Christ under your filthy feet from
the peoples reading; which is the lively food of their souls? yea how many
innocent Christian creatures have ye most cruelly murdered to cause them to
abhor it? I have known you burn a worshipful gentlewoman for having but
one chapter of S. Matthews Gospel written in her house; and another man for
having S. John's Gospel: beside many other cruelties by you committed. Some
have you burned for not allowing your pilgrimages; some for not beleening your
pardons; some for not fasting the friday, for not observing your Lent; some for
your Purgatory, some for your images; some for not praying to dead Saints of
your own making; some for not creeping to the cross; some for not going on
procession; and some for holy water: and for other vain trifles of your own
inuenting. Too long were it to recite all your acts of mischief, which ye
have always practiced to deface Gods word. Never were ye yet content that the
seed of salvation should fructify among the people, but evermore ye have
strove to stop the sweet blast thereof, thereby to do the devil your father a
pleasure. Ye are those wild swine, leawd shepherds and Foxes, which have
rooted up the Lords vineyard: therefore how terrible will your sentences be
against you at the latter day, where in fear ye shall confess openly all
your damnable foolishness, and that ye have been wilfully ignorant of the
truth, and have tired your selves in the ways of wickedness and destruction?

Before your own faces I will more plainly set down your abominations, and
good works as you call them. You are, I say, bewitchers of our French
Parliaments, wherein ye have deprived altogether the common people of the
Bibles reading; only you admit it to three degrees of men, to Gentlemen,
Merchants and Priests: all artificers, and men of the commonsort, dearly
excluded; as though God were partial, not willing his laws and sweet
promises should be known to poor men, unto their souls salvation.

These be the good works that (you say) will justify you before your God the
Pope. These are deeds of supererogation, where with you scour your fiery
Purgatory. These are the merits of your satisfactions, whereby you get heaven
when God is not at home. Oh shameless murderers! If he be called a mankiller
that kills the body, much rather he that kills soul and body. All the
world in a manner derideth your proceedings, and laugheth to scome your
vnprudent practices. Christneuer contemned the poor, but blessed them above
all sorts of people. Not only opened he his Gospel to the poor in his own
person, but also appointed the poorest sort of men to declare it after his
departure, Matthew. 28. Mark 16. Luke 24. John 15. Acts 2.
enduing them most largely with his Spirit from above. He chofe the weak to
confound the strong, and the poor to deface the proud. Never sent he such
glorious and Lordly Prelates to sit in Consistories, Councels, and Sessions, to
the destruction of such as believe faithfully in Christ: therefore it is easy
to perceive whose servants you be. You evermore call upon earthly governors,
as did Simon Magus your predecessor upon the Emperor Nero, to martyr the
Gospell-preachers. Christ never willed any to be brought to his faith by
compulsion, neither used the Apostles to enforce any man thereunto: But you
like tyrants, more cruel then the Turk, constrain people to your false faith
by diverse kinds of torments. The true faith which comes by the Gospel
preached, brings forth the works of the Gospel, Gal. 5.22.23.
which are the fruits of love and gladness, peace, patience, gentleness, long
suffering, meekness, chastity, temperance, and such like. But your good works,
as you term them, be the going for pardons, the seeking of images, the praying
to dead Saints, the taking of holy water, the hearing of Mass without
understanding, the wearing of beads, the offering of candles, the idle spending
of your holidaies, the coming to confession, the creeping to the cross, the
fasting of Saints eues, the praying for all Christian souls, the building of
Monasteries, and chanteries, the charming of Churches and chalices, with a
thousand superstitions more for your profit and advantage. These, I say, and
such like, are your good works, which beget nothing, as Saint Paul says, but
haughtiness, vain glory, covetousness, pride, hatred, malice, manslaughter,
gluttony, drunkenness, sloth, idolatry, sedition, witch craft, fornication,
letchery, and such like sins of the flesh.

And now to conclude with this my souls prayer: Oh eternal Father, for thy
infinite mercies sake, graciously grant that our sovereign Lord and king,
Lewis the 13. may be so inspired with the true understanding of thy word, that
he would clearly cast out of his privy Counsel house, these locusts of
Egypt, and daily vpholders of Sodom and Gomora, the popes cruel cattle; to
the universal health of his people: for never shall he have of them but
deceiptfull counselors, and hollow hearted gentlemen. Finally (O Lord) take
from the^ their inordinate pomp, and riches, and more godly bestow it, to the
aid and maintenance of the commonwealth. As for an example, it has in times
past been done in England, our neighbor kingdom; where all Monasteries,
Nunneries, Conuents and Friars houses, were converted into schools of
Christian learning, hospitals for sick persons, and convenient dwelling places
for poor and aged people: reserving the rest of their lands and goods, to the
maintenance of their cities and towns. Which godly deed is now commended
through all Christendom; and there (O happy country) is Christ truly
harbored, nourished, covered, fed, and visited in his diseased members: all
which will be recompensed at the latter day. God grant that France, and all
other nations may do the like. Amen:

FINIS.

