The Supremacy of Christian Princes, over all persons throughout their
dominions, in all causes so well Ecclesiastical as temporal, both against the
Counterblast of Thomas Stapleton, replying on the Reverend father in Christ,
Robert Bishop of Winchester: and also Against Nicolas Sanders his Uisible
Monarchy of the Roman Church, touching this controversy of the Princes
Supremacy.

Ansvvered by John Bridges.

The Princes charge in his institution to ouersee the direction of Gods law.

DEVTER. 17. After he shall be settled in the throne of his kingdom, he shall
write out for himself in a volume the copy of this Law, taking the same of the
Priests of the Leuitical tribe, and he shall have it with him, and read it all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and keep the
words and ceremonies of him, which are written in this Law. etc. PRINTED AT
LONDON, by Henry Bynneman, for Humfrey Toye. 1573.

^ HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE ^
E. R
royal blazon or coat of arms

To the most high and most excellent Princess Elizabeth, by the grace of
God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the Faith of Christ,
and in earth next under God, of the Church of England and Ireland, in all
Ecclesiastical and temporal causes, the supreme Head and Governor.
ALbeit ( most Gracious Sovereign) I might be vvoorthily noted of presumption,
in dedicating these my travails to your Majesty, as well for the baseness of
my skill and calling, as for the vnreuerent demeanor of the adversaries that
here I answer, unworthy whom your Highness should deigne to look upon:
yet, both because the matter entreats most of a Princes estate, and that
upon the chiefest point thereof, belonging in general to al Christian Princes,
but in especial to your Majesty, against whom they chiefly direct their
malice, and in maintenance whereof your Majesty direct your government, and
herein have given a mirror to al christian Princes to follow, and be partakers
in their common weals, of the like blessings, wherewith God has beautified
your Highness, and established your authority: I thought it therefore not
unfit (setting my self and them aside, with all such by matters as incidently
fall out in disputation, betwixt the Bishop and master Feckenham, of me and
these my adversaries* to con^ecrate this argument of Supremacy to your most
excellent Majesty, as to whom chiefly in your dominions, next under Christ it
does pertain. Which your Highness so nobly maintains by practice of godly
government, how ever we by the word and argument do defend it.

There is no controversy at this day betwixt us and the enemies of the gospel
more impughed, tha^ this one of the Supremacy, nor more books compiled more
libels scattered, more vaunts made of truth on their party, more sclaunders
devised of our doctrine, and your Majesty's Title, more secret conspiracies
and open treasons against your Royal person and state of the Realm: than our
adversaries make, only for this Supremacy. Shall Satan then use all this
double diligence, in promoting the pride and tyranny of his Antichrist, the
man of sin, the foreigne usurper of all Christian kingdoms: and shall the
children of God. be negligent in defense of the kingdom of Christ, of the
Lords anointed, of the dutiful office and lavvfull authority of their
natural Sovereign*

Other means (I grant) may be had to suppress their furious dealing. And God
be blessed therefore that has furnished your Majesty with power, counsel,
authority, law, wisdom learning, virtue, courage, and al other Princely
habilities* suffi^iet to maintein your Highness Title, and protect that
portion of Christ's Church, which he has committed to your most Gracious
government, in peace and truth prosperously, (...) your enemies. Wherein as
your Majesty has ever most z^lously sought and set forth the glory of god,
^e has so glorified you again, as he has promised, (...), glorificabo: that
your highness may say as king David said* he has delivered you out of your
enemies hands, and defeated all their purposes, he has established you a
kingdom here on earth in peace and righteousness, and has prepared in heaven
a Kingdom for you in glory and eternity.

Now although this be so clee^e, that even the enemies themselves confess,
God works with you, God fights for you, God has taken your heart into his
hands, that have taken his quarrel into yours: yet since the (...) do mutte^ and
sclander your Highness, to take such kind of Government on you, as were not
co^petent, as the Pope had wont to do, and your Highness is furthest from: if
this your claim be not proved to be grou^dedon Gods word, if those envious be
not co^^inced by evident arguments of the seripture, all the foresaid
prosperity is counted but earthly blessings, and such as other vvorldly
Princes have. All the due authority is (...) but extorted violence: neither is
the mouth of the adoersarie stopped, neither is the mind of the subject
satisfied. And therefore when al is don* there is no better mean^ to may (...)
this Title, than even by learning and (...) for to me it to the uttermost, and
to fight vvit^ the vveapon of Gods word for it, vvhiche^s sharpe^ to vvo^nde
the adversaries heart and conscience, than any two edged svvord.

But some vvil say, this is sufficiently done, by other^ learned labors, when
both in the days of your Majesty's Father of most renoumed memory, even the
best learned of our adversaries did not only confess it, but vvrote so
effectually in defense thereof, that shamefully afterward reuolting, their
guilty conscie^cebore witness against themselves, nor they could ever
answer their own vvritings. And also after that, in the godly government
of your Highness blessed Brother, many other more excellent fathers, in
vvriting did confirm it. And now lastly in this your Majesty's happy Reign,
diverse famous and learned men, to the further confirming of the godly, and
confounding the enemy therein, have written upon this argument. Yet since
our adversaries have never done therewith, but set on a fresh, like to him
that when in vvrastling he was ever cast, of pride and vainglorie vvoulde
never acknovvledge that he had any fall: I thought good to make evident to all
your Majesty's subjects, and even to the enemies themselves, the places where
they shamefully fell, and lie still in their error, rather than to vvrastle
with such vvarblers. And yet if they start up again, to try a further pluck
with them, and by the strength of Gods invincible truth, so to overthrow
them: that as fast as they boast, cavil, and sclaunder: the truth of our
cause, and the goodness of your Majesty's quarrel, shall shevve it self the
cleerer, although the simplier handled.

A number of other whom I know, could have done it far better, who may
also at their discretions further travail in it. And in deed (where the most
of this was done a good while since) it was laid aside thus long, expecting
if any other would attempt it. But since none has adventured on it, I thought
it my duty to yield to the godly and urgent requests of those personages,
that understanding I had privately delte therein, required the publishing of my
labors, to the which I condescended a great deal the vvillinger, partly
because it touched vvithall, the defense of that Reverend fathers innocence
and learning, the Bishop of Winchester, who had, although briefly, yet most
orderly and exactly, handled this question before, and was oppugned by this
adversary, neither was it for diverse causes thought so convenient for the
Bishop himself to answer, and I for my part was bound in so just a cause to
defend him. But chiefly for that it spared not most opprobriously to slander
your most excellent Majesty, your title, your state, your government, your
most honorable and godly Counsel, your nobility, your Bishops, your
clergy, your magistrates, your justices, your people, and all estates of your
dominions, your doctrine, your faith, your religion, yea the truth and glory
of God, which your Highness defendes, to all which, I and all other are
bound in principal. I thought not good therefore to stay it any longer, and
suffer these uncircumcised Philistines blaspheming the truth of God, reproching
the Lords anointed, and railing on the host of Israel, to stand thus and vaunt
vnansvvered: but let this answer that I had thus farforth made in private*
come abroad to others. Promising (god vvilling) by your Majesty's favorable
protection, to deal further with them, and to shevvethe continual practice
hereof, how in all ages, since Christendom began to flourishe under the
Great Constantine, that christian Emperors, Kings and Princes, have dealte as
does your Majesty in the oversight of Ecclesiastical matters, till the Pope by
little and little encroching on them, not only spoiled them of this their
chief authority, but of their temporal estates and vvorldly kingdoms, yea of
their goods and lives also. In the mean season for this that is here already
ansvvered unto, I most humbly crave your Highness acceptance, whose right is
here defended by truth from sclanders, that by justice defends our right from
injuries. Most heartily beseeching almighty God, as he hitherto has
vouchsafed, so to bless, preserve, continue and prosper your Royal Majesty,
to the long establishing of your Highness Throne, to the utter vanquishing of
all your spiritual and bodily, privy and open enemies, to the godly comfort
and quiet government of all your faithful subjects, and to the prosperous
advancement of Gods everlasting glory, thorough Jesus Christ.

AMEN.
Your Majesty's humble and obedient subject JOHN BRIDGES.

The Preface to the Reader.
IT is now a good while since (dear Christian Reader) that this master
Stapletons Counterblast was blown over the seas from Louaine, against the
Reverend father in Christ, the Bishop of Winchester, or rather against the
Queen's Majesty and her Supremacy, and was thus far answered unto, as here
is now set forth. Which may easily be perceived by the reading, for there is
little or nothing altered, except a sentence or two here and there added, as
things have fallen out since. I speak this, that thou should not here look
for any great or exquisite penning, thinking that after so long a leisure some
more notable and exacter answer should come forth. Our adversaries vaunt much
of their wits herein, and chie^y this my matefellow master Stapleton, to be
very fresh and pregnant in readiness of answering, for he is his mothers
son, and has it on his fingers ends. Howbeit, I may say to these, as Apelles
said to one, who when he had drawn a picture: Lo (quoth he) I did this apace.
Some thinks (quoth Apelles) it is so ru^ningly done. And thus it falls often
out with our Lo^anists writings, but Sat cito si sat been, It is soon enough
if it be well enough, (say I) when all is done.

The reas^ why this answer came forth no sooner, are these. First, I kept it
private to my self, abiding if either the Bishop, against whom it was made, or
any other would answer to it. Secondly, I heard at the length, that Master
Nowell the Deane of Poules trauayled in it, whose learning and wisdom being
such as all the adversaries could never withstand: I surceased to proceed any
further. Thirdly, when I perceived he set not out his answer neither, I
thought it best to lay mine aside also. Thinking that either he was stayed upon
some weightier consideration, than I did know: or else that he did think the
book not worth the answering at al (as in very deed, to the learned marker it is
not) and M. Nowel had answered Dorman in much like matter before, which were
ye occasions why it slept so long.

But since that time, as many have mused and talked much on the matter, so they
have not a little marueiled why nothing was said unto it. The argument was
great and weighty, not so much whether now the Supremacy belonged to the
Pope, as whether it pertained to the civil Magistrate, and whether the Queens
Majesty did claim and hold it by right or no, The parties in controversy
were of note, as well master Feckenham among the Papists, as the Bishop of
Winchester, whose estimation among us, is not more for his authority, than his
name among other nations for his learning. Now when Master Stapleton stepped in
like a lusty yoncker, and blewe up this Counterblast between these twain, so
hotly hallowing for answer out of hand to be made by the Bishop thereto, and all this while had none: some did interpret it, that he was a very unfit match
for so grave a Bishop, as (to say ye truth) the match was nothing even. And
therefore I wite not the Bishop, if he vouchsafed not to answer him, especially
seeing home his book was so pestred with scoldes and scorners Rhetorike.
Neither will the horse of noble courage strike at every brauling curre that
barks at his heels. But when others misseco^strued this to the worst, and said
the Counterblast was so notably blown, that the Bishop durst not, nor was able,
he nor any other to answer it: and when upon the head of all this M. Saunders
Latin volume co^mes forth, although chiefly on the Popes visible Monarchy,
yet once again entering into this question of the Princes Supremacy, with fresh
matter (and as he bosteth) with such invincible arguments against it, that all
are but unlearned, stark fools, and clean mad that do defend it: and not
thus content, so depresseth the Princes estate, that he will now prove the Pope
has interest to depose al Christian Princes, and release their s^biects of
their sworn obedience: which valiant champion vau^teth also, of his fellow
Stapletons noble piece of work, against the Princes Supreme Government,
saying in his praise: Quod argumentum* Thomas Stapletonus omnium copiosissime
tracta^it in ^o Libro quen^ (...) and eloquentia and doctrina refertum, contra
Hornum Ps^udoepiscopum Wintoniens^ edidi^, which argument Thomas Stapleton
has most copiously handeled in that book, which being replenished with
all eloquence and learning, he set forth against Horn the false Bishop of
Winchester. So stornfully this railing Papiste speaks of the Bishop, and so
he braggeth of his fellows lerning and eloquence. All which considered, I
thought it necessary and more than high time, to answer these proud
Phariseis, least the goodness of the cause should become distrusted, the truth
suspected, the Prince slaundered, the Bishop defaced, the enemy encouraged,
the godly offended, the simple abused, and the whole estate evil spoken of,
by too much unfruitful silence, and ouerlong suffrance of such false and
glorious pratlers. And although for these causes I was the willinger to set
it forth, yet was I the more emboldned on the request of diverse, that hearing
I had travailed in it, by their godly persuasions urged me the more thereto.

The chief of the Argument consists on the Supreme government of Christian
Princes in causes Ecclesiastical. The occasion sprang of a controversy
between the Bishop of Winchester, and master Feckenha^, about the Oath of the
Supremacy. All which is extant abroad in a learned and pithie book of the
Bishops, answering to master Feckenhams scruples. The issue they drove the
matter unto, was this, that master Feckenham must be resolved for the Princes
Supreme Government in Ecclesiastical causes, by any of these four means,
the Scripture, the Doctors, the Councels, or the Practice. The Bishop
accepts the offer, and makes proof of the Princes Supreme government in
Ecclesiastical causes, not only by any one, but by every one of all these
foresaid points, as the Bishops book is evident to testify. Master Feckenham
that had made his promise to take the Oath vponany of these proves, and seeing
them all (beyond his cunning and expectation) proved, but neither mynding to
keep touch, nor able to answer: suborneth a chapman from beyond the seas, to
wit, this Louanist master Stapleton, (if he may be called Master, for order
of schole degree, that is such a renegate from God, and runnagate from his
Prince) who to save master Feckenhams honesty, if he would adventure to
relieve his cause: master Feckenham should to save his credit, vouchesafe to
relieve his need.

Master Stapleton having better furniture of sale eloquence, than store of
grounded learning, and yet more learning than grace well to employ it, in
acknowledging the manifest truth, takes upon him to answer the Bishop, and
deuides all the matter into four Books, whereof this is the first, that here
is answered. This done, he conceiueth such apride of this his exquisite piece
of work, that we must needs have some fine new name for this fine new book,
(singular heads ye know, must have singular inventions) and because the Bishops
name is M. Horn, he entitleth his work forsooth a Counterblast. And yet
somewhat truer than he himself wist, being in deed a blast, scarce worth a
Counter, if the reader well examine it.

And that ye may the better perceive, this volume deserves so rare a name, for
these two rare gifts, eloquence and learning, for which master Sanders so
highly extolleth him ( Mulus mulum scabit:) And since these two champions bear
now the bell for eloquence among the Papists, the one for English, the other
for Latin: I have sorted master Stapletons eloquence by it self, consisting
on certain Common places following, that we may the easier judge of the
substance of his learning, which otherwise we should not so well discern, it
is so poudred with his eloquence. His eloquence (I confess) I have said but
little unto, nor can say much, nor would say ought unto it, as one that never
was trained up in the schools and art thereof. As for master Stapleton goes
beyond master Saunders, and without all comparison is an A perse Doctor in
it, and therefore I set it aside, the better to view the learning, to the
which I had more especial regard, for when all is done, the Eloquence settes
it out, but the Learning proves the matter. And though it be not replied upon
with such learning as many other better could, that rather should have done
it, yet have I endeavored truly, simply and plainly to answer it, and (I hope)
to the co^tentation of the modest Reader, that rather respects the boul^ing
out of the truth, the stay of his conscience, and the glory of God, than
either the estimation of learning, or the show of eloquence.

Now although the Supremacy be the principal matter, yet the importunity of
master Stapleton has once or twice carried me perforce away with him, to purge
our selves of certain ancient Herekes that he lays to our charge, and cries
so fast upon us for answer, and says we still slinke from it, as though we
heard it not, and therefore I have here at large made answer to it, which
makes the volume arise the bigger. In somuche that I thought, for all master
Stapletons exclamations, to have left it out, or put it in one of his Common
places. But that Master Saunders comes rufflyng in with the like argument,
and therefore I let it stand as it did. And I trust I have clearly
disburdened us, and justly burdened them therewyth, till they shall be hable to
discharge themselves thereof. I desire (good Reader) but even indifferency in
thy judgment.

Last of all, since Master Sanders has compiled his great volume of the Popes
Uisible Monarchy, in the second book whereof he enters into this argument of
the Princes Supremacy: I have chosen out of the second book. 4. chapters of
the state of the Civil and Ecclesiastical power, in the Original, in the Use,
and End of both: of the Interest and superiority of either state: chiefly of
that he would not only defeat the Prince of all government in matters
Ecclesiastical, but also clean dispossess her Majesty of her Crown. For,
master Saunders, to mayntein the treacherous fact of P^us the fifth, the last
Pope, (if Cardinal Bon Compagnion, Pope Good fellow, as the talk went, be
not dead) would prove, that Bishops may depose their Princes, and assoyle
their subjects from their allegiance. Which points as they draw nerest to
the present argument, and in deed are for learning (such learning as it is)
the principal points of all his volume, I thought good to ioy^ them unto
Stapleton, and so in one answer, answer both, though both be answered
severally, as they draw near or far, in resemblance or variety of
Argument, example, or similitude about this matter. Wherein what is done, I
commit unto thee (good Christian Reader) to judge as God shall move thy
heart, and besecche thou him, to move it to the best, That the truth may
appear, that the falshode may be detected, that thou may be edified, that
the Prince may be obeyed, that the Gospel may be prospered, and that God above
al things may be glorified now and for ever.

Amen.
Master Stapletons common places
THat all master Stapletons whole volume (as well therein himself terms it,
a Counterblast) is indeed but a very blast, blown out to encounter the grave
and pithie (...) of the right reverend father in Christ Robert Bishop of
Winchester, to ^he Libell of M. Feckenhams scruples, for refusal of the oath
of the Queens Majesty's Supremacy: and withal to blow out, (thereby to darken
the clearenesse of the truth) these light clouds without moisture whereof
Saint Jude prophesied: I have good Reader, or ever I enter into the ^laying of
the Counterblast, gathered together by themselves (as it were in a table of
common places) all those blastes wherewith his Counterblast is puffed up, and
have sorted them in several winds and blastes, whereby thou may know, as
it were by a chart, into what coast he is always carried, and by what gale of
wind he sayleth: so shall thou the better find, in what creek he sets
footing, whether on fast or on foggie ground. Which yt it may the better
appear, behold the most or principal of those winds, wherewith M. St in this
his first book, and so increasing more and more in the residue (as we shall
likewise see when we come thereto) blu^ring like an other Aeolus, blows forth
his Counterblast.

M. Stap* chief common places.
1 His spiteful railing. 2 His reproachful slanders. 3 His scoffs and
scorns. 4 His immoderate bragging. 5 His flourishing Rhetorike. 6 His
impertinent discourses. 7 His false translations. 8 His words of course. 9 His
petit quarrels. 10 His contradictions to himself and his fellows. 11 To the
which is added his beaderoll of untruths, with a plain and brief answer
to every one of them.
The most of these his common places being such as here thou feast, I think,
good reader, thou will look for no great answer unto them: it is answer
good enough to make them stand forth, and show themselves like proper
fellows mustring in their ranks and troops: howbeit if any particular things
shall be thought worthy the aunswering: either in these common places they
shall be satisfied, or else more at large in the answer to the Counterblast
it self, nothing God willing, whereby master Stapleton, or any of his
friends, may justly find themselves grieved, shall be omitted. The residue of
these common places, that are either unworthy any answer, or so much as the
naming, except to show with what spirit our student is moved: shall be
answered in the fronts and ends of these common places, even with his own
words in vpbrayding the same to the Bishop.

Why see thou a mo^e in thy brothers eye, but considerest Luc. 6.
not the beam that is in thine one eye? Either how can thou say to thy
brother: Brother let me pull out the mo^e that is in thine eye, when thou see
not the beam that is in thine own eye* Thou hypocrite, cast out the beam out
of thine own eye first, and the^ shall thou see perfitly, to pull out the moa^
that is in thy brothers eye.

Master Stapletons own objections of railing.
THat I may a little roll in your railing Rhetorike, wherein 80. 2. ye unjustly
rore out. etc.

His first common place of spiteful railing.
A Pestilent rank of most shameful untruths, an unsavory In his. 1. Pref.
and vain kind of reasoning. Page 4. Shameful and malicious. 4. Your bastard
daughter. 5. A misshapen lump of lewd and lose arguments. ib. Most wretched
and miserable handling. 8. Most lying reply. ibid. Dishonest and shameful
shifts. ibid. Miserable perverting. ibid. Your peruersitie. 9. Your fond,
foolish, and heretical paradox. 11. Your own whoredom. 12. You most
shamefully dissemble. 12. A most captain and notable lie. 12. Most miserably
and wretchedly, pinched, pared, and disme^bred, most shamefully contaminated,
depraved and deformed. 12. You bear such a spiteful and malicious heart. 13.
Most falsely and lewdly. 13. The cankred and malicious heart ye bear. 13. You
are false and malicious. 13. A partial writer an evident falsary. 14. Ye write
so Turkishly. 14. Such Turkish treachery might better have been borne, in the
lauishing language of your ho^e spurred ministers. 14. Blind bayarde. 14. Ye
do like furious Ajax. 14. Your turkish talk. 15. The Turkish spirit that
lurketh in you. 15. Bluster and blow, fume and frette, rave and rail, as
lowdly as lewdly, as beastly as boldly* 15. Ye bluster not so boysterously.
etc. as ye lie most lewdly. 15. Ye well deserve to be sewed on an action of the
case. 16. Villaynously ye slander. 16. You and your fellows most rightly and
truly are proved Donatists. 16. You are far from a true Catholic. 16. A
most ridiculous wrangler. 18. Freighted and stuffed with falshoodes. 19. Your
untruths do swa^me and muster. 19. Master Iuell joins obstinacy to folly.
20 Ye are at a point to lie. 20. A false Prophet and a lying master. 20. Most
ignorantly ye defend the oath. 21. Poisoned and cankred reproach. 21. Your most
slanderous accusation. 22. Your heighnous heresies. 23.
His second Preface.
Prefac. 2.
WHat sielie shifts and miserable escapes master Horn has devised to
maintain that obstinately which he once conceived erroneously. 26. Master
Horn stoutly, but fondly avouches. 27. Master Horns whole answer is but a
vain blast. 29. Heresy, scisme, great and abominable heresy. 31.
The reply to the Bishops Preface.
AN untrue and false surmise. Fol. 2. b. Tedious and infinite talk and
babbling. 4. a. Foolish wiliness or wily foolishness. 4. b. What an impudent
face as hard as a horn or stone have you, besides your mere folly. 5. a.
The first book.
YOur fond and folishe cavil. 7. a. Miserable and wretched perverting. 7. a.
Ye are but an usurper and intruder. 7. b. M. Poynet was but an usurper. 8. a.
Ye are. etc. no doubt an heretic. 8. b. By this your incest wretchedly
profaned and villained 8 b. M. Horn a stark schismaticke and heretic. 11.
a. Devilish and spritishe. 14. a. Blasphemous, horrible and villainous. ibid.
M. Horn most maliciously ascribes. etc. most wickedly surmiseth. 14. b. That
poisoned root of Luther and his strumpet Kate. 15. b. The wicked tabernacle of
their loytring heresies. 16. a. Runnagate preachers. 16. b. The gaping ravens
mouths, the heretical brood. 17. a. Schismatic sermons, rebellious
protestants. 17. a. Protestanticall rebels. 19. b. This man so falsely and
maliciously blows his horn. 21. a. You being a sacramentarie. 22. a. The
gehennicall Church. 26. a. Losely and lewdly without any regard. 33. a.
Blind, fond, foolish and false, stark false, blindly and lewdly. 33. b. The
strange proceeding of the Parliament against Gods Church. 33. b. Your poor
wretched soul. 36 a. As you without all knowledge. 37. b. The dirtie dung of
filthy schism and heresy. 38. b. Ye work unskillfully and ungodly. ibid. Your
great offense, schism and heresy. ibid. Your hard stony heart. ibid. A loud
lewd lie. 38. b. Peruersitie and malice concurrant for your infidelity. 40.
b. Variable, diverse, deceiuable and false. 40. a. Topicall and pestiferous
translation. 40. b. False, dangerous and damnable gloses. 41. a. These errors
and heresies. 41. a. b. You and your fellows teach false and superstitious
religion, many and detestable heresies, and so with all plain Idolatry. 42.
a. Ye are no simple Idolater but one that maintains a number of heresies. 42.
a. Obstinate defense of such filthy marriage. ibid. A fool, a dolt, an ass.
43. a. Ye deny full pieuishly. 44. a. Craftily dissembled, lewdly swarued. 49.
a. b. Ye have set up your Idols, that is your abominable heresies. 50. a.
VVretchedly and shamefully handled. ibid. Lying beyond all shame. 50. b. His
ridiculous dealing. 50. b. The indignity of his demeanor is to be detested.
50. b. Fond counterfeyting, flat lying, a lewd and a horrible lie. 50. b.
What can be done more abominable. ibid. Your wretched doctrine. 51. b. Most
wretched and traitorous translation. 51. b. An open and notorious lie. 53. b.
This most sensible and most gross lie. 55. b. Most impudent and shameless
lies. 56. a. His lewd book ibid. M. Horn and his fellows and his Masters
Luthers and Caluins heresies are no secret nor simple heresies, but so
manifold and open that they have no way or shift to save their good name and
honesty blotted and blemished for ever without repentance for the obstinate
maintenance of the same. 56. b. Your Masters worse than the Pelagians. 57. b.
Calvin and other sacramentaries. 57. b. Ye draw near to Simon Magus. 57. b.
They are no petit nor secret heresies that you and your fellows maintain.
57. b. You and your fellows must needs remain stark heretics, and for such
to be abhorred and abandoned of all good christians. 58. a. You and your
companions open and notable heretics. ibid. M. Fox in his dunghill of
stinking Martyrs. 59. a. M. Foxes stinking Martyrs 60. a. His diuelishe dirty
dunghill of his foul heretical and traiterous Martyrs 60. a. Stinking,
heretical and foolish martyrs. 61. a. Falshoode and folly. 61. b.
Appollinarians and Eutichians. 63. b. Your falshoode, your great folly. 63. a.
Ye are wicked deprauers of religion. 65. b. Ye are as great blasphemers as ever
Christ's Church had. ibid. Doltish devilish Donatistes. 66. a. You the
sacramentaries. 66. a. M. Fox. etc. his huge monstrous martyrologe. 66. b. An
open damnable heretic and a Donatist. 66. b. Not only a traitor, but a
detestable Donatist also. 66. b. His own huge martyrologe. 66. b. Like to
Captain Kets tree of reformation. 66. b. Your froward quarrellings and
customable elusions. 66 b. A blunt and a foul shameless shift. 68. b. An open
and a shameless lie. 68. b. So outragiously and blasphemously villained by
you. 68. b. M. Horns foolish figurative divinity. 69. a. A foolish and
frivolous admonition. 70. a. M. Horns fantastical imagination. 70. a. M.
Horn which talk so confusedly. 73. a. Thousands have taken the oath to their
damnation. 73. a. Your heresies condemned. 74. b. Impudent and shameless. 75.
a. A stark and most impudent lie. 75. b. Facingly and desperately. 75. b Fond
and foolish. 76. a. He walks ignorantly, or maliciously, or both. 76. b.
Most ignorantly and falsely. ibid. Notable lies. ibid. A most notorious lie. 77.
a. Foolish blasphemous babbling. 77. a. Shameless lies. 77. a. As gross, as
foul, and as loud a lying fetch. 77. a. Schismatic council and heretical
synagog. 77. b. VVorthie to have been cast to the dogs and ravens upon a
dirty dunghill. 77. b. The wicked working of wretched heretics. 77. b. Plain
schismatic and heretical. 78. a. O more than childishe folly. 78. a. That
crafty cooper. 78. a. Your great ignorance or like malice. 79. b. Ye have one
heresy more than any of your fellows. 80. a. Your great grandsires the
Grecians. 80. a. Ye term with an unclean and impure mouth. 80. b. M. Horns
dissembling falshoode. 83. a. Dissemblingly to uphold a falshoode. 84. b.
For full and sufficient answer to all this and other his black Rhetoric,
we may return his own words on himself.

The Donatistes when they could not justify their own doctrine, Fol. 59. b.
nor disprooue the Catholics doctrine, leaving the doctrine, fell to railing.

His own vpbrayding of slanders.
YE bluster not so boysterously. etc. as ye lie most lewdly upon etc. whose
person ye impugn for lack of just matter with most slanderous reproaches. 1.
Preface. Page 15.

His second common place of reproachful slanders, neither sparing the Queens
Majesty, nor his native Country.
THat this religion whereby thou hopest to be saved, has no authority to
ground it self upon. 2. Pref. page 27. That if it have any authority, it
has authority of the Prince, by whose supreme government it is enacted and
forced upon thee, other authority has it none. ibid. That of Protestants some
be Luthera^s, some be Zuinglians, some Anabaptists, some Trinitaries, and some
be of other sects. 29. a. That King Henry the eight, and the Parliament
thought erroneously. 31. That King Edward in his minority set forth a new
Religion. ibid. That the Bishops now, are but Parliament and no Church
Bishops. 32. That the Queens Majesty's title can not be applied with any
convenient sense, to any civil Prince, especially to the person of a woman.
34. That a woman is expressly by nature, and by scripture excluded from being
capable of spiritual government. ibid. That the Bishop of Winchester his
meaning is, to ingraft in the minds of the subjects, a misliking of the
Queens Majesty* as though she usurped. etc. Fol. 2. That he conspired to the
making of a book, that spoyleth the Queens Majesty of all her authority.
ibid. That he has in open sermon at Winchester mainteyned, contrary to the
Queens ecclesiastical injunctions, such as would not refor^ their disordred
apparel. ibid. That the (...) has and does maintain many things* contrary to
the laws and orders of the realm, to the pro^ whereof he cites the defending
of a minister of Du^ley, as true as all ^. 3. That the temporal men without,
yea against the consent of the whole clergy, altered the estate of religion.
4. b. That the Bishops are no true Bishops. 7. b. That Bishop Poynet was but an
usurper, with diverse other slanders against Luther, Calvin, Beza, Bishop
Cra^mer, etc. 8. a. b. A contumelious term of Brittle bulwark against the
act of Parliament. 9. a. That our faith hangs on an act of Parliament. ibid.
That civil and profane matters be converted into holy and ecclesiastical.
ibid. That lay men are of the fold only, and are not shepeheards at all.
ibid. That they altar the whole religion, and confound heaven and earth
together. ibid. That in King Edwardes days, legerdemaine was played, a leaf
put in at the printing which was never proposed in the Parliament. Which is an
open slander even of the king himself, and his Council. The rule in the boo^
of common prayer says, the people shall receive kneeling. To show that this
law meant not adoration: the King and his Council caused a declaration of the
true meaning of the law, to be drawn in ten or twelve lines, and added them
to this rule. ibid. He slaundereth the honorable of the Council for uneven
ordering the disputation at West. Anno regn^ Elizabeth 1. Which being so fresh
in memory, all men can witness^ against him. 12. a. b. He likeneth it to the
Anabaptists disputations. ibid. The fourth Chapter. of. 13. leaves, together
besides that it is almost all impertinent talk, is full of shameful
slanders, of many noble virtue and learned men: the Duke of Saxony, the
La^graue of Hesse, the Lo^le Cobham, sir Roger Acto^, Luther, Zuinglius,
Calvin, Beza, etc. to deface them and the professors of Gods word with tales
of ^umultes, cruelties, disobedience and rebellions. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19.
20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. That the civil government of Christian Princes
stretches no further than the civil government of heathen princes. 29. b. That
the O. Majesty's title is not compete^t for her highness and that the
auouching of the oath is the e^payring of her worldly estate. 27. a. That the
oath bemyreth them which receive it. 30. That it is an unlawful oath, and like
to wicked K. Herod's. 30. That the plague reigned at London to plague the
strange proceedings of the Parliament. 33. b. That the Bishop of Winchester
because he required the oath of d^ctour Bonner therefore sought his blood.
ibid. That our Bishops are no Church Bishops. ibid. That the Queens Majesty
takes on her a pretensed regiment. 42. That marriage in ministers is filthy.
42. ^. That of late years, lay men durst adventure to take the guidi^g of the
arc, and go before the Priests, and not suffer the priests to go before
them. And durst alter the state of Christian religion, against the will and
mind of the Bishops, and the whole clergy. 46. a. That we attribute to the
Queens majesty to alter religion. 47. b. That lay men have not only put to
their hands to sustain the Arc as Oza did, but have also of their own
private authority, altered and chan^ged the great and weighty points of
Christ's Catholic Religion, and in a manner have quite transformed and
overthrown the same, and so have as a man might say broken the very Arc
itself all to fitters. 47. b. That wesay, that Princes do hea^ the supr^
government in all ecclesiastical matter^, to decide and determine, ^* what
religion ^ mere sovereignty. 48. b. That the Prince enacteth a new religion.
50. a. That the decision of matters of religion a^ made Parliament matters.
ibid. That w^ labor to confound the spiritual and secular power. ibid. That
the Queens Maiestle enacteth a new religion by force of supreme authority,
contrary to the commandment of God. 53. a. That her highness has altered
and abandoned the usual religion a thousand years and upward, customably
from age to age received and embraced. 53. b. That she has abandoned general
Councels. 54. a. That Princes now make Bishops by letters patents, for such
and so long time as please them, for term of years, months, or days. ibid.
b. That she inhibiteth them to visitte their flocks and to preach. ibid. For
4. or. 5. leaves together he does nothing else but slander the Protestants
with ^mbers of Heresies that he ^aisly lays to their charge. But this is
answered at large and those herestes with many other returned on the Papists.
That a thousand in England have taken the oath to their great damnation. 73.
2. That the Prince and his successors are made absolute governors without any
limitation or exception. 73* That the Bishop builds a new supremacy on the
wicked working of wretched Heretics. 77. b. That the Bishop is of the opinion
that the Grecians were of, denying the holy Ghost to proceed from the Father,
and the son. Wherewith he ^laundereth the Bishop only because he cyteth*
Emanuell Paleologus the Emperor of Greece out of Nicephorus by the name of a
Christian Emperor* where Nicephorus himself the Papists that set Nicephorus
out, call this Emperor Christianiss^, The most Christian Emperor. ibid. He
compares the reaimes of Boheme, France, Scotland, and Germany, to lerusalem
destroyed by the heathen Romans, and to Constantinople, captive to the
Turks. 82. b. That the Queen takes upon her all manner of government and
authority in all things and causes ecclesiastical. 82. b. That the Queen
takes upon her, by her own supreme authority, to enact matters of religion,
to approve and disprove articles of the faith, to determine doctrine, to
excommunicate and absolve. ibid. That the statute and the oath implies and
concludes all these particulars. 83. a. That by the statute is flatlye
excluded all the authority of the whole body of the catholic Church without
the realm. ibid. That the statute implies, that if a Turk or any heretic
whatsoever should come to the Crown of England, all manner superiority in
visiting and correcting Ecclesiastical persons in all manner matters should be
united unto him. ibid. That the Queen takes on hi^ to be a supreme governor
ecclesiastical. ibid. That her supreme government gives her power in all
doubts and controversies to decide the truth, and to make an end of
questioning: ibid. That by virtue of this statute, the Queens Majesty has
judged, determined and enacted a new religion. That she takes on her the
preaching of the word, the administration of the sacraments, binding and
losing. ibid. That the statute is thus generally conceived. 83. b. That the
statute is generally conceived, and not generally meaned. ibid.
To all these slanders we may answer in a (...) with his own words.

These besuch slanderous reproaches ( (...). (...)) and the person 1. Pref.
page 1^
son whom ye burden them withal, so far from all suspicion of any such
foul matter. etc. that if you were sued hereof upon an action of the case as
you well deserve no less, or rather in deed you deserve far sharper
punishment for reporting thus of your most gracious sovereign, and all the
estates of the Reaime, whom thus vnsubiect^ke ye slander.

His own objection for scoffs.
I pray you call to remembrance what a scoffing and wondering he makes. 407.

His. 3. common place of scoffing and scorning.
In the Prefaces.
YOu work your matters so handsomely and so perswasiuely. page 6. What a new
Cicero or Demosthenes are you. 7. A marvelous kind of new and false
arithmetike. 8. Is not this, I pray you, an important and mighty argument. 11.
Your own dear brother Bale the chief antiquarie of English Protestants. 13.
Your hot spurred ministers. 14. No news for a man of your coat. 14. Whose
bold as blind Bayarde. 14. Ye tell your reader in great sadness. 16. Ye
bluster excedingly, and are in a vehement rage. 16. With the like felicity
your brother Jewel. etc. laid full stoutly and confidently. etc. with great
bravery. 81. It pittieth me in your behalf. 19. Master Jewel has led us this
dance. 19. Your fair piece of work. 23. Your poor honor should say
honesty. 23. The chief masters of the religion. 28. Parliament Bishops.
32.
In the answer to the Bishops Preface.
THe holy Brotherhoode of Geneua. ^. b. This noble blast so valiantly and
skilfully blown. 3. a. Worthy for this great prowess to be, if all other
things fail, a prelate of the garter. 2. a. The iolie policy of this man. 4.
a. The wise trade this man keeps. 4. a. What if now sir M. F. would revel
with like rhetoric. 4. b. These things hang together like Germains lips. 5.
a.
In the first book.
Master Grindall and M. Jewel your pewfellowes. 7. b. This glorious
glittering pecocks tail. 7. b. Ye are a Bishop of this sewte. 8. a. Your
Apostles Luther and Calvin. 8. a. Ye are yoked, or as ye pretend, married. 8.
a. Ye live in pretensed matrimony with your Madge. 8. b. Ye keep your said
Madge. 8. b. M. Cranmer his pretty conie, his nobbes. 8. b. Your brittle
bulwark of acts of Parliament. 9. a. Luther your first Apostle. 9. a. I
beseech ye good sir. 11. b. This is your fine and singular invention. 12. a.
We must pluck ye by the horns. ibid. Yea forsooth, who sees it not, and
withal what an honorable Prelate ye are. 12. a. This man blows his Home a
wrong. 15. a. Their Evangelical brood. 15. a. Zealous Gospellers. 17. a. A
brother of your Gospel. 17. b. The holy brotherhoode went to their drudgerie (
so he calls the singing of the Psalms. 18. b. The zealous brotherhoode. 19.
a. The Gospellike zeal of this sacred brotherhoode. 19. a. Under pretense for
sooth of your Gospels zeal. 91. a. Theodore Beza Caluines holy successor. 20.
b. Your dear brethren the Calui^ists. 21. ^. Your poor honesty. 21. a. M.
Horn his evangelical brethren. 21. b. Calvin your greatest apostle. 22. b.
The Patriarchs of the new Evangelical brotherhode. 22. b. A new sect of Lay
head makers. 22. b. The fervent brethren. 23. a. Your protestant fellow of the
bestrace. 23. b. I promise you a well blown blast and handsomely handled. 24.
^. Your wisdom, your finenesse, there was never a new brother. ib. Such a
noddy. 24. a. Your holy brethren so fervent in the word of the Lord. 25. a.
Master John Knoxe the new Apostle of Scotland. 25. a. A zealous brother of
Caluins school. 25. a. Your holy brethren of Geneua. 26. a. Lo good M. Horn.
26. a. The English brethren. 26. a. This noble and clarkly work. 26. a. The
Gehennicall, I should say Geneuicall Church. ibid. This good brotherhoode, men
no doubt, well worthy. etc. To whom the Queens Majesty is (who doubts)
deeply bound, and they worthy to be so well cherished at her hands as they
are. 26. a. These good brethren with their new broched divinity. 26. a. His
own good brethren. 27. a. Here is a worshipful reason. 28. b. This is as
great a cause to wonder at, as to see a goose go barefoote. 28. b. Now will he
play the worthy Logitian. 28. b. M. Horn walks like a bare footed man upon
thorns. 30. b. His great cunning and skilfulnesse. 32. a. As if M. Horn were
a lay man and a painter. 32. b. Full worshipfully concluded. 32. b. Blyndly and
lewdly harping. 33. b. How prove ye it good sir. 33. b. No gramercie to you
sir. 33. b. A pitiful case. 33. b. Hearken we to M. Horns blast. 34. a. By
the way I trow of some meritorious supererogation. 35. b. To bind M. Fecknam
the deeper to him for his exceeding kindness. 35. b. O gentle and loving
heart. 35. b. Now good M. Horn. 36. a. This your clerkly book. 35. b. Your
poor wretched soul. 36. a. Your brethren of Geneua. 39. a. These fellows.
etc. ruffle us up a black sanctus. 39. a. Go on I say in Gods name M. Horn,
prosecute your plea stoutly, God send ye good speed. 40. b. Your clerkly and
honest dealing to your high commendation. ibid. That ye may keep your Madge.
42. a. It may perhaps be in some ordinary gloss of Geneua his notes. 42. b. A
full mess of notorious untruths. ibid. Ye have fine dishes and dainty cates
coming after. ibid. M. Horn a very good simple plain man in his dealings.
43. a. Any of the good brethren. 43. b. This is but a childishe and boyishe
rhethoricke. 46. a. M. Nowell the schoolemaister. 46. a. Let the Prince in a
cope and surplusse celebrate your holy communion. 46. b. Ye iumble and jar.
46. b. M. Nowell here besturreth himself. 49. a. His ridiculous dealing were
worthy to be laughed at. 50. b. Your new Geneuian Bibles. 50. b. You have
shotten like a blind man. 55. a. I think his wits were not his own. 56. a.
What an hotch potch he made. 56. a. The excellent pregnant wit and great skill
of this man. 56. b. Such a special grace the man has given him of his master
the devil. 56. b. Good sir may it please you favorably to hear you and your
masters honorable pedigree, and of their worthy fears and prowes. 56. b. For
your more honor and glory, I adioyne the Emperor Iulianus the Apostata. 57.
a. b. The race of your worthy generation. 57. b. After long and honorable
succession your Patriarchs Luther and Calvin have learned. 57. b. Their goodly
doctrine. 57. b. Your new Gospel. 57. b. Your noble progenitors. 57. b. Your
Apostle Luther. 58. a. Your Apostles Luther and Calvin. 58. b. His own dear
brother Sleydan. 58. b. Your Apostle Luther. 59. a. Your Hugonotes and the
beggarly Guests. 59. b. German Lutherans, French Caluinistes, and Flemishe
Guetts. 59. b. Master Fox his holy canonization. 60. a. Because we should
keep their day a dubble feast. 60. a. A stout Confessor in this mad
Martyrologe. 60. a. Master Fox plays the wily Fox, and sprinckleth with
his false and wily tail his filthy stale. 60. b. Master Foxes authority
very large and ample in this his canonization. 60. b. By a cunning
Metamorphosis. 61. a. Will ye see the crafty dubling of a Fox walking on
the eather of the hedge. 61. a. So fine and subtle a blast of an Horn a man
shall not lightly find again among all the Horners in England I suppose. 61.
b. But yet by your leave sir this horn has a foul flaw. 61. b. A very blind
betell blunt shift of yours. 62. a As ye blindly and bluntly guess. 62. a. Ye
dream, it is spoken but in your dream. 62. a. Which surely is so forcible as
will not beat down a very paper wall. 62. a. These your great Canno^s. 62.
a. Your rotten weak hold underpropped with your great sampson posts as
mighty as Bulrushes. 62. b. Your good Logike, your law and like divinity.
62. b. But now good sir, etc. Lo then good. sir. 62 b. Unless master Horn
become suddenly so subtle* 63. b. His dear brethren and master Foxes holy
Martyrs. 6^. b. Your Apostle Luthers opinion. 66. a. Your holy martyrs. 66. a.
A blessed martyr in master Foxes holy Calendar. 66. a. A lie and more too by a
syllable. 66. a. His huge monstrous martyrologe. 66. b. Good stuff I warrant
you. 66. b. This worthy Calendar. 66. b. This huge martyrologe. 66. b. This
worthy Champion. ibid. Of his noble work, and of his noble holy martyr. ibid.
This worthy article. ibid. Like to captain Kets tree of reformation. ibid.
Ye make your reckoning without your host. 68. a. Your reformation or rather
deformation. 68 b. Master Horns foolish figurative divinity. 69. a. The great
weight of so mighty a proof. 69. b. Master Horn of his great gentleness.
69. b. These me^ make a very VVelshmans hose of Gods word. 70. a So aptly and
truly you allege you doctors. 73. b. This good Antiquarie and Chronographer.
76. b. Gayly and iolilie triumphs. 77. a. Very good stuff, as good pardie
as master Horns own book, and as clerkely and as faithfully handled. 77. a.
O what a crafty Cooper and smooth Ioiner is M. Horn. 77. b. Your handsome
holy dealing. 78. a. You are worthy exceeding thanks. 78. a. A'iolie
marginall note. 78. a. O more than childishe folly. 78. a. That crafty Cooper.
ibid. As wise as by the Metaphore of a Cow to conclude a saddle, for as well
does a saddle fit a Cow. 78. b. Such beggarly shifts. ibid. Ye have demeaned
your self so clerkly and skilfully. ibid. Such a personage as ye counterfeit.
80. a. This blessed Martyr. ibid. Ye are a very poor silly Clarke. ibid. M.
Fox will not suffer ye to walk post alone. ibid. That I may a little roll in
your railing rhetoric. ibid. Your dearlings the Grecians. 80. b. Seeing ye
deal so freely and so liberally. 81. a. Ye have iuggled in one. 82. a. Ye have
so craftily conveyed your galls. 82. a. Your dark sconce, a sconce of dim
light. 82. a. The new pretended clergy, the pretended Bishops. 84. a.
To all this, and all other his frumpes and scoffs, he may be answered with
his own words.

Modestia vestra (M Horn) not a sit omnibus hominibus. Let your modesty (M.
Stapleton) be known to all men. 435. b.

His own objection of bragging.
This is but an impudent facing and bragging. 4. a.

His fourth common place of bragging.
In his first Preface.
NOt being able to allege any author that makes not for us. page 7. Do
what ye can. etc. 15. You have in this reply, a just and a full defense. 22. I
have replied throughout. 22. I have not omitted any one part or parcel. 22. I
have answered the whole. 22. I wish that the most honorable. etc. would
command you to prove it so to the world. 22. I have here replied to all and
every part. 22. If truth be on your side ye have no cause to stick hereat*
etc. go through therefore as you have begone. etc. if ye think your
foundation good. etc. go through I say. etc. if ye now draw back men will
laugh you to scorn. 23. The dealing of the Catholic writers is so upright,
that such small occasions must be piked. etc. else against their dealings have
ye nothing to say. 18. Your cause I assure you will come forth stark naked,
feeble and miserable. 19. After all this struggling and wrestling against the
truth by you and your fellows master Jewel, and the rest, the truth is daily
more and more opened, illustred and confirmed, and your contrary doctrine is
or ought to be disgraced and brought in utter discredit. 8.
In the second preface.
I Was fully purposed, having so largely provoked such sharp adversaries,
especially master Jewel, for a season to rest me and to stand at mine own
defense if any would charge me. 24. I have shaped to the whole book a whole
and full Reply, wherein I rather fear I have said to much than to little. 25.
Thy religion is but a bare name of religion, and no religion in deed. 27.
These be such absurdities as every man of mean consideration sees and
abhors. 28. The primacie of the Bishop of Rome is evidently here proved. 28.
Master Horns whole answer is but as it were a vain blast. 29. The sea
Apostolic is the fountain and welspring of all unity in the Catholic faith.
33. Neither shall we ever find any cause of good and sufficient contentation
till we return thither. 35.
In the answer to the Bishops Preface.
AS I assuredly understand that the reverend father my Lord Abbate of
Westminster. fol. 1. a. But this may I boldly say, and I doubt nothing to
prove it, that in all his book, there is not as much as one word of
Scripture, one Doctor, one Council, general or prouincial, not the practice of
any one country throughout the world counted Catholic, that makes for such
kind of regiment as master Horn avouches, nor any one manner of proof that
has any weight or pith in the world to persuade, I will not say master
Feckenham, but any other of much less wit, learning and experience. 3. a. I
say master Horn comes not once nighe the principal matter in question. 3.
a. I say further, in case we remove and sequester all other proufes on our
side, that M. Horn shall by the very same fathers, Councels, and other
authorities by himself producted, so be overthrown in the chief and capital
question, unto the which he comes not nigh as a man might say by. 1000.
miles, that his own company may have just cause to fear, etc. 3. a I say, and
master Feckenham will also say, that even M. Horn himself retreateth so far
back. etc. 3. b. The premises then being true, and of our side abundantly
proved, and better to be proved, as occasion shall serve, as nothing can
effectually be brought against them. 4. a. Ye have not, no nor ye can not prove
any such matters. 4. b.
In the first book.
I Must be so bold, by your leave, as plainly and bluntly to go to work
with you, as I have done before with master Grindall and master Jewel. 7. b.
The Queen cannot make you Lord Bishop of Winchester, as I have otherwhere
sufficiently proved, in the Fortress of of our first faith annexed to
venerable Bede. 8. a. Luther, and Calvin, and other being therewith pressed,
were so messhed and bewrapped therein, that they could not in this world wite,
what to say thereto, answering this and that, they wist nere what, nor at what
point to hold them. 8. a. The Protestants wonderfully troubled about the
question of the continual succession of Bishops. 8. a. What have ye to
justify your cause. 8. b. Master Horn can not defend and maintain his
herisies nor himself to be a Bishop by any law of the realm. 9. a. The
Catholics not suffered to reply, least their adversaries weakness should
(as it would have done in deed, and now daily does God be praised) evidently
and openly have been disciphered and disclosed. 13. a. I dare undertake that
not only master Feckenham but many mo that now refuse, shall most gladly
take the said oath. 31. a. What should I reason further with this man. 32. b.
Notwithstanding all your great bragges, and this your clerkly book, ye know
not, nor never shall know, but that the Pope is the supreme head of the Church.
36. a. Master Hooper was so answered by M. Feckenham. etc. 37. a. After all
this your long travail, wherein ye have to the most vttred all your skill, ye
are so far from full aunswering his scruples and stays, that they seem
plainly to be unanswerable, and your self quite ouerborne and overthrown,
and that by your own arguments and inductions, as we shall hereafter evidently
declare. 38. b. I refer me to your scriptures, fathers, Councels, practice
of the Church, that ye would seem to rest upon. Whereby nevertheless, you
your self shall take a shameful foil and fall. Wherefore go on a Gods name,
and bring forth your evidences, go on, I say, in Gods name (master Horn) and
prosecute your plea stoutly. 40. a. b. Now therefore go on master Horn, and
being at your first encountering ouerblowne and discomfited with your own
blast, think well whether it is likely, that ye shall hereafter bring against
your adversary any thing etc. 42. a. We freely grant you that Princes may
sharply punish teachers of false and superstitious religion. etc. for I say to
you, that you and your fellows teach false and superstitious religion. 42. a.
I trow it will be hard for you to bring forth any act of parliament, or any
other convenient and sufficient plea. 42. b. The old ordinary Latin gloss, I
am right sure M. Horn, it has no such thing. 42. b. His scripture, etc.
reaches nothing home to his pretensed purpose, but rather infringeth and
plain marreth the same, as I have said, and fully stands on our side. So I
doubt nothing it will fare with his examples, as Moses, Iosue, David, Solomon,
Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias. And that they all come to short, and are to weak
to justify his assertion. But here am I shrewdly encombred, and in great doubt
what to do, for I could make a short, but a true answer that these ensamples
are fully answered already. 43 a. This one answer might well serve for all
the kings doings now following, saving I will particularly descend to every
one, and for every one say somewhat. Here I wish to encounter with master
Nowell. 45. a. Master Nowell fretteth and fumeth with master Dorman, who shall
cool him well enough I doubt not. 49. a. Ye have hitherto brought nothing
effectual. etc. the contrary is by us avouched and sufficiently proved. etc.
bring forth that king that did not agnize one supreme head. etc. ye have not
done it, nor never shall do it, and if ye could show any, it were not worth
the showing. etc. what president have ye showed of any good king? 53. b. That
the Popish religion, is the usual religion a thousand years and upward. 53.
b. What evidence have ye brought forth? etc. what can ye bring forth out of
the old testament to aid and relieve your doings? etc. what can ye show?
etc. what good induction can ye bring? etc. what good motive can ye gather?
etc. what? think ye that ye can persuade us? etc. are ye able suppose ye, to
name us any one king? etc. O M. Horn, your manifold untruths are disciphered
and unbuckled, ye are espied, ye are espied, I say, well enough, that ye come
not by a thousand yeardes and more near the mark. Your bow is to weak,
your arms to feeble, to shoot with any your commendation at the mark, yea if
ye were as good an archer as were that famous Robin hoode, or little John.
Well shift your bow, or at least wise your string. Let the old testament go,
and proceed to your other proufes. Wherein we will now see if ye can shoot
any streighter, for hitherto ye have shot al awrie, and as a man may say,
like a blind man, see now to your self from henceforth that ye open your
eyes, and that ye have a good eye, and a good aim to the mark we have set
before you. If not, be ye assured, we will make no courtesy eft soones to put
ye in remembrance. For hitherto ye have nothing proved that Princes ought
which ye promised to prove. etc. 55. a. Answer the fortress (Master Horn)
annexed to Saint Bede if ye dare. 55. b. Belike the world goes very hard
with you. 56. a. Ye shall anon hear of it. 56. a. Master Feckenhams heresy is
so secret and privy, that Argus himself with all his eyes shall never epsy
it, no nor M. Horn himself, let him pry never so narrowly. 56. b. Ye have
heard of (your ancestors) before perhaps, and that ^ by me. 56. b. I forbear
at this time of the residue of your noble progenitors, having in other places,
as I noted before, spoken largely of the same. 57. b. Come forth once and
clear your self of this only objection if ye can being so often pressed
therewith. 57. b. 58. a. Clear your self if ye be able, I assure you M.
Horn you and all your fellows will never be able to avoid this one only
objection. 58. a. As I have proved you and your companions open and notable
heretics, so shall I straight way purge M. Feck. to be no Donatist, or any
heretic otherwise for any thing yet by you laid to his charge. But now. M.
Horn beware your self, etc. beware I say, for I suppose I will lay more
pregnant matter, in this behalf, to your and their charge, tha^ ye have or
possible can do to M. Feck. or any other Catholic. Whereof I dare make any
indifferent reader judge. If I should amplify this matter at large, it would
rise to a pretty volume. 58. a. Answer then to my third demand in the
fortress annexed to Saint Bede. 59. b. I shall trace him and smell him out
well enough. 60. b. Your great Canons come not nigh his hold by. 1000. miles.
They will not beat down a very paper wall. 62. a. Here might we even by your
own rule, cry out upon you al, as Apollinarians and Eutichians. 63. a. And
for my part (master Horn) that you may not think I have now been first so
advised upon sight of your book: I have forced that argument, with many
examples of godly Emperors and Princes, in my Dedicatorie Epistle to the
Queens Majesty, before the translated History of the venerable Bede. 65. b.
We say that you are wicked deprauers of religion. 65. b. We say ye are as
great blasphemers as ever Christ's Church had, etc. we say further, that not
only the general council of Trent, but the whole church has condemned your
opinions by general and national councils many hundred years since. 65. I hear
say master Fox is busy to set forth a fresh in print yet once again his huge
monstrous martirloge, I will do so much for him as minister him plenty of
good stuff, I warrant you, to set forth and adorn at his next edition. 66. b
Well I will bring ye as I think a substantial and an inevitable proof. 66.
b. Though I grant you all that ye have alleged, etc. and all things else
that is here alleged, yet all will not reach home. 68. a. Which answer of
his may satisfy any reasonable man, for all that ye bring in here of
Constantine, or all that ye shall afterward bring in, etc. 68. b. Which I am
assured all Catholics will grant. 68. b. Give to Caesar that belongs to
Caesar, and to God that belongs to God* which later clause* I am assured,
does much more take away a supreme regiment in all causes ecclesiastical, than
necessalily by force of any words, bind us to pay yea any tribute to our
Prince. 69. b. We plainly say that this kind of supremacy is directly
against Gods holy word. 70. a. What can ye conclude of all that ye have or
shall say to win your purpose. 74. a. I say that if Saint Augustine were alive,
he would say unto you as he said unto Gaudentius. 74. b. Neither this that ye
here allege out of place, nor all the residue which ye rehearse of this
Constantine, etc. can import this superiority, as we shall there more at large
specific. In the mean season I say it is a stark and most impudent lie. 75. b
As I have at large in my return against master Jewels fourth article declared.
77. b. What honor have ye got, what honor have you I say won by this, or
by the whole thing it self? 78. a. And shall we now (M. Horn) your antecede^t
being so naught, the consequent ye will hereof infer? nay pardie. 79. a, b.
Well I will leave this, at your leisure better to be debated upon, betwixt
you and master Fox. 80. a. Ye are a very poor sielie clearke, far from the
knowledge of the late reverend fathers Bishop White, and Bishop Gardener. 80.
a. That I may a little roll in your railing Rhetorike, hearken good master
Horn, I walk not, and wander as ye do here, etc. I go to work with you
truly, plainly, and particularly, I show you by your own Emperor, and by
plain words. 81. b. Hitherto ye have not brought any one thing worth a good
straw, to the substantial prouse of your purpose. 82. a. I am right well
assured, ye have not proved, nor never shall be able to prove, in the ancient
Church while ye live. 82. b. I walk not in confuse and general words as you
do. 82. b.
To all these facings and crakes (though many of them be particularly answered
as occasion requires) these his own words may suffice for answer.

All men know that your great vauntes are but words of course to save your
poor honesty. 1. Pref. page 23.

Because he quarelleth so much with the Bishop, as for other things so for his
Rhetorike, as also Doctor Harding and his fellows vpbrayde likewise unto
Bishop Jewel his Rhetorike, and master Dorman to master Nowell: I have
therefore set down (as one of his chiefest common places) a brief note or two
by the way, to show wherein our master Stapletons flourishing Rhetorike does
most consist.

His objections of Rhetorike.
AS for your Rhetorike, ye work your matters so handsomely, and so
perswasiuely, etc. what a new Cicero or Demosthenes are you. 1. Pref. page 6.
7.

His chiefest flowers of Rhetorike partly nothing but copia verboru^, an heap
of needless words: partly nothing but rolling on a letter. With which
Rhetorike thou shall (...) his whole book so poudred, that it should be
superfluous to trouble thee with any exacter collection of the^, being in
effect nothing else but ^rs bahlatiua. Only I will give (...) a light taste
thereof, throughout his whole volume, and the rest thou (...) continually find
as thou read his Counterblast.

His fifth common place of flourishing Rhetorike.
IT is the Castle of your Profession, the Key of your Doctrine, the principal
Fort of all your Religion, the pillar of your authority, the fountain of your
jurisdiction, the ankerholde of all your proceedings. 1. Pref. page 1. Your
cause is betrayed, your doctrine dissolueth, your whole Religion goes to
wrack, the want of this right shakes your authority, stops your
jurisdiction, and is the utter ship wrack of all your proceedings. 2. Have I
not grounded this work. etc. have I not posted it. etc. have I not furnished
it. etc. have I not fenced it. etc. have I not removed all. etc. an outward
show and countenance, a gay glorious glistring face, a face I say; all is but
a face and a naked show. 3. Most miserably and wretchedly pinched, pared, and
dismembered. Most shamefully contaminated, depraved, and deformed. 12. A
misshapen lump of lewd and lose arguments. 5. With like good Logike ye lay
forth. 6. The truth is daily more and more opened, illustred, and confirmed. 8.
T. Turkish treachery, L. Lauashing language. 14. B. Bluster and blow, F. Fume
and freat, R. Rail and rave, as L. Lowdlyas lewdly, as B. Beastly as boldly,
etc. ye B. Bluster not so boysterously as ye L. Lie most lewdly. 15. A H.
Happy hap for master Horn that happed, etc. S. Such slender circumstances
to M. Minister him matter of such T. Trifling talk. 6. b. A prerogative
appropriate to the Prelate. 7. b. You will happly forsake and abando^ Saint
Augustines authority with the old C. Canons and Councels, and (...) under the
defense of your B. Brittle Bulwark. 8. b. A pretty legerdemaine played, and a
leaf put in at the printing which was never proposed in the parliament, etc.
what Parliament have your preachers. 9. a. b. O poor and siely help, O
miserable shift, etc. This is to trouble all things, this is as it were to
confound together heaven and earth. 9. a. Why good sir make ye such post
haste? what? are you so soon at the end? I see your haste is great. What
will you leap over the hedge ere ye come at it? And I might be so bold, I
would feign demand of you, the cause of your hasty posting. Perhaps there
is some eye sore, or somewhat that your stomach cannot bear. Grieueth it you
to hear? Does it appall you to hear? etc. Does it dasell, and amase you to
hear? etc. Do ye take it to the heart Master Horn* Is it a corsey to you?
Is there yet any other lurking sore privily pinching your stomach. I trow it
nipped you at the very heart root. 212. b. 213. a. b. Why? master Horn can
your ears patiently abide all this? can your stomach digest all this master
Horn? can ye suffer, can ye suffer? How chance we have not at the least for
your comfort one pretty nippe. 287. a. A rascal rablement of monstrous
heretical names. A rablement of strange monstrous heretical names. This
rascal rablement of huge monstrous names. 317. It is so, it is so, master
Horn, etc. You can not, you may not, you shall not, etc. You saw you saw
master Horn, you master Horn. 430. Your horrible dissension glistreth so
clear, cries so loud, and blustreth so great, that so long as we have eyes
to see, ears to hear, and hands to feel, we can not choose but behold it
in the face. 434. a. Ye had need look well to your self, remember now among
other things master Horn. etc. Take heed master Horn. Think upon this at
your good laysure, remember also how ye stand. etc. Wherein I pray you
rests a great part of your new clergy. B. But in Butchers, C. Cooks,
Catchpoles, and Cobblers, D. Diers, Daubers, F. Fellons, Fishermen, G. Gunners,
H. Harpers, I. Inkeepers, M. Merchants and Mariners, N. Netmakers, P. Potters,
Poticaries, and Porters of Belingsgate, R. Ruffling Ruffians, S. Sadlers,
Sheremen and Shepeheardes. T. Tanners, Tylers, Tinkers, Trumpetters. VV.
VVeauers, VVherrymen. 481. a. b.
This and such other is his Rhetorik, either flourishing with (...) words,
running on a letter, and now and then sifting the whole cross row for them.
Or else doubling and tr^bling of (...) phrases, or multiplying of words, with
which every sentence is in a manner farced. For (...) is not commonly content to
express his mind with one word be it (...) so plain, except he vnderpropp^
it with an other at the least, as thus, miserable and wretched perverting and
deprauing. The full illustration and opening of whole and entyre matter.
Evidently and openly disciphered and disclosed, espied and unbuckled, bewrayed
and detected, opened, illustred and confirmed. Which as it is most vain
babbling, so is it altogether unworthy the noting, except briefly to show the
reader what kind of vanity he has puffed up this his Counterblast withal.

His sixth common place of impertinent discourses.
His own objection of the same.
LIke a wanton Spaniell he runs from his game at riot. 243. Master Horn
(says he) seeks out bye matters, leaving the principal as the Donatistes
did 321. a.
That thou may the better see how he observes this and keeps himself to
his matter or no: first, behold the issue and state of the question between
the Bishop and M. Feckhenham, which is this. Whether any Prince have taken on
them any such supreme government as does the Q. Majesty in ecclesiastical
causes. Which issue to be resolved in, Master Feckenham desires the proof by
any of these four ways, either by the Scriptures, or by the Doctors, or by
the Councels, or by the continual practice in any one part of Christendom. To
the which issue by all these four said ways, the Bishop directs all his
proves, and in this first book he proves it by two of them, the Scriptures,
and the Doctors. Now whether Master Stapleton keep himself to this issue, or
to the proufes thereof, or to the Bishops answer, without playing the wanton
Spaniell, and the part of the Done: judge, when thou have read this his sixth
common place. And withal thou shall see, what good plenty of bye matters he
had in store, when substantial matter ^ayled him.

In his first Preface taking on him to gather abriefe sum, of such things as
he thought specially he might deface the Bishop withal, throughout all his
Preface he never sets (...) the issue in controversy, but quarelleth about
other things, with the Bishops rashness, folly, Grammar, Logike, Rhetorike,
Arithmetike. And where at the length he speaks of king Henry. 1. his
dealings, in punishing Priests whoredom, to show ^ow of purpose he seeks
out his quarelles, he slinketh from the Princes dealing, wherewith he is urged,
and says this is not the thing we now seek for, but to know what kind of
whoredom it was, that the Priests should be punished for. Page 12.

And Page 18. letting go the matter that he is in hand withal, he discourses
against the Bishop of Sarum about Sabellicus titles.

In the 2. Preface where he binds himself (...) than in the. 1. to declare
the whole pith of the question, and course of the Bishops and his own ^ke: he
digresseth into a common quarrel about diversity of fects and heresies, which
he ascribes to the Protestants, he c^eth into Greece, Africa, Bohemia,
Hungary, Lifelande, page 30 and so comes home to England, digressing from
the question and issue, to English books, to forbidding of the Bible to be
read, to the judgment of Lambert, to burning, to religious houses, Page 31. to
vows, to repealing laws, to setting forth a new religion, to marriage of
Priests, to consecrating* Bishops, to the real presence, Page 32. Then
runs he to search out discord in the Protestants, and quarelling about
words in the act and iniunction, he makes an exhortation to return to the
Roman Church. 33. 34. 35.

In the answer to the Bishops Preface, the first whole division. fo. 1. 2. a.
b. A long impertinent discourse to molli^e master Feckenhams pretense for
setting out his book.

A number of bie matters falsely charging the Bishop with diverse impertinent
slanders. 2. b. 3. a.

Pretending to direct the reader to the question here in trouersie, for the
nonce he sets up a number of new marks that master Feckenham and the
Bishop medleth not withal. 3. b.

Fol. 4. a. He quarelleth at the Bishop of Sarum for the 600. years, and the
Bishop of Winchester for alleging testimonies of later years, calling this
uneven dealing of the Protestants. He quarelleth about precise words. He
makes a new challenge to the Bishop. he charge the Bishop of a late brag,
none of all these things belonging any whit to the matter. 4. b. 5. a.

In his first book.
A long outrode whether the Bishop were well called by M. Feck. the Lord
Bishop of Winchester or no. 7. a. b.

Whether he be Bishop or prelate of the Garter. 7. b. succession of Bishops. 8.
a* against the marriage of Bishops, of flesh on Frydayes, of a Pigge turned into
a Pike. That the Protestants be Heretics even by the Apology of England. 8.
b. An inuectiue against the acts of Parliament, of altering religion against
the will of the whole clergy, that the Bishop can not defend himself to be
a Bishop by any law of the Realm. About the real presence,
transubstantiation, and adoration. 9. a. Denial of free will, the necessity
of baptising children, unlawful marriage. 9. b.

A long inuectiue against the disputation at Westminster Anno. reginae. 1.
with a number of frivolous excuses why they shranke from it. 12. a. b. 13. a.

A long digression almost of. 13. leaves together, nothing to the question, but
discoursing into all countries, Boheme, Germany, Denmark, Swethland, Brabant,
Hollande, Flaunders, Lukelande, England, France, Scotland, Saxony, Hessia,
Westphalia, besides many towns and Cities, chiefly about the business in the
low Countries, to deface the Gospel by the tumults there raised, as the
world well sees, only by the practices of the Papists.

Fol. 33. b. Having mentioned the plague, he falls into wicked ghessing that
the procedings in that Parliament were the cause of the plague that reigned at
London, and once again a ^ing at the Bishops that they be no Church nor yet
Parliament Bishops. A long impertinent bibble babble, about master Feckenhams
ioly disputations begone at London, and ended at Worcester. 36. b. 37. a

An Inuectiue against heresy, and that it opens ye truth. 37. a

A comparison of the ignorance of the greatest learned men among the Papists
in king Henryes days, and the clear knowledge that the Louanists have n^we.
38 a. b.

Master Feckenham his repentance for confessing the Kings title of supremacy.
38. b.

A bi^ quarrel at the Bishop for calling this sentence of the Book of
Wisdom, In (...) ammam non intro^it sapientia, A sentence of the holy ghost.
Whereupon he concludes a discord in the Protestants writing. 39. a.

Where he should reply. 39. b. 40. a To the Bishops answer, he answers not
a word, but seeks starting holes out of another answer, that he threapeth
on the Bishop to have made before, to challenge him thereby with falsehood, as
being variable in his aunsweres, and so aunswering nothing, runs quite from
the matter.

In stead of answer in the Bishops argument out of Deuteronomy. 13. and. 17. he
runs to a needelesse proof, that Heresy is a very Idol. And once again,
that we have no warrant by act of Parliament for marriage of ministers, for our
doctrine of the Sacrament, for our wrytinges and preachings. 42. a.

When he should answer in the ensample of Iosue, he is in hand with M. D.
Harding, and the Apology, with M. Dorman, and M. Nowell, quarelling for
ciphers in misquoting, for (...) ma^er D^rmans the^tes, for lay men's
presumption to go before Priests, for altering religion at the convocation.
46. b.

Challenging the Bishop for running at randon from the mark, and willing the
Reader to regard the mark, he sets up of purpose. ix. false marks,
nothing nere the issue in question between the Bishop and M. Feck. and under
pretense of those nine marks, runs himself at randon, into above. xix.
impertinent matters, of the Jews acknowledging one high Priest, of altering
religion, of the auncientnesse of Popery, 53. b. of the Priests oath, on their
Priesthood, of abandoning the Pope, and general councels, of the authority of
the Scriptures, of the determining heresies by them, of foraigne authority, of
bestowing ecclesiastical livings. Of Bishops letters patents, of restraining
their jurisdiction, of inhibiting from preaching, of payment of tenthes and
first fruits, of the privilege of the heathen priests of Egypt, of writing
the Queens title, of Priests receiving the oath, of exempting the nobility,
of a woman Prince, and in the end of all this, of Robin Hood and little John,
and because he shoots at these marks, he says, he has shot awrie like a
blind man. 54. a. b. 55. a.

Where he should directly answer to that wherewith master Feckenham is by
the Bishop charged, for refusing all the proves of the old Testament to play
the part of a Donatist, Master Stapleton snatcheth hereupon occasion to run
out from his matter, and to gather together first a great rabble partly of
heresies, partly of no heresies, to charge us withal, and then trauayleth to
heap up a number of points, laboring thereby to prove the Protestants, to be
Donatists, meddling by this occasion with every matter, that he thought he might
enlarge his book withal, with sects and divisions, with bragging of
multitudes, with viciousness of life, of tying the Church to this or that
place, of corrupting the fathers, of visions and miracles, of vaunting of
Councels, of a general Apostacy, of beginning and continuance, of doctrine
and Bishops, of complaining of good Princes, and praising of ill, of defacing
the Sacraments and incredible cruelty, of the Emperors laws, and the holy
Gospels, of murdering others and themselves, of false martyrs, all which
(saving his long discourse of three or four pages against master Foxes book,
which I remitte to him to be answered) is answered for his importunity sake,
though much of it be more fully answered by others, and also quite
extrauagant from the matter in hand. 57. 58. 59. 60. 61. 62.

Fol. 65. He chalengeth us to be blasphemers, he is in hand with contempt of
the number of the sacraments, with provincial and general Councels, with
another fling at M. Foxes book of Martyrs, about the articles of Sir Thomas
Hitton priest, (...) Sir John Oldcastle Knight, the Lord of Cobham, for
putting of heretics to death, for compelling to receive the faith for
manslaughter. 66. a. b.

Once again he is in hand with his old quarrel of Images, Idols, and the
Cross. 68. b.

Where he should answer to the Bishops allegations out of Nicephorus, he
lets them all alone, and medleth with other matters nothing to the purpose,
as with Michael Paleologus Emperor of Greece, with thalenging the Grecians for
heresies, with the heresy of the holy ghost to proceed only from the father,
and not from the son, with the Council at Lions, with the accordment between
the Grecians and the Latin Church, with their revolt from the same, with the
spite of the Greek Bishops. From thence he runs to other matters, railing
on the Author of the Homely against Idolatry, for calling Michael*
Theodorus, about his depriving and funerals, that the question of Images was
not moved at the Council of Lions, of the setting up and continuance of
Images in the Greek Church. From hence he runs to quarelling about the
names of Valence and Valentinian, and of his and Theodosius his law against
the picture of the Cross. Against Bishop Jewel for citing it out of Crinitus
simply, as the same Crinitus does. Hereon he enters into a general
inuectiue, against the reading of the Homelies now ^et forth, and falls in
praising of the Homelies in the Popish Church. 76. b. 77. a.

In stead of aunswering to the Bishops argument out of Saint Paul, and
Chrysostomes allegation thereon, he is in hand again with master Fox, for
setting forth the doyngs of Doctor VVesalian, with the Bishop to be but a
poor Clearke, with the aduauncing of Bishop White, and Bishop Gardener, with
chalenging the Bishop to be of the Grecians opinion against the proceeding of
the holy Ghost from the father and the son, with the decay of the Empire of
Greece, with a comparison between the decay of Jerusalem besieged at Easter
by the Romans, and the Captivity of Constantinople besieged at VVhitsontide
by the Turks, with the poynting of Gods ^ynger, with the Realms of France,
Scotland, Germany, with the vaunting of his own plain and true going to
work, with Michaell and Andronicus once again, and none of all these things
either aunswering the Bishop, or perteyning to the question.

Last of al, where he takes on him to set down the state of the question, he
sets up many new questions, neither in hand between the Bishop and master
Feckenham, nor any whit defended by us, but mere slanders of the Papists, of
the Princes preaching the word of God, ministering the Sacraments, binding and
losing, etc. Thus handsomely has he kept himself close to the matter, and yet
ever he cries, have an eye to the mark, and wills us still to call for the
question, and yet himself has thus digressed from it, for otherwise ye must
understand, his big Counterblast had been but a very short and little
puff of wind. But to all this impertinent stuff (though the most of it for
his importunity be answered at large) I answer it with his own words. fol.
4.

Much labor vainly and ydly employed with tedious and infinite talk and
babbling al from the purpose out of the matter which ought specially to have
been justified. 4.

His seventh common place, of false translations*
THe reason why I place this among his other common places, is that (although
he cite few allegations in this first book for the Popes supremacy, and
therefore could not be much noted here of this fault) yet in his other books
following, he is full of false translations, or at the leastwise so captions
translations, that he might seem any ways to further his purpose thereby.

His own objection.
MAster Horn does not faithfully but most corruptly and Fol. 5 b.
falsely allege the authors words, and uses his own in stead of theirs,
and to such as he truly rehearses, he gives an unmeet and unprofitable
sense of his own making.

Interpreting a sentence out of the story of Magdeburge, wrested as spoken
against us, defending the supreme government of the Queens Majesty, where it
was spoken of a Popish supremacy: he translateth Non sint capita Ecclesiae.
They may not be heads of the Church in no cafe. Which words, in no case, as
though it denied all kind of supremacy, is his own addition, and not his
Authors words. fol. 22. a.

To pretend a iolie antiquity and authority for the Popish error of
penance, and that it is a Sacrament, alleging S. A^g. whose words are these,
Nunquid enim perfect de Trinitate tractatu^ est anteque oblatrarent Ariant?
nu^quid perfect de penite^tia tracta^ est anteque obsistere^t Nouatiani? sic
non, etc. Was the matter of the Trinity thoroughly discussed before that the
Arrians barked against it? Concerning repentance, was it ever thoroughly handled
before the Nouatians withstoode it? etc. which master Stapleton translateth the
Sacrament of penance was never thoroughly handled. etc. Where Saint Augustine
names not penance but repetance, neither speaks he of any Sacrament at all,
but only says de poeniten^a, of repentance. 37. b.

Where the Bishop alleged King David's acts to infer a supreme government:
Master Stapleton aunswering by this sentence. 1. Par. 24. Ut ingrediantur domum
dei iuxta ritum suum sub manu Aaron patris eorum, That they should enter into
the house of God according to their rite or manner under the hand of Aaron
their father: to make the matter some to serve his turn the better, he
Englisheth these later words, Sub manu patris Aaron, Under the spiritual
government of their spiritual father and his successors the hie Priests, which
words his text has not.

Translating the words that he has picked out of an Epistle of Theodosius:
that which is there spoken of a particular controversy of the ^ayth, and the
Priests then, about the Bishop of Constantinoples deposition and appeal: he
translateth, locum ac fa^ultatem habeat de fide ac sacerdotibu^ iudicare. That
he may have place and liberty to give judgment in such matters as concern
faith and priests. As though it were spoken simply of all such matters, where
his allegation has neither these general words such matters as concern,
nor any such general meaning, only the Emperor Ualentinian writes to
Theodosius being also Emperor, that the Bishop of Rome may have place and
license to judge of the faith and the Priests, meaning of that controversy of
the faith, that was then sproong up, and the quarrel about Flauianus, for so
the end of the sentence, in express words expounds it self. Which words
master Stap. leaves out, least his false and captious translation should be
espied.

His own objections of contradictions.
THese fellows jar always among themselves, and in all their doctrines fall
into such points of discord, that in place of uniform tuning, they ruffle us
up a black sanctus. Quo teneam (...) pr^tea nod^.

His eight common place of contradictions to him self, and his fellows.
THis controversy, says he, of the supremacy, is the only matter the Papists
stand in, which if it were so, then they admit all other things and stand not
in them, but straight he contrary^th his own tale, saying: other matters in
controversy are not so oppressed, Ergo, they be pressed, and the Papists
stand in them* 1. Pref. page 2.

The Princes inuesturing of Bishops, is but an impertinent matter. And yet anon
he says, The inuestiture of Bishops is a matter quite destroying the Princes
supremacy.

He often complayneth that the title of King Henry the eight, and King Edward
the ^ixt, was so simple and large, that it was feign to be mollified with the
Queens title.

And yet he says in his. 2. Preface. Page 34. the Queens title has more
added than theirs, and that of greatest importance.

He says, Princes may meddle and deal with ecclesiastical causes, which
neither master Feckenham nor any Catholic will greatly contend with him in.
4. a.

Where not only the contrary is most apparent, but also Cardinal Hosi^ will
not suffer Princes so much as Mouere sermone^, To move any talk of
ecclesiastical matters.

Fol. 1^. b. He says the matters debated in the disputation at Westminster
were but three, the service in English, the alteration of ceremonies, and the
Sacrifice propiciatorie. But in the next page, where he says, there would
have been more deliberation: he adds a fourth, the controversy of the
supremacy. 13 2.

He says those matters that were debated were nothing touching faith, and yet
in the page before, he only said the first and the second be no matters of
faith.

He says also they were no principal matters, but dependant and accessorie.
And yet in the first he says of the supremacy, that it is of such and so
great importance as no matter more now in controversy, and for the other
points who sees not what principal matters otherwhiles they will make these
seem to be, especially the sacrifice of the Mass, for the which they burned
so fast in the late reign of Queen Marie, when this was one of their first
and chiefest questions.

Again that the Papists be most obedient subjects to the Queens Majesty, he
craketh almost in every place. And yet about this disputation he confesses,
that eue^ in a trifling matter, they disobeyed the Queens commandment. 11. b.

Fol. 29. a. b. Christian Princes civil government reaches and tends to
this end, to preserve their subjects from outward and inward injuries,
oppressions and enemies, to provide for their safety and quietness, for their
wealth, abundance, and prosperous maintenance, and no further. What is here more
than in a Sarasin Prince? But anon he says. Christian Princes most of all, are
much more bound to employ themselves to their possibility, toward the
tuition and defense, furtherance and amplification of the spiritual Kingdom.
fol. 29. b. 30. a.

The service of the Prince is common as well to the heathen as Christian
government. 29. b.

Christian Princes are faithful advocates in ayding and assisting the
spiritual power. 30. a. which the heathen are not fol. 30. b. He flatly
confesses that M. Feck. helped to spoil Queen Marie of a principal part of
her royal power, right and dignity (in spoiling her of this supremacy)
thought says he, he so did, but not as an unfaithful subject. But so to
spoil hi^* and not therein to be an unfaithful subject, are flat
contradictorie.

Again he says, he did it as a repentant Catholic, but to spoil any body
of their right, and to do it repentantly, are also flat contradictorie. ibid.

Again he says afterward, it was no part at all of hi^ royal power, but to
confess first that he spoiled her of a principal part of her royal power,
and after to say it was no part of her royal power, are likewise
contradictorie.

As also to say he spoiled her, and yet it was no part belonging to that, of
which he spoiled (...) What are all these but an heap of words, (...)
contradictions? And all this he utters within less than forty words
together.

Fol. 40. b The^ Bishop (...) that the Prince shall have by him the law of
God, (...) ^ly (...), (...) that the (...) s^yth not so* (...) yet within fire
lines before, he confesses that ^he (...) ^yeth so, and (...) of infidelity,
for leaving out words, that went immediately before the Text that the
Bishop alleged. And so while he stryueth to challenge the Bishop, he clears
the Bishop, and ouerth (...) himself.

Again in the (...). On the one side of the leaf, he grants freely, that
by the. 13. of Deuterenomie, Princes may punish teachers of false and
superstitious religion and Idolatry. On (...) ^ther (...) of the leaf, he
eats his free grant (...), and says that in all (...) chapter, or in all
that book* there is no (...) ^ounde. ^ cares not what.

Where the Bishop allengeth the (...) of ^osue, M. St. (...) the ensample,
because says he, Iosue did sacrifice, (...), and (...) other (...) himself.
46. b. that Princes cannot now do.

And yet after. fol. 49. speaking of Iosue, he confesses that he did them not
him self, but by appoynting them to be done by the priests ministry.

He chalengeth the Bishop for not proving his matters by any testimonies of the
new Testament, after he has handled the old. And by and by he confesses
that he alleges two testimonies of the new Testament to prove his matters
by. 59. a.

He confesses that master Feckenham refused of sett^ purpose like ^ wise man,
the testimonies of the old Testament. And yet all his long treatise of eight
leanes together in the* ^6. Chapter, is chiefly to this purpose, to prove that
he refuses them not. 62. a.

He confesses that he omitted them, because they made against him, and yet he
says, he includes them, and affirms them as all making with him. ibid.

Fol. 65. a. b. He grants by Saint Augustines words, that Princes may make
laws and constitutions for the furtherance of Christ's Religion. And in the
next side, he denies Saint Augustines words to enforce any thing else, but
laws to punish Heretics, which is no Ecclesiastical matter at all.

Fol. 66. a. He says, we deny that Princes may punish Heretics by death. And
(...)* he says we hold with Calvin, that says Princes may* pot* Heretics
unto death.

When the Bishop presses him with the ensamples of Moses, (...), David, (...)
denies as does master Dorman that the ensamples of the old are figures of the
new Testament, and yet in the* 17. Chapter he grants, that all the examples
(...)* (...) that the (...) of the old Testament herein, be figures of the
new. fol. 68. ^.

He confesses there is some regiment that Princes may take upon them in causes
ecclesiastical. And in the next side he (...) the Princes regiment to ^e but
an over ^r in civil matters. But forthwith again contrary to this, he
grants the Prince may have the procurations and executions of Church
matters. fol. 68. ^. And thus in Docke, out Nettie, he so grants and denies
that there is no hold of his word. 68. a. b.

He grants Christ destroyed not the rule of Princes in Church causes figured
in the old law, and that Christ's sentence, give to Caesar that that is
Caesar's, confirms the figure of Princes rule in Church causes in the old
law. And yet streightway he says, it makes nothing for it 69. a.

He says this sentence, give unto Caesar that belongs unto Caesar, destroys
not the figure: where the subjects in the old law were bound to give all
duties to their Princes that belonged unto them. And yet anon after by this
sentence says he, men be not bound to pay any thing, yea not so much as
tribute to their Princes. 70. a. And so this sentence confirms not, but
lo^eth and destroys the figure, by the which subjects were bound before to
their Princes.

He says that this sentence of Christ determines something. And by and by he
says it determines nothing. Again he says it determines paying tribute
only. And yet he said before it determined not that neither.

He said also before, that this sentence only licensed, that we might pay
tribute if we would, but we ought not. And yet after he says, Christ willed
that to be given to Caesar that is his, which is ^oth a determination and
commandment also. 70. a.

He says the Bishops admonition hereon, is without any cause or ground. And
anon he says, it serves him and his brethren for many and necessary
purposes. fol. 70. a.

He grants that Princes have authority, both to further the observation,
and to punish the breach as well in the first table as in the second, that is,
as well in such actions as concern our duty to God him self, as in the duty
of one man to another. 71. b. But in the next side he flatly denies this
again, saying, these are the works of the first table, the punishing,
correcting or judging of these, appertain nothing to the authority of the
Prince or to any his laws. 72. a.

He says we make the Princes supreme governors without any limitation. And
yet withal he alleges Master Nowell to say, it is not without limitation,
but that Godly ministers may judge of the synceritie of doctrine according to
Gods word. fol. 73. a. As also he showed in the division before how the
Bishop limited the Princes government, by the bounds of the word of God.

He says that Saint Paul. 1. Tim. 2. speaks there of no authority at all
in Princes. Where the words are evident, for all those that be put in
authority. And yet himself by and by says, he speaks of their government.
And anon after, will ye know (says he) why the Apostles both Saint Peter and
Saint Paul so earnestly taught at that time obedience to Princes? But what
obedience could they require in subjects, if they comprehended not with all
authority in Princes. fol. 75. b.

Answer these contradictions with his own words.

I am here in the beginning put to the knowledge by the variety of your
aunsweres, that they cannot be both true, but if the one be true, the other
must be false. fol. 40. a.

By your contradictions, ye show the unstableness of your own Judgment. 1.
Pres. page 19.

His ninth common place of petit quarrels, at Grammar and other trifles, to
prolong his book thereby.
His own objection of the same.
WHo sees not now that all this was but a quarrel picked without desert and
you (master Stapletonn) to have showed yourselfe amost ridiculous wrangler. But
Gods name be blessed, the dealing of Catholic writers is so upright, that
such small occasions must be piked, and upon such trifles your Rhetorike
must be bestowed, else against their dealing ye have nothing to say.

1. Preface. page 18.
IN his first Preface, where he gives a brief antedate of all those things,
that he is ^ust offended withal: he makes this a very heinous fault that
the Bishop called Conuen^t, It ought to be, for It is meet or convenient to
be* 1. Pref. Page 4. As who say if a thing be meet and convenient, it ought
not to be, or if it ought to be, it is not meet and convenient to be. But if
Oportet must needs always signify it ought to be, then ought your Bishops
(if they be Bishops) to be married. For Saint Paul says not Conuenit, but
Oportet Episcopu^ esse vni^ vx^r is viru^, A Bishop ought to be the husband of
one wife.

In the same place he makes a sorer matter about this word recen^endam, to
rehearse, which word the Bishop went not about to interpret in that place,
as the letter shows, but only to tell the sentence and intent of their
doing: and wherefore did the Council present their doings, to be read or
rehearsed before the Emperor, but that he might examine and confyrme the same?
Besides that they them selves beseech him to ratify and confirm them, which
he could not well do, having not examined and perused them. ibid.

Likewise about irrogare priuilegia, that either by escape of the Printer (as
many such escapes in any book may hap) or by the oversight of the writer of
the Printers copy, was printed to take away, for he gave, of which escape,
Lord what a wonderful triumphant outcrie he makes also in his Counterblast,
while the material purpose is all one against him, whether the Prince made
privileges, or abrogated privileges and took them from the Clergy. For, if
his taking away were lawful, his authority remained equal in both, except ye
will say* Princes have authority to make privileges for the Clergy, give or
make for them what and how much they will, but they, that have learned
holdefast, the first point of hawking, will not suffer them by the same
authority, to take any away ag^ine, for that is against their profit. But the
law says contrary, the same authority that may make, the same authority may
vnd^e and take away again. ibidem.

But less marvel is it that he quarelleth about the former words, that
cauilleth about the Englishing of quaui^ causa, any cause, which must be, says
he, every cause, calling this interpreting, foul shifts, nevertheless of
much importance, to call quauis, any, and yet himself even in the next lease,
not of quauis, qualibet, or quacunque, whereon he descanteth Grammarian like,
but even of nothing, can make (Any) a foul shift, and yet not of any other
importance at all, than to show that any, or all these causes of his
brablings, are in conclusion of no importance at all. But admitting as he would
have it the Kings and the Councels decree against the carrying of causes out of
the Realm, to be pleaded at the Court of Rome, should signify not any, but
eue^y cause, then could not the penalty of the breach thereof extend to any,
that had tried exceeding many causes at Rome, and daily did for all this
decree, unless it had ^ene proved he had there tried every cause, and so the
decree it self had been of non^ importance at all, whereat so heinous a matter
is made, and yet the word in that place admits so well none other
interpretation. ibid.

The like quarrel he piketh about supremu^ g^bernator, supreme governor, in
the Queene^ Majesty's title to the oath administered at Oxenford^, of the which
oath he says, A scholar might make an honest refusal, were it nothing but
for false Latin. Which rule of his if it hold: then many of their po^ishe
ceremonies, their Latin service, their Mass, yea even their consecration
might honestly he refused, were it but for false Latin, when their ignorant
Priests did pronounce corpus (...), etc. in nomina patria filia spirita sancta
etc. (...), for sum^simus. or such like words, about the which your best
scholemen make somewhat more (...), standing upon the intentio^s, and not so
much upon the sillables, that even for the false construction of sir John lack^
Latin that patreth Latin like a Parat, they might honestly refuse the same:
but to save the honesty of their priests, and their ignorant escapes, they
have a contrary F de ma. te ^. qui habet ser^um. etc.
gloss to your rule, quia error sillabae non nocet, the error of a syllable
hurts not, although, they that used this phrase, knew as well how to set
the Substanti^e and the Adjective together, as master Stapleton I dare say, and
(were it so as he says) might take the phrase usually received, not respecting
the gender so much, as the self thing and power, As we use in English^ to say
without quarelling thereat, the Queens Royal or regal estate, though she by
her se^e, be Queen, and by Grammar should say reginall estate, likewise we
call her governor, defender, and your self call her often Prince, not
Princess, all these and such like words or phrases, setting aside the
exacting of Grammar rules, in respect of her kingly power, the lawyers say they
may use this license of speech, to whom I remitte you, and to other your
Canonists, scholemen and Historiographers, that have used the same or like,
with no reproach or quarrel piked thereat. And if now the Queens Majesty's
supremacy must needs be renou^ced for this phrase, because by the censure of
our new Aristarchus, it is not so Grammerlike, then must your Pope himself
leese his usurped supremacy, so often (as it often falls out) he is no
Grammarian at all. ibidem.

Likewise he makes a quarrel about these words supreme head, in the title of
King Henry and King Edward, and the words of the title used now, supreme
governor, where all men know that the sense is all one, but that this title
more plainly expresses ye matter to prevent such ianglers. Yea but says he
there is a certain addition of greatest importance (which is) in all
spiritual or ecclesiastical things or causes as temporal. What is this but
an importune seeking of a knot in a rushe of no importance? (...) there any
thing in these words, added more, than was ^ully compre^ hended in the other,
or than King Henry, or King E^warde claymed and took on them? 2. Pref. page
34.

He makes an other petit quarrel at the form of the printed letter. fol. 49.
b. But it is answered in his bederoll of untruths, where he likewise makes a
slurre about it. Diverse other petit quarrels he dath about the distinction of
the letter, and for cyting the effect of certain textes, and not declaring
them word for word, fol. 50. b. which is answered.

Another quarrel he pyketh at the Bishop, for citing Emanuell Paleologus* the
Emperor of Gree^e. Another for that he calls him Christian Emperor, (...)
these ar^ answered in their proper places. Another ^or translating Suprema
Anchora, Supreme Anchore, and not the last Anchore, but this is likewise
answered.

(...) like petit quarrels he piketh many, which here for brevity I ouerpasse.
And although there is none vnaunswered in their places, yet answer them all
with his own words.

A man would here suppose (master Stapleton) that ye had some great and just
occasion, thus grievously to charge such a man (as the Bishop is) and that in
print where all the world may read and consider it. Pref. 17.

What an offense I beseech you has (the Bishop) committed herein so great as
wo^thie a dash with your pen. (...)* b.

To these he adioyneth his tenth common place, which himself calls words of
course, saying, these are but words of course. 1. Pref. page 2. And therefore
I used his own term.

His words of course, that is, such as may be better returned on himself.
FIrst his beginning of his first Preface, with the parable of the foolish
buylder. Luc. 14. Whom he compares the Bishop unto, for attempting this
controversy, which he calls the Castle of our profession, and not able to go
through therewith, is therefore laughed to scorn, saying, behold this man
began to build but he has not been able to make an end. That this may be
truly recoursed on the Papists, all the world begins to see and to laugh
them to scorn, at the overthrow that God has made of their Nymrods
Babilonicall Tower, and how the more they labor to repair the decay thereof,
because they build not on Jesus Christ the Rock, but on the sands of their
Fathers traditions, they can not therefore with all their force, inquisitions,
devises and attemptes, bring their buylding to any good pass, their
groundworke i^ rotten, their stuff is naught, and therefore master Stapletons
Fortress, and all their Bulwarks are overthrown, spirituoris ^ius, with the
spirit of his mouth, that is, with the word of God.

But ye will say (says he, of this parable) they be but words of course. Well
prevented, master Stapleton, and in time, who can rightly say or judge any
other of them, since they be so indeed, as your self confess, words both of
ordinary course with you and all your side, and what is said in the whole
discourse of them, but such course stuff God wot, as in recoursing them to
you, may be more fitly and truly applied.

For ensample, even in the similitude ye allege of the Apples and Grapes of
Sodom and Gomorre. Pref. 1. page 3. fair to the eye without, within nothing
but stinking ashes. A most lively picture of the fruits of Popery, more
glorious without in pomp, riches, wealth, and might of the world. More
shining in outward holiness, counterfeyts miracles, Jewish ceremonies, and
Pharisaical works, and in all other things more fair and delectable to the
outward senses, than ever were the Apples of Sodom, or any thing else: but
within, for sound doctrine, and the right worship of God, consisting in spirit
and truth, neither the Apples of Sodom and Gomorre, nor Sodom and Gomorre it
self, had ever the like stinch and infection. And all those gay things come
but to touch them, with the touch stone the holy word of God, they sm^lder
forthwith into Ashes, or rather into nothing. Uevobis hypocritae (says Christ)
VVo be to you hypocrites, that make clean that is outward. etc.

The like recourse is made of all your glorious pamphlets, and of this yours in
hand, there need none other answer than to return your own words to your
own self thereon. It bears a countenance of truth, of reason, of learning,
but come to the trial and examination of it, I find a pestilent rank of most
shameful untruths, an unsavory and vain kind of reasoning, and last of all,
the whole to resolve into gross ignorance. Page 4.

Likewise where he says. Page 8. After all this struggling and wrestling
against the truth by you and your fellows, the truth is daily more and more
opened, illustred, and confirmed, and your contrary doctrine is or ought to be
disgraced, and brought in utter discredit. The answer to this, is the same
that (...) made to the quarelling sophister, If I say it, the argument is true,
if thou say it, it is false.

That which ye forge of a namelesse Protestant, from one of your lying fellows
(...) that A protestant of late days being pressed of a Catholic for extreme
lying, and not being able to clear himself, said plainly and bluntly,
Quamdiu poter^ clades adferam, latebunt quamdiu poterant, valebunt apud vulg^
ista mendacia, I will deface them, and do some mischief to them as long as I
am able, my lies shall lie hid as long as may be, and at the least the common
people shall fall in a liking with them. page 20.

A^ this is most likely to be your own and your authors lie on the
Protestants, that at the least the common people might fall in a misliking with
us: so is it evidently true if it ^e recoursed on your own side, all the world
can witness, it has been your sayings and doings in very deed: and no^e for
fear y^ should have been prevented, object it in your Preface to us. It is you
that with your cruelty, and slanders have and do say, Quamdin potero clades
adferam, I will do mischief to them (...) long as I can. It is you that this
long while have slaundered and devised horrible lies* by those that have
professed the truth, altering and chopping their articles, saying, they
mainteyne such and such he resies as they never thought, and have said,
Latebunt quamdi^ poterunt, valebunt apud vulg^ ista mendacia, These lies shall
lie hidden with the vulgar people so long as may be. And so have ye made the
people (in executing your cruelty) believe that they did God good service. So
did the Phariseys and high priests, abuse the (...) and ignorance of the
Iewishe people, with such untrue slanders on Jesus Christ himself. And to the
better compassing hereof, ye have set forth lies for truth, and kept the people
ignorant, least they should discern them. And ye have said of your
hypocritiall errors, of your ^ayned miracles, and legends of lies, latebunt
quam diu p^rerunt, v^lebunt apud* (...) mendaci^, The ignorant people will
osteeme such lying to ^es. And therefore we may well return your conclusion on
your self, that ye be those false Prophets and lying masters, such as Saint
Peter spoke of, bringing in wicked and damnable sects. God give them grace
which are deceived by you, so well to know you, as we that do examine your
writings, have good cause to know you. And thus your words of course, fathered
(as ye call it) in a luskie lane of some indiuiduum vagum, (a certain
Protestant of late days) and for witness hereof ask your fellow if it be not
so: how well in every point they appear (that as they say the fox was the
first finder) to be your own tootoo open sayings and doings, to charge us
withal, a Gods name hardily, let all the world be judge.

His obiecting of straggling from the matter. fo. 4. a. Of false alleging his
Authors words. fol. 5. b. Of omitting and concealing circumstances. fol. 7.
a. Of deep silence to answer the pith of the matter. fol. 8. a. Of obiecting
fleshly pleasures. fol. 8. b. Of quarelling that our Bishops be no Bishops fol.
9. a. b. Of passing good manners for misrepor^ing. n. a. Of obiecting
conspiracies and sedition. fol. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26.
27. Remove them with a writ of return to the Papists themselves, and then
they are fully answered.

This lo at the least (says M. St.) fol. 37. b. heresy works in the Church
that it makes the truth to be more certainly known and more firmly and
steadfastly afterward kept, so says S. Augustine the matter of the Trinity
was never well discussed till the Arrians barked against it. etc.

This is truer M. St. than either ye wene, or would. The experience whereof is
daily to be seen in the Papists, defending their errors and impugning the
truth, in their subtle practices, in their tyrannical inquisitions, and cruel
torments, yea even in this yours and your fellows volumes, striving to obscure
and deface the truth: but all these steps notwithstanding, the truth is and
shall be more and more set forth, the Popish errors ^sse and less begutle us,
and the kingdom of Antichrist detected and forsaken.

Fol. 40. a. M. St. tells us that S. Greg. Nazianzen says, Verum est quod
vnum est, mendaciu^ aute^ est multiplex. The thing which is true is always one
and like unto it self, whereas the lie, the cloked and counterfeyt thing is in
it self variable and diverse. By the which rule here given, of so learned and
grave a father, I am here put to knowledge, that the Papists not being content
with the only word of God, always one and like it self, but joining thereto
men's variable and diverse unwritten verities: That the Papists being not
content with the true spiritual worship of one God, always one and like
himself, not with one mediator Jesus Christ, but yielding spiritual worship
to Saints and Saints pictures besides God, and making other variable and
diverse mediators to God besides Christ: that the Papists being not content
with the only merits and satisfaction of Christ's death always one and like
itself* but devising variable and diverse Masses, Diriges, Pilgrimages and
satisfactions besides: being not content with the flat scripture always one
and like it self, that testifies only faith in christ, to be the means of
apprehe^ding our justification, but adding variable and diverse infinite work^
of their own, to deserve their justification by: being not content with the
only title and profession of Christianity, always one (...) like (...) but
s^tting up variable and diverse feas, professio^s, religions, and names
besides: be but cloked and counterleyy liers* as Greg Naz^n. has most truly
said. And thus ye see M. St. how you citing falsely this sentence to prove the
^variable (...), (...) your self on* the thumbes.

Fol. 40. b. Let the King (says master Stapleton) reode on Gods name, not
only that book, but all the Bible beside, it is a worthy study for him, but
let him beware least this sweet honey be not turned into poison to him, etc.
What words are here that we say not also? yea, his permission of Princes to
read and study the Bible* is our most earnest prayer and exhortation. And
they, whatsoever they would seem now to pretend, because they can no longer
keep it under their bushel: it is full sore against their heart that Princes
should read or study it. Otherwise, why suffered they not Princes, to give them
selves to so worthy and commendable a study heretofore? And now that they
can keep it in no longer, who it is that turns this sweet honey of Gods
word into poison, is easy to judge. Whether he that gives bread to the
hungry, bringing forth the whole loaf of the only pure wheat, and wills
them that are to be fed therewith, to see, to view, to feel^ the whole, and
in seasonable time breaks it to his fellow servants, before their faces, that
they may fully refresh their hungry seules: or he that beats his fellow
servant, hydeth the loaf from them, and if he must needs give them some,
mingleth the pure wheat with his own branne, and that worse is, with Darnell,
and more of that by three halues than of the wheat, and will needs have the
receyuer blindfolded, nor will suffer him to take it in his own hands, but by
gobbet meal thrust it into his mouth, nor will let the party see, what (in
this sort) he crammes him with, as though he were worse than the Capon in a
coupe, and yet for all this, will bear him in hand it is the true bread.
Whether of these twain be the likelier to give this poisoned bread: no man
that has any wit, but will give a shrewde aim. As for false translations,
false dangerous, and damnable gloses, wherewith (master St. says) we have
corrupted and watered the same, and made it as it were of pleasant wine most
sour vinegar: it is so evident on his own part, that the Papists have so
used the Scripture, and that so shamefully, that it seems he is past shame,
that he dare once mention it, and yet he obiecteth it to us, that admit the
express scripture, without any gloses at all.

Take heed to your self Master Horn, for I say to you, that you and your
fellows teach false and superstitious religion, many and detestable
heresies, and so withal plain idolatry. Blot out these words Master Horn,
and put in Master Stapleton, and then it is truly said: Although we not only
say it, but prove it also. And therefore you and your fellows M. Stapleton had
need to take heed thereto. fol 42. a.

We say you are wicked deprauers of religion. etc. We say ye are as great
enemies as ever the Church of Christ had. etc. We say ye be they that have
contemned Christ's sacraments: we say further that not only the general
Council of Trent, but that the whole Church has condemned your opinions.
These words of course are answered in their places. fol. 56 a

He tells us, we would master and rule our Princes, because we limit their
rule to Gods word, and that we refer the interpretation of Gods word to
our selves that we make thereof a welshe man's hose. Which words of course
are answered in their places, and are so manifest the doings of the Papists,
and so far from touching us, that it is marvel with what face he could
rehearse such things. But such is the propretie of impudency, to object that
to other, wherein he is most culpable him self. fol. 70.

We plainly say this kind of supremacy is directly against Gods word, so he
said before, and so let him say s^il, so long as he does but say so, and can
never prove it.

These and such like his sayings, good reader, as thou see them but mere
words of course, so thou shall find them swarm through ^ut all his book, and
if any of them be not answered (for thou see I cut them off for brevity
sake) answer then them as thou think good, easy answer God wot may serve
them, and his own words serve for all, returned on him self, (...) nomine,
de (...) fubula narratur, change but the name, and the tale is told of thee.
Fol. 31. b. In the mean season for these and all his other words of course, I
will say to him again as he says to the Bishop, Neither will I thank you
for bringing to our hands so good stuff to prove our principal purpose by, but
say herein to you as S. Aug. said in the like case to the Donatists, alleging
the works of Optatus, by which they were even confounded, and the catholics
cause maruellously furthered, Ne^mmen ipsis* etc. Neither do we yet thank
them for their so doing, but rather God, for that they should bring forth and
utter, either by talk or by alleging, all those things for our matter, the
truth forced them, not any charity invited them. And so truly (M. Stapleton)
that you have alleged all this and other like words of course, when they are
(...) compensed to you, you are even so confounded by them, that it had been
better for your cause ye had not so much used them, but that ye brought such
good stuff to our hands, the truth of our cause forces you, not any good
will to our cause, or to us, moved you.

Master Stapletons own words returned to him self for all these his Common
places.
MOderate your pen better, report your authors more 1. Prefa. pa. 19*
syncerely, translate your allegations more truly, lay down the whole
sentence without concealing of such matter as overthrows your purpose, say no
more than ye find in stories, slander not your betters, deal more advisedly
and uprightly, (seek not out so often bymatters and starting holes, quarrel not
so much about trifles of letters, syllables, and escapes in printing, rail not
so bitterly, scoff not so Lucia^like, boast and vaunt not with such defacings
of persons, and outfacings of the matter, leave your vain rhetorik of Copia
verboru^, and rolling on a letter, use not (as ye call them) so many words of
course, let your tale hang better together without so many contradictions) so
shall your untruths be fewer an other time, but so will your cause I assure you
(M. Sta) come stark naked feeble and miserable, And al your great volume as
bare and ^ield as Esops pulde crow, as partly may appear by this pretty far^el
of some such yeur sentences and ordinary phrases, in a part of the foresaid
points, and may further be considered what a full and sufficient book they
might make up of them selves, if all the residue throughout all the four books
were gathered together, and sorted in their troops and orders of these your
common places. But these only shall suffice for this your first book, for a
view of the rest, to show what good divinity of Louaine your volume is most
^arced withal, and what, as ye say, they shall look for at your hands.

Master Stapletons Beadroll and collection of untruths, with a plain and
brief answer to every one of them, so many as are noted in his first Book.
His own challenge of the Bishop for untruths.
YOur answer is so fraighted and stuffed with falshodes, your untruths do so
swarm and muster all along your book, that for the quantity of your
treatise, you are comparable to Master Jewel, your untruths amounte to the
number of six hundred fourscore and odd, they be so notorious and so many,
that it pitieth me in your behalf ( Crocodili lachrym^) to remember them, but
the places be evident, and cry corruption, and may by no shifte be denied. If
my curiosity in noting them displease you, let the uttering of them first
displease your self, then ye will the less be displeased with me. You know
master Jewel has led us this dance, be not angry, Master Horn, if we
follow the round. 1. Preface. page 19.

The answer to the collection of untruths.
Winchester. If I had not seen a further meaning in his setting forth and
publishing the book, than he durst plainly utter.

Stapleton. The first untruth slanderous concerning master I.
Feckenhams meaning. Fol. 1. a. Prefa. diui. 1. Master Feckeha^s further
meaning than he durst utter.


Bridges. Lo, even at the first striking up of the round, what a passing
notorious untruth is here, to be the captain ringleader to all this band: ye
may well, M. Stapl. not pity it, but pity your self, and be ashamed also,
to have so cried out of such notorious vntru^hes, and here to begin your
dance with this, to have us look for the like to follow the round. How untrue
this is, let each man hardely conjecture, and your self show, that M.
Feckenham durst not say all that he meant, oftentimes in excusing him, and even
your next untruth will somewhat declare this further.

2 But seeing his chief end and principal purpose Winchest.
intended as may be justly gathered in publishing the book, was to engraffe in
the minds of the subjects, a mislikyng of the Queens Majesty, as though she
usurped a power and authority in ecclesiastical matters whereto she has no
right.

2 His chief end was far otherwise as shall appear. Stapleton.


You so challenge this to be an other untruth, that denying Fol. 1. a. Pref.
sect 1. 2. Bridges.
it to be his chief end, ye durst not say, but covertly confess, that an
end and purpose of him it was, though not the chief end. Wherein ye prove
that, that ye challenged before for an untruth, to be a truth, that he meant more
than he durst plainly utter. And yet howsoever ye would cover his and your
meaning here, both he in his book, and you in yours also, durst plainly utter,
that ye mislike hi^ Majesty's claim of this supreme authority, and plainly
lay to her charge usurpation. How subiectlike, let all true subjects judge.
And sit^ this, his, and your books are chiefly directed to dissuade her
subjects minds (to whom in hucker mucker ye send these books over) from the
acknowledging of the said hi^ Majesty's supreme authority, may it not truly
be said, men may justly gather this as your Our chief end in this
co^nouersia.
chief end? Is not every wri^ers chief end, to persuade his reader in his
principal matter? is not this here your principal matter, to improve the
taking upon her of this authority? If ye have any chiefer end, or more
principal purpose, that is better than this: clear your self and show it.
Uer^ly our chiefest end in writing hereof, is to persuade The Papists chief
end in this controversy.
her subjects, (that by your deceiuings stand in any mammering) to a godly
liking of the said title, as most d^e and lawful to her highness estate. And
if yours be not the contrary hereto? let your doings be according, and we shall
like it the better.

But see here, M. Stapleton, how soon ye folter in your M. Stapleton
misreck^neth in his numbers.
numbers, and miss in your tale at the first beginning of all, ye have scored
us up in your marginall score, two untruths, when ye come to counting them
twain, afterward in your answer ye reckon us up three, saying of the second
in your score, This is an untrue and false surmise of Master Horn, as are the
other two here also, reckning up that, that ye counted for the first. And thus
we know not whether we have even or odd, 2. or. 3. Whereby all your reckening
is marde and false counted. Is this your dance (M. Stap.) in beginning to trip
the round, when one lie tumbles out so proprely in the neck of an other? But
hoysta God bless them, they fallout fair. Howbeit, as they say, it is a good
horse that never stumbled: though it be an evil sign to stumble, yea to fall
down right at the first setting out.

I make proof by the continual practice of 3. Winchest.
the Church in like government as the Queens Majesty takes upon her.

The third untruth you never prove the like government Stapleton.
namely in all Ecclesiastical things and causes. Pref. ^. sect. 2. Fo 2. b.


The truth or untruth of this, being referred to the trial in the said
practice, will soon pull back this third dauncer from hopping in your
round. And as for your self M. Stap. pipeth avv^o^g round
ye are a false piper M. Stapleton, thus soon unto your li^ to pipe a wrong
round, harping on an other issue, than was required of the B. to prove. Wherein
as your great falsehood ^hal appear: so your self do here half grant this
to be no untruth, daring not flatly say, the Bishop never pro ued the like
government, which the Bishop only here affirms, but you deny it in a
respect, namely (say you) in all ecclesiastical things and causes* which the
Bishop here affirms not, nor it is his propre issue in question, demanded of
Master Feck. and yet he proves even that also.

I have put into english the authors minds 4.
and sentences.

The fourth untruth, for he wrongfully alleges both the Fol. 5. a. P^efa.
diuis. 3.
words and meanings of his authors.

He brings no instance at al, whereby to prove this that he says, which til
he can do, it must go for a lie of his own making, whereby he measures other
men's translations by False translations.
his own, corrupting his authors words, sentences, minds and all, as is
already declared.

This title is so replenished with untrue reports. 5.


The fyfth untruth, in wrongfully charging M Feckenham fo. 6. c. 1. di. 1.
for the title of his treatise.

Whether Master Fecke^hams treatise had a true title or no, let others deem.
Master Feckenham made a treatise, The false title of M Feckeohams treatise.
entitled by the name of An answer to the Queens Majesty's Commissioners,
and the same by writing be delivered to the Bishop of Winchester, and
afterward sent abroad the said Treatise, entitled by name: The declaration
of such scruples. etc. as Master John Feckenham by writing did deliver unto
the Lord Bishop etc. when he never delivered any such entitled trea^ise unto
him. Is this then untruly or wrongfully done, to charge him of the title of his
treatise? 6. 7. fo. 6. c. 1. di. 1. 8.


His sixth and seventh untruth trifling denials.

You. etc. not without the help of the rest, as may be gathered, devised,
wrote and purposed to deliver this book to the Commissioners.

The eight untruth slanderous. f. 9. b. c. 1. di. 2.


Neither does the Bishop flatly affirm it, but only says, as may be gathered,
whereupon M. Stapl. can not justly gather a flat asseueration one way or other*
to conclude his The co^lecture of others help.
untruth. Neither does M St. improve it any way, though ^e himself and that
very often, without any coniecturing of the matter (and yet can he gather no
just conjecture thereof) does boldly charge the Bishop with the help of other.
Which so often as he does, he should remember that this untruth returns on
himself.

In all which points ye were so answered, that 9.
ye had nothing to obiecte, but seemed resolved, and in a manerfully satisfied.

The. 9. untruth. M. Feck. was never so answered. And in his Fol. 10. diui.
cou^terblast he says, had not the B. put in these words, In a manner,
otherwise it had passed al goodmaner and honesty too, so untruly to make
report, the contrary being so well known, that he never yielded unto you in any
one point of religion, neither in Court, nor yet in manor, nor else where.

Ye are a mannerly man I perceive master Stapleton, and as full of good
manners or honesty, it appears, as an egg is full of oatemeale. Belike ye
have been brought up neither at court nor manor, but at Hogs norton as
they say, for otherwise what good manner or honesty Passing good manners.
is this, to challenge your better of so heinous untruth, and prove nothing at
all against him, but say, the contrary is well known, when your self know
it not at al, but speak without the book. For shame (M. Stapl.) learn better
manners, to refer it to them that were present at the hearing of both parties,
and then shall ye hazard your honesty and truth a great deal the less, and
show your nourture to be the more.

Whereupon I made afterward relation (of 10. Winchest.
good meaning toward you) to certain honorable persons, of the good hope I
had conceived. etc.

The. 10. untruth incredible. What good meaning could Stapleton. Fol. 10.
diui. 2
he have to him when he would have him revolt from the religion by him received
and professed at Baptism, to revolt from the faith of Christ's catholic
church. etc.

Why Master Stapleton is this incredible, that the Bishop Bridges.
hoping of his conformity in making relation thereof to the honorable, might
not have therein a good meaning? A good meaning.
yea, admit the truth which he professes, were as false as you would have
it seem to be: might he not for all that have a good meaning? Saul had a
good meaning, ye wot, when he did full ill. And how say ye to your Scholemen,
that speak so much good of a good meaning, yea even in ill causes. But as the
Bishop meant well to him, so the cause M. Stapletons well meaning in an il matter
was good also, and your cause naught, how well so ever ye mean in an ill
matter. Ye mean well (I dare say for ye, good man) when ye talk of reuolting
from the religion by him received at baptism, and the faith of Christ's
catholic church, meaning your popish religion and church, and many times
ye wish the Bishop to acknowledge it, but he and all godly wise men do see
how you are deceived in your well meaning, by evil and false assumptions,
taking that for Christ's catholic church, which is not, nor the popish faith is
that faith which we professed at baptism, but a degenerate faith. Nor Master
Feckenham was baptized, if M (...) baptism.
he were rightly baptized, in the name of the Pope, or the Popes religion.
Which if you do mean, your self mean not so well to him as you pretend.
Now for the untruth of the Bishops well meaning to M. Feckenham (be the cause
as it be may, this way or that) how dare you so boldly anouch, that it is
incredible the B. should mean him well? Beware M. St. ye presume not to sit
in Gods seat, the heart of man, which for meaning is only known to God and the
meaner. Qui^ enim hominum scit quae sunt hominis, nisi spiritu^ 1. Cor. 2.
hominis qui in eo est? For what man knows the things that are of man, but
the sprite of man that is within him?

A certain friend of yours standing by and hearing 11.
what I had declared then to the honorable in your commendation, did shortly
after report the same unto you.

The. 11. untruth. There was no such report made. Fol. 10. diui. ^


Any a^nswere were needless, but that the facing of this man is shameless,
that denies so boldly he knows not what. The right honorables (God be
praised) be yet alive, to whom the Bishop reported it: the stander by at the
same time, as those right honorables can tell, was a Gentleman named M. White,
of Southwicke, whom since God has called away, which openly to M. Feckenham,
in the hearing of the Bishop and all other present, declared that he heard the
Bishop speak to the honorable in his comendation. All this notwithstanding,
(...) in M. Stapleto^ like another suborned Stilpho, that neither was there,
nor, as he confesses in his Pr^face Page 24. had any skill of the private
doing^ between^ them, and yet he steppeth in as boldly as though he had ben^
the chief (...), and (...) denies, that there wa^ any such report at all.
But to use his own terms, what is impudency if this be not?

Doubting that you^ confederats should understand 12.
of your re^olte, 12. which they ever feared having experience of your
shrinking from them at 13. Westminster in the conference there.

The. 12. untruth slanderous. Fol. 10. c^p. 1. diuis. 2.


The. 13. untruth notoriously slanderous.

Here in your score are notched up two several untruths, The fear of M.
Feckena^s shrinking from his confederates.
in your answer, both these two by contraction are but one untruth* and thus
ye can not keep your tale. Yea, But this (say you) incomparably passes and
far excels all your foresaid untruths, and so belike it may go well for
two it self. But wherefore is this so passing an untruth? The bishop said his
confederates feared his novelty, having experience of his shrinking from them.
To this you reply and say: In what one point of religion did he shrink from
his company? and in the end ye come in asking further: What shrinking in
religion call ye this? as though the Bishop Fol. 11. b.
had charged him with shrinking from them in religion. Which if M. Feck. had
done. then would they no longer have feared it, being already done: but they
were afterward afraid of his shrinking in religion, seeing his shrinking from
them, in that so peeuishly they stacke to their obstinate refusal, wherein your
self confess, they refused to obey the Queens highness commandment. And the
less matter ye would make it, ye less ought they to have showed such
disobedience, had they ben good subjects (as they pretend) or had they in deed
stuck to their cause. But they shronke from their cause, which of likelihood
they suspected. Howbeit M. Feck. seeing not so much in it as they, he (as you
say) for his part thought it not good to disobey the Queens highness
commandment, and so therein shranke from them. This (Master Staple.) your self
confess, and so or ever ye wist, ye clear the Bishop of this incomparable
untruth.

Ye seemed in our conference before had resolved. 14.


The. 14. untruth, that M. Feck. should give up his treatise in Fol^. 13. a.
diuil. 3.
writing, after he was resolved by M Horn. And in his counterblast, How
unlikely a tale is this? that Master Feckenham should either be resolved by
Master Horn, or being resolved, should then give up his matter in writing,
for none other cause, than M. Horn reports. I durst make any indifferent man
judge, yea a number of M. Horns own sect, there is no appearance there is no
color of this matter, and therefore I will be so bold as to add this to his
other vntruth^.

This untruth springs of two causes: the one, the vnlikelyhod The giving up
of M (...).
of the matter, the other, M. Stapleto^s boldness, for he will be so bold as to
score it up. But I pray you M. Sta. is every vnlikelyhood an untruth with you?
ye are over bold that dare so affirm. Were ye present there? Did ye see the
dealing? can ye tell the contrary? No* How dare ye then say it* write and print
it to all ye world, yt it is an untruth. Is this suf^ proof to say, it is
unlikely to be, Ergo it is not? and to press this vnlikelyhood the sorer, there
is no appearance say you, there is no color in this matter. In deed here ye say
truer tha^ ye are aware, there is no color nor appearance* but the very truth
it self, in yt the B. said, neither yet an unlikely truth therein. Nay, say
you, I dare make any indifferent man judge, yea a number of M. Horns own
sect, that it is not lykely that M. Feck. should be resolved, or should give up
his treatise in writing* after he was resolved by M. Horn. What? man, if you
remember you but of your own, of your master D. Hardings inconstancy, and
other a number even of your own sect ere this, ye may find likelyhod enough
of M. Feckenha^s resolution, yea even in himself in K. Henry's days, and
therefore bewar^ whom ye make judge in the matter of this vnlikelyhood. But
setting like or unlike apart, may a man be so bold as to say, that your self
(so boldly charging the B. with an unlikely untruth) make a manifest untruth:
for the B. said not (a^ you tell the tale) that M. Feck. was resolved, or that
he wrote his treatise after he was resolved, but that he seemed resolved, these
were the bishops words. And so he likewise said before, yt he seemed resolved,
and in a manner f^lly satisfied, and that he seemed openly to have little matter
to stand in, but that he was resolved that is to say fully persuaded, the B.
might have some cause (for all his hope) to dout, knowing that, wisdom will not
enter into a froward mind. And the Bishop here tells, how afterward he
perceived the contrary to his former opinion of M. Feckenham, declaring how he
pointed to his breast, saying: that was there (meaning Popery) that should
never go out. Thus ye untruly say, the B. said, that the B. said not, and then
(being your own untruth) ye skore it up as his.

How soever by words ye would seem to tender her Majesty's safety, quietness,
and prosperous reign: your deeds declare your meaning to be quite contrary.

The. 15. untruth villainous and slanderous. M. Feck. by all his 15.
deeds, has always showed himself a most obedient subject. Foli. 14. a diuis.
4.


His dysobedience to her highness authority herein, and the privy dispersing
of his book, to breed a misseliking as is before showed, is proof enough
hereof. Howebeit this M. Feckohams and the Papists disobedience.
must needs be a villainous untruth, for no milder term will serve this
gentleman. And yet himself is far worsse than M. Feckenham in the same
fault, as his Common place of slanders, to whom this term villainous, might
better agree, does declare: where he neither spares her highness or cuntrie,
nor any estate, or laws thereof, how soever here he speak of obedience and
subjection, as though he were as innocent as a lamb.

How much prosperity you wish to her Majesty appears, when with 16. deep
syghes and groans you look daily for a change thereof, and that 17. arch
eheretike of Rome, 18. your God, in 17. 18. 19.
earth, 19. to reign in her place.

The. 17. 18. and. 19. untruths, diuelishe and spritishe, blasphemous,
horrible, and villainous, for neither is the Pope any heretic, neither do
catholics make him their God, neither wish they him to reign in the Queens
place, that is to say, have temporal jurisdiction as the Queens Majesty
has.

Here is an heap of sore untruths, piked out of one poor sentence, and yet
are al so apparent truths, as all the world The Papists sighs and groans for a
change
may see them. Your groans and sighs for a change, not only of the Religion
her Majesty sets out, but also of the authority that her highness takes
on her, not only the prime whisperings, letters, tokens, and comforting of the
Papists, in hope of a day, that long ere now ye looked for, do declare: but
these your books that ye privily scatter about, and your self even here in
this present Chapter, do show your good heart, saying, and for my part I
pray God heartily the trial once would come. What call ye this earnest wish, but
a sigh and a groan? which is in deed as ye term it, both devilish and
spritish, but (...) hypocritae peribit, the hypocrites hope shall perish.

That the Pope is no heretic ye stoutely affirm, but ye clear him not. You
say, that the Catholics make him not their God. The Bishop said not the
catholics did so, but the Papists, howebeit ye will have us presuppose, you be
catholics. But catholics or papists, who are they that write Dominus Deus
noster Papa, our Lord God the Pope, and give him that honor that is only due
to Christ? Ye wish him not The Pope takes upon him to be God.
to reign in the Queens place ye say, that is, to have temporal
jurisdiction, as the Queens majesty has.

Who made you M. Cotroller to take so upon you to assign the Queens majesty
her place, which ye make very straight for her highness to sit in? The
better half of her throne your self here yield to your Pope, that is, all her
government over spiritual matters, and ecclesiastical jurisdiction, leaving
her Majesty no more room in her own seat, The Pope clay meth the Queens
majesty's place.
than ye would do any heathen Prince or Turk: to have only temporal
jurisdiction in their Realms. But think ye your Pope will be yet content with
this, having gotten the half of the place, will he not strive for the whole,
and thrust the Princes clean out? How served he the Emperors of Greece? how
served he diverse German Emperors? how learned he King Childerike of France?
how served he King John of England? sat he not alone in the whole place? made
he not this realm tributarie to him, so much as in him lay? Did he never claim
the kingdom of Cicile, nor the kingdom of Irelande? yea does he not say, that
al Princes temporal jurisdiction flows from him, and he may depose the^? Did
the Pope never put off and set on with his foot an emperors diadem? Did he
never himself wear the scepter, sword, and robes of an Emperor? Did he never
give the temporal jurisdiction of this realm to the French, and after revoked
the French again? And what does he now? Has he not given the temporal
jurisdiction, and the estate of the crown and realm to any that can waste,
spoil or conquer it, saying as though he were Christ, Qui potest capere,
capiat, he that can take it, take it, so that he will become the Popes man for
it?

What is this but to take upon him to sit in her highness and in all other
Princes places?

The. 20. 21. 22. untruths, are none of them so proved, as is evidently showed
in the answer to the 4. chap. for that he Foli. 28.
has not improued the Bishops definition of a supreme governor, but rather in
matter agrees therewith, and al his examples show the truth thereof.

Like an unfaithful subject contrary to yt oath etc. you helped to spoil Queen
Mary of a principal part of her royal power right and dignity.

The. 23. untruth slandrous, for M. Feck. so did, not as an unfaithful Fol.
30. b. diui. 6.
subject, but as a repentant catholic.

Ye have well excused him M. Stapleton, and he is much beholding to you
therefore. Where the B. laid to his charge that contrary to his oath made to
King Henry, he helped to spoil Queen Mary of her royal power, right and
dignity: ye confess the fact, and say, he did so, but what then, he did it
(say you) not as an unfaithful subject, but as a repentant catholic.

Year as good a Proctor for your client, I see, M. Stapleton, as the Proctour
that taught his simple client to say, I did so, but what then, who is his
witness? where no witness needed when the party had confessed the fact.

So you Master Stapleton confess, that M. Feckenham M. Sta. confesses that
Mast. Feck. spoiled Queen Mary of her royal power.
perjured himself to his Prince, and that he spoiled his sovereign Queen
Mary of her royal power, right and dignity. But ye stand in the manner of the
doing it, which is not so much material how he did it, as whether he did it or
no. And since ye confess so freely for him (as his proctour) that he did so, I
may tell ye again, howsoever he so did, it could not be so done, but like an
unfaithful subject, (I had almost said worse) for any subject living, under
any pre^ence to spoil his Prince, of his or her principal, or any part of
their royal power, right or dignity. Call ye that Catholic What is catholic
(...)
repentance? that is catholic repentance with all my heart. But such
catholics, such repentance. And if you do not repent and recant your note of
this untruth, M. Feckenham may repent that ever he hired you, that have not as
ye say, slaundered him, but spoiled him of all his faith and honesty. Now
where the Bishop said he spoiled her:

Of a principal part of her Royal power, right, and dignity, Ye add
your. 24 untruth, saying:

The. 24. untruth, this is no part at all of the Princes royal Fol. 30. cap 4.
diui. 6.
power.

Yedenye this too late Master Stapleton: For where before the Bishop charged
him, that he spoiled her of a principal part, and you say for him he did
so, your self both directly, grant it a principal part, and indire ^ely,
because he spoiled her, whereof I pray you, but of that beelonged unto her?
For otherwise he spoiled her not, if it were not her right. And then should
you have said, he did not so, which you do not, but flatlye confess, he
did so, and therefore it was a part thereof.

You play now after your return into your 25.
hold, as you did after the Parliament before ye came out of the Tower to me.
Fol. 32. diui. 7.


The. 25. untruth. The Tower is not M. Feckenhams hold, for it holds him, not
he it.

This untruth, in the yrkesome number of his ragman roll, is chiefly noted to
recreate the spirits of the reckoner, The toure M. Feckenhams hold.
with some pleasant devise, as M. Stapleton in his merry conceyt, thought
good to sport at the name of hold, saying, the Tower is not his hold, for it
holds him, but not he it. He learned belike that jest of the fellon in
Newgate, to who^ when one said he was in for a bird, that is untrue, quoth
he, I am in for an horse: so dalieth M. Stapleton about the ambiguousnesse of
this word hold. And when al his hold is done, it is no untruth, of any
matter, nor speech neither, so long as men use it both ways commonly: but I
dare say M. Stapleton would be loath, to have the Tower no less his hold, than
it is M. Feckenhams. His two last untruths proved that M. Feckenham deserved
that hold. As for M. Stapleton who thinks himself safe in his hold at
Louain: what hold he well deserves elsewhere, his reverent speeches on the
Queens majesty, her Parliament, and Realm, in this his book declare, besides
his open and stubborn disobedience.

Whereby (your friends) might be the rather 26.
induced to continue their good opinion conceived of you, and also pay your
charges weekly in the Tower, sent unto you 26. every Saturdaye by your
servant, who wrote and delivered the Copies abroad as ye told me your self.

The. 26. untruth. The Queens Highness words in the Tower can testify the
contrary.

Did the Queens highness in the Tower say, that M. Feckenhams friends did
not send unto him weekly to pay his charges? did her highness say so M.
Stapleton? ye M. Fecknhams charges in the tower defrayd by his friends.
affirm it boldly, and nicke it on your score. But till ye prove it, ye
shall give me leave to think, that your wits were occupied about some other
matter, or else ye would have set this note in some other place. For in your
counterblast speaking of this matter purposely, ye have nothing to say there to
it, but that it is (as far as I can understand) stark false. And so calling
it the Bishops gueste and su^mize, ye would put him to his proof by some
circumstance: so that there it seems ye can not flatly improve it, but
requiryng further proof, deeming it a guess, daring not say it is stark
false, but as far as ye understand and yet in your score so flatly to auouche
it for a certain untruth and so redily and precisely to affirm, that the
Queens Majesty said the contrary thereto, judge your self how these things
ha^g together.

Now that ye ar returned again to the tower, 27.
and perceiving that your friends (as you gave them just cause) have some
mistrust of your revolt, and wavering inconstancy, whereby your estimation
and fame, with your service to your God the belly, is decayed. Folio. 32.
diui. 7.


27 A heap of slanderous and railing untruths.

Ye still confound your talie, M. Stapleton, in nicking M. Stapletons
unorderly reckoning his untruths.
on so fast without aduisement, making one an whole heap, and an whole heap of
untruths, but one untruth. Belyke ye do it by the figures of Arithmetike,
diminution, and multiplication, that ye vpbrayde to the Bishop in your preface,
whereby many are but this one, and yet this one is many, yea many slanderous
and railing untruths. Although ye prove neither one slander, or railing, or
any one untruth at all: but let it quite alone, for fear of opening further
matter. A sore head ye wist is soon broken, and if they should fall out in
the ripping of them to be true, M. Feckenham might rather beshrew your heart,
than con ye any thank for noting such untruths.

Other untruths he chiefly stands upon in his counterblast, but they are
none of the reckoning. As the Bishops noting of M. Feckenhams impudency,
saying: Whereunto presently I am required to swear, when no oath by the
Bishop was required at all of him. These and other falsehoodes that the B.
lays to M. Feck. charge, M Stap. though he say in his counterblast, that the
B. accumulate an huge heap of untruths, yet for shame durst he not put them in
his score, neither one by one nor alon a plump, for fear his reckoning should
be called to an account, but thruste them up together in the thick of his
book. And yet seeing in the end he could not excuse Master Feckenham of
those things wherewith the Bishop charged him: How soever it be (says he)
this matter is nothing appertayning to the state of the principal question,
and of small importance. Where in deed it much apperteyneth to the purpose
of the controversy between the parties, and is of great importance, to show
the entry into the whole controversy. But if it had been as light as he would
have it seem, is it therefore lawful for M. Feck. to lie so impudently therein,
or for M. Stapl. so to excuse his lying?

You did know, acknowledge and confess this 28.
supreme authority in causes ecclesiastical to be in king Henry the eight
and his heirs.

The. 28. untruth. For no man can know that which is not Fol. 35 a. diui. 8.
true.

As ye were before disposed to be somewhat pleasant in your note of the hold,
so here you utter an other knack of your budget, to show how deep a
Philosopher ye were in subtle knowledge, and therefore where the Bishop
according as each man uses to speak, did say, that M. Feckenham did know and
acknowledge it then, in confessing this supreme authority of the Prince, you
contend on the word Whether falshod may be known or no. Genes. 3
know, that he did not know it, because it is not true, and cite Aristotle
to witness. Why sir, does not the Scripture even in the beginning, mention
Arborem scientiae boni and mali, The tree of the knowledge of good and evil?
And yet do all the Philosophers say, that Verum and bonum, malum and falsum
conuertuntur, look what is true that is good, and look what is evil, that is
false. Knowledge therefore is not always taken so precisely to be only of true
things, but granting you this preciseness that knowledge is only taken to be
true things yet you do ill herein, because ye take after your ordinary custom
Pro concesso controuersum, that to be granted that is in question, whether
your or our part be true or false heerin. Yea, why may not we say, and that
with greater reason, that you take the truth for falsehoode, and falsehoode
for truth. And so you, nor any of your side, notwithstanding all your great
bragges, and this your clearkly book, have any true knowledge. Well may ye
say (as ye do most falsely,) and to your poor wretched soul, as well in
this as in other points, most dangerously believe the contrary, but know it
ye can not unless it were true, for knowledge is only of true things and as
the Philosopher says, Scire est per causas cognoscere.

Do ye know whose words al these be? and yet ye see how they serve our turn
far better than yours M. Sta. because our cause rests on the truth, which is
the infallible word of God, Deus est verax, God is true and yours is grounded
on ye doctrines of men, Omnis aute^ homo mendax, but every man is a lier. And
therefore is it less marvel, since ignorance and falsehood, knowledge and truth
are al one, that ye account so much of ignorance, and make it to be the mother
of devotion, that ye keep down ye people in ignorance, which conspireth with
falsehood, and cannot abide knowledge yt is linked with truth: and as ye have
long kept ye truth under a bushel, so yet you cannot abide yt it should come to
ye knowledge of ye people, perceiving ye since knowledge has begone to spring in
the world, our cause wtal, as ye truth has flourished, and yours has drouped
as yt falshod: wherefore your fre^^ have cried out upon al good letters, seeing
that their cause has had no greater enemy than knowledge is, no greater
maynteyner than ignorance, Qui male agit odit lucem, nec venit ad lucem, ne
opera eius arguantur. John. 3.
He that does evil (says Christ) hates the light, nor comes to the light,
lest his works should be reproved.

Next unto this, you note a rabblement of untruths but ye neither number them
in your Calendar (but only mark them with a star in the forbead) nor in
your reply say any more unto them than this: I will not, nor time will serve
to discuss them, but why would your will and your time serve you to challenge
them for untruths, and not serve you to discharge your challenge, and your own
truth, in proving them so to be? but go to, I see there is no remedy we must
tarry your leisure, until that your will come on you, and that your time will
serve you.

Many horrible erroures and superstitions of 29.
Monkerie.

The. 29. untruth reprochefull and slanderous. Foli. 35. a. diuis. 8.


This was so untrue that all the world rang of it, and the Papists themselves
cried out thereon.

Although ye were in the Tower in king Edwardes time, that was not for any
doubt of the supremacy, for that ye still agnised, but for other points of
religion, touching the ministration of the sacraments.

The. 30. untruth. This was not the cause of his imprisonment, Fo. 35. diui. 8.
as shall appear.

Here in his beadroll though ye see he denies it ^latly, yet in his
counterblast, where he touches the same, he dare not be so impudent. But says
as I understand, so that if he M. Stapletons cunning handling the matter.
be challenged of rash dealing, to affirm that for an untruth, that he
stammereth in: no will he say, look my beadroll, and ye shall find that I
denied it flatly and boldly without any stammering at the matter. If again
this bold flatnesse be proved a ^atte lie, ^ushe will he sai^, I referred it
(in saying it should appear) to my counterblast, where I declare no further,
than I understood by my friends, let it light on them if it be a lie: thus
cunningly Master Stapleton has handled the matter. But a manifest lie it is,
that he makes, howsoever he auonch or mollify the same. For this was a
special cause of his imprisonment, as those can tell that be yet living, who
were sent to him, and to others to persuade them therein. And by whom soever
he understood it, it is but M. Stapletons, and his misseinformers lie. And
where he would excuse the matter, because he was examined in the matter of
Justification, does it follow therefore he was not in, also, for the matter of
the sacrament, being principally then in controversy? The Bishop only said be
was in, for other points of religion (and namely) touching the Sacrament, but
see how pretily M. Stapl. would bleare the readers eyes with quarelling at
this half point of the sentence, least the reader should mark wherein the
Bishop principally charged M. Feckenham, that he had confessed this article of
supremacy, all King Edwardes M. Fecknhams yelding to the supremacy in K.
Edwardes reign.
days, and so knew and acknowledged it then, contrary to his pretense of
ignorance now therein. And this digresseth not from the matter in hand. But
from this M. Stapleton slippeth in great silence, and says not a word thereto:
but dalieth about other matters to find the readers play. And so (by his own
rule) confesses, by not denying the very point in hand: that M. Feckenham
all king Edwards time, though he were in the Tower, yet ever he agnized this
title then, that he refuses now.

Whereunto also you agreed and promised to 31.
profess and preach the same in open auditorie wheresoever you should be
appointed. Whereupon a right worshipful Gentleman procured your deliverance.

The. 31. untruth slanderous. He was not delivered upon any Fo. 35. diui. 8.
promise of recantation, but to be disputed withal.

Here M. Stapl. makes much ado to convince the Bishop The conference had
with master ^ecke^ham ^n king ^dwards reign.
of an untruth, and to make it seem more probable, he cites diverse honorable
and worshipful to witness, and al nothing to the purpose in hand, excusing M.
Feckenham of that, wherewith no body charged him, and answering nothing, but by
silence consessing that, that he was charged withal. The bishop made no mention
of any conference or disputation had with M. Feckenham, after his departure
out of the tower, but of that conference which was with him, master Moreman,
and master Crispine, while they were in the Tower. When at their own suite to
the council, they desired to have some learned men, with whom to confer,
especially about the sacrifice of the Mass, the ministration under both
kinds, and the ministration upon a table, and not an altar. And at this their
suit, Master Story the Bishop then of Chichester, and Master Roberte Horn
then parson of All Hallows in Breadsteat, now bishop of Winchester, were
appointed by the honorable counsel to deals with them, which they did, by the
space of a month at sundry times, till that Master Feckenham did* consent with
them in all these three points, and so by master Hobbies means was
delivered, as also M. Crispine should have been, but that death prevented him,
only M. Moreman stubbornly persisting in his errors, remained still in the
Tower.

In this conference M. Feckenham promised to preach, as the Bishop truly
charged him. Of which conference and promise, there be yet many on live, both
worshipful and honest men, to witness the same, and prove you a liar M.
Stapleton, so impudently to deny it.

You had nothing to say to the contrary. 32.


The. 32. untruth more slanderous, as may well appear by Foli. 35. a. b diuis.
8.
this your book.

It appears thereby right well in deed, and shall further appear, that you
also had not any great thing else to to say to the contrary neither:
excepting these and such like your brabbling common places.

For answer I say, they ought to take upon 33.
them such government (as does the Queens majesty.)

The. 23. untruth employing a contradiction to your former Folio. 39. a.
diuis. 9.
answer made to Master Feckenham, as shall appear.

The answer is here cited for an untruth, but for trial it is referred to
appear in an other place, on the other side of the leaf in the counterblast,
and there being cited also, because nothing is proved but by M. Stapletons
hearesay, of an other contrary answer, the matter is there again further
deferred to be heard an other day, when Master Stapleton shall be occasioned
to entreat more at large hereafter upon the matter, where (at the Calends of
Greece) it shall be proved both an untruth, and to implie a contradiction. The
contradiction that he would enforce, is between a suborned answer, forged to be
made in the bishops name which he never made, and this present answer which
the B. makes: so that in deed there is no contradiction at al in his answer,
because the one of them is of their own making, not of his. As for the untruth
of the Bishops answer, stands only on M. Stapletons bare saying, that it is
false and deceyuable. And ye must well we^e, that M. Stapl is of such
indifferency and credence, that he would not say it on his word, if it were
not so, and therefore in any case ye must believe him, or else ye mar his
reckoning. Fol. 40. 2. diuis. 10. 34. 35. 36. 37.


The. 34. 35. 36. 37. untruths, because they are the whole matter throughout
the eight chapter wherewith he charge the Bishop, in the answer to the
chapter they are at* large answered. Besides a number of Master Stapletons
untruths detected.

Moses was not the chief priest or bishop. 38.


The. 38. untruth, for Moses was the chief Priest, as shall Fo. 42. diu. 11
be proved.

How this promise shall be proved, or the Bishops saying Moses.
improued, to avoid anticipations and repetitons, thou must resort to M.
Stapletons proves, and the answer thereunto.

The charge of chief government over Gods 39.
people both in causes temporal and ecclesiastical was committed to Iosue.

The, 39. untruth. Iosue had not the supreme government Fol. 45. a. diuis. 12.
in Ecclesiastical causes, but Eleazarus had it.

Whether he had it, that commanded Eleazarus in ecclesiastical Iosue.
matters, or Eleazarus that obeyed his commandment, is easy to judge. And
notwithstanding any thing that M. Stapleton brings beside his bare
allegatio^, Iosue had the supreme government therein.

To Eleazar only belonged the administration 40.
of things belonging to the Priests office.

The. 40. untruth. For beside, in all things to be done of Foli. 45. a.
division. 12.
Iosue, Eleazar should instruct him.

If this were beside the administration of things belonging Eleazar.
to the Priests office: then to administer instruction, in any thing unto the
Prince, was not the Priests office. For if it were belonging to his office: why
say you it was beside, being contained in it? But see your fond reason, the
Bishop says, he had not the supreme government, but the administration of
things belonging to his office, yes say you he should instruct the Prince,
Ergo, he had the supreme government of him. Neither had he, say you, that
supreme government as his office, or belonging to him, but besides, and not
belonging thereunto, while the question is, whether this supreme government
belong to the Priests office, or to the* Princes office, but your self withal
exclude it from the Priests office. And thus to nick up on the score apace, ye
speak it seems) ye can not well tell what.

David. etc. the supreme governor over all estates, 41.
both of the laity and of the clergy in all mane^ of causes.

The. 41. untruth. David was not suprme governor in all Fol. 46. b. diuis. 13.
manner causes, but suffered the Levites in Church matters, to live under the
rule of their high Priest.

As though these two might not both agree very well together, David.
except it were in such an usurper as is your Pope. As for the Queens
Majesty, her highness claymeth no such Papali^ie, but suffers the inferior
ministers to live under the rules of their superior Bishops: and yet her
supreme government, to ouersee, that all of them observe their rules in their
vocations, is no whit empaired.

Solomon deposed Abiathar. 42.


The 42. untruth, for Solomon of his own authority (as Folio. 48. b. diuis.
14.
your argument runs) deposed not Abiathar, but executed only the sentence
pronounced before by Samuel Gods minister.

Your self confess the Bishops words M. Stapleton, Solomon.
nor ye can for shame deny them, the Scripture is plain for them, and
therefore ye run from them to the Bishops sense, and say, not his words, but
his meaning and argument is untrue therein for he did it, but not by his own
authority, but executed Gods sentence, as though these The execution of Gods
sentence empayteth not the Princes suprem authority.
were contradictorie, to execute Gods sentence in doing it, and to do it by
his own authority, when all authority of any Prince, comes likewise from
God, and he is Gods minister, and executer thereof, and yet withal it is his
own authority, because the authority is given him of God thereto. Although
herein, chalenging the B. of one untruth, ye utter two untruth and your self
together on a clap. First ye say, he executed only the sentence pronounced
before by Samuel Gods minister. Where the text that afterward ye cite, faith
not so, but, to fulfill the words of the 3. Reg. 2.
Lord, which he spoke over the house of Hely in Silo, which words of the
Lord, we find out in the. 2. and. 3. chapters of the first book of the
Kings, where the whole story is at large set out, and dete^s your falshoode.
The words that do threaten Hely and his posterity, in the. 2. chapter, were
pronounced by a Prophet in deed, but he is not named, 1. Reg. 2.
the text only says, Venit aute^ vir dei ad Hely, and ait ad eum, haec dicit
Dominus, And there came a man of God to Hely and said unto him, thus says the
Lord, etc. This Prophet pronounced (and was Gods minister therein) among other
things, even this deposition of Abiathar. But this man of God was not Samuel,
who was at that time as yet but a child. The second time was in the next
chapter, by God 1. Reg. 3.
him self, that called Samuel three times, and the fourth time, dixit Dominus
and Samuelem, the Lord said, or as ye call it, pronounced unto Samuel, etc.
confirming all that he had pronounced before, by the former Prophet. As for
Samuel being straightly charged by Hely the hye Priest (not by the way of
prophecy pronounced those words of the Lords to him, or to any other) but
only showed him all that God had said, Indicauit ei vniuersos sermones, and
non abscondit ab eo, And Samuel told him every whit of the ^ayings, and hid
it not from him. And therefore where ye say, he only executed the sentence,
pronounced before by Samuel Gods minister, as though God had prophesied it, by
the mouth of Samuel, as he did in the chapter before, by an other: and as ye
say in your Counterblast, published before by Samuel the Leuite: the text
mentioning neither the pronouncing nor publishing of this sentence by Samuel
at all, but only the fore said manner of private telling to Hely what he heard
God pronounce: it is but an untruth in your self, M. Stap. falsely wresteth
the text to his advantage.
to tell your tale so to your advantage, that it might seem that Solomon was
but the executour of some solemn sentence published and pronounced before by
Samuel, commanding or moving king Solomon, to obey that sentence, and so to
depose Abiathar,

And here appears also your other untruth, that Solomon should do it to
this end and intent, to fulfill this How Solomon fu^filled the prophecy.
prophecy. Which in deed he fulfilled in the doing, but it was not fulfilled
by him alone, king Saul had fulfilled a great part of it before, in causing
to be killed wickedly, the whole family of Hely, except only this Abiathar,
How Soul also fulfilled the prophecy.
that escaped by flighte. Which cruel fact of Saul, proceeding only of
mere malice against David, and further against them as David's abettours and
fautours: was the only cause of this tyranny, and not to fulfill Gods
prophecy. Neither could he pretend it, and yet he fulfilled the same, when
he fulfilled his wicked lust. But Solomon that deposed Abiathar, the only
remaynder of Helies stock, and his sons after him, had good and right cause
to deprive him, and all his posterity, of this dignity, because he was, as
your self confess, a traitor to him. For which cause Solomon deposed him,
and laid this cause to his charge only, not that he must execute Gods
sentence, of punishing his fathers offense, and yet in doing the one, he
performed the other also. Both of these Princes were executours of Gods
sentence, that wrought by his secret Justice, what soever he purposed, yea as
well by the evil deed of Saul, as by the righteous deed of Solomon.

And things foretold in the scripture, came not to pass Gods foretelling of
things.
because they were foretold, but because they should come to pass therefore
they were foretold. God did foretell what he would do to that house, and yet he
named not by whom, so that none could pretend to do it, because God had
foretold it, but when God had done it (by such instruments as he purposed,
good or bad) then the writers of the scripture, by the instruction of the holy
ghost, because of the certenty of Gods prophecy, do say it was done, to
fulfill such or such a thing. So when Herod had killed the innocents, says
S. Matthew tunc adimpletu^ est, the^ was fulfilled that which was spoken by the
Prophet Jeremy, of which kind of speech, as well in factes of the godly as
the ungodly, we have many ensamples. Though therefore the words of the
Scripture be, Eiccit ergo Solomon Abiathar, vt non esset sacerdos domini, vt
impleretur se^mo Domini quem locutus est super domum Heli in Silo: And so
Solomon cast out Abiathar, from being the priest of the Lord, that the Lords
words might be fulfilled which he spoke upon the house of Hely in Silo: yet
do not these words import, that Solomon did it of this purpose, to fulfill
that prophecy, as you would make the reader to understand, by your
guylefull translation, saying, And so Solomon put out Abiathar. etc. to fulfill
the words of the Lord as though the cause why he did it, was that, when the
cause was Abiathars treason, and therefore he told him before, he was ^ilius
mortis, the child of death, id est, (says Lyra) morte dignus pro
conspiratione co^trame, and ^rdinationem Dei and patris mei, that is to say,
Thou art worthy to suffer death for thy conspir^cie against me, and the
ordinance of God, and of my father. Here is the very cause why Solomon deposed
him although also he fulfilled therein Gods secret justice, which the holy
writer considering, wrote vt adimpleretur, that the Lords words might be
fulfilled. etc. And thus while ye would charge the Bishop with one lie, even
your self discharge him, and you commit a couple for failing, to men^ the
matter withal.

Neither the Priests nor the Levites swarued 43.
in any thing (pertaining to their office) from that the king commanded them.

The 43. vntruhe, those words are not in the Scripture alleged. Fol. 48 b.
diuis. 14.


These words make a heinous quarrel, at which words also in his Counterblast,
he stormeth, saying, He has swarued lewdly from the text, added words more
than is expressed, and that with such homely shifts an ill cause must be
furthered. And when all is done, it is but a little parenthesis placed in the
middle of the text by the way of explication, t^ declare, wherein the king
comm^ded them and they obeyed, in their offices next before set out, how the
king ordained according to the disposition of David his father 2. Paral. ^.
the offices of the Priests in their ministeries, and the Levites in their
orders, to praise God, and minister before the Priests according to the custom
of every day, and the porters in their divisions port by port, for so had
David, a man of God, commanded, and neither the Priests nor the Levites
swarued from any thing that the king commanded.

Thus lies the text word for word. Wherein the Bishop placing this
parenthesis* what did he that any most exact interpreter might not do? M Stap.
here escrieth it for so horrible a crime, yea and an untruth of his bedroll
withal, whera^ first there is no untruth at all in the parenthesis, and
himself in the same chapter, confesses for Princes a great deal more: that
they may not only command the Priests, to do those things that appertain to
their office, but cause them to do them, which is a manifest proof of the
Princes supreme authority (...) them, so that untruth in this parenthesis was
there none. Nor any other fault at all, saving that M. Stapleton was frowardly
M. Stap. quarrel at the print of the letter, not at the matter.
disposed to pick a quarrel at the form and print of the letter, not at the
matter, as though those words were pretended to be the words of the text,
wherein he himself, though there were some negligence in the printing, does
yet excuse the Bishop of this fault, of any such addition of words. For
twice in his Counterblast mentioning those words, he circumscri^eth them with
a parenthesis, and seuereth it in the poynting as the bishop did, from the
text, which is argument enough to any, but to contentious quarellers, who will
ever busy themselves to seek, as they say, a knot in a rushe, that it was not
put in, as the express words of the text, but as the opening of the sentence.
To return therefore his own words to him self, with such homely shifts an
ill cause must be furthered, and with such patit quarrels, a good cause must be
bayted at, and challenged for lewd swaruing, and homely shifts. And yet his
manifest swaruing from text, letter, sense, and all without either difference
of letter or of poynting, must be neither lewd nor homely shifte at all, but
good and Cathelike translating with him.

Iosaphat used his Princely authority in the 44.
reformation of religion.

The. 44. untruth. The scripture terms not any such Fol. 49. diuis. 14.
princely authority.

Here M. Stapleton stands altogether on the term of the Scripture* would to
God always the Papists would M. S. stands on the terms of the scripture
and lets go the matter of the scripture.
thus, not in terms so much, as in the truth of matter, be leueled by the
scripture. But here he does it even as the devil objected scripture unto
Christ, not to show any regard, only above all other, to the authority of
the scripture: but to pick a quarrel with the Bishop, although untruth he
can find ^one. The Bishop a^ouched not, that this very term is here in the
scripture, nor he stood upon terms, and therefore though the scripture
terms it not, yet has the Bishop committed no untruth. He only said, that
losaphat has* no small commendation in the scriptures, for that he used his
Princely authority in the reformation of religion. If you can improve the
sentence and effect of this, then hardly challenge the Bishop for an untruth.
But this can ye not do, and therefore ye flee to terms, and let the matter
alone, which is the principal, and is manifest in the Scripture, that he used
his princely authority in those things that he did, yea and your self
confess that he used care and diligence about the directing of ecclesiastical
matters, that he reformed religion, that he commanded and appointed the
ecclesiastical persons, the high Priest and all other, so well as temporal,
in their ecclesiastical functions. This your self have granted and
confessed, both in sentence and in terms also: and the text is s^ plain ye
could not deny it. But did he direct, refourme, command, and appoint* and
all without authority so to do? and what authority had he besides his
princely authority? Ergo, even by your own confession, he reformed religion
by his princely authority* as the Bishop said. And therefore even your self
that accuse him, acquit him also of this untruth.

He did command and prescribe unto the 45.
thief Priests, etc.

The. 45. untruth. There appears not in the scripture any Fol. 49 b* Diuis.
15.
such prescription made unto the chief Priests.

That it appears in the scripture* it is most evident, and your self have
confessed it in your Counterblast. cap. 13. fol. 50. to the which place where
it is answered, I remitte the Reader.

At the commandment of the king concerning 46.
things of the Lord.

The 46. untruth. Those words concerning things of the lord, Fol. 52 a. diuis.
16.
are no words of the text, but falsely added to holy scripture.

Ye are very hasty in nicking on your score, M. Sta. and so hasty, that ye
have no leisure, or will take none to examine your text. The old translation
has in deed iuxta ma^datu^ regis and imperiu^ domini, according to the
commandment of the king, and the commandment of the Lord. But the Hebrew text
has, as those that are skilful in that tongue can tell, ^edibrei* Ie^oua:
which ^atablus notes to signify, In vel de rebus Domini, In or concerning the
things of the Lord, even as the B. said, so that he is clearly acquitted by
such learned interpreters, as your skill M. Stapleton* will not easily
confute. And when ye have confuted them, then score up this for an untruth.
Although eue^ then, ye could not well charge ye B. therewith, but the Hebrew text
it self, and Uatablus that so expounds it. And yet you note it so bitterly,
for falsely added to holy scripture, not marking the common practice of your
own side, ordinarily to add, and to subtracte what ye please from the holy
scriptures, and when ye please make them not over holy neither, howesoeuer here
to aggra^ate a quarrel against the Bishop, ye thought good to term them holy
scriptures.

But now to admit, that those were not the words of the scripture, but only
the exposition of the words, yea and that there was a negligence in the
printing or copying out thereof, whereby the words were printed in several
letters like the text, were this, M. Stapl. so heynons a fault, where in
effe^ the matter is most true, and all one with the text? Did not the king
command them to sanctify the Lords house? Did they not obey and come when
they had so done, and make an accounte to the king of all that they had done,
saying to him: We have sanctified all the house of the Lord, and the
shewbread table with all the vessels thereof, and all the furniture of the
temple, etc. and see they are before the altar of the Lord?

Now that all these things, were things of the Lord, or that they obeyed the
kings commandment, and made relation of al their doings to the king,
concerning these things of the Lord: This M. Stapleton medleth not withal,
nor dare deny it, which is the matter in question, and fully proves the
Bishops assertion against M. Feckenham, that they obeyed the kings
commandment concerning things of the Lord. So that in the matter of the
Bishops saying, there is no untruth* as even M. Stapleton him self can not
deny the scripture is so plain. And being true, it argues most expressly
the untruth to remain in M. Feckenham and M. Stapleton, with their
co^federates, that deny the Clergies obedience to their Princes, and the
Princes authority of commanding them, concerning things of the Lord, which
the scripture here allows. Now what does M. Stapleton to save his poor
honesty, as h^ terms it, but casting a cloud before the readers eyes lest
he should consider this, he quarelleth after his manner at the printe, and not
so content, cries out of words falsely added to holy scripture, where if the
words had been misprinted only, in a wrong form of letter, ye^ the sense
is all one, the matter is most true, and the words them selves of the learned
Hebritians, are even so expounded, so far are they from all false addition to
holy scripture, as M. Stapleton most falsely does exclayme.

According as David had disposed the order by 47.
the counsel of the Prophets.

The. 47. untruth. Holy Scripture falsified and maimed, Fol. 52. a. Diuis. 16.
as it shall appear.

Because he appealeth in this untruth to his Counterblast, where he says, it
shall appear, in Gods name let it there appear, where it is also answered
folz^ For his. 48. and. 49. untruths he alleges no reason, nor cause, only
he says, the former is boldly avouched, but no way proved, and the other,
somewhat more impudent. Since therefore he has nothing wherein to convince
them, I may well return his boldness and impudency to him self, and remitte
the trial of the truth or untruth, to the discussing of Josias ensample.

Now have you showed your self plainly 50.
herein to be a Donatist also.

The. 50. untruth most slanderous. M. Horn and his fellows Fol. 58. Diuis.
18.
are in many points Donatistes, as shall appear.

The trial of this untruth, is discoursed at large, in the proper place where
M. Stapleton cites it to appear, there shall be heard enough, for trial of
this challenge pro and contra, and as the Reader on the view of both shall
there find it, so on Gods name let him esteem of it.

The Donatistes said they were of the Catholic faith, and of the Catholic
Church-which shifte for their defense against Gods truth, the Popish
sectaries do use in this our time, being no more of the one or of the other,
than were the Donatistes and such like.

The. 51. untruth. Answer the Fortress, M. Horn, annexed Fol* 58. Diuis. 16.
to saint Bid, if ye dare to defend this most sensible and gross lie.

How happy are you, M. Stapleton, that ever ye buylt M Stapletons fortress.
such a Fortress, that ye thus can crake of, so lustily bid us come and
assail, crying, answer the Fortress, and come if ye dare, and if he come
not, then he dare not come, if he set not on your Fortress, then this must
needs be a lie. Must it? now truly then your Fortress is but a weak
Fortress, if the proving this a lie do answer and ouerturne your Fortress.
We need never go thither for the matter, to prove your Church no^ the
catholic Church, nor to have the catholic faith, this will be proved in this
book well enough I warrant ye, or ever it be ended, ye shall see your self more
than once or twice confess it. And diverse other have at large proved it, what
need we then run to your Fortress.

In the next division, which is the. 19. M. St. gathers an other untruth,
but before it he sets down two marginall notes. The first where the Bishop
said:

All the sects of the Donatistes, whether they be Gaudentians, Petilians,
Rogatists, Papists, or any other sect. etc. Upon this word Papists, master
Stapleton makes a star, saying: You should have said Protestants who in so
many points as has been showed, resembled the Donatistes.

It is well enough M. Sta. and ye can let it stand, til time be ye have
untrussed all those points, even from your own sloppes, and then ye may go
perhaps like Baily hosegodowne.

The. 2* note is this. Where the Bishop having alleged a long sentence of S.
Augustine against M. Feckenham.

Thus far S. Augustine (says he) by whose judgment of the catholic Church,
etc.

Note (says M. Stap.) that now S. Augustines judgment is S. Aug. judgment
of the catholic Church.
also the judgment of the catholic Church.

To the which note I also add this note withal (M. Stapleton) that your
Church is not then the Catholics Church, whose judgment herein agrees not
with Saint Augustines judgment. Lo M. Stapleton how pretily yourself begin
to answer your last untruth, if ye hold on thus, we shall not greatly need
to scale your fortress, even this your Cou^terblast will encounter and
ouerblowe it.

After these two notes he sets down his untruth.

Your errontous opinion.

The. 52 untruth. M. Feckenham holds no such opinion. 52. Fol. 65 a. Diuis.
19.


The opinion there mentioned, and confuted by S. Augustine, is this of the
Donatists, that the order, rule, and government, practiced be the Kings of the
old Testament in ecclesiastical causes, are not figures and prophecies of the
like government to be in the kings under the new Testament, nor the order
that Christ left behind him in his Gospel and new Testament. This was the
opinion of the Donatistes in Saint Augustines time, and this is yours, Master
Fecknams, and Master Dormans opinion now, that they are not such figures and
prophecies, and therefore ye confess your self fol. 62. that M. Feckenham
omitted the proufes of the old Testament, because they made against him. Now
whether this be an erroniouse opinion or no, I commit you and Saint Augustine
together to scamble about it.

The. 53 untruth. Whither S. Augustine have witnessed 53. Fol 67 a. Diuis. 20.
no such large and supreme government as we attribute now to Princes, yea
whither Master Stapleton have granted so much or no, is proved at large in
the. 19. and. 20. Divisions.

Your wilfulness is such, that you delight only 54. Fol. 67 a. diuis. 20.
in wrangling against the truth.

The. 54. untruth, ^claunderous.

Then are your self this ^claunderer M. Stapleton that confess, Folio. 62. he
omitted to show forth the truths, of purpose because it made against him,
what is this but wi^full wrangling against the truth?

Constantine made many wholesome laws and 55.
godly constitutions wherewith he restrained the people with threats,
forbidding the sacrificing Images and Idols.
to Idols, to seek after the diuelishe and superstitious soothsaying to set up
Images.

The. 55. vnt^uthe. They were Idols, not Images that Constantine Fol. 67. b.
Diuis. 20.
forbad his subjects to set up. And in his Counterblast, fol. 68. he says: to
say that Constantine forbad to ^et up Images, is an open and a shameless lie.

What shameless outfacing is this. The very words even in the same place, and
many other of the book, are plain against Images, and names both Idols and
Images also, as the Bishop does. Which withal confuteth his subtle
distinction, between Image and Idol, as though an Image might not be an Idol
also. Neither can the distinction serve your turn. For Constantine forbids
both (...) and (...). As for (...) your self confess he forbad, whether he
forbad Images or no, these are Eusebius own words in Greek, (...). Lib. 2.

Even so Christ our Savior confirmed this 59.
their authority, commanding all men to attribute and give unto Caesar that
which belongs unto him.

The. 56. untruth. This place of S. Matthew makes nothing Fol. 69. Diuis. 21.
for the Princes supreme government in ecclesiastical things.

It makes, as the Bishop alleged it, to confirm all that authority by
Christ's Gospel, that was due before in the time of the old Testament, Which
your self grant* but that Princes had supreme authority in ecclesiastical
things, in the time of the old Testament, the Bishop proved before, and your
self also granted it, though ye denied such supreme government as we
attribute. Therefore this place makes some thing for Princes supreme
government in ecclesiastical things, and so bewrays your own untruth and
the truth of the Bishop.

This to be Christ's order and meaning that 57.
the kings of the nations should be the supreme governors over their people,
not only in temporal, but also in spiritual or ecclesiastical causes, the
blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, do plainly declare.

The. 57. untruth. The Apostles never declared any such Fol. 70 b. Diuis. 22.
matter.

So say you in deed, ^ Stapleton, but the Bishops proofs out of Chrysostom
and saint Augustine, do plainly declare they did.

The. 58. untruth. Of misunderstanding saint Augustine, because, besides this
bederoll, he also charge the Bishop therewith at large in the Counterblast,
it is answered severally in the answer of the. 18. chapter.

Not meaning only the transgressors of the second 59.
table in te^porall matters, but also against the offenders of the first table
in spiritual or ecclesiastical causes or matters.

The. 59. untruth. Saint Augustine means not to teach Fol. 71. a. diuis. 22.
such government of Princes in ecclesiastical matters, as you teach, but
only to punish Heretics, and by the same to maintain the Catholic faith
decreed by the Clergy, not by the civil Magistrate.

Belike ye can tell better what saint Augustine meant, than be could him
self. But S. Augustine is plain, he needs no such interpreter. Remember
your own note, maledicta glossa quae corrumpit textum, Cursed be that gloss
that corrupts the text.

S. Aug. interpreting ye mind of ye Apostle to be, 60.
that the authority and power of Princes has to deal in ecclesiastical
causes so well as in temporal.

The. 60. untruth. Saint Augustine never wrote so.

Ye should have told out the sentence of S. Augustine, Fol. 71. ^ Diuis. 22.
that the B. cites, which fully proves it, and then have improued it as an
untruth if ye could, which although ye do not, yet in the margin of that
sentence, ye cry out lustily and say, where is there in all this master Horn
that the Princes have to deal in ecclesiastical causes, so well as in
temporal? For sooth master Stapleton even here at your hand, in this present
sentence, wherein S. Augustine proves, and your self also grant so much,
that the Princes authority, punishethe so well abuses in eccl. causes, and
faults against religion, as it does civil or temporal causes, but it
punishes all external faults and abuses in all civil and temporal causes, M.
Sta. grant out of Saint August.
and that by his supreme authority therein, and not as an others executioner.
Ergo, it punishes al external abuses and faults in all ecclesiastical causes
and religion, and that by his supreme authority therein, and not as the
clergies executioner.

Eusebius. etc. understanding the ministry of 61.
the civil Magistrate to be about Gods religion and eccle. causes so well as
temporal.

The. 61. untruth. Eusebius never understood any such ministry Fol. 75.
Diuis 23.
of the civil Magistrate.

In what things Eusebius understood the civil Magistrates ministry to
consist, the B. set down Eusebius his own words, to prove that he understood
it so: you say he never understood it so, but ye set down never a word,
neither here, nor in your Counterblaste to prove the contrary, which till ye
shall be able to do, the Bishops understanding of Eusebius by his own words
is no untruth. The understand ding of Eusebius.
Eusebius says, that in preaching by his decrees true godliness, in setting
forth the religion of the most holy law, and the most blessed faith, the
Princes ministry consists in these things, so well as any other, or before
al other, as his best ministry But these things are not civil matters but
spiritual and ecclesiastical: Ergo, his ministry by Eusebius understanding
consists so well in ecclesiastical or spiritual matters as civil or
temporal.

This most Christian Emperor did rightly consider as he had been truly
taught, of the most Christian Bishops of that time, that as the Princes
have in charge the mynisterie and government in all manner causes either
temporal or spiritual.

The. 62. untruth impudent and shameless concluded but Fol. 75. diuis. 23.
no whit proved. And in his Counterblast: I say it is a stark and most
impudent lie that ye say without any proof. Constantine was taught of the
Bishops, that Princes have the government in all manner causes, either
temporal or spiritual, ye conclude after your manner, facingly and
desperately, without any proof or half proof in the world.

Here are wonderful boisterous words Master Stapleton, but great boast and
small roaste, as they say. For all this high challenge stands on ( I say)
and so in deed it appears to be your saying, but had it not been your
saying Master Stapleton, I would have thought it had been some cotqueanes
cryaleyson, and I would have answered, a wispe, a wispe, for setting aside
your foul language, what untruth is here concluded, or what concluded that is
not proved? The Prince has the setting forth of true religion of Gods most
holy law, and the most blessed faith, but these things are not civil but
ecclesiastical and spiritual: the Prince has to pu^te away and overthrow
all euilles that press the vvoorlde, but none press the world more
daungerously than superstition, Idolatry, erroures, heresies, scismes, sects,
and false religion, all which are no civil but ecclesiastical and spiritual
matters: The Prince does these things not as an executioner of an others
ministry, but all the doing hereof is the ministry properly belonging to
his own office, yea it is his best ministry. Ergo, he does all these
things with as much or more full and proper authority of his office* as he
does any other civil thing, But his ministry in civil things is by his
supreme authority under God therein, whose minister S. Paul calls him. This
is the Bishops conclusion most plain and true, all your blackemouthed
Rhethorike to the contrary notwithstanding.

For this cause also Nicephorus, etc. compares 63.
Emanuell Paleologus the Emperor to Constantine.

(For this cause) the. 63. untruth, as shall appear. Fol. 75. b. diuis. 24.


There is no doubt some great cause that moved you M. Stapleton, to put this in
your bederoll of untruths, that the Bishop said, for this cause. And if you
were asked for what cause ye do so, it seems it would be hard for you to
render any, and therefore ye take a wise and a short way to tell us it shall
appear. But here ye show none, nor any at all here appears. And where it
should appear, there appears none also, except this be sufficient reason
only to deny it, and say, it is no cause at all. For these words only
appear there: Where ye say, for this cause also, etc. Fol. 76.
this is no cause at all, but is untrue, as of the other Emperor Constantine,
and much more untrue, as ye shall good reader straight way understand.

What cause I pray you is here alleged? and yet this is all that ye say unto
it, saving that as ye said before, it should appear, referring us there,
hither: here ye say, as the reader shall straightway understand it. And yet
neither straight way nor crooked way, ye speak one word more of the matter,
but go about the bushe, meddling with other matters, and not with the truth,
or untruth hereof any more. And so it appears nusquam, and the reader shall
understand it nunquam. Neither is it any marvel, if ye can not let the
reader to understand it, for I think ye understood not the Bishops words
your self, which if ye had done, ye would never have quoted it for an vn^th for
shame. Ye know the Bishop before having, for the understanding of saint Paul's
words for the Princes ministry, alleged the ensample of Constantine, to
show that his best ministry consists in his careful zeal, direction of
Gods glory and truth, and other matters of religion, wherein Eusebius
commends him, being a famous ecclestastical writer, and allowed amongst you:
sithe also Nycephorus another your late famous ecclesiastical writer,
co^par^th most expressly herein the Emperor of his time, to Constantine the
great: what untruth has the Bishop committed to say,

For this cause Nycephorus compares the one to the other, for that he did so
nearly imitate his duetifulnesse, in ruling, procuring, and reforming religion
to the pureness thereof.

If Nycephorus have not thus in these points compared them, then a Gods name
blame the Bishop, that said for this cause al^o Nicephorus. etc. but if
Nicephorus have so done, then is the Bishop cle^red of this vntru^, that said
^e did so. And if ye have any quarrel to pick, go pick it against Nicephorus,
that so did, and not against the Bishop, that only said he did so. Now
whither Nicephorus have done as the Bishop said (...) did or no, let the
reader be v^per.

The words of Nicephorus are long, notwithstanding I will set down some of
them, writing to the Emperor he says thus. Verily one shall suffice me as I
might ^aye for all, with whom also perchance, for that kindred and likelihood
which is between you and him, you will gladly suffer your self to be
compared, and is this any other than that Constantine, the great valor and
name among all men? Constantine whose memory ought to be as it were a certain
sprite in all men. Who helped ^s in our most necessity and Nicephorus
compares Emanuell or Andronicus to Constantine the great.
so mightily. Constantine the great in such arts as belong to an Emperor,
in prudence incomparable, but in feruencie toward God, and in great acts
achieved, and contentions sustained for the true godliness he is above all,
even as the Sun is shining above the stars. And art not thou O most excellent
Prince the very certain image of him (and here (...) notes in the margent
co^paratur. etc. The Emperor is compared to Constantin the great, and is
conferred with him) verily eue^ so does the glass render the right shape of
the Image, as thou expressest the divine show of his mind, and glisterest
again being very like unto him, none otherwise than even the natural son
does represent his father: and although I know well thou will disalowe my
boldness which art chiefly wont to avoid and beware of such praises,
notwithstanding I will not doubt to say this thing (which I beeseech thee ^o
suffer me and consider my reason, since I chiefly know that thou art the son
of God by grace and the Lords anointed above the rest) that thou art the Image
of him in all points alyke, which manifestly have obtained the very godly form
of him, and the force and impression either of his living or imperial
substance. etc. And so he runs into particular points, wherein he compares
them together. Is not all this enough master Sta. to prove the Bishops saying
true, for this cause al^o Nicephorus* etc. compares these two Emperors
together: but you (...) this, and showing no cause in the world why ye challenge
the Bishop therefore, run to an other quarrel about the Emperors name,
because the B. said as follows.

For this cause also Nicephorus in his Preface 64.
before his ecclesiastical history, does compare Emanuell Paleologus the
Emperor to Constantine.

The. 64. untruth. In putting Emanuel for Andronicus. (...)* b (...).


Ye are answered to this at large in the replye to your Whether this Emperor
were Emanuell or Andronicus.
Counterblasting thereon What soever his name were, as it is called in question,
so the Bishop is cleared thereof, following your own principal au^ors and
doctors, that transl^ting and setting out this story, named him even as the
(...) ^oth Emanuel Paleologus, and not once n^r twice neither, ^s the blind
man castes his ^affe, but as they say themselves, on good considerations among
them therevn^o.

And so rehearset^ his noble virtues. 65. Fol. 76* a. Diuil. 24.


The. 65. untruth. For this Emperor w^ a stark heretic.

So say you M. Stapleton, and so ye revile him in your Counterblaste, for a
wretched heretic also, and a wicked dooer. But your ecclesiastical writer
Nicephorus says not so of him, he recites (...) many virtue* and also (...)
and excellent virtues of this Emperor. If he were not such a one, or had not
such v^rtues as Nicephorus rehear^eth him to have, what is that to the Bishop
who only says?

Nicephorus recites his noble virtues. Fusebius his p^ayse of the Emperor.


And to prove this true, the whole preface of Nicephorus is manifest, being
for the most part nothing but the Princes commendation of such noble virtues as
Nicephorus shows he was endewed withal. He calls him princip^n omniu^
Christi a^antissimo atque humanissimo, qui prorsus omnes virtutes complexus,
nihil rerum pulc^errimarum and excellentissima^um pretermisisti. The Emperor
most loving of Christ, and most ^teous, who having thoroughly a^tained all
virtues, haste let slip nothing that is mo^e fair and excellent. It were
tedious to r^cite al or the quarter of that he cites in the praise of this
Emperors virtues. The preface throughout is manifest, the Bishops allegations
that ye can not deny, the comparison aforesaid between him and Constantine
do declare, yea your self confess, that Nicephorus does highly advance and ex^
this Emperor. But as Nicephorus says, if we may believe him on his credit,
being called of all your side scriptor per onmia vere catholicus, a very
catholic writer in all points, he flattreth him not, nor forgeth, but speaks
the truth, in praising of him, al which does sufficiently acquit the Bishop
for saying that Nicephorus rehear^eth his noble virtues.

The Princes supremacy in repairing religion 66.
decayed.

The. 66. untruth. Fond and foolish as shall appear. Fol. 76 a. Diuis. 24.


This is only a marginal note that the Bishop pr^fireth to all the allegations
that he cites out of Nicephorus, to any one sentence of which allegations M.
Stapleton answers nothing. But thus iustleth at the marginall note, and
sends us to his Counterblaste thereon, where it shall appear how untrue,
how fond and foolish it is. Which the reader shall judge when he has read
his Counterblaste, and the answer thereto.

That by their rule, ministry and service, not 67.
only peace and tranquillity, but also godliness and religion should be
furdered and continued amongst men.

The. 67. untruth. No such words in S. Paul. Fol 79 a. Diuis. 25.


Ye do the Bishop manifest injury M. Stapleton, neither have ye any vauntage
to pretend any of your former quarrels at the printe of the letters, it is
evident the Bishop sets not down those words, as the bare words of the t^rt
of S. Paul, which he cited the line before adverbum, and with diffinct
letter, which he does not here, but Paraphrastically expounds the text.
Wherein if he do wreste the meaning of saint Paul ye should hardly note
that, for an untruth* S. Paul there names not religion, that is true, The
word godliness in S. Paul compr^hendeth religion.
but that this word godliness which saint Paul names comprehends not
religion, as the Bishop says, that is your own untruth. But this matter is
debated more at large, in the answer to your Counterblast chap. 18. diuis* 22.
where is showed both by the Fathers and by your own chief writers, that
saint Paul by this word godliness meant true religion.

Here ye set another blasing star upon these words that the Bishop says.

This would be noted with good aduisement that Saint Paul himself shows
plainly prosperity amongste Gods people and true religion, to be the
benefits and fruits in general, that by Gods ordinance springs from the
rule and government of Kings and Magistrates unto the weal of the people.

This would be noted (say you) how ye rack saint Paul: Fol. 79. ^ diuis. 25.
he names not religion at all, he does not attribute religion to the rule and
government of the civil Magistrate, but peace and tranquillity only in
godliness.

Ye durst not note this for an untruth M. Stapleton, but for a racking or
wresting, although this is but your peevish Racking a sentence.
difference. If he rack saint Paul's meaning, he tells an untruth of saint
Paul, although this does clear the B. of racking also, that ye durst not
plainly note and score it up for an untruth: yet as the B. saying is most
true, so it nothing swarueth from the meaning of saint Paul. For a^ the B.
proves by Chrysostom, that by this word godliness is meant religion, and
the inward peace of the mind and conscience, and not only the outward peace
of the body. So Saint Paul makes these to be the benefits, fruits and
ends, that by Gods ordinance we receive from the rule and government of
kings and magistrates, in which saying S. Paul is not racked, but it is you
M. Stapleton, that rack Saint Paul* for he says not tranquillity and peace
only in godliness, y^ may put your only in your pursse, Saint Paul says in
godliness and pureness.

The which knot and fastening together of religion and prosperity inco^mon
weals, the most 68.
Christian and godly Emperors Theodosius and Ualentinianus did wisely foresee.

The. 68. untruth. They saw no such confounding of the two functions
spiritual and temporal as you imagine.

This untruth is directed against the Bishops imagination, ye go very near
the B. M. Stapleton, that where he says no such words as you challenge, ye
will creep into his heart and fetch i^ from thence, ye have a goodeye sight
that can see what the B. imagines. But wisdom will think this to be a fond
toy of your own idle imagination, for the Bishops words import no such
confusion as ye talk of, he tells how godliness and prosperi^e are
lincked together in commonweals, so that the one cannot be well without the
other, and that the Prince is the knitting together of both these, and this he
says the Emperors saw, and that they saw^ it, he brings good proof,
their own manifest words set down at large: either prove this an untruth M.
Sta. or else the B. has made nene, it is but your untrue sclaunder and fond
imagination.

I have proved etc. That such like government 69.
in Church causes, as the Queens Majesty takes upon her, does of duty
belong unto civil magistrates.

The. 69. untruth. Such like government you have not nor Fol 81 b. Diuis. 26.
ever shall be able to prove.

The B. says that in this first book he has hitherto proved it by the
scriptures, the Doctors and some Emperoures. This you deny that he has done,
and set him a long day to prove it. Now the truth or untruth of this the
reader must hang in suspense til be have read the pr^s over, what they be, and
then in the name of God let himiudge, whether the untruth light on the
Bishop or on Master Stapleton. In the mean season ^ytherto the Reader may
have a taste, what shame is in this impudent man's ^ace, what truth in his
cause, and what folly in h^s head, thus to the wide world to score and set
out such things for untruths, as being never so little rypped up, are most
apparante truths, and to make such a tryumphante gambolde, and pyping up of a
round as he does thereon. But le^te him dance his ^yll, and nicke up still on
the score, in the end he will run so far in the lashe, that no man will
credit a word of his mouth. Me^daci non cr^ditur ne iurato quidem. A liar is
not believed, no though he swear.

To Master Stapletons first Preface.
OR ever Master Stap* enter into his counterblast, he prefixeth two Prefaces,
the first to the B. the second to the Reader. The first, because it is only a
packet, trussed up, of all such accusations, as he lays to the Bishops
charge, through out his whole counterblast, and so is to be answered in their
proper places, I mind not therefore to follow Master Stapletons vain, that
says, Decies repe^ta placebunt, to spend the time and trouble the Reader more
than needs in answering to them here, that are to be answered in their places
severally, and are already many of them noted before, in his Common places. The
effect and conclusion of this preface, in the end is this. That the Bishop
must needs make a full reioynder, A full reioynder I Stapl. Page 22. and 23.
Prefa. 1.
say (says he) and perfect to all and every part of this reply, and put in
Master Stapleton^ whole answer, not omitting any one line or sentence either
of the text or of the margin: or else the truth is not on the Bishops side, or
else he wa^teth learning: or else he builds on no good fundation, nor the cause
he groundeth on is sure, or else all men will laugh him to scorn, for his
fair piece of work so shamefully broken of, or else M. Feckenhams scruples
are most learned and invincible reasons, or else the oath can not be taken with
out manifest perjury, or else Master Horn must retract his most haighnouse
heresies, or else (which I should have set before) all that the B. has said,
is but words of course to save his poor honesty, and but waltham talk, or
else (as he obiecteth foolishness to the B.) so M. Stapleton may prove as wise
as walthams calfe, and thus as he says to the B. for this time I take my leave
of you, Vale and resipisce, so may I for this your first Preface, take my leave
of you Master Stapleton, Uale and sape.

To Master Stapletons second Preface.
THe second Preface is directed to the Reader, and is co^triued in three
parts. The first shows the reasons why he took upon him to answer the
Bishop. The second how and by what order he proceeds in his answer. The
third is an earnest admonition to forsake this religion. In the first part he
shows that Master Fekenham could not answer the B. him self, but he shows
no other reason thereof, than this, seeing his state is such. Secondly, that the
cause why he more than any other of his accomplices took upon him to answer
this, least it should appear to come of his own ambitious busiositie, was
only at the request of some of his friends, he will not tell of whom, for so
perhaps be might detect him self, to be a disciple of Balaa^s mark, hired for
lucre to curse with his cursed and blackmouthed Rhetorike, the Church and
truth of God. And because hereby, be would have the reader covertly to
understand, what kin a great clerk he is, of what terror to his enemies,
and estimation among his friends, to entreat him more than any of all the
rest, to atchieue this enterprise: he tells us he was not very willing
thereto, because forsooth, he purposed having so largely provoked such sharp
adversaries, Staplet. Page 24. Prefat. 2.
especially M. Jewel, for a season to rest and stand to his own defense, if
any would charge him. Wherein he would not have ye forget, what a lusty
prouoker of sharp adversaries he is. And although for two causes he was loathe
to meddle therewith, first for that many things in this book Stap. Page 24.
pertain to certain private doings betwixt M. Feckenham, and M. Horn, of
the which (says he) I had no skill: secondly for that a number of such
private matters, touching the state of the realm occurred, as to them
(without farther advice) I could not thoroughly shape any answer: yet
notwithstanding all these things that neither touched M. Stapleton, nor he had
any skill of them, nor could shape any answer to them, he must needs intrude
and busy him self, to shape some misshapen answer, his fingers itched (since
none of al his sharp adversaries would once deigne to answer him) to provoke
the B. in these things, and where his skill should fail, rather than his will
should fail, he would furnish out his answer with his foresaid common
places, in which he has a very good skill and grace. As for the residue of his
wantes, afterward it so happened (says he) that by such as S^p. Page 24.
I have good cause to credit, there came to my knowledge such instructions,
as well for the one as for the other, that I was better vvilling to employ
some pains and study in this behalf. How these instructions happened to him,
we must not understand all, for fear it fall out (as they say) that asking
his fellow if he be a thee^, two false companions need no broker. As it will I
fear me fall out Master Stapleton in the scanning of your false informations,
whereof your self were unskillful ye say, but ye have good cause to credit
them, and were the more vvilling to employ your pains and study therein, and
good reason ye should credit them, that make any thing for you. For why, they
be credible men of your own party: be it true or false they tell you, recke
not you, let them bear the blame, if they lie, you did but tell it for them.
Why should ye not therefore employ your pains, and study, to painte it out,
and that the more willingly, since they do pay well for it.

Now M Stapleton being well instructed, though he promise to take the vvillinger
pains and study, in this behalf, yet must ye not presuppose, that he takes
this upon him, for that (says he) I think my self better able than other,
but Stap. Page 24.
for that I would not it should seem, there lacked any good will in me
either to satisfy the honest desire of my friends, or to help and releue
such, as by such kind of books are already pitifully inuegled and deceived,
or to stay other yet standing, that this book be not at any time, for lack of
good advertisement a stumbling stock unto them.

What soever here M. Sta. ye pretend of your forward good will, who so
co^ferreth here with your Common place of boastings and crakes, may easily
return your own saying on your self, that these are but words of course to
save your poor honesty, least men should see and detest your ambitious vain
glory herein. Neither does your preposterous zeal cover it any whit, except
this be to help and relieve a stu^bler, where scarce a straw lay in his way
before, to tumble a stock into his path, to make him fall down right.

Now that M. St. has showed the occasions that pricked him forward to set on
the B. He secondly shows the manner of his answer. Wherein first after his
ordinary crakings of his poor labor, of his diligence, of his whole and
Stap. Page 25.
full reply he excuses his long and tediouse babbling: wherein I rather fear
(says he) I have said to much than to little, which in deed he has good
cause to fear, as his Common places do and shall declare. And yet would he have
every word put in and replied unto, him self in his own conscience having
said to much already. But to excuse this fault he has a sufficient reason at
hand, that tediousnes is good to make al perfect, and therefore he had rather
be tediouse than short. Thus having handsomely excused the matter, he secondly
shows the order of the Bishops book.

M. Horns answer as he calls it rests in two parts. Stap. Page 25.


Why M. St. and how call you it? may it not think you be called an answer,
that answers the demand or request of an other? but as you wrangle
peeuishly about the name, so that curiouse fine pate of yours, disdeyneth the
playn^ and simple name of an answer, or reply, or any other usual word, as
ye pretend, to avoid confusion, but in deed, to show some singular conceit
and excellency of your book, which so finely ye Entitle A counterblaste, to
say the truth a blast not worth a counter, to counterblowe and all to blast the
Bishops answers with all.

The two parts that he deuides the Bishops book into are these: In the first
(says he) and chiefest he plays the opponent, laying forth out of the holy
Scriptures both Old Stap. Page 25. Prefat. 2.
and Nevve, out of Councels both general and national, out of Histories and
Chronicles of all countries, running his race from Constantine the great,
down to Maximilian, great grandfather to the Emperor that now lives:
taking by the way, the Kings of France, of Spaigne, and of our own country
of England, since the conquest, all that ever he could find, by his own
study and help of his friends, partly for proof of the like government of
Princes in Ecclesiastical causes, as the oath attributes now to the crown
of England, partly for the disproofe of the Popes supremacy, which the oath
also principally extends to exclude. In the second and later part, he
plays the defenda^t taking upon him to answer, and to satisfy certain of
M. Feck* arguments, and scruples of conscience, vvherby he is moved not to take
the oath. How well he has played both his parts* the perusal of this
reply will declare.

How well so ever he has played his parts, full ilfauoredly, you begin to
play yours M. Stap. thus to wrangle about the parts of opponent and answerer.
The B. plays not the opponent, but you play the Merchant. The B. not in
play but in truth and good earnest, (as M. Feckenham pretends to (...), and
requires to be satisfied) answers to his requests, by the foresaid proves
that here ye confess he brings forth. The party opponent (as in the other
scruples) still is M. Feckenham. But be he opponent or defenda^t (as either of
the^ in respects, may be either) if he bring those proves that ye grant he
does, ye have little occasion to make a play and scoff at the matter. Neither
does this blemish ye truth, from whom he had it: where with ye would seem as it
were with an awke blow, to foil the B. learning, that he found out these
proves not all by his own study, but by the help of his friends. Which as
you M. Stapleton for your own part were feign to confess right now, so is
there no cause, ye should measure the Bishops knowledge by your own defecte.
But herein ye do but as the residue do, this is the fashion of all your
co^peeres. Where truth fails you* at the least, to win a credit of
learning to your selves, (like proud Pharisees) ye despise al other besides
your selves. To which purpose, as M. Stapl. would stain the Bishops godly and
learned labor herein, at the least, that all might not seem to be his own,
but gathered by others to his hands: so in the telling of his own well ordered
piece of work, he sets out every point to the uttermost, to commend the
better unto us, his great learning, industry, and perspicuitie. He tells us
solemnly, how to the first part, he replieth in three books, how he has
divided Stap. page 26.
each book into several chapters, what he has noted at the top of each
page. But he tells not what common places he has set out in each line. He
tells how he has exceedingly lightened the matter, and what recapitulations
he has made thereof. To the second part, he tells us it shall appear (but
when he tells us not) both what strong and invincible arguments M. Feknam
right learnedly proposed, as most just causes of his said refusal. And also
what ^ely shifts, and miserable escapes, M. Horn has devised, to maynteine
that obstinately, which he once conceived erroneously. And thus forsoothe,
nothing to the praise and setting forth of him self and M. Feckenham, nor to
the blemishing of his adversary, has M. Stapleton divided the content of the
Bishops answer, and his counterblast thereto.

Now thinking with this prejudice of both their labors he has sufficiently
affectionate the Reader to his party, thirdly he enters into a general fore
warning of him, the effect whereof is to forsake this religion, which he
begins with this earnest adiuring of him. Now good Reader (says Master
Stapleton) as thou tendrest thine own salvation* Stap. Page 27. Prefat. 2.
and hopest to be a saved soul, in the joyful and everlasting bliss of
heaven, so consider and weigh with thy self the importance of this matter
in hand.

What hope of salvation (M. St.) can the Popish doctrine breed, that always
doubts as much of damnation, as it hops of salvation, and ha^geth wavering
between despair and hope, admitting no certentie of faith or trust to ground
upon? The atten^ion that ye desire in the Reader, we as earnestly desire the
same also, neither that he come to read attentively, with any preiudicate
opinion on either part, as you would have his mind fores^alled on your side,
but even with indifferency, as he shall find the matter in hand to lead
him, so to weigh and consider the importance thereof, even as he tendreth and
verily hops his own salvation. And as the Reader shall do this for his
part, so let us see how you do for yours, and of what great importance your
arguments are, to stir up this earnest attention in the Reader. The first
argument that ye make is this.

First without authority is no religion. Stap. Page 27. Pref. 2.


Then if this Religion whereby thou hopest to be saved, have no authority to
ground it self upon, what hope of salvation remaining in this religion
can thou receive?

Now as though the Mayor were in controversy, and the point we stick upon:
he first solemnly strengthens it with the authority of S. Augustine. For no
true religion Aug. de v^ilitate credendi* Cap. 9.
says S. Augustine, can by any means be received, without some weight
force of authority. As for the Minor which determines nothing, but hanging on
a conditional pin: makes no direct conclusion too or fro. We grant him
that i^ our religion have no authority, no hope of salvation can be grounded
thereon.

But then he replieth: If it have any authority, it has Stap. Page 27.
the authority of the Prince, by whose supreme government it is enacted,
erected and forced upon thee, other authority has it none: Ergo, For want of
sufficient and good authority, it is no true Religion. Ye desired right now M.
St. even as the Reader tendreth his own salvation, to consider and vveighe
with him self the importance of this matter. And is this all the importance of
your first argument against our Religion, that the Reader should weigh and
consider so deeply? What is here alleged besides a bold and manifest
slander, forced upon the Reader, by the authority only of your bare word?
Which the more the Reader shall consider, and especially thus your beginning,
for an handsell of good luck to the residue, he shall the better perceive the
falsehood and impudency of your whole cause and dealing.

For, to set one If, against another, If the reader better considering and
weighing with himself, shall find this religion, not to be of so late enacting,
erecting, and forcing, but enacted, erected and forced of God in his holy
word, shall not this consideration detect you to be a malicious slau^derer?
if the reader with all shall weigh the peise of your argument, that the Prince
has a supreme government in all Ecclesiastical causes: Ergo, the Religion
that the Prince sets forth has no^e other authority but of him, shall be not
find it like the father of it, as light as a thing of naught? But, exhorting
the Reader to weigh and consider the matter, and not considering nor vveighing
what ye say your self, ye blunder on in your Ifs, and say: If then that
supreme government (that having Stap. Page 27. Pref. ^.
none other authority, enacteth, erecteth and forces a Religion upon thee) be
not due to the lay Prince, but to the spiritual Magistrate, and to one chief
Magistrate among the whole spirituality, thou ^eest thy Religion is but a bare
name of religion, and no religion in deed. Here whether he be ashamed to set
it down, or thinks it so clear it needs not recital, but is inferred of
the Mayor he leaves out ye Minor of his argument. But, that supreme government
is due to one chief spiritual magistrate only, and to no lay Prince. Ergo:
Thy religion, is no religion in deed, but a bare name thereof. The reader,
thanks be to God, were he but a simple clerk, need not greatly beat his
brains in considering the weight of this argument. The mayor is hanged up for
holidayes, on your conditional pin. The minor is your manifest falsehod. The
whole in effect stands on these two false ^urmised principles, presupposing
the prince to take such supreme government on him, as the Pope chalengeth,
and that such as the Pope chalengeth is due to the Pope, to make, infringe or
alter religion, without any other authority, which indeed is neither due to
Prince or prelate, but to God alone, nor the prince but the popeclaymeth it,
and therefore his argument makes only against the popes religion, as thus: To
enact, erect, or force religion upon thee, ^yther of spiritual or lay
magistrate whosoever, by their, or his supreme (...), and other authority for
it, has none, is to make in deed no religion at all, but a bare name of
religion only: But that thus does the Pope, as (besides that it is manifest)
even here M. Stap. plamely confesses, saying that supreme government (making
relation to the words immediately preceding, which supreme government
enacteth, erecteth, and forces religion upon thee having no other authority)
is due to the spiritual magistrate, and to one chief magistrate, among the
whole spirituality, meaning his holy father the pope: Ergo:

The popes religion is a bare name of religion only and no religion in deed.
And thus his own argument better considered, returns on him self. But he
being blinded with the affection of his false principles, and reasoning a
petitione princip^* runs on with his (...), from the religion to the oath,
to infer peri^rie.

Again (says he) if this supreme government be not Stap. pa. 27. Pref. 2.
rightly attributed to the lay magistrate, in what state are they, which by
book oath do swear that it ought so to be, yea and that in their
consciences they are so persuaded. Is not perjury, and specially a vvilfull
continuance in the same, a most horrible and damnable crime, in the sight of
god? and does not gods vengeance vvatch over them which sleep i^ perjury* I
will be a quick witness to perjured persons says God by the Prophet
Malachie.

He that heard you preach thus against perjury M. St. and knew ye not, might
think ye were not guilty. But if he better considered your perjured case, and
obstinate disobedience against your Prince, and how wilfully ye continue and
sleep therein, and maliciously slander your prince and countrymen, and wrest
the oth^ of set purpose. he would surely marvel of your impuden^ If this
supreme government (say you) be not rightly attributed to the lay magistrate,
in what state are they, which by book oath do swear that it ought so to be?

What is this supreme government M. St. that ye speak of? If ye say, that which
I speci^ed before, to were, that which erecteth, enacteth, and forces religion
upon thee, without any other authority thereof what is this but one of your
impudent slau^ders? For though your pope takes this supreme government, and
you give it him, yet neither we attribute this to the prince, nor the prince
takes any such upon (...), neither do ye people swear it ought so to be, nor
any such oath is tendered them, and therefore be in no such state of perjury. The
oath that the prince offreth and the people take, names nor conteyneth any such
supreme government, but such as they may lawfully and ought to take, and thanks
be to god, incur no such danger, but perform therein their dutiful and true
obedience. But in what state are you (to set another if to yours, ^f the
supreme government, that ye lay magistrate (as ye saucily call the Queens
majesty) requires by oath be rightly attributed unto her highness, in what state
the^ are all those papists that obstinately disobey, maliciously slander, and
by all means impugue the same? are you not in the state of perjury, or far
worse? in what state be al you papists, that where the oath to this supreme
government which ye speak of, implies (as you conclude) manifest perjury, and
you plainly ascribe it to the Pope, and the Pope swears you and other his
vassals to it, is not this perjury (especially a willful continuance in the
same) a most horrible and damnable crime in the sight of God, and does not Gods
vengeance vvatch over them which sleep in perjury? I will be a quick
witness to perjured persons says God by his prophet Malachie. And therefore
look your self to this your challenge better about ye M. St. For if the reader
should weigh it further, as ye pretend, I fear me, further matter will fall
out agay^st ye.

But for all this M. St. will not stay, but on he goes still with his iffs,
and reuerseth his arguments on the contrary, reasoning on this his condition
(...) absurdo.

If that supreme government may duly and rightly appertein Stap pa. 27. and 28.
to our liege sovereign, or be any principal part of a princes roial power,
as master Horn stoutly but fondly avouches, or of his (...) ^eruice to God,
which never prince in the realm of England before the days of K. Henry the
8. used or claimed, which never Emperor, king, or prince without the realm
of England yet to this present hour had or attempted to have* which the chief
masters of the religion now authorized in England do mislike, reprove and
condemn, namely Martin Luther John (...), Philip Melanction and the
Magdeburgen^s, as in place convenient I have shevved, which also in no time or
age since princes were first christened, in no land or country, in no council
general or national, was ever witnessed, practiced, or allowed: last of all,
which directly fights with christ's commission given to the apostles and
their successors in the gospel, and stands direct contrary to an article of
our creed: if such supreme government (I say) may be lavvful and good, the^ is
the oath lavvful, and may with good conscience be taken.

But if these be such absurdities as every man of any consideration sees and
abhors, then may not the oath of any man that has a conscience be taken.
Neither can this supreme government be possiblye defended for good and
lavvfull.

Upon iffs and affs ye may conclude M: Stap. what ye please. This one pin, ^f,
will bear all this light stuff that that ye hang upon it well enough. What
man, and if, the sky fall we shall have Larkes they say. Ye reckon up many
particulers, if, this be thus, and if, that be so, and if the other thing be
that: and i^ such be good, and if these he such: but if this be not thus, if
that be not so, if such be not these, if these be not such: then I say then,
that that is not this, and this is not that, and so ye conclude it makes no
matter what. For of all your solemn arguing to and fro, ye lay down in deed
many particulers, but neither to nor fro ye prove any one, so that he that
would rebate them again particulerly, might as easily improve them all, if
with a contrary if, he deny them every one. And if it be so say you, then.
^c. and if it be not so may be say, so then and so, ver^a vice. And what is
this but mockholiday with the reader, whom ye desire to mark you so
attentively, and here is no proof at all to mark. Besides that, all these
iffs stand on your former wrong principle, (that supreme government) and may
be all answered with one if, if not the prince in deed, but your pope,
claymeth that supreme government, then the oath from the prince, as clayming
another ma^er of supreme gou^rnement, is free from all these absurdities, and
they only light on your popes pate, that exacteth the same. And so must they
stand by your own confession, till ye prove that supreme government, and
these absurdities to make against the prince. Yes say you that I do for it
follows immediately, That al these Stap. page 28.
absurdities and many yet more, which to avoid prolixitie I here omit, do
hereof depend: this reply gentle reader, abundantly proves. Why? is this
proof enough M. St. having made so solemn and full a conclusion against our
religion, the princes supreme government, and the oath, and will, your reader
as he hops his salvation, to mark how ye prove the importance of your
matter: And having alleged many bitter things, when you should come to the
proof of any one thing, to prove nothing, but only tell him y^ prove it in
your reply? and clawing him with the smooth title of (gentle reader) do ye
think he can be so satisfied? Now s^rely then he might be a gentle reader, but
he should not be a very wise reader, that would think this were enough, to
answer the hope of his salvation. But ye say ye omit the declaration of the
proves here to avoid prolixitie. Why avoid ye not then here, such prolixitie
also, in making your solemn conclusions, and reserve them (as were more
couement) to their convenient places, where ye say ye have showed them? What
need ye needeles^y babble of them here? or why may not I reiecte the answer
of them to the place of answer which ye refer us unto? and there a go^s name
let the reader weigh them. In the mean season I answer, if, with if, if
nothing hereof be hitherto proved ^ut is to be proved hereafter in your reply,
then for any absurdity here concluded, the oath is to be taken, the princes
supreme government is good and lawful, and your own arguments and fond kind
of reasoning, to conclude simply on co^ditionals, to avoid prolixitie by long
vain babbling, to crave the readers diligent vveying, and to bring no proof the
weight of a straw, these are the most absurdities that the reader as yet can
find. The like are your vain crakes, that ye bear ^he reader in hand
withal, how ye have evidently proved the prima^ie of the B. of Rome, not only
in England Stap pa. 28. Pref. 2.
before and since the conquest, but throughout all Christendom, as well the
east as the west Church, even by the authors (...) ^. (...) to the contrary,
and how ye have proved the (...) (...) first general councels, and many
national besides, in Spain, France, and Germany And nothing is pronounce^
^y the^ (...) the princes supreme government in matters ecclesiastical. And
here breathing your self, as though you (...) all (...) in (...), as ye beast,
it is nov^ Stap. pa. 29. Pref. 2.
thy part (...) ((...) you) not to shut thine eyes against the truth so
clearly shining before thy face. What soft M. St. the Sun shines not in your
Hemisphere as yet: Ye are early up and never the nearer. Ye have told the
reader his duty alredie, to weigh and consider with himself the importance
of the matter in hand as he hops to be a saved soul, and tendreth his own
salvation. This is a sore coniuration, and requires yt he be not moved lightly,
with any prejudice or affection, nor carried about with every wind, on credit
of your word. Soft a while, till he shall see these things ye boast of, they
are not yet in hand, when they shall come to hand, then give him leave to try
and view them, and o^ what side he shall find the truth to shine clearly
before his face, to that part he should open his ^ies, his ears, and heart
also, and shut them to that party that he shall find love darkness, and can
not abide the clear shining beams of the truth to lighte^ and direct him.

But as though ye had won the reader already, and had determined before hand
which is the truth: Against the which Stap. pa 28. Pref. 2.
truth (say you) because master Horns answer, is but as it were a vain
blast, the confutation of that answer to avoid confusion of replies (vvherof
so many and diverse have of late come forth) I have termed for distinction sake
a Cou^terblast.

Whatsoever the B. answer is, the readers attention hitherto sees nothing in
you, but vain words, and a vain title of a vain book to come, as he may
hitherto judge, proceeding of a vain head, to show a finer vain than your
fellows have. Your fetch is in this your vainglorious title, to gyrde at the
B. name, whereat diverse times ye likewise scoff, as though an other ^oulde
not descant a like on yours. But this vain dealing, as it may perhaps delight
and ^oad on, such as your self (and yet ^erchaunce, the indignity of your
behavior, against, though your adversary, yet far your better, and your
m^lapert arrogance, in aduauncing of your self, may lose ye some credit with
other your friends) nothing (...) the Bishopp^, nor impeac^eth the cause that
the B. defo^deth: so the i^different reader between both, reading both, will no
doubt regard more the force or weakness of your arguments, than esteem the
iolitie of your fresh title, or fear ye boysterousnesse of your Counterblast,
and so conferring the one with the other, will judge as he finds cause.
Neither will the advised reader be moved with your flattry, saying. And now
gentle reader most Stap. pa. 29. Pref. 2.
earnestly I beseech thee of all other articles that be this day over all
christe^dom co^trouersious, through the great temeritie of self willed
heretics raised up, most diligently to labor and trauail in this of the
supremacy, as being such, that to say the truth* in effect all other depend
upon. You beseech the reader so (...) M. St. that he should do but well to grau^^
your vown. How be it there are many other articles of n^ less controversy
between us, his day, and far more subtle and dangerous. Nevertheless, it
shall be necessary for the reader, most diligently to labor and trauail in this
of the supremacy, as a mother in deed to ye most of your popish errors, and
so ye reader shall epsy, your self to be one of those self willed heretics.
And yt for all your earnest beseching him to travel most herein, ye would have
him either believe first, and ground him self, on your false principles: or else
would ye s^e beshrew him, for traueling one whit therein, and fall as fast to
beseech him, to let the matter alone, except he will before hand on your word,
believe yt this supreme government belongs to your pope. And having so gotten
his grant on this, which is ye controversy it self, the^ ye beseech the
gentle reader most diligently to labor and travel in this controversy. But
the reader may see, with no great travel for y^ matter, yt as ye ^etract your
duty from your prince, so ye ascribe a great deal to much to your pope. For,
where to win the reader to your party, ye say that all controversies in effect
depend upon this: Ergo admit this, admit al: deny this, deny al: the antecedent
in deed in your popish church is true, Where they make al articles of religion
to depend upon him. But in christ's church it is true of none other but of
christ alone. Upon who^ being ye corner s^one and rock, al ye building is
Ephesians. 2.
founded, and arises, and in who^ being ye only chief universal h^d, all the
members have life, all controversies in effect depend. Admit his supreme
authority, admit all his religion. Deny his supreme authority, deny all his
religion. But it is not so of any limited and secondarie head, or supreme
governor in any particular Church of Christians. That all articles, or any
article of faith dependes on the Princes government, but the Princes
government depends on them, to ouersee them duetifully set forth. And when
the Reader sees this, that the Prince claymeth not an absolute Supreme
government, and that it is your Pope only, that takes this absolute
Supromacie on him, and you that give it him: then I trust the reader will not
be so won with your fair words, which make fools feign, as he will abhor
your slanders on your Sovereign, and detest the open injury ye offer to
Christ the only head, to make all Articles depend on your Popes supreme
authority. Now whereas for this ambitiouse claim of your Pope, ye allege
here nothing to fortify the same: ye think ye shall win it, yet at the
least this way, if with dispitefull raylings, ye may beforehande discredit us
to the Reader, and so win credit to your self thereby. Ye argue thus: The
Protestants (whom odieusly and falsely ye divide into Stap. page 29. Pref. 2.
many sects) are at mutual and mortal enemitie among them selves, but al
conspire against the primacie of ye Pope, Ergo a good resolution once had in
this point stays and setleth the conscience, as with a sure and strong anchor
from the insurgies and tempests of all sects and schisms.

This argument might as well make for Mahomets religion, or any other never so
false, as for the Popes: to reason from the adversaries division among them
selves, or agreement of them selves against his religion: to a truth and
perfection in his false religion. And though the argument fail alike both in
the Pope and the Turk, yet it holds in Christ's primacie. and only in him,
against Pope, Turk, Sectarie, or any other divided from him. Chiefly against
the Popish church, wherein are diverse and infinite sects and errors, and al at
mutual and mortal enmity amongst them selves, and yet all conspire with the
Pope against Christ and his truth: Ergo, a good resolution once had in Christ
and his truth, stays and setleth the conscience, as with a sure and strong
anchor from the insurgies and tempests of all sects and schisms. This argument
thus framed, had been better and truer, and not to make the Popes supremacy,
or the exalting of any creature in heaven or earth, to be the anchor hold and
stay of our consciences, besides Christ and his truth. Which sithence all
Papists do, by this your confession, they can have no good resolution,
resolving them selves amiss, leaning to a broken Reed. Where they say, Pax,
pax, peace peace, non est pax impijs dicit Esaias. 48.
dominus, there is no peace of conscience at all, nor any sure ankerholde to
stay unto. Maledictus qui confidit in boinine, Ierem. 17.
and po^it carnem brachium suum. And therefore if Protestants, yea al Sectaries
or Schismatikes, though they can not agree amongst them selves, yet if they all
hate this most Antichristian doctrine, to ground their faith on man: no
marvel though they hate it, it is so wicked and detestable, that even good
and badde, and all abhor it.

After he has taken this pro confesso, that the anchor hold of conscience,
consists in settling him self on the Popes primacie, he reasons on the
contrary effect.

Contrary wise, they that be once circumuented and decea Stap. page 29. Pref.
2.
ued in this Article, are carried and tossed with the raging waves and floods
of every error and heresy, without stay or settling, even in their own
errors. True in deed, Master Stapleton if ye had rightly showed withal, what
it had been to be circumuented and deceived in this Article, otherwise ye do
but like an unskillful and harebrayned Pilote herein, that to avoid the rock,
thinks him self sure and safe, when he has cast his anchor on the
quickesandes, or rather even in the goulfes mouth, and so I warrant him also
(as you say) he shall not need long to fear to be carried and tosted with
the insurgies and tempests of the ragyng waves and flouddes, but soon be
swalowed up and drowned in them.

But Master Stapleton not considering, or not mynding to warn the reader of
this to much trusting to a false Pilote, but to terrify him further with fear
of forsakyng this Popish ankerholde, and to confirm this argument of the
contrary effect, reasons from the instancies of diverse ensamples. And first
of the Greek Church arguing thus.

The Grecians forsook the unity of the roman Church: St. pa. 29. and 30
Pref. 2.
Ergo they fell after to be Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutichians, etc.
and in conclusion fell into the Turkishe captivity. This argument besides
other faults, has chiefly two hoamely and foul fallations, that make it
v^cious. The one a secundum quid ad simpliciter, from the Church of Rome,
limited to that time that it was not stained with those errors, to the
Church of Rome simply, that since that time has fallen it self, partlye into
some of those errors, partly into other as great, and many worse.

The second fallacion is a non causa vt causa: for their fall was into those
heresies, not because they acknowledged not the Bishop of Rome, to be their
supreme head, for therein they had played like the Flownder, that lept out of
the frying pan into the fire: but because they forsook and perverted the
word of God, as the Papists since have done, and their ^ares itched and
a^iended to the inventions, doctrines, and errors of men, to lying masters, as
the papists have done also. This was the proper cause of their fall into these
errors, and of the Papists fall, into the like or greater. And where M. St.
joins to his conclusion, to make the sequel more dreadful, that after
diverse reconciliations with the Roman Sea, they fell into the Turkish
captivity: Why may it not as well be noted thereon, that they never came into
this extreme flanery of the Turk, but their Empire continued above 1000.
years, till after those their reconciliatio^ made with the Pope? and then
within 14. years they fell in the Turks captivity. But of this, more
hereafter.

From the Greek and ^ast Church he proceeds to the Affricanes, making the
like argument on them. But to answer him briefly: To reason thus, from the
unity of the Roman Sea, in faith then, to the obedience of the Roman Sea,
in the supremacy now, every scholar will some say, is a very good non seq^tur.

The like common fallace a non caus^ vt caus^, he makes of Hungary and
Lifelande, fallen into the hands of the Stap. pa 30. Pref. 2.
Turks and Moscouites. Because (says he) they forsook the Pope, and fell to
Luther. But if this argument be good, demand of him, how (...) the ^hodes,
Belgradum, Buda, and other cities and parts in Austria which likewise the Turk
has gotten, be clean forgetten here of him, and not reckened up in this
number? was it because they acknowledged, none more than the Rhodians, the
Popes supremacy? and yet fell into the Turkishe captivity so well as the
other?

At the length he (...) home to England, and when he should here make the full
conclusion of all these lamentable sequeles, of re^olt from the Roman Sea, in
other Countries, that the like should light on us: seeing that his
argument, contrary to his long and wicked hope, does fail in the
conclusion: least either he should show the folly of his impertinent
arguments, or utter the unnatural malice, that for his Pope and popish
religion, he has fostred long in his cankred breast against his natural
prince and Country: he turns the Catte into the Pan, not by concluding his
argument on the like issue to England, but rawly and generally knitteth up the
matter thus:

But what was the issue all the world knovveth, and England, Stap pa. 31.
Pref. 2.
the more pity, grievously feels. To this M. Stap I answer: Thanks be given
to God, no such is^ue, as you would conclude of other Countries, from errors
and the Turk to us. It is you that abhorring the Gospel more than Turkerie,
feel this grief ye speak of, for that your sequel holds no better in
England. England neither fears the Turks, nor these your byous threats,
and would to God no part of Christendom, even of those that you accounte
most Popish catholic, were no more subject to the invasion and danger of
the Turkishe, barbarous, and Sara^ins irruptions and tyranny, than England:
is and yet if God should punish any part of Christendom by them, though he
use by his secret Justice, their fury, as a rod to scourge their offenses,
yet will not we, nor may justly, make such tragical sequeles, reasons to
argue pro or contra on Religion, as here you do by these peoples, to conclude
against us. But, praises be to God, you can conclude nothing. England ever
since that, through the Queens most excellent majesty, it has enjoyed the
liberty of Gods most holy word, has ma^ger all your spites, rejoiced
withal, both tranquillity, wealth, peace, freedom, and above all things,
the favor of God in Christ, even for that it has escaped the spiritual
bondage of your Pope, far worse than the bodily captinitie of the Turk, God
continue his mercy to us, and make us thankful for it. Now since ye can not
fasten any such sequel as ye wish on England, ye gather petite quarrels, and
like a po^her, seek corners to find out some inconveniences, not worthy
answer. And yet because ye resume them often times after, and make much ado
about them, as reading the Bible and other book^s, suppressing Abbeys, marriage
of Priests, oirginitie, vows, no Church Bishops, but S^. pa. 31. and 32 Pref.
2.
Parliament Bishops, the sacrament of the altar. etc. they are answered, where
ye handle them at large, and not here whereye snatch at them. Only this your
gross lie, I will note here, about king Henry's laws. Because ye cite it not
that I remember, any more. Ye say, that after his death and Stap. pa. 32. Pref.
2.
in the minority of his son king Edward, all the laws that he had made
touching matters of religion (saving against the supremacy) were repelled and
abolished: What a manifest and impudent lie is this? King Henry besides the
supremacy, made laws for the abolishing of shrines and pilgrimages, of
pulling down Images, of depressing popish sectaries, Monks, Friars, Numies,
Heremits, Anachores. etc. Were these laws repelled and abolished after his
death in the minority of king Edward? Show it, or else wipe your lips, for
a foul lie has beslabbered them Master Stap.

All these former arguments and these extrauagant discourses consist on a wrong
principle. All this have I spoken Stap. pa. 33. Pref. 2.
(says he) to shevve it is most true, that I have said, that there will
never be redress of error and heresy, or any stay, where men are once gone
from the unity of the Sea Apostolic, which is the well spring and fountain
of all unity in the Catholic faith. This false principle if we deny it him,
then all his arguments of absurdities, and events thereon, are not worth a rush.
But had he put in but one letter more, and for unity had said vanity, it had
been a most true principle, nor we would or could have ever denied the same.

The last reason of his Preface to leave a prick of discredit against the
Protestants in the readers mind, is of our discord and inconstancy in this
question, the assumption whereof being in deed nothing but slanders, of the
prince, the Realm, and diverse Godly learned men, is partly set out in his
common place of slanders, and partlye shall be further particulerly answered,
as they come to hand in the book where he discourses on them.

Thus much for the pithe of all his arguments, contained in his Preface to the
Reader, to win his mind to his cause before hand, and alienate it from
ours: but the wise Reader will first read, or ever he give his judgment.

The answer to M. St. Counterblast on the Bishops Preface.
The first Division.
IN his answer to the B. Preface, whereas the Bishop in the first Division
(for so. M. Stapleton terms every several portion that he answers unto)
shows the necessary reasons that moved him to answer Master Feckenhams
book, and the covert meaning of master Feckenham, in secretly scatering his
book abroad: that therein he showed a further meaning than he durst plainly
utter, and that the intent of the book as might justly be gathered, was to
engraft in ye minds of the subjects a misliking of ye Q. majesty as though
she usurped a power and authority in ecclesiastical matters, whereto she had
no right: to slander the whole realm as though it were estraunged and
directly against the Catholic Church, tenouncing and refusing to have
communion therewith, and under the B. name to deface the ministers of the
Church, and that therefore he could not but of duty shape M. Fec. an answer.

To this M. St. omitting the B. motives, labors like a clearkly proctour for
his client, to purge M. Feck. for the setting forth of his book, and accuses
the B. of false surmising, laying to the B. charge his first two untruths
which are answered in their proper Calendar.

The clearing of Master Feckenham he deuideth into three parts. First why M.
Feckenham made this book, or as he calls it a Shedule, or little treatise.
Secondly, why Stap. li. 1. ca. 1. Fol. 1.
he delivered the same to the Bishop. Thirdlye, why he afterward caused
the same to be publyshed and delivered to some of the council. But first
whatsoever he will set down for master Feckenham, whom he calls the reverent
father my lord Abbot of Westminster, because him self has no knowledge
hereof, but by hearesay, all that he declares he builds on this ground, as I
assuredly understand. Stap. fol. 1.
Now who gave him thus assuredly to understand, a man may easily divine, even
forsooth this reverent father, who as we must understand with all, would tell
M. Stap* nothing that should be partial to himself in his own case. We must
therefore believe that all is true that Master St. tells of Master Feckenham,
for assuredly master Feck. his own self, and no worse man has let him so to
understand.

The drift of all this first division is to challenge the B. of untruths, which
is answered into, the boderoll, as before and therefore is but superfluous to
repeat it. The second division draws nerer to the matter.

The second Division.
THe B. in the second division of his Preface declares Winchester.
by what manner of proufes in this answer, he satisfies master* Feckenhams
demand, by the scriptures, by the Doctors, by the councils, and by the
Churches practice. And that even by some such authors as themselves are,
papists, and in this matter partial to the Pope.

To this M. St. replieth in three parts. The first part is Fol. 2. b. and 3. a
nothing else but an heap only of slanders, and bragges.

The second is a setting up of marks before his counterblast, for the reader
to direct himself unto, whereby to see who swarueth from, who keeps him
niest, to the question in controversy. The third is a quarrelling with the B.
for saying that he brought forth proufes even of the papists them selves.

The first part is set out in his common places thereon, whereto, howbeit his
slanders and bragges be very lauishe, there need no further answer.

In the second, remembering at the length himself, that he has hitherto
spoken nothing material to the question, after his facinges, he says:
Wherefore as it is mee^e in all Stapl. fol. 3. a.
matters, so is it here also convenient and necessary, to have before thine
eyes good Reader, the state and principal question controuersed between the
parties standing in variance, and then diligently to see how the proofs are
of each party applied, for the confirming of their assertions.

This is very good and necessary council that here ye give the Reader M.
Stap. and it had been to be wished, your self had either in time remembered it,
or not forgot it so soon again. But ye would not remember it of purpose, for
had ye set this rule always before your eyes, and (as ye should) have followed
your own precept, ye well foresawe, what a lean carrion Pamphlet, your puffed
up Counterblast should have been, lookyng with a thinner pair of cheeks by
three deals and more, than it does. Nevertheless I wish, as you do, the
Reader still to mark this rule, and he shall see it is no good fat nor
sound flesh, but foggy wind, that this whole Counterblast is bolne and
swollen up with all.

Now having this warning of his own mouth, to have still before our eyes the
state and principal question of the book, and thereby to see hovveche parties
proves are applied, let us see how here he sets it down before his own eyes,
and applies his proves thereto.

What the state and principal question is betvveene the The state of the
controversy and principal question.
parties (M. Feckenham, and the B. of Winchester) standing in variance, Look
M. Feckenhams own words, desiring therein to be resolved. Whether any such
government M. Feckenha^, Division. 8. Page 6. b.
in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical causes as the Queens Majesty claymeth, may
be proved by any of these four means, the Scripture, the Doctors, the
Councels, or the continual practice of any one Church of Christendom.

On this state being demanded to be proved or improued, stands the
principal point in variance betvveene these twain. This M. Feckenham
earnestly calls upon, and offers readily to swear, if this by any of these
four parts can be proved. This, the B. of Winchester laboreth directly to
prove, and fully has proved even by all four parts, unless you can
disprooue his proves. And this now is your principal part M. St. always
while ye labor to confute him, to have set and fixed your eyes on this point,
being the issue, the state and principal question betvveene these tvvaine in
variance. And to show wherein the Bishop swarues from this, or makes any defect
herein. And not to look upon other so many impertinent matters (as your Common
place thereon declares your vagaries) nor to stand so long on them, nor to
pry and poare out new starting holes, nor direct the eye of your reader to a
wrong mark, and point out a new butte, to the which when your adversary
directly shoots not, but to the issue couenanted between them twain,
desired of the one to be shot unto, shot unto and fully hitte of the other,
and then you like a booty aim giver, to cry out as ye do, that he shoots
vvide and short, St. fol. 3. a.
and comes not nere the mark by a 1000. miles: Ye are a false aim giver M.
Stap. all the world may see, and withal, how, when ye see the mark is hit at
the full every time, ye have no other shifte but this, to deny that to be the
mark set up.

But now let us see how properly your self shoot at the mark, and set before
your eyes the state of the question in variance betvveene them twain. If ye
starte away therefro^ having now said thus much, ye quite shame your self and
your cause. Look to it therefore, play the good archer and shoot you nearer,
hit the mark, to win the B. shot and ye can. But ^o how ye begin to
wrangle even at the first entry, and swerve from your own principle, to set
before your eyes the principal state in variance betvveene them, which (say
you) is convenient and necessary. If it be so M. Sta. requires six
considerations to be granted or ever he enter into the question.
M. St. then followit. Nay, say you, ye shall first grant me six things, and
when ye have granted them, then will I enter into this match with you, and
show how ye ever shot amiss, and so beat you out of the f^elde. Is this even
dealing M. St. to demand six things at once to be granted? What? will not
one, two, or three serve your turn? ye are to gredie, man, remember that qui
cupit totum perdit totum. But let us see your six demaundes, whether they be
reasonable, and to be granted yea or no.

There are therefore say you many things to be considered, Stapl. 3. b. The
first consideration.
first that Christ left one to rule his whole Church in his stead from time
to time unto the end of the world.

Is this your first request to be considered and granted M. Stapleton? now
surely a reasonable demand to be considered upon: And worthy to have that
Solomon granted to Adonias, for asking of Abisa^g to wife. Wise king 3. Reg. 2.
Solomon saw he might as well have asked the crown from his head, yea his head
from his shoulders: and who so unwise that sees not, ye might as well ask the
whole controversy to be granted you, and grant ye this, what need ye
propounde your other principles following. How be it let us see what they be
also.

Secondly we must consider (ye say) that this one was The second
consideration. St. fol. 3. b.
S. Peter the Apostle, and now are the Bishops of Rome his successors. Out of
doubt ye had on some great considering c^ppe M. Stapleton, when you considered
that the Bishop should have considered this. He was much to blame he considered
it not, but M. Stapl. and ye were as wise as God might have made you, ye would
have better considered with your self, than to think others have so little
consideration, as to grant ye this your false and foolish principle.

Thirdly (say you) that albeit the Bishop of Rome had no The third
consideration. Stap. fol. 3. b.
such universal government over the whole, yet that he is and ever was the
Patriarche of England and of the whole West Church, and so has as much to
do here as any other Patriarche in his Patriarchshippe. It is a sign (M.
Stap*) ye shrewdly doubt the former twains would never be granted, that so
soon would be content to become a Patriarche of a piece, from a Pope of the
whole: which though it shows less haughtiness in you, that would play small
game, rather than sit out, yet perchance your Pope is of Alexanders spirit, to
whom Darius having offered half his dominions, if I were Alexander (quod
Parmenio) I would take it, so would I (quod Alexander) if I were Parmenio: And
so perchance your Pope will say to you, if I were Master Stapleton, I would be
content at least to be a Patriarche, and perchance a worse rowme would serve.
But being the Bishop of Rome he will say, Aut Papa aut nihil. And therefore
least ye get his curse, before ye ask our consent, the surest way were to know
how he will like of this your limitation, and when he shall be content, then
propose it to us to consider thereon.

But I see ye like not greatly to stand hereon, for fourthly The 4.
consideration. Stap. fol. ^. b.
say you. Then all were it, that he had nothing to intermedle with us, nor as
Pope, nor as Patriarche, yet can not this supremacy of a civil Prince be
justified. Whereof he is not capable, especially a woman, but it must remain
in some spiritual man.

Your must is very mustie M. Stapl. and smells of the pumpe of Romes ship.
Your Sequence is as badde: the B. of Rome neither as Pope nor as Patriarche is
supreme governor in Ecclesiastical causes in England: Ergo, No civil Prince
man or woman is capable of it. Again: There must be one spiritual man that
must have an universal government over the whole Church: Ergo* A civil
Prince may have no particular government in his particular Church. The
antecedents in deed are true of both. For neither has the Pope, as Pope or
Patriarche, or any otherwise, any supreme government over England, as you
presuppose he had none, and yet the Prince both may have, and has some supreme
government over us. For in deed all supreme government, such as the Pope
usurped, she neither has, nor may have, nor requires, nor belongs to any
creature, but is due to Christ alone. He is that spiritual man, that your
other antecedent speaks of, if ye mean him, it is true: if you mean any
other, it is but your false presupposall, though the consequentes whereon we
stand, follows neither way, neither do ye labor once to prove them.

But is here all things we must consider? no say you, The. 5. consideration.
Stap. fol. 3. b.
for fifthly, Besides this, the Catholics say, that as there was never any
such president heretofore in the catholic Church, so at this present there is
no such, except in England, neither among the Lutherans, the Suinglians, the
Suenkfeldians, or Anabaptists, or any other sect that at this day raygneth, or
rages in the world. None of these, I say, agnyse their civil Prince, as
supreme governor in all causes spiritual and temporal. Let go these raging
terms of sects, M. Sta. to their common places, and I pray ye tell us once
again, who says thus? Who? even the Catholics say so. But whom mean you by
the Catholics? The Papists. Then gentle M. Stap. have me commended to those
your Papisticall Catholics, that ye say, say so, and ask them again if all
be Gospel that they do say, or no. Tushe man, (will M Stap. reply) will ye
not believe the Catholics?

Why then sixthly and Last of all I say, and M. Feck. The 6. consideration.
Stap. fol. 3. b.
will also say, that even M. Horn him self in this his aunsvvere, retreateth
so far back from his assertion of supreme government in all causes
spiritual and temporal, which is the state and keye of the whole question,
that he plucketh from the Prince the chief and principal matters and causes
ecclesiastical, as we shall hereafter plainly shevve by his own words.
This gear goes hard indeed. The B. is now driven to asore straight. But
sir, might a man be so bold to ask your mastership, what are you and M. Feck
are ye not Catholics? that when ye have said the catholics say so, ye come
rushing in and say, Last of all I say, and M. Feck. will also say, you make us
doubt least ye be no Catholics, and withal to suspect (when ye call your
self and your client M. Feck. to witness,) some partiality in your sayings,
least the sole will hold with the shoe: and that as two false witnesses came
in against our savior Christ, with I say so, and he will say so also, so
would you compact together to slander the B. herein, with, I say so, and M.
Feck. vvil say so also. But by both your leaves, may I be so bold as to set
your, I say so, and his, I say so also, aside, and desire ye to prove your so
saying. Why say you, doubt ye of that? we shall here after plainly shevve it by
his own words. These are but words M. Stap. and ioly promises, if ye can
shevve it so plainly, why shevve ye it not plainly here, where ye say it so
plainly? or else have shevved at the least, where the B. does thus? which till
ye shall plainly show, this your* bold and plain saying, may be suspected
for a plain lie. But M. Stap. shaking of the further examining of this matter,
hastneth to the full determination, and solemnly sits down like a Pope him
self or Patriarth, and pronou^ceth the definitive sentence of this matter,
saying: The premises being true, and of our side abundantly Stap. fol. 4. a.
proved, and better to be proved, as occasion shall serve, as nothing can
effectually be brought against them, so master Horn, as ye shall evidently
perceive in the process, straggleth quite from all these points.

Ha sir, how Popelike ye have handled all this matter. But were it lawful to
appeal from your sentence or call it in question, might^ it not be asked
whether the promises were all true? Yea might it not be doubted whether they
were not all most false? might it not be thought that it were scarce
abundantly proved of your side, to say, the Catholics say so, and I say so,
and mas^er Fecken. will say so? Might it not be suspected that ye still say ye
have proved it, ye will prove it better* ye shall hereafter show it plainly*
we shall evidently perceive in the process, and presently, that we can
perceive, ye prove, nor shevve any thing at all, and so sit down to
sentence, as though the matter were out of all doubt and controversy,
determining solemnly that al these premises be true, and M Horn erreth in
defending the contrary. This is an hard law M. Stap. presently to condemn
and behead the man, and then after to examine the fact. But it is the daily
practice of your holy father, and so like a good son ye follow his ensample.

But now sir, whereto were all these six so undoubted principles brought
fo^rthe? They are (say you) the principal questions in variaunce betvveene the
parties controuersed, to fix their eye upon. What? are these but questions,
that were such true and infallible principles right now? If they be but
questions, I see they be still disputable, for all master Stapletons definite
sentence. A man may still doubt of them, yea dispute of them. And they may
chance prove as false in the end, after diligent discussing them, as master
Stapleton, without further doubt would have them presupposed to be true. But to
save all vprighte he says, they are the principal Sta. fol. 3. a. b.
questions controuersed betvveene them, and yet master Horn, does not once
touch them, he comes not nighe them. What does he not man? not once touch
them nor come nighe them? and yet M. Feck. and he be most at variance about
them? What a variance is that, belike he allows them, go to, go to, M. Stap.
leave this fond lying for shame. Your self knows, and each man may see, that
he touches and touches home (as occasion served him) all those of them, that
were incident to his matter. Some of them in deed he little medleth withal,
as questions principally sucked out of your own fingers, and devised now by
you to defeat all that he touched, as though he touched other things, and not
the matter in question, from the which ye say he straggleth quite. But this is
your doing M. Stap. ye bring in new controversies that were not the issue
between them, on which you should have fixed your eyes. But the B. so touched
the matter he had in variaunce, and so touched you also, that thus malapertly
would vary with him and hitte you so full, that your eyes stared belike in
your head, that ye could not, or would not, see the question, but quite
straggled from it, to other questions, and those also, which we must grant ye
for principles, and their no doubt but ye will conquer all alone.

These new premises being thus craftelie devised, and set up by you, as the
principal questions in variaunce betvveene them, that striued clean about
another matter: as though neither the B. nor M. Feck. saw where aboutes they
striued, no^ fixed their eyes any thing near their matter. But fought more
Andabatarum, beating the air, and them selves, they wiste not about what: and
being now revoked to their matter by you, that never cast your eye so much
as one glimpse aside therefrom: these being also such principal matters, as
must withal of our liberality be granted you, for most assured principles:
thinking now all is proved on your side:

M. Horn (say you) straggleth quite from al these points, Stap. fol. 4. ^.
besetting him self, all his study and endeavor, to prove that, which
neither greatly hinders our cause, nor much bettreth his and for the which
neither M. Fek nor any other Catholic, will greatly contend with him,
which is, when all is done, that Princes may meddle and deal in causes
ecclesiastical. Ye do now like a liberal gentleman (M. Stap. grant us more
than some of your highest estates ever would allow. Cardinal Hosi^s durst not
be so free to Princes, as to grant them thus much, as mouere sermonem, to move
any talk of ecclesiastical matters: and dare you that are nothing like to
come to so ^ye promotion, grant that Princes may meddle and deal with causes
ecclesiastical? What moved you hereto? belike ye still dreamed of your former
Papal sentence, and that we had granted, or we must needs grant, because
you have said so, that these are the principal questions, and these are also
most true principles* and that nothing can effectually be brought against
them: which when ye presupposed we must needs grant, ye were content to
grant again to the B. that straggling as ye say from these points, that
which he proves may^ well be granted him, that Princes may meddle and deal
with causes ecclesiastical. But now sir, put the case that this were but
your own fond dream, that he grants you those to be his questions, or
those questions to be such principles, and that each man utterly denies that,
which you fancy each man graunt^th: yea and that M. Feck. will tell you, that
not one of these your six questions were any of his questions, and that he
dreamed not like you, but saw well enough what be did, when he stood wholly on
his said issue, of the dealing of Princes in ecclesiastical matters: yea and
all your fellows are ashamed that all the world should see, (...) ye set up
wrong marks, and fondly took for granted, that almost each man denies, or
doubts of: When your self, being come to your self, shall see all this:
will ye not repent ye of your hasty liberality? and say your self saw not
so much? for if ye had ye would not have granted it so (...). Which being in
deed the thing in question, and the thing wherein ye grant the B. has beset
him self, all his study and endeavor to prove: it not only, as you grant
against yourselfe, some what hinders your cause, somewhat bettreth his, saying
it neither greatly hinders our cause, nor much bettreth his, but also it
fully proves the question in variaunce, on his part, and clean overthrows
M. Feck. assertion therein. And thus of your too much prodigality (as M. Feck.
may call it) laboring to defend him, ye have quite foilde him: and while ye
would set up new marks, and have al men's eyes fixed thereon, your self not
fixing your own eyes on the very mark set up between them, grant that the
B. hitte at the full, that which he shot unto. Which granted, the arrow so
reboundeth on you, and your cause, that it quite ouerturneth both. But M. St.
having now espied, that he has granted that, which he saw a^nswereth
sufficiently M. Feck. issue, and also confounds these new and false
principles, and yet he could not for shame plainly reca^t, nor revoke his
grant: he first begiuneth* to pinch and nip it, saying, it is true, princes
may have dealing in eccl. matters, but in some meaning, by which some meaning
what he means, Stap. fol. 4. a.
as he dare not here for shame utter, so he quickly slippeth from it, telling
us it reaches not home, and that the B. does but face and brag, thinking
every man borrows of his common places. And so (to knit up with his own
words) Stap. fol. 4. a.
is much labor vainly and idelly employed, with ^edious and infinite talk and
babbling, al from the purpose and out of the matter, which ought specially to
have been justified, and not in stead thereof, to detayne and delude the reader
with these new six marks and false presupposed principles.

The third part of this division, is his quarelling with the B. for saying he
made proof, even by many Papists them selves. Which part he distributeth into
three members: the first, he calls in the margent, the uneven dealing of the
Protestants, the second, a challenge to M. Horn, and the third, Stap. fol. 4. a.
M. Horns tale incredible. First, for the uneven dealing of the Protestants
Now is it worthy (says M. St.) to see the ioly policy of this man, and how
even and corr^spondent it is to his fellow Protestants. M. Jewel restrayneth
the Catholics to six hundredth years, as it were by an extraordinary and
new found prescription of his own, embarring al latter profes, yet he him
self in the mean time runs at large, almost one thousand years later,
shrynking hither and thither, taking tagge and ragge, Here^ike and Catholic,
for the fortifying of his false assertions. When ye have proved the B. of Saru^
his assertions false, then call them so, for before, while ye complain of the
Protestants uneven dealing, ye shall show most uneven dealing in such a Papist
as your self. As with all you show your ioly Logike that you crake so much
upon, how even and correspondent it is to reason. M. ^uel restrayneth the
Papists to 600. years to prove their articles by, Ergo, he can not confute
their articles with their own co^fessions that are of later years. As for the
tag and rag, and mag too that he has improued them withal, be even them
selves, their own ragged rabbines, and tagged scholemen, be they heretics or
be they catholics. But be they as ye please to call them, does the limitation
of your proves restrain his improues? What if he improued your articles even
by your own mouths who are now oxtant? might it be lawful for you to c^yne
yet more new articles? and to allege proves for them of your own time,
because he confuteth them by proves of your own time? this belike were even
dealing with you, to let you have so large scope to prove articles, as the
improuer may have to confute the^. But as it is good reason ye should for the
proof of your articles, be content for shame with so large a scope of. 600.
years next after Chris^e, so have ye accepted this limitation already, and M.
Harding your standard bearer, and your self with many of your partners, have
undertaken to bring forth your proves according to that restraynt of 600.
years. How ye have done it, Scripture (as they say) makes mention, let the
readers judge. Belike your selves doubt of those proves. and therefore groyne
now at length, to be so restrained for your proves, and feign would have a
larger scope, saying, this is an extraordinary and nevve found prescription
of his own, embarring all later proves, it goes hard with you he like,
that ye whine now so fast at that which ye received so lustily (to soeme to)
and craked upon before: and now that ye can not prove any one of your articles,
in all that term of 600. years* ye compain of uneven dealing. But what if
ye had been restrained to the time of the primitine church? ye would then have
made an outcrie, and yet it had been requisite, that for articles of faith and
religion, ye should not refuse to be restrained even to Christ and his
Apostles. And least ye should think we deals unevenly with you, whereas you for
to prove those articles of your religion, have ye scope of. 600. years next
after christ: limit you us for any one articls of our faith or religion, even
to the time of Christ and his Apostles abode on earth. So far within. 600.
that we will prove it, even within six score, yea within six years, if ye will.
So little have ye, any just cause to complain of uneven dealing* But let go
this your fond quarrel against the B. of Sarum, and preserute your argument
from him to the B. of Winchester your adversary. This wise trade (say you)
this man keeps also, Stap. fol. 4. b.
and to resolve M. Feck, and settle his conscience, he specially staieth him
self upon Platina, Nauclerus, V^spergensis, Sabellicus, Aeneas pius,
Volateranus, Fabian, Polychronico^, Petrus Bertradus, Be^no the cardinal*
Dura^dus* Paulus Emilius, Martinus Penitentiarius, Polid. Ver. and such like as
he him self declares other where, and in this place also confesses. Now
albeit the catholics refuse no catholic writer, nor in this matter have cause
so to do yet in a matter of such importance which besides the loss of all
temporal relief, and besides bodily death, imports also everlasting
damnation, to the catholics (if the case so stand as M. Horn and his
fellows bear us in hand) reason would he should have fetched the substance
of his profes much hier, yea, within the. 600. years, whereunto they strain and
bind us The effect of all this, is, that as the B. of Sa. has done, the B. of
Wint* must do the like, or else they disagree: and is contrived in this
argument.

If the B. of Sa^ would have the papists to prove those their articles within
the bounds of 600. years, then should the B. of Winchester in this so (...) an
Article, fetch the substance of his proufes within those bounds.

But the B. of Winchester does not this, but to resolve M. Fecken^am and setle
his conscience, stays him selt upon Platina, Nauclerus, Abbas Ursperg.
Sabellic^ etc. all popish and late writers: Ergo, Their doings are not even and
correspondent.

To this I answer: no part of this argument is true, neither Ma^or, Minor,
nor Conclusion. The sequence of the Ma^or follows not, because the B* of
Sarum and the B. of Winchesters cause and occasion were nothing a like.

The Minor being of two parts, both are false. For first, he fetches the
substance of his (...), from within 600. years, yea and before that also, from
above 1000. years. Secondly he stays not him self and his cause upon any
of those late writers mentioned by you, but only confuteth a Papist by a
Papists own witness, nor he did this but only to satisfy a Papists demand
For so M. Feckenham in his fourth part expressly desired to be resolved, not by
the restraint of 600. years, but by the continual practice. Although in a
matter of such importance ((...) say) reason would that M. Feckenham should
not have disdayned to be resolved with the proufes of 600. years. But now that
he requires the continual practice, what has the B. committed, in laboring
to resolve M. Feckenham, and settle his conscience, even after his own
assignement? If he had not thus done, then ^ight ye have wrangled more
probably. But to request him to do it, and when he has done it, to say he
should not have done it, what is this but very paltrie wrangling? I think, y^
would that b^ had not done it, but ye should be angry with M. Feck. that
desired him thereto.

Thirdly, the conclusion is like the premises, for neither upon these their
proves, or improufes ye can infer any discord or folly, in the manner of
their writings, nor any matter of disson^hre between the^ Only in this your
reprehension you jar with your self, for where your drift is to prove the B.
of Win. doings, not even and correspondent to the B. of Sarisburies: when ye
have alleged the doings of the one, and should infer the unlike doings of
the other, this wise trade (say you) this man keeps also How wise the trade
is let others that be wise judge: but how wise a trade keep you, to infer
your complaint of unlike dealing? for if he keep also the same trade, be it
wise or unwise, that the B. of Saris hurie did, the^ are their doings of one
trade* even and correspondent to the other. If they be not correspo^dent, Why
then say you, this wise trade this man keeps also? But this wise trade keep
you, all ever your book, to overtake your self in your own tale telling* Yet,
although there be no eue^neste in your tale, you are still correspondent to your
self, ever wrangling about bymatters, and let the principal slip. For what
is here concluded, of that which you sai^e right now, our (...) should be
always fixed, on the state of the question in variance between them twain:
and to see how each party applies his proufes thereto? which if we here should
do, we should see this your brible brable, to be nothing even or correspo^dent
to the matter, nor to your own aduertiseme^t.

Now M. St. having proved (as he imagines) such a foul jar of uneven
dealing between ye protestants this argument so pleases him, that herevpo^, he
enters into a challenge with the Bishop, to have precisely the whole and every
word of the Stap. fol. 4. b.
Queens* Majesty's title, and that in express words to be proved within the
said 600. years. But herein ye wily folishnesse or folish wiliness, for
precise terms, that he would object to the B. of Saru^, as all the world may
see the said B. stands not therein: so M. St. him self standing precisely on
the same, incurreth worthily his own rude terms, be it of (...) folishnes or
folish wiliness, and the more to bewray them both, he chale^geth the B.
further, to have these precise words proved in the said 600. years. That the
temporal men, without, Stap. fol. 4. b.
yea and against the consent of the whole Clergy, altered the state of
Religion, called and used for Catholic through out the whole corpse of
Christendom one thousand years before.

This he chalengeth to have precisely verba^ found out with in 600. years, and
every point of this challenge he would* have so proved by expres^e words, that
within 600. years after Christ, the state of the Religion that continued 1000.
years* after Christ, should have be^ thus altered: and thus would he* co^teyne
and limite (like a good Arithmetrician) the number of 1000. within the number
of 600. Whether this be fool^ wiliness or wily foolishness, even let Sim
subtle M. St. the chalenger* he judge him self thereof. As for the matter it
self of his challenge* is referred to his (...) ^ place of ^ders, so much a^
touches those, whom he calls (...) men. The other part thereof, may thrust
in an elbow, among his lying crakes. That the Popish religion, which after his
ordinary fashion he calls Catholic, was called so, or so used, 1000. years
agone. Your precise terms called and used for Catholic, if ye mean of the
present or late time, may well be borne with all, it has so (I grant) ^ene
called and used for Catholic, though in deed it were never so. But to say it
was called or used so, for a 1000. years ago, when it had neither name, nor
use, nor was any thing at al, therein ye reckon without your host: but true
reckeners do say misreckening is no payment.

Hitherto ye run at randon. But now at the ^gth ye come nearer to the B.
preface. The B. said, he made proof etc. Winchester, Second division.
And that by such authors for a great sort of the^, as are the more to be
credited in this matter for that they were most earnest fautours of the Romish
sea, etc. Here ye come in hu^ing, What an impudent Stapl fol. 5. a.
face as hard as any horn or stone have ye, besides, your mere folly, to
make the world believe that the authors aforesaid allowed such kind of
regiment, of civil Princes, as the Catholics now deny? Which assertion*
is so certainly and notoriously false, that Master Horn him self can not nor
does not deny, but that his own authors were most earnest fautors of the
sea of Rome. And how then may it once be thought by any wise man, that they
should alovve the doings of such, that forsake and abandonal manner of
authority of that sea, further than is the common authority of all other
Bishops, yea and make the Bishop of that sea to whom the said authors
attribute so large and ample authority and prerogative as may be, and whom
they agnise as supreme Judge in matters of faith, a very Antichrist. These
things be incredible, these things (as the Proverb is) hang together like
Germans lips, and so shall you good Readers see the matter most evidently
fall out.

Let the matter fall out as it shall M. Stap. I answer as now to this present,
which well shows who ^eareth that impudent face ye speak of, for what is all
this but partly your impudent facing, that all these authors are so clear on
your side as ye pretend. Partly it is yet a more impudent facing, thus before
the face of the world to outface the B. with a manifest untruth, saying, that
he said, all those Popish writers allowed it. Where he only said a great
sort of them not all. Neither talked he of their allowing this thing, but
said they were most earnest fautors of the romish sea, infected etc. Whether
they allowed it or not, what was that to him? in this part of the practice, he
proved by their own tales, the thing to be practiced, not their allowance or
disalowance thereof. And yet might they, yea and ought also, (being Historians)
to write the fact, whether they allowed it yea or no. As for making the Pope
to be Antichrist, diverse of them have not spared to call him so, whether they
took him to be so or no I refer to others. But all this not withstanding,
you cry out, these things be certainly and notoriously false, these things be
incredible, M. Horns tale incredible. These things hang together like
Germans lips. But for short answer M. St. these incredible things if your
own light wit, did not hang in the light of your own liyng lips, ye might
see them hang together well enough.

Thus much to your counterblast on the B. Preface.

M. Feckenhams title of his Book.
THe declaration of such scruples and stays of conscience Fol. 6. a. b.
Feckenham.
touching the Oath of supremacy, as M. John Feckenham by writing did deliver
unto the L. Bishop of Winchester, with his resolution made thereunto.

This title the Bishop notes to contain an untrue report and ambiguous
guile. You pretend (says the B.) Winchester Fol. Division. 1.
and would have your friends to think, that the first four chief points set
forth in your book, were devised by you, put in writing, and so delivered unto
me, as the matter and ground. Whereupon the conference to be had betwixt me and
you should stand, and that I made thereunto none other but such resolutions,
as it pleased you untruly to report. In the first part you conuaye an untruth
under a colorable and ambigious meaning, in these words, as M. John Feckenham
by writing did deliver unto the Lord B of Winchester. In the other part you
make untrue report with out any color at all.

Thus says the B. to M. Feckenham, for the false title of his Book. To this
M. Stapl* counterblast consists on four points, the first is, that It is a
by matter, which whether St. fol. 6. b.
it be true or false, does nothing either preiudicate or touch the principal
question.

To the which I answer, it is in deed but the very title, but I fear me, it
is somewhat prejudicial to the parties honesty, and also to his whole
treatise, to be entitled with a manifest lie. Howbeit M St. does wisely for
himself to set the matter so light, that it should not force whether this
title be true or false so long as it does not touch the principal question,
for by this rule M. Stapl. counterblast, being almost little else, than by
matters nor touching the principal question, when soever (as it will fall out
very often) he shall be sound to make a lie, the matter may quickly be salued,
with this his first rule, it is a by matter which whether it be true or false,
does nothing either preiudicate or touch the principal question. And so this
one answer may serve to defend not only M. Feck but the best part of M.
Stapl. counterblast. But if he had any great regard of his own, or M. Feck.
honesty, or would win credit to his book and cause, he would have more
regard, then, even of the thing that is first of all challenged, for a manifest
falsehood, to protest that he recketh not whether it be true or false. It is a
sign either of a very rechlesse defender that cares not for truth: or of a
very false client and cause that must be defended with falsehood. and that, even
in the very title and front of the treatise. But alas, what should M. St. else
do, in so evident a case, and yet I may say to you, he sets a good face on
the matter, leaving out nothing that may seem not only to make ye matter less
haighnous, but also to prove that M. Feck. used simple dealing herein.

And so secondly entering into the excuse of M. Feck. What inconvenience (says
he) is it I pray you, though M. Feck wrote St. fol. 7. a.
in the tower, that which he delivered to M. Horn at waltha^* what
inconvenience follows I pray you, if he minded first to deliver the same to
his examiners in the Tower, or else where as occasion should serve? is this
sufficient to disprove him, to condemn him, to slander him of surmised
untruth? it is rather to be thought of such as are not malicious, to be plain
dealing* not to dissemble with you, but even as he had penned the writing
before, so without any alteration to deliver it* who nevertheless afterward
having occasion to exhibit and present the same writing to others, did simply
without guile or deceit signify it to be delivered unto you at waltha^* and
was it not so? deny it if you ca^. Every child by this may see, how fond and
foolish your cavil is. But every child M. St. (you thought) should not see
the couneyance of your Sophistry, in fetching the matter thus about the bush
to clear M. Feck. of the falsehood of his title. And yet many children know that
captio^ well enough a pluribus interrogat^s, by asking many things together
confusedly, to make us grant unawares what ye please to conclude. We grant
ye, that M. Feck. wrote that in the Tower, that he delivered to the B^at
waltha^, he did so, and might do so without any inconvenience. We grant ye
also, he minded first to deliver the same to his examiners, in the tower or else
where, as occasion should serve, this might he also have done conveniently. You
ask again, if this be sufficient to disprove him, to condemn him, to
slander him of surmised untruth? We grant ye also it is not M. St. nor ye B.
or any other goes about so to do, here in you do but slander ye B. with
surmised untruth. Ye proceed, that it was plain dealing, and not to dissemble
with the B. even as he had penned the writing before, so without any alteration
to deliver it. We grant it might be so also M. Stapl. if he meant good sothe,
but what is all this to the matter, wherewith the B. charge him? It
follows, Who nevertheless afterward, having occasion to exhibit and present
the same in writing to others, did simply without guile or disceit, signify it
to be delivered to you at Waltham.

Yea forsooth M. St. now ye come to the purpose, wherewith the B. charge him,
for the falsehood of his title Prove now that this treatise, thus made by M.
Feck. in the tower, directed to the commisioners, and after that, without any
alteration delivered to the B. at waltham: had the same title which this his
treatise set out, has, and then you clear M. Feck. But this you can not do,
and therefore you speak in ^ious speeches, saying, Who nevertheless
afterward having occasion to exhibit and present this same writing, to
others did simply without guile or deceit, signify it to be delivered unto
you at waltham. The writing ye say, is the same writing, how chance then it
has not the same title? why say you, nevertheless? mean you not thereby he
altered either something therein, or at least the title thereof? why dare ye not
speak it in plain english? But say he did signify it to be delivered to the
B^at waltham? If he had let the treatise keep his true title, and then have
made such signification, then might ye have said he did it simply without
guile or disceit, then might ye have concluded plain dealing. But since M.
Feckenham first en^ituled his book, an Answer etc. to the Queens Highness
commissioners etc. and after scrapeth out that title, and in place thereof
entituleth it, Scruples etc. to the Lord B. of Winchester: if ye had
concluded that M. Feck used plain dubling, this had been a plain conclusion.
And the more ye travail to excuse his dubling, ye show your own guile and
disceit, with your captious argument and ambiguous speeches, and to cover his
falsehood bewraye your own untruth. Which M. Stap. wisely fearing, lets go
the further excusing of M. Feckenham and retorning to his former rule.

Be it false or be it true what is all this (says he) to the matter St. fol. 7.
a.
and thing now in hand? it is (as your self confess) but a circumstance. And
here thirdly after his defense of M. Feck* he falls to accuse the B. for not
observing of due circumstances. But I reserve the answer, to some instance
hereof, and also his marginal note that M. Horn keeps not his own rule. But
since this has neither cou^terblastical, nor marginal, nor any (...) of proof
at al: till it shal^e proved, let it go as words of course among his common
places.

M St. having thus labored to excuse the title of M. Feck, book, and that now
it is so clear of all fault, that he might proceed to his next division
without further dalia^^e, as one that all this while, was not well advised, nor
remembered his matter, nor him self, but wrote this excuse of M. Feck. half a
sleep, suddenly calls to mind one great point, wherein the title of M.
Feckenhams treatise may be counted faulty. And here fourthly, he enters into
a great and solemn counterblast, almost full true sides of his book, the
sum whereof is very much forsoothe appertayning to the question, and
therefore in no case mus^e so lightely be forgotten.

But now (says he) that I remember and advise my self Stap. 7. a.
a little better, I suppose I can not altogether excuse M. Feck. for this
title, but must raze out thereof four words, and in stead of L. B. of
Winchester, set in M. Robert Horn.

This is a sore fault in deed M. Stap. and M. Feckenham worthy great blame for
it, and you worthy much commendation, for calling to your remembrance so
seen, a matter that so much touches the state of the question between them,
whether the B. of Winchester were well called L. Bishop, or M. Horn, yea or
no, a very high point, and worthy so clerkly a declamation, as ye have made
there^. But since, as ye confess, he is so in the estimation of many, and so
called after the usual sort, let us see after what usual or unusual sort,
you esteem and gather to the contrary, against M. Feck. and the B. herein.
But first, remembering also in time, that this is not the way to defend M.
Feck. to find fault with him, and that he has already found a fault in
this title of his treatise, and can not eat again his word: though he
defend him not, yet will he not be over hard an adversary to him, but
mitigate at the least the cause of his defaulte, saying: M. Feckenham
dissembling Stap. 7. b.
and winking at the common error. etc. of his great modesty and civility,
willing the less to exasperate you and others, though he well knew ye were
no right B. yet after the usual forte, calls and terms you L. B. of VV. But
I must be so bold by your leave, as plainly and bluntly to go to work with
you, as I have done before with M. Grindall, and M. Iuell, your pewfellowes,
and to remove from you this glorious glittering pecocks tail, and to call a
fig a fig, and a horn a horn, and to say that most truly, ye are no L. B. of
Winchester, or else where, but only M. Robert Horn.

And is there no remedy M. Stap. but you must be so bold and blunt, as to
change M. Feck. title only, for saying L. B. of. Winchester? But since ye
must needs, who can let you, ye do but after your blunt kind, ye are a plain
man, brought up at home, and who so bold as blind bayard. Yet is your b^unt
boldness herein yt more to be borne withal, that while ye would show your
bold spite against the B. your adversary, ye excuse M. F. your clye^t with
very blunt terms also: who^ ye entitled before with smooth flattring claws,
The right Reverent father my L. Abbot of Westminster. Now he is distembling M. Feck.
and winking M. Feck. at the common error. But the B. and M. Feck. must needs
bear with you at this time, because ye must needs be so bold as to go
plainly and bluntly to work. But howsoever they must bear with you for your
blunt speeches, must we also bear with you, that would make dissembling at
errors, to proceed of great modesty, and virtue to be the mother of vice?
except disse^bling be also a virtue in you, as it is much used amongst a number
of dissembling Papists at this day with us, and was wont to be proper to friars
and monks above al other, to dissemble, and that with most feigned modesty and
humility to. But al was but hypocrisy, and an hypocrites end it has come
unto. Therefore howsoever we must bear with your bluntness, as ye call a fig
a fig, and a horn a horn, so I pray you call dissembling dissembling and
falshod falshod, ye can never call it modesty, great or little, how boldly,
bluntly and immodestly so ever ye out face the matter. And thus once again,
while ye would excuse M. Feck. title, to contain no ralshod ye not only accuse
it, but also accuse M. Feck. to be a false dissembler, and a winkapipes, so
properly ye defend him. But still ye must be borne withal, for because ye go
bluntly to work.

And were it not that for this phyne bluntness, ye must be borne withal, some
blunt plain fellow would peradventure call for some reason. Let us hear
therefore how bluntly you proceed to prove, that ye have so bluntly spoken.

For (say you) albert the Prince may make a Lord at her Stap. 7. b.
gracious pleasure, whom she likes, yet can she not make you L. B. of
Winchester, considering you are not L. but in respect of some baronages and
temporalties belonging and annexed to the Sea of VV. But you usurping the Sea,
as ye are no B. so for the consideration aforesaid ye are no L. nor Prelate of
the Garter. For ye can be no Prelate of the Garter, being no Prelate at all,
that being a prerogative appropriate to the Prelate and B. of Winchester.

Soft M. St. if ye be so plain and blunt a man as ye pretr^d, The title of L.
Bishop.
ne suitor vltra crep^da, hew not t^ hye, least chips fall in your eye: blunder
not so rudely with princes. must the Q. Majesty bear with you to, because you
must needs go bluntly to work? ye presume to determine what the Q. highness may
do. She can make him ^. but she can not make him L. B. of VV. And why so M. St?
considering he is not Lord, but in respect of some baronage and temporalties
belonging and annexed to the Sea of Winchester. Erg^, then ye grant him to be
Lord B. by your own words, to whom the Q. highness (as you grant she may,
in respect of the temporalties and baronies belonging thereto) has granted and
given him them. Whereby she has made him Lord, except ye will deny, that her
highness authority, which even al your popish bishops, did receive before at
her graces progenitors hands, neither the baronies and temporalties only
(whe^by they were named Lords, but their inuestiture also, whereby they were
Bishops,) at the Princes hands.

But see still how bluntly ye go to work against your self, and for have to
remove this title of Lord from the B. of W. ye ouerturn ye glory of your own
prelates. For if this your rule be true, yt he is not called Lord, but in
respect of some baronies and temporalties belonging and annexed to the Sea how
many Cardinals, Bishops, Suffraganes, Abbots, and Priors, even in Italy (that
have neither baronies nor much temporalties) should leese their title of Lord
and honor? think you all these will be pleased with this your rule?

We must bear with you there is no remedy, and well may M. Feck. of
friendship, and the B. of pity bear with you also, and the Queens majesty
of her gracious clemency bears with your saucie bluntness. But assure your
self, and ye were as blunt and plain as ever were your Marcolphus, those
Italian prelates, if ye stayne their honor, will never bear with you one jot.
And I read you beware this bluntness for they can do much with your holy
father the Pope, except ye be so blunt ye care not for him neither. But deal
with them as ye may, ye are blunt inoughe in your own conceit, for the finest
of them all. Let us see what reasons moves you to be so blunt with the B.

He is not L. Bishop of VVin. nor Prelate of the Garter. Sta. fol. 7. b.
Why so? because he is no B. or Prelate at all. How prove ye that? he is an
usurper, he is an intruder, he is called thereto by no lawful vocation nor
canonical consecration etc. he is no true B. etc. his vocation is direct
contrary to the canons and constitutions of the Church, and to the universal
custom and manner heretofore, used and practiced not only in England, but
also in all other Catholic countries and Churches, delivered to us from hand
to hand, from age to age, even from the first gra^fing and planting of the
faith, especially in England.

Here are many blunt and plain words in deed M. St. and many great crakes,
but here is no proof of any: do not think ye must still be thus borne
withal: your to much presuming of each man's patience, to bear with your
rudeness, will hazard your credit to far, except ye allege some reason
of your sayings. Let us hear therefore what proves ye bring.

For the which I refer me (say you) to all autentike and Stap. S. ^.
ancient* records, as well of England as of other Nations concerning the
ordinary succession of Bishops, namely in the foresaid Sea of Winchester, for
there was not, no not one, in that Sea, that did not acknowledge the supremacy
of the Sea of Rome, and that was not confirmed by the same, until the late time
of M. Poynet, who otherwise also was an usurper, the true B. then living, and
by no lawful or ecclesiastical order removed or deprived. Ye are therefore
the first B. of this sewt and race, and so consequently no B. at al. As not
able to show to whom ye did ordinarily succeed, and any good or customable
either vocation or consecration. Which point being necessarily required in a
B. and in your Apostles Luther, and Calvin and other lacking, (as I have
otherwhere sufficiently proved, though you by depesilence think it more
wisdom, utterly to des^emble, than once to answer) they being therewith
pressed, were so messhed and bewrapped therein, that they could not in this
world wit what to say thereto, answearing this and that, they wiste near
what, nor at what point to hold them, yea Beza was feign at the last assembly
at Poysie, with silence to confess the invincible truth.

Setting aside these vain crakes, and manifest lying slanders which I refer
to your common places M. St. I will answer only to your invincible argument.
Which stands upon your common brag of succession.

Your argument is this, ye succeed no Bishop of Winchester: The papists
argument of B. succession.
Ergo, ye are no Bishop of VVincester. I answer: First, if he mean succession
of the person in the room, your antecedent is evident false. He succeeded the
persons of Popish Bishops in the same room. And the consequent follows not.
For then, the first Bishop of that Sea, was no B. because he succeeded none, but
was the first ther^f. And if the first was none, then the second was none, and
so there was never any at all. If ye mean sucession of the doctrine, and the
Apostles rules: then neither Bishop Gardener whom ye call the true B. nor any
popish Bishops, have succession, but digression and defection from them. And
our Bishops have the true succession, that is to say follow the doctrine and
orders of the Apostles, prescribed in the word of god, for a Bishops office.
But how do ye prove your antecedent?

Of all the Bishops not only in England, but in other nations, namely, in the
Sea of Winchester. From hand to hand, from age to age, even from the first
grafting and planting of the faith in England, not one of them all, no not
one, that did not acknowledge the supremacy of the sea of Rome, and that was
not confirmed by the same.

But you do not acknowledge the supremacy of the Sea of Rome, nor are
confirmed by the same.

Ergo, ye are the first Bishop of this sewt and race, and so consequently no
bishop at all, as not able to show to whom ye did ordinarily succeed, or any
good and customable either vocation or consecration.

This argument (M. Stapleton) is of a new sewt and race, it succedeth neither
good nor customable mood or figure, and therefore can make no good success.
Howbeit let us see the parts of it. The minor we grant, as evident on the
Bishops part. For the mayor we must put you to your proof. We affirm it to
conteyne many evident falshoodes. For proof hereof, you say, for the which I
refer me to all autentike and ancient records as well of England, as of
other nations. Ye say well herein master Stapleton, and we take your offer.

And first let us see for other Nations. Did James even the first Bishop of
Jerusalem, acknowledge the supremacy of the Sea of Rome? Was he confirmed by
the same Sea? when as yet the same Sea was not to be acknowledged or be
confirmed by? If (as you say) the B. can be no prelate of the Ga^ter, being no
prelate at all: how could that Sea be acknowledged, that was not at all?
Moreover do ye think that Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, or Titus of Cr^ta, and
all other Bishops of Asia or Greece, that Saint Paul made, acknowledged the
supremacy of the Sea of Rome, or were confirmed by the same, when Saint
Galat. 2.
Paul that ordained them says, he received his authority of no man? And
when he came to Rome, he neither came to have his Bishops confirmed of the Sea
of Rome, nor he found any Sea there, nor sought Peter for the said purpose
else where, nor thought himself any whitte inferior to him: much less
thought he of any such supremacy, either of his Sea or him.

Now, if the first and original of all those Bishoprikes Eastwarde, neither
acknowledged any supremacy of that Sea, nor were confirmed by the same: What
plea can you make of their succession? If they swarued from their predecessors
and first founders, your self confess it is no good succession, but a new
sewte and race. And if it be good and lawful succession, that the Bishops of
the East Churches succeeded by, then, neither acknowledged they any supremacy
of the Sea of Rome, nor were confirmed by the same, even which not only the
true autentyke and ancient records do testify, how they agreed, although
in says, yet nothing like in disciplines, rytes and orders, to which the
Roman Sea does swear all those Bishops, that are confyrmed by it, and
acknowledge obedience thereunto: But also even to this day (though one or two
Bishops, now and then of late time, for very necessity and hope of
relief) have run to the Sea of Rome, yet by their ordinary and customable
succession, even from the Apostles times, so long as they continued Christian,
never acknowledged they the supremacy of the Sea of Rome, nor were confirmed
by the same.

The like records for the Churches southward, remain, not only of their
beginnings from the other Apostles, and not from the Sea of Rome, but also of
their continuance, how they would not admit any supremacy of the same
Sea, over them, and what contention they had thereabout. As for their
confirmations, that they had them not from the sea of Rome, but even from the
Emperor, yea the Bishop of Rome himself, and other, from their princes: the
practice when we come thereto shall show.

And as east ward and southwarde, so may we like wise reason of the Church
westward, where S. Paul (after he had been two year at Rome) by the space of
ten years traveled in Italy, Spain, and France, as witness Eusebius,
Epiphanius, Jerome, Euthalius Diaconus, Nicephorus, Beda, Platina, yea Friar
Perionius, that wrote the other day de vit^s Apostolorum: that in Langue do^
he made a Bishop at Narbona, who traveled after with him in Spain. And if
in all that space (as it is most likely) he made other Bishops, shall we
suppose they were not full Bishops, till they had their Bulls from the Sea of
Rome? And if the first B. did not so, your reason of succession fails.

So that your mayor is false concerning other Nations. Now let us briefly see
how it likewise fayles for England. And as you say.

Namely in the foresaid Sea of Winchester, that from the first grafting and
planting of the faith in England, there was not, no not one in that Sea, that
did not acknowledge the supremacy of the Sea of Rome, and was not confirmed by
the same, until the late time of master Poynet: who otherwise also was but an
usurper, the true Bishop then living, and by no lawful or ecclesiastical order
removed or deprived.

The lawful order and sufficient causes of B. Gardeners deprivation is extant,
and set out in the book of Monumentes. How true a Bishop (as ye call him)
he was, if the acknowledging of obedience to the Sea of Rome, be an argument
of a true Bishop, his book de vera obedientia, of true obedience, does
declare, and almost all the time of his bishopriche, he never acknowledged the
supremacy, to apperteine to the Sea of Rome, but to the prince, as the Bishop
now does, there need no records for the matter. And as for old records,
since the first grafting and planting of the faith in England, which is
far longer, than either from your Apostle, monk Augustine, or from Birinus
Bishop of Winchester: the records do testify, how the Christians, whom your
Augustine and his mates found in this Realm, neither kept the ceremonies and
rytes of the Roman Church, nor admitted the Legantine authority, of your
said Apostle, which argues that their Bishops acknowledged not (as you
say) the supremacy of the Sea of Rome, nor were confirmed by the same, even
from Lucius till almost King Arthures time. when the Heathen Sarons so
prevailed, in the west parts, that even in Winchester, in King Arthures reign,
Cerdicius erected a Temple of Heathen Idolles falsely called yet to this day
the Temple of Dagon, as the old records do mention. And therefore your mayor
is false for England also.

Now M. St. seeing the falsenesse of this argument of succession to be such,
that he dare not abide the trial of his records, he flies from it, and
grants at the length, the B. vocation to be good and sownd. Yet has he a
stronger reason to disable him, which is this:

No heretic ought to be admitted to a Bishops room, Stap. fol. 8. ^
or if he be, he forthwith ought to be removed. But for that ye are yoked, or
as ye pretend married, ye are no doubt an Heretic, Ergo were your vocation
good and sound, yet have you disabled your self to occupy that room, and
either ought not to be admitted, or forthwith ought ye to be removed.

I answer the mayor i^ true, and if it were as truly executed, none should
better feel it, than the popish prelates, who confess them selves not only
for other Seas, but even for their head and mother sea of Rome, that diverse
here^ikes have been B. thereof. Who being so admitted, I demand with Piers
Plowma^ of you M. St. by this your mayor, who shall hang the Bell about the
rattons neck? who shall remove an heretic Bishop of Rome? I think it will
belong or ever he remove him self.

The minor of this argument is of the devils sophis^rie, so S. Paul calls it
doctrinam daemoniorum, and says, let a 1. Tim. 4. 1. Tim. 3.
B. be the husband of one wife, and so was Saint Peter (who ye say was your
first Bishop of Rome.) And yet neither was Saint Peter therefore an here^ike,
nor saint Paul would have B. to be here^ikes. But herein your own Canons
answer and confute you.

And yet here to prove us heretics, for defense of marriage, he says he will
refer us to the old Canons of the fathers. What fathers mean you, the
Apostles, Master Stapleton, that said marriage was honorable among all men?
Hebr. 13.
Mean ye the Canons that bear those fathers titles, and say, Episcopu^ aut
Presbiter vxorem propriam nequaquam sub Canon. 6.
obtentu religionis abijciat, si vero reiecerit excommunicetur, sed si
perseuerauerit deijciatur? Let not a Bishop or a Priest put away his own
wife under the pretense of Religion, and if he put her away, let him be
excomunicate, and if he continue (in his fault) let him be put out of his
office.

If you mean these fathers, your selves hear their verdict against you. Dr
mean ye the fathers of Nicene council, that agreed to the reverent father
Paphnutius? but, for some of the fathers, ye name whom ye mean, specially S.
Augustine and Epiphanius, whom ye call poor Catholics, in deed master
Stapleton they are very poor helps, that ye can wring from them, to maintain
Popery withal: but thinking we will reject them, M. St. will wrap us even in
our own confessions.

Your own famous Apologi^ (says he) says that Epiphanius Stap. fol. 8. b
numbreth. 80. heresies, of the which it is one, for a man after the order of
Priesthood to mary. But I trust you will not be against your own Apology. Ergo
ye are heretics by your own confession that marie after Priesthood.

The consequence of this argument goes hard M. St. to reason from ye
Apollogies reciting of Epiphanius, to the Apollogies allowing of all things
that either he has, or they recite out of him. But letting go your logike, I
answer to the mayor. The Apology says truly that Epiphanius numbreth 80.
heresies, and the Apology vs^th this term Heresies, in the same sense that
Epiphanius did, as appears plainly by the example, of heresies that are
therein rehearsed. Epiphanius entituling his book contra. 80 hereses, means
not 80. particular and several false opinions, for so he should have doub^ed
at the least that number, but he means by 80. heresies, so many head or chief
^ectaries or sects, whereof every one maintayneth many several particular
opinions heretical, this is the plain meaning of Epiphanius, as appears
most manifestly through out his book, which argues that M. St. seeking this
poor shift, full like a poor Catholic and poor clearke also, never read
Epiphanius himself, but hearing tell that Epiphanius wrote against 80 heresies
(...) at 80* particular opinions heretical. Of the which heresies taken after
Epiphanius his usage, sect or sectarie, either for a particular opinion
heretical, he reckeneth this for none, (that I can find) for a man after the
order of priesthood to marie. If he had reckened this for any, be sure M. Stap.
would hane reckened up his words and quoted the place.

Master Sta^leton now imagining with himself that he has quite foiled us, and
that we must run from the fathers, yea and ea^e our own words, cries out,
what then have you to justify your cause?

But again to help us in this distress, he conceyueth that there is yet one
poor and s^elye help behind, and that is to fly under the defense (as he
contumeliouslye terms it) of our brickle Bulvvarke of acts of Parliament.

And here for raging after many impertinent things he concludes thus. Such and
such articles are commanded to be set forth by the authority of Parliament.
Ergo our faith hangs only on the authority of Parliament.

Item, such and such articles of religion are not namely expressed in the acts
of Parliament, Ergo they are heretical, and unlawful. The folly of these
arguments need none other answer but to show them. But all this while where
were your eyes fixed, that they once looked not to the question in controversy
do ye observe your own rule, so well M. Stapleton? howbeit, since ye do it of
bluntness, against these words of M. Feckenhams title, the Lord Bishop of
Winchester, Ye must be borne withal.

The second Division. Fol. 1. b
THe B. to prove this challenge of M. Feckenhams title to conteyne manifest
guile and falshoode, shows the whole process, first of Master Feckenhams
treatise composed in the Tower, and directed to the Queens highness
Commissioners: and afterward how he scrapeth out those phrases, and
pretends as though the treatise had been composed at Waltham, and directed
to the Bishop. Secondly, for his pretense of scruples as delivered to the B. by
writing, to be resolved in them, and of the B. resolutions there unto, the B.
shows the whole dealing of the co^fere^ce between the^. First that by mouth,
not by writing, they reasoned on these points, and that M. Feckenham seemed
resolved in them, and upon what occasion afterward he fell to wrangling again
from them, and what a do the Bishop had, to have master Feckenham write some
positions or assertions in for me of propositions, to the end they might
certainly go forward, which the Bishop could not bring him unto, till at the
length, at his own request the Bishop put in writing the words of the
oath, with the sense or interpretation added thereunto, that master Feckenham
considering therevppon, might devise the form of his propositions,
whereupon they might afterward debate. Whereby appears both how untrue
it is, that he had delivered unto the Bishop any such scruples of his in
writing, for then the Bishop needed not have sought any propositions of his
assertions: and also how^ untrue that is, that the interpretation of the oath,
which the Bishop wrote at his request, before he ever saw any writing of
master Feckenham, was to answer his scruples and stays delivered to the
Bishop in writing.

To these the Bishops chalenges of master Feckenhams Stap. 10. b.
false title, master St^pletons answer is threefolde. First (says he) here is
no matter effectual, but that may seem already by our former answer
sufficiently discharged. How this matter is before of you discharged, is yet
fresh in the Readers memory. I think he will not give ye your quietus est,
so lightly, except ye bring better proves, and agree better to your own tale.
For here, where ye say, ye have ansvvered suffyciently before, to all that is
effectual, this argues that he was charged with somewhat that was effectual,
else have ye answered to no effectual thing. And yet your answer before was,
that ye matter wherewith the B. charged M. F. for his false title, was but a bie
matter, which, whether it were true or false does nothing preiudicate or touch
the principal question: and so the whole charge is a matter nothing effectual.
But let go this to your contradictions, and let the reader judge how
sufficiently ye have discharged M. Feck. or not rather charged him, with as
much, or more than the B. did.

The second part of M. St. answer, is a gathering together of such matters, as
he notes in the B. for untruths, which I refer to his common place thereon.

Thirdly, where the B. speaking of the occasion of M. Fe. The disputation at
West. An. 1. Eliz.
wrangling in his conference with the B: mentioned his shrinking from his
confederates in the conference at W. in the. 1. year of the Q. majesty:
Hereupon, though he confesses, saying, I might now pass forth to the residue
of M. Horns Stap. 12. a.
book, yet must he not in any wise let slip this occasion of digression, for
otherwise, he should want matter to s^uffe up his connterblast. And so at large
enters to prove, that they were unevenly dealt withal, for proof whereof, he
alleges diverse reasons. First, they were disaduantaged to be put Stap. 12. a.
to the proof of that, whereof they were in possession. I answer, they were in
possession of possessions in ^eede, not of the truth, unless they had it in
their possession of imprisonment.

Secondly, they gave over the disputation, not because they had not, or did not
shevve suffycient evidence, but because they were very much strayted for
shortness of time: and so belike could not find it out.

Thirdly, it was a fruitless and superfluous enterprise, to Stap. 12. a. b
dispute of those three matters only, whether the service may be in the mother
tongue. Whether any one realm may alter and change the rites and ceremonies in
the Church, and make new. Whether the mass* be a sacrifice propiciatorie,
seeing that the. 1. and. 2. question, be no questions of faith And the 3.
depends upon the questions of transubstantiation, and the real presence,
which ought first to have been discussed and then this as accessorie thereunto.

What a number of starting holes the papists had to avoid the disputation?
they were far better armed to find excuses to give it over, than provided to
go throughstitche therewith. But had they had such evidence ready as ye pretend
M. St. what need they find fault with the time? although they had as much
time, as their aduerfaries had, to prepare them selves. And if they were
strayghted for shortness of time, to dispute only of three matters, and those
as ye say not the weightiest neither: why complain ye of their questions to
have been but three only, in so many and weighty matters, as now stand in
controversy?

Could they dispatch so many great matters, in so straight a time, and would
they whine to be straited, for only three less matters? Ha M. St. this is to
broad before. But ye wrythe the excuse an other way, not so much for the
number, as the lightness of the matters, to be dependant and accessory to
other questions, and to be no matters of faith. How light so ever ye would
seem to make them now, ye have made the^ as weighty an other time before. But
let the^ be as light as ye would have them, and less to, did ye not agree on
them, yea did you not your selves devise them, unwitting to the other parties?
Did ye not prepare for them? and might ye not the easelier have answered unto
them? these are but childishe excuses, let us hear what more ye have.

Fourthly, it was made before lay men as Judges. Yea Stap. 12. b.
there M. St. ye hitte the nail on the head. Ye would be disputers and Judges
too your selves.

His example of the Anabaptists disputation at Monster, which he likeneth to
this at Westminster, I pass over to his raylings and slanderous common
places.

Fifthly, they should have been suffered to have replied to Stap. 13. a.
their adversaries, which they could not be suffered to do. If ye had put in
disorderly, ye had said true. But would they have kept the order by them selves
devised and agreed upon, they might have replied at the full: the doing was not
in hucker mucker, inowe heard it that can tell. And your own other excuses do
plainly argue, not that ye could not be suffered, but that ye could not for the
time, or would not for the matter, and needed not pleading possession, and
thought not good, for because of the Judges, with such other excuses, that as
your self confess, moved you to give over the disputation. Which how it
agrees with this fifth excuse, that ye could not be suffered to reply: is
easy to discern, and to take a liar tardie in his own tale.

Sixthly and last say you, surely among al other, concerning the Stap. 13. a.
supremacy of the Prince in causes eccle. etc. there should have been much
more mature deliberation. Deliberation is good in all things, M. St. but wilful
prolonging and foding on the time, is neither good nor godly, chiefly in Gods
matters, wherein we are bidden, hodie si vocem (...) andieritis, nolite
obdurare Psalm. 95.
corda vestra. But when would your deliberation be ripe M. St? it appears by
these your excuses, yt your self would be rotten, or ever it would be ripe. Ye
would go to it with ripe deliberation, that is to say, as a bear goes to the
stake: ye would advise your self long or ever ye would willingly come to try
your doctrine and religion by disputation, if ye could otherwise chose. Howbeit
by your own tale, these matters need no such long protracting the time,
being so few, and so light, as here in your excuses you pretend they be.

Yea but surely (say you) among al other things concerning Stap. 13. a.
the supremacy of the Prince in causes ecclesiastical. etc there would have been
much more mature deliberation. Why M. St. here was neither al causes, nor the
cause of supremacy debated. But only (as your self say) three accessarie
matters, and matters nothing touching faith. And therefore ye ouershoote your
self once again, to put in this excuse. But what is your small drift of all
these excuses? forsooth this: The Popes legate should have been president at
the disputation of these matters, and then it had been a formal disputation.
Then the Catholics had been indifferently dealt withal. Then would ye have
refused no controversy. Then would ye not have complained of the straightnes
of time. Nor desired further delay. Nor refused either to have answered or
replied, if the Popes legate had been president at it. But who sees not that
this is no indifferency? but what argument bring ye to prove that the Popes
legate should be president thereof?

Especially considering (say you) that above ten hundredth Stap. fol. 13. a.
years past, in disputations of matters of faith, whereto the Catholics were
provoked in Aphrica, the said Catholics required, that at the said
disputations should be present the Legates of the sea of Rome, as the chief
and principal sea of Christendom. Ye forget M. St. that in Aphrica likewise,
the Catholics refused the B. of Rome his anthoritie, and detected his
falshoode in forging of Canons therefore. Well, let that now go as forgotten.
And let us see your argument, which in effect is this:

Above ten hundredth years past, when the sea of Rome flourished in more perfect
religion and faith, the Catholics of Aphrica, in their disputations of faith,
required that at the said disputations, should be present the Legates of the
sea of Rome, as the chief and principal sea of Christendom. Ergo:

We now, in all our disputations of causes Ecclestastical, especially
concerning the supremacy, should acknowledge the Pope by his Legates, to be
president thereof.

This argument follows not M. Stapl. reasoning, from that tune to this, from
their requiring to our submission, from Aphrike to England, from presence to
presidence, from certain questions to all questions, from matters of says to
these in hand, which your self say are nons. From the chief and principal
sea then, to the universal supremacy that the Pope claymeth now, in all which
points there is no sequel, and therefore your argument is stark naught, nor
all your vain excuses, will hide their froward disobedience, or strengthen
the weakness of their naughty cause in the said disputation.

But let us now (says M. St.) return to M. Horn, for these matters were
(...), M. Stapleton looked quite besides his mark.

The third Division.
THe third Division shows the cause and occasion, Fol. 13. a.
why M. Feck. delivered this his treatise to the Bishop, not as he pretends
to be resolved at the Bishops hands, for he had said before that the matter it
self was grounded here (pointyng to his breast) that shall never go out. But,
being charged of the B. herefore, that he had neither conscience nor
constancy, M. Feckenham showed and delivered this his treatise to the B. to
show what he had suffered for the same, and how it was grounded and settled in
him long before. Which argues first his falsehood in pretending to have offered
the book before to the B. as scruples by him to be resolved in: And also his
further falsehood, in setting forth of his own bald resolutions to his scruples,
under the B. name.

To the former part M. Stapleton replieth it is an unlikely Stap. fol. 13. b.
tale, and refers it to his score of untruths. Where it is answered unto.
The later part for the resolutions, he leaves it to a place more apropriate,
where the matter shall be Stap. fol. 13. b.
more conveniently and more fully discused. And this is all that he says for
the clearing of M. Feckenhams false title.

The fourth Division.
MAster Feckenham in the beginning of his treatise, Fol. 14. a.
propounding one chief purpose and entente (as he says) of this Oath, to be
for a more sauegarde to be had of the Queens royal person, and her highness
most quiet and prosperous reign: Offreth to swear thus much, that her
Highness is the only supreme governor of this Realm, and of all other her
Highness dominions and Countries, according as the express words are in the
beginning of the said Oath. And offreth yet further to swear: That her
Highness has under God the souerainetie and rule, over all manner of persons,
borne within these her Highness realms, of what estate either Ecclesiastical
or Temporal soever they be.

To this the B. of Winchester answers, that this being one chief intent of
the Oath, as is granted: whosoever denies the chief part of the Oath, what
soever in words he pretend, in his deeds denies withal the chief intent
thereof. But M. Feckenham does thus, Ergo: How soever by words he would seem
to tender her Majesty's safety, his deeds declare his meaning to be clean
contrary.

The Minor that M. Feck. denies the principal part of the Oath, he proves
thus:

The principallest part of the Oath, is the Q. Highness supremacy in causes
Ecclesiastical so well as Temporal, but about this M. Feck. dalieth with
dominions and persons, and denies the causes, which is the matter it self,
wherein the governance does consist: Ergo, He denies the chiefest part of the
Oath.

The Mayor, that the governance in Ecclesiastical causes is the chiefest thing
that the Oath does purporte, is evident.

The Minor, as it appears by this nice daliance of M. Feck. so the B. further
proves it, by this his treatise, by his deep sighs and groans, desiring a
change, and ascribing to the Pope this principal part of the Oath.

M. St. to counterblast these the B. arguments, blows Cap. 3. fol. 14. b.
apace with both his cheeks. With the one breathing out dispitefully all
riffe raff^, that he could gleane together, to deface, as he thought, the
protestants with disobedience. With the other he laboreth to qualify the
disobedience of the Papists, namely of M. Feckenham.

But before these two parts, wherein the most of his reply consists, he
prefixeth yet one page, declaring first that this parcel of the Oath, is no
part of the Princes royal power, and wherefore the Papists refuse the same.

First says he, There have been many kings in this realm Stap. fol. 14. b
before our time, that have reigned virtuously, quietly, prosperously, most
honorably, and most victoriously, which never dreamed of this kind of
supremacy, and yet men of such knowledge, that they could soon epsy, wherein
their authority was empayred, and were of such courage and stoutnesse, that
they would not suffer at the Popes hands, or at any other, any thing done
derogatorie to their Royal power. This argument stands upon the opinion of
Princes heretofore, and is framed thus.

What soever the noble and prosperous Kings to fore, took to be so, or took
not to be so, the same was and is so, or was not and is not so.

But many noble and prosperous Kings heretofore, took this kind of supremacy
to be no part of their royal power: Ergo, It was not, nor is any part
thereof.

The Mayor, which God wot is very fond and weak, he would furnishe and
strengthen with their wisdom and stoutnesse, if it had b^ne iniuriou^ to
their authority, they were so wise they could soon epsy it, and were so
stout they would not suffer it. But who sees not, that they could not very
soon epsy it, in that palpable darkness of popery: and that worldly
politic wisdom, is no good proof of soon espying the spiritual wisdom of
God and his word, and of their duty in setting forth thereof? This knowledge
was not so clearly espied then, as thanks be to God now it is, being pulled
from under the bushel, wherewith it was covered, Matthew. 5. 2. Cor. 11.
and the Angel of darkness, being stripped out of that shape of the Angel of
light, that when he was cladde withal, be bleared many wise Princes eyes. And
though many of them were coragious and stout, yea and espied to, what belonged
unto them, and attempted also to get it, yet who sees not, that the Popes
tirannie ouermatched them? And yet such Princes were there many, wise, stout,
and virtuous, that dreamed not as you say, but well saw this their authority,
and took it on them, and withstood the Popes usurpation. Which improueth your
Mayor, that ye would seem to carry away so clear. And withal ouerturneth your
argument, by the like: Some Princes thought it was no part of their royal
power: Ergo, it was not. Some Princes thought it was part of their royal
power: Ergo, it was. Neither of these arguments (ye see) does hold, for still
the matter is where it was, who thought so, or who thought not so, and yet
both of them politic, stout, and prosperous Princes.

But whereto does M. St. thus colourably, so highly extol the virtuous, quiet,
prosperouse, most honorable, and most victorious estate, of those noble, wise,
stout, and coragious princes, that (he says) never heretofore dreamed of this
kind of supremacy? can he dream out this so drylie, against his most
gracious sovereign, the Q. Majesty now, that not only of right claymeth, but
most godly directs this supremacy, to blemish her highness with her noble
auncesters, and thinks he this his byiouse nippe, could not easily be espied?
Yes M. Stapleton, it is easy to see your good heart, and what opinion ye have
of her highness.

But albeit comparisons be odious, chiefly of the living with the dead, De
quibus nil nisi bonum, whom we ought to speak reverently upon: yet
notwithstanding, thus much may I say, without derogating from them, or
^lattrie of her, (for he flattreth not that says that which each true man
finds true) her highness in no point that you reckon, is inferior to any
her royal progenitors, and in many far greater points, that ye reckon not,
does far surmount them all. Which I speak not to boast of, but that God,
whose gifts they are, make her thankful for them, and us thankful for her. And
therefore, go the matter by wisdom, fortitude, quietness, virtue, honorable,
prosperous and victorious reign, her Majesty that claymeth this title, her
Brother, and Father before her also, have as good plea for them, as any other
princes of England can have, that never claymed the same. And therefore leave
this crake M. St. of vpbrayding to her highness, the good gifts of her
predecessors, for thanks be to God (that has given her all the same or more)
her grace has had hitherto a most quiet, prosperous and victoriouse reign,
and yet has claymed and enjoyed this supreme government withal, yea, the one
has strengthened the other: And God for his mercy continue and prosper her
majesty long therein. And in deed this is that ye whine at, that God still so
prospers the success of his Gospel by her: (...) so God has promised, Q
^cunque honori ficauerit me* glorificabo eum, and 1. Reg. 2. ^. Reg. 3.
thus he glorified Solomon, when he sought the wisdom and truth of God,
before the riches and might of worldly Princes, and so has God blessed her
Highness above many Christian princes, for that she directs all her
government, to the setting forth of his glory. Peccator videbit and irascetur,
all you Psalm. 112.
Popish enemies beholding and gnashing your teeth thereat. But who would think
M. Stapl. were one, or the Papists any, they have of him so sweet and fine a
proctor, with so fair words to cover so foul disobedience.

And albeit (says he) the Catholics wish to the Q. Majesty, Stapl. 14. b.
as quiet, as prosperous, as long* and as honorable an Empire, to the glory of
God, as ever had Prince in the world, and are as well affected to her highness,
as ever were good subjects to their noble Princes aforesaid: Ye reckon not up
so many times as as as, as as as as, as he were a very ass, that would believe
you for all your goodly wishes and painted affections, such fair words may
make fools feign, and believe that all is gold that glistreth. But what in
heart you wish, and in deed you attempt, her grace has tried thoroughly, and
all men well perceive. But God sends a cursed cow short horns: and God send
her Majesty long safety, from the fained tears of such well wishing
Crocodiles. And the^ with ye grace of God, she shall do well enough, maugre all
hollow hearted Papists. But go to now, tell on M. Stap. if ye wish her highness
thus well as ye would seem, why refuse ye your duetiful obedience?

Albeit (say you) the catholics wish thus, yet can they not Stapl. 14. b.
find in their hearts to take the Oath, not for any sinister affection etc. but
only for conscience sake, grounded upon the Canons and laws of the holy
church, and the continual practice of all christian and Catholic realms,
finally upon holy Scripture; namely that saying of S. Peter, O portet obedire
Deo magis Act. 5.
quam hominibus, God must be obeyed more than men.

Is not here a fair cloak to cover the Papists disobedience to their Prince
withal? all whose open stubbornesie, and privy practices against their Prince
and country, are not forsooth of any sinister affection, but even for
conscience sake. A Papists co^^cience.
But what manner a conscience is this that ye do it for M. Stapl.? is it not
such an other conscience, as Sir Thomas More tells the Wolf had? to whom
when the Fox his ghostly father enjoined him penance for his ravening, that he
should never after, devour any thing that he thought in his conscience was
above the value of six pence, the penitent Wolf afterward, seeing a fat cow
with her calfe feeding in a meadow, being hungry and greedy of his pray, yet
durst he not break his ghostly fathers rule, till he had examined in his
conscience the price of them: On my conscience (quod the Wolf) this cow is
but worth a groate, and then of conscience can her Calie be hardly worth half
as much. Now if you M. Stapl. and your fellows have this woluish conscience,
to devour the sheep of Christ, the cow and calfe and all, to burn the people
of God, to persecute his truth, to betray your country to strangers, to
disobey your natural Prince, and so can set your conscience, that all is done
for conscience: then, as, many have to little consciences, so you have a great
deal to much. And such large consciences God defend us from. But to show that
your conscience is no better, I pray ye whereon is it grounded? Grounded upon
the Canons and laws of the holy Church, and the continual practice of all
Christian and catholic realms. Do ye ground your consciences upon the Canons
and laws of the church, that is, upon the practice of man? this is but a
sandy ground, (M. St.) for a christian conscience (in a matter of religion,
that ye say, is the waightiest of all points in controversy, and the fountain
of al other) to be builded and founded upon. And yet the one of these grounds,
is a manifest lying crake, of the continual practice of all Christen realms,
which ye have not yet proved, crake of it, and ground your conscience on it,
when ye have proved it, for before, ye do but set your conscience on the
tenterhookes, to presume of that ye have not proved. The other is even the
wolves conscience up and down, that grounded his conscience of his own
greedy desire, so you ground your conscience on the canons and laws of the
holy Church. And what is the holy Church with you, on your conscience? Forsooth
on our conscience holy Church, is our selves, that be the Bishops, Monks,
Friars, and priests. We (say you) are the holy Church, and our own laws
and canons, are the laws and canons of holy Church, and all that is given to
us, is given to holy Church. And so ye ground your consciences after your
own laws and Cannons, as the wolf did after his. Are not these good woluishe
consciences? But have ye no better ground of your conscience than these two?
yes, say you, finally we ground our consciences upon holy Scripture, namely
that saying of S. Peter, oporte^ obedire deo magis quam hominibus, God must be
Act. 5.
obeyed more than men.

In deed M. St. if ye can make this a ground, it is a much surer ground than
the other twain, the sacred word of God, and the obedience that ye owe to
God. Howbeit sith every pretense of obedience to God, and every wresting of
Gods word, is no good ground of conscience: neither the word of God, nor the
obedience to God, takes away the obedience that is due to the Prince: How do
ye frame your argument, from S. Peter's saying? God must be obeyed more than
man. Ergo, the Q. Majesty can not be obeyed for supreme governor under God,
in all ecclesiastical causes within her dominions. This argument is so fond,
it might serve any traitor, or any other to disobey his Prince, under pretense
of conscience: and therefore can not clear you from the sighs and groans,
that ye make for your foresaid change, where with the Bishop rightly
chalengeth M. Feckenham.

These arguments now pretending conscience, being not sufficient to discharge
the Papists of disobedience, M. St. adds to them two more, the one, by
obiecting the like to us: that we sighe and groan for the change of other
princes, nor affected in religion as we be. And so he thinks to put away this
reason from them selves, that the B. makes against them: The Papists do not
obey but impugn the Q. Majesty's authority, Ergo, they wish and look with
diepe sighs and groans, for a change thereof. The other argument that M. St.
makes against this, he frames thus: diverse papists have lost their goods, and
are ready to lose their life, Ergo, they wish not for this change. This
argument as it serves no more their cause, than any other heretics: so it
follows not, but rather the contrary, that the more they leese, the more
they wish the change. And to show this, as one that had forgotten himself,
while he craketh what wit, body, and life, he would employ for his prince and
country, adding withal this exception, if the case so require: he bursteth
out into a diepe sighe and groan for a change, saying: And for my part I pray
God heartily the trial once would Stap. 15. a.
come.

What case is this ye speak off so doubtfully master. St. if it be not a
change? that leaving your argument, ye fall thus devoutly to your beads, and
pray so heartily, promising to employ your pregnant wit, your proper body, yea
venture your life and all, that once it might come, if it be not a change? if
ye mean well, why be you not at home, and in your native country employ your
wit and body, like a good subject as ye ought to do, but subtract your body,
and bend your wit, your body, and all your endeavor, by all malicious
practices, against her Malesties authority herein* abusing daily, not only by
such your inuectiue Pamphlets dispearsed abroad in hucker mucker, her
Majesty's subjects here quiet at home, to make them mislike her Highness
regiment: but also to slander her abroad to other Nations, besides your
continual whisperers, whom ye send about, instilling into the peoples
heads, a hope or fear of a change to come: bearing the people in hand, even
from her Majesty's first reign, that the next Easter, the next Midsomer, the
next Michelmas, the next Christmas, the next quarter, the next half year,
the next year, we shall have a change. And thus from year to year ye fode
them on, with vain hope, nourishing privy rebellion in their hearts, or at
least, to make the people to faint and murmr, as the searchers of the land
of promise, Number. 13.
did to the children of Israel. But God be blessed, that hitherto has
defeated all your blind prophesies. He will Job. 8.
confound the hypocrites hope, and establishe his truth for ever.

Now to put away this crime from the Papists, and to Stap. 15. ^.
charge us therewith, he alleges first, the practice of the Paynims and
Jews, and Heretics. The effect of his argument is this:

Diverse Heretykes used great cruelties and seditions, for that they misliked
the contrary religion to theirs: Ergo; the Papists misliking the Queens
majesty's authority, and wishing a change thereof, make not in so doing, a
preparation to sedition, but we that acknowledge the same, do make it.

I answer, (...) est. A false Papiste is a perilous beast. And if hot
burning, cruel handeling, traiterous poisoning, pitiful murdering, horrible
tragedies, tragical enormities, privy and great conspiracies, (all which he
obiecteth to us in the sustian fumes of his boystrous Rhetorike) be arguments
of Paynims Jews, or Heretics: then ^one better than the Papists have
deserved those titles.

And here, as he thinks, being gotten into a plentyfull Stap. 15 16.
^ayne, he runs into Germany, Denmark, Swethlande, England, France, and
Scotland, from these to the low countries of Brabant, Hollande, Flaunders, and
Lukelande, from thence to Monster, then to the Duke of Saxony, and the
Lantgraue of Hesse, again to Denmark and Swethlande, and for his witness, he
brings in one as good as him self, Frederike Staphilus. From thence suddenly
to Charing cross and to Tower hill, then have over the water again to
France, Piemont, Geneua, Gascoigne, Rhone, Orleance, Lions, skipping in and
out, and it were a Jack of Bedlam, raking every corner to pick quarrels, and
devise lies by the Protestants. And what proof of all this alleges he?
forsooth, I refer you M. Horn, to an oration made of this matter Stap. 16. ^.
expressly, and pronounced here in Louayne, and translated eloquently, and
printed in our English tongue. Nay, then it must needs be true M. St. who
dare gainesay it, if such a man of credence as you, will refer all these
discourses unto that oration, yea and that it was pronounced among you in
Louayne, where, God wot, never lie is pronounced, yea, and besides all this, it
is translated eloquently in our English tongue, and printed too: these are
sore arguments I promise you, as ever I heard so wise a man make, to prove the
truth of all th^se accusations, that ye lay to the protestants charge. But M.
Stap. and ye would follow my council, ye should let all these by quarrels go,
and refer your self to your matter.

But ye will first make an other vagarie, and see the countries Fol. 16. 17. 18
19. 20. 21.
once again, so may ye write us over lies ^owe by authority, as ye do full
handsomely, for after ye have been at Scotland, and are returned to your low
countries of Flaunders, we have five leaves together entitled the rebellion of
Flaunders, with a swarm of reprocheful staunders, to deface the Gospel with
sedition, hurli^ b^rlies, and disobedience: when all the world sees, the
authors of al those tumults, to be the Papists them selves.

At length remembering him self that all these lies, are no good purgation for
the Papists, for the full proof of their obedience. Now for the purgation of
the Catholics (says Stap. 21. ^.
he) against whom this man so falsely and maliciously blows his horn, it may
seem a good and convenient proof of their quietness and obedience, that all
this eight years and more, there has not been in this realm, no not one that
I can hear of, that has been convicted of any disloyalty, for word or
deed, concerning the Princes civil regiment: which they all wish were as
large and ample, as ever was our noble countrymans the great Constantines.

You blow your pipe like a subtle flatterer, howsoever he blows his horn,
M. St. The ioly civil regiment, that ye wish her highness, is in the end no
better, as your self afterward show, when ye come to the definition thereof,
than ye can aforde to the very Turk, and therefore her Majesty is much
beholding to you, and has very loyal subjects of you. Yea you are (as ye
commend your self, if we may believe you on your own report) such obedient
subjects, that all this eight year and more there has not been, no not one
convicted of any disloyalty, for word or deed, that you can hear of. Ye do
wisely, M. Stap. to mitigate the matter by your own hearing: ye could hear
all things that sounded against the Protestants, wherein you were as quick of
telling as of hearing. But for any thing, that should sound against the
Papists, although it rang in the ears of all men, ye have on your harvest
ears. But and if ye could have heard on that side the ear, that shows out
the Papists practices, ye should have heard of many their conspiracies, and
other their wicked attempts, bysides their muttrings that they dare not utter,
which if they durst, no doubt ye should hear thereof. Did ye never hear of
one that wrote, Quod non est tutum scribere Stap. 21. ^.
contra eos qui possun^ prescribere? Well, it was written and printed at
Louayne also, no doubt of an obediente subject, but he Englished it not, for
fear all Englishemen should have seen his Devils Paternoster, and have
espied his traiterous heart, that no will wanted in him, to direct his pen,
so far as he durst, against his most gracious sovereign: and shall we
think, if he could with safety attempt further against his prince, that he
would spare his vttermoste? Well, ye know him, I dare say, at least ye have
heard of him, for he takes him self a nere friend of yours, and spoke it,
besides many mo treacherous words against his Prince, even within this your
limitation of eight years, and less: but I will not bewray him, although your
partial dealing be not to be borne withal. To diffame the Protestants, ye
have run at randon, and raked together, all that ye could devise, from
Paynims, jews, and heretics, and all other, true or false, for this. 1000*
years, and chiefly for this. 40. or. 50. years, in every country, all that ye
could hear of, or invent any thing to slander the Gospel by. On the
contrary, for your own party, ye could rem^ber your self, but of eight
years only in England. Where even in your said eight years, had ye but opened
your other ear, to understand but those French and Flemmishe matters, that
were done hard by you, you might have heard of such fetches, practices,
murders, conspiracies, and other such horrible enterprises of the Papists:
that your ears would have glowed on your head, to have heard but a quarter of
them reported truly.

But letting go these eight years, may it please ye to rem^ber, if not of old
times, the continual broils, seditions, conspiracies, and rebellions, that
your Pope and Popelings, have exercised christian princes and their realms
withal: as in Germany, Henry the. 4. Henry the. 5. Jews the. 4. Frederike
the. 2. In France, king Childeprik, Philip le Beaw, Philip de Ualois. In
Apulia and Cicill, Conradus, Manfrede. etc. In Naples, Charles, Alphonsus. etc.
In Italy, the factio^s of the Guelphes, and Gibellines, the Albi and Nigri. In
Rome, the hurly burlies with the Consul and people for their ancient
liberty. In England, the troubles of king John, and king Henry the. 8. If not
all these and many more: yet I pray you remember the late rebellions of the
North, of Lincoln shire, of Devonshire, and the attempts of Put to these the
late treasons and rebellions of the Papists in ^ng land, their horrible murders
and cruelties in France and Flaunders.
cardinal Poole, in the time of king Henry the eyghte, of Kettes rebellion, of
the Western men's vprores in king Gowardes time. All moved by the Papists, good
paternes of Popish obedience and loyalty to their Princes I warrant you.

But all this M. S. could never hear of, nor any other thing else that sou^ded
against the^. And here, as though they were so clear and innocent from all
disobedience, returning again to his former pretense of conscience and
religion, as though he were the proctor of the Papists:

We poor Catholics (says he) most humbly upon our Stap. 21. ^.
knees, desire her highness, that we may with most lowly submission, crave
and require to be borne vvithall.

And were ye down on your marybones in deed, M. St. when ye wrote this? but
why should we not think so? since that (to have her highness the better behold
you, how humbly ye kneel) ye are run to Louayne, belike that she might see you
kneeling over ye seas, because she could not see you so near as here at home.
What a mockery is this, most stubbornely to disobey her government, to
forsake her Majesty's dominions, and your native country, and live in other
Princes territories, as subject to them, not to your natural Sovereign, to
solicit, not only by privy whisperers, her Highness subjects to a
misliking of her government, but by open writing to deface, to slander, and
inueighe against the same: and all the while most humbly kneeling, with most
lowly submissio^, desiring, craving, and requiring. If this be your most
humility, and most lowly submission if this be your manner of desiring,
craving, requiring, how intolerable and tyrannical, was your violent and
proud authority? when Emperors were feign to go barefoote, kneel unto, and
kiss the feet of your Pope, and with much adoo and great labor, obtain
thus much favor at his holiness, to lie prostrate and be trodden under his
feet, when al Princes and people creeped, crouched, and stood in dread, of
almost every pelting Priest. The N. highness requires only of you and your
accomplices. M. St. to come home, and do your duty, as good subjects ought to
do. Show that lowly submission, that is necessary, and then crave that is
requisite, and so may ye easily find her highness merciful and gracious to
you. But what is it, that after this mocking sort ye pretend to crave so
earnestly?

To be borne withal, if we can not upon the sudden, and Stap. 21. a. We
abandon not the faith we were baptized in because we abandon the Pope.
without sure and substantial grounds, abandon that faith that we were
baptized in. See what a wicked slander to cover your disobedience, ye charge
your most gracious prince withal: as though she went about to make you renie
that faith ye were baptized in. And this ye do even where ye pretend to
kneel on your knees, with most humble and lowely submission. See what
cankred hearts ye bear, for all your counterfayte crouching. If ye know, M.
Stap. the faith ye were baptized in, at least, if ye were rightely baptized,
and be a true Christian man, it is not in the name, faith, or obedience of the
Pope, but in the name, faith, and obedience of the father, the son, and the
holy ghost, and this faith, the Q. majesty goes so little about, to have you
abandon, that her Graces supreme government is chiefly directed to this end,
to have ye without any superstition, error, idolatry, or any other pollution
thereof, keep and maintein it inuiolate, as in baptism ye promised to do, and
therefore this is not subject like, though ye be on your knees never so much,
to accuse her highness, as to cause ye to abandon the faith ye were baptized
in. She requires ye to keep it, not abandon it, neither on the soden, nor at
leisure. And if this were all the cause of your refusal of obedience, as her
Grace never denied you it, ye do but slander her: so needed ye not have run
away, nor show yet such disobedience to her authority, since she ever granted
and maynteined the thing ye seem to crave.

Howbeit your counterfeite humility detecteth it self, to be very stubborn
disobedience. And that while ye pretend to crave one thing, ye entende another
thing. And that is, ye would be borne with, still to refuse her graces supreme
authority over you in Ecclesiastical causes, this is the thing in deed ye
mean: and ye would the rather be borne withal, because it is a matter that
comes upon the sudden, and therefore ye can not upon the sudden grant it.
In deed M. St. ye pretend reason. Weighty matters require not to be done on
a sodeyne passion, but with deliberation* But is this so sodeyne a matter yet
unto you? did ye never hear of this question before? have ye not had leisure
to deliberate thereon? but who sees not, that and ye had never so much
leisure, this matter would still come upon the sodeyne to you? and of reason ye
must have time to take aduisement upon it, which you will take all at your
leisure, and so for fear ye should become an obedient subject upon the
sodeyne, ye crave to remain still upon deliberation an obstinate enemy. But
M. St. prete^ding this refusal to be for the abandoning of the faith that we
were Christened in, proceeds:

And as we are assured all our auncetours, and her Majesty's Stapl. 21. a. b.
own most noble progenitors, yea her own most noble father King Henry the
eight, yea that faith, which he in a clerkly book has most pithily defended,
and thereby achieved to him and his, and transported as by hereditarie
succession, the worthy title and style yet remaining in her Highness, of the
Defendour of the Faith.

As ye slander most wickedly the Queens Majesty, to cause ye to abandon the
faith of your baptism* so ye slander not only al our ancestors but that most
famous Prince her highness Father K. Henry the 8. as christened in the faith
of the Popes obedience: and hereof ye say, ye are assured, when it is most
assured and most evident false. For although our fathers, and the Q. Majesty's
father also, yea many of us our selves, and the Q. Majesty also her self,
were borne and baptized, when all the errors of popery, or many of them did
chiefly abound: yet can no more any one of these, be said now, to be baptized
in those errors, that they held which baptized them, (if they kept the right
and formal words of baptism, I baptize thee in the name of ye Father, of the
son, and of the holy Ghost:) tha^ in the old time any of their children, or
they themselves, could be said to be baptized in such errors, as they held
that were Nouatians, Donatists, Rogatists, Pelagians, or any other Heretics,
that notwithstanding kept the right element and formal words of baptism.
Neither can any Papist say now to any, that dissuadeth him from his popish
errors, that he goes about to will him, to abandon the faith wherein he was
baptized: any more tha^ a Pelagian, or any such Heretic, being moved to
forsake his heresy, could pretend he were moved to forsake the faith, he was
baptized in, because they that baptized him, yea and his auncesters before him,
were Pelagians, etc. Ye should therefore M. St. make your distinction, between
the faith of your baptism, and the faith that your popish Church puts in
diverse erroneous points of doctrine.

As for the faith that K. Henry the 8* the Q. Majesty's most The book of K.
Henry the eight.
noble Father, set out in the Book that ye mention, and thereby labor to
stayne the Q. Majesty, as setting out a contrary faith to her father: as you
for your part M. St. show your extreme malice, nothing subiectlike, to blemish
her highness with the famous renown of her father, which notwithstanding ye
ca^ not do: so for the King her father, I answer you, howbeit his book were
clerkly, yet clerklines is one thing, and truth is an other. and what marvel if
he the^ wrote, in defense of your doctrines, when your popish prelates hid ye
very truth from him, and bore him in hand, that your falshoodes were truth?
till it pleased God, not to suffer so noble a Prince, to be any longer deluded
by such false prelates, but first in this question, and after in other,
according to the measure of his merciful riches, reveled the truth unto him:
how chance, ye speak not of his faith then, and what clerkly and sincere
doctrine he set out the^, against your Pope? And as for the Q. Majesty herein,
(which is the proper question now in hand) follows most zealously the steps
of her highness father, not wherein he was abused, as many other princes were,
by false teachers, but in that he forsook those errors, he abolished those
false teachers, and their captains usurped authority, in yt he obeyed the
truth reveled to him, before all his own clerkly books, before all worldly
glory and security, and adventured himself and his kingdom, against all his
enemies, in setting forth the truth, and governing his subjects after ye word
of God. Which though it were not so plentifully set forth then, nor all weeds
so thoroughly rooted up, by reason of some false Gardiners, whom he trusted
over much (howbeit at length thanks be to God he espied them also, and had
proceeded further if God had lent him further life) yet is he rather to be
commended for that he did, than to be evil spoken or evil thought of, for that
he could not thoroughly bring to pass in his time, but left his most virtuous
Son King Edward, to bring to more perfection. And herein has the Queens
highness followed, as ye say, both her Fathers and Brothers faith also.

But ye wring al to that faith, wherein he was before beguiled, as though she
should follow him in that he was deceived, and not wherein he found out and
forsook the deceyuers, that you with your painted words might likewise deceive
her Highness now, as they dece^ued her May father then. But see how God
turned their deceyt against them selves. That where your Pope, to flatter K.
Henry withal, ascribed The title of Defender of the Faith.
to him this title (as it were the prophecy of another Caiphas) Defender of
the faith, the King espying the falsehood of ye Pope, became the very defender
of the true faith in deed, abolishing the Pope the very impugner and peruer^er
thereof, and so (as you say truer than ye wist, M. Stap.) achieved to him and
his, and transported as by hereditarie succession, the worthy title and style
yet remaining in her Highness, of the defendour of the faith. Neither as you
faintly say, this title only remains in her Highness, but the thing that the
title does entende, her highness is in very deed, not in a ^aked name, the
defender thereof: And has defended her subjects, not from foreyne power of
strangers only, brought in by the Papists, and from all bodily injury and
oppression of Popish firebrandes, or any other tirannie: but defends even our
faith from all errors, heresies, superstitions, and Idolatries. And this it is
for a Prince to be a defender of The title, defender of the Faith, infers
supremacy.
the faith in deed: which argues a plain supremacy. Now after M. Stapl.
has thus flattred, and on his knees humbled him self, to obtain a placard of
their disobedience: up he starteth once again, and gives another fling at us,
to reuerse this crime of disobedience on us, thinking so to excuse this
disobedience of the Papists thereby.

And first he sets on those, whom he calls round cap The Papists
objection of apparel.
Ministers, howbeit if he remembered, that within this hundredth years and
upward, the popish priests themselves did wear round cappes, he would not be
so hasty to give that nick name. He asks who are those that have preached
with a chain of gold about their necks, in stead of a tippet? St. fol. 21.
b.
Assoyle your question your self M. Stapl. I know no such protestant. What
slanderous report you have heard of any singular person I know not, no such
order is allowed. Although it be common among your popish Cardinals, Bishops,
Abbottes, Deanes, Canons, and other beyond the Seas, so to ruffle as ye
speak, not only with a chain of gold, but with hatte and feather, cappe and
agglets, rapier and cloak, hawke and hounds, ruffians and fools waiting on
them, and oftentimes in complete harneys on a great courser, or on a palfrey
with a courtisane behind them, thus go the chiefest of your fleshly
spirituality: belike they learned it of that royster Pope John. 13. howbeit no
Pope does amend this disorder. Upbrayd not therefore such petit and
particular things to us, which is so great and so common a fault with you.

But Master Stapleton will go more certainly to work, and charge the
Protestants ex scripto with their own writings.

Who are those I pray you (says he) that write, sint sane Stap. 22. ^.
Magdeb. p^ef. cent. 7.
and ipsi Magictratu^ membra, and paries, and ciues ecclesi^dei, imo vt ex toto
cord sint, omnes precari decet. Flagrent quoque ipsi zelo pietatis, sed non
sint capita Ecclesi^, quia ipsis non competit iste (...). Let the Magistrates
also be members, and parts, and citizens, of the Church of God, yea and that
they may be so it behooves us all with all our heart to pray. Let them be
fervent in the godly zeal of Religion, but they may not be heads of the
Church, in no case, for this supremacy does not appertain to them. These are
no Papists I trow M. Horn, but your own dear brethren of Magdeburge, in their
new story ecclesiastical, by the which they would have all the world
directed. Yea in that story whereof one percell, Illiricus and his fellows
have dedicated to the Queens majesty, that bear the world in hand they are
the true and zealous scholars of Luther.

Thus triumphs M. Stapleton against the writers of the story of Magdeburge.
The effect of his argument is this. These writers do say that Princes may not
be heads of the Church, Erg^ no prince over all Ecclesiastical persons and
causes in his own dominions, may be supreme governor. How evil this
argument follows is easy to perceive, and the better, in beh^lding how
impudently master Stapleton wresteth these writers. But he forces The Magde.
burgen^es wrested.
not thereof, because they be his adversaries. For that which they write, not
simply against the supremacy of princes in Ecclesiastical causes, but
against such supremacy of princes, as the Pope usurped: that wresteth he as
spoken against such supreme government, as the Queens majesty claymeth and
uses.

The writers hereof, having set forth two ^nsamples of that age, the one of a
godly princes government, by Constantinus Pogonotus: the other of a wicked
tyrant, by ^eraclius: to declare what kind of supremacy they disalow. They
she we that this is the scope of the matter, iste est scopu^res, quod
magistratibu^ politicis, non sit licitum cudere forma^ religionu^, Histo.
Magde. pref. cent. 7.
in perniciem veritatis, ita vel co^cilietur verita^, and me^da^ium, vel
vtraque simul sopiant, id quod tandem ^um habet exitum, vt regnent errores,
veritas crucifigatur, and sepeliatur. This is the ^cope of the matter, that it
is not lawful for politic magistrates to coin forms of religion, to the
destruction of the truth, so that thereby truth and falsehoode should be
reconciled together, or both of them together quayled: Which at the length
comes to this end, that errors reign, the truth is crucified and buried.
And so follows the sentence that M. St. cites, let the magistrates also be
mebers. etc. but let them not be heads of the Church. Whereby appears
plainly what manner of heads they mean.

And this they do not once nor twice, setting forth the doings of the wicked
^yrant Heraclius for ensample, that was The tyranny of Heraclius.
altogether led by affection, and not indifferent to hear ^ither party, nor
called in counsel learned and faithful men, nor called any synod to try the
matter, nor serched ye truth diligently, but being puffed up with pride, and
devising only with a flattring Monk (that after set up the false faith of
Mahomet) determines in a corner of a most weighty controversy, and
afterward will have the matter never called into question. This Emperor they
call Architectum religionis, and demand what man well in his wits, would
allow such attempts, process and executions? concluding it is not lawful form
as religionum conflare. etc. To make new forms of religions, and obtrude them
to the Church without all kind of godly, honest, modest and comely gainsaying
and refuting thereof. All this and much more, say they, of that kind of supreme
government in Princes that they mislyke, and is in deed to be utterly
mislyked of all Christians. But as this is a plain description of your Popes
supremacy, that plays in all these points Heraclius part, so it nothing
touches that supremacy that the Queens majesty claymeth. It is but your
wicked malice to slander her, with such tyrannical usurpation of Heraclius as
they condemn.

Why do ye not rather take their other comparison, The godly supreme
government of Constanti^us Pogonotus.
from Constantinus Pogonotus, to al other godly Princes, and refer that to
her regiment? With what care, and singular diligence, travail, and godliness,
when the Churches were horibly deformed, and torn, by the sect of the
Monothelites, He summoned the sixth general Council, he overwhelmed not the
debating of the controversy of doctrine by might or prejudice. He willed the
Ministers of the Church, and preachers of the word of God, to search out
which opinion was, and which was not agreeable to holy writ. He regarded not
the ensamples of his auncesters, who by public Edictes had approved the
doctrine of the Monothelites, which was hard for him to abolishe. Neither did
the authority of the Patriarchs and Bishops, in Constantinople and all over
the East (that stiffly held that opinion) any thing move him. Nor he suffered
himself to be made afraid, although he heard that the pride of the Bishop of
Rome was incredible, as one that wickedly challenged a dignity and authority
above other Bishops and teachers. But sent his letters to him, exhorting him to
come or send some other in his place. Neither gave he him any prerogative, nor
craves license of him to call the Council, but of his own duty, he
defines him self for the appoynting of the Council. He lovingly bids the
Roman and other Bishops, not to be absent at so necessary matters, and
concerning the Churches public weal. The Emperor himself is present at the
Synod, not as a dumb or deaf person (like a cifer in Algorisme) or receiving
the decrees without judging of them, or placing the B. of Romes Legates in the
chiefest place, and receiving them without all contradiction (as oracles from
them, as it were from Apollos trivet) but modestly, reverently, and godly, as
much as became his calling, he governed the Synod, propounding to them the
state or scope of the cause, and enquiring on a row, gathered their sentences
together, least ought should be done rashly or confusedly. He commanded not
the one party, but the contrary party also, plainly and without subtilties
to declare their opinions, and what grounds they had of their sentences, out
of the holy scriptures, and what autenticall witness of the approved fathers.
And so forth, they declare, how indifferently he dealt with either party,
knowing, that he must not condemn any before he knew the full matter. And
when it was evidently found out, that the Monothelites could not defend their
opinion, by the clear testimonies of the scripture, nor any sentences of the
doctors allowed, yea when it was found out, they hacked of purpose certain
of the Doctors sayings, and in place of them cited certain sayings falsely
fathered in the Doctors names, the^ the Emperor subscribed to the judgment of
al those that thought aright, and earnestly and stoutly executed the
condemnation made in the name of them all.

Here these writers commend this Emperor, and the more for that he had about
him, no doubt say they, such parasites, as would tickle in his ear, that
these things were unsitting for his majesty to intermeddle him self, with
the brawles of the Churches pelting Doctors. It were a blemish to him, to
condemn his ancesters, and to call into doubt or retract things already
decreed. This were not the safest way. Let the bishops alone with the matter,
for even they are able to make laws against the Emperors estate, and abase it.
The Emperor by his authority may do no more than command silence, send into
exile, or punish with other violence, those that make clamors, or disobey the
councels decree. But the Emperor not regarding these fancies, thought it
honorable to him to be present, in the midst of the teachers of gods word,
assisting not a little the trial and judgment of the controversy. This
ensample these writers thus set out, for a princes government, dealing, and
oversight in the chiefest ecclesiastical causes. And thus before they
determined in general, that God or deined not Princes to spoil their
subjects, and make themselves ^at. Neither only to attend to outward
discipline, and that men may live in honest tranquillity, for (say they) seeing
that magistrates are in the scriptures called Gods, this ought to be their
first and chiefest care, that their subjects serve God after such a sort, that
his kingdom in their dominions may be known, increased, and conserved, that
is to were, sincere doctrine. etc. may be delivered, remain, and pass from
the^ to their posterity. To this end tends all politic administration, all
defense of peace and neighborhod, and that laborsome care of getting the living
and gathering goods: that these spiritual and everlasting goods both of the
body and of the mind, should be gotten. Thus do they stretch out, further than
does M. St. the bounds of a princes government to al ecclesiastical canses. And
all that they write on the other part, is against such a popish supremacy, as
establishes and makes a new religion quicquid imperita^erit re^. And yet see
how spitefully and falsely M. St. wresteth it, as written against the Q.
majesty. When as he confesses himself, they commend her, and even by the
ensample of Constantine, they allow that supreme government that she does take
upon her. Now M. St. after his manner presupposing, we will reject these
writers, as though they spoke against the supreme government of the Queen:

In case ye think (says he) their testimony not to have St. Fol. 22. a
weight enough, then harken to your and their Apostle Luther, Contra a^tic.
Louani. tom. 2
who writes that it is not the office of kings and princes, to co^firm no not
the true doctrine, but to be subject and serve the same. The effect of this
argument is this, princes must not take on them, so to confirm the true
doctrine, that they be not subject thereunto, nor serve, but rule the same:
Ergo Princes may not set forth the true doctrine, nor be supreme governors in
their dominions, over all ecclesiastical persons and causes. This argument is
like to his fellow above. Luther wrested.
And as ye wrested the former writers, so wrest ye Luthers saying also, whose
sentence as it is nothing against the godly government of our most noble
sovereign, subject to ye principal authority of Gods word, and that it might
be of chiefest authority, subduing thereto the authority of all other
writers, and removing those superstitions, that exalted them selves in
authority equal, or above Gods word: so this sentence is eftsoon, as the
other, against such usurpation, as is evident that your Pope takes upon him.

But M. Stapleton dreaming that he has so sore pressed Stap. fol. 22. a
us, and this is so hard and strange a case, that now Luther can take no
place amongst us: he obiecteth another unto Andr Modre. de Eccl. li. 1. ca. 10.
us, one Andreas Modrenius. And yet his saying also, makes (God wot) full
little for the Papists herein. Who says there ought to be some one to be taken
for the chief and supreme head in the whole Church in all causes
ecclesiastical. What conclude ye M. St. hereupon? Ergo it must be your Pope?
or no christian prince? And here as though all these were not yet sufficient
testimonies, ye bring in Calvin. But since ye do it but to fill up your book,
with that common allegation of your side, which being also not omitted of M.
Fecke^ham, is to be referred, to be propounded and answered unto in his proper
place: I therefore remit you thither. Only to that ye say, he so spitefully
handled King Henry St. fol. 22. b.
the eight, as he never handled the Pope more spitefully, I answer: this is
but your spiteful lie, to deface the Protestants. Else why do ye not prove
the same? And as for your Pope it is evident also, he never handled him
spitefully, but only reproved his vices and errors by the word of God. But
how spitefully your Pope and popish Prelates, so far as they could,
handeled him, and how spitefully they handle all Protestants, that they may
once set their spiteful spiritual fingers upon, all the world does see.
And yet the silie Protestants must bear all the blame, it is not enough for
them to bear the iniuryes. This lesson ye learned of the Devil of Dowgate, to
bite and whine also, or rather ye do as Esops Woolfe did, challenge the poor
Lamb for troubling his water, and to misuse him spitefully, but this merciful
Woolfe, devoured this spiteful Lamb.

He urges us farther in great outcryes, with a sentence of one Anthony
Gilbie, our own Countriman. The sum Stap. 23. a. b.
of his argument is this. Anthony Gilbie an English man, speaks very
irreverently, and vnreligiously, of King Henry the eight: Ergo the
Protestants now in England, whatsoever they pretend and dissemble in words,
in heart mislike the Queens majesty's government.

How does this follow M. St? and yet ye wrest Anthony Gilbies sentence also.
He speaks not of this supremacy neither, but in plain words, of such a
supremacy in England, as ye Pope chalengeth all over Christendom. Though
therefore he be greatly to be blamed, for his vnreuerent speech, and for his
unadvised mistaking of his Princes lawful authority: yet is he not to be
belyed, as though he spoke of all kind of supremacy in all princes simply.
It is a shame (as they say M. St.) even to belie the Devil. But see how the
matter falls out. Ye have brought Anthony Gilbyes sentence, against us and
the Queens majesty's authority. Have ye not well helped your self, if this
sentence also make flat against your pope? For if (as he says, and therein
truly) Christ ought only to be the head of the church, and the placing of any
other displaceth him: then is not the pope the head also, but the placing of
him displaceth Christ. But the Pope chalengeth to be the head of the Church
also, which our prince does not: Ergo not our prince, but your Pope displaceth
Christ. And thus thinking to beat us, ye still make a rod for your own
Popes tale.

And here suddenly calling to mind, how far he has straied in forraging out
these sentences, he returns a little to the Bishop, setting on him for
calling the Pope the Papists god Stap. 24. a.
in earth, the archeheretike of Rome and that M. Fec. would have him reign in
the Queens place. Besturring himself with a heap of arguments, to defend
his Pope. Besides his scoffs, raylings, and other rhetorical flowers quoted
in his common places. But first for his Pope says he, We The Popes goodness.
Stap. fol. 24.
make no God of the Pope, and sometimes perhaps no good man neither. In deed
M. Stap. ye should have more than both your hands full, to make your Pope
sometimes a good man* ye need not put perhaps to the matter. It would pose him
self, and all the Devils in hell, and that oftentimes, to work such a miracle
on him, as, that man of sin, that child of perdition, and adversary of God,
to become a good man. But yet I say beware, how ye speak such buggishe words
of him, as not to be a good man. Whose will is law, whose law is all power, in
heaven, in earth, in hell. Now can this be an ill man. Beware least this come
to his ears The Pope called God. Extrau. Ioh. 22 cum inter in glosia.
Cardinalis Zirabella.
M. Stap. and withal, that ye make him not a God in earth. Are not you of
their religion, that believe and confess this principle, (...) deus noster
Papa: Our Lord God the Pope? Yea and as some say, he is Plusque deu^. If ye
be: beware his thunderbolt. If ye be not: why defend ye him, and his errors,
against the truth of God? why forsake you your most virtuous Prince, to follow
a stranger, and that an ill man? but you answer:

And yet we reverence him, for his office, and authority, Stap. 24. 2
that Christ so amply and honorably gave him, for preservation of unity and
quietness in his Church.

That ye reverence him in deed, and that is more, adore The Popes patent.
him to, is manifest. But the patent of that his office and authority, that ye
crake Christ so amply and so honorably gave your Pope, ye show none, nor
where, nor how, nor when he gave it: Only ye tell us of the ends, wherefore he
gave it. For the preservation of unity and quietness in his The Unity that the
Pope makes.
Church. But if these were the ends M. St. he has forfeited his patent long
ago. That not only disagreeth from the express words and commandment of
Christ, but swerueth, one Pope from another. And how chance he sets his own
scholeme^, and his Canonists at no better unity? his Thomists and his
Scotistes, his sects of Religions, at no better quietness, than a t^ade and a
snake together? how chance he agrees no better with his Bishops, and his own
college of cardinals? How chance he falls out so often with Emperors and
kings, and sets Princes and their subjects by the ears together? why
fights he so fast with both his swords, like king Arthures dubble sworded
knight? why had he rather at this day, that al christendom were in a broyle,
and so much bl^ud were cruelly shed, than he would relent one inche of his
honor, one penie of his filthy gain, one i^te of his errors, Idolatries, and
false dectrines, that eue^ are confessed of his own sect, and give place to
the word of God? is this his preserving of unity and quietness, in the Church
of Christ? or had he any such patent given him, has he not lost and lost it
again? and will ye still reverence and adore him, for it?

Secondly, where the Bishop calls your Pope, the archheretike Stapl. 24. ^.
of Rome. Your wisdom (say you) with like truth also appears, in that ye
call the Pope the Archeheretike of Rome, naming no man, and so your words so
liberally and wa^tonly cast out, do as well comprehend S. Peter, S. Clement,
and other holy Martyrs, and Bishops there, as any other.

The sum of this argum^t is this, The Pope now alive, or to come, (for the B.
speaks of one, that they would have reign in the Queens place) is called an
archeheretike: Ergo, S. Peter, S. Clement, and other holy Martyrs, are called
archheretickes. His answer to this is thus,

I promise you a well blown blast and handsomely handled,

I answer ye again M. Stapl. I promise ye this is a well Stapl. 24. a.
made argument, and handsomely answered.

Ye brag much for your Pope of S. Peter, and S. Clement, and other holy
martyrs. Your Pope does well M. Stapl to brag of them, for that is all the
neerenesse that he comes to them. S. Peter and those Martyrs were as like
your Pope, and he as like them, as Caiphas was like to Christ. If they saw his
deings and his craking of them, they would never crake again of him, but call
him archeheretike to. But he may crake of these holy martyrs, as ye Earl of
Warwick craked in king Edward ye fourths days, that it was a iolier Hallus in
vita Edw. 4.
thing to make Kings, than to be him self a King: and so may your Pope brag,
that it is a iolier matter to make martyrs, than to be a martyr him self. He
can make saints he says, and I believe it, and the poor saints feel it
daily, whose Apoc. 7. How the Pope can in deed make saints and martyrs.
stoles he dippeth in their blood. So like is he to s. Peter, S. Clement and
other holy Martyrs, that where he is none him self as were they, yet in that
defect, he will re^o^pence God, with store of martyrs of his own making. And
for this resemblaunce, if the Pope be now touched, S Peter by and by is
touched, and he that speaks generally of the Popes now a days, if he name
not one certain Pope, casts out his words wantonly, at S. Peter, S. Clement
and other holy Martyrs of the old time. But and ye had not been wantonly
disposed M. St. your self, you might well have perceived whom the B. meant,
nothing the old Bishops of Rome (of whom whether S. Peter were ever any or no,
is an other question, and ye are well stripped out of that Lions skin.) But
he spoke plainly, of such Bishops as now usurping the sea of Rome, ye would
have to reign in the Queens place. But let not the matter go so M. Stapleton.

With like finenesse (say you) ye call him archehereticke Stap. 24. a.
that is supreme judge of all heretics and heresies to.

I answer with the like finenesse ye take that for granted, that is chiefly
denied. By this fine Sophistical figure Petitio principij, your finenesse M.
St. will hurt you, every boy in the scooles would hiss out such fine reasoning.

Ye call him archeheretike, (say you) that has already Stapl. 24. a.
judged you and your Patriarchs, for archeheretikes. I wiste as well might the
fellon at the bar in Westminster hall, to save his life if it might be, call
the judge, the strongest these of all. And doubtless had he a Prince on his
side, his plea were as good as yours is. Let go the Prince M. Stapleton, that
is to much treachery, and more than felony, though ye liken us to the fellon,
to resemble the Queens most excellent Majesty to an abbettour of thieves and
fellons: and then I will answer your I wiste, with an other I wiste. I wiste
as well the strongest thief of all, might cry stop thief, by any true man,
to save the pursuit from him self, and his cry were as good as the Popes
cry, that we, not he, are the archheretikes: and doubtless, having such
confederates on his side as you, to help to cry so with him, the thieves cry
might seem more true, than the true man's. Especially if as you would have the
matter go, that the thief should be made judge in his own case to, when would
this thief condemn him self trow you? do ye not perceive M. Stapleton, that
your comparison fails of the indge in Westminster hall against a fellon?
when saw ye there a judge sit, and give sentence in his own cause, him self
being on the one side the principal party? what Justice or law call you
that? you should therefore let Westminster hall alone, and say, at Rot^ in
Rome, or in the Popes co^sistorie, and where he will si^te as Judge on him
self and us. There in deed, he has Judged us to be the archeheretikes, but
even this unjust doing, shows him self to be the very archeheretike.
Otherwise if his cause were good, he durst come down from the bench, and
plead with his adversaries, the truth or falsehood thereof: Which till he do,
he plaieth the part of an archetyrant also.

Now (say you) where ye say we would have the Pope, to Stapl. 24. a.
reign here in the Queens place, proceeds from your like truth and
wisdom. For albeit the Popes authority was ever chief for matters
Ecclesiastical, yet was there never any so much a noddie, to say and believe
the Pope reigned here, the Pope and the King, being ever two distinct persons,
far different the one from the other, in several functions and
administrations, and yet well concurrant and coincident together, without any
imminution of the one or the others authority.

I answer, with the like truth and wisdom, as ye reasoned before, so ye frame
also this reason. Ye say (say you) we would have the Pope to reign in her
place: Ergo, ye say we would have the Pope to be King. Hereupon ye make your
distinction of reigning, and having supreme authority, and so ye conclude
there was never any so much a noddie, to say and believe the Pope reigned here.

First your argument is faulty, for, putting the case, ye The Popes reign in
England.
will not for shame say, that ye would have him King here, yet if he took from
her a principal part of her royal power, did he not then reign in her
place, though he claymed not to be King? and since ye vaunt of wisdom, what a
wise distinction is this, of raygning and having supreme authority, to bleare
the simples eyes with words? for so far forth, as he claymeth the supreme
authority, which he does in all supreme matters, as are Ecclesiastical, and
that over her, so well as any other: so far forth he claymeth, to raygne
over her. Now this being a part of her royal power, death he not claim to
reign even over the principal part, and so is King thereof?

But say you who was ever so much a noddie as to say he raygned here? Sir this
noddie is even your Pope, that makes this claim, and you your self for him.
Do you not here say, (although you greatly lie therein) that he was ever chief
for matters Ecclesiastical, and do not all your accomplices say, that he
reigns for spiritual matters, both here and all over Christendom? Yea, I
will go further, for the temporalties to. I pray you (saving the reverence of
your noddie) who raygned here, when for certain days the Popes legate, kept
the crown of England from king John, and gave it him again, making the king
become vassal and feodatarie to the Pope, and to hold the crown and realm
of him in fee farm, and pay. 700. marks a year for England, and. 300. for
Irelande? And has not the Pope challenged other kingdoms also: yea does he not
claim to be the chief Lord and Prince of all kingdoms? and to set up, and
depose, what king or prince he pleased? And he that believed not this, was not
counted a noddie, but an heretic. And yet says M. St. was there ever any so
much a noddie, to say and believe the Pope reigned here? but all Papists must
be noddies with him, yea his own Pope in stead of a triple crown, must
wear a cocks comb, and him self for company will bear the bell.

But here he leapeth back again to M. Gilbie, not for the matter of
supremacy, but for his misliking of certain orders of religion in king
Edwards days, and here upon pleads, Stap. 24. b.
that the Papists are now more to be borne withal, if they can not bear the
service, and the title set forth.

I answer, first (M. St.) another man's faults excuse not yours. Neither
Anthony Gilbies and yours are alike. For were his greater, or any of those
Protestants, that ye vpbrayde unto us afterward, yet are they less, in that
they obstinately maynteyned not the same, nor persisted therein, nor attempted
any conspiracies, nor would have a foraigne supreme, nor such an other as your
Pope, the father of errors, and so on their submission or repentance, their
fault is pardoned or made less. But you obstinately maynteine a plain
refusal of obedience, would have a foraigne usurper be your supreme, and not
only subdue the realm and our bodies to his tyranny, but our souls to his
errors: neither do ye repent thereof, but persevere in it, and by wicked Libels,
privy conspiracies, and all other means that ye can, deface Gods word, your
natural prince, and native country: your fault therefore, is much greater tha^
his, or theirs. And therefore your wilful obstinacy is not to be borne withal,
especially since after so long and gentle tollerance of the Queens most
gracious lenity toward you, ye increase your malice, and harden your hearts
with Pharao, abusing her highness lenity.

Now, where the Bishop said, these dealings were a preparation to rebellion
against the Queens person, M. Stap. Stap. 24. b.
says, that it nothing touches her person, nor her crown. And that without
the ecclesiastical authority, the crown has continued and flourished most
honorably many hundredth years* and shall by Gods grace continue full well, and
full long again, when it shall please God.

Why M. Stap. what mean ye by this? does not the crown flourishe and
continue, even now also, God be praised for it? why say you then, it has
flourished, and shall again, when it shall please God, as though it did not
now. And the state of the Crown were now no estate, or a very ill estate, in
the reign of the Queens majesty. If this be not a preparation to rebellion,
to make the Subjects mislike the estate of the Crown, is it not then, even a
rebellious Proclamation it self? but let us see your argument, that ye make
hereon, to excuse your selves.

Diverse Princes have continued and flourished honorably of long time without
the ecclesiastical authority.

Ergo, it is now no preparation to rebellion, against the Queens person, to
refuse her authority over all causes ecclesiastical, and to defend that it
apperteyneth not to her Ecclesiastical authority, and authority over eccl.
matters are not all one.
person or Crown.

I answer. First the word ecclesiastical authority, is very subtly and
doubtfully spoken, as though her highness went about to play the minister. If
ye mean so, the antecedent is then true. The ecclesiastical authority
nothing touches her person or crown* without the which it has most
honorably continued and flourished many hundredth years, and shall by Gods grace
continue, full well, and full long again, when it shall please God. But then is
this your most spiteful slander, to say, that the Queen now takes upon her
eccl. authority, and that it is now united to her person or crown, which is
most evident false. And therefore the crown flourishes, (for any such
matter) so well as ever it did. And God grant it never to flourish worsse,
than it does under her Majesty now. But the antecedent being so far forth
true, as is declared, then the consequent follows not, that it is now no
preparation to rebellion to refuse her authority over all eccl. causes, and to
defend that it perteyneth not to her person or crown.

But if in the antecedent by ecclesi. authority ye mean authority over
ecclesiastical matters, then the antecedent is false, and so to be proved, by
the issue of the practice in this Realm: Neither is it any good argument.

Because many took it not on them: Ergo, none may?

Because they did not use it: Ergo, they ought not?

Because they had worldly prosperity without it: Ergo, it was not necessary
to them?

Because the denial was no preparation to rebellion then: Ergo, it is none now?

None of these causes are sufficient, M. St. and therefore your subtle and
false reason fails.

Now when ye see nothing will fadge this way, either to defend you, or to
accuse us, ye will set upon us for other matters, that we are those that make
this preparation to rebellion.

Let this title and eccl. jurisdiction go (say you) which all Stap. 24. b.
good princes have ever forgone, as nothing to them apperteyning: let us come
to the very temporal authority, and let us consider who make any preparation
of rebellion, the Catholics, or the Protestants.

In letting that go, M. Stap. that appertains to this title and
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, ye let go your matter, and after your manner, make
so many impertinent discourses, contrary to that ye called upon before, never
to swerue from the question in hand, and now your self swerue of purpose
from it. Howebeit, shall we let you go so round away, with such a heap of
notorious lies, that all good Princes have ever forgone this title and
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as nothing to them appertayning? that not some or
many, but all good Princes, have forgone, and ever forgone, both this title,
and also ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and so ever forgone it, as nothing
pertaining to them? If ye could have showed this, ye should have well spent
your time, and kept ye nearer your matter, ye needed not have fisked about so
many by quarrels. But this could ye not prove, and therefore it was necessary,
ye should run to them, picking quarrels at us, not marking your own wicked
defacing of your Prince, whom otherwhiles so fauningly ye flatter. For whereto
else tends this saying, all good princes have ever forgone this title and
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as nothing perteyning to them, but to infer,
that all those princes that take on them, or will at any time not forgo this
title and eccl. jurisdiction, as apperteyning to them, are ill and wicked
Princes? What else can be made of your saying? And so not only ye plainly
revile the Lords anointed, the Queens most excellent majesty, but also her
highness brother and father, whom so much ye praised before. For neither of
them did forgo it, no not Queen Mary her self, that did forgo it, did ever
forgo it, and so ye rail at her also. Besides many other godly princes, of
this and other realms, for the eccl. jurisdiction, as ye call it, which some
of them did never, some of them did not ever forgo. And therefore ye both
revile them, and belie the^, but chiefly the Queens highness, and is not this
neither a preparation to rebellion?

But M. Stap. must needs be let go, whether he list to range: and therefore
let him go. First, he asks, who were they that set forth devises of their
own, for the succession St. 24. b. 25. a
of the crown, without the Princes knowledge? Surely (says he) no
Catholics, but the very Protestants them selves. Ye doill, M. Stap. to make a
general conclusion, of the Protestants simply, from the private dooinges of
some. Should a man say that the pedigree, that M. Christoferson set from John
of Gaunt, for king Philips title to the Crown of England, proving him to be,
even nearer than Queen Mary her self, was the doing of all the Papists? No,
the Papists mystiked and corrected it. Howebeit, when it was best corrected,
it tended to a far worsse end, (which end was all their doings and fetch,
to bring this Realm to perpetual slavery and bondage of Aliens) than did
these men's fact, in devising for the succession: which though it were not
lawful to be done, without the Princes knowledge, as ye say: yet was their
intent far otherwise than to make a preparation to rebellion, yea rather to
stop all gappes (as they thought) the better from Popish rebellion,
although they meddled further than became them to do. But what excuses this
the Papists disobedience? think ye these faults of the Protestants be
couerings large inoughe to hyde the Papists wickedness? but to stretche them
further, he discourses on the writings of master Knox, and master Goodman.
For we shall have all laid in our dishe, naught shall be The commodity that
we have of Papists.
left behind concealed, that any Protestants unadvisedly ever did or spoke.
And it is good to see our own fa^ts and follies, this profit of foes
Plutarche teaches us, to be one of the greatest commodities, for that that our
friends would not tell us, our enemies will not layne, but sp^e out all that
they know, to our shame, good and badde, false and true together. And therefore
we had need beware, that profess the word of God, how circumspectly we lead
our lives, least we give occasion to the adversary, and his ministers, to
slander the Gospel, and that the uncircumcised Philistians rail not of the
God of Israel, by reason of our defaults, as here this enemy does. Howbeit
his argument is all insufficient, either to prove any disobedience in us, or to
excuse the Papists disobedience: the argument is this.

M. Knox, and M. Goodman wrote against the raygne of Stap. 25. a. b. 26. a. b.
women: Ergo, the Protestants acknowledge not the Queens supremacy in all
causes ecclesiastical.

Such slender arguments he gleaneth together against us, seeking bye matters.
But what should he do? else should he have naught to furnishe his counterblast
withal.

At last, giving over the pursuit of the Protestants, he returns to the
defense of his clyent, that this can be laid of all men least to M. Feck. And
here like a well enstructed proctor, he reckneth what good deeds he did in Q.
Mary's days, and appealeth to certain Right honorables, as the Lord Earl of
Leicester, the lord Earl of Bedforde, the lord Earl of VVarwike, Sir
William Cecill secretary. Yea the Queens majesty her self, to defend and
purge him. The good deeds that he reckneth up are these two. First, that sir
John Cheeks life, lands and goods, by his travail and humble suite were
saved. The other: His hope is, that the Queens highness, his sovereign good
Lady, will thus much report of him, how in the beginning of her highness
trouble, her highness then being imprisoned in the Court at Westminster. and
before her committie to the Tower, his good hap was to preach a sermon before
Queen Mary, and her honorable council in the Court, where he moved her
highness and them also to mercy, and to have consideration of the Queens
highness that now is, then in trouble, and newly entered in prison. What
displeasure he sustained therefore, I do here (says M. St.) omit to express,
but this I certainly know that he has reported, and has most humbly thanked
almighty God, and her highness, that her highness had the same in
remembrance, at the first and last talk that ever he had with her in her
palace at VVestin. before her highness coronation. I trust these are suffycient
personages for M. Feck, purgation and discharge, against your false (...). And
so he concludes with a prayer, that M. Feck. may be made partaker of the like
dooinges, as he then showed to other men.

That down, M. St. God has granted him long time, and M. Fec. has felt it:
nor (if he be not too unthankful) can deny it: yea, your self grant that he
confesses the Q. highness to be his sovereign good lady, and reported, that
her highness forgot not the same, and I warrant you, forslacked not ye large
recompense of his sermon, not only if he would have revoked his errars and
super^titions, but also, even as he wilfully refused her highness favorable
inclination toward him, and I have herd him often times my self, publicly
and privately acknowledge, what the Q. majesty most liberally gave him, at the
reducing of the Minster to the former estate. But what does this Pharisaicall
repetition of his former good deeds then, excuse his obstinate disobedience
now? or prove that his book set forth against the Queens majesty's
authority, and dispersed among her subjects, is notnowe a very preparation to
rebellion? if he did any thing then, to deserve favor now, let him now so
behave him self, that he may find it, the Queens majesty is most mercyful
and beneficial. What hinders him then, but his own rebellions obstinacy?
and yet he has found since (what little favor so ever he got for other
then) tenfolde much more doubled to him again. Little favor (God knows,
and her Highness felt) found she in that her trouble, and straight
imprisonment, after M. Feck. sermon. But ye will not express, what displeasure
M. Fec. sustained for moving Queen Mary and her Council to mercy, and to have
but consideration of the Queens highness that now is. What? How far the
Papists are from mercy and consideration.
got he so great displeasure for thus much, M. St? was it so sore a matter,
to move them to mercy and consideration of their doings? I had thought they
had done all things with mercy and great consideration. But why will ye not
express it? forsooth, ye should then express, what exceeding cruelty,
(which can hardly be expressed) what inconsiderate doings, the Papists used
then, neither could they be moved from them. And never so little a motion (for
M. Feckenham went not over far I warrant you) could not be made of mercy and
consideration, without great displeasure taken. Ye have well described the
state of your Popes reign (M. Stap.) so unmercifully an estate and
inconsiderate, that for description thereof ye do best, as did Timantes, when
he painted the mourners at the sacrifice of Iphigenia, setting out one weeping,
another with this, another with that heavy visage, when he could not devise a
more dol^rous countenance, he painted Agamemnon hiding his face with a
kerchiefe: so you, when ye can not sufficiently set forth those doleful
times, ye do wisely, in that ye omit to express them, and therein ye express
them most of all.

And would ye have like mercy and consideration sheshed now to the Papists,
as the Papists showed then to the Protestants? Alas, master Stap. if but
half a quarter of such extremity were showed now, as was showed then, it
would go harder with master Feckenham, and other his accomplices, than it
does. No, no, M. Stap. their A difference between a Pap^st and a Protestant.
chambers, their walks, their liberty, their ease, their fare, is nothing
like your do^geo^s, your stocks, your colehouses, your famine, your racks,
your gaggs, your whipping there, and rostmeate at a stake, that ye gave the
protestants. I warrant ye M Fe. looks not like a ghost, nor like a poor
scholar of Cambridge or Oxford, and perchance fares better than some stude^ts
of divinity in Louayne. It is easy to discern^ M. St. what spirit either
religion is of, the protestants and the papists, even by this your own note of
unmercifulness and mercy: and now (says M. St.) let us proceed on to the
residue of your book.

The fifth Division.
THe Bishop of Winchester, after he has showed (on M. Feckenhams words) the
intent of the Oath, and the intent of M. Feckenh. book to be contrary: and
therefore, what soever he offreth in words, he denies the same in deeds: and
in the beginning for ensample, dalieth with ye Oath about dominions and persons,
thinking thereby, he escapes the principal end of the Oath: in this division
shows first, how doubly he deals, in pretending as though the Bishop had
forced him to swear: but there was no such Oath offered or required between
them: ^rgo, A man might well mar^aile, that he shamed not to pretend such a
lie.

Secondly the Bishop shows, how M. Feckenham is taken in his own dalia^ce.
The Bishops reason is this. In that ye grant to her Highness the only
supreme rule over the Lay and Ecclesiastical persons, you have all ready
proved withal the causes also, euenby a supreme governors definition.

A supreme governor or ruler, is one who has A supreme governor.
to ouerse^, guide, care, provide, order, and direct the things under his
government and rule, to that end and in those actions, which are appointed,
and properly belong, to the subject or thing governed: But the Queens
Highness is, by your own confession, the only supreme governor over al manner
persons Ecclesiastical, etc. Ergo, Her highness has to ouersee, guide, care,
provide, order and direct, to that end, and in those actions, which are
appointed, and do properly belong to persons Ecclesiastical.

And thus concludes, that M. Feckenham grau^ting thus much for fashion sake in
general speech, is but a dissembler, and in deed denies the obedience of
the person also: or else he peeuishly stands on the distinction of the cause,
which in full effect he has granted already.

To the first part M. Stapleton answers. Here is first a worshipful reason,
and cause to marvel at M. Feckenham. Stapl. 2^. b.
that he should by writing presently offer him self to receive an Oath,
because he never made mention of any such oath before, neither any such was
at any time of him required, surely this is as great a cause to wonder, as to
see a goose go barefoote.

Ye plainly falsify the Bishops words M. Stapl* he said not, that M.
Feckenham never made mention of any such oath before, but he said, that he
never made any motion of such an offer to him. So that this declares both a
double dealing of him, and also a wresting of you. But this in either of you,
must not be wondered at, as a rare dealing, that in lying and wresting ye be
shameless, because it is as common to you, as to see a goose go barefoote, and
as rare, as to hear a barefoote Fox, preach to shod geese in Louaine.

Secondly to the Bishops argument he says:

But now will he play the worthy Logitian, and M. Feckenham Stapl. 28. b.
will he, nill he, shall be driven by fine force of a Logical definition, to
grant the Queen to be supreme head in all causes Ecclesiastical, for that he
grants her to be supreme head of all persons both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal. Because (says he) the supreme governor or ruler is he, that
orders and directs all actions, belonging and appointed to the subjects,
and thereby enferreth that the Queens Majesty is supreme and only governor,
eue^ in those actions that belong to Ecclesiastical persons, which are causes
Ecclesiastical. But as good skill as this man has in Logike (which is
correspondent to his divinity) he has brought us forth a faulty and a
vitiouse definition. For a supreme governor is he, that has the chief
government of the thing governed, not in those actions that may any way,
properly belong to the subject or thing governed, (as M. Horn says) but in
those actions that belong to the end, whereunto the governor tends. Which
may well be, although he have not the chief government in all the actions of
the thing governed, but in such actions as properly appertain to him, as a
subject to that governor.

Although M. Stapl. arguments hitherto have showed some taste of his own great
skill in Logike, and what a worthy student of Divinity he is him self (the
want of which two he vpbraydeth to the Bishop after his proud and scornful
manner) yet in this his cou^terblast to the Bishops only reason of a supreme
governors definition, he will further show what a passing subtle Logitian, and
deep Divine he is. But alas the man's ill luck, for while he clerkly laboreth
and strives to bring M. Feck^ham out of the briers, he not only wrappeth him
the faster in them: but so snarleth and entangleth him self withal, that as
one all amassed, he speaks he wottes not what. And going about the Bushe
wonderfully to work, when he has all done, he has not only left the matter
where it was, against M. Feckenham, but has made it more plain against him
self also. First, he reprehendeth the Bishops definition of a governor as
faulty, but his guilty conscience was so stricken, that he durst not, or he
well wist not, how to report the definition as it lay, but says that the
Bishop defined, A supreme governor, to be one, that ordreth and directs all
actions, belonging and appointed to the subject: Which the B. said not, but M.
St. who has altered, hacked, and cut half away of the Bishops definition,
which within eight lines after (though nipping and wresting the words, yet
some what more truly than before) he expresses, saying: in those actions that
may any way properly belong to the subject or thing governed. Wherein he
seems unskillfully, or as one astonnied, to make no difference betwixt the
subject which is the person, and the object, which is the matter and action, or
not to understand that properly the governor, is not said to order and direct
the object, but the subject, in or about the object. In which point as the
Bishops definition is distinct and clear: so M. Stap. finding fault therewith,
but not able to say here lies the fault, nor to amend it, and yet going
about to amend it: either in conclusion, makes one, nothing differing in
matter, or far worsse so much as it differs from it.

A supreme governor (says M. Stapl.) is he, that has the Stapl. 23. b.
chief government of the thing governed, not in those actions that may in any
wise belong to the subject, or thing governed (as M. Horn says) but in those
actions, that belong to the end whereunto the governor tends.

This is your perfect definition M. St. which either is Ide^ per Idem, a
governor is he that governs in those actions, wherein he is a governor: and
so your fautles definition is very faulty it self: or else it is in effect and
matter all one, with the Bishops definition, that ye reprehende, though ye
would in words seem to make some difference: and so again it is the more
vicious, the more obscure it is.

But this may well be (say you, to confirm your definition) Stapl. 28. b.
although he have not the chief government in all the actions of the thing
governed, but in such actions as properly appertain to him as a subject to
that governor.

M. St. we stand not now in question what may well be, but what is of
necessary consequence. But ye seek out corners and dark speeches to wrappe
the truth in such obscurity, after the Popish manner, that your readers might
rather marvel at ye than understand ye. Which if they did, they should see
your folly and contradictions, and that your self scarce understand your own
words (if they were your own) for if ye understood your self, when ye say,
he has chief government, in such actions as properly pertayne to him, as a
subject to that governor: then would ye also see, how it follows that being
a subject to him (as M. Feckenham has confessed) as well in that he is an
Ecclesiastical person, as Temporal: he is also a subject to him in such
actions, as are so well Ecclesiastical as Temporal. The argument is evident.
He that is subject to the Princes supreme government, is under him in all such
actions as appertain to him, as a subject to that governor. But every manner
person so well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, borne in the Princes dominions, is
subject to the Princes supreme government: Ergo, The Prince has the supreme
government over every manner person borne in his dominions, in all such actions
as are Ecclesiastical so well as Temporal.

And thus his own dark speeches being brought to light, make flat against
him self.

But to make the Reader understand his meaning better, and to vnwrappe him
self out of this obscurity, in the which he has rather hindered than bettered
his cause: he sets out the same with sundry ensamples, of a Master and his
Servant, a Father and his Son, a Mayor and a Citizen, the Prince and his
subject, a Schoolmaster and his scholars, the Shipmaster and the Mariners.

For in one man (says he) many rulers may and do daily Stapl. 28. b. and 29. a.
concur, which in some sense may every one be called his supreme governor.
As if he be a servant, the Master: and if he be a son, in that respect the
father, and if his father and Master dwell in a city, the Mayor also, is the
fathers and masters, and so his chief governor to, for things concerning the
chief government of the city, and of all these the Prince, chief and supreme
governor, as they be subjects. Otherwise the Prince does not intermeddle with
the fathers office, in duetifulnesse dew to him by his son: nor the Master
for that government he has upon his servant, no more than with the
scholemaster, for the government of his scholars, and their actions, or the
master of the ship, for the actions and doings of the mariners, otherwise than
any of these offend the positive laws of the realm, and so has the Prince
to do with him as his subject, or when he shall have need to use them for the
common wealth, wherein as subjects and members of the said commonwealth, they
must to him obey. Much like is it with the spiritual men, which be also members
of the said commonwealth, and therefore in that respect, subject to the Prince
and his laws: and so is it true, that the Prince is supreme governor of all
persons as well spiritual as temporal. But that therefore he should also be
supreme governor in all their actions, will no more follow than of the actions
of the^ before rehearsed, yea much less.

M. St. thinks he has now clered the coast, and that by all these ensamples,
the matter goes clear with him. Showing first how every one of these rulers,
master, father, mayor, and Prince, may in some sense be called supreme
governors. But yet, either he does not or will not see withal, how in the sense
now in controversy, all these ensamples are also flat against him. For as the
father, in all causes that have respect from the father as father, to the son
as son* is the sons supreme governor, as he says: and as the master in
all causes that have respect from the master as master, to the servant as
servant, is likewise the servants supreme governor: and as the mayor in all
causes that have respect from the mayor in that he is mayor, to ye citizen in
that he is a citizen, is also the citizens supreme governor: so the supreme
governor of ecclesiastical persons, in all causes that have respect from him,
in that he is a supreme governor, to ecclesiastical persons in that they be
ecclesiastical persons, is in all those causes their supreme governor: but
the causes in respect whereof they be called ecclesiastical persons, being no
other than ecclesiastical causes, it follows that he is not only supreme
governor of the persons, but also in the causes belonging to the persons, as
the father or master is not only supreme governor of the sons or servant
persons, but also in those causes in respect whereof he is the son or servant.

Yea, but says M. St. though the Prince be supreme governor to these and all
other persons in the realm, yet as he entermedleth not with father,
schoolmaster, shipmaster, etc. in their several actions of their offices or
vocations: so though the Prince be supreme governor of all persons
ecclesiastical, yet is he not supreme governor in all their actions of their
offices or vocations.

Ye conclude not a like M. Stapl. but subtly and falsely ye alter the state
of the conclusion: if ye made your argument aright, ye should make it thus: as
the Prince intermedleth not in the several actions of his temporal subjects
offices or vocations, so he intermedleth not in the several actions of his
Ecclesiastical subjects offices or vocations. This is the right illation of
the s^militude, and thus it makes nothing against us. Which you espying, in
the place of intermedling, thrust in, governing, concluding ^alsely, because he
is no intermedler in the one, that therefore he is no governor of the other.
But the ^urder ye wade in this similitude, the more ye labor against the
stream. For as, although the Prince intermedle not with the Fathers, the
Masters, the Schoolemasters, the Pilotes several actions, in their offices or
vocations: yet he ought to ouersee, that every one of these, and all other his
subjects, do their own proper actions, belonging to their vocations, and
offices dutifully: yea not only to make laws for them all, as subjects, but
also for their several estates and degrees besides, not for him self to
exercise, but for them to work in their vocations: so the Prince being
likewise governor of Ecclesiastical persons, so well as of any other
aforesaid, although he intermedle not with the several actions of their
vocations, yet ought he to ouersee them, that every Ecclesiastical estate do
their proper actions dutifully, and also to make Laws and Orders, not for him
self, but for them in their degrees and vocations to exercise and observe the
same. And thus your similitude every way makes quite against you M. Stapl. how
be it you will prove it better ye say.

For the better understanding whereof it is to be known, Fol. 29. a. b.
that before the coming of Christ, Kings were there many, but Christian Kings
none. Many common wealths were there, but no Christian commonwealth, nor yet
godly common wealth, properly to speak, saving among the Jews, but cluill and
politic. The end and final respect of the which civil common wealth, was
and is under the regiment of some one or more persons, to whom the multitude
committed them self to be ordered and ruled by, to preserve themselves, from
all inward and outward injuries, oppressions and enemies, and further, to
provide not only for their safety and quietness, but for their wealth and
abundance, and prosperous maintenance also. To this end tends and reaches,
and no further, the civil government: And to the preservation, tuition, and
furderance of this end, chiefly serves the Prince, as the principal and most
honorable person of the whole estate, which thing is common as well to the
Heathenishe, as to the Christian government.

Is this all that ye will aforde christian Princes M. Stap. The Papists make
the government of christian princes, no better than the Turks government.
what a heathenish doctrine is this, to make Christen princes and Heathen
princes government all one? What if Christen princes (as they have right good
cause) begin to startle at this, that ye make their estate no better before
God than is the great Turks? And what if one should answer, that ye not only
sclaundered reprochfully, all the estates of Christendom now living, or that
shall be, or have been since Christ's coming: but also wickedly deface all the
godly Kings and rulers before Christ's coming, Melchisedeck, David, Solomon,
etc. believing in Christ to come, as Christen Princes now bear the title of
Christ already come. And yet dare you say, that before the coming of Christ,
Kings were there many, but Christian kings none. Do^ ye dally on the title
and name of Christian, or mean ye the title and effect of christianity? if
ye mean so (as ye must needs mean, if ye mean any thing material to the
purpose) ye are very injurious, not only to those Kings, but to their
subjects, yea, to their common weal also. And yet ye say further, their common
wealth was but civil and politic, and went no further, than outward peace,
tranquillity, welthe, and prosperous maynteinance, which is the only end of
their government, and that it reaches not any jot further.

What if one should bid you look further in the scripture, Deuteronomy. 13. 17.
Romans 13. 1. Tim. 3.
and so ye should find it stretche somewhat further, than to be common with
the great Turks government? What if a man should press you with your own
words afterward, that yet catch it more than one inche further, for
assisting of the Church with the temporal svvorde, which the great Turk,
the great Chan, the Persian Sophie, does not, but draw their swords against
it? What if a man should refer this among your contradictions? What if he
should join another withal, that where yet ye confess, the Jews common
wealth was godly before Christ's coming, and other common wealths were not
godly and yet the civil government of Christian princes, reaches no further,
than the civil government of heathen princes, and one final end is common
to both, and so either the Heathens common weals were godly also, or else
the Jews were ungodly too? yea, what if the heathens common weal, and
heathen Princes fell out to be in better estate of the twain, if only
quietness, wealth, abundance, and prosperity, were the only and final end
of both? if ye were well urged in all these things, think ye, M. Stap. these
your principles would be able to defend you? yea lastly, if one would deny
these your Heathen and Turkishe maximies, bring ye any thing to prove them,
than your own bare saying, that it is to be known? But no true Christian
knovveth it, M Stap. nor will ever acknowledge this, which with such bold
impudency, ye ground upon, that christian Princes government reaches no
further, than civil and outvvarde safety, wealth, abundaunce, and
prosperity, and is common asvvell to heathen, as to Christian princes.
Nevertheless, M. Stap. taking it for a rolled case, and out of question,
rolleth up the matter as granted. And as he has thus determined the bounds
of Christian Princes government, so (as it were by commission from his holy
father) he descrybeth the Popes kingdom.

But over and besides (says he) yea, and above this, is Stap. 29. b.
there an other government instituted and ordained by Christ, in a spiritual
and a mystical body, of such as he graciously calls to be of his kingdom*
which is the kingdom of the faithful, and so consequently of heaven,
whereunto christian faith does conduct us. In which spiritual body, commonly
called Christ's catholic Church, there are other heads and rulers than civil
Princes, as Vicars, Parsons, Bishops, Archbyshops, Patriarchs, and over them all the Pope. Whose government chiefly serves, for the furtherance and increase
of this spiritual kingdom, as the civil Princes do for the temporal.

That there is another mystical body, the kingdom of the faithful directed by
an other spiritual government, this is a true principle, M. Stap. and truer
than you ween or would have it. But as you are deceived, and would deceive
others, with the title of that spiritual Church, so on this principle, you
gather a most false assumption. That the heads of this spiritual or mystical
body, the church of Christ, are vicars, parsons, bishops, archbyshops,
patriarchs, and over them all the Pope. In which assumption, ye take for true
and granted, sundry manifest errors, flatly of us denied, chiefly four. The
first about the spiritual and mystical body of Christ. Wherein ye show great
vnskill, not knowing what is meant by the spiritual and mystical body. For in
that respect, as there are no civil princes, emperors, kings, or queens, Gal.
3.
so there are no Bishops neither, no not Greek nor Scythian, Gentile nor Jew,
neither male nor female, but all the elect that have been, are, or shall be,
either in heaven above, or here dispersed in any part of the earth, without
any respect of person, are al members, and Christ the only head. And so M. St.
your self also call it, the kingdom of the faithful, so that if any bishop
be unfaithful, he is so far from being a head in this mystical corporation,
that he is no member or any part thereof. And your self confessed before, that
now and the^ your Pope was no good man neither, and therefore unfaithful, having
not the true, lively, and effectual faith in Christ, as they only have yt be
members of this body, whereby he is quite excluded from it. Your first error
therefore is, in not discerning between the invisible and visible estate of the
Church.

Secondly, taking it (as after, contrary to your former sayings, ye seem to
expound it) to be the visible estate of the church, saying, commonly called
Christ's catholic church: then err ye, in that ye say, vicars, parsons,
bishops, archbyshops, and popes, be rulers and heads of it. For excepting
parsons (taking them for pastors) and Bishops, the scripture knows none of
th^se rulers. The other titles have come in since, with deanes, arch^eaco^s,
abbots, priors, cardinals, patriarchs. etc. although I speak not against the
names of the^, no not of the name of Pope neither, which being well used, I
reueri^ce and admit, but against the Popish hierarchy, and proud abuse of
them. And therefore thirdly, where ye say, the Pope is over them all, that he is
so over all those degrees in your Church, I grant ye, but that he is so over
those, or any other degrees, in the true visible Church of Christ, it is but
your facing manner, to take that for confessed that is chiefly denied. Fourthly,
that ye affirm the Pope, and his Prelates gouernemente chiefly to serve for
the furtheraunce and increase of the Spiritual kingdom of Christ: where it is
evident to the contrary, what havoc and decrease, so much as they can,
these Rulers make of the members of Christ's Church, to maynteine infidelity,
and exautorate the word and kingdom of Christ thereby.

M. Stap. now presupposing, that the christian Princes government is only
outward and for the body, and common with the heathen and stretches no
further: and that on the other part, the Pope over al, and his fleshly
chaplens under him, are the heads and members of the spiritual and mystical
body of Christ: now he will prove (and God before) that this government of
the pope, and his chaplains, is far above the kings government, and that
kings he subject thereto.

Now (says he) as the soul of man incomparably passes Stap. 29. b.
the body, so does this kingdom the other, and the rulers of these the rulers
of the other. And as the body is subject to the soul, so is the civil
kingdom to the spiritual. His reason is thus:

The soul or spirit incomparably passes the body:

The kings government is only for the body, and the Priests government only
is for the soul and spirit:

Ergo, the Priests government incomparably passes the Kings.

As this argument is naught, so the conclusion being rightly understood,
does naught infirm the Princes supreme government over all ecclesi. causes.
For though the mayor be true, the minor is most false, that the kings
government is only for the body. Yea though the spiritual government be
only the Priests, yet the government over spiritual matters, and matters
apperteyning to the soul, may still for all that, and does belong, even over
the Priests to the Prince. Neither does M. St. prove the contrary, or allege
ought for his minor, than as we have heard, the foresaid principles, of
limiting the Princes government, to be all one with the Turks. But you might
have done well M. Stap. to have e^sed your pains even here, and have troubled
your self no further to prove your matter, if these your vain presupposals,
be such true and undoubted principles. But as though we had already granted
them, M. St. still goes on. Stap. 22. b.


To the which kingdom (says he) as well Princes as other, are engrafted by
baptism, and become subjects to the same by spiritual generation, as we
become subjects to our princes, by course and order of nativity, which is a
terrestrial generation.

The argument is thus. As the child that is borne by a terrestrial
generation, in the earthly Princes kingdom, is subject to the earthly Prince:
so, even the Prince being borne again by spiritual generation, is become
subject to the spiritual kingdom.

But the rulers of the spiritual kingdom are the pope. etc.

Ergo the Prince is become subject to them.

Thus fondly still ye reason on your principle, in so much that we can say
nothing against you. But now, while ye think ye may say what ye will, suddenly
see how ye have ouerturned these your mighty principles, with a trippe of your
own contrary sayings, even in the same place.

Furthermore (say you) as every man is naturally bound, Stap. 29. b.
to defend, mainteyne, increase, adorn* and amplify, his natural country,
so is every man bound, and much more, to employ himself, to his possibility,
toward the mition and defense, furtheranee and amplification, of this
spiritual kingdom, and most of all the princes themselves. As such which have
received of God, more large help and faculty, toward the same, by reason of
their great authority, and temporal sword, to join the same as case
requires, with the spiritual sword.

Think ye this to be true indeed M. St. may we trust you on your words? then
is religion an end of the Princes government, which a little before ye not
only most untruly denied, but builded as ye thought iolye arguments thereupon.
All which come now down of themselves with an heave and he, your self
pulling away the soundation, whereupon they were buylt. And now ye make an
other platform, contrary to the former, which is, that Princes most of all
are bound (as those that have received of God more large help, and faculty
toward the same) to employ them selves to their possibilities, to these ends,
to defend, mainteyne, increase, adorn, and amplify, not only the civil
peace and prosperity, but much more the spiritual kingdom. And join the
temporal sword with the spiritual sword, as the case requires.

Upon this, as a better platform than the other, I build this argument even
according to your own definition of a supreme governor, and master Feckenhams
offer.

A supreme governor is he (say you) that has the chief government of the
thing governed, in those actions that belong to the end, whereunto the
governor tends:

But the actions of Ecclesiastical persons (over whom the Prince is supreme
governor, as master Feckenham has granted) do belong properly to the end,
whereunto the Prince tends: to wete, not only to mainteyne the common peace
and tranquillity, but also to see that Gods religion and service be purely and
syncerely had and kept amongst the subjects: Ergo

In these actions the prince is supreme governor, and so by consequence in all
causes and actions ecclesiastical.

To prove the minor: first, that all the travail of all godly Preachers in the
world, is to this end, is plain and manifest. That this is also the chief
end of the Princes government, both your self master Stapleten at length
have confessed, centrarie to your former heathen limitation, and also the very
heathen and profane writers themselves: so well as Christian, have
acknowledged. Wherein master Stapleton both shows his great folly, in
reasoning that heathen Princes did not regard religion, Ergo they ought not
especially to have regarded it: and also bewrayed his ignorance in the
antecedent of this his vain reason: for the heathen though they erred in
mistaking religion, yet they knew and taught that it was an especial care,
and end of the Princes government. I speak not how Plato in his books de
rep. and legib. reckons Heathen princes care and government tended to
religion.
the care of Religion, to be a chief end of their authority: And yet will I
note two sentences out of Aristotle, whom to deny your Sorbonistes make more
than petit heresy. (...)) says he) (...) Aristot. Polye. 3. ca. 10. Cap. 11.
in the other Cities the sacryfices are left only to the Kings. And again,
(...). For the Captain was ^oth King and Judge and Lord of the divine
matters.

And to prove this by the stories of heathen Princes. Numa Pompilius has his
chiefest commendation not so much for making civil laws and policies to the
Romans, as for his laws about their religion, their Priests, their Nuns,
their Sacrifices. The Magistrates of Athens, did sit in judgment and
condemned Socrates when Anitus and Melitus accused him for false religion. The
Roman Princes them selves would labor principally for the office of the
chief Bishop, which term Pontifex. Maxim^ the Bishop of Rome now
chalengeth. Tiberius promoted to the Senate of Rome, (as to those that had the
care and government of their religion) that Christ might be accounted among
their Gods.

Yea, in the Scripture is declared that Nabucha^nezar Daniel. 1.
the King of Babylon, an Heathen Prince, and utterly destitute of the truth,
before God gave him some spar^kes thereof, yet made he a law of worshipping
his own Image. And King Darius of Persia made a Daniel. 6.
decree that none should worship God in certain days.

In all which matters although these heathen Princes crred from the truth: yet
they thought, that religion (which they mistook for truth) to be a principal
part belonging to their government.

Although therefore master Stapleton ye do great injury to Christian Princes
to make their state common with the Paganes: yet do you more injury herein to
them, than The Papists more injurious to Christ an Princes than to Heathen.
the heathen did to their heathen princes. Was it lawful for them in their
heathen government to have so especial a care about their heathen and false
religion, and is it not lawful for godly Christian Princes, to have the like
or more about Christ's true Religion? Is the end of their government common
to both alyke, as ye say, and yet the Heathens stretched further than does the
Christian Princes?

Johannes de Parisus affirms, that this is a false supposition Johannes de
Parisi^s de po^estate reg. and p^. ca. 18.
of yours Master Stapleton. Quod potest as regal^. etc. That the kingly power
is corporal and not spiritual. That the Kingly power has the cure of the
body and and not of the souls. Sith it was ordained to the common profit of
the Citizens, not every profit, but that profit which is to live according to
virtue. Hereupon says the Philosopher in the Ethikes, that the intention of
the lawmaker, is to make men good, and to enduce them to virtue. And also in
the Politykes he says, that as the soul is better than the body, so a
lawmaker is better than a Physician, because the lawmaker has care for the
souls, and a Physician for the body.

Now as the Philosophers ascribed this end (in the Heathens false religion,
in virtues of life, and care of the soul) to the government of Heathen
Princes: Does not Saint Paul show as much and more trow you, for the end
of Christian Princes government in these things? Ut (...) and tranquillam
vitam degamus in omni pietate and honestate. That we may lead (says he) 1.
Tim. 1.
a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Was this no further
master Stapleton than safety, quietness, worldly wealth, abundance and
prosperous maintenance? Did the great Constantine stretche the end of his
government no further when he said, (...) debere ante ^useb. lib. ^. de vit.
Constable.
omnta scopum esse ^udicaus, etc. I judged that this ought before all other
things to be my scope, that among the most holy multitudes of the Catholic
Church, one faith and sincere charity and godliness agreeing together
toward almighty God, might be conserved?

Did the whole assemblye of Bishops, in the first Council Constantin. 1.
general Council at Constantinople, limitte no further the ends of
Theodosius government, when they confessed that God instituit imperiu^ Theodos^
ad communempacem ecclesiarum, and sanae fid^ confirmationem? God did orday ne
the government of Theodosius for the common peace of the Churches, and the
confirmation of the sound faith? Did Saint Augustine believe that Princes
government Aug. epist. 48.
reached no further, when he said, Reges in terris seruiunt Christo faciendo
lege^ pro Christo? Kings in the earth do serve Christ in making laws for
Christ? Did Justinian suppose, his authority tended no further, when he
wrote, Legum Authoritas and diuinas and humanas res been disposuit? The
authority of the laws has well disposed both the divine and human matters?
Did the m^ste Christian King of Spain Richaredus, think that the end of his
government stretched no further, when he said openly in the third Council
at Tolet, before Council. Tola. 3
all the Bishops there assembled, Quanto subditorum gloria Regali extolli^r,
tanto prouidi esse debemus in his quae ad Deum sunt, etc? How much more we
be exalted in royal glory over our subie^es, so much more ought we to be
careful, in those matters that appertain to God, either to augment our own
hope, or else to look to the profit of the people committed to us of GOD. And
as ye see me in very deed inslamed with the feruencie of faith, God has
styrred me up to this end, that the obstinacy of infidelity being
expelled, and the fury of discord removed, I should revoke the people to
the knoweledge of faith, and to the ^eloweshippe of the Catholyke Church, who
served error under the name of Religion.

Lo master Stapleton, here ye see far other ends, of the civil government
of Christian Princes, than (as you most falsely and iniuriouslye allege to
preserve them from all outward iniuryes, oppressions and enemies, and further
to preserve them for their safety and quietness, for their wealth,
abundaunce, and prosperous maintenance, and that it tends and reaches no
further. And that this is common as well to the heathenishe as the Christian
government. Fie for shame master Stapleton that ever such heathenishe words
should proceed out of your catholyke lips.

But ye are half ashamed I see, and would mollify the matter so much as ye
can with a proper qualification: that those things which these godly Princes
did, although they did them: yet therein were they no more but Advocates: and
so say you, All good Princes do and have Stap. 30. a.
done, ayding and assisting the Church decrees made for the repression of vice
and errors, and for the maintenance of virtue and true religion: Not as supreme
governors themselves in all The papists shift that princes are the clergies
advocates.
causes spiritual and temporal: but as faithful Advocates in ayding and
assisting the spiritual power, that it may the sooner, and more effectually
take place.

As ye bring this shifting distinction of Advocate to late, M. Stap. having
before quite debarred the Princes Civil government, of going any jot
further than ye there did bound it, to meddle no further with ayding and
assisting the spiritual power, than a Saracene does aid and assist it:
gyuing Princes no more leave to be Advocates thereof than ye make the Turk or
Souldan, saying this their so limited government is common as well to both
Heathen as Christian: even so this your office of Aduocateshippe came to late
into the Church by many years, to debar any of these forenamed Princes,
in their own supreme government about (...) matters, to make it sownde, as
though they only had been the ayders, assisters, or Advocates unto others,
and not them selves the doers. Whereas on the contrary, they were the very
doers, though not of those actions that appert^yned to the Ministers offices,
yet of the governing and directing both the Ministers and their actions, yea
and the principal overseers and supreme rulers of them, as even their deeds
and words before rehearsed plainly declare.

As for this shyft of Aduocation, was long sithence, after their times devised.
Which office of Aduocateshippe, seems to be de^yued, from this fond error
of the Papists, that the seculer power is immediately and primarelye (as they
term it) in the Pope, but he has not also immediatelye the exercise or
execution of it, but gives that to the Prince, and so the Prince becomes the
Popes Advocate, or rather his executioner.

And thus was first (say they) Carolus Magnus Pope Adrians Advocate, executing
the Bishop of Romes will, against Desiderius King of Lumbardie. Whereupon
Charles was made Emperor by the Pope, notwithstanding Michaell the Emperor
was then living at Constantinople. Propter hoc dicunt (says Dantes Dantes
Alegherius. li. 3.
Aligherius) quod omnes qui fuerunt Romanorum imperatores, post ipsum and ipse,
Aduocat^ Ecclesiae sunt, and debent ab Ecclesia aduocari. For this thing, all
that were Emperors of Rome after him, and he him self, are Advocates of the
Church, and ought of the Church to be called upon.

Lupolous de Babenberge also tells, that Pope Zachary Lupold. de Babenb. ca.
15.
declarauit. etc. declared or pronounced, that Childericus Pepins master,
should be deposed, and Pepine be made the King of France, whom when Pope
Steven the second anointed, with his sons Carolus and Carolomanus, French
Kings: Ipsos specialiter elegit (says Lupoldus) ad sedem Apostolicam
defendendam. Ex hac electione putoque reges and imperatores Romanorum, sint
vsque in hodiernum diem ecclesia Romanae aduocati, de qua Aduocatia loquuntur
iura canonica. He chose them especially to defend the Apostolical Sea. Of
this election I think it comes, that Kings and Emperors of the Romans
are even to this day the Advocates of the Romayne Church, of which
Aduocacie, speak the Canonical laws.

Thus you see the original of your devised Aduocateship, comes nothing near
the examples of the said godly Princes, being themselves supreme governors
in Ecclesiastical matters before your Aduocateshippe was first hatched. No
reason therefore the Punie should debar the Seniour. And yet it is but a
sielie shift of your Canonistes descant, rather detecting the unlawful
encroching of the Pope, than defeating any part of the Princes authority, in
this his supreme government.

As for those Princes Carolus Magnus, his sons and other Emperors since
their times, were nothing such Advocates as your Pope and you would now
pretend, that is to say, to be your only executioners: But as these stories
testify, even these Advocates also, were the chief directours and supreme
governors, of all those things they did. Yea the Pope him self so well as
any other Bishop in their territoryes was subject to them. They aided and
assisted the Bishop of Rome I grant, when he humbly aduocated, then he
called upon them for aid and assystance, against the wrongers of him. But the
Pope by commandment called them not, and they obeyed his calling, and so
became his advocates, which is clean contrary to an advocates office. And
therefore once again your argument is naught. They were aiders and advocates,
Ergo, not supreme governors.

But M. St. will further prove, by his former ensamples, why this supreme
government can not appertain to the Prince.

For this supreme government (says he) can he not have, Stap 30. a.
unless he were him self a spiritual man, no more than can a man be master
of a ship, that never was a mariner: A mayor, that never was a citizen. His
principal government resting in civil matters, and in that respect as I have
said, he is supreme governor of all persons in his Realm, but not of all
their actions, but in such sense as I have specified, and least of all the
actions of spiritual men, especially of those which are most appropriate to
them, which can not be unless he were him self a spiritual man.

You frame your similitude very vnproportionably, M. Though the Prince be not
an eccl. person, yet has he supremacy in eccl. causes.
Stap* from the master of a ship, or the mayor of a city, to a Prince or
supreme governor. Either of these being particular offices under a supreme
governor, that makes laws, even both for majors in cities, and masters of
ships also* And albeit no argument builded on similitudes, is firm to prove
or improve any controversy, though rightly applied, they may lighte^ the
matter, to him that assenteth, but not enforce it to him that denies
(notwithstanding your similitudes, as they prove nothing, so they nothing
lighten, but more obscure the matter) yet if these your similitudes were
admitted, from mayor and pilot, to supreme governor, what true conclusion can
ye infer upon them? when both the ensamples that ye make your similitude
from, and the matter that ye apply them too, are false. For a man may be master
of a ship, though he never was a maryner in the ship: and also ^e made the
Mayor of the town, wherein he was never citizen before. As many a noble or
gentleman, is made the captain of a forte, of a town, or an army, that never
was pressed before a soldier, and yet a good captain to, having the knowledge
how to govern soldiers, though he him self were none.

Yea, to draw nearer than mariners, Majors and captains, read ye not, that S.
Ambrose was never so much as any of the clergy, and that more is, no not
baptized, and yet he was a better bishop, than the best bishop of the Romish
making now, or than the bishop of Rome him self? yea your holy Pope Felix. 5.
was he before he was Pope any other than (as ye call it) a mere lay man,
neither Cardinal, Bishop, Priest, nor had so much (that we read of) as your
benet and collet? and therefore your examples are not true of Mayor and Pilot,
that they must have been citizen and mariner before. And yet, where hereupon,
ye would needs have christian Princes to be spiritual men, if they should be
supreme governors of spiritual matters: it is granted you, and so they be.
And if you think godly christian Princes not to be spiritual, but utterly
void of spiritualnesse: then is this in you a lying and carnal spitefulness.
All godly Princes, y^a all godly persons are spiritual, and that much better
than any shaued or oyled massing Priest. But if ye mean, after the common
distinction, those that have any spiritual office in the ministry of the
word and sacraments, as deacons, elders, byshop^: etc. then your similitude,
as is before declared, fails. Such Offices are not necessary to have gone
before in a Supreme governor over them, although the knowledge is necessary
how to govern them.

Besides this, the proportion of your similitude fails, in that to prove a
supreme governor should withal be a spi^ituall man, yo^ allege ensamples of
such governors, as be not, but have been, such or such persons before: and
so from the master, which has been a maryner, and now i^ ^ master, you
conclude, the prince being a governor in spiritual matters, should withal be
a spiritual person. Neither does the proportion hold, in the necessary
relation of the similitude, from a Ma^or to his citizen, from a master of a
ship to a mariner serving in the ship (which has relation from the governors,
to the parties in their offices governed) to any like relation between a
supreme governor, over eccl. causes and persons, to a spiritual person* but
from a spiritual governor, to a spiritual subject, this were the right
relation. Now the Prince needs neither to have been a spiritual subject, nor
yet a spiritual person, in your common sense of spirituality: neither so
claymeth he to be a spiritual governor. And therefore, neither the ensamples
of your similitude, nor the proportion holds.

But see how still your own tale ouerturneth your self. For if his principal
government rests in civil matters (as immediately ye say) and that, in that
respect he is supreme governor, of al persons in his realm, but not of their
actions: why is he not of their actions also, sith they be civil or temporal
matters in which respect he is their supreme governor? is it not because,
though he be their supreme governor, yet he professes not all their several
offices, sciences, handy crafts, mysteries, or vocations, and so is not a
dealer in their actions? which hinders nothing his principal government over
them al, that he is, nor ever was, a prentise of any of their sciences, nor
practices the actions of their callings, being all civil matters. And yet say
you truly, he has the principal government in civil matters. But why then
also, notwithstanding the prince deals not with the actions of spiritual
men, may he not have a principal government in spiritual matters, though
him self have not the spiritual function, or office of a spiritual man? Do
ye not ^ee, by your own words, that to have a principal government, or to
be a supreme governor ou^r all persons and matters* is one thing: and to do all
the particular actions, of those persons or matters, is another thing, not
requisite in the supreme governor? and why then wilfully confound ye them so
often, as though we made the Prince the doer of the actions, because we
acknowledge the Prince the governor of the matters. And why said ye before in
your last similies, that he could not be a principal governor of any civil
matters except he had been a doer of the actions, and as it were, a prentise
to the occupation before? concluding the like for a governor of spiritual
persons and causes, that he must be a spiritual man, and do the spiritual
actions. But if now, being better advised, ye perceive that a man may be a
governor in civil matters and yet be not the doer of the civil actions, I
then conclude likewise for spiritual matters, that the Prince may be a supreme
governor in spiritual causes, and yet the same not the doer of the spiritual
actions.

The two untruths therefore M. Stap. that ye gather of the Bishop, saying:
Wherefore we have here two untruths, the one, in an untrue definition, the
other in saying the Prince is supreme governor in all causes spiritual, are
no untruths. The Bishops definition is clearer and truer than yours. Neither
have ye, or hitherto could ye, improve his conclusion, with all your
ensamples, or your similitudes, Yea, every similitude that ye have made, being
thoroughly weyed, has proved the Bishops conclusion, and confuted and
contraried your self.

But beside all this, we have, says M. St. a plain contradiction Stap. 30. b.
of M. Horn, directly overthrowing his own assertion here. The Bishoply rule
and government Winchester. fol. 96. 97.
of Gods Church ( says M. Horn) consists in three points: to feed the
Church with Gods word, to minister Christ's Sacraments, and to bind and lose.
to govern the Church (says he) after this sort, belongs to the only
office of Bishops and Church ministers, and not to Kings, Queens, and
Princes. The like he has afterward. Now then, these being, by his own
confession, the actions that properly belong to Ecclesiastical persons, and
the Prince by his said confession, having nothing to do therewith: how is it
then true, that the Prince is the only supreme head and governor in causes
Ecclesiastical. Yea in those, that do properly belong to persons
Ecclesiastical? or by what color may it be defended, that this saying, is not
plain contradictorie and repugnant, to this later saying, which we have
alleged, and whereof we shall speak more largely, when we come to the said
place?

There is no doubt M. St. but ye will reckon it up there at large, and here
also, and in many other places, ye still sing Decies repetita placebunt, for so
your book will grow to a welfauoured volume. The outcrie is here, for a
contradiction. But ye should first clear your self, of your own foul
contradictions before committed, and then object contradiction to the Bishop.
But let us see what a sore contradiction it is: Princes can not do certain
Ecclesiastical actions. Princes are supreme governors in Ecclesiastical
causes. Here M. St. ye labor to show where the Bishop says so, but ye should
labor to prove them co^tradiction^, but that ye take for manifest, being
manifest false. Neither need there any color to defend these sayings from
contradiction, for it was even the last thing that your self defended, in
putting a difference between a principal government of matters and that
government that is exercised in doing the actions of those matters. And thus
easily your self reconcile this great contradiction, and a^were your own
argument, that ye make of the Bishop sayings, reasoning thus: He confesses,
that those actions do not belong to the persons of Princes, Ergo, he
confesses, that Princes are not supreme governors to direct and ouersee them.
This argument your own distinction answers. And therefore where ye lap up
the matter, saying, Thus ye see M. Horn walks like a bare Stapl. 30. b.
footed man upon thorns, not knowing where to tread, ye should remember your
self M. Stap. that you have walked all this while like your barefooted goose
that ye spoke of before, not knowing what last ye creaked.

The sixth Division.
MAster Feckenham offreth to swear to observe and Fol. 30. b.
perform that obedience to the Queens highness now, that he did before unto
Queen Mary.

The Bishop shows how therein he was forsworn, and as he had helped to
spoil Q. Mary, of a principal part of her royal power, so would he with no
less disloyalty spoil the Queens Majesty now.

M. Stapl. taking after his fashion, Non concedenda pro Stap. fol. 30. b.
concessis, says the oath is unlawful: likeneth it to wicked King Herodes
oath, denies this government to be any part at all of the Queens royal
power, and avouches that if the Bishop can once by any means, prove this
government to be a principal part or any part at all of the Queens royal
power, he dare undertake that not only M. Fek. but many mo, that now refuse,
shall most gladly take the said oath, he were surely no good subject that
would wish her highness any wrong.

To wish wrong to any body, is naught in deed M. St. and worse to do it, but
worst of al to wish and do it against your liege and soneraigne. What wrong ye
wish and do by all treacherous practices, unto the Q. Majesty, is apparent,
and therefore your own judgment be on your own head. Ye liken her highness
to wicked King Herod, even here present, and yet ye say ye wish her no wrong.
But what reasons should move ye M. St. to think this open wrong no wrong?

Neither can (say you) the maintenance of the Catholic Sta. fol. 30. b.
faith, whereof she bears a title of a defender, be counted any injury to her
highness, neither is it to be thought but if there had been any wrong or
injury herein done to the Crown, some Christian Prince or other in the world
have ere this, once in this 1000. years and more espied it, and reformed it to.

This later argument of former Princes, is answered a^ Supra Diuis. 4. fol. 65.
large already. The other argument, stands on M. Stap. former presupposall,
that the Popes supreinacie is the Catholic faith. His reason is this.

The maintenance of the Catholic faith, is no injury to the Queens
Highness.

But our refusal of the oath is the maintenance of the Catholic faith:

Ergo, our refusal of the oath is no injury to the Q. Highness.

Here where M. St. should prove the Minor being manifest false, he lets that
go, presupposing it is most true, and confirms the Mayor which none denies.

She bears a Title of defender of the Catholic faith:

Ergo, The maintenance of the Catholic faith is no injury to ^ir highness.

Of this Title we spoke also before, only now I note his Supra fol. 80.
argument that here covertly he seems to make thereon.

The Qu. highness Title calls her defender of the faith:

Ergo, If she should also have the Title of supreme governor in all causes
Ecclesiastical, then were the former Title injury to her highness.

But the former Title of defender of the faith can not be counted any injury
to her highness.

Ergo, She can not have the other Title also.

This bald reason stands upon a presupposal in M. St. head, that this is a
principal article of the Faith. The Pope is only head of the Catholic
church: But grant not M. St. this his faithless principle, and he will prove
but a sielie Defender of this. His simple reason.

The seventh Division.
MAster Feck. pretending that he was by the Bishop required Fol. 31. ^.
and provoked to swear, refuses that part of the Oath that touches the
Queens supremacy in the causes Ecclesiastical, unless the Bishop show him
the means how he may swear without perjury.

The Bishops answer stands on two points: the one, to Winchester, Fol. 31. b.
32. a
detect his false dealing to pretend that the Bishop required the oath. The
other, that this his refusal of the later part of the Oath, is but his nice
daliance in words, having granted already the matter in effect. The B.
reasons thus:

Every Ecclesiastical person is called Ecclesiastical only in respect of
ecclesiastical functions, things and causes belonging to ecclesiastical
persons.

But ye have granted that the Queens highness is supreme governor over al
persons in her realms so well ecclesiastical as temporal:

Ergo: ye have granted that she is the supreme governor over them in those
their ecclesiastical functions, things and causes also.

M. Stapletons counterblast is threefold: the first against Cap. 5. fol. 32. a.
b.
the Bishops argument. The second as he calls it, is an heap of untruths
wherewith M. Feckenham is falsely charged. The third his shameful sclaunders,
that the plague, was sent of God to punish the doings of the Parliament: that
because the Bishop required the Oath of D. Bonner, he therefore sought his
blood. That our Bishops were no Church Bishops, nor parliament Bishops
neither. But these too frivolous parts I omit, it suffices to have quoted
the slannders in their common place. As for the untruths, are answered in
their proper bedroll. I will answer only now, that which is material, and
that counterblasteth the argument.

Yet once again (says M. St.) M. Horn takes in hand Stapl. 32.
M. Feckenhams grant, which may well be granted, and by* his great cunning
and skilfulnesse will thereof infer as before, that may not be granted. But
now he spitteth in his hand, and takes faster hold as he thinks, and seeing
the lightness of his former reason, would now give greater weight to it with
a new fetch, but yet as light and as weak as the other, and employing
manifest contradiction as before, and to be answered as before. For albeit, a
man is not called an Ecclesiastical person but in respect of some church cause
and function, which we freely grant to M. Horn, yet Fol 32. b.
is he never a whit the nearer of his purpose, unless he can prove that there
were also no other respect, why he should be under the Prince, but for causes
Ecclesiastical. For as we have said, he is a subject also as other Lay men
are, and a member beside of the civil common wealth, in consideration whereof
the Prince has to do with him, and not properly as he is a spiritual man,
though both respects be concurrant in one person, and he be named of the
worthier.

As the Bishops argument is plain and formal against M. Feckenham, so here M.
Stapleton stepping out to help him, as it were clapping him on the back,
recomforts him, saying, his grant of the Minor, That the Queens highness is
s^preme governor of all persons in her realms so well Ecclesiastical as
temporal, may be well granted. And he will also freely grant to the Bishop
the Mayor, A man is not called an Ecclesiastical person but in respect of some
church cause, and function, which is all one with the Bishops affirmative:
Every ecclesiastical person is called Ecclesiastical only in respect of
Ecclesiastical functions things or causes belonging to Ecclesiastical
persons: what now can rightly follow hereof, but the Bishops flat conclusion,
that the Queens highness is supreme governor of them, in those their
functions, things and causes also?

Nay says M. St. I will grant him all this freely, and yet is he never a
whitte the nearer of his purpose, unless he can prove that there were also no
other respect, why he should be under his Prince, but for causes
ecclesiastical: for he is a subject also as other lay men are.

Ha M. St. I see you would feign slip the collar, devising a new diversity
of respects between ecclesiastical person and subject, when the question is,
and M. Feckenham has confessed, that he is a subject every way, whether he be
lay subject or ecclesiastical subject* Otherwise, when M. Feckenham said,
over all persons either ecclesiastical or temporal of what estate so ever
they be: if he had meant as you say over ecclesiastical persons in deed, but
not in that respect that they be ecclesiastical but temporal and lay persons,
then had he plainly dalied in colored speech and foolish meaning, as thus:
over al persons ecclesiastical and temporal, that is to say over all persons
temporal and temporal* if he meant ecclesiastical persons, not in that
respect they be so called, but in that respect they be temporal and lay as
other subjects be. But this is your own wily device which in effect is
nothing but wily beguild him self. M. Feckenham meant plain and therefore
twice together says, either ecclesiastical (on the one party) or temporal
persons (on the other party) and to make the matter plainer, of what estate
(says he, that is to say of what condition kind or degree of subjects) soever
they be. And did not your self say before and freely grant it, that an
ecclesiastical person has not his name of ecclesiastical person for any other
respect but for ecclesiastical causes and functions? why say you now contrary
to your self, he is named here ecclesiastical person* not in any respect of
any ecclesiastical causes or functions, but in respect he is a lay and temporal
subject? how hangs this together M. Staplete^? will ye deny so soon that so
late ye freely granted? then I perceive (as ye here say the Bishop does) I
must be feign also to spitte on my hands and take faster hold on yours and M.
Feckenhams grant.

M. Feckenham has granted and you also, thus much: that the Queens Highness
is supreme governor over all persons borne within her realms, either
ecclesiastical or temporal, of what estate soever they be. That is to say,
they are all subject to her, all persons governed, or under her supreme
government, but the usual word is subject. Subject here is the General word
or Genus, comprehending two members dividing the^ selves under it, that is,
ecclesiastical person and temporal person. Either of these is comprehended a
like in the general word subject, for it is neither nearer the one nor the
other, nor may be more properly spoken of the one than of the other. The
temporal person is as much subject and no more, than the ecclesiastical
person, the ecclesiastical as much and no more than the temporal, nor these
two can be confounded together, nor the one taken for the other, Membra
diuidentia non confunduntur, but as the one is temporal in respect only of
the temporal functions, so the other (as ye say well therein) is
ecclesiastical, only in respect of functions ecclesiastical, and both are
comprehended under their general word subject: and thus does M. Feckenham
plainly set them forth as it were in a table. Now comes our student M. St.
and seeing all this so manifest plain, that him self is eue^ forced to grant
it: he has studied out this shift, first to iumble them altogether
iugglerlike, and then deuides or rather breaks them, making ecclesiastical
and subject to be Membra diuidentia, the one to overthwart ye other, which they
do not, but the one co^prehendes the other. And makes this word person, to be
general to them both, which here is al one with subject. And thus when he has
played Cole under ye candlestick, chopping and chau^ging the words, now says
he, ye shall see the Bishop is never the nearer of his purpose, Stapl. 32. b.
unless he ca^ prove that there were also no other respect, why he should be
under the Prince, but for causes Ecclesiastical, for as we have said he is a
subject also. As who should say in that respect he is a subject, he is not
Ecclesiastical, in that respect he is ecclesiastical, he is no subject
because he supposes these two are contrary respects, ecclesiastical and
subject. But this he does by presupposall, that ye will grant him all that he
says, or else he would never so freely have granted the Bishop, that which
after made against him self. For who sees not that ecclesiastical and
subject may well agree together, which M. Feck. saw well enough, when he
granted as well the ecclesiastical person as the temporal to be the princes
subject? And again, who sees not that this is but a fond shifte of M. Stapl.
to say that the Bishop is never the nerer of his purpose, unless he can prove
there were also no other respect, why he would be under the prince but for
causes ecclesiastical. For, grau^ting him again, there are other respects
wherefore he is also under his prince. What is M. St. the nerer of his purpose?
does it follow because he is subject also in other respects, that therefore he
is not subject in this respect? he should have proved this, but this he lettes
alone, and thinks all is safe if he be subject in other respects. But what
other respects so ever there be, him self having freely granted* that this
name of person ecclesiastical has no other respect, but to the causes
ecclesiastical: and being governed or subject, as M. Feckenham has granted,
in respect of either part of this division, temporal or ecclesiastical: if
fellows that in all respects what soever, of causes or persons
ecclesiastical or temporal, the Prince is supreme governor. Nor all M.
Stapl. crooked shifts, and crabbed respects, to hinder the sequel of this
argument, are any more to be respected, than ^ere trifles, and toys to delude
the Readers withal.

But M. St. will not give over the matter thus, but will bring his dark
respects, to the aspect and light of all men's eyes, by a familiar though
somewhat an homely sim^

As if master Robert Horn were a lay man and a paynter, Stap. 32. b.
(says he) the Queen properly has not to do with him as a paynter (unless
it were for some law or order concerning paynters) but as Robert Horn her
highness subject, and borne under her obeisance. See how envy has blinded
this man, that whereas for very spite he likeneth the reverent and godly
learned father in Christ, to a paynter, this his painted similitude makes also
flat against him. For, as he confesses, the Prince has to do with a
paynter, not only in that he is simply her highness subject, borne under her
obeisance, but also in respect he is such a subject, in which regard (he
says) she makes laws and orders also concerning paynters, though she
entermeddle not with the Paynters pencell, in drawing lines, and laying
colors, and other their particular actions: even so has her highness to do
with all ecclesiastical persons, not only in that they be simply, subjects
borne under her obeisance, but also even in that they be such manner of
ecclesiastical subjects, in which respect she may also make laws and orders
concerning ecclesiastical persons, though she entermeddle not with preaching,
ministering the sacraments, and other their particular actions. Thus as God
would have it, does your own similitude (M. Stap.) which of pure envy ye
bring forth to deface the bishop withal: so lively in every point make
against you, as any similitude can do. At length ye discende from your
similitude, to your plain purpose, saying.

So should the Queen have also to do with you, yea in Stap. 32. b.
case ye were the true Bishop of Winchester, but not properly as Bishop, or
for your byshoply function, for the which ye are immediately under your
Archbishop and the Pope, but considering you as a subject otherwise, or as
Bishop either, touching your temporalties, and no further. For the which the
true Bishops also to their Prince do their homage.

With much ado (for it sticks in your throat like a boane) ye admit at
length this case, that the Bishop were the true Bishop of Winchester, but
without any stay at the matter ye could compare him to a paynter) but now
being a Bishop, he is (as you say) under his Archbishop and the Pope, and
under the Queen only for his temporalties. Here is no argument, M. Stapleton,
but your bare assertions, as though the matter were clear and all out of
question. I ye had still reasoned from the similitude of the paynter and
painted it out in his true meaning, ye had concluded another manner of tale,
that as the Prince might meddle even with laws and orders for paynters, so
she has to do with Bishops, not only concerning their temporalties, but even
concerning that they be Bishops. And so again your similitude excludes your
Pope. And where ye say, in that he is bishop, he is immediately under his
Archbishop and the Pope, what if his Archbishop be not under the Pope neither,
is he not then also being immediately under him, exempted likewise from your
Pope? and thus ye stammer even in your own false principles.

Now when ye have thus without any reasoning determined the Bishop to be under
the Pope, and that he does homage to the Queen only for his temporalties and
no farther, ye conclude the matter, saying:

But what should I further reason with this man, which Stap. 32. b.
(as I have said) has removed the Prince from all superiority, concerning
the mere Byshoply or Priestly function, and so with a notable contradiction
has full vvorshipfully concluded against him self, and eased his adversary
of any other proof, and eased master Feckenham also, for taking any oath, that
the Queen is supreme head in all causes temporal and spiritual.

This notable contradiction is so sore a matter, that you must needs have a
fling at it once again, the contradiction is this:

The Prince has not the jurisdiction of the mere Priestly or Byshoply
functions:

The Prince has the superiority over the priestly or Byshoply functions:

Is not here a notable contradiction, and worthy to make this final
conclusion thereon? The Prince has not the jurisdiction of the mere Priestly
or Byshoply functions:

Ergo, He is removed from all superiority over the same functions?

Full vvorshipfully concluded, to use your own terms master Stapleton. What
should ye reason further with this man? but in stead of reasoning, fall to
making principles, or sit down and ease you with master Feckenham without any
further proof. But, might it please you to starte up again, and look better
about ye: ye should see, that between even that superiority (which word
notwithstanding the Bishop said not, but power or jurisdiction) of the mere
byshoply or priestly function, that is to say, his office, and the proper
actions of his office, preaching, binding and losing, the ministering of the
Sacraments: and between the superiority, that is, the oversight and supreme
government, in caring for, directing, and providing, that all those functions
and actions be duetifully done on their parts, to whom they properly belong:
there is a great difference, as all your similitudes hitherto have proved and
concluded against you. And that between the doing of the one, and the not
doing of the other, is no contradiction or opposition at all. And therefore ye
be not so eased yet, but that ye must take a little more pains, or else where
ye had thought to have won the spurs, ye may hap to lose the saddle.

The eight Division.
MAster Feckenham stands on four points, whereby Fol. 34. ^.
he thinks he should periure himself, if he should swear to this last
part of the oath, in eccl. causes. The first point is, that he must testify
it on a book oath. But to testify any thing on a book oath, and not to
know the same, is perjury. Then for him self he pleads ignorance, that
he neither knovveth it, nor knovves any means how to come to the knowledge
of it. Whereupon he joins an issue with the Bishop, which issue is this: If
the Bishop make proof to him, that any Emperor or Empress, King or Queen,
may clay me or take upon them any such government in spiritual or
ecclesiastical causes, then he will yield and receive the oath. The means
whereby he will have this issue proved, are these four. Either by such order
of government, as our savior Christ has left behind him in his Gospel and
nevve Testament: Either by the writings of such learned doctors both old
and nevve, which have from age to age witnessed the order of eeclesiasticall
government in Christ's Church: Either by the general councels, vvherin the
right order of ecclesiastical government in Christ's Church has been most
faithfully declared, and shevved from time to time: Or else by the continual
practice of the like ecclesiastical government, in some one Church or part
of all Christendom. The issue and state of the question betvveene the B. and
M. Feck.


By these four means, this issue aforesaid (as the state of the controversy
between both parties) must be tried. That, by any of these four means,
proof be made to him, That any Emperor or Empress, King or Queen, may
claim or take upon them, any such government in spiritual or ecclesiastical
causes.

This requires master Feckenham to be prored. The satisfaction whereof to be
proved by the Bishop is this:

That by some of these four means, proof may be made to him, that some
Emperor, Empress, King, or Queen, may claim or take upon them, some such
government in spiritual or ecclesiastical causes. If the B. shall be found
to have proved thus much to M. Feck. he has fully satisfied his request, and
M. Feckenham according to his promise, ought to swear with humble thanks,
notwithstanding master Sapletons quarelling Counterblast.

The Bishop reducing M. Feckenhams first point, to a Fol. 34. b.
form of argument, repeateth it:

No man may restifie any thing by a book oath, whereof he is ignorant and
knows nothing, without committing manifest perjury:

But you neither know that the Queens highness is the only supreme
governor of this Realm, as well in all spiritual or ecclesiastical things
or causes, as temporal: neither yet know ye any way or mean, whereby to
have any knowledge thereof.

Ergo ye cannot testify the same on a book oath, without manifest perjury.

To this the B. replieth, that although he might flatly deny the minor, that
M. Feck. is not without all knowledge, and utterly ignorant of ye matter, nor
destitute of al means to attain thereto: yet he says he will answer by
distinction of ignorance, to show how M. Feck. is ignorant, how he is not. He
alleges a threefold division of ignorance out of Thomas of Aquine the chief
of the Popish scholemen* Three kinds of ignorance*
Ignorance of simplicity, Ignorance of wilfulnes, and ignorance of malice.
Proving that he is not ignorant of the first sort, having in king Henry's and
king Edwards reigns, continually known, acknowledged and confessed it, and
therefore his ignorance is either of wilfulness, or of malice, or of both of
them.

M. St. Counterblast stands chiefly on three matters, first his answer to
Thom. distinction, with an obiecting again to the B. the opinion of Tho. in
this controversy. Secondly a quarrelling and chalenging of the B. for
untruths. Thirdly, an excuse of master Feckenham for setting forth this
supremacy. With a quarrel joined thereto that the B. citing a sentence out of
the book of wisdom, called it a sentence of the holy ghost, concluding
thereon a discord of our doctrine. But or ever he enter into his first part,
he notes this for a general warning before.

Now are master Feckenham, and master Horn come to Stap. 35. ^.
couple and join together in the principal matter.

If this forewarning be true M. St. that this their coupling and joining
together on this issue (to wete, whether any princes have taken any such
government on them) be now by your confession the principal matter
controuersed, between the parties standing in variaunce, which (as ye said
before) is convenient and necessary to have before Supr* ^o. 3. a. b
(our) eyes, and then deligently to see how the proufes are of each party
applied, for the confirming of their assertions: Then all those six
principles, which ye set up before your Counterblast as marks to fix the
eye of the Reader upon, were but false marks and not the principal matter,
wherein the parties coupled them selves together to prove or improve the same.
Then were almost all that hitherto M. Stap. has said (as the Reader marking
this well shall see) and the most of that which he has to say in this great
Counterblast, nothing else but a running about the Bushe, and wresting of
every thing, from the principal matter in which they joined, to some other
matters wherein they coupled not. Which is plain to beguile and abuse, not
rightly to direct the eye of the Reader, as the Reader fixing his eye on this
issue, shall soon epsy your falsehoode.

This issue then, being the principal matter (as ye say) and the Bishop
coupling and joining herein together with Supra. fol. 4.
master Feckenham (as ye also say) and the Bishop having proved that which he
endeavored himself to prove (which ye likewise have confessed) what remains
by your own tale telling, but that the Bishop has fully proved the principal
matter in question? Neither will you (as you say) nor any other Catholics
greatly contend with him for that he has proved: and he has proved that that
he labored in: he labored in that he coupled: he coupled in this issue: this
issue is the principal matter between them: why then do ye so fiercely
contend? but that ye would show your self a vain sophistical and brabling
quarrellour, that have no great cause to contend, nor any cause at all, and
yet will so greatly contend, only of wylfull malice, confessing your self
the thing to be proved, that is the principal matter.

Master Stap. having given this forewarning, comes to his first part, which
he deuideth threefold.

First he iesteth out the matter with scoffs, which I refer to his common
place thereon. Secondly, he denies master Feckenham to have any ignorance in
this point except it were invincible ignorance, by no study or diligence able
Stap. 36. a.
to be put away, and therefore pardonable. Since ye admit the distinction M.
Stap. ye bring out of time your other invincible ignorance. How pardonable it
is, is another question. But see how ignorantly, while ye would defend M. Fec.
you overthwart him, he pleads ignorance for his defense, and you say he is
not ignorant and would put the B. to prove that he should be ignorant of
wilfulness and malice, which the B. has done already, and so ye debar M.
Fecke^ham of his refuge, and make him to have knowledge of this point. Which
not only he himself denies, but which your self afterward deny also, yea
that he could not have knowledge of this point. But you think to escape
clear, with helping the matter by a new pertition of ignorance, adding a
fourth part of invincible ignorance.

Surely (say you) if there were any ignorance in this point it were such as S.
Tho. and other call invincible ignorance. Except (M. St.) ye confound this
fourth ignorance with one of the three before named, ye quite exclude M. Fec.
from the whole distinction of Thomas, and yet ye say the distinction may be
true, and ye will not stick with him for that distinction. So that either ye
stick at that ye will not stick, and make that false that ye grant true, or
else ye prove master Feck. not to be ignorant, contrary to his defense, and
all the rest of your own defense of him, as we shall see your words
afterward. In the mean time let us see how pretily ye shift off the matter,
only because the Bishop names Tho. of Aquine a schole Papist, for the division
of Ignorance, thinking ye have gotten a wonderful advantage thereby, for the
Popes supremacy.

But now (says M. Stap.) the very author brought Stap. 36. a.
forth by master Horn, so fully and effectually discharges M. Feck. of all
three, and charge M. Horn, with the worst of them three, that is wilfulness
and malice, as he shall win small worship by alleging of S. Thomas. For S.
Tho. says plainly, that we are obliged and bound upon pain of everlasting
damnation to believe that the Pope is the only supreme head of the whole
Church.

Now fearing (as not without good cause) that the B. would in this matter
reject the authority of this Thomas, whom our Thomas calls a late latin
writer, and to much affectionate to the Pope: as it were by prevention, He can
not well reject his authority (says he) using it him self. Stap. 36. a
And why so Sir I pray you? must every one that cites him in any one point,
receive and admit his authority to in every point? Is it lawful for the
Sorbonistes, the Scholemen, and the whole rabble of the Papists, yea for
Thomas Stapleton him self, to accept Thomas of Aquines authority in some
points, and to reject his authority in other some points: and is it not
lawful for the Bishop or any other to use the same liberty? The Sorbonistes
affirm of this Thomas, Illa doctrina non potest esse in omnibus In erroribus
Parisi^ condemna^s.
sic approbata, etc. That doctrine can not in all things be so approved, that
conteyneth many things erroneous in faith: but as they say the foresaid
doctrine of Saint Thomas, not only in the matter of the absolute necessity
of a creature, etc. but also in many other things conteyneth many matters
erroneous in faith. And again, Non oportet Ibidem.
credere. etc. We must not believe that the doctrine it self is in no part
thereof erroneous or heretical, wherein are contained many contrarieties and
repugnancies, yea even in the matter perteyning to the says* but many such
contrarieties and repugnancies are contained in the doctrine of Saint Thomas:
Again. (...) dicunt Ibidem.
aliqui. etc. And some say for this, that many may deny the glosses of the
decrees and Decre^, when the gloss does openly deny the text, and likewise
some say of the ordinarye glosses of the Bible, that notwithstanding seem to
be of greater authority (when they are alleged for authority) than is the
Doctrine of Saint Thomas.

The sixte example may be given of certain Doctors which are not canonized
Saints, as the venerable Anselme Bishop of Cant. Hughe of Saint Victor, and
certain other, whose sayings or wrytinges are in certain points found
erroneous, and yet their doctrine seems to be no less authentical, than
the doctrine of Saint Thomas, sith they are of the skillful in their
scolasticall acts alleged for authority, nor are wonted to be denied, but
their sayings reverently to be glosed and expounded, which notwythstanding
the Schoolmen are not wont to do on the sayings of Saint Thomas, and
therefore it seems presumptuous so to extol his Doctrine over them and other
Doctors, that we may not believe and affirm that he erred in faith, even
as other also have erred.

And after this as likewise before, reckoning up diverse errors, these
speeches are common: Ista locutio est de virtute sermonis falsa and multum
impropria. etc. This speech in the force of the words is false and very
improper. Ista doctrina multos errores continet. etc. This Doctrine conteyneth
many errors. Uidetur multipliciter erroneum. etc. It seems diverse ways
erroneous. Deficit in multis. etc. If fayles in many points. Non est verum.
etc. It is not true. Et breuiter haec and alia multa erronea falsa and
improprie dicta, vide^tur multis in praedicta doctrina contineri quae, tamen ex
taedi^ pertransimus. And briefly these and many other erroneous, false, and
improper sayings, seem to many to be contained in the foresaid doctrine, the
which notwithstanding we ouerpasse for tediousness. And from hence they
descend to manifest errors in divinity. And in conclusion write thus of him.
They say also that in very many places of his doctrine he erred by reason of
this, that he applied to much the principles of philosophy or rather certain
words of Philosophers to the conclusions of Divinity.

Thus say the great Censors of the Popish doctrine against Thomas of Aquine, so
well they agree together in unity of doctrine, obiecting discord unto us. Yea
the whole swarm of Papists, not excepting our Thom. St. here him self
(unless he be returned to the truth since he wrote his book) rejects and
condemns Thom* of Aquines judgment and authority, in one of the most
necessary matters of Christian religion, namely the doctrine of justification.
For expounding this sentence of S. Paul: Arbitramur hem^ne^ Tho. Aquin. super
Tit. ca. 3
iustificari absque operibus legis: Arbitramur enim nos, etc. For we being
taught of Christ, think (says Thomas) according to the truth of the Apostle,
that every man, whether he be Jew or Gentile is justified by faith. Acts.
15. By faith purifying their hearts, and that without the works of the law,
and that not only without the ceremonial works, which did not give grace: but
also without the works of the moral commandments, according to that saying to
Titus. 3. Not of the works of the righteousness that we have wrought. The reason
is presumed, that we are saved for our merits, the which he excludes when he
says, not of the works of the righteousness which we have done: But the true
reason is the only mercy of God. There is not therefore in them the hope of
justification, sed in sola fide, but in faith alone. Works are not the Sola
fide.
cause that any body is just before God, but they are rather executions and
the manifestings of righteousness. Executiones and manifestationes.


Where Tho. of Aquine thus according to Gods word speaks the truth, as in
this point here of justification: the Bishop and all other faithful, receive
his judgment and admit the same, with better reason than the Papists reject
it. But where as, in many other points he swarueth from the truth: though the
Papists saint him never so much, yet there all true saints, with good reason
refuse him. As in this that master Stapleton cites out of him, who confesses
him self that Thomas being a late latin writer, wrote partiallye in this
point, because he was to much affectioned to the Pope, and shall we believe
such an affectionate Stap. 36. a
writer in his partial affection? Or shall we believe master Stapleton no
less affectioned than Thomas, telling us that Thomas says plainly, that we
are obliged and Fol. 36. a.
bound upon pain of everlasting damnation, to believe that the Pope is the
only supreme head of the whole Church. And yet when he has all done, Thom.
plainly says not so, it is but our Thomas his plain lie. And though Thomas
him self in that he said, made also a plain lie, as (...) affectioned to the
Pope, yet should you have (...) words more truly master Stapleton, if ye
(...) pressed the Bishop with his authority. But for (...) Thomas his
partiality would soon be (...), ^o (...) more weight thereto, ye say:

Saint Thomas proves his assertion by Cyrill and M^ximus, two notable and
ancient writers among the G^ans. Wherefore it follows that neither master
Feckenham, Stap. 36. a.
nor master Horn, nor any other Christian man, can know the contrary, being
such an evident and dangerous falsehood as imports eternal damnation.

See how one Thomas here (were it but for namesake) would still help another
Thomas, he cares not by what means, hook or crook, both belying Thomas and
these notable fathers also. Where said Thomas your words above alleged? Where
had he them out of Cyrill and Maximus? where have Cyrill and Maximus that
assertion? Show it and then you clear your self. In deed Thomas Contra
errores Grecorum.
being a late and affectioned writer herein, alleges proufes out of both
Cyrill and Max. but they prove no such assertion. Cyrill has no such words in
his book of Thesaurus, and that epistle of Maximus is not extant for ought
that I can learn, and yet Thomas does but wrest both their sayings to prove
his title, that it is of necessity of salvation to be under the B. of Rome.
The sentence that he fathereth out of Cyril to prove his saying, and yet
notwithstanding proves it not, is this: Itaque fratres, etc. Therefore
brethren, if we follow Christ, let us as his sheep, hear his voice, abiding
in the Church of Peter, and let us not be puffed up with the wind of pride,
least peradventure the winding serpent cast us out for conte^tion, as long
since it cast Eve out of paradise. Can you, or Thomas, or any other, conclude
your assertion, or anything for your Pope on this saying? ye will urge these
words the Church of Peter Think ye he meant the church to be S. Peter's
patrimony, as ye term it? or the Church of S. Peter's dominion? if ye so
think, S. Peter him self gaynsayth it, saying that he is him self but (...)
consenior, a fellow Elder, or Priest, and witness of Christ's passions, and
not the Lord, but Christ the Lord of his Church, and him self with other not
to be rulers and princes among the clergy, but they be only pastors and forms
of the flock, Christ alone being the Prince of the Pastors. So that if you
mean hereby S. Peter to be the owner and Lord of the Church (as your Pope at
this day takes on him to be) this sentence makes nothing for him, but quite
against him. For neither does the Pope follow the humility of Christ, nor
hear his voice, as Cirill wills, neither follows he Peter, of whom he
craketh, but is puffed up with the wind of pride. Which Cirill forbids, and
therefore is cast out with the winding serpent.

But what Cirill means by ye church of Peter, even the other sentence
following may declare of Maximus: Coadunatam and fundatam super Petram
confessionis Petri dicimus vniuersalem ecclesia^, sicundum definitionem
saluatoris, in qua necessario salutis animarum nostraru^ est remanere, and ei
obedire, suam servants fidem and confessionem. We call that the universal
Church, according to the definition of our Savior, the which is united
together, and founded upon the Rock of Peter's confession, in the which it is
necessary to remain, for the salvation of our souls, and to obey it, keeping
the faith and confession thereof. This sentence well expounds the other. The
Church of S. Peter, that is to say, the Church united and founded upon the
rock of Peter's confession, not of Peter's rule and patrimony, but of his
confession, which Rock is only Christ the corner stone, on whom only the
Church is founded, and in whom as lively stories of the buylding we are
united. To this Church in deed must we be obedient, and remain in it,
keeping the faith and confession thereof. But what does this prove for the
obedience to the Pope and his Church? does it not rather detect his church,
not to be the universal Church, whereof Maximus speaks, that Christ has
defined (howsoever the Papists crake of the universal church) sith it is not
united together on the rock, but on the sands of men's traditions, and founded
as you say, upon Peter, and not as Christ said, upon the Rock* Since it
keeps not this faith and confession, nor remains in it, nor obeys it, it
is not Christ's true universal Church, neither ought we to remain in it, or
obey it. But as the Angel calls us, exite de illa populus Apoc. 18.
men's. etc. Come out of her my people, and be not partakers of her offenses,
least ye taste also of her plagues. And thus by Maximus saying (howsoever
Thomas as an affectionate late writer does wrest the same to the obedience of
ye Pope and his Church) when we examine Christ's true definition, and Peter's
confession, we find that we are obliged and bound, to renounce the Pope and
his Church, and that upon pain of everlasting damnation. But now M. Stapl.
let us also see your own proper arguments out of Thomas.

Thomas says, the Pope is the only supreme head of the whole Church (wherein he
quite excludes Christ:)

Ergo, we are obliged and bound to believe the same upon pain of everlasting
damnation.

Thomas says, we are obliged and bound to believe the Popes supremacy upon
pain of damnation: Ergo, the B. is to be charged with malicious and wilful
ignorance.

Thomas says, we are obliged and bound to believe the Popes supremacy, upon
pain of damnation: Ergo, M. Feckenham is fully and effectually discharged of
malicious and wilful ignorance.

Thomas his distinction of ignorance is alleged of the Bishop: Ergo, the
Bishop is bound to allow his authority simply in all matters, or in this of
the Bishop of Romes supremacy.

Thomas cyteth Cirill and Maximus to prove his assertion: Ergo* the matter is
so plain that the Bishop nor any other can know the contrary.

These writers say so (or rather as is showed are wrested to say that they say
not:) Ergo, it is such an euidente and dangerous falsehood, as imports
eternal damnation.

These are the wise and worshipful conclusions (to repeat your own terms)
that ye gather on the authority of Thomas, because the bishop cited him in the
said division of ignorance: wherefore ye say, he shall win small worship
by alleging of S. Thomas. Howbeit you to win much worship and great honor by
alleging him, have adventured to lay all your honesty to pledge.

M. Stapletons second part about untruths is answered sufficiently in his
bedroll.

In the third part be confesses that, wherewith the bishop charge M. Feck.
that in king Henry's days he set forth this supremacy in his open sermons.
But withal to excuse him, he says, it was not upon knowledge but upon very
ignorance Stap. 37. b.
and lack of true knowledge, and due consideration of the matter* What
ignorance call ye this M. St? if it be not malicious, it is of simplicity, yea
and wilful carelessness withal* and yet before ye said he was discharged of
all three, and here contrarying your own self, ye charge him again with two
of them at the least, besides that ye there said: Surely if there were any
ignorance in this point, it were invincible Stap. 35. b.
ignorance, by no study or diligence able to be put away, and therefore
pardonable. But is this such ignorance, when here ye confess that he studied
not for it, but did it without due consideration of the matter? and therefore it
was not pardonable eue^ by your own saying. Thus, while ye would excuse him of
ignora^nce, do not only accuse him of ignorance, but also declare such great
ignorance in your self, yt it seems ye neither well wot, nor much care what
ye say, so that ye may contend. Neither shame you in this point, while ye
would mitigate M. Fecke^hams fault, to accuse with him of ignorance, no fewer
than all, yea the best learned of the realm then, to whom it was not so well
known (ye say) Stap 37. b.
as it is now to every man, being but of mean learning. To the proof
whereof, ye cite sir Thomas More, that till his latter time, did never of many
years believe the Popes supremacy to be provided by God, and therefore M.
Feck. with many other good and well learned men otherwise, was Stap. 38. a.
carried away among them, with the violence of this common storm and tempest,
for lack of mature and deep consideration. Where as now all Papistee, such
as have traveled Stap. 38. b.
in these latter controversies do believe, that the Popes primacie was
immediately instituted of God, and that it is Iure diuino, by Gods law, and not
the Princes supreme government, which is now known clearly to stand against it.

Here is no argument all this while for it, but only defacing of their
predecessors learning and knowledge, to advance their own, which
notwithstanding it be nothing comparable in all wise men's judgments, yet is it
worthy to behold the gross presumptuous impudency of these Louanistes, that
as though they came from the new Indies, that say, other men are blind or
have but one eye, and they only have two: so these writers pretend they have
such knowledge now, yea, the mean learned among them, as the very best
learned before them, had not the like, who were not resolved herein, nor saw
so much as they The Louanists bost they have now found out the Popes title to
be lure diuino.
now do, in the Popes authority. For they have espied now at the length with
their Linxes eyes, that the Pope his primarie is de lure diuino of the law of
God, which thing even Sir Thomas More did not see, who a great while was so
blind herein, that he thought it but the Churches institution: at length, full
dimly God wot, he thought that he saw, it was provided of God. But now every
mean learned Louanist, has espied through a millstone (to use M. Stapletons
own phrase) and clearly sees and knows, it is ex lure diuino, instituted
by God immediately. Who would have thought they had been then so blind, unless
M. Stapl. had told us they were so? or that our Louanistes had been waxen so
cunning, to have found out of late, that they could never see before? no doubt
they had turned over and over, both the Old and the New Testament many a time,
and I warrant ye, all to have found out this immediate institution of God, and
yet was it never their hap (unfortunate blind buzzardes that they were) to
light on the place of this Institution. But now the Bible and Testament has
been so turned and tossed once again at Louaine, and that with such clear eye
sights, that it is plainly found out, yea and so clear, that every man of
mean learning knows it, that the Pope is supreme head over all the whole
Church, instituted by God immediately, to be obeyed under the pain of eternal
condemnation. O happy man for the Pope (whose estimation and wealth began so
fast to decay) that yet at the last has found out this institution. I warrant
ye like to wear a Cardinals hatte M. Stap if you have had so good luck, to
find this out. But I pray you (since it is so plain a place, that all your
side now clearly sees it) show where aboutes in the Bible or Testament it is.
I have of purpose turned them over ere now also, yet could I never have the hap
to see this. But I hope your sight be better than mine, I pray you tell us
where it is, do but quote the place, is it not peradventure on the back side
of your book? for in your book it is to be doubted ye shall find no more,
than could those learned men before you, find out. That it was ordained but
Iure humano, by the law of man. And where ye crake so much, that ye have now
found it instituted lure diuino, by the law of God, I am afraid it will in the
end be found out, to have been forged (...) and fraud Diabol^ca, by the
injury and craft of Satan.

That it is not Iure diuino, by Gods law, your self alleging no place or
proof besides your only vaunt, fearing ye should be put to the proof of your
crake, ye starte from it again by admitting that if ye could not (as ye ca^
not) prove so much as ye have made boast of, though the Popes primacie Stapl.
38. b.
(say you) were not ordained of God, yet could it not be rejected by any one
realm. And although the Popes primacie were not grounded directly upon Gods
word, but ordained of the Church, yet could it not be abrogated by the
private consent of any one or few realms, no more than the City of London
can justly abrogate an act of Parliament.

The sequcle of this argument M. Stapleton is naught by three ways. First by
presupposing an impossible absurdity that the true Church of Christ should
ordeyne any other necessary doctrine to salvation, than God has ordained or is
grounded on his word. The spouse of Christ hears her husband, my sheep
(says Christ) hear my voice, John. 10.
and not the voice of a stranger.

Secondly if this absurdity were admitted, that the church of Christ should or
could (as it ca^ not) ordeine other things, yet should not we be bound to
follow it, no though an Angel came from Heaven, to teach us any thing that is
not Gal. 1.
only contrary, but even praeter besides the word of God. And thus the
Fathers of the Church the^ selves have taught us, to reject it as easily as to
receive it, what soever has not Hieronimus super Mat. Ambrosius li. 1 de
officijs. Aug. contra Faustum li. 23
his authority out of the Scriptures. And what so-euer we find not in the
Scriptures, we may use them even as we list our selves. Why may we not say as
S. Augustine said, Quia Canonicum non ^st, non me astringit. Because it is not
the Canonical Scripture it binds me not to believe or receive it? but of this
matter further as ye give further occasion.

Thirdly your argument of proportion from a Parliament to London fails,
standing on your old and vayue presupposals, that we have granted or must
grant you, that your Popish Church is the true Church. That Christian realms
have the same respect to your Popish church, that a City in any Realm has to
the whole estate of the same Realm, and again that your Popes violent
Councels, are as free, lawful, and general, and enact only as Godly decrees
and constitutions, to the directing of the true Church, as the Parliaments of
a realm be free, lawful and general, and enact godly laws and
constitutions, for their policies and estates. All these things being nothing
proportionable, we must grant you to be true and fit, or else this your
argument, and your former crake, neither barell better herring, may go together
a Gods name.

The rest of your counter blast to this division, as it is nothing material,
so it is either altogether words of course, or else a petit quarrel that ye
lap up all the matter withal, because the Bishop called this sentence, a
sentence of the Holy Ghost, In male^lam animam non (...) sapientia: Sap. 1.
Wisdom shall not enter into a froward soul: which because it is mere
impertiuent and frivolous, I have rejected it to your common places. Discord
on our doctrine can ye gather none thereon, but you would feign sow discord
where none is, and yet ye boast of unity. But if ye remembered, (setting all
other discordes aside) how well as is before said, your Sorbonists, and your
Louanists, and you Thomas Stapleton agree even with your own sweet S. Thomas
of Aquine, and how your tale agrees with it self, how it excuses and
accuses M. Feckenham, ye should then see who they be, that as ye say, in place
of uniform tuning Stapl. 39. ^.
ruffle us up a black Sanctus, who they be that changing their shapes like
Proteus, have so often altered their religion, and whether they touch M.
Feckenham and you, or any of your chief Masters yea or no.

The ninth Division.
THe Bishop having by Thomas his distinction of ignorance answered M.
Feckenhams argument: descends to cope with M. Feckenham in his issue, and to
prove the same by all the said means that he requires. And first to the
issue, which was: That any Emperor or Empress, King or Queen, may claim or
take upon them any such government in spiritual or Ecclesiastical causes:
The Bishop answers that they ought to take such government, Ergo: they may
lawfully do it. For his antecede^t that they ought, he refers to the four
means of the issue, that M. Feckenham would have it tried by.

M. Stapl. picking by quarrels, of other pretended answers, Stapl. Cap. 7. fo.
39. b. 40. a
made by the Bishop before, and falsely surmising that he then denied, or
mollified the words of the oath, and that now he answers, without any
molli^iyng or restiaint, that the Queen ought to take upon her such kind of
regiment: these answers he calls so ^arring, variable, diverse, and so
contrary the one to the other, that if the one be true, the other must be
false, and so concludes they be false and deceivable both of them.

But M. St. this is a false and a deceiuable point of your own devising, from
the which I perceive by the tenor of your whole counterblast, ye will never
jar nor vary one jot, except God send you hereafter better grace and
judgment, than thus still to ground your self and your writings, on manifest
lies and forgeries, and then presuppose them in your nod^le, for manifest
principles and truths. Thus do ye all your book over, and so ye play here.
First ye ground your self on a forged answer, that the Bishop should before
have made: imagining it must needs be true, because you say ye certainly
understand, that M. Feckenham has so reported to some of his friends, that
the Bishop made then another resolute answer. This is all that ye all age for
proof of it, ye have it but by hear say, at the hand of some partial tale
bearer, some told you, that M. Feckenham told some, that the Bishop told him,
that this was his resolute answer, and you believe it for a certentie, and
write it solemnly in your book, to deface the Bishop as it were with doubble
and contrary answering, your self in the mean season answering nothing to the
argument, nor to ye Bishops present and printed answer. And therefore I need
return no other answer to you, than, that one told me, that another told
him, that he told you, that ye were to light of credence, to believe every
flimme flamme tale, and to rash of Judgment, to clap down such tales in your
book, of which ye had no better proof, than that all the world should see,
claw me claw thee, two false merchants need no broker they say.

The tenth Division.
THe Bishop entering into his proufes of the issue, that Princes ought to take
upon them such government in Ecclesiastical causes, as the Queens Majesty
does challenge and take upon hit, among other properties belonging to the
Princely office, to begin with all, avouches out of Deuteronomy. the 17. and the
13. with some expositoures upon the same, that the Prince is commanded to have
by him the book of the law, to read in it diligently, to this end that he
himself may learn the fear of God, and cause his subjects to become
Israelites by his princely authority, redressing the perverseness of such a^
swerue from the ordinances and ceremonies appointed of God. The which being
true, the conclusion consequently follows thereuppon.

M. St. answer to this argument, rests on four faults Stapl. ca. 8.
that he finds with the Antecedent, which he calls untruths, and so
reckons them up also in his score, but because they are the principal
material points whereon his answer dependes, I thought it more fit to note
them here.

But first after his scoffing, and craking manner he says to ye Stapl. 40. b.
Bishop: Go on I say in Gods name, M. Horn, and prosecute your plea stoutly:
God send you good speed. And so he does, eue^ such as ye, and the honesty of
your cause deserve. etc.

But all these his fromps and vaunts I ouerpasse and refer them to his common
places, and will only answer to that which he charge the Bishop withal,
which is no less than infidelity and unskillfulness. And to begin with the
later, because he says it is the least matter and note^h it for the former
untruth.

Your unskillfulness (says he) which is the least matter, Stap. 40. b.
stands in that ye say the King is commanded to have by him the book of the
law, your text says not so ^ir, but Describet sibi Denteronomium legis huius
in volumine: he shall Deuteronomy. 17.
write out this second law in a book; as Edmund Beck, a man of your sect truly
has translated.

This is the least matter, says M. Stapl. and yet this is so great a matter,
that as a notable reproach, he fasteneth it also in the margin as it were with
a ten penny nail (to use his own phrase) M. Horns unskillfulness* But if M.
St. did not play the unskillful hypocrite him self, but had pulled the beam
of unskillfulness out of his own eye, he should then have clearly seen, that
the Bishop used good skill in citing his text faithfully, and he in thus
repr^he^ding the Bishop has showed so little skill, and so much infidelity,
that though he him self be paste shame, yet M. Feckenham, and all his friends
may well ^e ashamed of him.

Ye say (says M. Stapleton) the King is commanded, to have by him the book
of the law, your text says not so sir. Forsooth sir the text says so by your
leave, the text has both, and therefore it is not the Bishop but you that
lie, both unskillfully and also unfaithfully therein. Put on your spectacles,
read your text again, and I dare say, except your lips hang in your light,
ye shall within six words following, find these words, Et habebit secum,
and he shall have it with or by him, or as Munsterus translateth it, Eritque
illud pen^s e^m, and it shall be about him, or appertayning unto him. So that
here appears plainly your skillful fidelity, (if it be not done rather of
peruersitie and malice, to use your own words) in deniyng the Scripture to
say that, which in plain words it says, and in calling that an untruth in
translation, which evidently is a very true translation. This untruth therefore
must be cut of from your talie, and nicked upon your score.

The second fault found with the Bishop in his antecebent, is an untruth (as
M. Stapleton has scored it up) in leaving out a part of the sentence
material. Wherein he Stapl. 40. b.
notes the Bishop of infidelity. Your infidelity (says he) appears in the
curtalling of your text, and leaving out the words that immediately go before
those that ye allege. What were these words that the Bishop did allege?
That he have by him the Book of the law. Say ye me so M. Stapleton? then, if
the Bishop have left out the words of Moses, that immediately go before those
that he alleged, even by your own confession these words alleged, do come
immediately after those that ye say the Bishop left out. D^ye not see what a
manifest lier your own testimony proves you. Within six lines following, ye
affirm that the text has not these words, and here ye say they follow
immediately. You are full of gathering contradictions, what call ye this, it
follows in the text immediately, and, it is not in the text at all. Where is
your Logike that ye boaste of? are not these contradictories? so that unless
ye ca^ ^ake two contradictions true, ye have made your self in the one an open
lier. Alack M. Stapleton where was your remembrance? Mendacem memorem esse
oportet a lier should have a good memory least he faulter. Well will you say,
here ye took me tardie. But how say ye to this, the Bishop has leaft out a
part of the sentence material, he has Stapl. 40. b.
curtalled his* text. The later word he has (because they make directly
against him) quite least out. Has he so M. St.? verily that were a foul
fault, and infidelity in deed. But what again if he have not done so, if he
have left out no part of the sentence which he cited, and what if those words
which M. Stapleton would add out of another sentence, would not make any thing
against the Bishop, were he not then cleared of this fault, and might it not
redounde to the faultfinder? And by your leave M. Stapl. though I will not
herein charge ye with infidelity, unless ye wist it, but impute it rather to
want of knowledge, yet at the least, it is one of your unskillful lies, for the
sentence, Et habebit se^um, etc. and he shall have it by him, and shall read
it all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord, his God,
and keep his words and ceremonies, which are commanded in the Law, is an
whole and perfect sentence, and as the Hebrews call it a Pasuk. which, if not
so much as perusing the Hebrew or Chaldee text, yet if, meaning a truth, ye
would have looked upon the translation of Sanstes Pagninu or Munsterus, ye
should have seen it to be a full period and sentence of it self. So that the
Bishop is sufficiently discharged of all unfaithfulness, nor has curtalled
any sentence that he alleged, nor left out any later, former, or middle part,
material, or not material thereof. But now M. Stapleton, look you to it,
least you be found herein a passing unfaithful liar, not only on the Bishop,
but on the holy Scripture also.

Ye say he has curtalled his text. What was his text? he shall have by him the
book of the law. What words follow immediately after? and he shall read it
all the days of his life, to the end that he may learn to fear the Lord
his God, and keep all his words and ceremonies that are commanded in the
law. All this the Bishop cited and expounded also: has he then curtalled his
text, M. Stap. that so thoroughly and so largely has set out the same? Tushe,
say you, he left out the words that immediately go before those that he
alleged. Why, M. Stay. call ye that curtalling? curtalling is to cut off those
words that come behind. To cut off those words that immediately go before,
was rather to behead his text, than to curtall it. And do ye not see withal
how contrary ye speak to your self, they be the latter words and they be
the words that immediately go before? If they be the words that go before, they
be not the latter words, if they be the latter, they be not those that went
before, unless they come twice both before and after, and so the head and the
tail of the sentence is al one, and the bishop cutteth off both head and tail
away, according to your popish usage of the Scripture. But then where ye say,
he leaves out a material part of the sentence, ye should have said he took
away, all that is material, and not one material part thereof. But the
bishop cites the full sentence. And those words which ye say come after, and
that the bishop leaves them out, because (ye say) they make directly against
him, they come not after at all, but plainly are set before. And I much
marvel with what impudent face ye durst challenge the bishop for curtalling his
text, when he tells all the words that follow, both of the sentence he
cited, and of that which comes after also: and yet your self so flatly
belie the Scripture, for malice to the bishop, in saying, such words that the
bishop left out do follow which neither follow at all: and your self before
confessed, they went immediately before.

See, see, how envy has blinded this man's sight. Less marvel it is that
ye saw not the period, for although those words which ye cite, as left
out, taking a copy of the Priest, and the Leuiticall tribe, ^e words going
before the bishops sentence, and he shall have by him. etc. yet is there a full
period between them, which you saw not, or would not see, so that those former
words are no material part of the sentence following cited by the bishop, but
a material part of the sentence going before, which the bishop cited not. But
M. St. cites and falsely threapeth that the bishop did cite it, and in citing
it, left out a material part thereof, charging the bishop in these words,
after such order as your own text Stap. 41. ^.
appoynteth* saying: When he is set upon the seat of his kingdom, he shall
write him out this second law in a book, taking a copy of the Priests of the
Leuiticall tribe. Which latter words ye have, because they make directly
against you, quite left out. Why, M. Stap. he left out both the latter,
middle, first words, and all of this sentence, he mentioned it not at all, ye
do but threapen kindness on him, to fasten withal upon him your challenge of
infidelity. Only he alleged the next sentence, and that expounding it so
fully, that he leaves out neither former, latter, or any material point at
all thereof.. And thus much does your self also witness against your self,
saying, that he left o^t words that immediately go before the words which
he alleged. And what were those? he shall have by him. etc. This then was the
text that he alleged by your own confession. And therefore when ye urge him
with the former text that he alleged not, to prove infidelity in him: ye
contrary your self, ye clear him, ye show your own exceeding unfaithful
dealing, both to the scripture, and to him also.

But wherefore should the Bishop have left out (as ye charge him) any material
part of his text? because (say you) it makes directly against him. In deed
that were a shrewde cause, and would iolily cloak M. St. infidelity, and cause
men to suspect infidelity in the bishop, if he had concealed any thing in his
text, that directly made against him. Which infidelity who uses, and who
approves it, for the point of a wise man, to conceal that, that makes
against him, shall after well appear. But now, although it be plainly proved,
that the bishop in his text left out no part thereof: Yet for further trial of
this also, let us take not only the latter words of the next period going
before, which words he complayneth are left out, but every word also of the
same sentence, concluding two or three periodes under one, because we would
have nothing left out, and join them to the sentence following cited by the
bishop, and then behold what manner of conclusion either directly, or indirectly
they make against him. Wherein shall appear, that M. St. has so besotted
himself in divinity, that he had quite forget the logike that so often he
crakes upon. These textes are these: When he is set on the seat of his
kingdom, he shall write Deuteronomy. 17.
for him self out of this second law in a book, taking a copy of the Priests
of the Leuiticall tribe. And he shall have it with him, and he shall read of
it all the days of his life that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and
keep all the words and ceremonies that are written in the law. Upon these
words, M. St. frames his argument.

The king shall write out this second law in a book, taking a copy of the
Priests of the Leuiticall tribe:

Ergo, a king ought not to take upon him such government in ecclesiastical
causes, as the Queens majesty does challenge and take upon her. For this is
the conclusion that directly makes against the bishop: but as herein his
logike is altogether unskillful, so is his divinity yet more unfaithful. For,
having challenged the bishop for leaving out these words, taking a copy of the
priests of the Leuiticall trybe, as directly against him: and the^ immediately
follows (says he) how he shall busily read the said book, and so forth.
In which words he makes another toto manifest lie, falsifying the text yet
once again. For these words, Et habebit sec^, he shall have with him, which
word he leaves quite out, go between, and therefore follow not (as he says)
immediately. But see here (whether it be of malice to the bishop, or to the
Scripture) that all this while in quarelling with this little poor text, and
habebit secum, he shall have with him, he finds fault with translating, he
accuses the bishop of infidelity and unskillfulness, he complains of
leaving out words going immediately before, of curtalling the text, and
leaving out latter words, of leaving out a material part, of words following
immediately: he cites and recites these and those words in Latin and
English, he scanneth and descanteth on translations, and all this while those
only three words, and habebit secum, which the bishop alleged, wrinching and
wresting, he ever glaunceth by them, he will not once name them, but leaves
them quite out, which was the material thing that the bishop alleged. And yet
all the while he whineth of leaving out, and leaves out him self that he
should chiefly answer. What shall we think is the cause that he does thus?
surely there is some force in those words, that he saw were more directly
against him, or else he would never do so for very shame. But I remember a tale
that he has patched up into his counterblast, of the Simoniacall Priest, that
being commanded to say In nomine patris, and filij, and spiritus sanct^,
could rehearse all well enough, till he came to spiritus sancti: as for that,
he could not pronounce it in any manner of wise. But see your chance M. Stap.
that ye there fabled, how here your self have playde the like part. The
bishop urges you with three words, and habebit secum* ye will not only
answer nothing thereto, but ye will not in any wise, while ye repeat the
sentences, so much as name those words, and yet ye go round about them. On
the other side, those words that the bishop cited not, as no part of his
sentence alleged, Lord what a do ye make of curtalling, of leaving out, of
infidelity, unskillfulness, peruersitie, malice, and I can not tell what.
Only because ye think those words seem to make for your massing Priests
authority, because they name Priests: and yet God wot they make nothing for
you, nor against the bishop directly or indirectly.

But you think this sentence makes thus much for your priests, that if the
Prince hereon will claim by the one sentence, to have the knowledge of the
law and word of God: ye will enforce of the other, that he shall have no more
thereof, nor no otherwise, than it pleases you to license him. And so far ye
dare adventure to say: Well let the king Stap. 40. b.
read in Gods name, not only that book, but all the whole Bible beside, it is
a worthy and commendable study for him. But let him beware that this sweet
honey be not turned into poison to him, and least under this pleasant bayte of
Gods word, he be suddenly choked with the topicall and pestiferous translation,
wherewith ye have rather perverted than translated the Bible printed at Geneua,
and in many other places, with your false dangerous damnable gloses, wherewith
you have corrupted and watered the same, and made it as it were of pleasant
wine, most sour vinegar. The only remedy and help to eschew and avoid
this danger, is to take this book, and other holy writings faithfully
translated at the Priests hands, as they from time to time have received them.

How fitly ye apply your metaphors in making one thing in the same respect to
be sweet honey, and yet sour vinegar, let others desca^t, How properly ye rap
your friars and monks on the balde, in vpbrayding gloses wherewith the word of
God has been watered and corrupted, let even the Papists be judge them
selves, whether it touches you or us more near. How notably ye have confuted
the translation of the Geneua Bible, shall be declared, when ye shall set down
some one or other false word or sentence translated in it. How well you like
that kings should read the Bible, as a worthy and commendable study for them,
appea^h, in that ye can away with no translation, nor yet your ^e will set out
any for them. But how well soever you like it, or at least dissemble for to
like it, the most of your complyces like it never a deal: Full sore against
whose wills it was translated in the mother tongue of any prince or people. But
if it were so worthy and commendable a study for Princes, why were not
Christian Princes permitted to study in it? why kept ye them in ignorance?
why limit ye them within the study of ^ill affairs, of martial policies, of
hunting and hauking pastimes: But as for the word of God not one word, no not
to move any talk thereof, says Cardinal Hosius. And think ye they might
then make the same their study? but how soever ye ordered Princes as other
people then: now that ye see there is no remedy, Princes will be no longer
deluded, but make it their study in deed: with a false heart God knows, ye
say, well let the king read in Gods name, not only that book, but all the
whole Bible beside. It is a worthy and commendable study for him.

If ye be thus liberal (master Stapl.) to Princes from your heart now, why
did ye quarrel with the bishop so much before, for saying, he should have by
him the book of the law, should he read and study the same, and yet not
have it by him? But I perceive ye are half weerie of your own wrangling, and
therefore in the end, ye not only grant that he shall have it by him, but also
shall make the same his study. Now here if your fellows ask ye, what ye
mean to be thus liberal to princes, in permitting them to study in the word
of God, in such tongues as How subtly the Papists grant princes to study
in Gods word.
they understand, which thing many of your fellows would stiffly gaynsay: be
content my masters may you say, it is not now time to strive to much with
princes, since they will needs have thus much, let them have it a Gods name,
yea let us seem to give it them frank and free, but ever presupposed they
must have it of our giving, and then go^d enough, they were as good and
perchance better without it* For here, after ye have seriously warned princes
to beware of our false gloses and translations: The only remedy and help
(say you) to eschew and avoid this danger, is to take this book and other
holy writings faithfully translated, at the Priests hands, as they from time to
time have received the^.

Some simple man, that heard ye, M. Stapleton, thus demurely preach of
translations and glosinges, would perhaps think ye could not gloss and
translate so falsely and so impudently as ye do, even here, where ye reprehende
the same in others. Does your text that ye beat so much upon, mention these
words, receiving of it translated at the Priests hands, as they from time to
time have received it? or is there any such meaning? First, there is no
mention of any translating at all, but the text says, accipiens exemplar Deuteronomy.
17.
a sacerdotibus Leuitic^ tribus: taking a copy of the priests of the
Leuiticall tribe: Or as other have it, describet sibi exemplar huius legis, in
librocoram sacerdotibus Lenitici generis. He shall write out for him self a
copy of this law in a book before the Priests of the Leuiticall tribe. He
speaks not here of any translation, for why, the law was written in their
own mother tongue. Now because to other Princes it is given translated, can
ye infer hereon, the Priests only should have the translating of it? or
being translated, it should be received only at the Priests hands, as they
from time to time have received it? whereby it should follow, that had the
translation passed any continuance from time to time, it should be forced on us
for a faithful translation, were it never so false: which is apparent in the
old translation that has long time from time to time continued falsely under S.
Hieroms name, as both appears by S. Hieroms works, and also S. Hierom
co^futeth this fond reason. Neither was he moved with ye outcries of those in
his time, yea even of S. Austine, yt cried on him as you do now on the learned
tra^slators in our time. Neither might ye word of god hereby be translated into
any other to^g, tha^ it has been translated into of long continuance from time
to time, and thus should princes be debarred of the word of God, in which ye
would have them study except you popish priests would translate it, and per
adventure, to keep them from it, ye would say you should not deliver any other
translation, than has been used from time to time. And yet to what
prescription of time, ye would drive us off, it is uncertain.

This is false therefore, and full of absurdities, that ye prattle of receiving
it translated at the Priests hands, as they from time to time have received
it. No (M. St. to borrowe your own terms) your text says not so sir, nor
means so. But only that the prince should receive it of the Leuiticall
priests, as they had faithfully kept the word of God, from the first original
setting out thereof. So notes Uatablus the great learned Hebritian. Curabit
sibi describ^ exemplar legis Vatablus in Deuteronomy. 17.
huius. vulgo transumptu^. Ung double de ceste loy* ad exemplum libri
sacerdotu^ Leuitaru^. Quasi dicat ad exe^plu^ castigatiss^u^, ad exemplum eoru^
qui sunt periti in ea lege, quales sunt Leuitae. He shall provide for him
self, that of this law there be drawn out a coppie, commonly called a
transumpt. One couple of this law. According to the examples of the priests
being Levites (as who should say) after the best corrected copy, after their
copy that are skillful in the law, such ones as the Levites are. But to
receive it after such a simple sort, as in process of time the Rabines and
the Priests too, from time to time had watered it with their false gloses: and
as since that time, the popish Rabines of the schole friars, monks, and
priests, from time to time with their false dangerous damnable gloses, have
corrupted and watered the same, and made it as it were, of pleasant wine most
sour vinegar: ye had need to rise betimes, M. Stap. or ever ye shall prove
this untimely consequence, by the text that you urge so sore, or yet by any
other. Your argument is this:

The king in the old law, should receive the coppie of the book of the law,
at the hands of the Priests of the Leuiticall tribe:

Ergo* If Princes now will have the Bible, they must receive it of such, and
after such manner, as the popish priests will from time to time deliver it to
them.

Now, not seeing ye extreme folly of your sequel, ye run on headlong as
though all were yours, and say: if this order Stapl. 41. a.
had of late years been kept, and that Princes and other had taken the Bible
as it is and ever has been of the Priests of the Catholic church (orderly
and lawfully succeeding one the other as the Levites did) read, taught, and
expounded, as well in Greek and Hebrew as in Latin, these errors and heresies
should never have taken so deep a root as they have now caught.

Here is bibble babble enough but no argument, and all runs upon his wonted
presupposals, that our doctrine is heresies and errors, that they be the
Priests of the Catholic church. That they orderly and lawfully succeed one
the other, as did the^e Levites. That they have ever read taught and expounded
the Scripture, in Greek, Hebrewe, and Latin. That their translation is only
true and faithful. And that this their order from time to time, has ever been,
till of late. Let all these things be granted to M. Stapl. for undoubted
principles, and then let him alone. But if a man denied all these things (being
every one so apparent false) and proved that our doctrine were not those
dangerous gloses, errors, or heresies, but the express infallible word of
God: if he denied that their Church were the Catholic Church, otherwise than
in that sense that the scholar of In what sense the popish Church may be
granted Catholic.
Oxford, by a certain woman whom other praised, did merrily say, she was a
Catholic woman, meaning a common queen, so the Popish church in like sense
is a Catholic church, that is to say, a common strumpet prostitute to all
Idolatry, and not the chaste espouse of Jesus Christ: if he denied not only
such orderly succession in your Pope, his Bishops, and Priests now, as was of
the Levites then, they being expressly ordained of God, you being not ordained
of God at all: but also prove that such succession as it is, (which in deed
may better be called degeneration) is altogether unorderly and unlawful: If he
denied that they did always read, teach and expound the scripture in Hebrew,
Greek and Latin, when even among the most of their great School doctors,
in that blind time, they had uneath any mean skill in Latin, much less, or
nene at all in greek or Hebrew: As for the most of their morrow Mass
Priests like blind guydes, were so far from reading, teaching, and
expounding the Scriptures to the people, out of any other tongues, that even in
their mother tongue they scarce knew one word thereof themselves: If he denied
that they would have the Scripture read, taught and expounded at all, but on
the contrary would have no translation, other than their common latin
translation, which how corrupt it is, is manyfeste: as Besides the
Protestants, Caietanus, Erasmus, Pagninus, Catharinus, and others of
themselves are enforced to confess it: If he denied that the Popish handling
of Gods word, has been the order that has ever been, but is quite contrary
to the original Institution, to the aunciente order, and is of much later
times, as corruption from time to time has taken deeper root. If a man thus
denied all these his Principles, til time be that M. Stapleton shall prove them
better, than only by dreamyng that we grant them for true, which are
called into great question, and denied of us for manifest false: Then is all
the fat in the fire, and this Mast. Stapletons solemn process answered and
confuted.

Nevertheless, M. Stapleton still proceedyng on, as though all these things
were out of question: Neither Stapl. 41. a.
is this place only mente (says he) that the King should take the bare
letter, but rather the exposition vvithall, of the said Priests. For what
were the king the better, or any man else for the bare letter, if he had
not also as ordinary a way for his direction in his understanding, as he
had provided him for to receive a true and an incorrupted copy? Whereof we
may see the practice in all ages in the catholic Church, whereof this place
is the very shadow and figure. And herewithal he sets up in his margin this
note: both the books of the Scripture, and the exposition must be taken at
the priests hands.

The argument is this: The king in the old law must receive not only the
bare letter of the priests hands, but the exposition withal:

Ergo, Christian Princes must receive that sense of the Scripture, that the
Popish priests do please to expound unto them.

As there is none I trust so simple, that sees not the fondness of this
argument, so again each man may perceive, that the more M. Stapleton
trauayleth on these words (which he says be unfaithfully left out,) he
shall not only show the more his own unfaithfulness: but detecte also the
unfaithful dealing of all his Romish priests and Church. For where as this
place says, that the Leuiticall Priests shall deliver to the King a perfect
and true Coppie of the Law of God, which he shall write out and have it by
him. And that the Priests should not deliver only the bare letter, but
withal the exposition thereof, not expounded after their fantasies, as did the
Scribes and Phariseis, in one place by the bare letter, which Christ confuteth
Math. 5. 6. 7. In an other place, by their own inventions and traditions, but
one place truly expounded by an other, and so deliver it faithfully to their
Prince: And that this order then was the very shadow and figure of the true
Church now: But then is it most evident that the Popish Church is not the
true Church, nor was figured hereby at all.

For first the popish Prestes delivered not a coppie of the law of God, to
wete, of the Old and New testament up into their Kings, Queens and Princes
hands, to write it out and have it always by them to study upon: but rather
do the contrary as did the Pharisees, keeping the key of knowledge away from
them of purpose, telling them it appertains not to their estates: but that
they may go play them, or employ them selves in other foreigne matters, only
the word of God they must in no case meddle withal, which belongs alonely
to the Priests. Nor they will be bound to deliver up to their Princes any
coppie thereof at all. But thus much yet they will do for their Princes, to
give them a piece here and there, and that either must be the bare letter as M.
Stapleton calls it, or else such expositions, as it shall please them to
leaven the dough withal. And is this now the perfect body of that shadow, the
verity of that figure set forth in Moses order? or not rather the full
accomplishing of the Scribes and Pharisees doings? whom they have so followed
in not giving up a coppie to their Princes, in wresting, defacing and taking
away Gods word, that theirs may better be said to be a very shadow and figure
of the Popish priests dealings herein. And that we rather express the verity
of that figure and shadow of Moses order, rendering up to our Princes a full,
perfect, and sincere coppie of Gods law, that they may write it out, set it
forth, have it by them and meditate therein day and night (as King David
counsayleth) Psalm. 1. 2.
to learn thereby to be wise and fear the Lord their God: and by them all
their subjects. And thus his importune urging of this place has so properly
helped his matter forward, that where he says, the Bishop left it quite out as
making directry against him, what soever the Bishop did, it had been better for
M. Stapl. to have left it quite out, also: or not to have triumphed so much on
that, which at the better view thereof, so directly makes against all his
popish Priests.

But for all this, M. Stapleton will prove, that the popish priests must not
only have the handling of Gods word: but also that they can not be deceived,
nor err in the sense thereof. And this will he prove even by the Protestants
them selves.

For (says he) as the Protestants them selves are forced Stap. 41. ^
by plain words to confess, that they know not the true word or book of
God, but by the Church: which from time to time delivered these books, even
so by all reason and learning they should also confess that the Church can
no more be deceived, in delivering the sense of the said word, than in
delivering the word it self. Which seeing they will not confess, (for then
we were forthwith at a point and end with all their errors and heresies) they
must needs continue in the same.

The argument is this. The Protestants confess that they know not the word of
God but by the Church (of Christ) that keeps, witnesses and agnizeth the
same from time to time.

Ergo the Protestants must needs confess, that the Church (he means the
Popish priests) in delivering of the word can not be deceived in the sense
thereof.

In steed of answer hereto, master Stapleton him self makes a
preoccupation, for perceiving the falsenesse and folly thereof would soon be
rejected: Which seeing (says he) they will not confess (for then we were at
a point with all their errors and heresies) they must needs continue in the
same.

Do we not confess, master Stapleton that ye would have us confess? why then
have ye reasoned all this while thus fondly, taking that for confessed which
your self now are forced by plain words to confess, that we confess not,
but utterly deny, that you be the Catholic Church, that you have delivered
these books from time to time, (which you have rather hid away) that you can
not err in the sense ^f the scripture, and such like wrong principles. Which
in deed if we should falsely confess with you, then all the matter were at a
point and end, as ye say. But since we deny it, and reject your fond
reasoning, a petitione principij, it is time that ye seek out other arguments
more substantial, or else as your cause is at a point, or not worth a point:
so in conclusion ye stand on this point, to slander us, as following every
man his own head, and that Stapl. 41. b.
we shall never have done, and errors will never cease more and more to
increase and multiply, unless we take forth (say you) the lesson I have
showed you. And what lesson is that? Forsooth that we must grant and confess
to be most true, all these your false principles. And then we shall be your
white sons, and good scholars I dare say, if once we would conne that lesson.
Ye would give us a fat remedy, and leave to play the fools and truands all
day long, if we would learn that lesson of yours. But such scholemasters as y^
are, such scholars ye desire to have, and such lessons ye take them forth.
Caecus autem si caeco ducatum prestet, ambo in foueam cadunt. Math. 13.
If the blind lead the blind, both of them fall into the ditch. Thus ye
deceived the princes and people in times past. But God be praised both Princes
and people have now taken forth that lesson, out of Gods holy word, that ye
could not, or never would teach, read or expound unto them.

Now when ye have read this lesson unto us, with so false a gloss and
commentary upon the text, (as ye complain) left out: ye determine that the
best remedy were the Stap. 41 b.
exact observation of this place that ye have (say you) so wilyly and slightly
slipped over. This is but a point of your apparent impudency master Stapleton,
to set a be^de face on the matter, for God knows ye would nothing less, than
that the diligent reader should exactly observe this place. Which if he did,
this place alone, (were there no more) would sufficiently show how ye have
haled and racked it, and all the law of God besides. That this place therefore
(if the exact observation thereof be the best remedy to your cause, as ye say)
might remedy your cause the better, I have somewhat the more exactly observed
it, and if your cause have found any remedy thereby, much good do it you,
ye shall have more of it. So that I trust ye shall not need to complain of
ouerslipping any thing material. Which least ye should do, the Chapter shall
be yet more exactly observed than perchance ye would have it to be. And to
begin with that ye quarrel at next, as wilily and slightly slipped over.

But most of all (say you) another sentence in the very said Stap. 41. b.
Chapter. And even the next to this ye allege that the king as soon as he is
chosen shall bestow his study upon the reading of the Deuteronomie. Where
Moses says that in doubtful causes, the people should have their recourse to
the said Priests, and to the judge for the time being meaning the high
Priest, of whom they should learn the truth: and are commanded to do
accordingly, even under pain of death.

All this ye say the Bishop wilily and slightly slipped over, and yet in the
very said Chapter it was even the next to that he alleged. Alack master
Stapleton that ever ye should for shame have thus ouerslipt your self. Were
ye not half a sleep, when ye made this slip? For I will not recharge you so
hard with wiliness and slight, but with palpable grosnesse, and marvelous
negligent ignorance, in a student of divinity, to beat so much upon a text
as you do here, charging your adversary with wiliness, slight,
unfaithfulness, unskillfulness, leaving out, curtalling, and ouerslipping, and
your self show so little skill, or regard, in citing your text, that either
ye know not, or ye care not what comes before, what comes after, what
comes next, what comes not next, nor nere it. Ye say that the sentence of
the Priests and the Judges judgments on doubtful cases, comes even the
next, to that the Bishop alleged in the very said Chapter.

Turn your book to the Chapter once again M. Stap. read the words that
come next, yea all the words that follow in that Chapter. Nor his heart shall
be lifted up in pride above his brethren, neither shall he turn to the right
Deuteronomy. 17.
hand or to the left, that both he and his child may reign long time over
Israel. Does not this follow next and is not this the last sentence of the
said Chapter? Then if it be in that very Chapter, it comes not as you say
next unto it, but must needs go before, and so does it. Neither yet the next
before, for there comes between them five or six periods at the least. And as
they are two diverse places, so are they two sundry matters. Ye charge
therefore the Bishop amiss, with wily and slight ouerslipping, where nothing
is ouerslipped, though the former sentence be not alleged. And ye falsely
join them together saying. The King shall bestow his study upon the reading
of the Deuteronomie, where Moses says that in doubtful causes. etc. When as
Moses there, says not so. Ye falsely say it comes next to it, which it does
not, but goes before, in another matter, and diverse sentences between. What a
foul ouerslippe was this of you, that could pry so narrowly to seek a slip
over a slipper in another footing, where was not so much as any tripping
awrie, and your self unawares have slipped into a foul lie over the sloppes and
all.

But if we let slip this, as but a gross ouerslippe, yet may we not so let
slip M. Stapletons slipperie and false exposition, for all he says, that
their priests can not expound the scripture amiss. For where the text says,
the people should have their recourse to the priests, and to the judge for the
time being: meaning (says M. Stapleton) the high priest: In deed so does his
popish gloss interline it, and yet even Lyra that would shift of the matter,
as much as he might, for his Pope, with his moral or rather mar all gloses
hereon: both notes in his margin that these be twain, summ^ sacerdos, and
iudex, the high Priest and the Judge. And says, in his casibus, etc. In these
and the Lyra in Deuteronomy. 17.
like cases, they must run unto the higher Judges, that is to say* to the
high Priest, and to the chief Judge of Israel. And although sometime it
chanced, that one person had both these offices as appears by Hely, who was
both chief 1. Reg. 4.
Judge, and chief Priest, yet for the most part, as they are distinct offices,
so were they commonly in distinct and several The high priest and the chief
judge mentioned Deuteronomy. 17. were two distinct persons.
persons.

And to prove this further by the penalty, which as you say was under the
pain of death, the which judgment apperteyned to the Judge, but ordinarily it
was not lawful for the high priests, to judge any man to death, as even the
wicked priests, to cloak their murder, when Pilate said unto them, Accipite
eum vos. etc. Take you him and judge John 18.
him according to your law, could reply (like to the papisticall Priests,
that post of the bodies death to the temporal power) Nobis non licet quemque
interficere, It is not lawful for us to kill any man: but the Judge that this
place speaks of, should ordinarily condemn to death the refuser, Ex indicis
decreto moriatur homo ille, Let that man die by the judges decree. Ergo he
means not that this ordinary Judge should be the high priest.

Besides this the very text is plain, in making this distinction, to the
Priests, and to the Judge, not to the Judge meaning the Priest. Again, The
commandment of the high Priest, and the decree of the Judge. Which fully
imports that he means not the one by the other, but expresses two diverse
persons, and two several offices distinctly. Wherefore master Stapleton
apparently wresteth the text, thus flatly to say, that he means the high
Priest by the name of Judge, to prove that his Pope has no peer, but all
judgment remains in him alone, in every difficult matter of religion.

And here again appears another of his false and purposed ouerslippes. Moses
(says he) does say that in doubtful causes the people should have their
recourse to the priests. Why do ye here master Stapleton forget your former
marginall censure, of leaving out any material parts of the sentence?
telling us of doubtful causes, but not telling us what those doubtful causes
were, and speak as doubtfully as though they were matters of doctrine,
religion, and ecclesiastical ordinances, (which are the matters in question
between the parties) when this place speaks only, of decyding a difficult
or doubtful matter, between blood and blood, plea and plea, plague and
plague, in matters of strife: But none of these specifications, what manner of
doutfull causes he meant, would you express, for fear it would then be to
soon espied, that this sentence made nothing at all for the supreme judgment
of your Pope. And yet after these two sleightes, the one of remoouing the
civil Prince or judge from this judgment with the Priests, and ascribing all
to the Priests alone, to make it serve your purpose the better: The other by
slipping over all these doubtful causes, in the sentence expressed, as though
it were simply spoken without any specification, to make it serve for the
Priests absolute judgment in all ecclesiastical ordinances: When ye have
with this dubble sleyght and wiliness thus wrested the Text, then come ye in
ruffling like a lustye Rutterkin, and swappe me down hereon this iolie
marginall note.

An other sentence in the said Chapter by master Horn Stap. 41. b
alleged that overthrows all his boast. God save al master Stapleton, here
is no small boast I trow. We had now need to beware betymes, for fear the
Bishop be here quite overthrown, since that master Stapleton makes so
proud a challenge. Let us therefore take heed to his argument on this place.
Which place (says he) well weighed and considered, serves to declare that
I have said, that the King and others, should receive not only Stapl. 41. b.
the letter, which as Saint Paul says does kill, but the true and sincere
meaning withal, wherein stands the life of the letter, as the life of man
within his body, yea the eternal life (whereof by following lewd lying
expositions of holy w^itte, we are spoiled) at the Priests hands.

Is this the conclusion of all this great crake M. St. that the B. should be
quite overthrown by this sentence? what one word is here, not only of this
sentence, but even of your own well weighed and considered conclusion thereon,
which has come nere unto, much less overthrown the Bishops assertion? Which
if ye would have overthrown, ye should have concluded against it, and thus
have reasoned.

Moses said to the people of Israel, if any hard or doubtful Deuteronomy. 17.
thing in judgment rise up with thee, betwixt blood and blood, plea and plea,
plague and plague, in matters of strife within the City. etc. Go to the
Priests and unto the Judge that shall be in those days. etc. Ergo a Christian
king ought not to challenge or take upon him any such supreme government in
ecclesiastical matters as does ye Queens majesty. This conclusion in deed,
quite overthrows the Bishops assertion. But who sees not that this sentence
is to far fetched to infer any such conclusion? And therefore master
Stapleton though this was his butt^ on which his ey^ should have been
fixed, and brought his proves to have improued this: yet durst he not once
touch or come nighe it for very shame, for if he had, he saw that every boy
in the schools would have hissed out his argument. And therefore wilyly
weighing and considering how he might make it seem to serve to some purpose,
that he had craked on so much. This place (says he) well weighed and
considered serves to declare that I have said, that Kings and others should
receive not only the bare letter, but the true and sincere meaning withal.
etc. at the priests hands.

And is this all that this place serves to, M. Stapleton? for I dare say you
have well weighed and considered the matter, that from so great a boast, are so
suddenly fallen into so deep a consideration, of the bare letter killing, and
the true quickening sense thereof. Whereas that text if ye would but meanly
weigh and consider it once again, neither talks of any killing letter, or
living sense at all: but of certain doubtful cases of strife, nor can serve
to confirm those sayings of Christ and Saint Paul, without manifest wresting
of it. But to what purpose do ye so well weigh and consider that, which is
nothing in question, and that which is in question, and denied, and you should
prove: without any weighing or considering ye take it for confessed? Who
doubts of this that Princes should not only receive the bare letter, but the
true sense and meaning withal at the priests hands? This Princes in deed
should do, which if they had always done, they should not have received so
many of their lewd lying expositions, as they have done here to fore, at the
priests hands, who herein deceived princes, and gave them not the true meaning
and sense together with the copy of Gods word: but debarred Princes of copy
thereof, of letter, sense, and all: feeding them with the vain fables, and
lewd lying expositions, of their own deuisings.

Wherefore Lyra notes here upon the Hebrew gloss, Lyra in Deuteronomy. ^7.
Hic dicit glossa Hebraica. etc. Here says the Hebrew gloss, if the priest
shall say unto thee that thy right hand, is thy left hand, or thy left hand,
is thy right hand, this saying must be vpholden, which thing is manifest
false. For the sentence of no manner of man, of what authority so ever he be,
is to be vpholden, if it conteyne a manifest falsehoode or error. And this
appears by this, which is set before in the text. They shall judge unto thee
the truth of Judgment: and afterward is set under: And they shall teach thee
according to his law: whereby it appears that if the Priests speak that
which is false, or swerve from the law of God, they are not to be heard. Thus
says Lyra in (confuting the Hebrew glosars) of their hye Priests, that said
they could not err, and therefore what soever they taught must be believed.
And do not your Papists say the same of the Pope, and your self hold the
same of your Priests expositions, that theirs always must be taken for the
true sense? else whereto bring ye out this conclusion? In doubtful cases of
blood, and civil actions of strife, the high Priest, and the chief Judge
must determine a final sentence:

Ergo, Princes must receive, not the letter of the scripture, but such sense
as the Popish priests and the Pope, shall determine for the true sense in all
controversies of religion.

For this is the full drift of your reason, though ye dare not for shame speak
so plain. But this argument, the more it is wayed, wayeth like a fether in the
wind: and therefore ye turn the conclusion into general words and say: Ergo,
Princes and others must receive at the Priests hands not only the bare
letter that kills, but the true and sincere meaning thereof withal.

Which conclusion is not in controversy, but on both parts granted they
oughtso to do, the Priests to deliver to their Princes and others, the word of
God, and the true sense thereof: and the Prince and others ought so to receive
of them the same word of God, and the true sense thereof, and not the priests
own devises and expositions.

But since that none have ever done more contrary to this rule, sithe it was
first given by Moses, then have the Popish priests: had not Christian
princes great need to beware of Popish Priests gloses, and follow the
council of Lyra in rejecting them, and as other good Princes have done, to
displace those false glosing priests, and place faithful disyensers of Gods
mysteries in their rooms, and ouersee that their people be not deceived in
receiving at the priests hands, quid pro quo? And for this cause the priest
should deliver to his prince a perfect copy of the law, which M. St. wickedly
terms the bare letter that kills, and thereto wresteth S. Paul, and
wresteth this sentence of the judicial law, among the Jews for their time, in
the foresaid civil controversies: to be a simple rule for all christian
commonweals, in all ecclesiastical causes, excluding quite al judgment from
the prince, and including it in his Pope and Priests alone, iumbling the Prince
and the people together under the priests absolute determination. Where this
place joins together as colleages, the prince with the priest, or rather
ascribes the skill in such doubts to be defined by the learned and faithful
priest, and the full authority to give judgment, and to ratify the Priests
sentence, in condemning the refusers to death, and in approving the receyuers,
to consist, not in the high Priest, but in the Judge or Prince. And thus this
place, that he would so feign wrest every way against Christian Princes, and
for his Pope and popelings, being well wayed and considered according to his
own request: makes nothing for his matter, nor for his shauelings, but clean
against them. And being better wayed and considered, makes nothing against
the Bishops cause, nor against christian Princes supreme government, in
ouerseeing and correcting such false priests: but very much for their duty
and chief authority therein.

M. St. having thus shamefully counterblasted the Bishops allegatio^, to set a
good face on an euilfauorde matter: biddes the bishop go on, and cries out
that he has go^ten the victory, and that the bishop is at his first
encou^tring ouerblowne Stap. 42. a.
and discomfited even with his own blast. And that it is not likely hereafter,
that he shall bring any thing to resolve his adversary. But as God would have
it, all these words are no blows, nor arguments, but vain triu^phes before
he have gotten the victory: of the which he reckons him self so sure, that
he grants the Bishops other allegation. Deuteronomy. 13.

For as for the next place (says he) it enforces no supremacy, Fol. 42. a.
we freely grant you, that princes may sharply punish teachers of false and
superstitious religion and Idolatry (being thereof by the Priests instructed)
which is the matter of your text.

This parenthesis, M. St. (being thereof by the priests instructed) is the
lewd lying gloss of your own forge. The text has no such matter of the
priests instruction but what think you, does enstruction more enforce an
authority in the priest, than power to punish and correct does enforce an
authority in the prince? or does this follow, that because the prince by the
priests enstruction does punish false teachers: Ergo he punishes the^ by the
priests authority? but as you freely grant that the prince may punish
noughtie, false, and idolatrous priests, so that the priests instruction is any
matter of the bishops text, or that his instruction should more enforce
authority over the prince, than the princes punishment does over false
teachers: is both evident false, and this we as flatly deny, as you do freely
grant the other.

Howbeit, presupposing that we would also grant him this, that all things must
still be done by the priests instruction: But then (says master Stap.) take
heed to your self master Stap. 42. a.
Horn) and as though he him self were this instructour, for I say to you
(says he) that ye and your fellows teach false and superstitious religion,
many and detestable heresies, and so withal plain idolatry.

In deed sir, so ye say, and that full stoutly, braying out with I say to you,
but thanks be to God, ye do but say it to us, ye do not prove it to us, but and
it were put to a double post, might it not prove a word of course? and then
take heed to your self master Stapl. for we not only say to you, but by the
word of God prove it to you, that you and your fellows teach false and
superstitious religion, many and detestable heresies, and so withal plain
idolatry. etc. and so have ye given sentence against your self, and have told
the magistrate his office to punish you as false teachers, that care not how
ye falsify and wrest the scriptures to deface your adversary, the
unskillfulness and unfaithfulness wherewith ye falsely charge him, ever double
or treble, redounding upon your self. The residue of your process on these two
chalenges of unskillfulness and unfaithfulness, I refer to your common
places of railing, scoffs, and slanders, and will answer to the third great
fault that ye find in this division.

Now that ye bring out of Glossa ordinaria, (say you) that Stap. 42. b.
the Prince is commanded by his princely authority to cause his subjects to
become Israelites, it may perhaps be in some ordinary gloss of Geneua his
notes, Bales, or some such like, but as for the old ordinary Latin gloss, I am
right sure (M. Horn) it has no such thing.

Are ye right sure thereof, M. Stap? and has it no such thing in deed? will
ye venture your poor honesty thereon? I dare say ye would have us think, that
ye have looked on the ordinary gloss, whether any such thing were there or
no, else would ye never for shame so boldly affirm it. But what speak I of
shame in so shameless a face, that boldly dare auouche he is right sure there
is no such thing, when if he had looked in ye ordinary gloss, except he would
of purpose look from it, he could scantly miss it, even at the first view.
The words of the gloss upon super Israel, are these: Benedictio est regnare
super Israel. 1. regnando facere Israel. s. deum videntes. It is a blessing to
reign over Israel, that is to say, by reigning (which the Bishop Englished,
by his Princely authority) to make or cause to become Israelites, that is to
wete, folks seeing God. The Bishop Englished the sentence plainly, by his
Princely authority to cause his subjects to become Israelites. And what is
here that is not only in sum of sentence, but in the very emphasis or force
of the bare words, all one with the gloss? and yet this most impudent, what
should I call him, unskillful or unfaithful liar, or both, chalengeth the
Bishop of untruth, and says he is right sure there is no such thing. In what
thing will this man stick, to outface the simple and unlearned, that dare thus
deal with such a learned father? and commit it to print to be examined of any
learned reader, and crake of such assurance, as though he had poared over all the
book for it, and even at the first chop, he is found an open liar. But I doubt
whether ever he looked on the book at all, but trusted some retchelesse
superuisor. For if he had looked but over the head of the very text, Ut longo
tempore Deuteronomy. 17.
regnet, That he might long time reign, he should have found noted on this
word Regnet, corporaliter and spiritualiter, That he should reign or
exercise his Princely authority a long time, Bodily and spiritually, not only
to have a regiment in lay, temporal and civil matters, as M. St. affirms,
but even in spiritual matters also. And had he but looked a little higher on
these words, Legetque illud omnibus diebus vitae su^. He should read it all
the days of his life, He should have found, Vsus reddit magistrum, the use (of
reading the word of God) makes the king a master (in Gods word) that is to
say, a setter forth or teacher thereof as it were. Upon which the ordinary
Gloss says, Nota quan^ assid^itate legere debent Sacerdotes, c^ assidue legant
reges. Lectio ipsa est lux and vit^: vnde verba qua ego loquor spiritus and
vita sunt. Note with how much continuance the Priests ought to read the
word of God, when Kings should read it continually: The reading is it self
the light and the life, whereupon says Christ, the words which I speak are
spirit and life. Here M. Stapleton, the life lies not (as you said right
now) in the Priests exposition, but in the word it self, and the continual
reading thereof: wherein not only the Priest, but the Prince, is a kind of
Master: But are ye not right sure, none of this is there neither? ye were best
to say so, for I perceive ye have an excellent grace to face down a matter,
be it never so plain and open.

Let us now come to the fourth and last fault, that he gathers against the
Bishop in this division which is also an untruth (as he says in his margin)
the place of the Deuteronomie flady belied and adding this unto the other
before, he says, This therefore may well stand for an other untruth, as also
that which immediately you allege out of Deu. 13. for in St. fol. 42. b
all that chapter or in any other of that book, there is no such word to be
found as you talk of.

Uerily I believe our student M. St. had for studied himself in a lasie
slumber, and wrote this nodding half a sleep, for full awake for pure shame, he
would never have suffered such lewd lies to escape his pen, and come in dropping
thus one in an others neck, as though he were at a point, he cared not what
he said, neither against the plain truth, nor against himself, much less
against the bishop: Every word that the B. rehearses in the last end of this
division, is f^u^d plainly expressed in the. xiij. and* 17. of Deuteronomy. which
chapters ye Bishop quoted: The words of punishing teachers of fal^e and
superstitious religion and idolatry, in the former side of Fol. 42. a
the leaf, he grau^teth himself to be in Deuteronomy. the. 13. Notwithstanding he
forgets straight ways what he said, and affirms on ye other side of the
leaf, that there is no such word to be found. But as he trippeth on the truth
in the first side, so on the other side of the same leaf, he flatly falls
into a flat lie, and in both he tumbleth into a foul contradiction. Moreover
in both sides he grants, that by the. 13. of the Deuteronomy. The prince by his
authority may punish teachers of fal^e religion, superstition and idolatry.
And may he do it without examining, whether the doctrine wherewith the teacher
is charged be true or false, and being false whether he taught it or no? Such
may be the order in the Popes consistory, but in Gods Courts it is far
otherwise. For God commands Deuteronomy. 17. (as the Bishop avouched) the Prince,
when any is denounced unto him, to have taught any false religion, that he make
diligent examination, Quia no^ est Lyra in Deute. 17.
procedendum ad sententiam (says Lyra upon these words) fine dilige^ti
examinatione praeuia, because he must not proceed to give sentence without
diligent examination had before. And this being found by the Princes diligent
examination that he has taught false religion: he shall be put to death. The
Bishops words comprehend all this. The last words also of the Bishops
division, to wete, Et auf^res malum de medio tui, And thou shall take away evil
from among thee: Are they not plainly set forth in both those chapters? So
that a man might wonder that knew not well Master Stapletons impudency
(seeing that all the points that the Bishop speaks of in the later part
of this Division, in the places of the Deuter* above mentioned, are so
manifestly expressed) with what face M. Stapleton can so boldly affirm, that
in all the* 13. chapter, or any other of that book, there is no such word to be
found as the bishop talks of. And thus with more than a full mess of
notorious untruths Sta. 42. b
(to return your own conclusion M. Stapl. most worthyly upon your self, ye
have furnished the first service, brought yet to the table, concerning the
principal matter: howbeit perhaps though this be very course, yet you have
fine dishes and dayntie cates coming after. Let us then proceed. And as he
says in the entrance of this division, Go on I say in Gods name (M. St.) and
prosecute your Supra. 40. b
plea stoutely, God send ye good speed, and so he does even such as you and
the honesty of your cause deserve, and at the first entry of your plea,
causes you and your clerkly and honest dealing, forthwith to your high
commendation so to appear, that even the first authority that ye handle of
all the holy Scripture, plainly discovers you and causes you to be espied,
and opens as well your fidelity, as the weakness of your whole cause, the
which even with your own first Counter blast is quite ouerblowen. So fitly
(M. St. al these your own words do serve against your self.

Division. 11.
IN this division the Bishop brings for his purpose two ^ol. 42. b
things, first he alleges generally that the best and most godly princes
that ever governed Gods people, did perceive and rightly understand, that to be
Gods will, that they have an especial regard and care, for the ordering and
setting forth of Gods true Religion, and therefore used great diligence, with
fervent zeal, to perform and accomplish the same.

Secondly, for proof hereof, he enters into his ensamples of the old
Testament, beginning with Moses, that he was not the chief Priest or Bishop,
but the supreme governor or Prince, and as chief gouernoure had the ordering
of religion, which he dutifully executed with great zeal and care.

To the former part and general assertion of the Bishop, Chap. 9.
M. Stapleton only answers by a marginall note, saying:

Regard, and chief rule, care and supreme government, Fol. 43. b
are two diverse things* Now forsoothe a solemn studied answer of a student
in divinity, he is a silly wise man that understood not thus much before
without this marginal note. Too simple were he in deed that sees they be not
al one, as he has simply set them out. But he that complained so late of
curtalling and leaving out a material part of the sentence, which doing he
calls unfaithfulness, see how unfaithfully he hoffeth and curtalleth the
Bishops sentence. The Bishop spoke not of simple care and reregarde, but of
an especial care and regard for the ordering and setting forth of Gods true
religion. With which assertion M. Stap. finds no fault, neither ^y any word
goes about to improve it, and so shows himself to agree therewith, and by
silence to confess the truth thereof. Now therefore let us resolve the Bishops
assertion, and then consider thereon. The Bishops assertion has these three
parts. First that godly Princes ought to order and set forth Gods true
religion. Secondly, that they ought to do this with an especial regards and
care. Thirdely, they perceive and rightly understand, that it is Gods will
they should so do. Now since that this by master Stapletons deep silence, is
agreed upon betwixt the Bishop and him: I make hereon this argument. To order
and set forth Gods true religion with especial regard and care is the Princes
duty.

But the only sort of government that the Queens Majesty does challenge and
take upon hi^ in ecclesiastical causes, is to order and set forth Gods true
Religion with an especial regard and care. Ergo

Prin^ ought to take upon them such government, as the Queens Majesty does
claim and take upon her in ecclesiastical causes.

And thus is the Bishops antecedent directly proved, and so consequently the
principal matter of M. Feck. issue.

Now as the former part being the general assertion to all the ensamples
following, is no whitte impeached by any answer of master Stap. to it, but by
silence (which with him is an argument of confession) granted: so like a very
Counterblaster in deed, he blus^reth and puffs at the second part, as though
he would all to blast it.

Moses (says the Bishop) was supreme governor over Gods people, and was not
chief priest or Bishop, for that was Aaron.

Here master Stapleton denies not Moses to be the supreme governor, but that
he was not chief priest or Bishop he utterly gainsayeth it. It is an untruth
(says he in his score) for Moses was the chief priest as shall be proved.
Stap. 42. b and 43. a
Here is a flat promise of proof, but I fear me it will never be performed,
neither does master Stapleton here go about the perfourmance of it. And
therefore the Bishops denial of Moses to be the chief Priest, must stand for a
truth, till by proving Moses to be the chief Priest, he have proved it to be
an untruth. And in the mean time, his promise must stand but for a crake, as
also his proud entra^nte into his Chapter. That the Scripture by the Bishop
alleged reaches nothing home, but rather infringeth Stap. 43. a.
and plainly marreth the Bishops purpose, and fullye stands on our side,
says this student, so greatly has arrogancy sotted him. He fares as did
the Soldier, who when his adversary had many times in wrestling hurled him
down in the sight of every stander by, yet would he never confess that
he had any fall, yea, most arrogantlye* he still affyrmed that he had ^ast
the other. And even so plays this student (for this of wrestling is one of
his common similitudes) he contendeth to wrestle with the Bishop, which is
in verys deed as he says in this Chapter, Impar congressus Ach^lls Troilus.
An uneven match between Troylus and Achilles. What a number of ^oule falls
he has had, yea, how he has been ouerturned in his ^wne trippes, is
apparaunt to every Readers eyes, and go no further but even to his last
Chapter. And yet see how he craketh, that all the Bishops allegations,
mar his own cause, and fully stand on his side. Where contraryewyse they
have dry beaten him back, belly, side and all.

And as he thus fondely makes vaunt of his former Stap. 43. a.
victory: ^o I doubt nothing (says he) it will fare with his examples. Well
said of a student, like an other Gawin, he doubts nothing. But see a sudden
qualme of his inconstancy, for even straight ways, after he has cried out,
all comes to shor^: he says, but here am I shrewedly ^ncombred, and in a great
doubt what to do. Why master Stap. 43. a.
Stapleton, are ye now so soon in a great doubt, and right now as does bold
Bayarde doubted nothing, and have before already without any stammering
thereat, clapped down your marginall note for a full resolute answer, that
Moses was the chief Priest, and now doubt ye what to answer?

But master Stapleton has so many weapons that he is shrewdly encombred with
them, as it were another armed Golias, and yet one small poebble stone, will
soon ease him of this encombrance. He tells us he has so many aunsweres,
that he doubts with which he should begin, for I could (says he) make a
short but a true answer that these ensamples are fully answered already by
master D. Harding and master Dorman. In deed master Stapleton this were a
short aunswers, but I see your self fear (as ye said before) it would come
to short, and not reach home to the matter. Yet, say you, if ye should
refer the Reader thither, Stapl. 43. ^
to his and your great ease, it should be to the sparing, not only of pen,
ynke, and paper, but of the time also, which of all things is most precious.
It seems master Stapleton ye are a man of deep casting, these are good
considerations of pen, ynke, paper and time. But why follow ye not your
own council, which if ye had observed, and left out so many impertinent
vagaries, and other your trifling common places, ye had saved more paper,
pen, ynke, and time, by three halues than ye have done. And here as seeming
full resolved to follow this advise, ye clappe down another marginall note.
All master Horns examples out of the old Testament answered already, by
master Doctor Harding, and master Dorman. Here, says he, is a short but a
true answer. To this short answer, I answer again.

All M. Doctor Hardings and M. Dormans answers, confuted already by the B of
Sarum, and M. Nowell.

Here is another as short an answer as yours M. Stap. and a great deal truer,
which I remitte to the indifferent viewers of both their answers.

Now might we both rest, and breath us, from further answering of these
ensamples, and spare penue, ynke paper, and time also, that he seems to
account most precious. But another thing was more precious unto him, and that
was master Feckenhams hyre, and his friends largess, for so much Paper pen
ynke and time spent about his book, and the gain of the printed copies, which
the bigger volume it came unto (for he would not seem a threehalfepennie
student) the fatter exhibition it should yield, and he seem the greater
clerk, yea to go beyond his masters. And therefore there is no remedy, he
will spare neither pen ynke paper time. nor pains also, but that his
Counterblast shall be blown up to so large and full a volume, that it may
encounter even the best of theirs.

To whose answers if he should refer himself, and say no more thereto:
Then I fear me (says he) would Stap. 43. a.
step forth if not master Horn (a good simple plain man in his dealings)
yet some other ioly fine fresh pregnant witty fellow, yea and bring me to
the streightes which way so ever I did tread.

You are loath I perceive master Stapleton to be brought into the straight way
to tread aright therein, for then your wrie treading would soon be espied.
But ye seek crookes and shifting answers for the nonce. And like the vain
talkatiue Arrian Philosopher, ye despise the right reverend and learned
father, calling him in contempt a good simple plain man in his dealings. Whose
wisdom, judgment, learning and estimation, not only all godly learned that
know him both on this side and beyond the seas, acknowledge with reverence:
but even the chief syre^ on your side, and your good masters master Stapleton
do confess, though they groyne thereat, and be of contrary opinion unto
him, and agree therein with you, yet are they ashamed of this your light
demeanor. And which of them sees not that yet it is much better, to be a
good simple plain man in his dealings, then to be a vaineglorious, wicked,
crafty, dissembling man, in his dealings, as you have showed your self
throughout all your Counterblast to be? And if he be a good simple plain
dealing man, are not you again (that durst counterblast his dealinges) a
naughty, false, and dubble dealing man? If he be a good simple plain man in
his dealinges, than he has dealt well simply and plainly with master
Feckenham, who ought to receive the oath by his promise, if he meant also good
truth* simple and plain faith in his dealinges. And then what meant you master
Stapleton, thus to bend your study, to spend your paper, pen, ynke, pains
and time, against a good simple and plain dealer? Though ye have Balaams
mark* man, and tread the way of Balaam. ( Qui mercedem 2. Pet. ^.
iniquitat is am^it, That loved the reward of iniquity.) Being hired for
lu^re to write against him: did ye think that d^bling false^ would prevail
against honest, plain and simple dealing? Or that the truth is to be despised
because it is plain and simple? And that your false craft would not be espy^,
except some iolie, fine, fresh, Stap. 43. a.
pregnaunt, witty fellow, would step forth and bring ye to the
streightes? Ye are much deceived master Stapleton, in your own concepte, and
think your self a iolyer fellows than any man else takes you, that ye must
needs be matched ^th some such ^ie pregnaunt witty fellow, or else ye can
not be dryu^n to the streightes. But were your memory as good as (...) take
your wit to be, ye would^ not forgette, that even that Balaams Ass, whereon
your Balaams mind do^th ride, has brought your self to the streyght^ many
times before this. And as Saint Peter says of him, Correptionem vero habuit
2. Pet. ^.
s^ vesani^. etc. He was rebuked for his iniquity, for the dumme Ass
speaking with man's voice forbad the foolishness of the Prophet: so your own
tongue has diverse times so confounded you, that there is less need than ye
wene of some such iolye fellow. I wisse a good simple plain dealing man, will
bring ye to the streightes soon enough, how witty, pregnant, fresh, fine,
and ioly, so ever ye esteem your self. Now say you:

If I should (as I said) send the Reader to them, then Stap. 43. a.
should I hear a fool, a dolt, an Ass, that can say nothing of his own. As
though ye had not already sent the Reader to them, when ye say it is a true
and a short answer, and set it forth with a solemn note in the margin, as it
were a mark for the nonce set up, for the Reader to resort unto them. Does
your conscience give ye therefore, that ye deserve such homely terms as you
conceive ye should hear, if ye did so? Why did ye not then avoid the doing
so, that ye might there by a^oyde those terms? But ye may well hear in
deed, (if not such terms as your guilty conscience fancieth you deserve)
yet this, that ye can say nothing of your own, but their aunsweres in effect,
turquesed in your flaunting livery words.

Then should the cause be slaundered also (say you) Stap. 43. a. b
as so poor and weak, that it could bear no large and ample Treatise, and
that their aunsweres were such as I was ashamed of them, and therefore wylilye
and wiselye forbeared them, with many such other triumphant tryfling toys.

Would ye in good sadness master Stapleton avoid all triumphant tryfling
toys? Why then stand ye tryfling in these excuses? If master Harding and
master Dorman have answered these ensamples already, lease you any estimation
(upon the which ye stand so much) being yet but a young student in divinity
to them, to refer the matter to their aunsweres? If they have answered ho^*
your surplus^age is but tryfling toys. If it be any other, then their
aunsweres reached not home. And so your answer makes your self a liar, that
say they have answered the Bishop already. Again, is your cause slaundered
as poor and weak, if it have answered already by such famous Rabines? Or
is it the richer and stronger for the addition of your needelesse toys?
Lastly, does the honesty of your cause lie, in bearing a large and ample
Treatise? Now truly then it is a false cause, that dare not abide short
plain and simple dealing, but must be flourished (...) embossed out with a
large and ample* Treatise. ^. And herein you have done in deed your part,
neither will I speak it to flatter you (though I would not Wherein master
Stapleton excels all the Lou^in written*
have you wax to proud thereof) your aunsweres are far beyond all your
fellows, or masters, or any of your side, for railing, scoffing, lying,
slaundering, quarrelling digressions, and other your common places, ye may
^eare the prick and prise. Yea the best of them all herein, are but
benchewhi^lers to you, that of so poor and weak, of so false and naughty a
cause, could make it bear so large and ample a Treatise. But when all is
done, a good plain simple manne in his dealing, would tell ye in plain
English, that all these flourishe^ are nothing else, but tryumphaunt trys^ing
toys.

Again, (say you) if I should repeat or inculcate their Stap. 43. ^.
aunsweres, then would master Nowell or some other rushe in upon me, with his
ruffling rhetorike that he uses against master Dorman, and master Doctor
Harding, with a precise account and calculation what either master Dorman o^
master doctor Harding borrowed of Hosius, or either of them two of the other,
and what I have no we borrowed of them both, or of either of them.

It were maruayle, had master Stapleton any shame, that he would for shame
mention those broad borowings. Howbeit that this is but a crafty
preoccupation, borowing likewise from them, the most of his stuff, and would
not be vpbrayded therefore, nor called to account: a good simple plain dealing
man may soon epsy this prevention.

Now that he has cast all his doubts that encumbred him, like a circumspect
man, because he would have his answer large and ample: and has made his
preoccupation, under the name of borowing, to steal hereafter what he will
from his fellows, knowing he might be bold with them, who had by like
borowing (...) the s^ne from others: leaving the short answer that he chose
before, he chooses two for more surety, that if the one fail him, the other
may help at a pi^che.

But on the one side (says he) least any of the good Stap. 43. b.
brethren, should surmile upon my silence any such distrust* I will
compendiously as the matter shall require abridge their aunsweres, and that
master Horn shall think that our stuff is not all spent* I shall on the
other side for a surplussage, adioyne some other things to our opponent
accomodate. An Almonde for Parate, so finely our student begins to speak, that
a good plain simple man can scarce understand his (...) terms.

But this is the effect of it, we shall now have new stuff of some old store,
(good stuff and God will) for all their stuff as he crakes, is not yet spent,
but I perceive it goes hard with them in their store house, and that this
stuff is some of the last cast, God send it be not such stale stuff, when it
comes to the view, as Cardinal Campeius moiles did bring into England, and
uttered in Cheap side. But such as it is we must take it in good worth, it is
the best he has to answer the Bishops ensample withal.

The first ensample is of Moses, in whom the Bishop The example of Moses and
the Papists shift^ about it.
notes three things. First that he was the supreme governor of Gods people.
Secondly, that he ordered and set forth Gods true Religion, with great regard
and care, prescribing as well to Aaron and the Levites, as to the people.
Thirdly, that he was not the chief priest, and therefore could not do them in
such respect, but as he was supreme governor.

The first and the second propositions that Moses was the supreme governor,
and that he did order and direct all things, M. St. grants. The third part
he denies, and affirms that Moses was the chief priest, and in that
respect did all these foresaid things. This assertion he says he will
prove, both by his masters old, and by his own surplusage of new stuff
also. His argument of both these stuffes is this.

I say with M. D. Harding, and S. Augustine, that Moses Stap. 43. b.
was a Priest as well as a Prince, I say the same with M. Dorman* with Philo
Iudeus, with S. Hierome, and with S. Hieroms master, Gregory Nazianzene:

Ergo, Moses was the chief Priest.

By the like reason, if M. St. be a priest, he might prove him self to be the
Pope of Rome. He is a Romish priest: Ergo, he is the chief Romish priest,
which is the pope. The one reason is as good as the other. But here he will cry
out, and say I do him wrong to change his conclusion, for he infers no such
words, but these:

And so consequently Moses ensample serves not your Stap. 43. b.
turn, but quite ouerturneth your assertion.

True it is in deed, this is your conclusion, M. St. but what was the bishops
assertion, which this ye say, quite ouerturnes was not this his assertion, that
Moses was not the chief priest, and did not you deny this assertion, and
affirm it to be an untruth, saying, for Moses was the chief priest, as shall
be proved? did ye not here make promise to prove it? did ye not say, that to
answer this example, ye had other fresh stuff, not yet spent? must not then
this stuff be directed to this end and conclusion, to fulfill your promise,
and ouerturne the bishops assertion, which was, that Moses was not the chief
priest, but Aaron? and you should prove as ye have freshly promised, that Moses
was the chief Priest. And therefore if this be not your conclusion, ye subtly
and falsely swerue from the conclusion that ye ought to have concluded: ye
perform not your promise to prove Moses the chief priest: nor your
conclusion, as ye crake, ouerturnes the bishops assertion: which was that
Moses was not the chief priest, but Aaron. And therefore either this is your
argument, Moses was a Priest, Ergo, he was chief Priest, or else ye conclude
not against the bishops assertion.

If ye say ye conclude this, all the world sees what a fond conclusion it is.
And if ye have a poleshorne priests crown of your own (as I doubt not but ye
have a fair one) ye may as well conclude to your self the Popes triple crown.
And if ye conclude it not, ye conclude not against the bishop, nor fulfill your
promise, for all your proves stand on this proof, that Moses was a priest.
Now the question was not whether Moses was a priest, or no, which is another
question in controversy. But the question is, whether he or Aaron were the
chief priest.

Yet will ye peradventure say, though I have herein (as ye have proved) swarued
from the direct conclusion in hand, that Moses was not the chief priest, nor
kept my promise, yea and made a escape in saying, that I ouerturned the bishops
assertion, when I did not, or if I went about it, yet mine argument proved but
a fond reason, from priest to chief priest: yet in the end I have proved
Moses a priest, and so consequently it serves not your turn (unless Stap.
43. b.
ye will king Henry the eight, and his son king Edward, yea and our gracious
Queen to be a priest to) but rather quite ouerturneth your assertion: and
think you M. Horn, that the Queens authority does iumpe agree with the
authority of Moses in causes ecclesiastical? then may she preach to the
people as Moses did: then may she offer sacrifices as Moses did: then may she
consecrate priests, as Moses did consecrate Aaron and others: then may it be
said of the imposition of hands, as was said of Moses, Joshua the son of
Nun was Deuteronomy. 34.
full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had put his hand upon him. It must
needs therefore follow that Moses was a priest, and that a high priest,
which ye here full peeuishly deny.

Where ye ask, M. Stap. of the Bishop. And think ye M. Horn, that the
Queens authority do the iumpe agree with the authority of Moses? might not
the bishop demand again the like of you, and think you* M. Stap. that even
your Popes authority, (admitting it were not the usurped tyranny which it is)
does iumpe agree with the authority of Moses? yea admitting also that
question, that he was a Priest, and so consequently again it serves not your
turn, nor master D. Hardings, nor master Dormans neither. I am sure, as ye
confess he was a priest, so ye will admit a difference between your Pope and
him, and even so (since ye reason thus precisely of differences in the persons)
ye ought also to have made a difference between Moses his diverse offices,
and to have given either office his proper actions, and so to have applied
them, and not to have confounded them, admitting that he, one person, were both
a Prince, and a Priest also, which hangs in controversy for all your cited
authors. But you reason confusedly a secundum quid ad simpliciter.

Moses (by an especial privilege) was a Priest as well as a Prince, and
thereby did preach, offer sacrifice, consecrate Aaron, lay imposition of
hands, and did other offices of Priests, and many extraordinary things besides:

Ergo, Moses in that he was a Prince, not a Priest, in that he exercised
ordinary government over priests and all ecclesiastical persons and causes, as
other Princes did after him* is not to be brought for example for our
christian princes to follow.

This is the plain and full effect of your tale. And what an ilfauorde
argument is this I pray you? but to hide this sequel after your fashion, ye
would inserre another yet more dark conclusion, saying:

It must needs therefore follow, that Moses was a priest, and that a high
priest, which ye here full peenishly deny.

Does this conclusion, M. Stap. if it were admitted, improve the Bishops
assertion? and yet this your conclusion standing on three parts, as it is not
to the purpose, so is every part stark false, and like the maker thereof. For
Moses by his prerogative, having especial commandment of God thereto, might
well do all those things, and yet it follows not of any necessity, that, as
you say, he must needs therefore have been a priest. Or if he had been a
priest, he must needs therefore be a high priest: or if he had been a high
priest, that he must needs be the highest priest. Neither did the bishop deny
peeuishly, that he denied (as you full peeuishly, rashely, and like your self
do judge,) nor yet denied, or granted, or spoke upon, one way or other,
whether Moses were priest, or a high priest, yea or no. But denied, and that
truly, that Moses was not the highest or chief Priest. Which words ye durst
not allege, nor yet generally term him the high priest, but ye say, a priest,
and that a high priest, your self seeming even by your speech, to grant that
the high priest or highest priest he was not. Nor ye can not cavil about your
own phrase, unless ye will say it is all one, a Lord, and the Lord, a high
priest, and the high priest, and so say ye meant the chief priest, when ye
said, a high priest: for all the world sees a great difference between these
terms, and that your self did subtly see, to make the reader believe ye had
performed your promise in proving him to be the chief priest. And yet ye bring
no proof, but only say, a priest, and that a high priest, ^go, the highest
priest So that if the reader more narro^ly viewing your gross slight, should
challenge ye, that you have not proved him the highest priest simply, no (will
ye say to save your honesty) I only said, a priest, and a high Priest, and
no more. But why do ye then belie the bishop, saying he denied that, that he
meddled not with, and prove not your matter in hand, nor keep touch with your
reader in perfourming your promise, that Moses was the chief Priest? Have ye
learned so well this subtle shift, that Omne promissum est aut debitum aut
dubium, Every promise is either due or doubtful? But howsoever ye will
discharge your promise, this your doutfull conclusion neither discharges your
falsehood, nor impugneth the Bishops assertion, much less ouerturnes it,
that he was not the chief priest, but the chief Prince or gouernoure, and
thereby did order and direct Gods true religion, both to all the Priests and
people, as the Bishop affirmed.

Now seeing he can by no means, neither old stuff, nor new stuff, bring
it about as he would have it, nor prove him to be the highest Priest, he will
leave his promise, and like to the Fore that would eat no Grapes, when he
could not come by them, with all the leapes he could make, so M. Sta. will
now, even renounce his solemn marginall crake, that he promised to prove
Moses the chief priest, and leaping at it, but ever leaping short, that he
was a Priest, and a little higher, that he was a high Priest, but he can not
leap so high, to obtain his purpose, that he was the highest Priest, he will
now let him go for being any Priest at all, and since he can not get the
grape he will none of it, but will hunt after an other pray.

I say now further with master Dorman (says he) that put Sta. 44. a
the case Moses were no priest, yet this example frames not so smoothly and
closely to your purpose as ye ween, for Moses was a prophet, and that such a
prophetas the like was not again. Give me now M. Horn Princes, prophets,
give me P^nces and lawmakers by especial order and appointement ordained of
God, to whose words God certainly would have given as great authority, as he
would and commanded to be given to Moses, and then perchance I will say that
ye say somewhat well to the purpose. Again Moses was such a special
Prophet, and so singularly chosen of God to be heard and obeyed in all
things, that he is in the holy Scripture evidently compared to Christ
himself: compared, I say, in the office of teaching and instructing. Moses
in the Deuteronom, foretelling the Jews of a Messiah to come, Deuter. 18.
says: The Lord thy God will raise thee up a Prophet from among thine own
nation, and of thy brethren, such an one as my self, him thou shall hear.
And this so spoken of Moses in the old Law, is in the nevve Testament
avouched and repeated, first by S. Peter the chief apostle, and next by
Saint Stephan the first martyr, and applied to Christ. If then Christ must
be so heard and obeyed of us, Act. 3. and. 7.
as was Moses of the Jews, no doubt as Christ is a king, a Prince, a
Prophet, a Priest, and a Bishop to us: so was Moses to them a Prince, a
Prophet, a Priest, and a Bishop. As Christ is of us to be heard and
obeyed as well in all matters Ecclesiastical as temporal (for no temporal
law can have force against the law of Christ among Christian men) so was
Moses to be heard and obeyed of the Jews in matters and causes as well
temporal as spiritual. For why? the Scripture is plain. Tanquam meipsum
audietis, You shall hear that Prophet even Act. 7.
as my self. Shevve us Master Horn any prince in the nevve Testamente so
conditioned and endevved, and then make your argument on Gods name. Verily any
prince that now is (namely in Ecclesiastical government) compared with
Moses, is as the Poet says: Impar congressus Achilli Troilus.

Yea forsoothe now ye say somethyng further, Master Stapleton, as ye
boaste: howbe^it nothing further in substance than your fellows before, but
in flourish of Copia verborum, ye say now further in deed, And I may say
to you, it was high time to say something further^: for hitherto all that ye
have said is nothing.

Well say you, now Put the case Moses were no Priest: I conclude then he
was not high Priest, and so putting this case, ye put your self in an ill
case, that before ye made a false lying crake, and now with shame are feign to
give it over. But if ye put the case (as ye say) like Master Dorman, then dare
ye not abide, by this case neither like Wylliam Summer, for so playde Master
Dorman in putting this case, and so I fear in the end ye must be feign to do.
Nay say you it frames not so smoothely and closely to your purpose as ye
vvene. Well Master Stapleton, it has hitherto so framed, that ye are feign to
give over your tackelyng, and forsake the perfourmaunce of your promise, and
to seek out other shifts of descante so that, although ye would bear us
in hand, it frames not so smoothelie, and closely for the Bishop, as he
thinks, yet you grant thereby, that it frames to his purpose. But as for
your purpose, for all your old or new stuff, it neither frames wide nor
close, smoothe nor roughe, but bringes it out of frame. For what an argument
call ye this?

Though Moses was no priest, yet Moses was a prophet so well as a Prince.

Ergo, Princes in that respect Moses was a Prince, may not follow his
princely steps.

Was not Saul also for the while a Prophet: Number and 1. Reg. 19. Iudic. 4.
Saul inter prophetas? Was not Debora a Prophetess, and yet a Princess too or
Judge over Israel? Was not David a Prophet, and is commonly called Regius
propheta, the Kingly Prophet? Nevertheless all Christian Princes may and
ought to follow his princely supreme government. And yet you cry, Give me now
M. Horn princes, prophets, give me princes and lawemakers by especial order
and appoyntmente ordained of GOD. Do ye not see how fondly ye reason, and
how ye confute your self* A difference in excellent Princ^ between their
extraord^ gifts and ordinary authority.
Ye reason as though there were no difference to be put between those
especial gifts and appointmentes: and the ordinary gift of their Princely
authority, because one Prince had both, and that after an extraordinary and
especial sort, but if those commandments, laws, and gifts of prophecies,
were such specialties, (as you say) ordained of God, then do your self sever
them from the prince ly authority. And why do ye then demand such
prerogatives in every Prince, which they had not in resp^* they were Princes,
but in other especial respects? But by this your fond rule, if because they
had such especial privileges, commandments, or gifts, therefore they are
not to be brought in for an example of the authority: then you must not
allege them, for the Priests or bishops authority in Ecclesiast. causes
neither, except your Priests and Bishops have the like prerogatives, and that
God would have as great authority given to them, as he would and commanded to
be given to Moses.

And thus your argument makes directly against your self. Yea, you may
hereby exclude al Princes from al civil government too, which if we proved
they might have, because Moses ordered and directed all the Judicial laws of
Gods people: may ye not reply on this fashion, and say, Give me Princes and
lawmakers by special order and appointment ordained of God? For you know we
can give you none in these laws neither, that are equal to Moses. May not
therefore Moses ensample herein, be alleged for the Princes authority in
making civil laws, because the Prince makes them not, with such special
order and appointment ordained of God as Moses did? Yes M. Stap. Moses
authority may well be alleged for all Princes authority, although they have
not the like gifts that Moses, Iosue, or David had. Yea those singular
ornaments of God in them, joined to their princely authority, make so (...)
an argument to fear Princes from doing the like things, because they have not
the like excellent gifts: that they be rather encouragementes, to set such
singular Princes government (as patterns to follow) evermore before their
eyes, and the better those Princes were, the better their ensamples be.

Where as you reason contrariwise, such a Prince was more excellent than
princes be now, Ergo, our Princes now may not take example of him: but ye
should conclude, that they ought to take example of him the rather. And even
for these causes, such Princes are examples to all other, because they so
excel all other. So men set their children in writing, to the best and most
cunning penman, at the least to have them come the nearer to him, so much as
they can though they cannot fully attain to his perfection, and not to say,
tushe he writes too fine for them, and therefore they must not take ensamples of
him. Yea, if a learned Schoolemaister were also an excellent divine, might not
the same man be reckoned for a schoolemaister, yea rather for a pattern and
ensample for other schoolemaisters to follow, because of his singular gift to
train the children up in the fear and knowledge of God, so well as in the
rudimentes of Grammar?

And will ye then debar Moses from being an example to other Princes,
because he was not only a Prince, but a Prophet also, because he had more
excellent gifts and prerogatives than other Princes have?

But here, thynking thereby the more to abase and dashe Christian Princes out
of countenance, from taking example of this excellent Prince Moses, ye
mount so high into the praise of him, that like to the Friar which in the
praise of saint Frauncis, extolling him above all the Saints, above
Seraphin and Cherubyn, yea above Christ, could find no place in Heaven to
set him in: so where in the praise of Moses, ye should refer him unto
Christ, ye ouershoote your self, and refer Christ unto him, making Christ
to be terminum a quo, and Moses terminum ad quem* Moses says (say you) The
Lord thy God will raise thee up a prophet, from among thine own nation, and
of thy brethren, such a one as my self, him shalt thou hear.

Ergo, Christ is so to be heard of us, as Moses was of the ^wes. Hereuppon
preposterously ye inuerte the reason backewarde, not from Moses to Christ (of
whom Moses knowledged him self but a figure) but from Christ again to
Moses, as though Christ also were a figure of him, saying: As Christ is a
king a Prophet, a Priest, and a Bishop to us, so was Moses to them a
Prince* a Prophet, a Priest and a Bishop. As Christ is of us to be heard and
obeyed ^s well in all matters Ecclesiastical as temporal, so was Moses to
be heard and obeyed of the Jews, in matters and causes, as well temporal as
spiritual.

What a manifest writhing of Scripture is this? Who plays Cacus part here,
that drew Hercules ^en by the tails backwarde, and so stole them into his
theeuish^ den? Do not you so hale this testimony of Scripture backwarde,
like the witch that said her Pater noster backewarde, to make her payle go
forewarde, saying, As Christ is King, Prophet, Priest, and Bishop, so was
Moses: As Christ is to be heard and obeyed, so was Moses. Where by the
testimony alleged, ye should Moses a figure of Christ* not Christ a figure
of Moses
rather have reasoned forward, thus: As Moses was Prince, Prophet, priest and
bishop to the^, so should Christ be to us: As Moses was heard and obeyed of
them, so should Christ be of us. This had been the right and orderly reason,
but you saw, that then your wresting the Text would soon be espied: And
that in swaruing from the hearing and obeying of the old law of Moses, and
the Gospel of Christ, to all proportions of these pe^ons offices, would be
but an homely sequel to serve your ^urpose, and rather abase Christ, than
serve any thing for Moses, to make him a Priest and a Bishop. And where you
make Christ a figure of Moses, to make Moses also a Priest and a Bishop,
because Christ is so: the text makes a similitude from Moses to Christ,
only in either being a Prophet, and that the one Prophet and the other
should be heard and obeyed: But you turn it topsie turuie, and making
Christ's person represente Moses person, conclude thereon not only Prophet
but Priest and Bishop also, which the text cites not, nor any other
mentions in the scripture, that Moses was priest and Bishop. Nor the
Priesthood of Christ was prefigured by Moses priesthood, (for that is a
question whether Moses were Priest at all or no,) but the Scripture expressly
for Christ's priesthood, testifyeth, that Aarons Priesthood in some
respects, but chiefly Melchis^decks, were the only fygures thereof, and not
any Priesthood of Moses, and therefore your self durst not flatly conclude
before that he was the chief Priest, but a high Priest: But dare ye say
the like of Christ, he was a high Priest, but not the chief or highest
Priest of all?

But when ye saw a glimse, that this inuersed argument could not prove Moses
to be a like Priest to Christ nor bishop at al, nor that his being a
Prophet, took away the ensample of his Princely authority: as ye did the
residue, so ye subtly inuerte and fold up the conclusion. For, where it
should have fallen out thus: As Christ is of us to he heard and obeyed, as
well in all matters Ecclesiastical as temporal: so was Moses to be heard
and obeyed of the Jews, in all matters and causes as well spiritual as
temporal, which were the plain conclusion: ye come indreaming and say, in
matters and causes as well temporal as spiritual, as though the ^uestion
were moved of temporal, not of spiritual matters* neither dare ye say all, as
ye did in ye former part. But if ye reply that ye meant all, and so the
proportion of your argument runs, and that I do ye wrong to charge ye, with
so light a matter, since the indefinite, is taken for the universal: may not
I reply again, that ye do the Bishop much more treble wrong? that so often
call and make such outcryes for this syllable, all, when soever he concludes,
In matters so well ecclesiastical as temporal, Lo say you, he leaves out, in
all matters Ecclesiast. and temporal. Which although it were no part of his
issue with M. Feckenham, and yet he settes it down oftener than ye would have
it, though he be not in every particular proof bound thereto: yet see how
this hitteth your self, that if ye leave out this word (All) ye can make no
good conclusion from Christ to Moses at all.

Now when you have thus Master Stapleton, preferred Moses before Christ, ye
cry out unto the Bishop, Show us Master Horn any Prince in the new
Testamente so conditioned and endued, and then make your argument on Gods name.

Have you made your argument on Gods name M. Stapleton? or not rather in his
name that exalts himself above all that is called God, when ye have made the
master serve as a figure to the servant, to serve your purpose? But let
Moses have his due estymation under Christ, and his especial prefiguryng of
Christ also, and all prerogatives of dooyng any thing for the time then, by
Gods especial appoyntmente, that Princes now can not do: Yet on Gods name,
may any man argue as the Bishop did, that Moses care and regard (being
the Prince of the Israelites) in setting forth and ryghtely orderyng Gods
true religion then: may, and is, and ought to be a pattern to all Christian
Princes, to care and regard in setting forth and rightely ordering Gods true
religion now.

And what though in this comparison (although in deed i^ be no comparison, as
you call it, but an example) any christian Prince that now is, compared with
Moses, be Impar congressus Achilli Troilus, as uneven a match as Troilus to
contend with Achilles, may not therefore a christian Prince follow Moses
examples? Why bring ye that Poets sentence, M. St? what Prince goes about to
compare and contend with Moses, and not rather submit them selves to his
example herein? Ye slander christian Princes, ye deface Christ's glory, ye
belie Moses, ye skippe from Priest to Prophet, from Prophet to Priest again,
to delude the bishops ensample, and yet all this will not frame, neither
smoothly nor roughly to your purpose. Which when ye perceive, leaving all
these shifts of descant, to infringe the authority of this first example, that
urges you so sore, that ye can not tell what to say unto it, but are driven to
the hard wall, and that all store, old stuff, and new stuff is clean
spent: then as a desperate man ye quite deny all examples, either of Moses,
or of any that hereafter shall be alleged, and ^ee for sanctuary once again,
to the place of the Deuteronomie, mentioned in the former division, of the
doubts arising between blood and blood, plea and plea, Deuteronomy. 17.
leprie and leprie, to be determined by the priests and Judge. And here
clayming sanctuary, and removing al examples:

And the lawier says (say you) legibus non exemplis iudicatur, Sta. 44. b.
We must judge according to the precise rule of the law, and not by
examples: extraordinary doings enforce no ordinary prescription or rule. The
ordinary rule of priests judgments without whyes and what is, and such other
tryfling importune instances, as ye are wont to make against it, by the law of
Moses, and by your own chapter before alleged in doubtful cases, must
absolutely upon pain of death be obeyed. By this rule of the law you must
measure all the examples following, of kings and princes under this la^e. Ye
must square your examples to the rule, and not the rule to the examples,
unless ye will make of the law of God Lesbiam regulam, and both unskillfully
and unorderly work therewith. And hereon as a ruled case ye set down your
marginall judgment. Men must judge by law, and not by examples.

If ye will not, M. St. be judged by examples, wherefore do ye take upon you to
defend M. Feckenham, and impugn the bishop? For one of the four means
whereby he desires to have his issue proved, and will be judged by, is
practice: which altogether ye wot, stands of examples, and therefore the
bishop proves it by examples. And if you will now flee from the authority of
examples, ye should at the beginning have stricken off, one of those four
means to have the issue proved by, and not first to admit them, and ^id the
bishop go on, and say ye will yield also if, he prove ought by any of those
four means, and when he has so proved the same, by such examples as first
with all shifts ye labor to answer, and when ye can not answer to any
purpose, will ye now at length come in crying, with an human lawiers shift,
against the examples of Gods eternal word, and say, legibus, non exemplis,
iudicatur, men must judge by law, and not by examples? is this your
indifferent dealing, M. St? But of what opinion I pray you, be you, that How
the Papists order the examples of the Scripture.
dare reject the ensamples contained in the holy scripture? and make a
difference between them and rules? do ye lyken them to other worldly examples?
are they not also rules, if they be examples of godly men, for us to follow: if
they be examples of wicked men, for us to flee? Does not S. Paul so teach us,
after he had cited many examples of the old Testament, saying: H^c autem omma
in figura illis contigebant. 1. Cor. 10.
etc. All these things happened to them for ensamples, and are written to
admonish us, upon whom the ends of the world are come. Thus makes he rules
of these examples to be ware the like. And your self that here refuse them,
if this or any other ensamples should never so little see me ^o serve your
turn, or may with any countenance of probability be wrested to it: there by
and by ye will be judged by ensamples, and marvelous eloquently dilate them,
omitting nothing that might each forward your cause, yea though in stead of
an example of the scripture, it be but a tale of your golden lying legende.
This is afterward in all your Popish historiographers, your common fashion, as
the Reader shall perceive. And here ye will not in any wise the matter to be
judged by examples of the Scripture. For then it were to evident by many and
manifest examples, the judgment would go against you. The examples of Gods
word would soon overthrow you, and therefore you plainly refuse now at the
length to be judged by them.

But to bleare the simples eyes, ye allege that extraordinary doings enforce
no ordinary prescription or rule. Stap. 44. b.


As who say the bishop alleged such doings of Mases as were extraordinary,
and not rather such his doings, as other godly princes did besides him the
like, it is your self, M. St. that reckon up his prophecies, his making
special laws appointed of God, and other his extraordinary gifts and doings:
and not the bishop. And therefore this is but one of your ordinary shifts,
under the pretense of extraordinary doings, to deny flatly in the end al
examples brought against you, and say, men must not judge by examples. But
whereby will ye be judged then? by the rule, say you, of the chapter going
before, that the Priests and the judges judgment, in Stap. 44. b.
doubtful cases, without whies and what is, must absolutely be obeyed upon pain
of death. By this rule of the law, you must measure all the examples
following, of Kings and Princes under this law.

If this be your rule, M. Stap. this is ruled over already. Which besides that
it has showed many of your impudent falshods, in belying and wresting the
place, so it be wrayeth also your extreme folly, ignorance, maliciousness, and
arrogancy, besides the weakness, yea and desperation of your whole cause, to
flee from examples, and depend on The rule Deu. 17. that the Papists would
have all the question ruled by, and how far it stretched.
this sentence. First, this rule was but the Judicial law of the Jews, and
so it touches not us. Secondly, the cases mentioned in this rule, were not
matters of religion, but civil cases of strife between neighbor and
neighbor, and therefore the rule of that law was no absolute rule in all cases
to them, or is any rule at all in any case to us, and is both to them and us,
manyfestly wrested of you, to all cases of religion: and therefore in this
controversy, of all spiritual or ecclesiastical matters, is alleged out of
place and season. Thirdly, the doing herein appertayned not to the Priests
alone, but the sitting and determination of the truth of the doubt to them,
and the ratifying decree to the Judge or Prince. Fourthly, it was not
absolutely done, without whies and what is, as you pretend, but that, even by
your own popish doctors minds, men might not only have asked why and what,
but utterly have refused it, had it been, not according to the law. But to
bear men in hand, as the Papists would, that the Crow is white, and we
must not say the contrary, because (as the Pharisees said, we have a law,
and by that law he ought to dye) so Ioh. 19.
says M. Stap. we have a rule, and by this rule ye must obey the Priests
sentence in all doubts whatsoever he says without any whies and what is thereto.
And whatsoever examples ye have to allege, they must all be measured and
squared by our rule, otherwise ye work unskillfully and unorderly, making of
the law of God Lesbiam regulam, a rule to bow every way that ye would have it.

But who are those that make of the law of God Lesbiam regulam, to run on
four wheels to every tropologicall, anagogicall, mystical, and moral sense,
that ye list to apply it: who it is that by this rule, would make the
manifest words of Moses Lesbiam regulam, applying them backewarde and forward
as he list, and wresteth Christ to Moses, and would rule Christ under Moses
ruler: who it is that would bring all examples to one rule, and so make his
own rule Lesbiam regulam also: who they be that call the scripture not only
Lesbiam regulam, but besides give it other foul and shameful terms: I trust
master Stapleton you are not ignorant. But ever ye were best to object that to
us, wherein ye are culpable most your self, for thus it becomes an impudent
man in a desperate cause to do. And so yelustily knit up the matter, that This
one answer might well serve for all the kings doings now following, saving
that I will (say you) particulerly descend to every one, and so for every one
say somewhat.

What somewhat ye will say to other ensamples, we shall then see somewhat as ye
descend unto them, and somewhat may we see already by this, whereby ye count
ye have answered all to come. The somewhat and sum of this great answer is
this: A canceled rule, perteyning nothing to Christian men to follow, nor being
ever of any spiritual matters, but indiciall and civil cases, for the time
being, wherein the Prince had as much to do, or more than the Priests, is a
fit rule and absolute, in all ecclesiastical and religion cases, to rule
over all Christian Kings, Queens, and Princes, upon pain of death to be
ruled by popish priests: but an express ensample of a most godly Prince, to
set forth, order and direct Gods true religion, with great regard and care, is
no fit ensample for Christian Princes to follow. And the reason is, because,
that Prince had, besides that he was a Prince, some especial prerogatives, and
other excellent gifts of God. Here is the full effect of your whole answer,
which how effectual it is to infringe the Bishops assertion, let all the
world be indge. And yet ye so triumph hereon, that as it were some instie
fresh Champion, having beaten all down before him, ye cry out for another
adversary.

Here I wish (say you) to encounter with master Nowell. Stap. 45. ^.
Ye are all heart to the hard heels I see M. St. and were it not herein that
ye resemble the wise captain, that in the beginning you mentioned out of Luke.
14: I would have said this challenge had proceeded of a noble and hawte
^orage, but because it wants that natural wisdo^e and foresight, so rashly
to run upon one adversary, and having more than both your handfuls with
him, yet more fondly to challenge another on your top, your ca^se beein^ so
badde, and your self so weak and unskillful a soldier withal: all wise men
will judge it in you neither policy nor manhood, but that in your fool
hardy presumption ye play but the desperate Dicke, if not a Thom of L^dlem.

The. 12. Division.
NExt to Moses the Bishop adioyneth the ensample of 45. ^. The example of Iosue
his supreme government.
Iosue, proving by diverse testimonies and doings of Iosue, that the supreme
government in all ecclesias^i also well as temporal causes, was committed to
him, ^ot to Eleazar the high priest, who only had the ministration of things
belonging to the priestly office.

M. Stap. in all the residue of the examples, ^auing before Cap. 10. Fol. 46. b.
promised to be as brief as he may: yet to amplify his answer, least it
should be too brief, or his counterb^ast too small, in the beginning, and so
throughout his answers, picketh bye quarrels at the Apology, at master Nowell,
at the Convocation, and other things not to the present purpose, but for any
material or direct answer to any of Iosues doings, he uses nothing but
mere shifts, or very childishe arguments.

First to Iosue his example generally. M. D. Harding Stap. 46. b.
(says he) shows that allegation to importe no chief rule in spiritual
matters as in deed it does not. As though the whole matter (M Stap.) must be
determined by that so ever your M. D. Harding has said, and you with it is
learned proof, in deed it does not have confirmed your masters saying. Now
as though this were, between his allegation and your confirmation, a
sufficient and full proo^e, ye set down thereon your marginall note, as a clear
case, Iosue no supreme governor in all ecclesiastical causes.

What kind of arguing call ye this, M. Stapl? but see how soon at the first
ye confound your self, and (...) that Iosue had the government in
eccleuasticall matters. For where ye pick by quarrels, already answered,
against the Apology and master Nowell, about this phrase to go Number. 27.
forth and come in, and will not have it understood only of going and
coming to and fro the wars, as M. Nowell has fully proved it does, as also
Ruvi (...), and (...) Aben ^zra, do expound it, and Lyra expresses the
meaning of the phrase, do a quod no^ si^ (...) ad labores sed pri^us, Lyra in
Number. 27.
so that he be not the last but the first to labor.

But say yau, Immediately before it is generally written, Stap. 46. b.
prohoc si quid agendum crit, Eleazar sacerdos consulet dominum. For him
(meaning Iosue) Eleazar (...) ask counsel of God when any thing is to be
done. In which words we see euident^y, that Iosue whatsoever he did touching
the governing of the people in ecclesiastical matters, he did nothing of him
self, but was in all such matters instructed of Eleazarus the high Priest.

Do ye not see withal evidently, master Stapleton, that admitting this to be
understood so generally as you pretend, how your self do piaynly grant,
that the government in ecclesiastical matters appertayned to Iosue, in
saying: What soever he did touching the governing of the people in
ecclesiastical matters: and what now will ye make Iosue? a Priest? no say you,
but in all such things Stap. 46. b.
he was instructed of Eleazarus the high Priest. Whose part therefore it was
always to ask counsel of God, when Iosu^ had anything to do. Why, what then
M. Stap. the question is not asked here of asking counsel, who asked it of
God, or whether Iosue asked it of Eleazar, but by whose government it was done.
We grant the Princes should ask counsel in all ecclesiastical matters of
their godly learned clergy, and they should ask it of God, that is to say,
of his holy word, wherein he has revealed his will. But what lets this
asking counsel, the ordering, doing, The Princes asking council of the clergy
embarres not his authority over them.
setting forth, and governing of those ecclesiastical matters, to be in the
Prince? What hinders this, that the Prince ought to ask counsel also in
every weighty civil affayre, the chief government thereof to be in the
Prince? Though he follow in all points, the advice of his counselors, yet have
not they the chief authority? This exception therefore of asking counsel,
takes not away your grant, that Iosue had the doing of those things that
touched the governing of the people in ecclesiastical matters. And so is this
a fit ensample, even by your own flatconfession. And with all ye have granted
the full issue, that godly Princes have and may take upon them such government
in ecclesiastical causes, as the Q. majesty now does.

Here if ye would flee touch, and say ye grant Iosue had the government in
causes ecclesiastical, but not the supreme government: although this be but a
shifting toy, so long as he did not those things by any others governance, (and
yet is it much more than your fellows, or your self otherwhiles will
confess, that he was any governor at all in ecclesiastical matters: so
contrary ye are to your fellows and your self) yet what can ye show, why, as
ye grant Iosue to be governor: so he should not be supreme governor also,
but be subject to another? If ye stand on this argument: Iosue must in all
things ask counsel of the Priest: Ergo, Iosue in all things is subject to the
Priests judgment: By this argument you will make the kings counsel to be
the kings supreme governors to. But they for all their good counsel given to
the king, be he never so much b^und to take it, are but his subjects still
therein, and he their sovereign Lord, for by him when al their counsel is
done, the thing must be set forth, and established through his authority. As
therefore you have granted, Iosue had ye governing of the people in
ecclesiastical matters: so this exception does nothing embarre his supreme
government therein, but rather establish it, that in all his doings were they
never so general, the priest was but the counselor, first learning of God,
and then instructing his Prince: but the governing and setting forth thereof
belonged unto Iosue. And to reason on the contrary, from asking or giving
counsel and instruction, to a chief authority: or from following good
counsel, to obedience and subjection: is but an homely argument, and fit for
such a counselor as your self are M. Stap. Stap 45. b.


But when ye see this weakness of your argument, by and by you start back
again from all that you have said. And as before ye forsook the ensamples
from Moses, and referred them to your foresaid wrested rule, so would ye
now also deal with Iosue, that if the Priests counselling would not infer
his authority, yet his judgment should as ye thought enforce it. Your
argument is this.

The Priest and the Judge must discuss all doubts of Deuteronomy. 17.
blood, strife, clean, and unclean.

Ergo all the testimonies of the holy scripture brought Sta. 45. b.
forth by master Nowell, and before him by master Horn, can not induce
supremacy in causes ecclesiastical, but the execution of the high Priests or
laws commandment.

This frivolous argument, grounded on this impertinent and weak ankerholde,
which master Stapleton makes his general rule and succor, whenever he is
driven to a plunge, then back again to this, as a fox to his earth: is so
fully answered and confuted, that it were but superfluous to stand any longer
about it.

And here (says master Stapleton) I will not quarrel Stap. 46. a.
with master Nowell. etc.

Under pretense that he will not, he begins to pick by quarrelles with him.
A pretty figure he will not, but he does. The quarrels are, a couple of
mi^quotings of figures for 33. 34. for 23. 24. For using such examples as the
Bishop of Winchester does. For detecting M. Dormans s^ealth, the noting whereof,
he calls childish and boyish rheto^ike, for fear in deed that his own
childishe and boyish rhetorike (stealing so many sentences, arguments, and in
manner whole leaves, from Doctor Harding and master Dorman, as master Dorman
stale from Hosius and ma^ler Harding) should be also detected as master
Dormans is, and therefore he flourishes it out with his common places, but the
stuff is the old st^ffe still, though new furbished for rusting to seem the
fresher to the show.

After he has done with M. Nowell he returns to Iosue, and least he should
seem to have answered no particular point, he choseth out one of Iosue his
doings in the place of all the rest alleged, not so much to make any answer at
all to the objection thereof, as thereby to pick yet another by quarrel, and
so to shake of the matter, as though he had made a clerkly answer thereto. The
Bishop showed how at the appointment of Iosue, the priests (...) the arc of
Covenant, and placed the same: and so goes on through many particular actions,
that decla^e Iosues supreme government and ordring of ecclesi matters. To this
when M. St should directly answer, whether this declare an authority of the
Prince, ever the priests in ecclesiastical matters yea or no, in s^eed of
answer he says.

But for the doing of Io^ue, I will further note, that then Stap. 46. ^.
the Priests took up the arc of covenant, and went before the people. But I
pray you master Horn, how was this observed of la^e years, when the lay men
durst adventure to take the guiding of the arc, and go before the Priests,
and not suffer the priests to go before them? And durst alter the state of
Christian religion, against the will and mind of ^he B. and the whole clergy
then at their convocation as^embled? And I pray you again master Stapleton.
What does this answer the Bishops proposition? ^t shew^th your shifting, it
detecteth your malice, that wit^ingly slander your most grac^ous prince, and
native country. Her Majesty has only done therein, even after the example
of this most Godly prince Iosue. In commanding the arc, that is is to say
gods holy word, in the sincere setting forth of it, by the godly ministers
thereof, to be carried before her, and her subjects. And when your popish
pr^lates and priests (which in deed are neither pre^ates nor prieus) refused ^o
to carry it, otherwise tha^ after your o^n devises to cart it, ^ot after Gods
(...), or rather would not carry it about at al, but bury it under a bushel, ^
in (...) thereof carry about ma^mets and toys, to m^ke (...) people commit most
barbarous idolatry: her high ^sse as (...), has abolished iuch caryage: and
as did Salo (...), (...) out of office your (...), and (...) clergy, and
placed other (...), and painful (...) in their ^ooues, to carry this erke as goo
has appointed it, before her highness and all her people.

Now when ye have thus (...) the prince, the clergy, the whole realm, and yet
answered not one word to the objection: Well (say you) ^et t^ts pal^e for
this present, I say Stap. 46. ^.
no (...) for Iosue his doing, saving that otherwise they are not to be drawn
into an ordinary rule for that the spirit of God was certainly in him, and
for that he had part of Moses glory, and the people commanded to hear him,
and those things that he did (whereof M. Nowell and M. Horn would infer a
sovereignty in causes spiritual) he did them by the express commandment of
God. And from such princes to all princes indifferently, to gather the like
pre-eminence in all points were no sure and found gathering and collection.

Your argument is this: those Princes in whom the spirit of God certainly is,
and have part of Moses glory, and whom the* people are commanded to hear,
and whose doings are by Gods express commandment, are not ensamples for all
godly Princes to follow in their governments.

But such another was Iosue:

Ergo it were no sound gathering and collection, to set Iosue for ensample, for
other Princes to follow. For that which ye infer (of like pre-eminence in all
points to Iosue) both makes your argument vicious, having more in the
conclusion than is in any of the propositions: neither does the Bishop or any
other contend for like prehemmence in all point, as Iosue had, but infer of
his ensample a like charge of their duties, and a like care and regard of
governing Gods people, to be required of the^, being princes and rulers as
Iosue was. But where learned you this wicked and false principle, whereon ye
ground your argumnet? that the doings of any, are not to be set for examples
for other Princes to follow, that had certainly the spirit of God in them, or
that had a part of Moses glory, or the people were commanded to hear them,
or because they did their doings by the express commandment of God, are they
not a great deal the more to be set for ensamples to follow? Would ye have
them follow such as certainly had the spirit of error in them, such lying
Papists as your selves? Would ye have them follow your express
commandments, and then they were to be followed, but not if they followed the
commandments of God? Are those Princes not to be followed whom God
commands the people to hear: And are they to be followed whom you command
the people to hear? If they be godly Princes, God commands all people both
to hear them, and obey them, chiefly where they have for warrant the express
commandment of God. So that by your wicked principle no good nor godly
princes ought to be drawn into example, for any other Princes to follow, but
naughty and wicked Princes, such as had so little any part or spark of Moses
glory, that they had not the spirit of God in them, or at the least it is
uncertain whose spirit they had, such as the people were not commanded to
hear them, such as had not Gods express commandment for their doings,
these are fit examples with you for Princes to follow. Thus do ye show how
ye have heretofore, and yet still would abuse Princes, making them so drunken
with that cup of abominations of the whore of Babylon, that they might take
ensample of no good nor godly Prince.

But let us see how substantially ye prove your mayor. You reason by admitting
the contrary thereto, ab absurdo, from a foul inconvenience that we should
fall into, by taking such Princes for example: or else fall into a ^oule
contradiction against our selves.

Else if ye will have your examples (say you) to prove and Stap. 46. b.
confirm, then as Iosue circumcided, so let the Prince baptize, and as Iosue
sacrificed upon an altar, so let the Prince in Cope and Surplesse celebrate
your holy communion: But these two things as peculier offices of Bishops and
Priests. M Nowell excludes flatly all Princes from, yea and says they ought
to be untouched of Prince or other person. Ergo, thus again, either ye iumble
and jar one from another, or else your argument (to bring Iosue for example
to prove and confirm) falls down right, choose which of both ye will.

Here is, as M. Stap. thinks, a marvelous Dilemma, and yet the absurdity
thereof most easily anoyded, and the contradiction as plainly turned upon him
self. To the mayor I answer, that as the one did these things, so does the
other, and therefore the one is a fit example of the other. As Iosue then did
circumcise, so the Prince now baptiseth. As Iosue did then sacrifice on an
altar, so the Prince does now celebrate, not ours (as he scornefully terms
it) but the Lords holy communion. Neither of them, by executing them selves
the fact, but by commanding, appoynting, and ouerseeing the fact to be
rightly executed by the ministers, to whom the doing apperteineth.

And that this was Iosue his doing, and not otherwise: Lyra upon these words,
Et primum quidem benedixit populo, Lyra.
does witness, And first of all he blessed the people, etc. Non est
intelligendu^ quod Iosue proprie loquendo benedixit populum, quod hoc pertinet
ad sacerdotum officium, sed imprecatus est bona populo, tanquam princeps
populi, post immolatione^, praedicta^ quam similiter fecit non per se, sed per
sacerdotes. We must not understand (these words he blessed the people) that
Losue. 8.
Iosue in speaking him self did bless them, for this apperteyned to the
Priests office. But Iosue as the Prince of the people wished well unto them,
after the offering before said, which likewise he did not by himself, but by
the Priests. And again, Posthac legit omnia verba, etc. Then afterward he
read all the words of the law, the blessings and cursings according to all
that is written in the book of the law, there was not a word that Moses had
commanded, which Iosue read not, before all the congregation of Israel, as
well before the women and the children, as the stranger. etc. Non per se sed
per sacerdotes vt praedictum est, coram omni multitudinem Israel. etc. Not by
him self, but by the priests, as is before said, before all the multitude of
Israel.

And even as he thus read and blessed by his commandment, Iosue. 5.
and their ministry: so says Lyra, fecit immolationem similiter, he did
offer sacrifice in like sort, not by him self, but by commanding the minister
to do it. And do ye think that he circumcised all the whole people of Israel
with his own hands, because the words are, circuncidit filios Israel? Do ye
think because the bare words are, Igitur Iosue. 3.
Iosue de nocte consurgens mouit castra, that he removed Iosue. 4.
all their tents with his own hands? and of the stones in Jordan, alios
quoque duodcim lapides posuit in medio Iordanis alueo, that he set them in the
river with his own fingers Do ye think of the City and the King of Hai,
succendit vrbem Cap. 8.
and fecit eam tumulum sempiternum, regem quoque eius suspendit in patibulo, he
burnt the City, and he made it an heap Cap. 10.
for ever, and the King thereof he hanged on a gallows, and of the other
Kings Iosue smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on five trees: all
these things and a number of such other, as well servile as other deeds, as
well temporal as ecclesiastical, think you, because still all runs under
his name and his doing, that he did them him self? Or rather gather thereon,
that sith he did not these things himself, and yet so well in ecclesiastical
as other matters, all bears the name alone of him, it imports his supreme
government and direction of them. So little is there any absurdity, in the
comparison of these doings, but your own absurd mistaking and reasoning so
absurdly on them, not distinguishing between the doing of these things and the
manner of doing them.

To the minor likewise I answer, there is no contradiction, iumbling, or
iarring, between the Bishop and master Nowell therein. For of the same mind
that the one is, is the other also, as the Bishop has declared many times in
his answer, ever observing this destinction between the doing of the fact,
and the oversight in appoynting the fact to be done. But this, of a peuish
self will, ye will not understand. And so here because the words are simply
spoken that Iosue did such things, ye understand it that personally he
executed the doing of them. But what now if you do contrary your own self,
and talking after of this same party, confess that the doing of these and
such like things* must be understood by this said manner of another
ministry? May ye not then most worthily here your own words returned on
your self, that your argument falls down right (if ever it stood upright)
your self, in plain speech hurling it down? and that either here or there
ye speak against your own conscience, your own sayings iumbling and iarring
one from another, and so ye encurre either the absurdity or the contradiction,
choose which of both you will.

The. 13. Division.
The next ensample of the Bishop is of David, how God The example of King
David's supreme government in eccl. causes.
appointed him king, not only for the people to live in ciul^ peace and
hones^ie, but chiefly that by David's government, care and zeal therein, they
might be fos^ red up in Gods true religion, decayed among them by the
negligent reign of king Saul. This the Eyshop proved by king David's Acts, in
ordering, disposing, reforming the priests and Levites in their offices and
functions ecclesiastical, in appoynting how the Arc should be borne. For
sacrifising, and blessing, for ordeining Psalms, singers, instruments,
officers, and all other things, for the setting forth of the divine service,
and Gods true religion. Which argues that he was their supreme governor in
all ecclesiastical causes.

Master Stap. first for a brief summarie answer to Cap. 11. Fol. 47. a.
these doings of David, clappeth down this marginal note:

David in all these matters determined no doctrine, nor altered any religion
against the Priests wills of his own supreme authority.

This note is both malicious and slanderous, as though we ascribed to the
Queens Majesty, or she took upon her such authority, and that of her own
sway and will, against all her Clergies mind and counsel, to determine and
alter what religion pleases or displeases her. This is the Popes claim and
tyranny, and not our Princes, or any other godly Princes doing. And yet this
note is partly false, for king David against the will of his idle Priests,
caused the misordering of the Arc to be reformed. And did many other things
about Religion, to the which the Priests obeyed. And determined doctrine also,
even by master Stapl. own confession in this Chapter. The first argument that
master Stapl. makes is this:

Both M. Dorman, and M. D. Harding affirm that the Stap. 47. a.
proceedings of king David are nothing prejudicial to the ecclesiastical
authority in redressing of disorders before committed, or doing such things
as are here rehearsed:

Ergo, They infer no supreme government over causes ecclesiastical.

This argument stands altogether upon the authority of his good masters. M.
Dorman, and M. D. Harding, from whom he boroweth his stuff. For, the most of
his own surplusage, is but his common places of descant on them. And as they
be so great in his books, so he reasons as Pythagoras scholars had wont to
reason of their master, (...), he said so: Ergo, it is so: and thus argues M.
Stap. Both M. Dorman, and M. D. Harding affirm it: Ergo, it is true. But what
do they affirm?

That the proceedings of king David in redressing disorders before committed,
or doing such things as here are rehearsed, are nothing prejudicial to the
ecclesiastical authority.

Why M. Stap. who says against them, or you herein? king David's proceedings in
deed, were nothing prejudicial to the ecclesiastical authority of persons
ecclesiastical, they executed all their functions still belonging to their
authority. And because his proceedings in redressing such disorders, and all
other things that he did, declare most plainly his supreme government, in
setting forth and directing Gods true religion, and yet were no prejudice to
the Priests ecclesiastical authority: it follows there upon The Princes
supreme government in ecel matters not prejudicial to the eccle. authority.
that the supreme government, in setting forth Gods true religion, in
correcting, and repressing ecclesiastical disorders, in reducing and directing
good orders, and al other doings here rehearsed, that ye confess king David
did, are no part of the Priests ecclesiastical authority, for then in doing
them, he should have done things prejudicial thereunto, and therefore they are
no parts thereof, but of king David's royal authority. And this while fondly ye
would as it were, ouerpresse us, with such great men's authority as is M.
Dorman, and M. D. Harding: or ever ye be aware ye make them flatly give verdite
against you, and with us. A Gods name bring their authority so against us as
often as ye will, neither M. Dorman nor M. D. Harding will give ye great thanks
therefore. But for all this ye will bring us more of D. Hardings stuff.

As master D. Harding (say you) notes, king David's Stap. 47. a.
proceedings in redressing disorders before committed or doing such things as
are here rehearsed, do no more employ a supremacy in him, then the
reformation of religion made by Queen Mary.

But that, ye wot well, employeth in her no such supremacy.

Ergo, No more do those proceedings in him.

This argument stands wholly upon his M. D. Hardings authority alone,
because he has noted that the one did no more than the other, and that their
doings were alike herein: But the doings of the one infer no supremacy,
Ergo, the others neither. But if we might be so bold as to deny this your
mayor, or rather your maxima or principle that ye build upon of D. Hardings
comparison, in making king David's doings to be none other, but such as were
Queen Mary's: Where were then your argument, M. St? ye talked right now of
Impar congressus Achilli Troilus, the match between An uneven comparison
between the doings of king David, and Q. Mary.
Troilus and Achilles was vneue^, but here is a great deal more inferior match
between K. David and Q. Mary. Yea their doings were so little alike, that they
were clean contrary. For, although she were a princess of famous memory,
yet herein your popish Prelates made her so believe them, that she durst not
redress disorders in the Clergy at al, but suffered the Pope and his prelates
to reduce their false religion. Nor she retained the estate that belonged to
her of supreme government, but utterly renounced it. And therefore that
reformation, or rather deformation, was not made at all by her, nor in her
name, but by the Pope and his Popelings, she only permitting it* But if ye
mean as ye speak, that it was made by hi^ in d^de, and as your Massers words
are, Queen Mary did it, by the means of the Priest so that she was the doer,
and they were but the m^anes, she was the maker, and they but her instruments:
then your similitude goes against you, and proves a supremacy in her, as was
in David. But ye speak colorably to make in such a (...), some proportion in
speech of a similitude. For in very deed, what soever ye say, the matter went
so, that your popish bishops and priests were the doers of all. And she good
Lady, was but your instrument and mean, whereby ye killed Christ in his
members as did the high priests kill Christ in his body, under Pontius Pilate.
I speak not to compare her, being her self a noble How the Popish priests
abused queen Mary.
Christian Prince, to him, being a heathen tyrant: but to show how you abused
hi^ authority, as the Jews did his.

But as for king David, as he did those things, in redressing disorders, and
all other noted by the Bishop (which your self can not deny) so he was the
principal in the doing of them, and he reformed even the Priests them
selves. And though in some things he used the Priests as means, yet what
does this infringe his supreme authority, and not rather prove it? And thus
your other argument from D. Hardinges authority, by D. Hardinges own
confession, that they were but the means, and king David, and Queen Mary the
doers of such ecclesiastical matters, once again makes quite against you,
and your master D. Harding also, and establishes the Princes supreme
government over the priests and all. I areade ye beware, since ye stand so
much upon your masters words herein, that if ye allege his authority any
more, ye bring him forth to better, purpose, or else while ye think by
clawyng him thus, to win his good favor, ye get his heavy displeasure,
and that he answer ye flatly, non hercule veniam tertio, he will not come at
your call. Howbeit ye will once again in hope of better luck bring him forth,
and allege his authority better than ye have done hitherto.

Besides that (say you) it is to be considered, as M. D. Harding Stap. 47. a.
The Papists shift against the example of king David's supremacy, because he
was a Prophet.
touches, that he passed other Princes herein, because he had the gift of
prophecy. So that neither those things that the Apology shows of David, or
those that ye and master Nowell add thereunto for the fortification of the
said superiority, can by any means induce it.

This frivolous argument, he was a Prophet also as well as a Prince, Ergo, his
superiority in that he was a Prince, can not be alleged for other Princes to
follow: ye used before, as your own fresh stuff, to shifte off Moses
ensample: but as it nothing helped your cause then, no more does it now.
Only it detecteth here, your vain crake there, of unspent stuff, where in
deed it was old rotten stuff, spent before by D. Harding on king David, as
here your self confess: yet there ye brought it as a notable fresh
surplusage, beyond all that had been said. But as you thus of D. Hardings
old scroppes here, would have made us there new fresh stuff of your own,
whereby the alleging of him again this third time opens your shame: so yet
once again ye make your M. D. Harding, and your self for company, confound
your own tales, and speak contrary to your selves.

Right now ye said, and alleged your masters authority for it, that king
David's doings were no more than Queen Mary's doings, to employ a supremacy.
Now ye say again, and like wise allege your master for it, that king David
passed other princes herein, because he had the gift of prophecy. If he
passed other princes herein, then he passed Queen Mary, whom many other
Princes have also herein passed: and so his doings were more than were Queen
Mary's doings herein. For who know not that she was no Prophet? and thus the
oftener ye allege your master, ye take your master tardie in one lie or another
and make him still contrary both himself and his cause also. Again, it King
David were a Prophet, as I grant he was: a Prophet, ye wot, might and did
determine doctrine, but your self said before, David in all his doings
determined no doctrine, and thus ye lie on your own head, and make your master
witness thereto. Well, leave at the length to cite your masters authorities
for shame master Stapleton, since ye can bring them out no handsomer, or how
well so ever ye have brought them out to your advantage, since they be no
better proves than that: He affirms, he notes, he touches: as though all
were gospel that master Doctor Harding affirms, notes or touches. Are ye
so fond to think any man would yield so soon unto them, unless he were as
wise as your self?

But since none of all these reasons will serve, we shall now have other stuff
of your own, though not very fresh, but such stale refuse, as your masters
have refused, but to you all is fish that commes to net, ye do wisely to let
go nothing, that may any way be wrested to help so ill a cause. And first ye
reason from the authority of the scripture. In deed this is a better way than
to reason from D. Hardings authority.

The Scripture (say you) in the said place by you and Stap. 47. ^.
master Nowell alleged, says that David did work iuxta omnia quae scripta
sunt in lege domin^, according to all things written in the law of God.

What conclusion can ye infer hereon against the Bishops allegation of David?

Ergo he had not an especial care and regard in ordring and setting forth Gods
true religion? if ye make the quite contrary conclusion:

He did work according to all things written in the law of God:

Ergo, as the B. says he had an especial care and regard in ordring and
directing Gods true religion: then should ye make a most true conclusion, where
otherwise rightly applied it can no ways serve your turn. Thus bring ye out
that, which once again ouerturnes your cause, and proves K. David's supreme
government. And even so the Q. Majesty by this ensample of K. David, is taught
to do the like, as praised be to god for her therefore, she follows well herein
the steps of K. David: doing, iuxta omnia quae scripta su^t in lege domini,
according to all things written in gods law. And where the papists in all their
errors, and this among other of ye supremacy, do praeter and co^tra omnia quae
scripta sunt in lege domini, besides and against all things written in gods
law: As David redressed eccl. disorders crept in before his time, so ye Q.
highness now has redressed such disorders, as she found before her time crept
in. Thus the more ye reason, ye more still ye make against your self. Ye had
need add some better stuff tha^ this, or else if ye thus hold on, your friends
would wish M. Fec. had hired ye to hold your peace, when he first moved you to
plead for him.

Master. Stap. seeing it now more than high time to add Stap. 47. a.
some notable thing to better his cause: Whereunto I add (says he) a notable
saying of the scripture in the said book by you alleged concerning David's
doings by you brought forth touching the Priests and Leuits. Vt ingrediantur
domum 1. Par. 24.
dei iuxta ritum suum sub manu Aaron patris little sicut pr^ceperat dominus deus
Israel. King David's appointment was, that the Leuits, and Priests should enter
into the house of God, there to serve under the government: of whom, I pray
you? not of King David, but under the spiritual government of their spiritual
father Aaron and his successors. The governor of them was Eleazarus.

Upon this notable sentence for your purpose, as ye think, you gather three
notes. And because ye would go orderly, ye begin first with the last note.

Where we have to note first (say you) that David appointed Stap. 47. a.
hereto the Leuits nothing of himself: But sicut praeceperat dominus deus
Israel: as the Lord God of Israel had before appointed.

We have here again to note first in you M. Stap. no plain dealing, that
begin with the last part of the sentence first. And wherefore I pray you? but
that, that which is spoken here of this matter in especial, ye would make it
seem to serve for all David's doings in general. We have to note again, your
hacking and wresting of this sentence, which shows a plain destination
between their turns of coming in, and their ordinary ministry in their
turns, in attending on the high Priest. The text is thus: ^ae vices eorum
secundum ministeria sua vt ingrediantur 1. Par. 24.
domum domini, and iuxta ritum suum sub manu Aaron patris eorum, sicut
praeceperat dominus deus Israel. These are their courses after their
ministeries to enter into the house of the Lord, and according to their manner
be under the hand of Aaron their father, as the Lord God of Israel has
commanded. Which last words ye begin withal, and join them to the first
part, as though the Lords commandment had been of David's appointment
where it was only of the obedience of all the Tribe of Levy, to be under
Aaron and his successors in the ministry, which in deed was Gods statte
commandment. But the appoynting of the courses to those mentioned in that
place, was David's commandment, even as your self do say it was King David's
appointment. And the Chapter before of the like argument plainly says. Iuxta
pracepta 1. Par. 23.
quoque David (...). etc. And according to the last commandments of David,
the Levites were numbered from twenty year and upward, to wait under the
hand of the sons of Aaron in the service of the house of the Lord.

But admit that these words Sicut praeceperat, etc. as god had commanded, be
to be meant as you pretend of a special commandment to David, so to dispose
those courses: and as ye It abaseth not the princes supreme government, to do
all things accorto Gods commandment.
expound it, he did nothing without gods commandment. Is this again I pray
you? any argument to improve his supreme authority next under god, because he
did al things sicut praeceperat dominus, as the lord had commanded? then by
this same rule yourpriest should not have the supremacy neither, for I am sure
he had no further privilege, to do against, or beyond Gods commandment, no
more than David had. It is your Pope that thus stretches his claim to do
beyond all Gods forvoade, and contrary to Gods commandment, but little or
nothing sicut praeceperat dominus deu^ Israel, as the Lord God of Israel has
commanded. As for the Queens Majesty has not done, or does any thing, more
than David did, which is, sicut praeceperat. etc. as God has commanded her to
do. And sith Gods commandment unto David stretches to the placing and
appointing both above and under, in their orders of sacrifices, eue^ of all the
leuiticall pries^es: it strengthens her cause the more that she has not only
the bare example of King David, but also the warrant of Gods commandment for
the supreme government of all her clergy to place them in their several
functions.

Secondly, (ye say ye have to note) that king David did Stap. 47. b.
make appointment unto them, of no strange or new order to be taken in
religion, but that they should serve God in the temple, iuxta ritum suum: after
their own usage, custom or manner before time used.

Secondly, we note to you again M. St. that you interpret his sayings
ambiguously, and apply it maliciously. Ambiguously, because though David
neither made any strange or new order to be taken in Religion, nor yet in
their usage custom or manner of their ceremonies commanded of god, and so used
before his time, but saw every thing dutifully observed both sicut praeceperat
dominus, and iuxta ritum suum: as the Lord had commanded, and after their own
order: yet in their courses and in other circumstances, diverse of his orders
were new and strange unto them, and of his own appointment. And diverse
ceremonies that were iuxta ritum suum, according to their own order, having
been neglected by the priests, and become strange unto them: those he
redressed iuxta ritum suum, according to their own order, and sicut praeceperat
dominus, as the Lord had commanded.

But what serves this how soever ye expound it, to infringe The keeping of
the rites and orders appoyn ted, is not against, but confirms the princes
supremacy.
any supreme government in king David? because the Prince is bound not to
alter the Priests rites and ceremonies being appointed of God, Ergo, he is
not supreme governor in seeing them keept accordingly? might ye not rather
argue contrariwise. The prince is bound not to alter religion, nor those orders
that God has ordained, bringing in strange and new: Ergo, he is bound to
ouersee, care, and provide, that those orders be only kept and none other
brought in. And if princes had always looked to this their duty more
narrowly than they have done, then had not your Pope and popish Prelates
brought in so many vain traditions, false doctrines, and superstitious
ceremonies as they have, neither iuxta ordinem suum, according to their own
order, nor sicut praceperat dominus, as the Lord commanded.

On the other part this your application is a malicious The Queen appoynteth
no new or st^a^ge order in religion.
slander to the Q. highness. For she has not made or appointed to be
received, any strange or new order in religion, but revoked the old and
primative order of religion ordained of Christ, and has appointed the
ministers of God to do their duties, secundum ritum suum, according to their
own order, and sicut praeceperat dominus, as our savior Christ by him self,
and his Apostles has prescribed to them. It is your Pope and Papal Church
that offreth strange fire to God, that has appointed and erected those strange
and new orders in religion, and therefore her majesty has worthily abolished
all those false priests with their strange and new orders, and all their false
worship of God, and in that her highness thus does, she shows her self to
follow David's e^sample, like a godly supreme governor.

Thirdly and lastly (say you) king David's appointment Stap. 47. b.
was that they should serve in the house of God, sub manu Aaron patris little,
as under the spiritual government of their father Aaron, and his successors
the high Priests.

Here again to the show of some advantage, ye translate sub manu, which is
under the hand, importing, attendant at hand in their ministry to the high
Priest: under the spiritual government, as though they were exempted from
the kings government, and so you make your conclusion, saying:

The which words of the Scripture do so well and clearly Stap. 47. b
express, that king David did not take upon him any spiritual government in
the house of God. etc.

This conclusion is captious, and yet not to the purpose. There is a difference
between spiritual government, and government over spiritual and
^cclesiasticall matters. This ye should conclude, not that: if ye will confute
the bishop. And this government over spiritual matters took David on him, the
other, that is, the spiritual government he left entier unto the Priests,
without any prejudice to their ecclesiastical authority, as ye granted
before. And as David therein did, so does the Queens Majesty now.

But what makes this against king David's supreme government, that the inferior
priests and Levites in their ministeries and offices were by the kings
appointment, under the hand or spiritual government of their spiritual
father It deba^reth not the princes supremacy, that the inferior ministers be
under their bishops.
Aaron, and his successors the high priests, as you translate the text? Is it
not also the Q. Majesty's appointment, that the inferior Ministers should
serve in their functions, under the spiritual government of their bishops? and
because it is her appointment, it is an argument not of her subjection, but of
her authority herein over them, as also is this of David. And therefore the
example was very well applied, and al your three notes on your notable
sentence, that you have added to your master, not only nothing serving your
turn (for all ye have so notably inuerted the text, so wrested the sense, so
expounded the words, that your friends might very much muse and marvel at your
falshoode) but also in the whole and every part, all your three notes, have
made clean against you. And yet ye knit up your conclusion on them, That ye
can not but very much muse and marvel why he should allege king David for any
example or proof in this matter. So desperate a face ye can set on the matter,
though all be quite against you.

Now, as M. Stap. dalied with Moses before, if he could not prove him a
priest, yet at the least to prove him a prophet: so here (after a florishe in
one of his common places, slanderously comparing our clergy with Qza) seeing
that he can fasten no good argument against princes by the priests, he will
once again assay it by the Prophets. And where the bishop alleged that David
made Psalms, ordained priests, Levites, singers, and porters, etc. he denies
not, but that David did al these things, but, says he, Think you Stap. 48. a.
he did all this and the rest of his own authority, because he was king of the
people? so you would have your reader to believe, but the holy ghost tells
us plainly, that David did all this, because God had so commanded by the
hands of his Prophets.

What argument call ye this, M. Stap? the king ordained and set forth
ecclesiastical laws, because God had so commanded by the hands of his
Prophets.

Ergo, The king is not supreme governor to see those things observed, but the
Prophets are the supreme governors of them:

Here ye stand on two things, on Gods commandment, and the Prophets
message. As for your reason on Gods commandment, is answered already, it
(...) not that godly Princes authority that submits him self to God, as
David did, and the Queens Majesty does: but it is to be brought against the
ambitious proud usurpation of your Pope, that makes him self as it were a God
in earth, and will control Gods flat commandment.

Again, that ye urge so much the ministry of the Prophets, to abase the
kings authority, and thereon make your conclusion, saying:

Thus you see, that by the declaration of the prophets Gods Stap. 48.
ministers then, as priests are now, the king did al those ecclesiastical
matters, and not by his princely authority.

This answer is but a mere shifte, and yet nothing for your priests
supremacy. But such is your envy to princes, that ye care not to whom ye
ascribe this supreme government, so that princes have it not. When ye can not
The papists shifts from Priests to Peophets, and from Prophets to Priests,
for the Popes primacie.
prove that it appertayned to the priests, ye allege the prophets. Ye are not
so ignorant, I dare say, but that ye know the prophets were no priests, and
many of them (as ye term us lay men) and some also of occupation. Yea but say
you, they were Gods ministers then, as priests are now. Ye should prove they
were priests then, for, were they but Gods ministers herein to declare the
same to the prince, does this prove any supreme authority herein over their
prince? Nay but (say you) they were such good ministers as priests are now.

In deed were they such as your priests crake now to be, then the matter
were out of question. For your priests How highely Pop^sh priests esteem of
the^ solues.
now say they, be not only above kings, princes, and all other men, but above
angels, yea that they can make their maker also which Angels can not do, as D.
Bonner vaunted in his convocation of priests. The Prophets could do none of
these things, nor so exalted them selves. They were then Gods ministers and
faithful preachers of his word, they were not sacrificers. And if your
priests now are like prophets then, they must not be sacrificers, but
preachers of Gods word, and so shall they be like the Prophets. Your priests,
and chiefly your Pope can not err in judgment ye say, do ye father this
warrant on the Prophets, or on the Priests? have ye not alleged the priests
for it? and now when ye see the priests will not serve your turn, ye say ye
be like the prophets. But ye should make a distinction like what prophets ye
be* are ye not like to lying prophets? are ye not like the Prophet that God
said he would tempt his Deuteronomy. 13.
people withal, that should say, come let us go worship strange Gods? are
ye not like the false flattring prophets that deceived king Achaz, like Baals
prophets maynteined 3. Reg. 22. 3. Reg. 18. Math. 7.
of Iesabell? But Christ hiddeth us take heed to such false prophets as you
be, that come in sheep clothing, and are ravening wolves within.

But let us consider further this your shift by Prophets. Ye say, David did all
those ecclesiastical matters, but not by his princely authority, but by the
declaration of the prophets, Gods ministers then as Priests are now: and
therefore the next authority under God was theirs, not his, because he was no
prophet. But what now if David were a prophet also, and is so commonly termed,
and your self the leaf before said, he had the gift of prophecy, and
alleged your master D. Harding for it? will not this prove then by your own^
shifte, that either he being Gods prophet, had thereby so well as others this
authority, contrary to the which ye say he had it not, but the prophets had
it: or else the having of the gift of prophecy, is no argument of any supreme
authority, as ye would so said infer. As in deed it is not neither in
priest nor prophet: which ye should soon have perceived, had ye but read the
next chapter to that, out of 1. Pap. 25.
which you took (as ye fancied) your notable sentence for the Priests
government. For there are four chapters going together, the. 23. of the
Levites, how David put order amongst them. The. 24. of his appointment among
the 1. Par. 23.
priests and sons of Aaron. The. 25. of his ordering of 1. Par. 24.
the Prophets and singers. 1. Par. 25.


The Chapter begins thus: And David and the captains of the host appointed
out to do service, the sons of Asaph, of Heman and Iduthim, which should
prophecy with Harpes, Psalteries, and Cymbals. And the multitude of the men
were to do service in their offices. The sons of Asaph etc. to wait on, or
to be at the hand of Asaph, who prophesied by the king. And again, These were
the sons of Heman the Kings Seer of visions in the words of God to lift up
the horn that is the power, meaning of David. And again, A saph, Iduthim, and
Heman were at the Kings hand, that is to say, at the kings commandment to
execut^ his appointment. The. 26. Chapter is of David's ordring the 1. Par. 26.
Porters divisions, ending on this wise: Whom king David made rulers over the
Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half of the tribe of Manasses, for every
matter perteyning to God, and for the kings business, that is to say, both in
spiritual and temporal things. And also a little above, In all the business
of the Lord, and for the service of the King.

Howbeit, I speak not this so much to prove King David's supremacy over the
Porters, in all and every ecclesiastical matter, so well as temporal, but
chiefly to follow your shift of the Prophets. For here we see how expressly
the Prophets also, were appointed their orders by the king, and even the
principal fathers of them attendant unto him, as their children were to them.
And though their children were under their gouernmentes as were the inferior
Priests under the higher Priests, yet as Asaph, Both the chief prophets and
chief priests under the appointment of the king.
Heman, and Iduthim, were under the government of the King also, who ordered,
directed, appointed and commanded them, so was Aaron and his successors the
high priests under the appointment and order of the King, for all that their
sons and inferior priests were underneath their government. For the one
government does not exclude the other, as master Stapleton himself confesses,
that in one man many rulers may and do daily concur which in some sense may
every one be called his supreme governor.

And thus was first God by the ministry of his priests and prophets, the
absolute supreme governor unto David. So was David next under God, by his
oversight, ordering, and commanding those ecclesiastical actions to be
rightly done, the supreme governor, not only to the Leuits and Porters: but
to the chief Priests, to the chief Prophets and all. And so were the chief
priests and principal Prophets in their functions and ministeries of their
offices, the supreme governors over their inferior priests and prophets: and
yet was not their government embarring the kings, nor the kings any whit
prejudicial to theirs. For the priests and the prophets did the action: but
the commandments, the appointing and ordring, was the kings next to god, who
commanded them to him, and ^e to the priests and prophets.

And this order should M. St. have seen had he but read the next sentence
before the text that he urges. Secundum dispositione^ David regis and Gad
vide^tu regis. etc. According to the commandment or disposition of David the
king, and of Gad the kings Seer of visions, and Nathan the prophet. etc. Thus
the prince, even in those things that god commands by the hand of the
prophets, is cheef for his authority under God. Next to whom are adioy^ed the
Prophets, or learned preachers, or ministers of Gods word, as by whose mouth
or hand God commands it to be done, and have mosts skill thereof. And yet
that both priest and prophet do their offices faithfully, apperteyneth to the
kings commandment: appears further throughout this chap. as also in
Ezechias ensample 2. Par. 29.
from whence be takes this sentence as we shall see when we come thereto. Only
thus much to detect the shifts yt M. St. makes, still leaping from priest to
prophet, from prophet again to priest, as it were a squirrel skipping from one
tree to another, to save her from ye birdbolt, but all will not be, nothing will
any thing serve his turn, but every thing makes quite against him: which when
he sees (as it were to set an Oliver against a Rowlande, he alleges against
king David's eusample, the ensample of Carolus Magnus.

Again (says he) the like might you have alleged of Carolus Stap. 48. a.
Magnus, that he corrected most diligently the order of reading and singing in
the church, that he brought first into France ca^tum Gregorianu^, the order of
singing left by S. Gregory at Rome, and appointed singers therefore, and when
they did not well, placed other in their rowmes. And many such other like
matters of the church, wherein that godly Emperor much busied him self, and
yet exercised no supreme government over the clergy, but was of all other
Princes, most far from it: as it may easily appear to him that will read in the
decrees did. 19. in memoriam, where he protests obedience to the Sea of
Rome, yea though an importable charge should be laid upon him by that holy Sea.

Ye have picked out an unlike and uneven match, M. St. to Carolus Magnus, an
unlike match to David.
compare herein the doings of king David with K. Charlemaines. Where is become
your Impar congressus Achilli Troilus, the unequal match between Troilus and
Achilles? How corrupt the time of king Charlemayne was, and what practices
and fetches your Pope used, to get the crown of France to Pepin his father,
from the right and lawful prince thereof, and the Empire of Rome to Charlemayne,
from the Emperor of Constantinople, to who^ it did belong: every
hiltoriographer can tell, and may fitter be declared in his proper place, than
here to leap over the style, ere ye come at it by many an hundredth miles: and
yet for have ye break your shinnes even against those things yt as trifles ye
reckon up unto us. As, the correcting most diligently the order of reading and
singing in the Church, the placing and displacing singers, if he did these
things as a godly Emperor, as ye say, then he took it, that as Emperor he had
a government in them. But ye say as a godly Emperor he much busied him self.
If he found him self business like a busy body, wherein he had no authority
thus so place and displace, to institute, order, and correct, how was he a
godly Emperor therein, or not rather as ye said before, played Oza his part?
But ye say he was therein a godly Emperor, therefore he did nothing of any
bu^iositie, but of his own authority and supreme government therein. Well yet
say you it was but in singing and over singers. Was it no further M. Stapleton:
how then do you say, the like you might have alleged of Carolus Magnus, to
King David's doings? Did King David meddle only with singing and singers? Did
he not meddle with Priests and Prophets also? But to salve the matter ye say,
and many other such like matters of the Church. Why tell ye not man what
those many other matters were? have ye no lust to declare them, for fear they
would mar your market? Well, let them alone till we come to the proper
examination of them. Howbeit whatsoever they shall fall out to be, here
remember ye liken them to King David's doings. But King David commanded and
appointed singers, Priests, Prophets, all the clergy, high, and low, of what
degree so ever: Ergo, King Charlemaines authority stretched further than to
singing men, even to all Priests, Prophets and all the clergy besides. And
thus either your similitude is not like, or else the one and the other makes
clean against you.

But if these doings of Charlemaine be not like, yet has master Stapleton
another proof in store.

Also in the decrees. 11. Q. 1. which Iuo also alleges, where Stap. 48*
he renueth out of the Code of Theodosius a law binding all his subjects of
all Nations, Provinces and Countries, of what so ever quality or condition
they were, and in all manner causes, if the defendant require an ecclesiastiall
judgment, it be not lawful from the Bishops sentence to appeal any higher.

This law is here brought forth master Stapleton very The law of King ^uo.
untimely and impertinently, nothing to prove or unproue the ensample or doings
of King David, unless ye would prove it on this wi^e. ^uo alleges a law of
Theodosius, binding all his subjects of all Nations, Provinces and Countries,
of whatsoever quality and condition they were, and in all manner causes, if the
defendant require an ecclesiastical judgment, it be not lawful from the
Bishops sentence to appeal any higher: Ergo king David made the like law to
this, or this was like to king David's laws. How this hangs together like
your Germans lips that before y^ spoke of, let others judge.

King David's laws were not for priests to be such Judges, but for priests to
be subject to these orders, and that they should observe and obey them, porter,
singer, Leuit, Priest, or Prophet, high or low, of what quality or condition
soever they were. These laws of king David were (as ye say) by Gods
commandment, by the mouth of his Prophets, and therefore could not be ill.
The law you cite of Iu^ from Privileges of Princes, to the clergy well or ill
used.
Theodosius, though at that time it were good, and upon some godly
consideration, yet it is not ius diuinum, the law of god, it is but man's law,
and the princes law, and shows a chief authority in him to give such
liberties to the clergy, which as they may be very well used, especially when
princes do look well to them, that they use their gifts, offices and
privileges dutifully: so have they since by your pope and prelates been very
ill used, even to the treading down of the doners of the^, Theodosius, Iuo, or
any other. And as the Iuy taking al his The Pope and his prelates like the Iuy.
strength and growth from the Oak, so co^passeth and ouergroweth it, and that
by his green and pleasant embracings of it, till the Iuy have quite destroyed
the whole bole of the Oak: so have your clergy by such franchesies and
liberties of princes, at the first by compassing them with counterfeit holiness
and subtle devises, so grown up and above them in riches, strength and
possessions, that at the length ye have destroyed and brought to nothing, all
their supreme estate over you. For whereto bring ye out this privilege of the
Emperor Theodosius, that none might appeal to any higher sentence than the B.
but as ye have brought it now in the end, to call cora^ vobis, as your
underling, eue^ the prince himself, from who^ ye confess this your privilege
came? And thus ye allege king Iuo his laws as it were an Iuy bush to behold
how your popish prelates do play ye Iuies part. But it is hie time with other
sharper laws that princes pull up such Iuies by the roots. Now as ye have
thus shifted off ye answer to king David's doings, redressings, ordrings,
laws, and chief government in ecclesiastical causes, so to knit up the knot,
even like a fawning Iuy about princes your self:

And surely (say you) no Prince more recognized their obedience Stap. 48. b.
to the spiritual magistrate in spiritual causes, than such as were most
ready and careful to aid, further, and to their power direct, all spiritual
matters. This therefore proves well that godly princes do further and set
forth godly religion, by means seemly to their vocations.

Why master Stap. who desires or attributes more to Princes than to set forth
Gods religion by means semely to their vocation? If this ensample of David, as
you say, prove thus much: then to govern, direct, command, and appoint the
Priests, yea your hiest Priests, as David did, is no unseemly means to their
vocation, nor unsitting even for your Popes vocation, to obey the Princes
appointment and commandment. And if to direct all spiritual matters may be
done of Princes, and yet the obedience to the spiritual Pastor in spiritual
matters, still recognized: then does not the Queens Majesty any prejudice to
them, recognizing to them a dutiful obedience in the ministration of
spiritual matters: for all that she fetteth forth Gods true religion and
directs all spiritual matters, as ye grant she may. Which is as much as
the Bishop or any of us desire, or her Majesty takes on her.

But (say you) here is no manner of inckling, that Princes Stap. 49. a.
do or did ever bear the supreme government in all ecclesiastical matters, to
decide and determine, to alter and change, to set up and pluck down, what
religion liked them by their princely authority, and mere sovereignty.

Have ye gone about to impugn this all this while M. The Queens Ma estie by
the Papists shamefully (...).
Stapleton, then I see well it was not for nothing that always ye answered so
wide. Ye needed not have sought so many shifting corners. The Bishop proponed
one thing, and you answered another. Does the Bishop maintain or ever said
that Princes might decide, determine, alter, change, set up, and pluck down,
what religion liked them, by their Princely authority, and mere sovereignty?
Quote me the lease, name me the place, where once the Bishop so said. Or does
the Q. Majesty take any such thing upon her. These be but your wicked, I had
almost said trayt^rous slanders, to desace her highness to her simple
subjects. And no doubt so ye report to other Countries of her Majesty, as ye
write here most opprobiously against her. It is your Pope against whom ye
should make this conclusion, for he takes on him to decide and determine, to
alter and change, to set up and pluck down what religion likes him. The
Queens Majesty, God be highly praised for her, as a most godly supreme
governor feloweth king David's ensample, and neither your wicked conclusion
touches her, nor these your shifting counterblasts come nere the matter in
hand.

The. 14. Division.
AFter King David, the Bishop alleges the wise King Win. Page 9. a.
Solomon his son, citing a brief sum of his acts that infer his supreme
authority.

For answer to this, Master Stapleton chooses out one Cap. 12.
act of Solomon, as a full answer to all the rest besides, and says:

The weight of this objection rests in the deposition of Stap. 48. b. The
example of the supreme government of K. Solomon.
Abiathar the high Priest.

The weight of this answer rests first upon a manifest untruth. The Bishop
alleged besides Abiathars deposition, the placing of Sadocke, the placing of
the arc in the temple of Solomon, the dedication of the temple, the offering
sacrifices, blessing the people, directing the Priests, Levites and other
Church officers after his fathers orders, and the Priests obedience in every
thing to the kings commandment: none of these objections resting on
Abiathers deposition. Only the nearest that comes to it, is the placing of
Sadocke in Abiathars room. And yet says M. Stap. the weight of this objection
rests in the deposition of Abiathar the high priest. And so thinks if he
fully answer this, he has satisfied all the rest. Now since M. Stapleton
will needs have it so, and has prepared himself only to answer the
deposition of the high Priest, as the Salomons dedeposing the high priest.
highest and principallest matter, be it so, let us go forward with him, and
see his answer thereto. Although hereafter he must remember, that if the
placing and displacing of prelates, be a matter of such importance (as in deed
it is to this present purpose) that the answering of it includes diverse other
weighty points also: then the inuestiture of Bishops is not so impertinent a
matter, as now and then he will see me to make it being urged therewith. He
must remember also, that making all other objections to rest on this as chief,
if he answer not this, then both all the other be vnaunswered: and this being
a chief matter does quite overthrow all his counterblast besides, and brings
his pope to his old obedience, yea in case also of like deposition to
Abiathars. Wherefore, it stands him now in hand, to answer well and surely
unto this objection.

To go therefore (like a profounde clerk deeply seen in the doctors) the
more authentically to work, he first presses us with the authorities of his
good masters:

This thing (says he) Master Dorman, and Master doctor Stap. 48. b
Harding say employeth no more superiority, than if a man should say Queen
Mary deposed Master Cranmer.

But Queen Marie was not the chief, but an accessorie instrument for the
furtherance of the execution.

Ergo, Solomon in deposing Abiathar was not the chief, but an accessorie
instrument for the furtherance of the execucution.

Ye are much in Master D. Hardings debte already master Salomons example
deposing Ab^athar applied by the papists to Queen M^rie deposing the
archbishop Cran.
Sapleton, for much good stuff that ye have borrowed of him, especially this
example of Queen Mary and Bishop Cranmer, which I perceive ye like full well,
and therefore ye will borrowe it once again: and because master Dorman
borrowes it out of him also, ye will borrowe it of both: nevertheless so, that
they have the praise thereof that used it before you. And therefore to gratify
your masters again ( mulus mulum scabit, for one mule as the latin proverb
says rubbes another mule) you ever refer us to their high authority, saying:

I say with master D. Harding: I say with master Dorma^: D. Fol. 44. b 45 b.
47. a. 48. b
Har. shows: master Dor. and master D. Harding affirm: M. D. Harding notes.
M. D. Harding touches: and here, master Dor. and master D. Harding say it
imployeth no more.

Thus ye think to save your credit with them, to obiecte their credence and
authority to us. But in thus doing, either ye show a great arrogancy in
them, or an extreme flatry in your self, with no less folly, to frame your
argument on their bare sayings, and object it to us for good authority, they
being parties adversary, besides, God wotte, their little estimation even among
your selves. Although herein taking witness thus one of another, what is it
else than to ask your own fellows if you say true or no? Let go therefore
your masters authority, and if ye will needs allege them, allege their
reasons if they have any, and tell us not they say i^ imployes no more, but
prove you, or allege their proves, that it employes no more.

Ye urge the doings of Queen Marie how little they employed, but ye take pro
concesso and not to be denied to your Master, that their doings were alike*
whereas they were most unlike, and quite contrary. Queen Mary ye say was The
difference between Q. Mary's and king Salomo^s doings.
but the accessorie instrumente therein to the high priest which is ye say the
Pope: but Solomon deposing the high priest, that as ye likewise say was the
figure of your Pope, how could he be an accessorie instrumente to the high
priest, when he sat upon him, gave indgemente against him, and deposed him?
was the high priest the principal doer of it against him self, and Solomon
but his accessorie instrument? indede your high priests bear princes so in
hand, that no body can sit in judgment on them, or depose them, but they must
do it them selves, or else it can not be done. Abiathar never learned that
knacke, but was judged and deposed of his prince. for all he was the highest
priest. nor the prince was his instrument thereof, for then had he not been
deposed at all, he would not have made an instrument to Solomon to depose him
self. But Solomon did it against the will of Abiathar being a traitor to him:
nor he did it as the other priests accessorie instrumente, for a^ the other
priests were inferior to their high priest: and the inferior (your law
says, and good reason to) can not depose the superior, Ergo, he was
accessarie instrument to no living creature herein, but did it by his own
royal authority, and therefore by this royal authority he was supreme
governor over the priests, yea, the highest priest and all.

Now contrariwise, Queen Mary did not depose the highest priest, which you
say is your pope of Rome, and not the Archbishop of Caunterbury, except ye
will translate your primacie from Rome to Canterbury. She wrongfully deposed
the archbishop of Cant. or rather as ye say, was but an accessorie instrument
to the furtherance of the execution. For so in very deed ye used her, while
your Romish Pope his legates and prelates were the doers thereof: she sat not on
him in judgment, nor gave sentence against him, as did Solomon against
Abiathar, and had she done so, as ye would not have allowed her doing, so
would ye not allow him to be the highest priest.

And if ye will needs have it, that their doings were alike, then as King
Solomon deposed by his princely authority the chief Bishop, so, after your
account that the Bishop of Rome is the chief Bishop, she should have deposed
the Bishop of Rome, which she did not, but set him up in her realm even above
her self, where he was before put down: so that these doings being in every
point contrary, how are King Salomons doings with the high priest Abiathar,
like to the doings of Queen marie to Bishop Cranmer? and therefore this is but
a shifting answer of your Masters old stuff: and you are but their
accessorie instrument, to burnish it a fresh: which ye doso ill fauouredly,
that your master or you can take little honesty by it.

Ye alleged this comparison of Q. Mary out of your Master once before, that
Queen Mary redressed religion, but by the means of the Priests. What is the
mean whereby one does any thing, but the accessorie instrument whereby he does
it? And what is the accessorie instrument but the mean? But the Priests ye
say are the mean, for the Prince to do it by. Ergo the Priests were but the
accessorie instruments to the Queen. Which if it were any abasing of the
Princes superiority, why is it not an abasing of your Priests? And as ye
make these shifts thus in the end fall out against your cause: so can ye not
agree in your own tales to your self. In the ensample of David the Queen was
the represser, and the Priests were the means or instrument: in this cause of
Solomon, where your Pope by his figure (as you say) the high priest, is so nere
touched with an example of deprivation: There contrary to that ye told us
before, the high Priest him self must be the represser, and the Prince but
the mean or instrument.

And thus it seems ye care not what ye say, for you, or against you, so ye
may shift of the matter in one place, though in another ye speak quite
contrary. And thinking to bear your self out with your masters authority,
ye make your master partaker of your shame, besides the shame that they have
for their shameful shifts received already at the Bishop of Sar. and master
Nowels hands.

But here thinking to be even with master Nowell for confuting this unlike
similitude, used also as new fresh stuff by master Dorman.

But Lord (says he) how master Nowell here besturreth Stap. 49. ^.
him self?

Now when the Reader should look how here master Stapleton would besturre
him self, to bring ought against master Nowell: he dare allege nothing, it
was but a copy of his countenance.

He fumeth and he fretteth with master Dorman (says he) Stap. 49. ^.
who shall cool him well enough I doubt not. In the mean while, I will ask
master Horn and master Nowell to, one question.

Yea forsooth master Stapleton, I like your wit now better than before,
demand what you will, but challenge not the combat so fast as ye did ere
while, cumber not your self with more adversaries than ye need, ye shall
find more ease in the end. Go to therefore and propounde your question.

Master Horn says (say you) a little before that Iosue sacrificed Stap. 49. a.
burnt sacrifices, and burnt offerings, that king David sacrificed burnt and
peace offerings, that Solomon offered sacrifices. Were trow ye Iosue, David, and
Solomon priests? Master Stap. question and dilemma.
If so, then how bring you their ensamples to prove any thing for Kings and
Queens that are no Priests? If not, then this phrase is verefied in that they
caused the Priests (to whom the matter pertayned) to offer sacrifices. And so
whereas M. Horn says of Iosue, that he sacrificed burnt sacrifices which is
agreeable to the latin obtulit holocausta, master Nowell says he commanded
sacrifice to be offered.

Thus far your question to the Bishop, and your dilemma thereon. To the
question I answer, that neither Iosue, David, nor Solomon were priests, if
not, say you, then by your own words and master Nowels, this phrase is
verefied, that they caused the priests to offer sacrifices. I grant ye master
Stapleton, and it was granted to you many times before by the Bishop: what
infer ye herevppon?

And why then I pray you M. Nowell (say you, turning Stap. 49. a.
your speech to him) may not this phrase also be taken after the said sort
that Solomon deposed Abiathar in procuring him by some ordinary way to be
deposed for his treason? as master Cranmer might have bin, though he were
deposed and burnt for his heresy.

Here is a matter far fette or ever the inconvenience break out. In the end
thanks be to God, this is the worst conclusion: and why may not this phrase
also (of deposing) be taken after the said sort of sacrificing? I answer,
that to reason from may to must, either must or may be but a mustie reason. I
had thought this deep question, and this lusty dilemma upon it, would have
concluded with a necessity, this phrase of deposition must be so resolved as
the other of sacrifice: and comes it now in like a poor hedgecreeper, with a
perchance that it may be so resolved? parturiunt montes nascitur ridiculus
mus: the mountains travail, out there peepes a mouse. But now since ye
conclude no further, but that it may be so, what if one would doubt of your may
bird, and like a good simple plain dealing man, would bluntly say to your may,
Perawnter yea sir: perawnter nay sir, and bid ye reason more substantially than
to stand on a peradventure that it may be so.

But since ye will needs know why the one phrase may not be understood like
the other, I will not only show you why they may not, but also why they must
not. The phrases The difference of the phrase for the princes sacrificing and
the princes de posing Abiathat.
on the one part of Iosues, David's and Salomons sacrifices, might not be done
personally by them, because they were no priests, but it must have bin done by
the priests, because it was the priests especial office appointed of God But
in this other case of deposition. Solomon not only might either command or
execute personally, or by his deputy: but of duty ought to have deposed that
naughty high priest, because on the one part it was no especial or any part
at all of the priests office appointed by God to depose their high pressed, nor
the inferiors cold depose their primate: on the other part, only the king
could do it, did it, and ought to do it, because it appertay^ed to his royal
estate, and was appointed by God thereto. And thus ye see the phrases are not
alike, neither may nor must be resolved the one by the other, as ye say in your
conclusion, Salomo^ deposed Abiathar in procuring him by some ordinary way to
be deposed for his treason. What some ordinary way should this be, that ye
tell us thus generally, he might procure? If it were for the lower to depose
the higher, it was no ordinary way. If it were by the other priests, it was by
the lower. If it were by some Prophet, it was extraordinary, and yet ye pull
down the Prophets and all under the priests, especially under the high
priest. If it were by the princes procurement, ye say the prince is also
inferior, durst any inferior at an other inferiors commandment, or procuring,
attempt to depose their superior, yea their supreme? your Pope would give ye
little thanks, and he hard ye harp on that string master Stapleton. By what
ordinary way then should it be done, who should have done it, who should have
procured it? Can ye devise any except the ordinary power that God gave the
Prince, had been the procurer doer and all thereof?

Now that ye have put forth your question, made your dilemma, lapte up
your conclusion, and nothing still serves your turn, but more against you:
shall I be so ^old as to demand of you again, even your own question, and
add another dilemma of your own words thereto? The question and the dilemma
returned on the papists.
Were trow ye Iosue, David, and Solomon priests? If so, then how say ye here,
this phrase (they sacrificed) is verefied in that they caused the priests to
whom the matter perteyned to offer sacrifices? And why use ye all the shifts
ye can to abase their doings? If no: Why said ye then three Sup. fol. 217. a
leaves before of Iosue, If ye will have your examples to prove and confirm,
then as Iosue circumcided, so let the prince baptize, and as Iosue sacrificed
upon an altar, so let the prince in cope and surplesse celebrate your holy
communion? Did Iosue circumcise and sacrifice personally him self, and was no
priest? I speak this only to show your shifting off of your aduersar^e on
the one part, and your contradiction to your self on the other, even in your
own question.

Although herein if ye say they were no priests (which this your later
exposition, contrary to the first infers) ye say the truer, and therefore
do well to recant your former saying. But see how ye contrary your self once
again, ye liken the phrase of deposition and sacrificing together. Solomon
deposed Abiathar in procuring by some ordinary way to have him deposed: And
Iosue, David, and Solomon did sacrifice, in that they caused the Priests to
offer sacrifice. Here the Prince when he will have sacrifice done, causes the
priest to minister and execute the sacrifice, and so the Prince does it by the
Priests hands. Who is here the instrument for the furtherance of the
execution? the priest. For the Prince can not, except ye will make him a
Priest. Who is the causer (as ye call him) and such a causer, as has the name
of the doer, though he do it not, but have an accessorie instrument for him?
the Prince. Do ye not see what an overthrow ye give your self? and withal
speak clean contraryes not a dosen lines asunder? The Prince is not the
chief, but an accessorie instrument to the furtherance of the execution: the
Prince is the causer and doer, but he does it by an others execution. Is not
this plain contradiction? and yet to help the matter, ye let another on the
neck of it. As Iosue and David did sacrifice, so did Solomon depose Abiathar.
Solomon was the minister and executer: Stap. 4 9. ^.
Iosue and David were not the ministers and executers: If these things be a
like, this is another manifest contradiction. If they be not a like, why bring
ye them one for proof of another? Why affirm ye them to be alike, when the
doing of the one by your own report, is contrary to the other? Either ye lie
in saying they be alike, or ye speak huddle and overthwart your self. And yet
while ye would seem nicely to stand descanting on the phrases, (be it unawares
or wittingly) ye grant the full point of the matter, that in the sacrifices,
and the deposition, whosoever were the executor, the Prince was the procurer,
the causer, and the commander thereof, which is enough to argue his supreme
authority therein.

Your conclusion is, he was deposed by the Princes procurement, The highest
priest a traitor
for his treason. And who was this yt thus was dealt withal? for sooth the
highest priest. Why, the highest priest is (ye say) the figure of your Pope,
was the figure of your Pope then a traitor? I trust ye will tell a good tale
for your Pope anon. Nay will ye say, the Pope can not be a traitor, nor be
deposed, because he is the highest Priest. And what say ye to Abiathar the
successor of Aaron, was not he the highest Priest also? If he were not, name
an higher. And yet see, his seat saved him not from being a traitor, nor his
highness from being under the prince that deposed him. And had he not been
under his Prince, he could not have been a traitor to him.

A traitor is he that reuolting from his dutiful obedience A traitor.
to his Prince, rebelleth or conspireth against him.

But ye say Abiathar was a traitor:

Ergo, he ought a duetifull obedience to his Prince, from the which he swarued.

Now if that hiest Priesthood (which as ye say was a figure of the Popes
highest Priesthood) was nevertheless obedient to the Princes royal
authority, and the highest priest might be a traitor, in swaruing from his
obedience: then the Bishop of Rome having now likewise the highest Priesthood
(as ye pretend) ought nevertheless to be the Emperor of Romes
obedientiarie: and if he swerve from his obedience: as was Abiathar, he is a
traitor and ought to be deposed as Abiathar was. But how well he The Bishop
of Rome a traitor to the ^mperor of Rome
has set the pattern of Ab^athars tr^ason before his eyes, and far passed
it, in conspiring and rebelling against the Emperor of Rome, and in the end
has exempted himself from all obedience of the imperial estate, denying that
he can be a traitor thereto, but contrary, that the emperor owes obedience unto
him: it is so manifest that your selves can not deny it. Only therefore it now
remains that all other princes in their signiories, as the Queens Majesty
has done in hirs, take ensample of wise king Salomons supreme government, in
deposing this traterous Abiathar.

And thus thinking to deface the memory of the blissed martyr Bishop
Cranmer, that never conspired against his prince, that never claymed supremacy
over his prince, that never took him self to be the highest Priest, that in
his life lived like a most godly father, and in his death behaved himself as
mylde as a Lamb: ye have no whitte Master Stapleton blemished his renown, yea
your disprayse redoundeth to his greater praise. Neither does your masters nor
your similitude of him to Abiathar, agree in any point, only with your Pope it
agrees, and that as you see in every point so iumpe: that, as he claymeth
Abiathars chiefest place, as he has practysed more than Abiathars treason, so
Chris^yan Princes followyng King Salomons steps, should give him also
Abiathars reward. And were that or this Abiathar never so much the highest
Priest, Christian Princes have the same authority now to depose lowest and
highest also, that Solomon had before: except Master Stapleton have yet some
further shifte to delude this fact of Solomon.

But now master Horn, (says he) that Solomon was but Stap. 4 9. a.
a minister and an executer herein, the very words immediately following (the
which because they serve plainly against your purpose, you craftily
dissembled) do testify.

And here he fastneth a triumphant note in the margin.

Master Horn overthrown concerning the deposition of Abiathar, by the very
next line of his own text guilefully by him omitted.

Here is of a sudden a sore a do in deed. Solomon shall be proved but a
minister and an executer herein, by the plain words of the scripture. The
Bishop shall be proved a crafty dissembler, and a guilefull omitter of those
words. And by those words he shall be quite overthrown. May the matter go by
M. Stap. words, these words give a very boisterous Counterblast. But since he
will prove it by the scripture, let us hear not his, but the scriptures
words, and his conclusion thereon. The words are these:

And so Solomon put away Abiathar from being Priest 3. Reg. 2.
unto the Lord, to fulfill the words of the Lord, which he spoke over the
house of Hely in Silo.

Ergo Solomon was but the minister and executor of Gods Stap. 4 9 a.
sentence published before by Samuel the Leuite.

What does this infringe the Bishops purpose, or overthrow The ministry and
executing of Gods sentence debarreth not the princes supremacy.
his assertion master Stap? can ye conclude hereon he, was not the supreme
governor next under God in doing of the fact, because he was the minister and
executor of gods sentence? By this rule the Prince were not supreme governor
under God, in any point of civil justice neither: for he is therein also a
minister and executor of Gods sentence, that by his Prophe^es commands the
Prince to minister and execute justice. And by this rule, how could (...)
prove this superiority to be i^ your Pope either? would ye make him have
such a claim, that he should not be Gods minister and executer of Gods
sentences? or would ye not rather reason contrary?

He is in all spiritual causes the minister and executer of Gods sentences
published by his Prophets.

Ergo he is the supreme governor under God in all spiritual causes.

If ye had any sentence of God to prove this antecedent, I warrant ye then ye
would reason on this wise. Yea, you do reason on this wise, though ye have no
sentence of God at all therefore. As for us, we have (as by your own
testimony) the word of God to warrant, that the Prince in deposing the hiest
Priest, and figure of your Pope as ye say, has so good warrant of authority
therefore: that even he was Gods minister therein, and executer of Gods
sentence. which plainly argues his supreme authority next and immediately
under God. To be a minister and executer on that fashion next and immediately
under God, is no argument to abase the princes authority. If ye had proved he
had been the priests underling minister, and executour herein, this had been
somewhat to your purpose. But this ye could not prove, and ye said the contrary
before, that the priest was the princes minister and executour, and that he
deposed Abiathar not by himself, but as he sacrificed, by causing another to
minister and execute for him.

Now when ye say the Prince is Gods minister and executer, the priest is the
princes minister and executer, do not your self I pray you acknowledge in the
ministry and the execution the priest to be under the prince? and that the
prince is not only Gods minister and executer, but as ye say further the
causer, commander, and procurer also thereof to the priests?

Is this the overthrowing of the Bishop as your margin makes boast: or is it
not rather the overthrowing of your self? can ye speak any thing more plain
for the Bishop, and against your cause than this? and yet ye cry eut that the
Bishop omitted and dissembled ^his guilefully and craftily, verily M. Stap*
there was no cause ye see why he should so do, the craft and guile is but your
own, the Bishop as he did in all the other doings, only touched them per
trans^nnam, not describing any one of the circumstances, but in a word or two
showed the fact, and so passed over to other factes of Solomon. But whatsoever
the Bishop told or left untold, it had been better for you, as ye have used
guylefully and craftily many other points, to have omitted and dissembled
this, if ye have no better shift than this, that not only makes nothing
against the Bishops assertion in Salomons supreme government, but still more
and more, even by the mouth of God by his Prophets does confirm the same.

Now that none of all (...) shifts will hitherto s^rue against this one
ensample of Solomon, yet has M. St on^ shift more behind, and that a trim
shift to.

Besides (says he) that the deposing of Abiathar does Stap. 49. ^.
not employ that Solomon was the chief ruler in all causes ecclesiastical,
which is the Butte that ye must shoot at, and then must ye provide another
bow, for this will not shoot home.

This is one of your old s^ale shifts M. Stap. I see you are now even at the
last cast, to let the arrowe alone, and quarrel about the bow, and the butte,
but and ye would (as ye gave good counsel to others) have followed it your
self, in firing still your eye on the issue between the parties in
controversy: neither would yemake so many vagaryes as ye do, nor here have
quarelled at the Bishop^ short shooting. The words of the issue which is the
butte that M. Feck. requires the Bishop to shoot unto (if ye be remembered)
are these: to make proof unto me that any Emperor The issue (...) question.
or Empress, King or Queen, may claim or take upon them any such government
in spiritual or ecclesiastical causes (meaning as does the Queen) if the
Bishop prove this: then he hittes the Butte. His artillery the Bow and Arrows
that he must shoot withal at this Butte, are appointed by him likewise: the
Scriptures, the doctors, the Counsels, and the practice: the testimonies,
allegations, decrees, and examples therein contained.

The Bishop hitherto has with many arrows out of the Scripture hit the Butte
so full: that as yet ye could not make this quarrel, but sought other peltyng
shifts.

Now, seeing that none of all those paltrie brablings will serve, ye say he
shootes not home, and must change his Bow. His Bow here is the Scripture,
his Arrows here are the ensamples of Solomon, of which the Bishop shot a
good many several Arrows and factes, and every one hitte the Butte. He
alleged not only the fact of Abiathars deposition, but also of Sadockes
placing, of consecrating the Temple, of sacrificing, of placing the Arc
therein, of blessing the people, of directing the Priests, Levites, and other
Church officers, and of their obedience to all his commandments. Of all
these allegations, you your self master Stapleton, choose one to answer unto,
which is the deposition of the high Priest, and say all the objection
dependes thereon. And so guylefully omitting the residue, stand only a
measuring this shot, and in the end after much warbling cry out, short,
short, ye must provide another Bow, for this will not shoot home. The
deposing of Abiathar does not employe that Solomon was the chief Ruler in all
ecclesiastical causes.

First, what if it does not, M. Stapleton? one fact of Solomon Master Stap.
grants the Prince to be chief ruler in some ecclesiastical causes.
employes not all ecclesiastical causes. Go to, does it employ some
ecclesiastical causes to be in the chief rule of the Prince? If ye grant me
this, ye grant the issue, and this is the end ye grant. But ye say it
employes not all ecclesiastical causes* and therefore is short* Did the Bishop
again shoot no more but that one? how chance ye meddled not in measuring of
the other? Did ye foresee, that as this had hitte one cause, another would
hitte another, and so at the least every one one cause, yea perchance every
one (...), and so a number of your causes might be hitte, and perchance all
causes, by some one shot, not yet measured, and therefore guylefully and
crastily dis^embling and omi^ting them, you let all the rest alone. Yet should
ye not then for shame have thus cried out against this one first shot, since
if it were short though short shooting leese the game, yet one short shot
leaseth it not. And if one be short, many other may come home, and win the game for all this, especially matching with one that shoots so fair and
Gentlemanlyke as you do Master Stapleton, that it were better to stand at
the mark many times, than from it.

But seeing ye deal so unevenly with the Bishops other shottes, (for all your
bellowing short, short, it hittes not the Butte, it commes not home) ye give
all standers by, suspicion of fal^e aim in this shot, and therefore let us
measure it once again. The deposing of Abiathar (say you) does not employ
that Solomon was chief ruler in all ecclesiastical causes. I pray you who was
then chief ruler in all ecclesiastical causes? Abiather say you. And
wherefore he? because he was the highest Priest or Bishop, therefore the
chief rule of them was in him. Does it not then follow, if he depose him, in
whom is all the rule, that all this rule is yet restrained under his higher
rule, that deposes him? For the more man^fest ensample of our time: If I ask
in whom the chief rule of all ecclesiastical causes is now, in the Pope, say
you: wherefore? say I: because, say you, he is the hiest Priest or Bishop, and
therefore he has the ^yest rule of all ecclesiastical causes Well say I, if
the Emperou^ now would go about to cite the Pope, to judge him, and tell him
he is the child of death, for not acknowledging his old obedience to him, and
so deposing him bydde him depart and meddle no more with What the autho^tie of
dep^sing the Pope implies.
that Byshoprike: the Emperor can not do this (say you) for then the Pope in
all ecclesiastical causes should be the Emperors inferior, if the Emperor
might depose (...), because when he is deposed by the Emperor from all his
chief rule, all his chief rule is translated from him, and so were he under
the Emperor, and all his chief rule at the Emperors disposition to give to
another. But this say you were such a foul inconvenience as the like can not
be. And therefore the Emperor can not depose the Pope, but the Pope the
Emperor. This is your common reasoning. Wherein do ye not see, how the
granting of the deposition of the chief Priest, infers a hyer rule and
authority in the deposer over the deposed, in every prerogative that the
party deposed had before he was deposed?

But then (will ye say) the Prince that deposed the highest Priest, may not he
do all those matters that the priest might have done, if he be the chief
ruler of them? It is A difference between the chief* ruler of ecclesiastical
causes and the chief doer of them.
one thing master Stapleton, to be the chief ruler in and over all those
ecclesiastical causes, that the party deposed might have done, and to be
the chief doer or executioner of them. For example, the Prince makes an
Admiral or chief ruler over his Seas, a President or Deputy over his
Marches, a chief Justice or Chancellor over his laws. etc. These Officers
again, the king deposes: the deposition of them is an argument, that in all
those things the King is the chief ruler. And although the King can not do
any of those things that belong to their Offices, yet is that no impayring of
his chief rule over them and all things in their offices: And therefore he
transferreth the doing, to them that better can or will do those offices. And
so likewise in the chief office of priesthood (admitting there were such an
one now in all ecclesiastical causes) though the prince can not do all those
ecclesiastical actions nor any one of them: yet grant the prince that he may
depose that chief priest, to whom the doing of them appertains: ye grant
with all that he is the chief ruler of all those ecclesiastical things, so
far forth as the rule of oversight, governance and directing stretches unto,
which is above the ministerial executing. Now (as your self have confessed)
the prince is the causer, and the priest the executor, and doer, which
likewise his name imports, and therefore is called minister: which name
though the prince have also, yet he has it (as your self have likewise
confessed) in a higher respect, because he is Gods especial minister, to
ouersee, direct, dispose, and depose all other ministers.

And thus granting the ensample even but of this one fact of Solomon for our
princes to follow, to depose in their realms any one whatsoever highest or
lowest priest, it not only hitteth home the butte, yea and the prick to, set
up by master Fecke^ham: but this one fact of Solomon, and the like of
christian princes now, employeth a chief rule of over sight and direction
(though not of executing in all ecclesiastical causes) besides whatsoever
appertains to the parties office that may be so deposed, as Abiathar was by
Solomon.

The untruth that ye note in the end of this ensample, is orderly answered in
your beadrolle.

The. 15. Division.
TThe Bishop in this division alleging the example of The example of king
Iosaphats supreme government.
king Iosaphat, chiefly of two visitatio^s set forth by him, 2. Paral. 17. and.
19. how he reformed religion through out all his dominions, appointed preachers
and setters forth of Gods law, and Judges in all causes as well
ecclesiastical as temporal: concludes his supreme government hereupon.

To this Master Stap. counterblas^eth: As M. Doctor Cap 13. Sta. 50. a.
Harding and M. Dorman have written so say I that ye are they which frequent
private hills, aulters and dark groves that the scripture speaks of.
Wherein you have set up your Idols that is your abominable heresies.

In that ye say, master Stapleton, As they say, so say I, ye show how well ye
have learned your lessons thus one of another, to say what soever your master
said before you, and take your bare so saying for proof good enough. But as ye
fondly flatter your selves with your own sayings, so more fondly ye obtrude
them as principles to your adversaries, that will by and by bid ye either prove
them, or else will they still esteem them as they are, for mere lying sayings
of a knot of three false confederates, the master and his two scholars to
outface and delude the manifest truth withal. And if these your masters sayings
and yours hap to become words of course, then beware you on whose side they
are lykest to light, that have mainteyned so open Idolatry, and diverse false
worships of God that he did never institute.

After this master Stapleton drawing nearer to the matter, admit^eth this
example of King Iosaphat: We also confess (says he) that there is nothing
written in the Sta. 50. a.
holy Scripture of Iosaphat, touching his care and diligence about the
directing of ecclesiastical matters, but that godly Princes may at this day do
the same, doing it in such sort as Iosaphat did.

Hold ye here master Stapleton, and we ask no more of you. Ye have here
frankly confessed two things. First the care and diligence, that Iosaphat had
about the directing ecclesiastical matters. Which care and diligence was the
Bishops first proposition, now twice already granted by you, what followed
thereon ye have heard before already. Secondly, that godly Princes may at this
day do the same, doing it in such sort as Iosaphat did. Hereupon I conclude
this argument:

As Iosaphat did in directing ecclesiastical matters, so does the Queens
majesty now:

But all godly Princes ought so to do, as Iosaphat did in directing
ecclesiastical matters:

Ergo, the Queens Majesty does now, as all godly Princes ought to do.

To prove that she does as did king Iosaphat: your self confess, that he
reformed religion and was careful and diligent about directing ecclesiastical
matters.

But the Queens Majesty's claim is none other herein but this, to reform
religion and to be careful and diligent about directing ecclesiastical
matters:

Ergo, King Iosaphats doings and hirs are not unlike.

But this imports in her a supreme government.

Ergo, King Iosaphats example hitteth home the Butte, and is a fit pattern
to her and all godly Princes of supreme government in ecclesiastical causes.

Here seeing that for fashions sake, where ye durst not deny the manifest
truth, ye have granted so much that in deed ye have granted all: ye would
now restrain your grant, and say it was conditional, that though all Princes
may reform religion, and with care and diligence direct all ecclesiastical
matters, yet they must do it in such sort as Iosaphat did: and therefore
leaving your simple and general terms of reformation and direction by godly
Princes, ye will have them perticulerly leueled by that sort that Iosaphat did
them. Which as we gladly, grant you in all things that Iosaphat did well and
godly, Wherein christian Princes must go beyond^ king (...) hat.
as were the most of his doings, and in all that which the Bishop rehearses:
yet in some things Princes must not do in that sort, but go beyond him.
For, although for the most part he did those things, Quae plac^ta erant
domino, That were acceptable to the Lord: (...) en 2. Par. 20.
excelsa non abstulit, Notwithstanding he took not away the high places:
wherein godly princes must do after a more zealous sort than Iosaphat did.

As for all those things that the Bishop cites, see that ye stand to your
grant made unto us, that Iosaphat reformed religion, and used care and
diligence about the directing of ecclesiastical matters, and then that godly
princes may at this day do all the same: And fear ye not but we will also
grant to you, and not starte therefrom, that they may reform religion and
direct ecclesiastical matters in such sort as Iosaphat did. And so, except
ye be disposed to quarrel, or will falsefie the sort and manner of Iosaphats
or the Queen's Highness doings, I trust we shall anon agree herein.

They may do it (say you) in such sort as Iosaphat did, that S^a. 50 a.
Iosaphat direc ted eccl^siastical matters not by the commandment but by the advice of the prests.
is, to reform religion by the priests. First this is very subtly spoken
master Stapleton (by the priests) if ye mean by the advice or godly counsel
of the prestes, true it is, so might king Iosaphat well have done. If ye mean
by the authority and commandment of the priests, then is it false, nor you
can ever prove that Iosaphat did it by their commandment and authority, but
they contrariwise by his. Now in such sort as Iosaphat did, has the Queens
Majesty done, and this proves both their supremacies Sta. 50. a.
herein.

Not to enact (say you) a new religion, which the priests of force shall
swear unto.

Indeed this did not Iosaphat, no more has the Queens Majesty done, it is
but your surmised sclander.

Item to suffer the priests to judge in controversies of religion, Sta 50. a.
not to make the decision of such things a parliamente matter.

This latter part of your sentence, is again but your manifest sclander, to
suffer the priests to judge in controversies of religion after the rule of
Gods word, and not after their own pleasures, in such sort Iosaphat not
only suffered, but ordained them, commanded and ouersaw them so to do: and so
does the Queens majesty. And this sufferance, commandment and oversight,
argues their chief authorities.

Item not to prescribe a new form and order in ecclesiastical Sta. 50. a.
causes, but to see that according to the laws of the church before made, the
religion be set forth, as Iosaphat procu^ed the observation of the old
religion appointed in the law of Moses.

And even thus and none otherwise has the Queens Majesty procured the
observation of the old religion of Jesus Christ whom Moses prefigured, and
the orders of the apostles, and most ancient fathers after them, to be
restored: removing, as Iosaphat did, all other new forms and orders of
ecclesiastical abuses. And this restoring and procuring of the aunciente
religion and ceremonies, the suppressing and abolishing of new: is again in
both these princes a good argument of their supreme government.

Briefly (say you) that he do all this as an advocate, defender Sta. 50. a.
and son of the Church, with the authority and advice of the clergy, so
Iosaphat furdered religion, not otherwise.

Your word advocate how it came up, is declared already, but neither advocate,
defender, son or daughter herein, are any thing contrary to supreme
governor. But where ye add al these words, advocate, defender, and son, to
the prince: and to the clergy authority and advice: this shows your subtle
devise, to deceive princes with your painted terms. But princes begin to wax
wise and learned, as David exhorted them, and perceive how ye have foaded
Psalm 2.
them with these names and styles, that were but nomen sine re, a bare name
without any matter: for, the authority and advice ye reserved to your selves.
The princes to whom ye gave these gay titles, had neither authority, nor
might give their advice, according as Hosius would not have them so much as to
talk of matters of religion, much less to reform religion, to direct
ecclesiastical matters with care and diligence as before ye granted. And now
to eat again your word, ye would have them be careful and diligent without
advice, reform and direct without authority, of their own, except only the
clergies advice and authority. Think ye Iosaphat did so, not otherwise as ye
say^ ye may well tell us so but the Scripture tells us otherwise: how he
gave advice to the Clergy, and by his authority directed them, though I deny
not he might use their advice, and admit their authority to, yet the supreme
authority apperteyned unto him.

Not (say you) as a supreme absolute governor, contrary Sta. 50 a.
to the uniform consent of the whole clergy in full convocation, yea and of
all the Bishops at once.

This word absolute, is but your absolute and malicious slander M. Stap. Such
absolute supreme government did your Pope usurp, as says Franciscus de Ripa,
that the Popes power is absolute and that he may do what he will. As Baldus in
the proheme of the decrees alleges, that his power is absolute from all
bonds, and from all rule of restraint. And that we must believe him absolutely
as Marcus Mantua and Pope Boniface himself affirms. In cle. si Romans N 22. de
prebendis.


Thus does not the Queens majesty, no more did king Iosaphat, and therefore I
infer the conclusion that the Queens Majesty does all these things, in such
sort as losaphat did them, excepting these quarelous slanders which are your
own, put them up in your purse again master Stapleton, and then shall ye
find the sort and manner of the doings, of the one Prince and the other alike:
and so I conclude with your own conclusion. Thus the example of Iosaphat
fitteth well Christian Princes. he using the same supreme government then, that
the Queens Majesty now does: nor ye can allege any thing to the contrary but
certain manifest slanders. Whereupon it follows that the Q. takes none
other authority upon her than Iosaphat did, and all godly Christian Princes
ought to do the like, the one ensample fitting the other even as your self
confess.

Now that M. St. by this most clear confession and grant, has yielded so
far in this example that he has contraried not only M. Dor yt denied it to
be a fit example, from Kings in the old law to kings in the new: but contrary
also to himself that denied before any example at al to be fit, telling us that
legibu^ non exemplis iud^ atur, Men must judge by laws Supra. 205. a.
and not by examples. And here he says that this example fits well christian
princes, and thereon has concluded already the full matter in question:
neither ^e can find any thing in the Q. maiestyes doings swaruing from
Iosaphats, but certain of his own mere slau^ders: he startleth, and besturreth
himself with every tristing quarrel, picking fault at tra^slations, at the
print of the letter, and such like things to occupy the readers head withal,
least he should perceive and mark, how the weight and pith of the matter is
already granted and concluded, by his own mouth and confession. And here he
chalengeth ye B. with wretched and shameful bandling of the holy scriptures.
This is a sore fault indeed if it were true, but how proves he this?

First promising very sadly in his preface (says he) to Stap. 50. a. b.
cause his authors sentences for the part to be printed in latin letters, here
coursing over three several chapters of the 2. of Paralip. he sets not
down any one part or word of the whole text in any latin or distinct letter,
but handles the scriptures as pleases himself, translating, mangling and
belying them beyond all shame. For the translation we shall see afterward M St.
what you challenge therein, in the mean season, we may well see how hard it goes
with you in yt ye are feign to seek such brabling matters as this, which is
but a petit quarrel, and that false also. The Bishop even as your self
confess, did but course over, that is, did but touch the sum and effect of
those matters, and not set out word by word the text, as he has not changed
the letter hitherto in ye like doing, and ye find no fault there with. Neither
did the B. bind him self in translating, to every word, but so to set out
their minds and se^te^ces, which word minds, ye have left out, and also for
these words (for the most part) ye have put in, for the part. Thus do ye order
the Bishops sentence in setting it forth in a distinct letter, as though he
had so said, which in deed is the part of wretched and shameful handling and
belying beyond all shame, especially to vpbrayde it to another, to show the
more impude^cie of your self therein. As for the Bishop only showing the effect
of the matter, and not the words, nor going about there to translate at al, it
was lawful for him to use his common print, his promise still observed when he
translated any thing. You your self use this commonly in translating, not
only to keep your ordinary form of letter, but thereby, to handle the scrip
ture as it pleases you. But now in this the Bishops summarie draught out of
all those three aforesaid chapters, let us see what it is that ye challenge him
for so sore.

He tells us (say you) of the kings visitours, of a progress Sta. 50. b.
made in his own person, through out all his country, and of Justices of the
peace, whereas the texts alleged have no such words at all.

It is easy to see how envy or proud folly blinds this man, that
reprehendeth the Bishop as missetelling the effect of a sentence, and him self
in distinct letter, going about to set out the Bishops words, as he did
before, cannot or will not repeat the same aright, were these the bishops
words, kings visitors and Justices of the peace* the bishops words were these,
He sent forth through his kingdom visitors, and again, he appointed in every
town through out his kingdom as it were Justices of the peace. Why, will ye
say, this is al one. it is so in effect master Stapl. and so they were the
kings visitours. But yet should you here tell the bare words that the Bishop
alleged, and if you may be blameless in saying you tell the effect and sum
of the sentence, may not then the same saying bishop also? and a great deal
more, because (as ye say) he did but course over three chapters briefly, and
therefore could not easily express the bare texts. But you might easily
(noting but two or three little sentences) have set them down plain. I speak
this the rather for that that follows. Ye say ye bishop tells of Justices
of the peace. The bishop only said, as it were justices of the peace, as who
should say, such officers then, as a man might liken to our petit judges, or
justices of the peace now. But thus ye ever love to wrest the Bishops words,
that ye may make the feater entrance into one of your common places, saying:

Verily such a tale he tells us, that his ridiculous dealing Stap. 50. b.
herein were it not in Gods cause (where the indignity of his demeanor is to
be detested) were worthily to be laughed at.

Are the stories of the Scripture become tales to this Louanist? How contemp
tuously the papists esteem of the examples of the scriptures.
are the visitations and progress of this godly king, that right now was with
him a fit ensample for christian princes, become now ridiculous dealing, and
worthily to be laughed at, or indignities to be detested? such were in deed
the Popish visitations. As for that the bishop cites is manifest in the
scripture. The king sent out his 2. Par. 17. Preachers sent of the prince
Princes and preachers, as the sum of the chapter in your old translation
says, mittit praedicatores per vniuersam Iudeam, he sends ont preachers
throughout all Iewry: Whereupon Lyra notes, hic ostenditur qualiter populum
suum Lyra in 2. patal. 17.
instruxit, scilicet per sacerdotes and Leuitas quos ad hoc misit and cum eis
aliquot de principibus suis, vt populum inducerent ad obedientiam and punirent
rebels si quos inuenirent. Here is declared how he instructed his people, to
wite, by the Priests and Levites, whom he sent to this purpose, and with the^
certain of his Princes to move the people to obedience, and to punish the
rebellious, if they should find any. Is it ridiculous or detestable dealing
herein, to name these parties visitours sent from the king? were they not sent
to him to visit ye people and reform the^ in religion? Again the bishop
said, he made a progress in his own person, throughout all The princes
progress about religion.
his country. What fault find ye herewith, that he called it a progress? call
you it an egresse, or by what ye can find a more usual or ^itter name, where
the prince him self does travel. The text is, (...) egressus est ad populu^,
and again he went forth unto the people. Stand ye on that he said it was in
his own person? In deed Lyra says, per sacerdotes Lyra in 2. paral. 19.
and Leuit as sicu^ ante ficara^, He went forth by the Priests and Levites, as
he had done before. But the text seems contrary, that he traueled him self.
Whereon Uatablus notes, vt Vatablus.
ambularet per populu^ fortasse que^ offenderat ^alo exe^pl^, vel per populu^
cut prae^rat, quasi dicat pe^agrauit regione^ sibi subditam. That he might
travel by the people who^ perhaps he had offended by his evil example (for
personally he went out with them to Achabs wars) or by the people who^ he
ruled, as though he should say, he traveled all over the realm that was
subject to him.

Are ye offended that he says throughout al his country. The text is plain
De Bersabe vsque ad monte^ Ephraim, from Beersabee, even to the mount Ephraim.
Id est (says Lyra) Lyra.
a principio regni sui vsque ad finem, that is, from the beginning of his
kingdom, even to the end thereof. Of which progress in the note before, says
Lyra, Hie consequenter ponitur ipsius Iosaphat eme^datio in se and populo, and
primo in cultu diuino. Here consequently is set forth the amendment of
Iosaphat in him self, and in the people, and first in the worship of God. In
none of these words hitherto there is any indignity, nothing to be detested or
any ridiculous tale to be laughed at, but every word is agreeable to the most
grave, holy and infallible word of God.

If there were therefore any such leuitie and detestablenesse in ye bishops
terms, it is only in this, that he likened those parties to justices of the
peace. But this name I am sure is neither to be detested nor laughed at, except
you be some od Justices of the peace.
wicked Lucian or Timon ^all godly christians can allow this name with
reverence. Is the ridiculcusnesse and detestablenesse, in saying the one might
resemble the other? read the text. Constituitque Iudices terrae in cunctis
ciuitatibus Judah munitis per singula loca, and he appointed Judges of the land
in all the walled cities of Judah through all places. Now could a man express
this by a liuelyer example, than to say those petit judges were, as it were
Justices of the peace, if you can show a more apter estate to express them
by, do it on Gods name. I dare say for the Bishop, he will give you good leave,
and though ye somewhat missed the quishion, make no such heinous matter thereat.

Lyra says, Hic secundo describitur ipsius Iosaphat and populi Lyra.
melioratio in regimine populi, primo in communibus causis, secundo in arduis,
in quibus erat recursus in Jerusalem. Circa primum dicitur, constituitque
Iudices, vt non oporteat populum discurrere a loca ad locum, ad habendum in
causis communibus. Here secondly is described the bettering of Iosaphat him
self, and his people, in the governance of the people, first in common causes,
secondly in difficulte causes, wherein the recourse was unto Jerusalem.
Concerning the first it is said, and he appointed Judges to be had in the
common matters that the people should not run up and down from place to
place. And is not this exposition of Lyra so agreeable to the Bishops, that it
conteyneth even the same? what cause then had ye here, Master Stapl. to make
this heinous exclamation? Were not this your dealing rather ridiculous, and to
be laughed at, saving that the indignity of your envious demeanor is more to
be detested?

But now in the matter, of all this what is here, that directly infers not
Iosaphats supreme government, not only over the nobles and the people, but
over the Priests, Levites, preachers, and all the clergy, in directing and
setting forth the word and worship of God, and that not only in common
matters, but eue^ for those matters also of the priests sentence at Jerusalem,
for the which hitherto ye have made so much ado? but all this, M. Stap. though
he saw it plain enough, yet he thought best not to meddle therewith. But rather
(least the reader should mark it also) to find him play about the printing
of words and phrases, and here at to hallow and make such outcries, as though
all the matter lay therein. Yea he bursteth out into such a vehemency of his
spirit, that not content with his former heinous quarrels, he lays yet
greater to the Bishops charge, saying:

But from fond counterfayting he proceeds to flat lying, Stap. 50. b.
for where he says that Iosaphat commanded and prescribed unto the chief
Priests what form and order they should observe in the ecclesiastical causes
and controversies of religion. etc. This is a lewd and a horrible lie, flatly
belying Gods holy word, the which in one that goes for a Bishop, what can be
done more abominable?

In deed, M. Stapl. it were an abominable thing to belie Gods holy word,
were it in any man, chiefly in a Bishop: but this abomination, besides many
worsse, not only lewdly, flatly, and horribly to belie, but to deface and
blaspheme, yea to take away and burn Gods holy word, are the right properties
of your Popish Bishops, not of ours.

But what has the Bishop now here said that belyeth and accords not with
the holy scripture? for, the words which you your self set forth, do they
not plainly comprehend a form and order which they should observe in
ecclesiastical matters and controversies of religion? Sic agetis S^apl 51. ^.
etc. Thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully and with a perfect
heart. And as your self expound it. They should do their duty faithfully and
perfectly, as they had done before in the days of Asa and Abias. Lo, do not
your The princes form and order in proceeding.
own self here confess a manner and form of order, which be prescribed
them to do those things by? Again are not these your own words, how Iosaphat
appointed the Levites and priests to these ecclesiastical functions, it shall
appear in the next Chapter by the example of Ezechias? Where ye say, how he
did it: had that how, no manner or form of order in it? Yes, but ye say, that
manner of form shall appear in the example of Ezechias. A Gods name so let it
do in the mean season, ye grant he did it after the form of order that
Ezechias did it. And there ye say that Ezechias did it as David did it. But ye
wotte well the Scripture shows at large the fourmes and orders of David's
appoyntments: if therefore Ezechias did it like to David, and Iosaphat like to
Ezechias, then is the bishops saying proved true, by all these your
confessions, that he commanded and prescribed unto the chief priests what
form and order they should observe in ecclesiastical causes and
controversies of religion. Is not this then your own abomination and
contradiction, ^atly to say, here is no form or order prescribed? and that
the Bishop belieth Stapl. 51. ^.
Gods holy word which in one that goes for a student of Divinity, to
sclaunder one that goes for a Bishop, what can be done more malapertly?

But as ye thus sawfely misuse your better, so full fondly and malitionsly, do
y^ gather that thereon, then the which the Bishop minded nothing less, nor can
instly be gathered thereupon. Y^ say the Bishop writes thus to make folk
ween that religion proceeded then by way of commission Stap. 51. ^.
from the Prince only.

This is your own spiteful sclander M. Stapl. not only on the Bishop but on
the Queens Majesty, your argument is this.

He prescribed them a form and order to observe in controversies of Religion.

Ergo, He attempted to make Religion proceed by way of commission from the
Prince only.

This is a false and ma^itions collection M. Stapl. from the form and order
of athing, to the thing it self. It is your holy father the Pope to whom ye
may object this conclusion, he ma^eth religion to depend on him and to
proceed from him only* by his Commissions and Legacies ^ latere.
We-acknowledge all true religion to proceed only from God the father, through
Jesus Christ his son, by the Religion only proceeds from God, the preaching
proceeds from the ministers, the direction and ordering from the Prince.
ins^ctio^ of the holy ghost in the mouth of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles. And from the Prince to proceed, only such godly orders, and forms
of directing, and setting forth that true religion, as he by the notable
examples of these godly Kings, shall find out paterns most expedient for him
and his people, to govern and order them of what ^state soever they be, in
that true religion, and all other ecclesiastical causes belonging thereto. So
did Iosaphat then, so does the Queens Majesty now. From whose authority,
next under* God, the order and direction proceeded, though the religion
proceeded not from them, but altogether from God.

Nay (say you) king* Iosaphats dealings were rather with Stapl. 50. b.
(...) person th^n with matters ecclesiastical.

This was M. Fecke^hams former shifte, and many proper ensamples and
similitudes you also used thereon, to dally about the (...) of the
ecclesiastical person, but not in ecclesiastical matters. But those were but
seely shifts, and ever turned against your self in the end. And therefore ye
dar^ not abide by this shifte, but within a little while after, yea even in this
Chapter, ye recant and deny the obedience of the persons and all. And what
has been your The Papists deny not only the Princes go uernment of
ecclesiastical matters, but also of ecclesiastical persons.
practice, any other than clean to rid your selves out of al obedience from
the Princes authority? ye know your Pope has been under the Emperor ere
now, but under what Princes obedience even for his person will ye confess your
Pope at this day to be? And do not all the pack of the popish Priests, as
his chickens cl^cke under his wings, and exempt even their persons also from
the dutiful obedience they owe to their natural sovereigns, in so much that
where the Popes primacie is admitted, Princes can not by any of their lawe^*
fasten any condign punishment, upon any ecclesiastical persons* what
mischief soever they commit? and all because the ecclesiastical persons
were priuileged and exempted from their Princes authority. Wherein your
generation dealt surely for themselves, that having granted them an inche got
an elle. For, seeing, that if they should grant again the obedience of the
person, the cause and all would at last return to his old master the Prince,
as it did before, but you think your self sure enough, if ye grant that
Iosaphat dealed with ecclesiastical persons, but not with their matters. As ye
shifted of the matter before, that the Prince deals with a Bishop for his
homage, baronie and temporalties, Supra pa 47. ^
but not otherwise.

Think ye M. Stapl. and tell me on your fidelity, did Iosaphat meddle with
the high Priests, and all other of the Clergy so well as his temporaltie,
only in respect of their persons, or in respect of their revenues and
linings under him, or chiefly in any of these respects did he thus command
them and deal with them: or not rather and most of all in respect of
refourming abuses in religion, and setting in order all ecclesiastical causes?
he appointed not only the persons but the places where the persons should
execute their offices, and what matters these and those persons should
entreat upon, and how they should do them, as your self have confessed the
manner.

And least we should think he ^ubbered over the matter, as ye say, many good
and godly princes among the Stapl. 5^ ^.
Christians also have charged their Bishops and clergy to see diligently unto
their flocks and charges.

Ye say true M. Stapleton, many godly Princes have thus done to your further
confutation in this issue. But you mean they have only given them a general
exhortation, and yet nevertheless left the matter wholly in their Clergies
hands, not meddling themselves therewith: Least King Iosaphat did not deal
sclenderly in ecclesiastical matters but as his chiefest charge.
ye should think that Iosaphat did it thus sclenderly, and not that his chief
charge of oversight lay thereon, not only of them all generally, but
particulerly in every kind of matter: the holy ghost has penned out, how
precisely he went to work, and that rather having his care about the matters,
then the persons. For this was his principal mark and care, not so much that
the person might sit in authority, as that the matter might wisely and truly
be judged and discerned, and therefore says the text. In Jerusalem quoque
constituit 2. Paral. 19.
Iosaphat Leuitas, and sacerdotes, and principes familiaru^ ex Israel, vt
iudicium and causam domini Iudicarent habitatoribus eius, etc. Praecepitque
eis, etc. And Iosaphat appointed in Jerusalem Levites and Priests and families
of Israel, that they might give judgment and judge the cause of the Lord to
the inhabitants thereof, etc. And he commanded them saying: Thus shall ye do
in the fear of the Lord faithfully, and with a perfect heart, and in every
cause that shall come unto you of your brethren that dwell in their Cities,
between blood and blood, between law and precepte, statutes and judgments,
ye shall judge them and admonish them. etc. Whereupon says Lyra: Hic ordinatur
regime^^ populi in arduis causis, Lyra in 2. Paral. 19.
etc. Here is ordained the government of the people in difficult causes, which
could not well be cut of, without recourse had to Jerusalem, according to
that which is commanded, Deuter. 17. Where it is said, if thou shall perceive
the Nothing ecclesiastical or temporal, exe^pted from the chief oversight of
the Prince no not of the cases, Deuteronomy. 17. that the Papists chiefly boast upon.
judgment before thee to be difficult and doubtful, arise and get thee up to
the place which the Lord shall choose. etc. And therefore Iosaphat appointed
judges there, to determine such difficult matters. Wherefore it follows,
every cause which comes unto you, etc. Wheresoever the question is: if it be
of the law, so far forth as pertains to the ten comma^dements of the
tables. If it be of the commandment, so far forth as pertains to the
other moral points: if it be of the precepts of the ten commandments, as it
were certain conclusions piked out: if it be of the ceremonies, so far forth
as pertayneth to ceremonial matters: of iustifications, that is to say of
judicial matters whereby justice is to be conserved among men.

Thus is there no part ecclesiastical or temporal, exempted from the
oversight, care, direction and appointment of the king. No not the judgment
that ye have so often alleged and craked upon out of the Deuteronomy. 17. under the
which (as a general rule for all examples to be ruled by) ye would subdue the
Prince upon pain of death, to obey the absolute determination of the Priest.
Even this same office and all other, with all causes to them belonging, (so
far as stretches to the oversight and supreme government) do belong, to the
Prince, to appoint and ordeyne fit parties, to displace and remove unfit
parties, and to see al these offices, so well as any other temporal, observed
kept and executed dutifully. Which is not so much for the persons, as for the
persons offices. And therefore Iosaphat not only appointed them by his
authority or regiment as Lyra says, their offices: but also he told the^ how
they should do their offices.

Nay say you, to each your matter yet with an other shift, He does it not with
threats of his high displeasure, or by Stap. 51. ^.
force of his own injunctions, but only says: so then doing you shall not
sin or offend. The which very manner of speech, christian Emperors and
Kings have eft^ones used in the like case, as we shall hereafter in the third
book by examples declare.

Even in the examples that ye shall there declare M. St. The iniu^ctio^^ of
princes for the observation of ecclesiastical matters and threats of
displeasure for the breach of them.
ye shall find both threats of high displeasures and the ini^nctions also of
many godly princes. And therefore seeing that ye compare their doings alike, why
say you these doings of Iehosophat have no threats nor injunctions? what call
ye this, did he not threate them trow you, when he said, Ne veniat tra super
vos and super fratres vestros, Least wrath come upon you and upon your
brethren. Which words ye ouerhipped. He denou^ced unto them the wrath of
God, which declared his great zeal and care of Gods matters as the Bishop
said. And think you that the high displeasure of God, contained not this
godly Princes high displeasure also? do ye suppose that they drad not the
Princes high displeasure in the breach of their duties, because he threateth
them with Gods most high displeasure? Or think ye it was not so forcible as
any iniu^ctio^ of his unto them, in that (as your self say) he charged them,
and (as the text says) Praecepit eis, he commanded them? which is most
plain and evident to signify, that he enioygned them by his supreme
government over them?

And to show that besides his charge, his commandment, his threate of Gods
most high displeasure, they should incur his high displeasure also, if they
or any other disobeyed: Lyra says on his former visitation, Hic oftenditur
Lyra in 2. Pa^al. 19.
qualiter etc. Here is declared after what sort he instructed his people, to
wite, by the Priests and Levites, whom he sent to this purpose, and with them
certain of his Princes, to bring the people to obedience, and to punish the
rebels, if they should find any. And of this visitation also says Lyra: He
appointed Zabadias to be over those works that belong to the Kings office,
that if any rebels were found they should by him be chastized with due
punishment. Does not this import the Kings high displeasure, in the breach of
these his appointments, charge and co^maundment, when he adjoined those that
should punish the disobedient?

Now whereas the Bishop briefly noted all this, how King Iosaphat appointed the
Priests to decide and judge controversies: you snatch thereat, and clappe
down thereon a marginall note. Yea the Priests judged, not the king, say you,
ouerskipping that the King appointed them thereto, which argues his supreme
government. And yet the King judged also by his deputy, not the Priest alone.
And so says plain the text: In Jerusalem quoque constituit etc. And
Iosaphat appointed also Levites and Priests, and the The king judged
ecclesiastical causes, in that his debi^^e judged them.
Princes of the families of Israel: Here M. St. he appointed as well the lay
Princes, as the Priests. And whereto? vt Iudicium and causam domini iudicarent,
that they should judge the judgment and cause of the Lord. See how plain
this is against you: but what is there not, that ye will spare to 2. Paral. 19.
wrest, to make it see me to serve your turn? For eue^ of the last sentence,
ye think in the end ye have gotten so notable a proof for your matter: that
greatly ye urge it and wonderfully triumph therevppon.

Thus says (say you) King Iosaphat. Amarias the priest and Stap 51. b.
your Bishop, shall have the government of such things as appertain to God.
And Zabadias shall be over such works as appertain to the kings office. Lo
(say you) the kings office and divine matters are of distinct functions.

Lo say I, how sone ye would conclude a lie. Your text says not, the kings
office and divine matters are of distinct functions. Nor makes any opposition
or distinction between the kings office and divine matters, as though it
appertained not to the kings office, to have any thing to do with divine Divine
matters not excluded from the kings office.
matters. Contrary to the which, your own confession even in this kings doings,
witnesses against you, that he reformed religion, and had a care and diligence
about the directing ecclesiastical matters. And trow you he did this beyond
the bounds of his office? How can then his example, as ye say, fit well
christian princes, if it be not a parcel belonging to their office? the text
is plain that the king appoints as well the Bishop Amarias his government, as
Zabadias his government: to the one, to have the government of such things as
appertain to God: to the other, to be over such works as appertain to the
king. Here in these two, (such things) on the one party, and (such works) on
the other party, is the distinction made: and not between the kings office,
and divine matters, as you falsely conclude. And yet I pray you what argument
can ye gather herevppon?

The kings office and divine matters are of distinct functio^s:

Ergo the King has no supreme government over all ecclesiastical causes.

By the like reason he has no supreme government over temporal causes
neither. For, the kinge^ office and his temporal subjects matters, are not
they also distinct functione?

Ergo, the king has no supreme government over his temporal subjects matters.
Again ye reason thus:

Thus says the king, the priest shall govern in those things that belong to
God.

Ergo, to ouersee the Priests, and govern them rightly, appertains not to
the kings government.

Where in deed you should rather reason the quite contrary.

Thus says the king, the priest and the Bishop shall have the government of
such things as appertain to God.

Ergo, the Prince that thus appoints him thereto, has an other supreme
government of appointing and ouerseing even the priests government.

Does not the King appoint the one to his office, so well as he appointed the
other, and are not both governed in their offices under him?

Yet say you, over gods matters is the priest, not as the kings commissioner,
but as the priests were after the example of Moses. The Bishop refuses not the
example of Moses, but alleged even the same, and your self then refused that
example: saying, he had such prerogatives, that he of all other could not be
alleged for example, because of his especial privilege. And now contrary to
your former sayings, you say, the priests were not as the Kings commisioners,
but were always after the example of Moses. But go to, be it so, how does this
help your matter, or not rather quite confute it?

In Moses time Aaron, and after him Eleazar were the chief priests over gods
matters, under whom were the other Priests and Levites.

But all of them, yea Aaron and Eleazar, so well as the rest, were under the
supreme government, in ecclesiastical causes so well as temporal, of their
Prince and ruler Moses.

Ergo, If Moses be an example how the priests should always govern under
Gods matters, then must their government be always under the princes supreme
government, to ouersee, order and direct them as Moses did.

And where ye say, the Priest here, was not the Princes The priest the princes
commissioner.
commissioner in these matters, the very text is most plain to the contrary. I
stand not on the word, least I should minister to you occasion of wrangling
with me, as ye do with the bishop: but go to the matter. What call ye him that
the Prince sends forth in a commission, committing a charge unto him, call
ye him not a commissioner? and his commissioner that so sends him in
commission? did not Iosaphat so send about his priests and Levites on this
commission, that they should teach and set forth every where the word of
God? Tertio ann^ regni sui misit, etc. 2. Paral. 17.
in the third year of his reign, he sent out certain of his princes, Benail,
and Obdias, and Zacharias, and Nathaniel, and Micheas, that they should teach
in the cities of Judah: and with them the Levites, Semeiah, Nethamah, Zebediah,
and Asahel, and Semiramoth, and Ionathas, and Adonias, and Thobias, and Tob
Adoniah Levites: and with them Elizama and Ioram Priests. And they taught the
people in Judah, having with them the book of the law of the Lord: and they
went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and taught the people.

Were they not here sent in this commission thus to do, from the king? Their
doctrine was not the kings, but Gods commission, the Lords book: but this
their manner of traueling in setting it forth, was the kings commission. And
they, so well the Priests and Levites, as the Princes, were both of them the
kings commissioners. In like case, the Queens majesty sends out her godly
learned commissioners, and sends by them the word of God, Gods book and
truth to be set forth. The truth thus set forth, has not his authority
from her commission, nor the preachers to preach, only by her outward
commission? but they have another inward commission from God, and are Gods
commissioners by the calling and ministry of their office. Howbeit, in this
outward manner of visitation and setting it forth, in this sort of traueling
about her highness towns and cities, reforming abuses, and directing all
eccl. causes: they are therein even as well the Queens commisioners, as those
priests and Levites in all their reformation of religion, were commisioners
from king Iosaphat. And thus every thing in the end is most evident against
you. But yet ye blunder still on in your own conceit, and think ye have
here gotten a wonderful strong argument.

And mark well M. Horn, this point (say you) Zabadias Stap. 51. a.
is set over such works as belong to the kings office. But such works are
no manner thing perteyning to the service of God (for over them Amarias the
Priest is President) Ergo, the kings office consists not about things
perteyning to God, but is a distinct function concerning the common weal.
Ergo, if the king intermeddle in Gods matters, especially if he take upon him
the supreme government thereof, even over the priests the^ selves, to whom the
charge is committed, he passes the bounds of his office: he breaks the
order appointed by God, and is become an open enemy to Gods holy ordinance.

Your crakes and reuilings that ye powder your argument with, I remitte to
their proper common places, to the argument I answer. If it be marked well,
as ye would have it, saying, Mark well this point M. Horn: First, the marker
shall find it neither in any mood nor figure. Secondly, the marker shall
find an Equivocation in these words, works, kings office, pertaining to Gods
service. Which words being diuerfly understood in either proposition:
Thirdly, make a paralogisme of four terms. Fourthly, in these words ye make a
Fallation a secundum quid ad simpliciter. Lyra liuiteth the^e words, super ea
operaerit Lyra in 2. Paral. 19.
quae ad regis officium pertinent. He shall be over those works that perteyne
to the kings office: only to the ayding and strengthening the Priests and the
Levites, by the temporal sword, to punish the disobediente. But is there no
other works of the Kings office besides this? Uatablus Vatablus.
under stands it, that as the priest meddled with the weighty causes at
Jerusalem: so also the Levites should be over the lesser causes, Causae Ciutu^
cognoscebontur a Leuitis, causaeaute^ Regtae a Zabaudi^. The causes or
controversies perteyning to the citizens, should be herd of the Levites, and
the causes and controversies perteyning to the King, should be herd of
Zabaudias. Neither of these understand these words so generally, of all the
doings belonging in any wise to the office of a king. In like case, for the
priests government, in such things as belong to God, Id est (says Uatablus)
quod pertinet ad rem diuinam: To wite, so far as perteyneth to the divine
service, or the dyuine administration. And you wrest it to be understood
simply for all ecclesiastical matters, and all causes of religion. Besides
that Fifthly, ye reason still after your wonted fashion, from the distinction
of the things and works of eithers particular functions, to the taking away
of the Princes supreme government over those distinct works and functions.
How does this argument follow?

The king appoyntes one over Gods works, and another distinct from him over
his own works:

Ergo, the king has not a supreme government over them both, to ouersee the^
to do those works. Your conclusions therefore last of all are faulty, neither
directly following upon your premises, and comprehending much more then they
infer. This part of your conclusion, that the kings office is a distinct
function from the Priests, neither impugneth the bishops assertion, nor the
princes supreme government. Conclude this M. Stap. against them that confound
their offices. The other part of your conclusion, that the kings office
medleth only with the common weal, by which ye mean, only the civil
policy, and has nothing to do with any matters perteyning to God: or ever ye
shall directly prove it, on this, or any other place in the whole scripture, it
will find ye somewhat more to do than ye suppose it will. As for the kings
intermedling with Gods matters: your self before have granted a king Sta. 50.
a.
may intermedle and be no breaker, nor enemy to Gods order. And that even this
king Iosaphat used a care and diligence about the directing of ecclesiastical
matters, that he reformed religion, and that godly christian Princes may at
this day do the like. This your self have already granted. And is all this no
intermedling? does it not rather prove he intermedled, and that as supreme
governor thereof, yea even over the Priests them selves, to whom that charge
(of doing those matters) is committed? and yet he neither breaks the order
appointed by God, nor is become an enemy to Gods holy ordinance.

Ye say, it was Gods ordinance and appointment, what follows? it was not
therefore the Princes ordinance and appointment also? as though these were
contrary, and could not stand together the one under the other, the ordinance
of God, and the ordinance of the king. Put case the Priest had ordained it,
might it not have been Gods ordinance too? but the priest ordained it not, but
the prince: Ergo, the Prince immediately ordeyning it under God, shows that he
has an immediate power under him, even above the Priests. Of whom are these
words so precisely The prince commands the Priest.
spoken, he appointed, he commanded, he said it shall be so, thus shall ye
do, etc? was it the Prince, or was it the Priest? Did Amarias command
Iehosaphat, or Iehosaphat command Amarias, and all the other Priests and
Levites? who is the supreme governor of the twain, the commander and
appointer, or he that is commanded and appointed? Until therefore that ye can
prove, that the high Priest Amarias, commanded and appointed unto King
Iosaphat these things, and that the king did not command, nor appoint these
things to the Priest and Bishop: every man that has any understanding, will
easily perceive and judge, that the Prince was the Priests supreme governor
next under God, both over his person, and over the thing also wherein he
appointed and commanded him.

But, see your constant dealing in this matter* before, you made the governance
of the thing to be more than the governance of the person. And here as though
it were a greater matter to govern the person, you say:

If he take upon him the supreme government thereof even over the Priests
themselves, to whom the charge is committed: Again, before you said, that
Iosaphats dealings were rather with persons than with matters ecclesiastical:
But now ye exempt the persons to, saying: If he take upon him the supreme
government even over the Priests themselves, etc. he passes the bounds of his
office. And thus, although for a while ye would shift off the matter by seeming
to grant somewhat, to bleare the reader withal: yet in the end contrary to
your former grant, ye ea^e your word, and debar the Prince of all, both for
matter and persons to. But (thanks be to God) this insample of Iosaphat is so
plain, that all these fetches and shifts that ye are driven unto, can so
little any way improve his supreme government: that every thing which ye bring
against it, makes more and more for it. Such is the force of the truth, and so
does falsehoode in his own trippe still ouerturne it self.

The. 16. Division.
THe Bishop alleging the example of king Ezechias, first Fol. 52. a. The
example of king ^zechias supreme government in ecclesiastical causes. 4. Reg.
18. 2. Pat. 29.
shows what great commendation, for his godly government in reforming
religion, the scripture attributes unto him. Secondly, how he called together
the clergy, tells them their faults, declares to them the wrath of God,
exhorts and commands them to do their duties in clensing themselves, in
making their sacrifices, and appoints their offices, and provides them
convenient portions to live by, and that in all things the clergy and the
people obeyed the Kings commandment, which argues his supreme government
over all ecclesiastical persons and causes.

To this master Stapleton answers, first on the old warrant of his good
masters words, by rejecting all this as insufficient.

Here is nothing brought in by you (says he) or before Stapletoa Caput. 14.
Fol. 52. b.
by the Apology (as M. Dorman and M. D. Harding do well answer) that forces
the surmised sovereignty in King Ezechias, but that his power and authority
was ready and serviceable (as it ought to be in all princes) for the execution
of things spiritual before determined, and not by him as supreme head newly
established.

How well or ill master Stap. your masters have answered this objection, and
are answered again, is apparent and easy to be judged by viewing both their
answers. Howbeit, unto their well doings, for fear they should not fall out so
well as ye pretend: you have done well also to better their answers, with the
surplusage of your new stuff.

And if it were granted you M. Stap. that those things which Ezechias did, had
not been, by him as supreme head, newly established, would it follow thereupon,
that they were not by him, as supreme head or governor, newly reformed
neither: having been some of them of old established before, and by the
priests negligence, having long time been corrupted? But what lets why they
may not also be said, to have been by him newly established, being quite
decayed before? And so says Lyra of the joy at the great passover that long
time had ceased, Propter quod, quado Ezechias eam Lyra.
renouaeuit, fuit mayor exultatio, quod noua placent and delectant. For the
which cause, when Ezechias renewed it, there was greater reioising, for because
new things do please and delight. So that to them it was a new establishing.
But was the brazen serpent pulled down and destroyed ever before, as other
Images and hill aulters had been? was the feast of the passover ever changed
before? was that order of collations Ecclesiastical matters by K. Izechias
newly established.
ever ordained before? was this the Levites doings of the Priests parts, ever
done before? So that at the least some of these doings were by him newly
established and never done before: but as the necessity of the time was then,
so were they commanded to be done by him and well allowed of God.

Yet, say you, they were not newly established by him as supreme head, but his
power and authorit^e was ready and serviceable for the execution of things
spiritual before determined.

But if these things were not before determined, I pray you master Stapleton,
whose executioner was he then? neither the priests nor the prophets had before
determined that he should do, or command to be done these things, therefore he
was neither the Priests nor the Prophets executioner in them. If ye say, God
had determined that they should so be done: ye say true, and we deny not, but
that the Princes To be ready and serviceable to fulfill Gods determination,
debarreth not the Princes supreme government.
power and authority did execute Gods determination, yea it was ready and
serviceable, as ye say, thereto. And so it ought to be in all princes. But what
conclude you herevppon? Because the princes power and authority is ready and
serviceable to execute Gods determinate purpose, yea or his open commandment
either, and that by the mouth of any Priest or Prophet: Ergo, he is not
supreme governor under God therein? In deed ye might well conclude he is not
an absolute supreme governor over God, whose determination he does execute so
seruiceably, but this ye might conclude against your Pope, that exalts him
self above all that is called God, and despises to execute seruiceably Gods
open determination, and makes all Princes to be serviceable executioners of
his own determinations. Thus does not the Queens Majesty nor any Godly
Prince, but obeys and executes Gods determination, with all her power and
authority most ready and serviceable thereunto, and yet is neither her
supreme power nor authority under God, any whitte empayred thereby. And if
this be an argument to abase the Princes supreme power and authority, how
shall it not also abase the Priests? ought they to do any other things then
execute Gods determinations? ought not their power and authority be ready and
serviceable hereunto? Ergo* they can be no supreme governors neither.

But ye will say the Prince is yet inferior to them, because they executed
Gods commandment immediately, Ezechias executed Gods commandment, and the
clergy the commandment of Ezechias
and the Prince theirs. What now, if it fall out quite contrary, that Ezechias
executed seruiceably Gods commandment, and they again executed (although
their service was not over ready, such was their corruption, yet tandem, at
the length, they executed) the Princes commandment, does it not then follow
that they were therein inferior to the Prince? But, that he commanded and
appointed them, and that they executed in these spiritual things his
commandment and appointment, the scripture is most apparent. He brought in
the Priests and gathered them together in atrium Lyra in 2. Par. 29.
sacerdotum, says Lyra, into the porche of the priests. The Priests called not
him and his nobility together. And therefore says Lyra, under him was made
Primo, expiatio legalis. etc. First, the clensing of the laws sacrifice.
Secondly, the celebration of the benefit of the passover. Thirdly, the
repayring of the Priestly ministry. He, as a commander, said unto the
Priests seeing them s^owly de^ed, Audite 2. Par. 29.
me Leuitae and sanctificamint. etc. Hear me O you Levites, and be ye
sanctified, cleanse the house of the God of your fathers, and take away all
vnciennesse from the sanctuary. Which are not words of entreatie, but flat
commandments, as Lyra says: Ezechias cupiens renouare foed^ cum Lyra in 2.
Par. 29.
domino, primo pracepit. etc. Ezechias desirous to renew the covenant with the
Lord. First did command the Levites to be sanctified. Secondly, by them being
sanctified, the temple to be cleansed. Thirdly, by those which were cleansed,
sacrifice to be made for the offense of the people. Fourthly, by sacrificing,
God to be praised. Fifthly, by clensing, the holy burntoffrings to be offered up.

Thus were all these things done by his commandment, by his constitution,
and at his pleasure. Nunc igitur placet mihi vt (...) foedus cum domino, It is
now therefore my pleasure (says he) that we enter into a covenant with the
Lord. And in this doing, even in the place where he puts them in mind of
their high office, he calls them not his fathers (which word hereafter ye
stand much upon) but calls them, being the Priests and Levites, his sons:
Filij me^ (says he) nolite negligere. O my sons be not negligent, being him
self in years but a child in respect of them, of the age of xx. years:
saving that in respect of his royal power and estate, he considered he was the
father of all Gods people, so well the clergy as the laity: and so the
clergy took him, and obeyed him. Et ingressi sunt iuxta mandatum regis and
imperi^ domini, And they entered in according to the Kings commandment, and
the commandment of the Lord. Iuxta mandatum regis (says Lyra) ad purgandum
templum domini, To cleanse the temple of the Lyra.
Lord, according to the Kings commandment. And Lyra praising all these
doings says, Et sic Ezechias in d^ coronationis. etc. And so Ezechias in the
day of his coronation, opened the doors of the temple of the Lord, and even
there gathering the Priests and the Levites together, he enjoined Iniunxi^
(...).
unto them the said purging. (Lo here is again the kings own iniunction,
whereat ye quarreled in the former Chapter.) And on the morrow after, they
began it: and in this appears the great praise of Ezechias, that even
foorthwyth from the first day of his coronation, he commanded the renewing
Praecepit renouationem diuini cultus.
of the divine worship that was destroyed by his father. Lyra showing further
of the pollution of the temple, tells out of the Hebrew gloss, that there
were many Images of Idolatry, fastened in the walls of the Temple, with such
Imagines Idololatriae multas.
strong and great nails that they were hardly pulled away. A lively pattern
of your popish Temples Master Stapleton, The popish fond destinction of ^mage
and Idol.
decked up even so, with Images in the walls: and withal it confuteth your
fond distinction of Image and Idol, since as well ye may have Idolatry of
Images as of Idolles. If ye think to escape by distinguishing of the Images of
holy Saints, and the Images of the wicked heathen, that they only be Idolles,
not the other, I pray you what was the brazen serpent, was it the Image of any
profane thing? or not rather a representer of Christ, and yet 4. Reg. 18.
it became an Idol, and this godly King, not the Priests destroyed it, and
called it in contempt, a piece of brass, as a man might call your Images or
Idolles (whether ye will) a stock or stone.

Thus did this notable Prince, which I tell by the way, not only to show his
supreme authority in the doing: but besides, to answer your ordinary
cauillation in defense of your manifest Idolatry. The Temple being cleansed
from these Images, the Priests offered, first for the King, Pro Regno, for the
Kingdom, that is, says Lyra, pro Rege and Principibus, for the King and the
Princes: and after for themselves and the people. The King ^ad them offer on ye
altar of the Lord: and they obeyed, and offered (says Lyra) pro peccatis
Regis, and Principum, and Sacerdotum, and Leuitarum, and communis populi. For
the sins of the King, and of the Princes, and of the Priests, and of the
Levites, and of the common people. Thus in their degree reckoning every sort.
He appointed also the singers. Again, he commanded the Priests to offer the
burnt offerings, and he and his Princes commanded them to sing Psalms. When
they had sung and worshipped the Lord: he told the Levites they were
sanctified, and commanded them to do their ecclesiastical functions: saying,
Accedite and offer^e victimas and lauds in domo domini, Come near and offer
burnt offerings and praises in the house of the Lord. Thus are all these
ecclesiastical matters hitherto noted, done of the Priests and Leuits by the
direction and commanding of Ezechias. Nor this your common shift can any thing
avail you to abase Ezechias doings, because he appointed diverse of those
things The Princes predecessors disposing, debarreth not his supreme government.
According as David had disposed: he appointed also diverse other things, which
David never had disposed, and yet he had the like authority and commendation
in appoynting both. Which argues his supreme authority in appoynting
ecclesiastical matters, whosoever had appointed the^ before. And what was
Dauit? was he not a king also? So that this paltrie shift still makes against
you, that although godly Princes succeding, establish, renew, appoint, and
command such matters as their predecessors have done before: yet have they no
less authority therein, than had even the first appoynters of all. And also
the Queens majesty takes none other authority now on her, in appointing and
commanding, than David, Ezechias, and other ancient godly Princes did: than
Constantinus, and other her predecessors, have done The subjection to Gods
commandment, embarreth not the Princes supreme government.
before. And her authority, in renewing such orders as long have been decayed
or abolished* is n^ less than was theirs, in the first ordering and
commanding of them.

But ye say king David did not order those things by him self, but it was Gods
commandment. As though any said (except it ^eyour Pope) that this supreme
authority is not subject to Gods commandment, and under his absolute
authority, or as though this subjection under God, abaseth the Princes
authority, and not rather confirms it to be immediate next under him.

But ye add further, God did it, by the hands of his Prophets. If to do a
thing by the hands of another, do always signify a supreme authority in the
party by whose hands The doing it by the hands of the prophets or any other,
embarreth not the Princes supreme government.
it is done, then were ye Princes Pursiuant or letter bearer, above the
Lieutenant, Judge, or Deputy, to whom the letter is sent. But the bearer
although the Prince send it by his hand or ministry, is not only under the
sender, but also under the party to whom it is sent, and he, not the ^earer,
is next and immediate under the Prince, in the performing of his letter, and
signifies again to the Prince by the bearers hand, his dutiful obedience in
fulfilling the content thereof. Either parties here, ye see, use the bearers
hand or ministry: does it follow thereupon, he is superior to either of
them, or not rather under both? What good argument can ye frame hereupon?

God commanded David by the hands of his Prophets:

Ergo, the Prophets were above David in ordering and directing Gods will and
commandment?

And again, where ye say, Iosue, David and other Princes sacrificed by the
hands of the Priests.

Ergo, the Priests and Leuits were above Iosue, David, and those other Princes?

Your argument therefore, God commanded by the hands of his prophet, that the
king should make such orders:

Ergo, the Prophet is the Kings supreme governor: is a very slender argument.

But if ye had reasoned thus,

The party that commands is supreme governor to him by whose hands he
does it:

The Prince commands these ecclesiastical matters to be done by the hands
of the Priests and Levites:

Ergo, the Prince therein is the supreme governor to the Priests and Levites.

This had been the fitter and truer argument of the twain. But this had quite
ouerturned your shifte.

Nevertheless M. Stapl. ye have shifte upon shifte, and more ways I perceive
to the wood tha^ one. For, seeing that this argument, God commanded by the
hands of the clergy, that the Prince should make ecclesiastical orders, could
not infer he did it by their authority, but rather it argues the Princes
authority over the clergy: ye fall then in quarelling, that the Bishop says,
the king did it by the counsel of the Prophets.

As though (say you) David had first done it by the advice Stap 53. ^.
or counsel only of the Prophets, and by his own authority.

Does the doing and disposing then of any thing. M. St. by the counsel and
advise of other, infer his own authority, in the disposing, that is the
asker of counsel? Thus ye say here, and remember ye say it. For hereafter ye
make this a common reason: He did it by their counsel, Ergo, he did it not by
his owns authority.

But be it Master Stapleton, he did it not of his own devise and simple
commandment or authority, but by Gods commandment and authority over
him. Does it follow therefore he did it not by his own authority, since all
his authority was of God? but what improueth The asking counsel of others,
debarieth not the Princes supreme authority in the doing.
this his authority over the priests or prophets? can ye show he did it by
their authority? be it their counsel, or be it their declaration, their
authority it was not, but Gods: and under God, the kings authority, in
disposing such orders. And therefore your caui^ against the word counsel,
shows you wanted counsel to have disposed your answer better.

For even in this present example, do ye not see how king Ezechias did order
diverse eccl. matters by the counsel of his princes, clergy, and people, and
yet the whole doing was by his own authority? Initoque consil^o Regis and
principum 2. pa^al. 30.
and vniuersi coetus Jerusalem, decreuer^nt ^t f^cerent phase me^se secundo.
And a council being held of the king and his princes, and all the assembly
of Jerusalem, they decreed to keep the Passover the. 2. month Whereon says
Lyra, Circa (...) Lyra in. 2. Par 30.
celebratione^ Ezech^s de consilio sacerdotum diem instituit. Secundo ad hoc
populum inuitauit, ter^o sole^niter celebrau^. About this celebration, Ezechias
by the counsel of the priests instituted the day: Secondly he bad the people
thereunto: Thirdly he celebrated it solemnly* So that the whole doing in this
council was by his own authority in a matter never used before, for the
present necessity to change the day of the Passover. Moses, David, or any
other Prince, had never by the commandment of God, or by the hands of his
Prophets ordained it before.

And therefore withal where ye say: In all things that Ezechias or Iosaphat
before did, they did but as David had S^ap 53. ^.
done before.

I answer, that whatsoever they did, you here do none other, than your
masters and you have done before. Ye care not what rechlesse lies ye boldly
avouch, to bolster up your false cause, and furnishe your volumes withal. Were
all these things hitherto recited, done before by David? had he taken down
and destroyed the Brazen serpent? had Ezechias did many things never so done
before.
he caused the Levites to play the Priests parts? had he altered the Passover
day? had he appointed before to the Clergy those portions of liuel^de that
are mentioned? Besides diverse others things that argue his authority. For
after his summons to come to the Passover, whereto the Jews obeyed, Ut
facerent, secundum pr^ceptum Regis and ^. Pa^. 30.
principum, verbum Domini: To do the word of the Lord after the
commandment of the king, and of the Princes: because there were not Priests
cleansed inowe, the Levites did that, which by the law belonged only to the
Priests offices. But by whose authority did they it, had God commanded it by
the hands of his Prophets? had Moses, David, or any other so disposed it
before? or did they it here of their own brain? No, says Lyra, it was done
de mandato Regi^, by the kings commandment. Lyra in. 2. Paral. 30.
They also that were unclean did eat of the Passover, which according to the
law, ought to have been eaten only of the clean. But they were, says he,
dispensed with for the necessity. And how? the king him self, that was the
commander and doer of these things, contrary to the law for necessity sake,
made a prayer for them to the Lord, and he heard him, and was pleased therewith.
Thus did God accept these dealings of the king in ecclesiastical matters, and
allow his authority in commanding and disposing them.

And as he was the chief orderer and directer of all these things, so it
follows in the. 31. chapter, how^ he directed all other things about the
Priests. And therefore says Lyra in. ^. Paral. 3^.
Lyra thereon: Cumque haec fuissent ^ite celebrata, etc. Hic consequenter sub
Ezechia discribitur reparatio sacerdotalis ministerij, etc. When these things
were orderly celebrated. etc. Here consequently is described under Ezechias,
the repayring of the priestly ministry, about which is first described the
destroying of Idolatry, where the text says: And they brake the Images, etc.
And this by good reason, because that first the impediments of the Priestly
ministry ought to be removed, etc. Secondly, the repairing of the priestly
ministry is described, etc. where Ezechias, first, restored the priests and
Levites in their offices. Secondly, he provided the^ of victuals. Thirdly, he
ordained in these things procurators for the^. etc. And thus all the doing, not
only over the temporaltie, but over all the clergy, so far as apperteineth to
ye chief government under God, in ordring, appoynting, commanding, directing,
and providing, belonged to K. Ezechias. And in the end 2. paral. 31.
hereof, the scripture gives him this commendation, fecit ergo Ezechias
vniuersa, etc Ezechias therefore did all the things that we have spoken of,
through all Judah, and he wrought that which was good, and right, and true
before the Lord his god in all the works that he began, for the service of the
house of God both in the law, and in the commandments he The commendation
and application of K. Ezechias.
sought his God, and did the same with all his heart, and it succeeded
prosperously.

In like case, God be praised (maugre your mighty Zenacheribs head and triple
crown, with all your blasphemous raylings, that play the part of Rabsaces, to
rob the peoples hearts from the Lord their God, and from their duetyfull
obedience to their princes supreme authority) the Lord has prospered and
blessed the Q. Majesty, in following this godly Princes steps, in reforming,
or newly establishing Gods true religion decayed, as this good king Ezechias
did. And therefore as are all the residue of these your seely shifts in this
example, so is your conclusion no whit against her highness doings, and but
slanderous lies on her Majesty, and craking lies on your selves, saying:

This is far from enacting a new religion, by force of supreme Stap 59. a.
authority, contrary to the commandment of God, declared by the bishops and
priests, the only ministers of God now in spiritual matters, as Prophets were
then in the like.

And this ye clappe up for full conclusion, to all the doings of king Ezechias.
To which conclusion before I answer, I A proper shifting answer, much used
by M. St in these examples.
have to detect one pretty shift of yours, much practiced in your volume. When
ye should have answered to the doings of king David, ye then sent us hither to
the doings of king Ezechias: now when ye come to the answer of king Ezechias,
ye send us back again to the doings of king David. Likewise, when ye should
fully answer the doings of king Iosaphat, ye tell us: How Iosaphat appointed
the Levites Supra. 50. b.
and priests to these eccl. functions it shall appear in the next chapter by
the example of Ezechias. When we come to the example of Ezechias, to find it
set out here, as ye promised, ye send us back again to Iosaphat, and to
David, saying: In all that Ezechias, or before Iosaphat Stap. 53. a.
did, they did but as David had done before. That is, they executed Gods
commandment declared by the prophets. And thus ye shifte and post us of,
from one place to another, making us believe here, that ye answered fully there:
making us believe there, ye answer fully here, and when both places be
conferred, ye have answered no more in the one than ye have in the other, and
that is in effect* to resolve the arguments, naught at all in both. And if ye
make an account of this place to be a resolute answer, why send ye us back
again to David and Iosaphat? and yet how can those answer this, or this
answer those examples? Since many things ye se here were done by Ezechias,
that were not the executing of any commandment of God by any of his Prophets
before: But of his own authority Ezechias dispensed for them, and was allowed
of God therein, when he had commanded them to be done.

Now for your conclusion of the Queens Majesty is mere sclaunderouse and like
to your premises. Her highness does not by force of hi^ supreme authority
enact a new religion contrary to Gods commandment, but by the force of Gods
word in these ensamples, giving her a supreme authority: she enacteth the
most old religion to be renewed and restored, and rejects all other as new,
crept since into the Church, not proceeding ab Antiquo dierum, from the ancient
Daniel. 7. Apoc. 12.
of days, but ab antiquo serpente, from the ancient serpent, such as chiefly
is the doctrine of papistrie. And therefore your conclusion is not to the
matter in hand, otherwise than against your Pope. For he by the force of
Supreme government, or rather supreme vsurpatio^, enacteth a new religion
contrary to Gods commandment, declared by Christ and his Apostles, and
therefore by the Apostle is accursed. Si quis predicauerit euangelium praterquam
quod accepistis anathema Gal. 1.
sit. If any shall preach any other gospel than that ye have received: let him
be accursed. As for that ye say, the commandment of God declared by the
Bishops and Priests: is but a craking lie. For they hid Gods commandment (if
ye mean your popish Bishops and priests) and declared their own
commandment, in stead thereof, as did the Phariseys make frustrate Gods
commandment for their own traditions sake. And so far are they from being
the ministers of God now in spiritual matters: that, as they despise to
administer Gods word and Sacraments, so they disdayns and scorn at, even the
name of Ministers, as even your self do The name of ministers.
M. St. other where, how soever here it came upon you, to pretend to bestow a
reverent speech thereon. But the Apostles thought not scorn of the name, but
willed men so to esteem them, as the ministers of God and the dispensers of 1.
Cor. 4.
his mysteries, but as your papal Bishops and Priests be nothing like Gods
ministers, so least of all are they like the Prophets that were then, except ye
mean the prophets of Baal, that maintained idolatry and pleasant leasings, 3.
Reg. 18.
to maintain them selves at Achabs table, and fill their paunches with the
cheer of Beel and the Dragon. The Daniel. 14.
Lords prophets they be not like neither in preaching, propheciyng or ought
else. And yet says M. Stapl. they be the Stapl. 53. a.
only ministers of God now in spiritual matters, as prophets were then in the
like.

Why M. Stapl. were the prophets then only gods ministers The popish priests
now not like the true prophets
in spiritual matters? if ye say, no: how does your tale hang together? why
say ye, they are only Gods ministers now, as Prophets were then in the like?
since the Prophets were not only Gods ministers then, as ye pretend for your
Bishops and Priests to be only now. If they were not only then, no more be
yours only now, admitting they were in the like. If ye say, yea: they were
only then Gods ministers, as the Bishops and Priests be now: what were the
Bishops, Priests and Levites then, that were no prophets, were not they Gods
ministers in spiritual matters also? if yea, then were not the Prophets in the
like to your Bishops and Priests, that are (as ye say) only gods ministers
now. Make your tale for shame hang better together, and withal tell what you
mean by this dubble shuffling. Ye told us before that your Bishops and
Priests now, The Papists shifte from Priests to Prophets.
are like the Bishops and Priests then: and that not the Prophets, but the
Priests, had that prerogative which ye have so often craked upon, your
general rule of judgment, whereby ye urged then, a supremacy, not in the
Prophets, but in the Bishops and Priests. And now seeing that ye ca^ not prove
it in these examples, where the Bishops and Priests obey the Princes ordinance
as his inferiors: ye shift of the matter to the Prophets, and say now your
priests and prelates succeed and are like the Prophets and let go the former
claim of priests. But these are but your shifts, for if the Prophets had this
supreme government, then the priests had it not. If it appertained to the hie
priests chair, so long as the priesthood of Moses continued, then it
belonged not to the Prophets, and thus ye contrary your self. But in very
deed neither of the^ both had it, but the Prince under God. They were both
Gods ministers in their diverse functio^s, and yet subject to their Princes as
for the popish Bishops and priests, are like to neither of both.

The. 17. Division.
THe Bishop with the like example of Josias concludes Fol 53. a. The example
of King Josias his supreme government in ecclesiastical causes.
his collection of the Princes in the Old Testament, and herevppon makes in
effect this reason:

All these doings of these kings are commended as acceptable service and
right in the sight of God:

But the clayming and taking upon them the supreme government over the
ecclesiastical persons of all degrees, the ruling, governing and directing
them in all their functions, and in all manner causes belonging to religion,
were the doings of all these kings:

Ergo, For Princes to claim and take upon them the like supreme government,
is their right and acceptable service in the sight of God.

The counterblast of master Stapleton to this division Sta. Caput. 15.
is three fold. First to the example of Josias. Secondly to the argument.
Thirdly by setting up new issues and marks, to improve all that the Bishop
has hitherto exemplified, as insufficient to prove the issue.

To the first part says Master Stapleton.

King Josias traueled full godly in suppressing Idolatry by Stapl. 53. a. b.
his kingly authority. What then? so do good catholic Princes also, to
pluck down the Idolles that ye and your brethren have of late set up, and
yet none of them take them selves for supreme heads in all causes spiritual.

This is all that he answers to the example of Josias. First where the
Bishop said: Josias had the like care (to the foresaid Princes) for religion,
and used in the same sort his Princely authority in reforming all abuses in all manner causes ecclesiastical. To this answers master Stapleton.

He traueled full godly in suppressing Idolatry by his kingly authority.

As though this were a full answer denying or granting the Bishops
assertion, or as though besides the suppressing of Idolatry, he did nothing
else. Where as the scripture is plain, how he also read the law before all
his subjects, how he made the covenant with God that all his subjects should
walk after the Lord, and observe all his 4. Reg. 23. 2. Par. 34. and 35.
commandments, testimonies and ceremonies. How he swear them all to keep
this covenant. How he commanded them to keep such a solemn passover, as
was never kept by any of all the kings before him. How the Priests appointed
not themselves, but he appointed them in their offices. How they exhorted not
him, but how he exhorted Lyr^.
them, to prepare themselves (says Lyra) dutifully to celebrate with devotion
the solemnity of the passover. How he commanded the arc to be set up in
the Sanctuary, and to bear it no more on their shoulders. How he commanded
the^ to minister to the Lord and to his people Israel. How he commanded the^
to prepare them selves according to the houses of their au^cesters in their
orders a^ David had appointed them. How he commanded them to minister in the
sanctuary by their families and Leuiticall courses. How he commanded them to
be sanctified, and then to offer the passover. How he commanded them also to
prepare or sanctify the residue of their brethren. And when al things were
prepared, how the Priests kept their stations and the Levites were in their
orders according as the king had commanded them. And so (says the text,)
after it has reckened up the manner of the Priests, Levites, singers and
porters ministeries) all the service or worship was orderly accomplished in
that day to keep the passover and offer their burnt offerings upon the
aultare of the Lord according to the commandment of Josias the King.

All these things (M. Stapl.) were done by his authority and commandment:

But all these things are matters and causes ecclesiastical:

Ergo, his authority and commandment stretched further than in suppressing
Idolatry, yea ^uen over the chiefest matters ecclesiastical.

But all this had M. Stap. quite forgotten, and therefore we must bear with
him, though he answer the Bishop only with this:

Josias traueled full godly in suppressing Idolatry by his kingly authority.

Wherein we see also how doubtfully he speaks, for when he perceived it could
not be denied, but that which he did, he did by his kingly authority, yet
would he not say Josias travail by his kingly authority.
that he suppressed Idolatry by his kingly authority, but he traueled full
godly in suppressing Idolatry by his kingly authority. as though his kingly
authority stretched no further, than to travel in the execution of serving the
priestly authority. But the Scripture is most evident, that his kingly
authority and godly travel, was not in executing the Priests commandment,
but the priestly authority traueled in the service and executing of the
Princes commandment. For, as he destroyed all their Idols and places of
Idolatry, and abolished or deprived (as Uatablus expounds it) the false
priests of their priestly dignity: so he commanded by this his kingly
authority, all the true priests, both the high priest Helchias, and under him
the inferior priests and porters, to travel likewise in bringing out to him
all the Idolatrous vessels, and he summoned or gathered together all the
Priests. And all that there is done, is named to be done by him, that is to
say either by him self, or by his appointment and commandment, through his
kingly authority, both in abolishing the false worship, and in establishing
and directing the true worship of God, not only in general, but also in
particular, yea in the chiefest spiritual matters, over all the Clergy and
the high Priest, so well as all his other subjects: and all this was done of
him by his kingly authority.

But what then says M. Stapleton, to all this: as it were with a phillip to
ouerturne all the matter, with his Masters what then. Forsooth M. St. then, it
was not his godly travel in a serviceable execution of the priests
commandments: but his godly travel in commanding them, and their godly
travel in a serviceable execution of the kings commandments. And then, it
was not only in suppressing Idolatry as you limite it, but in refourming,
establishing, directing and appointing the whole true worship of God besides.
And then was this his kingly authority, by the which he did all these things,
though many of them were Moses, David's, yea the Prophets former ordinances,
and Gods commandment long before: yet were they done here by the kings own
authority, which in the last example of Ezechias concerning David ye would not
admit, because it was Gods appointment by the hand of his Prophets. Such as
were many of these things like wise, and yet now ye grant, they were done also
even by Josias his kingly authority. And then, I pray you, what so great a
difference find ye between these twain, the King does it by his kingly
authority, that here ye confess: and the King does it by his own authority,
that there ye denied? is not the kings kingly authority, the Kings own
authority? and yet is all his authority from God. It follows then, to your
what then, by your own confession, and the manifest Scripture, that this his
own kingly authority of Josias, was next under God the chief and supreme
over all the Priests, Levites, Singers, Porters, or any other, so well as the
people, in all abolishing of false religion, and in all commanding and
directing the true worship and religion of God, which are the principal causes
ecclesiastical. And what then say you to this M. Stapleton? does it not
clearly prove the Bishops assertion against M. Feckenha^, for all your
counterblasting it with your big what then? Think ye it proves he did no
more then, than you will suffer Princes to do now, abusing them with the title
of good catholic Princes, and bereauing them of their good catholic and
princely authority, that by the examples of these good catholic princes they
ought to take upon them, and your Pope usurps it from them?

And yet you say (to abase the doings of Josias) so do good catholic Princes
also, to pluck down the Idolles that Stap. 53. a. b.
ye and your brethren have of late set up, and yet none of them took them
selves for supreme heads in all causes spiritual.

The question is not now Master Stapleton, what those your good catholic
Princes (as ye call them) take them selves to be: whom you have spoiled, and
make believe, what it pleases you to tell them, that their kingly authority
reaches no further but to be serviceable trauelers and executioners of your
commandments. But the question is here, what these Princes (mentioned in the
holy Scriptures) took them selves to be, which appears by The travails of
good catholic princes.
their appointinges and co^maundinges of their Clergy in their functions, that
they took them selves for their Clergies supreme governors in these matters.
And so ought al good catholic princes by their examples to esteem of them
selves, and of their high calling and charge in ecclesiastical causes, and
travail by their godly supreme government to discharge the same. Where ye say
therefore, so do good catholic princes, meaning those that submit
themselves, with all the government of religion, and all ecclesiastical
matters, to your Pope and his prelates, not meddling them selves therewith, as
did Josias and these other godly Kings, whom we see to have meddled with the
government and direction thereof: it is apparent false, and their doings
herein are no more alike, than black is like to white: than to command,
direct and appoint others, is like, to be of the same parties, in the same
matters, commanded, directed and appointed themselves: than governing is like
serving: than one contrary is like to another. And yet you say (for ye care
not what ye say) as did king Josias, so do your good catholic princes now.

But what is that they do? pluck down the Idols (say you) that you and your
brethern have set up.

Whether we and our brethren, or you and your brethren have set up Idols, let
it fall out between us as it shall, hereafter we shall come to the reckening:
only stand you to this M. Stapleton, that the plucking down of Idols
belongs to Princes, by their kingly authority, and that so they ought to
account of them selves and their authority: which if they had done, and
diligently executed this their kingly authority, your shifte of Images and
Idols had not auayled you, for even to your most famous Images, shrines, and
pilgrimages, has foul idolatry been committed, as the chief of your
brethren them selves are feign to confess, and cry out upon, and yet durst
your princes never pull them down, nor you would ever have suffered the so to
do, Whether we or the Papists let up Idols.
(for your lucre lay much therein) but caused the Princes to maintain and
enriche such Images as you daily did set up. As for the Idols that we should
have set up, who sees not we have so little set up any, that we reiecte for
Idols those which ye call your Images, and profess that neither they, nor any
other thing besides God, nor God in them, or by them, is to be worshipped: but
God alone, and that in spirit and truth, and so receive his plain and simple
word and sacraments.

But if, as ye said before, those Princes pull down our Sta. 50 a.
heresies, and those are the Idols that we set up: except this presupposall
should be granted you, that those be heresies which we maintain, your
argument need not be plucked down with idols, for it would fall downrighte of
it self: what a kind of reasoning call ye this, to take that for granted,
and out of all doubt true, that is chiefly denied, and is most stark false?
But what soever our doctrine is, do those your Princes pluck it down by their
kingly authority, or by your false suggestions and commandments? or suffer
you their kingly authority to pull down, set up, or meddle any thing at all
with one jot of doctrine, true or false, more or less, otherwise than you by
your priestly authority, will command, appoint and direct them?

What babble ye then of their kingly authority, in pulling down such idols of
ours (as ye say) where both there How the popish prela^s used christian Princes.
is neither any Idols at all, and you give them, be there or be there not, no
authority, kingly nor unkingly at all, but only make them your seruitours, I
might say for your unworthy usage of them, your Butchers and slaughtermen, at
your commandment to kill and make havoc in the congregation of Christ,
destroying his lively Images and members, for the maintenance of your dead
Images and most gross Idolatry. And yet ye object Idolatry to us, which is,
not to epsy a mote, but to quarrel at a mote, in your brothers eye, where
none is: and not to see the great beam, or rather a number of beams, posts,
stones, stocks and infinite Idols in your own eyes, and in the sight of all
the world. Can your Princes see to pluck out so small a mote in our eyes,
yea, so small to your eyes, that ye are fame to call it invisible or spiritual
Idolatry (and yet falsely charge us therein also) and can not see to pull out
of their own eyes, those open and manifest Idolatries that the Popish Church
has set up? would ye have us think those princes to be thus blind? Surely if
some of the^ be, yet many of them have seen and do see such inckling, that ye
had need to beware betymes what kingly authority ye give them in plucking
down of Idols. For shortly they will not only pull down all your Idols, but
pull you down also for wicked Idolaters, asking Josias pulled down and
suppressed al Idolatry by his kingly authority. And so by his example many
good catholic princes indeed, as ye say, (thanks be to God) have done, do,
and God willing shall daily more and more suppress and pull down the Idols,
that you and your brethren M. St. have of long time set up. And in steed
thereof by their kingly authority, set up the true word and worship of God.

And thus, as did Josias, has the Queens majesty's most noble Father and
Brother of famous memories done, and hi^ Highness after them (who^ God
continue and prosper) does. And as Josias not only pulled down the Idols, but
also How the Q. Highness follo with the ensample of Josias.
the houses and open maintenance of filthy fornication, in the false
Idolatrous priests, in their geided chaplains, as Lyra says, and as he
tells how the Hebrews called them ^diculas M^nachorum, the celles of Monks,
how he destroyed their Sodomitical priests, and their co^c^tines, that weaued
their 4. Reg. 23. Monks and Nuns celles pulled down.
hangings for their groves: So do and ought to do good catholic princes. And
so has the Q Majesty both suppressed the popish Idols, and abolished a^
maintenance and dispensations of whores, concubines, and other such vowed
Stalions and Sodomites, pulled down the Monkish cells, with their Nunnish
weauers, and has (as did Josias) established the only worship of the living
God. ye only verity of gods most blessed word, the holy ordinance of honorable
and chaste matrimony. And this has she done by Gods commandment, by the hand
of his prophets and under God by her royal or kingly authority (for so may I
call it, for all your petit quarrels) and therefore since she can and ought to do
these things (as did Josias) by her kingly authority: it follows, her kingly
authority is a supreme authority, over all her subjects, bishops, and
priests, or any other, so well Clarke as Lay, in suppressing al false religion,
and plucking it down, in setting up and establishing Gods true religion, and
al things ecclesiastical belonging there unto.

Now says M. St. to the bishops argument, collecting his Sta. 53 b.
conclusions on the manifest doings of all these Princes:

And ye have hitherto brought nothing effectual to prove that the kings of
Israel did so, wherefore your conclusion, that they did rule, govern, and
direct the eccl. persons in all their functions, and in all manner causes of
religion, is an open and notorious lie: and the contrary is by us avouched, and
sufficiently proved by the authority of the old Testament, whereupon ye have
hitherto rested and settled your self.

Whether this bare saying, on M. Stap. priestly authority, without any further
proof or improfe, be any thing effectual, to prove that the kings of Israel
did not so: and whether the Bishops conclusion, of these t^r open and notorious
doings, or M. Stap. denial, be an open and notorious lie: let the indifferent
reader and marker of these kings doings, hardly be the ^pere. But M. St. as
though he had decided the matter already to the readers hand: The contrary
(says he) is by us avouched and sufficiently proved by the authority of the
old Testament. That it is avouched, M. St. and that full stoutly avouched the
reader may soon perceive. But that this your auouching is sufficiently proved
by the authority of the old Testament, would require a more sufficient
proof and authority, than your so saying (M. Stap.) in the judgment of any
sufficient examiner and conferrer, what you on the one part out of the old
Testament, hitherto have alleged for your priests supreme government, and
what the bishop has alleged for the Princes supreme guuernement: both
allegations and proves in their places are evident. Commit them to the reader,
suspende your hasty and partial judgment, least your sufficient proves be
esteemed more insufficient.

The third part of M. Stap. answer is prefixed with a marginall note, saying:

It is here declared, that master Horn comes nothing nigh the principal
question.

This declaration has three parts. First, an exhortation to regard the
principal scope and issue of the matter. Secondly, a setting up of eight or
nine new marks, as the issue and principal matter in question. Thirdly, a
number of outcries and exclamations, that the bishop shoots wide, and comes
not near the mark.

The first (as ye say M. Sta.) is a good admonition. Necessary Stap. 53. b.
it is that the Bishop have before his eye the very state of the question,
which must be especially ever regarded of such as mind not too loosely, and
altogether unfruitfully employ their own labor, and loose both their own,
and the readers labor.

This is good counsel, and ye often put the Bishop in mind of it, but I pray
you does it not comprehend your self? or have ye a Bull from the Pope to
call upon other, and dispense with your self? it may well be ye have some
especial placard, for ye use it throughout all your counterblast, to make your
continual outrodes and vagaries quite from the matter. No Fly is busier in
buzzing on entrye dish, than your Counterblast is blowing on every flim ^am
tale. If ye think ye may be borne withal for the enlarging of your volume,
yet ye make your Readers loosely and altogether unfruitfully to employ their
labors carrying them at roauers (as ye say) and at randon to, (^s ye had wont
Master Stap. stragleth from the mark, and calls on the Bishop to keep him to
the mark.
to do the people after all Hallowes) from the very state of the question in
controversy. For shame therefore vpbrayde not this to the Bishop, of straying
from the mark, except you keep your self better to the mark, or else show
your Dispensation that ye may still babble all besides the question, of what
impertinent tryfles ye please to descante upon, and will not suffer your
adversary once to wincke awrye, nor to allege any thing, though it never so
much appertain to the purpose, if it do not directly conclude the very state
of the question. This dealing master Stapleton is very uneven. If ye will deal
uprightly, call upon the Bishop hardly, so often as ye will: but then stand you
for shame to your tackling to, least an other come and call as fast on you, to
mark and regard better the matter ye meddle withal.

But perhaps ye will say, admit that I ran astray from the matter my
self, yet, does my fault excuse the Bishops? In deed it does not Master
Stapleton, if he be faulty therein, but it lesseneth his, and it makes
yours the greater, and the more to your shame, except ye be a very impudent
man, for your fault herein is manifest, and therefore deciphered out unto you,
in one of your common places? If ye be belied, there purge your self, which
t^ll ye do, the more ye call upon the Bishop, to keep him to his mark: he
that shall mark your dealing, shall wish you had either less impudency, or
more remembrance of your self.

Nevertheless, since ye so sharply challenge the Bishop, that all his examples
draw nothing near the mark, but run at randon, and shoot all at Rouers: I
pray you sir call to your remembrance what was the mark and issue in question
between them? was it not this, that if the Bishop by any of the four
abouesayde means could make proof The issue in question between the Bishop
and master Fecknam. Sup. ^ol. 136. a
to master Feckenham that any Emperor, or Empresle, King or Queen, may clay me
or take upon them any such government in spiritual or ecclesiastical causes,
that then he would yield? Was not this the state of their question? accorded
they not on this issue? and ought not the Bishop to direct all his examples to
prove this? And if he prove this, whether he shot at Buttes or Rouers, has
he not hytte the mark? and what would ye have more?

Now that he has done this, is plainly proved by every of these examples,
and that not only as the words of the issue enforce, that they took upon
them some such government in spiritual or ecclesiastical causes, which
being proved is enough to discharge the Bishop of straying from his matter:
but also, that they daymed and took upon them such supreme government in
all spiritual or ecclesiastical causes. And you have counterblasted nothing
to the contrary, that were able to remove these proves from this mark and
issue, saving your facing and bracing of the matter, and a number of blind
pelting and foreworne shifts, except ye have any better behind to come. For
all these shifts hitherto notwithstanding, the Bishops examples are both
directly directed to the issue, and directly and fully prove the same. And
whers ye find^ fault with straggling from it, ye touch not him, but wring your
self by the nose. For ensample whereof, I remitte the Reader to your common
place thereon, or to spare his pains, and go no further, than even here to
mark the marks that your self set up, and confer them with the issue
between the Bishop and master Feckenham, and the Reader shall soon discern
M. Stap. settes up. ix* nevve marks both differing from M. Feck. and the
Bishops issue, and also from his own former marks, and yet cries o^t on the
B. for straying from the question.
how far of purpose ye stray from it, yea from those false marks also that
your self set up before And yet ye cry the Bishop strayes from the mark, and
will the Reader to fix his eye thereon.

But herein ye play as the common people say the Lapwing or Pewet does, who
when they seek her Neast, draws them still further and further from it, with
her noise and flittering about them, crying as the simple people imagine, here
is it, here is it, when it is nothing near it. And even as they conceive of
the Pewet, so do you with us, with great noise and earnestness, bidding us
regard and set before our eyes the very state of the question, and The
Papists play like the Lapvving.
busily pretend to tell us wherein lies all the chief question, when under
the cloak and credit of this your earnestness, ye carry the reader quite
away from the question and issue in controversy, to run up and down after
such new and so many questions, that the Reader dared as a man in a maze,
should neither perceive the true question in deed, nor find out the
weakness and falsehoode of your cause, nor well know where himself is
become.

But, that he may wind himself the better out of this your Laberinthe, let
him (as is said before) direct his eye ever on the issue between the
parties, and then shall he still see whereaboutes he is, and how far or
near, not only the Bishop is, but you also are, to or from the matter.

The issue, as is before said, is this, That any Emperor The issue.
or Empresle, King or Queen, claymed or took upon them any such government.

By this issue in all his examples, has the Bishop directed him self, that
Moses, Iosue, David, Solomon, Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias, did take upon
them such government.

But all these were Kings and Princes of Gods people, commended of God for
their godly governance:

Therefore Emperors and Empresses Kings and Queen's, may and ought to take such
government upon them.

This being always the Bishops conclusion, wherein strayed he from the issue?
But now come you ruffling in with Nine new issues for advantage, not one of
them all being the very issue and state of the question in controversy, and
yet you cry the Bishop draws nothing nigh the mark.

True in deed master Stapleton, he draws nothing Stapl. 53. b. M. Stapletons
first fal^ mark.
near the marks that you have set up, for the nigher he should draw to
them, he should draw the further from the question between master Feckenham
and him, as you do of purpose in all these your marks, to deceive, and
begu^le the simple Reader, that thinks ye mean good truth, when ye ^rte so
often on the question, and run so far from the same.

For ensample, was this I pray you good master Stapleton, (to use your own
ph^ase) the issue and question between them, whether these Kings acknowledged,
or not acknowledged the high Priest? ^t is true, and the Bishop demeth not,
that they did agnise the high Priest, The kings agnising the high Priest in
the old testament, infers not that they agnised him their ^npreme governor.
every one of them. But follows it thereon, that they agnised him to be
their supreme head or governor? This would require to be proved with some
better Logycke. As for these examples, argue all the contrary, that though the
Prin^s agnised always one to be the chief Priest, and also agnised all other
inferior Priests, Levites, Porters, Singers, in their offices: yet all those,
high and low, whatsoever, acknowledged again the supreme government of
commanding, appoynting, ordring, directing, and ouerseeing them, to do all
their duties dutifully: to appertain not to themselves, but to their
sovereign Princes. And the Princes (as their several examples witness) took
it upon them, in commanding, appoynting, placing, and displacing, all and
every one, yea the highest Priest himself.

And therefore where ye say to the Bishop:

I pray you good M. Horn bring forth that king, that did St. fol. 53. b.
not agnise one supreme head and chief judge in all causes ecclesiastical
among the Jews, I mean the high Priest, wherein lies all our chief
question. Ye have not yet done it, nor never shall do it. And ye could show
any, it were not worth the showing. For ye should not show it in any good
King, as being an open breach of Gods law given to him by Moses, as this
your doings are an open breach of Christ and his Churches law, and given to
us in the new Testament.

These be but your crakes and outfacings master Stapleton. The Bishop has done
it evidently that ye require, and the scripture is manifest in all these Kings
ensamples. Nor they were any wicked Kings, nor breakers of Gods law given by
Moses, or any other. But even Moses and all the rest, were mainteiners of Gods
law given to them, and therefore are worth the showing.

Your conclusion that our doings are an open breach of Christ and his Churches
law, given to us in the new Testament, I may well ouerpasse without answer,
dismissing it to your common place of slanders, not only of us, but of Christ
and his Church, and his new Testament also: till ye show in what place of
the new Testiment, Christ and his Church (whom ye join together in this law
making) did make and give us this law, that either our godly Christian Princes
should not have this supreme government over their dominions, or that your Pope
should have it over all the universal Church. And when ye have proved this,
prove also this your first new mark, to be the very state and issue here in
question between the Bishop and master Feckenham, or else agnise with shame
your self, that ye run at randon, and loosely and altogether unfruitfully,
have employed yours and your Readers labor, for all (so like a Faulconer) ye
cry mark, mark, never so much.

Your first false mark being thus reared up, ye set up a second,
much less like the issue between them, but much more like the malicious
slanders among you, saying:

Again, what president have ye showed of any good King St. fol. 53. b. M. St.
second false mark.
among the Jews, that with his laity, altered and abandoned the usual
Religion a thousand years and upward customably from age to age received and
embraced: and that the high Priest, and the whole clergy gainsaying all such
alterations? If ye have not showed this, ye have strayed far from the mark.

Whether this be the mark or no, or whether master Stapleton of purpose
straggle from it, the conference of the issue with this, will soon declare,
there is no need to fette the high Priests judgment as in a doubtful
matter. Every child may see not only how far they differ, but also what
an heap of slanders on a plumpe, he burdeneth like an ungracious subject, his
most gracious sovereign withal. As for the Queens Majesty's most godly The
conferring of the Q Majesty's doing, with these ancient and godly kings.
doings, are very well confirmed by these examples. And in proof thereof, the
Bishop ever kept him closely to his mark, that the supreme government which
her Majesty takes on her, is none other, but such as they before did take on
them. Her highness has abandoned old inueterate errors, crept in besides,
and contrary to the word of God: she saw the ensample in these godly Kings
before her, whose doings therein she followed. Her highness has by the advice
and instruction of her godly learned Clergy, reformed religion according to
Gods word, although the Popish clergy were negligent and gainesayde the same:
she saw the ensample in these kings before her, how by their godly learned
prophets advice, and instructions, according to Gods word, they reformed
religion, although the Priests and Leuits were negligent or withstood the same.
And this hitteth home the mark, Any such government, sith both their supreme
governments be so like. And therefore in that you charge her majesty otherwise,
is nothing ^eare the mark, but is your own reproachful and very trayterou^
slander.

The ioly number of a thousand years and upward, of The Papists vaunt of
1000 years antiquity.
your usual religion, is but your common vaunte, and what if I said your
outfacing lie also, to deceive the simple with a countenance of antiquity, the
novelty and late hatching whereof, is daily the more ye strive, the more
discovered, to be nothing so ancient as ye pretend, of a thousand years and
upward. Of which number the most part (the originals being well boulted out)
may come back again half a thousand years and more downwarde with shame
enough.

But I see master Stapleton, ye have hoysted up your Religion so hie, that it
staggreth again, and higher for falling downeright ye can not get it. It has
been ye say the usual Religion a thousand years and upward, that is a
fair time master Stapleton, God save it. But what mean ye by this indefinite
term upward? Mean you it has continued a thousand years and a little
more? Alack Master Stapleton I am sorry for it, and for your pains taking
till your arms ache to lift it up so high, and yet it commes too too short to
be any true Religion. For The Papists dare not stretch their crake of
antiquity to Christ, or to 1500. yeare^ and vpvvarde.
if it be the true Religion of Jesus Christ, why say ye not boldly man, it
is the usual Religion of fifteen hundredth years and upward? But either your
arms are too short, or your heart fayles you, to lift it upward so high,
for then the word of GOD would soon control you, and beat it down again.
And therefore you are content with a lower sail, to crake that your Religion
is yet a thousand years old and upward. But as that is a false crake, so is
it also, a vain crake and serves not the turn, yea admitting it were so old
as ye boast, 1000* years and upward, yet ought it of all godly Princes to be
removed and pulled down again, except it be the Religion of fiftene hundredth
years and upward. E^amsi Angelus docuerit aliud Euangelium quam quod
accepistis Galat. 1.
ana^hema sit. Although an Angel from heaven should teach any other
doctrine than you have received, let him be accursed. The Religion that the
Queens Majesty has set forth (thanks be to God therefore) is the religion
of 1500. years and upward, and therefore good reason that yours give place to
his senior, ye popish and later base born religion of your Romish church, to
the first and most ancient true religion, of that Alpha and Omega Jesus Christ
himself.

Master Stap. having now set up these two false marks, like to one being out
of his way, that after he is once over his shoes in the mire, cares not how
he ben^yre himself, but running deeper through thick and thin, cries this
is the way, to have other to follow him: so rusheth on master Stapleton still
further from the issue, and yet takes every thing in his way, to be his
mark and directorie. Setting up the particular factes of those Princes, that
challenge and take upon them this supreme government: that the self same
factes must be found in the ensamples of the old testament, or else he
says, the Bishop strayeth from the mark.

What evidence have ye brought forth (says he) to show Stap. 54. a. M. Stap.
third false mark.
that in the old law, any King exacted of the Clergy In verbo Sacerdoti^,
that they should make none Ecclesiastical law without his consent, as King
Henry did of the clergy of England. In the proof of the supreme government,
the proof of every particular fact is not necessary.


Is this the mark master Stap. between the Bishop and master Feckenham, to
prove in their supreme gouerments every self same particular fact, yea the
circumstances about or concerning the fact to be all one, in them that claim
this government now, and those that claymed it then: since both the states,
the times, yea all the ceremonies of religion of the Jews then, and ours now,
are nothing like? and trow ye then the princes particular doings, must be like,
and even the same, and evidence must be given out of the one for every fact of
the other, or else their supreme authorities be not alike? The issue between
them, is not so straight laced, but requires only any such government, The
issue between the B. and M. Feck.
some such government, yea and he it, al such government to, I mean not all
such actions in the government, but the supreme directing, governance,
authority, or power, are proved both alike in either princes estate, so well
over eccl. persons in all their functions then, or now, as over the temporal
in theirs. For by this rule, whereas that most famous prince king Henry the
eight, did swear also to his obedience, all his temporal, subjects in civil
causes, as other Princes likewise have done and do: it would be hard to
alle^ge an evidence thereof out of the old Testament, and yet their supreme
governments therein, were not therefore unlike.

As for the ministering of the oath, is but a circumstance to confirm the
matter, and not the matter itself. And if The taking an oath.
king Henry were (by the obstinate and crafty malice of his popish clergi^
then,) constrained for his more assurance, to take an oath or promise of them
on the honesty of their priesthood (which God w^t, was but a small hold, as
it went then in the most of them) and that no king of those ancient years,
mentioned in the old testament, being not moved by the wickedness or
mistrust of his clergy, took the like oath or promise of their priests
honesty, or faith of their priesthood^ then: what is this to or from the
matter, why their supreme authorities should not be alike in both? Do not you
also say for your side, that the high Priest had such supreme government
then, as your Pope ^othe challenge now ou^r all eccl. causes? and does ^ot your
Pope now exact of all his clergy, in verbo ^acerdotij, by the word of their
priesthood, that they shall make The oath to the Pope.
no eccl. law without his consent? May we not then return your own words on
your self? What evidence can you bring forth, to show that in the old law
any high Priest exacted this of the clergy under him? And if ye can not (as
ye can not) does not then this your wyle reason and new mark, ouerturne the
false claim that your Pope claymeth, of such supreme government now, as the
high Priest had then?

But his claim is false, and his government nothing like. The high priest in
the old law did not as the pope does now.
For the high priest then, took not upon him to make eccl. laws, as does now
your Pope: but only observed such eccl. laws, as God had made to his hand,
till time of the Pharisees corruption, who not content with Gods laws, had
devised besides, many fond laws of their own inventions, when there wanted
among them this kingly authority. To the which, so long as it continued, the
high priest and al other obeyed, receiving and observing such eccl.
constitutions, as their godly princes made unto them. So did Aaron first
receive the eccl. co^stitutions of Moses. So after him did al^re residue admit
the eccl. constitutions of David, and the rest of the foresaid princes: their
priests made none of the^ selves without the Princes consent. But the princes
ord^ined diverse eccl. orders, partly with the advice and consent, partly
without, yea against the will and consent of their clergy now and then: and yet
those godly princes exacted of them, even as The king^ in the old law charged
their clergy on their priesthood for eccl. matters.
they were true priests (as the stories of Iosaphat and Ezechias mention, how
they charged their priests, even in that they were the Lords priests, which is
all one with that you allege in verbo sacerdotij) that they should do such
things as they appointed them to do. And is not this good and authentical
evidence for king Henry's doings? but that the priests appointed any such
ordinance without their princes consents, will be hard for you to bring the
like, or any ^uidence at all for your Popes exacting.

And if, as ye conclude hereupon, this exacting to make no Sta. 54 ^.
eccl. law without his consent, be to make the civil magistrate the supreme
judge for the final determination of causes ecclesiastical: then your Pope
having no such evidence for him, by this your mark, is no supreme judge for
such final determination: but it ^latly proves against you, that the Princes
should be the supreme judges therein. And if the exacting of consent, importe
such supreme authority as here ye confess: then, whereas not only these
ancient kings, but also the ancient christian Emperors, in the confirming of
your Pope, exacted, that none should be a lawful Pope, to whom they gave not
their consent: it argues that those Emperors were the supreme Judges, for the
final determination of the Popes ecclesiastical election. Which afterward,
when ye come to the handling thereof, ye renie: affirming that although his
consent was necessary to be required, yet it argued no such supreme judgment
in the matter.

And thus you care not, may ye for the time shuffle out an answer, how falsely
or how contrary ye counterblast your false. The next mark is yet further wide
from the issue, and more fond than any of the other, for abandoning his Pope,
and general Councels.

What can ye bring forth (says he) out of the old Stap. 54. ^. M. St.
fourth false mark.
Testament to aid and relieve your doings, who have abandoned, not only the
Pope but general Councels also, and that by plain act of Parliament.

And what can you bring forth, M. Sta. (to return your wise demand on your
self) for your pope and his councels, out of the old Testament? can ye find
your pope and his cardinals in council there assembled? Uerily, then might ye
have been much bolder than ye were right now, in your sacond mark, to limit
your crake within a thousand years and upward. But thereby might ye soon
have marred the popes claim from Peter: and so, that ye wan in ye hundrethes,
leese again in the shire, and put your winning in your eye well enough, and
yet see never the worsse.

But ye will reply, that ye can bring proof out of the old Testament, how
they acknowledged their high Priest. But what is this to the purpose, except
ye prove their high priest, to have had the same authority that your Pope does
claim? For otherwise, so say we, our godly Princes do acknowledge The Prince
abandoneth not godly bishops, though he aba^ don the Pope.
their godly bishops, nor do abandon, but reverence them. Nevertheless, if
those their bishops be wicked, they may remove, deprive, or as ye call it,
abandon the^, or otherwise punish them accordingly. Thus did king Solomon
deprive or abandon Abiathar the high Priest. And so if ye lyken your Pope to
the Jews high Priest, then has the bishop brought forth proof out of the
old Testament, to confirm our Princes abandoning of your Pope: but much more
(if we consider these godly kings examples) the foresaid idolatrous priests,
such as in deed all the Popish priests be. And also in rejecting such
councels The abandoning of the Popes councels.
as the Prophet, against the naughty priests in his time, speaks of, Inite
consilium, dissipabitur: Enter into counsel, and it shall be defeated. But ye
will say they are not like to your councils. Yet were they alike, then is
proof Esaias. 8.
brought forth even by the old Testament, against your councels. And wherein
are they not alike, being both aduersus Dominum, and Christum eius, against
the Lord, and against Psalm. 2.
his anointed? Saving that herein they are not like in deed: those old
councels of the wicked priests, yea the councels of Caiphas, Annas, the high
Priests, the Scribes, and Phariseis, that assembled so often against Christ and
his Apostles, were not half so crafty, malicious, and violent, as your Popes
general councels are. Where, saving the bare title of generality, is nothing
but partiality, violence, How general the Popes cou^ cells are.
and bondage, and are nothing less than general, as shall be further noted,
where ye give occasion further to speak thereon.

Now to that ye say the Queen has abandoned general councels and that by act
of Parliament, it is but your general lie. And your self very fondly without
further council in your next words confute your own tale. For, going about to
allege such motines, as cause you to say that the Queen has abandoned
general councils, and that by plain act of parliament: I say this (say you)
partly for a certain Stapl. 54. a.
clawse of the act of parliament, that for the determination of any thing to
be adjudged to be heresy, rests only in the authority of the canonical
Scriptures, and in the first four general councels, and other councels
general, wherein any thing is declared heresy by express words of Scripture.

Is this the clause that moves you M. Stapl. to say the act of parliament
abandoneth general councels? this clause The act of parliament admits the
g^rall cou^ncels.
does quite the contrary, most plainly admitting and acknowleging the
authority, not only of the first four general councels, but also of all
such other, as ground them selves on the authority of the canonical
Scriptures. Now what a reason call ye this:

The act of Parliament admits the determinations of the four general
councels, and other councels general:

Ergo, general councels be abandoned by act of parliament? it admits them.
Ergo, it abandoneth them? Had not your brains admitted somewhat overmuch,
which abandoned all counsel and reason (...), when ye framed this reason M.
Stapleton? for by the like reason your self do abandon your Pope and general
councels also, because ye do admit them. Do ye not see therefore how fondly
ye reason, and how falsely ye say, that the act of parliament abandoneth
general councels, when it admits and receives general councels, and
rejects so little any one true general council, that it admits also the
determination of anything to be adjudged heresy by any general council, that
the said council can so prove to be heresy, by the word of God?

If the act of Parliament attributes thus much to all general councels,
does it abandon them? and will you require it should acknowledge them further,
than even the godly general councels themselves, in determinations of Heresies
would be admitted? They always laid before them, as their level and ruler
the holy Scriptures. And think ye they laid them forth for a cipher in
Algorisme, The word of god, the rule of all true general Councels.
as the Pope uses them in his counsels? Or rather as Constantine the great in
the Nicene counsel said: In disputationibus rerum diuinarum a^ fidei, in
quibus tame^ habent sanctissimi Tripartit. hist. lib. 2. cap. 5. Theodoret.
spiritus doctrinam praescriptam, Euangelici enim and Apostolics libri, nec non
and antiquissimoru^ prophetarum oracula plane instruunt nos quid de voluntate
dei sentiendum nobis sit. Nothing is more unworthy than. etc. in disputations
of divine matters, and matters of faith, wherein they have yet prescribed to
them the doctrine of the holy ghost, for the Evangelists and Apostles Books,
and also the Oracles of the most ancient Prophets do plainly instruct us,
what we ought to think concerning the will of God. Athanasius one of the same
counsel, says: Quae in Synodo Ni^na a Athanasius in epistola ad Epictetum
Corynthi episcopum.
patribus secundum diuinas Scripturas exposi^ sit fides suffuiens est, ad omnem
omnis impietatis destructionem, and ad confirmationem piae in Christo fidei.
That faith is sufficient to all destruction of all wickedness, and to the
confirmation of a Godly faith in Christ, which faith was expounded of the
fathers in the Nicene council according to the divine Scriptures. And of this
general counsels authority, says saint Augustine, Nec ego Nicenum, nec tu
debes Ariminense tanque Contra maximinum Arianu^ li. 3. ca. 13.
praeiudicaturus proferre concilium, neque ego huius authoritate, neque tu
illius detineberis, scripturarum authoritatibus. etc. Neither ought I to
allege the Nicene counsel as giving any forestalled judgment, nor thou
ought to allege the counsel at Ariminu^, neither should I be deteyned by
the authority of this, nor thou of that, let the matter be tried by the
authorities of the scriptures, etc. And in this point S. Aug. is so earnest,
that he would admit no doctrine not proved by the Scriptures, but calls it
plain fabling. Ecce singere extra Euangelium In psalm. 92.
est fabulari, For behold it is but fabling to feign ought besides the Gospel.

Neither herein does S. Augustine think he injured any council, Neque enim
(says he) quoru^l^bet disputatione^, etc. Neither Epistola. 3. ad
Fortunatianu^.
ought we so to count the disputations of any men what soever, how catholic
or laudable soever they be, as we ought to count the Canonical scriptures, in
so much that I might not (their honor which is due to those men, saved)
improve or refuse any thing in their writings* etc. And writing to Paulina of
the credit to be given to the Scripture: Alijs Epistola. 112. ad Paulina^ de
videndo Deo.
vero testibus, etc. As for any other witnesses (says he) or testimonies,
whereby thou art moved to believe ought to be: it is lawful for thee to
believe it or not to believe it. And so says S. Herome, Quod scripturae sacr^
authoritatem non habet, eadem facilitate contemnitur qua recipitur: That that
has not authority of the holy Scripture, is as easily despised as received.
So says Chrysostom, Nullis omnino credendum In mat. ca. 24. Homil. 49.
nisi dicant vel faciant quae conuenientia sunt. scripturis sanctis. Thou must
believe none, without they say or do those things, that are agreeable to the
Scriptures. And again: Si quid absque scriptura dicitur, etc. If any thing be
spoken without the Scripture, the knowledge of the hearers halteth, now
granting, now staggering, now and then detesting the talk as vain, now and
then as probable receiving it. But whereas the scripture is, there the
testimony of Gods voice comes forth, both confirming the talk of the
speaker, and confirming the mind of the hearer.

So S. Cyprian, Legate hic vnum verbum, etc. Let him In Sermon de baptismo
Christi.
read the only word, and on this commandment let the christian religion
meditate, and out of this scripture he shall find the rules of all doctrine,
to flow, and to spring from hence, and hither to return what soever the
Churches discipline does conteyne.

So says Cyrill, Necessarium nobis est diuinas sequi liter as, Ad reginas de
recta fide.
and in nullo ab earum prascripto discodere. It is necess^rie for us to follow
the divine writings and to swerue in nothing from their prescript rule. And
(...) these Fathers, so all the Doctors be plain, not to allow, much less to
determine any doctrine, not only contrary but also besides the word of God.

Nor the Ancient doctors only, but also diverse of the popish writers
affirm, that neither the Church, the Bishops, the Pope, nor any prouincial or
general counsel, has power to determine any doctrine to be true or false,
otherwise than only by the authority of the Scriptures, to declare them so to
be. So says Thomas of Aquine, In doctrina Thom. Aquinas in secunda secundae
Questione 1. Arti^. 10.
Christ's and Apostolorum, etc. In the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, all
truth of faith is sufficiently laid forth. Howbeit, to beat down the errors
of heretics and of perverse men, certain opinions of faith ought many times
to be declared. And of the same mind also is your great captain Friar
Alphonsus de Castro, who attributing far more to the popish Church and the
Pope, than he ought to do, yet in this point after long disputation and
arguments on the matter, he concludes: Nullo ergo modo, etc. It can by no
Alphons. de Castro, aduersus here is. li. 1. cap. 8.
means therefore be, that the church may make any new article of faith, but
that, the which before was the true faith and yet was hid from us, the
church by her censure makes, that it may be known unto us. Whereupon
appears, that my Lord Abbate did miserably err, who expounding the chapter
that begins C^m Christus, which is had in the book of the Decretall
epistles in the title de Hereticis, says that the Pope can make a new article
of the faith. But he must be borne withal, being ignorant, nor well weighing
of what thing he spoke, this only I see must be laid in his dish, that he
Judged beyond the slipper: for it is not the office of Canonistes to Judge of
heresy or of faith, but the office of Divines to whom Gods law is committed.
The Canonistes parts are to descant of the Popes law. Look they to it
therefore, least while they covet to sit on both stools, the tail come to
ground, as is the Proverb. Thus sharply concludes Alphonsus against my Lord
Abbate, and all popish Canonistes that would intermedle with writing in
Divinity (I know not whether you Master Stapleton, were any such or n^, but
many of your site are even such as he speaks of) that would study both the
Popes laws, and Gods laws together, and so lay them both 2. Cor. 6.
in the duste. For, (...) Christi and Behal? What fellowship is there between
Christ and Belial? Thus writes he, that neither the Pope, nor his (...), nor
the Church, can determine faith or here^ie without the word of God.

And so says Ferus, Cum cont^leris falsa^ doctrin^m etc. Ferus in Matthew. 13.
When you shall confer the false doctrine, ye shall find out the error. For
the only holy Scripture is the rule of the truth, from the which whatsoever
differs, or does contrary, it is darnell and error, in what countenance
soever outward it come forth. For he that is not with me, is against me says
Christ. Herevppon the Apostles and Disciples in the primitive Church, did
daily search the Scriptures whether they were so or no. For often time it comes
to pass, that that is judged error, which is not error, and contrary wise.
Here therefore the Scripture judges. So Christ was Judged a transgressour of
the law, but if ye confer him with the Scripture, you shall see he agrees
best therewith. On the contrary, the traditions of the Phariseys seemed good,
which not withstanding Christ conferring with the Scripture, plainly shows
they are contrary to the Scripture. And therefore David in all that octonarie
desires nothing else, but to be directed by the word of God.

And the same Ferus in the eleventh chap. of Matthew. Ferus in Matthew. 11.
Baculus arund^neus est quicquid extra verbum des traditur, etc. What soever
is given without the word of God is a rod of a reed. For it is al only the
word of God, which we may safely lean upon, in so much that from hence thou
may see what froward deceyuers they be, that for the word of God would
only set forth unto us their dreams, that is a rod of a reed, Hereuppon
the true Apostles gloried most of all on this, that they delivered nothing but
the ^. Pet. ^.
word of God, so says Peter: Not following unlearned ^bles, we make known to
you the power and presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, so Paul does glory that
he received not the Gospel of men, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.
Whereon he infers, if therefore any preach any other thing, let him be
accursed. As though he should say* we have preached the word of God, whereto
ye may safely lean* accursed therefore be he, that for the certain word of
God, brings a rod of a reed, that is to say, man's feigninges.

Thus hitherto agree even these Papists with the ancient Fathers, that nothing
may be decided to be true or false, neither by Church, Council, Pope, or any
Man, nor any Angel, with out the authority of Gods word, so to judge and
confirm the same.

But (say you) by this rule it will be hard to convince many Stapl. 54. a.
froward and obstinate Heretics to be Heretics, yea of such as by the
foresaid four first and many other Councels general, are condemned for
Heretics.

As David said of the wicked, I^llic trepidauerunt timore Psalm. 25.
vbi non erat timor, They trembled there for fear, where no fear was: And as
Esaias says, Possedit timor hypocritas. Esayas. 33.
Fear has taken hold on the hypocrites: So are you M. Stapl afraid of your
own shadows. For, except those froward and obstinate he^etikes be your
selves, that fear the judgment of that cutting two edged sword, to beat
down your traditions: no godly Christian need to fear, or flee from the
determination of the Scripture, or think it insufficient to detect and
d^termine all Here^ies.

Yet (say you) it will be hard to convince there with many froward and obstinate
heretics* As who should say, it would be Heretics are to be co^uinced by the
Scripture.
easi^r to convince them, being so froward and obstinate with out the
Scripture, and not rather a great deal harder. Is it likelier that their
froward obstinacy, will yield to the authority of man's word, that will not
yield to the authority of Gods word? but be it hard or ^ofte, what is that
to the matter, if it will convince their Heresies, be the Heretics never so
obstinate? This is enough to the purpose, that there is no here^ie defended
never so frowardly, of any obstinate heretic but the word is able to convince
it to be an here^ie. Yea as Chrysostom says, Nullo modo agnoscitur Chryso. in
opere imperf. hom. 49.
etc. ^o them that are willing, to know which is the true church of Christ
(from heretics Churches) it is known by no means. (...) modo per scripturas:
but all only by the scriptures. And where ye make exception of such as were
condemned for heretics by the first f^wre general Councels: it is most
evident, that as in all those Councels, the word of God (as their line and
squyre) was laid forth amongst them: so they convinced all those heretics by
the same.

Your common objection hereto is of the word (...) which ye say in the
express scriptures can not be found, but what says S. Augustine to this:
Quidest enim (...) nisi Contra maximum (...). lib. 13. ca. 14.
(...) e^usdemque substantiae^ quid est inquam (...) nisi ego and pater vnum
sumus? sed nunc nec ego Nicenum etc. What is this word (...) but of one and
the same substance, what is I say (...) but I and my father are one? but now
neither ought I to allege the Council of Nice, neither ought thou to
allege (as to give fore judgment) the council of A^iminum, neither should I
be withhelde by the authority of this, nor thou of that, but by the authority
of the Scriptures, etc. Thus does S. Augustine both reply to you, that even
those Heretics were confuted only by the express Scripture: and also that
for the Judgment of Heresies, the authority of the Scripture is to be
preferred, not only before the provincial Council at Ariminum, but even
before the first general council at Nice. Neither did S. Augustine declare
their doctrine to be an heresy, because it was so determined by the general
council, but because it was determined by the authority of the Scriptures.
And following this rule we are sure we can not err. For this is (as David
says) Lucerna (...) men's verbum Psalm. 118.
tuum domine and lumen semitis me is, Thy word O Lord is a candle to my feet
and a light to my paths. On the contrary The errors of councels when they
swerued from the Scripture.
with out this light not only the private fathers, but even the councels, yea
the general councels, where they determined ought not grounded on the
Scriptures, so little could epsy the heresies of others, that they erred foul
them selves.

I omit the council of Carthage wherein S. Cyprian Carthaginense. 1.
was, how it erred in determining heretics to be rebaptized. The council of
Laodicea (which though otherwise Council. Laodice^um.
was a godly council) yet erred it far, in disallowing and enioyning
penance, for those that married the second time. And so forth diverse other
prouincial councils. And to speak only of general councels, even the first
Nicene council, Council. Nicenu^. 1.
how greatly was it like to have erred in forbidding priests marriages, and the
matter was already passed by all the Bishops voices, had not one father
Paphnutius been, that made them retract their error. Which they did, not for
any Zozom lib. 3. cap. 11.
authority in him, being but one Bishop against so many Bishops, but moved by
the authority of Gods word that be alleged, and from which they swarued. And
as they ha^ like to have erred herein, so erred they in deed, in condemning
those soldiers, who having once professed the faith of Christ, are pressed for
soldiers afterward. Which is contrary to the rule of S. John the baptist,
that allowed the A soldiers life alow^ble among Christians.
life of soldiers as a lawful calling. Neither does Christ in the Centuri^,
nor S. Paul in Cornelius, in Publius, or any other captains or soldiers,
with whom he had to do, and by whose industry he was often saved from danger,
and whom he likewise helped, did ever condemn the vocation of a soldier
under his Prince, as a calling not agreeable to christianity. Likewise the
counsel of Calcedo^, did Council. Calc^don.
well in condemning Eutiches, but in forbidding marriage to Monks, they erred
from the express word of God, that says: Marriage is honorable among all men,
and that every Hebr. 13. 1. Cor. 7.
man might take a wife to avoid fornication, and such wickedness not to be
named, as monks since that restraint have fallen into.

And to bring even a Monks, or an Abbots testimony of your own side,
Panormitane says: Concilium errare Panormitanu^ de electione cap. significasti.
potest, sicut alias errauit super ca^sa matrimon^ contrahendi inter raptam and
raptorem, quando dictum Hi^ronimi fuit postea toti concilio praelatum: A
council may err, as otherwise it erred concerning a cause of matrimony
between the party ravished, and the ra^sher, when as the saying of Hierome
was afterward preferred before an whole council. And if ye refer this to a
Provincial council, the general rule taken from S. Augustine will convince
you, that not only Provincial councels are corrected by general, but also
^psa plaenaria saepe pr^ora posteri^ribus emendantur: oftentimes Aug. contr. Do
natist. li. 3. cap. 4.
even the former general councels are amended of the latter councels.

But how soever this rule was true in S. Augustines days, since that time the
latter general councels have been worsse than the former, and so from worsse to
worsse, are not only become stark naught, but nothing general at al. And
therefore it is not only lawful to abandon them, but we are bound so to do:
as our Savior Christ warns Math. 10.
us: Cauete vobis ab hominibus quontam tradent vos in concihabulis suis: Take
heed to your selves of men, because they will betray you in their councels.

Such councels did S. Paul abandon, when Fes^us offered Act. 25.
him to go up to Jerusalem, and there to be tried in the assembly of the high
Priests. So Athanasius abandoned Examples of (...) nough^e cou^c^ls.
the councels at Lyre, Smirna, and Ephesus* So Maximus abandoned the Council
at Antioche. So Pauiinus abandoned the Council at Milayne. So Chrysostom
abandoned the Council at Constantinople. And so we abandoned the Popes violent
councels at Rome and Trident, that we might say with David, Non consed^ i^
consilio (...), Psalm. 25.
cum (...) non intro^bo, odi ecclesi^m malig^atium, and cum impijs non ^edebo:
I have not sitten in the counsel of vanity, I will not enter in with wicked
doers, I have hated the Church of the malignant, and I will not sit with the
wicked. These Councels we have abandoned, M. Stay. but no general Councels,
wherein all things are tried to be truth or heresies, by the touch of the
word of God, and not by the Popes, the councels or any creatures d^cree
besides. Omnis homo mendax, every man is a liar, and the Psalm 115.
word of God is only the truth of doctrine. Romans 3.


And therefore in all Councels we must cry with the Prophet, Adl^gem, and ad
testimonium Let them r^nne to the Esaias. 8.
law (of God) to the testimony (of his word) quod si ^on d^xerint i^xta
verbum hoc, non er^t eis ^x (...). If the Council declare any thing to be
heresy, not according to the word of God: the morning light, the (...) of
righteousness shall not shine on them, but they shall err in the shadow of
death. But says Ambrose, (...) us Ambrosius.
e^rare non possis, follow the ^pture, that thou may not err. And if the
Council do not follow them, we are made free from following, yea, licen^ed to
abandon and accurse those Councels by your own Canons. S^ quis proh^t vob^
De^r. Gratiani Can S^ ^s q^ p^aest. 11 q ^
quod a Domino (...) est, and rurs^s imper^t fieri quod Dominus prohibet,
exe^rabilis sit ab omnibus qui dil^nt Deum: If any body forbid you that that is
commanded of the Lord, and again, command that thing to be done, that the
Lord has forbidden, let him be accursed of all that love the Lord.

And your Abbote Panormitane wills us so to esteem of Pano^.
your Councels without the scripture, that plus credendum A lay m^n alleging
(...) before a gene^all council.
vel simpli^ l^co (...) q^ toti simul con^: we must more believe, even a
simple lay man alleging the scripture, than all the whole Council together.
And your famous doctor John Gerso^ Chauncelour of the university of Paris,
says, Prima verit^s (...) stat, etc. this John Gerson.
truth stands first, to weete, that any simple man being not authorized,
may be so excellently learned in holy writ, that we must more believe his
assertion in a case of doctrine, than the Popes declaration: because it is
evident, that we must more believe the Gospel, than the Pope. Neither says he
thus for the Pope alone, but even for your Councels, yea for general Councels,
in sacris. etc. We must more believe an excellent learned man in the
scriptures and alleging the catholic authority, than we must believe even a
general Council. Thus by your own doctors, yea by the Pope him self, that
says, no proof ought to Innocentius 3. C. Cum vene. de except.
be admitted against the Scripture, we may and must abandon your Councels,
wherein many things besides, and many things expressly against the Scripture,
are determined for truth, and the express truth of the scripture is
condemned for heresy.

And therefore where ye say, we renounce them only for this cause, because
they ground not them selves on the authority of the Scriptures: ye show a
good cause to clear us of all heresies and errors, and show sufficient cause
withal, why we admit not your Councels now: your obstinate froward
heresies to be such, that ye can not a^ouche for them, nor defend them, by
the holy Scriptures. The authority whereof, if those your Councels do
ad^itte, as did the old general Councels, then the clause in the Act of
Parliament does no more abandon your Councels, than it rejects those four
first, or any other, that ground their proves thereon. But ye have some
better reason belike, why ye set up this fourth mark^ of abandoning the Pope
and his councels, to be exemplified in the old Testament.

Partly, and most of all (say you) I say it for an other clause Sta. 54 a.
in the Act of Parliament, enacting that no foreigne prince spiritual or
temporal, shall have any authority or superiority in this realm, in any
spiritual cause.

Either your fingers itche (master Stapl.) at this clause wherewith ye be
pidling so often, before ye come to the proper place where this is handled more
at large. Or else ye do use the figure of anticipation so mutch, and so
impertinently, to puff up your counterblast withal. But were it the chiefest
cause why ye set up this mark, because we reiecte all foraigne authority:
then has the Bishop hit this The godly kings in the old testament admitted no
foraigne Prelates authority.
mark also at the full, even in all these examples. Except you can on the
other side prove, that these godly Princes admitted in their dominions, the
authority of any foraigne Prelate over them. Of which, till you shall be able
to bring proof, the commanding and directing of their own priests (as is
said before) yea even of the highest Priest of all: is argument sufficient to
infer, that they admitted not any other strange Priest over them (all
strange Priests then being heathen Idolaters) and therefore this clause of
foraigne prelates, is also by the Bishop, out of the old Testament fully
proved.

But say you, The Popes authority ecclesiastical is no Sta. 54. a.
more foraigne to this Realm, than the Catholic faith is foraygne.

You say so, M. Stapl. I will bear ye witness, but ye The Popes power
foraygne.
should prove it, and not say so only. Nevertheless, be it not foraigne,
then is he not excluded by that clause, nor ye need so storm thereat, that it
should be the cause most of all, why ye have said all this, and now ye like
it well enough, saying:

And yet might the Pope reform us well enough for any Sta. 54 a.
thing before rehearsed.

Why rehearsed ye this clause then, and found most fault therewith, since those
words hinder nothing his claim?

Saving that (say you) he is by express words of the statute Stap. 54 a.
otherwise excluded.

How chance your quarrel then, M. Stap. is not at that exclusion? But wilily
ye saw well enough, that he is exempted, even in that he is a foraigne power.
And had his name not been exempted, yet the clause that before t^kled ye so
much (though now ye would make so light thereat) did fully exclude your Pope,
because he is a foraygne power. Or elsefull fondly ye quarrel most at that,
whereat ye had no cause.

Yes, say you, there is a cause why I mislike this clause Stap. 54 a.
against foraigne authority. For then I pray you if any general Council be
made to reform our misbeleefe, if we will not receive it, who shall force us?
And so ye see we be at liberty to receive or not receive any general
Council. And yet might the Pope reform us well inoughe for any thing before
rehearsed.

Now surely M. St. and for any thing here rehearsed by you, the matter is well
help up, and full clerkly have ye answered your own objection* For first,
where ye say: If any general Council be made to reform our misbeleefe: Your
objection hangs altogether on your accustomed presupposall, threaping this
kindness on us, that having re^ected your Pope, we must needs be in
misbelefe: and so reason forward, a petitione princ^ that we must be reformed
therein. Where otherwise, denying first this your presupposall, and urging the
contrary, that the misbeleefe were on your party, in admitting the popes
claim, and al other his errors: then must ye begin a little higher to prove us
in misbeleefe, or else ye ca^ go no further, the fat is in ye fire, and al your
trim devised inconvenience against this clause of the act, is dashed.

But because it were great pity, that so good an heads invention, in
forecasting so great a peril, should not be herd throughout, let us wink at
your misbeleefe, in deeming misbeleefe in us, and suffer you to tell on your
tale, misbeleuing now with you that we are in misbeleefe, what follows? We
must be reformed, say you. And good reason, say I. But tell on.

If any general Counsel be made to reform our misbeleefe, if we will not
receive it, who shall force us? And so ye see we be at liberty, to receive or
not receive any general Council.

Your argument, M. St. after your wo^ted manner, stands al on ifs: If we be in
misbeleefe, we must be reformed: if a general Counsel be made to reform us, we
ought to receive it: if we will not receive it, who shall force us? if we will not
be forced, we be at liberty: if we be at liberty, we may reject it: if we
reject it, we continue in misbeleefe: if we continue in misbeleefe, we shall be
condemned. One if, as is aforesaid, for an Oliver to his Rouland, set against
his first if, ^f we be not in misbeleefe, had turned off all the other ifs. But
having admitted, we were in misbeleefe: is there none other remedy, M. St. but
needs a general Council must be called for us? are we so obstinate, or is
there none other means? yes, thanks be to God, where we have been in deed in
misbeleefe, we have been reformed by our godly Princes, and that without a
general Council.

Which I speak not to the disprayse or dispising of general Councels
(although when they were better kept than they be now, seldom they have had
good sequel, as the ancient fathers complain on them) but I speak against
Greg. Nazian.
the Popish Councels, nothing less than general now, and nothing less than
reforming any errors, but violently so maynteining them, that true general
Councels The Popes Councels not general.
(such as in the old time reformed errors) can not now be summoned. And the
Pope fears, hinders, and stops by all his practices nothing more, than a
very free and general Council, such as the four first general Councels
were. Of which sort admitting there were any called now, admitting also we were
in arror, since that Council would by the only word of God (for so did the
ancient general Councels) convince our error, we might well be reformed
thereby, even by these clauses that ye allege. For such a Council, where our
Prelates True general Councels, are not foraigne power to this or any
Christian realm, nor excluded by the Act of Parliament.
them selves* as well as any other of Christendom, might freely debate the
matter, were no forayne power to us, or to any other Realm in Christendom:
since every Christian Realm should have his free power and liberty therein
alike, to prove or improve by the word of God. And the clause of the statute
abandoneth not, but admits and receives all such Councels either past or to
come, that shall with such freedom, by Gods word, convince us of any heresy
or error that we misbeleeue upon. To say therefore, that by these clauses of
the Act, we set our selves at liberty, to reject simply all general
Councels, it is but the liberty of your slanderous tongue, disposed to bestow
a liberal lie upon us. No, M. Stap. we exempte not our selves from the
authority and determination of any such general Councels* But as we are ready
to admit them with all Christian reverence: so we heartily pray to God, once to
send such an one, as by the infallible word of God, might frankly and truly
determine, whether our Princes and we, or your Pope and you, maintain these
heresies, errors, and misbeleefe, that ye say we do.

The drift of your argument is this: there must be one to force us: whereby ye
mean your Pope. Wherein ye rightly conclude in deed for his part, that he is
a forcer, that is (to speak plain English) a violent Tyrant, perforce to
extorte of men, to yield to his partial Councels. But even for this cause
also we worthily reiecte him and his force, with his enforced conuenticles, as
no general or free Councels, nor orderly called, wherewith he has by the
form of old Councels no more to do, than other Bishops have.

But now where ye say, yet might the Pope reform us well enough, for any thing
before rehearsed. Whether the Pope might reform us or no or how he might do
it, by any his own authority over us, or otherwise, is not yet M. Stapl.
seen. But what the Pope has done, is manifest: How he has not reformed, but
deformed, not only us heretofore, and other places, but even his own Court,
and him self also. Let him first reform him self, his Cardinals, his whores,
his Stews, his simonie, his ambition, his pride, his tyranny, with other his
innumerable abominations, in life and doctrine (who by his claim from Christ
and Peter, should be an ensample and pattern of all godly reformation) and the^
let him move the question, how we may be reformed. This were a more formal
way for him, and for you also, M. Stap. (sith you will needs be writing) to
write to him hereof, meant ye to have your country reformed in deed, and not
deformed by him. And when he has reformed himself in all these things the^
write you over to your countrymen unreformed, that the Pope might reform us
well enough: for otherwise we can not but think he would reform us ill
enough, that can not, or will not once reform him self. But I think I set ye
to long a day, to write over to us of his reformation. Ye might tarry M. Sta.
til the Kalends of Greece, or ever ye see the Kalotes of Rome reformed by him,
or any vice or error besides.

Well, say you, and yet he might reform us well enough, for any thing before
rehearsed.

D^ ye not see M. Stap. how fondly ye have answered al your fo^de warbling? for
if he might still reform us, for all those clauses rehearsed: why rehearsed ye
them, since they were not against him? why have ye made such a do against
them? that by them we abandon him and his councels since he and they be in
statu quo, in the state we were before for all them? Why do ye frame your
argument on your iff^s, of the inconvenience of our liberty thereon, if for
all that we be no more at liberty from him, than we were before? how were they
ouershot that put those words in the act that were to so small a purpose? or
else how has M. St. over shot him self that has traueled thus earnestly to
reason against those clauses as most of all against the Pope, and when all is
rehe^sed in them, are neither to or fro against him?

The fifte false mark that ye set up is this. St. 54. b. Master Stap. fifte
false mark


Now what can ye show that mere lay men should enjoy ecclesiastical livings
as usually they do among you.

This is partly one of the usual lies and sclaunders among you, to term our
Clergy mere lay because we be not of your Romish stamp, oyled, clipped, nor
shaued. But what is this to the question or issue of the state of supreme
government, More lay men among the Pa pists than among us enjoy ecclesiastical
livings.
if any such mere lay men have crept into any ecclesiastical livings? I pray
you were not such both men and boys under your Pope also that enjoyed
ecclesiastical livings, and that with dispensation, and were no
ecclesiastical persons, otherwise than as ye call them students or clerks,
and yet many of them no great clearks neither, but great ruffians not a few,
yea some having abbeys, cardinalships, and bishoprics to the ricks as ye
termed it before, they had, and yet they were not over spiritual pastors. But
ye will say, they were not mere lay men* for at the least they had received,
if not Benet and Collet, yet Primam tonsu^um. As though the giving them a
notche in the head with a pair of (...), made them the more spiritual or
ecclesiastical. But does not Florobellus confess, that the Pope committit
(...) etiam mero laico, commit^eth spiritual things unto mere lay men?

But what manner of spiritual persons the Pope bestowed his ecclesiastical
livings upon, Bernard writing even to the Pope him self, does partly declare.
Ex toto orb Romam confluunt ambitiosi, etc. Out of all the world there Ad
Eugenium (...).
flock unto Rome ambitious men, covetous, Simoniakes, Church robbers, keepers
of co^cubines, committers of incest, and monsters like men, and that by the
Apostolical authority to obtain or retain ecclesiastical promotions.

Thus wrote Barnarde of the holy spiritual company of those in his time that
received and enjoyed ecclesiastical liuinges, even of the Popes holy hands,
four hundredth years ago. And trow ye then, they have not been bestowed far
worsse since that time? He said of them in his time: Ipsa quoque ecclesiastica
dignitatis officia* etc. The ecclesiastical In sermon^ 6. ad Psalm. 91.
offices also of dignity are gone into a filthy lucre, and into an occupation
of darkness, neither is there sought in them any health of souls, but riot
of riches, for this they are clipped, for this they haunt Churches, they
celebrate Masses, they sing Psalms, for Bishoprics, Archdeaconries, Abbeys
and other dignities they strive at this day impudently, to waste the revenues
of the Churches, in uses of superfluity and vanity. It remains that the man
of sin be reveled, the child of perdition, not only the day Devil, but also
the nooneday Devil, who is not only transformed into an Angel of light, but
is extolled above all that is called God, etc. Thus writes he of your Pope, for
bestowing his livings so well.

But alack Bernardus non vidit omnia, Bernard never saw the horrible abuses
that have been since, such livings bestowed on Catami^es to the maintenance of
Sodomitrie. But to let such buggishe abuses pass, except ye give further
occasion: and to speak of that that Kawline co^plaineth upon, taking occasion
of the tempter, taking up Christ and setting him on the pinnacle of the Temple:
In qua ostendit, etc. Wherein (says he) he showed that pride should destroy
Raulinus in quadragesimali. Sermon. 22.
the Church of God, and the desire of honor, even as now we see many, to fly
upon the pinnacle of the Church, without the wings of science and life, and
therefore the Devil carried them. And a little after he faith: Then the learned
did sly, now the ignorant and children fly, like to chickens that will
immediately have a comb so soon as they are out of the shell, these are noble
men that will be mytred and made Bishops being children and unlearned. For the
Devil does many things that God would not do. It is told, how that a certain
Germane having a very vgglie visage, would have obtained of the Pope a certain
benefice being The tale of him that got a benefice of the Pope in the Devils
name.
vacant, but fearing he should not have access to the Pope, neither would he
reveal it to any body else, least he should be defeated of the benefice: came
unto the gates of the Popes palaice, and strongly rapping thereat, when the
porter cha^ing with him, demanded who it was that beat on the gates so
mightily: the vggly Priest answered, I am the Devil, go tell the Pope that I
will speak with him, or else I will enter perforce. The porter trembling and
astonnied, ran and declared all to the Pope. The Pope all trembling, open
(quod he) the door, or else he will enter, all we can not shut him out. When
he was let in, he came to the Popes presence, that trembled for fear: and fell
down at his feet, saying, most holy Father I am not the Devil, but because
to get my benefice, I should not have entered in the name of God, I camme
unto you in the name of the Devil, the Pope hearing this, quickly gave him
what soever he demanded. Whereby it appears that many are carried upon the
pinnacle of the Temple, more in the Devils name than in the name of God. Thus
says (...) a famous Monk and Preacher of your side, for the good enjoying of
ecclesiastical livings usually among you. This is a spirituality in the Devils
name, yet much better wereit, to 8. Q. 1. C. Ve^cor. 2. Q. 7. C. Secuti. 2. Q.
7. August. 2. Q. 7. No^ omnis.
be in the name of God a mee^e lay man: according as your own Canons confess:
that oftentimes lay men are better than Bishops, yea your Bishops are no better
than Dogs, Ravens, Wolves and Asses.

But you will reply that these were abuses, true in deed, so they were.
Howbeit they were never better used, but ever worsse and worsse. Come now to
those that were counted no a^uses among you, but allowed: what say you by Mo^ks
in times past were but ^ay.
your ^ay brethren, among your holy ones of religion? Yea all the Monks that
were in the old time, were counted ^ay* What say ye by the Templers, and after
them the Knights of the Roades, and Prussia? but to let go them, and other
(...) brethren. If it were demanded, whether your Priests, Bishops, Caroinals,
yea your Pope him self, with all his ecclesiastical The popish priests and
Bishops were ^ay.
livings, were any thing else than mere lay, and clean without all
spiritualnesse, concerning Gods spirit, I think it would come to a Qu^
potest, and be a question disputable, whether his Holiness, for all his triple
crown, and other ecclesiastical livings and titles, were any Bishop, or any
member of Christ's Church or no, even by your ecclesiastical Canons, of which
one begins: No^ omne^ episcopi sunt episcopi, al Bishops are not Bishops.
etc. 2. Q 7. Likewise Bernard the Canonist says Spiritualis gladius ex leui
Bernardus Glossator in ca. St clericus.
causa non tantum per alios. etc. the spiritual Sword, moving and nourishing
wars of a light cause, not only by other but also by it self, contrary to
right, is become a soldiers Sword. Erasmus says, the Popes them selves are
rather the successors Erasm. Ch^ad.
of such as Julius Caesar, of Alexander, Xerxes, Croesus, and of mighty
thieves, than the Apostles successors. And that there are none so pernicious
enemies to the Church as the Encom. moriae.
wicked Popes, that suffer in silence Christ to grow out of knowledge, and
tie him to gainefull laws, and deflowre him with wrested interpretations, and
murder him with their pestilent life.

Call ye these spiritual bishops, or rather as Christ said, thieves and
robbers, painted sepulchers, ravening wolves, or as he called Judas the Devil
him self? For why, being thus degenerate from the office of a Bishop, should
they have the name of bishops? as their own law says. Si repriueris nec nome^
habere mereris, It thou want the thing* thou deseruest not the name. And as
Christ him self does say, If the salt have lost his saltness what shall be
seasoned therewith, Math. 5.
it is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out and to be trodden down
of men: These are the spiritual Pastors of the popish Church, yeathe Popes
them selves being worsse than lay men, and yet will be Lords of all
ecclesiastical livings, and lay men's livings too. But I will reserve this
matter till ye be disposed to commune further thereon, for they touch nearer the
ouerthrows of your Popes claim, and more decipher the hauiour of his Clergy,
than they come near the issue of the Princes government.

The sixte mark that ye set up is this: What good induction Stapl. 54. b. The
sixth false mark of M. Stapl.
can ye bring from the doings of the Kings of the old law, to justify that
Princes now may make Bishops by letters Patents, and that for such and so long
time as should please them, as either for term of years, months, weeks or
days.

What an impudent and too too shameful a sclaunderer you may be marked to be,
appears by this mark M. St. If Bishops have their letters patents from the
Prince, for their Bishoprike, had they them not also from Princes, even in the
most popish time? but that they are made for such terms as ye write, you
wilfully belie your Sovereign. The Prince in deed at all times, if they do
not their duty (and so shall be thought unworthy) may orderly remove, inhibite,
or punish them. And of this the Bishop has alleged good proof in the old
Testament. And yet if there were no proof of it there, what matter can ye make
thereon, that your Popes did not practice? who licenced, deposed, restrained,
limited, and that for such and so long time, as should please them. As
Florobellus says of the Florobellus de principal* romans eccl. ex bald. 6. q.
1. c. pastoralis.
Pope, Item facere potest Praelatum ad tempus, He can also make a Prelate for a
time. And can ye find such bulls of lead from the doings of the high Priest
of the old law? If ye can not, this mark ouerturnes your Popes supremacy,
more than it comes any thing nere the Queens.

The Seventh mark. What good motive can ye gather Stapl. 54. b. M. Staplet.
7. false mark.
by their regiment, that they did visit Bishops and Priests, and by their
laws restrained them to exercise any jurisdiction over their flocks, to
visit their slockes, to reform them, to order or correct them without their
especial authority and commission thereunto, yea to restrain them by an
inhibition from preaching, which ye confes^e to be the peculiar function of
the Clergy, exempted from all superiority of the Prince.

This mark has two parts. For the former (so far as ye say true) the
Bishop has gathered good motives by their regiment, that they did visit
Bishops and Priests, A Bishops jurisdiction.
and by their laws restrained them, to exercise any jurisdiction over their
flocks, to visit their flocks, to refourme to order and correct them, without
their especial commission thereunto, for what else was their ordeyning and
allowing them, their commanding, ordering, appointing and directing them?
Except ye mean hereby (for ye sp^ake it very subtlely) that the Bishops could
do none of those functions, that belonged to their office, after they were
appointed thereto by the Prince, but that for every thing they must have a
special commission: and than it is a captiouse sclaunder, the Prince does not
so. But what belongs to the Prince herein, and what to the Bishop, in either
of their Jurisdictions: is to be considered in the fourth book. Saving that
still ye will augme^t your counterblast, by the way of prevention.

Your other part of this mark, is a manifest sclaunder. The Prince
restrayneth no Bishop nor preacher with any simple inhibition from his office
of preaching, but Secundum Preaching not simply forbidden to preachers.
quid, inhibiting your popish seducers, from preaching their traditions and
erroneous doctrines, such false Prophets as Christ bids us beware of. If ye
would preach the only truth, ye might have good leave to preach it. Now, to
stop the mouths of false Idolatrouse Priests, the Bishop in these examples
has brought good proof hereof: no preaching is simply forbidden, but
Papists, sectaries, and other of noughtie or suspected life or doctrine, and
therefore where in the margin ye bidd^ your reader Note, here is nothing for
him to note, but your notorie^se lie, and your notable argument that ye make
thereon:

Preaching is the peculiar function of the Clergy exempted from the Prince:

Ergo, The Prince has not authority to restrain a noughtie preacher, nor to
inhibite him from preaching false doctrine. Prove your argument a little better
M. Stapleton, and then bid us note it, else is there little to note in it, but
much to note in you.

For your Eight mark say you: What? think ye Staplet. 8. fal^e mark. Stapl
54 b.
that ye can persuade us also that Bishops and Priests paid their first
fruits and tenthes to their Princes, yea and that both in one year, as they
did for a while in King Henry's days? Verily Joseph would not suffer the very
heathen Priests (which only had the bare names of Priests) to pay either
tithes or fines to Pharao their Prince, yea rather he found them in time of
famine upon the common store.

This mark Master Stapleten, of paying first fruits Tenthes and First fruits
to the Prince.
and tenthes to the Prince, is both wide from the Bishops mark, and mere
frinolouse. For supposing they paid none, yet this supreme government still
remained entiere and whole to the Prince: nor the paying it to the Prince,
makes him supreme governor any whitte the more. It was an order taken, ye
know, in the time of your Popes superstition, and that not long since neither,
under pretense of helping the Church in her wars against the Saracens, but in
very deed to enriche the Popes coafers, although he claymed it, not by any
title of Supremacy, but as the keeper of the Churches hutche. And since by
continuance grew to an ordinary custom, as a fee unto him. And afterward
(his usurpation here being removed) this Tenths and First fruits far better
bestowed on the Prince than on the Pope.
was also thought good, to be better and more profitably bestowed on our own
natural liege, and true supreme governor within our own realm, than on a
foreyne usurper, to mainteyne his whores and pomp, and to empouerish the
realm, and beat us with our own goods. And had it been otherwise disposed, or
remitted, the Prince not withstanding had been full supreme governor. But is
it so haynouse a matter now for a Prince to receive tenths or first fruits?
did not I pray you, even by your Popes dispe^sations and bulls, Princes
receive them diverse times before? and if they may receive them with his
bulls, why may they not receive them (being given by order of the owners) even
without his bulls also?

Now, since ye can make no good argument on the ordinary paying of tenthes or
first fruits, to prove your Popes, nor to improve the Princes supremacy,
think ye it a good reason to argue, from an extraordinary fact on some
occasion or consideration, to subuerte an ordinary authority? You say they
paid both in one year to King Henry. Were ye not disposed to wrangle and
misconster every fact odiously, ye would not urge your reason thus M.
Stapleton. For admit ought were amiss therein by oversight or ever the
inconvenience were espied and amended, as after ye grant it was; which was
eue^ the next year following: what is this to the impayring of his supreme
authority? if their receiving of the tenthes and first fruits be allowable as
even your Popes have allowed the same. What ca^ye make of the double receipt?
saving that he received more than he should that year of duty have received,
if ye make the worst of it. And yet thereby it follows, that he might have
received them, as he afterward did, and as the Prince now receives them. But
have ye never read of the Popes dubbling, trebling, quadrupling, and extreme
excessive increasing of payments upon payments, not one year but every year,
with continual and insatiable polling of the clergy in times past? But this
could ye not remember. Your remembrance serves ye like the horns of a
snayle, ye can stretche it out, and pull it in as it pleases you. But the
Chronicles that ye pretend to have read, and quote so fast, cry out of the
Popes insatiable dropsy, and infinite practices to get gold and silver. And
where finds he such priestly supremacy in all the old Testament?

The argument wherewith you confirm your mark against the Princes receiving
thereof, is yet more fond and faulty.

Joseph would not suffer the heathen Priests to pay either The Papists ar
gume^t of ^osephes immunitie to the Egiptian priest^. Genesis 47.
tithes or fines.

Ergo, The Christian Clergy must not suffer themselves to pay tenthes or
first fruits to their Christian Princes.

This argument is more Heathenish than christianlike (M. Stapl.) or student
like either, but good inoughe for the popish Clergy to ground them selves
upon. Think ye the doings of Joseph in dealing with those heathen Idolaters,
to be a fit rule to le^el Christian Princes duties, toward their Priests and
people? or do ye think that Joseph did give this immunitie to the Priests,
more than to the people, to mainteyne those Priests the better, because they
were Priests, having only the bare name of Priests (as ye say well therein)
and so being false Priests, and setters out of Idolatry, that they should
have more immunities, liberties and wealth than others had? you will make
Joseph belike a very holy Patriarch.

But perchance ye have espied a greater affinity between The affinity
between the Popish priests, and the Egiptian priests.
those Egiptian Priests, and your romish Priests than every body was aware of.
And therefore ye reason substantially from their prerogatives unto yours. Is it
because ye fetch your shaven crowns from them, or at least that they had
shorn heads as you have? as witnesses Alexander ab Alexa^dro, Apud Aegiptios
qui sacra ministra^t sacerdotes G^ialium Dierum. li. 2. cap 8.
capite rasi sunt. The priests among the Egiptians that minister the holy
sacrifices are shaven on the head. Or is it because the most of your masking
trinkets came from thence? or is it because of your Egiptiacall darkness and
ignorance that ye kept all people in? or is it because all your religion lay in
mystical figures, and as they dispising ordinary letters, had their
Hierogliphicall mysteries and signs, whereby they set forth their meaninges:
so you dispising Gods word, and all good letters, your whole religion
consists in mysteries, signs and gestures? or is it because the Egiptian
priests Idolatry, and the Popish priests Idolatry, is the grossest of all
others, and the most bestiall? or is it because, as Rauistus Textor tells, of
the likeness between your religious Heremites, Anachor^, and Friars: and their
priests called Sarabaytae? of whom he says, Habitabant In Epithetis textorn.
in foraminibus petrarum, induti porcor^m and boum pellibus, cincti funsbus,
discalciati, and sanguine cruentati, cauerni^ demum exeuntes pa^pertatem and
abstmentiam predicabant, and barbam spectante populo sibi per^ellebant,
nummisque tali astu and comme^to adeptis, remeabant in suas speluncas, and in
summa laetitia furtim dapibus epulabantur. They dwelled in the holes of rocks
(like your ankers and recluses) clad with hogs skins and ox hides (like your
heremites) girte with cords and barefoote (like your friars) besprent with
blood (like your Spanish whippers) coming abroad out of their dens they
preached poverty, and abstinence (like your limitors) they pulled away their
beards in the sight of the people (like your popish shauelings) and by this
craft and devise getting money, they returned to their dens and in great mirthe
they privily made good cheer. So like, the one almost in every jot, is to the
other. Or is it because your Ladies chaplains and maiden priests, were so like
the single priests of Isis? Or is it because your Nuns were so like their
women priests? or is it for that your priests have claymed such authority
above their princes, to take from them their estates, and realms, yea and
their lives at their pleasures, as did the Ethiopian priests at Mer^e: of whom
says Diodorus Diodorus Siculus de rebus antiquis. li. 4. cap. 1.
Siculus, Adeo superstitione impleuerunt hominu^ animos, vt no^nunquam misso
nuncio, necem reg^ Aethiops^ demandare^t, nullo detracta^te, a^t mandatu^
i^ssionemue abnegan^e. Superstition did so much fill the minds of men, that
the priests sending a messenger, would oftentimes command the king of Ethiopia
to be killed, and nobody forslacked his commandment, nor refused his bidding
Even a right popish supremacy, M. St. And thus they handled at their
commandment christian Princes, and the superstitions people were so
bewitched, that none durst fores^acke or refuse (even against their natural
Princes) to satisfy the tyranny and commandment of the Pope.

A great many causes more might be suspected, why ye pretend so much for
your immunities, the privileges of the heathen priests, they are so like unto
your popish priesthood, but I spare the reader. Nevertheless, what cause
soever moves you to write so favorably for the Egiptian Priests, none of these
causes, or any other maintenance of Idolaters moved Joseph: nor that any other
such like priesthood to come, should take hereat any such prerogative, of
being exempt from all fines to their princes. The reason that moved Joseph is
apparent in the text. He took the fifth part of the peoples fruits, because
before, they held the^ not of their king: but the priests living was
altogether of the kings gift and finding. And therefore they paid no portion to
the king, but the king allowed the^ all the portion they had. But this, yt all that they had to live upon was of ye kings gift, you quite forgot (which
argues their subjection to him) and ye reason upon their privilege. Where ye
sh^ld note withal, that al those and other their privileges and livings, came
from and depe^ded on the king. And the^ see how fit a mark thereby ye ca^ set
up, against the Princes government over priests.

Your Ninth and last mark is yet more fond and confused M. S^a. Ninth false
mark.
than all the rest besides, wherein ye demand of the Bishop, saying:

Are ye able (suppose ye) to name any one king that wrote St^p. 54. b.
him self supreme head of the Iewishe Church, and that in all causes as well
spiritual as temporal, and that caused an oath to the priests and people (the
nobility only exempted) to be tendered, that they in conscience did so
believe, and that in a woman prince to, yea and that under pain of praemunire
and plain treason too?

Me thinks ye play huddle now in the latter end, M. St. six or seven marks
together in one: For the title of supreme head, for receiving the oath, for the
persons receiving it, the persons exempted, the manner of receiving it, the
Princes person, and the penalty of the refusal. All these matters on a plumpe
for haste, come in one liuerie, with the cognizance of your Ninth mark: how
near the issue between the Bishop and M. Feckenham, I remit to the view of
others. To all these demaundes, because ye are in have, and therefore thrust
them out on an heap together, that the one might be a cloak to the other, I
will briefly answer them as they lie. To your first demand, for the Title,
think ye this a good argument:

No king of the Jews wrote this title of supreme head The title of supreme
head.
or governor:

Ergo, No king of the Jews was so?

By the same argument, no king of England before king Henry wrote him self,
Defender of the faith, neither any king of the Jews wrote that title: Ergo,
None of them were defenders of the faith.

And by the same argument, your holy Father might leese a ioly Uicarige, that
he claymeth from Christ and Peter, for neither of them wrote such titles as he
does: nor the high Priest in the old Testament wrote any such style as he
does.

Ergo, he claymeth his supremacy from them in vain. But this is a vain
argument, if you can prove, not the title, so much an the matter, the thing
and effect of the title to come from them to him: no man will stand with you
in the style, but grant your Pope his claim. This can you not do, and
therefore your Pope^tytle is but vain. But this, for the Princes supreme
government, the Bishop has named the Princes in the old Testament, and fully
proved it: that in matter, thing and effect, they took upon them this supreme
governance, that the Queens Majesty justly claymeth now. And this being
proved, as before: till ye can improve this, what babble ye of the title? and
yet since ye can bring no sufficient proof of your Popes title neither, why
makes this argument more against the Prince, than it does against the Pope?

Your second quarrel is at the oath, but the content thereof The oath of the
Supremaci^.
(as is proved) being true, why ought they not to swear thereto: yea though
there were in the old Testament no such ensample of an oath ministered by the
Prince to his subjects? And yet we read how Josias swore al his subjects to the
Lord. But ye will say, this oath is not for the Prince to swear them to Gods
religion, but to his estate. If his estate be dutiful by gods religion, is he
not thereby also sworn thereunto? And why then, may not the Prince for his more
assurance, make an especial oath thereof, so well as a general? But was it
lawful for your Pope to swear them to his undue supremacy, and is it not
lawful for the prince in a matter so due unto him? If you still urge, a plain
manifest ensample to be showed you, where in express words such an oath was
then required: I pray you (and you will not deal partially M. Stap*) show you
another example, where the high Priest of the Jews, required such an oath of
the Clergy, as your Pope did minister to those under him.

To that ye stand on the tendering the oath to the Priests Tendering the oath.
and the people, and to aggrauate the matter, as partial, say, the Nobility
be exempted: partly is fond, and partly false. For, the Nobility, or any
other, in certain offices are not exempted. But see the proud orgulous heart
of this Priest, how he picketh quarrels against the Noibilitie, because herein
they have any prerogative over his priestly order.

But he makes a matter in that the oath is, that they in Charging the (...)
with the oath.
conscience did so believe, as though they could swear thereto, and can not
believe it in their consciences. Belike master Stapleton your popish Priests
make good other, and have good consciences and beleefes, that can swear to a
thing, and have no conscience: or can have conscience, and not believe it so to
be as ye swear. It is to be feared that some of your order have so done.
Whether you have done so or no, I will not say, for I know not your dealing,
nor am over curious to search out your old reckonings. But I think some of
your good masters are not all in clean life thereof.

Your outcrie at a woman's Prince to have this Title, A woman Prince.
yea and that (say you) in a woman Prince to: shows your impudent spite
against your most gracious sovereign, and withal, your impudent folly. A
woman Prince to? say you. If a Prince, Master Stap. and why not a woman Prince
to? Will ye grant her to be a Prince, and take from her the duty, that these
ensamples show, does belong unto a prince? Therefore, either ye must deny
that a woman may be a prince, or else grant this authority, yea to a woman
prince to. And does not the Scripture commend, yea a woman Prince to, to
suppress Idolaters and tyraunts, to govern and judge Gods people? And why may
not now a woman Prince to, deliver us (as the Queens Majesty has done) from
the yoke of a greater tyrant, and all his Idolaters to? and punish to such
obstinate and traiterous resisters of her godly power, as you and your sect are
to? yea and that under pain of praemunire and plain ^reason to?

These are the Nine marks which master Stapleton sets new up. Of which
how wise soon be, how slanderous other some, and how wide all be from the
^ue in question: I remitte to the indifferent Readers judgment. For mine own
part, as I saw the shameless dealing of this student, studying with all his
endeavor ^oelude the Bishops ensamples, and to deceive the Reader with these
tryfles: so was I half ashamed to have answered them any thing, being
altogether unworthy of any answer, knowing that to the wise, folly detectes
it self. But least any one should be deceyue^ by this false aim giver, I
have somewhat more largely showed his dealing in these marks, than otherwise I
would. And yet as the impudency of this man may further move occasion,
hereafter he may perhaps hear more than he or his fellows would that all
the world should see. Only now it suffices to have showed the
insufficiency of his arguments, and to have cleared from his cauillations,
these ensamples of the Bishops, recorded in the old testament. Whereof the
Bishop Master Feck. demand satisfied in every one of the foresaid examples.
mentioned not one, that proved not Master Feckenhams demand and issue: Any
such supreme government, as has the Queens majesty. And therefore M.
Stapletons conclusion, is like the residue of his Nine marks, if it be not
rather most fond of all. And saving his rhetoric, railing, scoffs, and his
vain triumphing before the victory, is nothing else but words of course.

O Master Horn (says he) your manifold untruths are St. fol. 55. a.
deciphered and vnbuckeled, ye are espied, ye are espied, I say, well enough,
that ye come not by a thousand yardes and more nigh the mark. Your Bow is to
weak, your arms to feeble, to shoot with any your commendation at this mark:
yea if ye were as good an Archer, as were that famous Robin Hoode, or little
John. Well, shift your Bow, or at the least wise your String. Let the old
Testament go, and proceed to your other proofs, wherein we will now see if
you can shoot any streighter. For hitherto ye have shot all awrie, and as a
man may say, like a blind man. See now to your self from henceforth that
ye open your eyes, and that ye have a good eye, and a good aim to the mark
we have set before you. If not, be you assured we will make no courtesy
eftsoons to put you in remembrance. For hitherto ye have nothing proved that
Princes ought, which ye promised to prove, or that they may take upon them
such government, as I have laid before you, and such as ye must in every
part justify, if either ye will M. Feckenham shall take the oath, or that ye
entende to prove your self a true man of your word.

This were a hard matter for you to prove your self to be Master Stapleton, a
true man of your word, having now been taken tardie in your words with so
many open lies. And even here with no less impudency, ye would have the
Bishop in every part to justify, not such issue as he joined in with master
Feckenham, but such as you in every part do falsify. Did the Bishop promise to
master Feckenham, to prove that Princes ought or may take upon them such
government as you have laid before him? Or did master Feckenham request any
such proof? or not rather, Any such government as the Queens majesty does
clay me and take upon her. This is the right mark that they have set before
them, and not these marks that (say you) we have set before you. You assure us
that ye will make The Papists courtesy.
no courtesy. But ye need not assure us hereof master Stapleton, we will
believe you without assurance, that ye know little courtesy, and can make less,
nor ye will make any if ye could. Little courtesy (except butcherly courtesy)
have we felt of your stiffenecked and froward generation, and less we look
for, and none we crave at your discourteous and unmerciful hands, although more
mercy and courtesy be showed to you. Yet though ye assure us of no courtesy,
ye might and should assure us of truth and honesty: of which if we can have
no assurance of you, be ye assured again, master Stapleton ye shall get as
little credit, as we shall get little courtesy.

But to win you better credit: in your vain triumphant Robin Hood and Little
John.
conclusion, ye knit up al your Nine marks with Robin Whood and little John,
lacking but one of your Popes Courtisanes, and some Louaine Franciscan, to have
played Friar Luck, and maid Marian, and so to have made up the full mess.
Might not a man say for (O M. Horn) O Master Stap. these toys are full
unsitting and naught to the purpose to or fro. And for all ye cry he shootes
awrie like a blind man, though a blind man can not see to shoot, yet could
a beetle blindman both hear, and think small wisdom, in such great boast,
and well perceive, that the only turning of O master Stapleton, for O master
Horn, would hitte you so little a wrie, even with your own words, that there
needs no further answer.

The. 18. Division.
Now where the Bishop alleged out of the old testament Fol. 55. a. b.
all these foresaid ensamples: and master Feck. under the pretense of Christ's
gospel, restrayning himself to the new Testament, goes about thereby, to
clude and shake of all the Bishops ensamples of the old Testament: The Bishop
proves this to be the very shift and practice of the Donatistes, denying that
Princes ought to entermeddle in ecclesiastical matters, as now ye Papists
deny the same. Who when they were urged by the learned fathers Saint Augustine
and other, with such like ensamples as the Bishop has alleged out of the
old testament, they rejected them, and would have all examples restrained to
the new testament, as here does master Feckenham, which the Bishop shows to
have been (as Saint Augustine calls it) An odious and wicked guile of the
Donatistes: and thereon concludes, that either he must shun such heriticall
shifts, or else, that following the very error, defense, shift and pattern of
the Donatists, he bewrays him self therein to be a covert Donatist.

The effect of master Stapletons Counterblast to this, Stapleton. The. 16. chap.
is divided into six parts. The first, is an inuectiue against the order of
the Bishops writing. The second, is a clearing of master Feckenham to be no
heretic. The third, is a returning of his charge of heresies to us. The
fourth, an enumeration and conference of diverse heresies with our doctrine.
The fifth, a reuersing to us of the crime wherewith master Feckenham is charged
to follow the Donatists, in diverse points resembling us to them, and them to
us. The sixth and last, a removing of those motives, whereby the Bishop charged
M. Feckenham to play the Donatists part.

In the first part, or ever he enter into the matter, he makes as it were a
Preface against the Bishops dealing, which is twofolde: the former, for
proceeding in his matters out of order.

Hither good Reader (says Master Stapleton) Master Stap. 56. a.
Horn although untruly, yet has he somewhat orderly proceeded. But in that
which follows until we come to the. 20. leaf, beside most impudent and
shameful lies, wherewith he would deface master Feckenham, he prosecuteth his
matter so confusedly and unorderly, leaping in and out I cannot tell how, nor
whether: that I verily think that his wits were not his own, being
perchance encombred with some his domestical affairs at home, that he could
not gather the^ together, or that he the less passed, what an hodge potch he
made of his doings, thinking which is like, that his fellows Protestants
would take all things in good gree, knowing that poor master Feckenham was
shutre up close enough from all aunswering. And thinking that no Catholic else
would take upon him to answer to his lewd book.

To that ye begin with, master Stapleton, to challenge the Bishop for untruth,
yea, most impudent and shameless lies: till ye name them, and so prove them,
the best answer thereto, is to give it a wispe, and place it in your common
places of scoldes black rhetorike, and so let it alone. As for the Bishops
unorderly proceeding, (howbeit ye confess that hitherto he has somewhat
orderlike proceeded) in that which follows, ye say he prosecuteth his matters
so confusedly. etc. that you think his wits were not his own.

Were not your wits overmuch your own, M. Stap. you would never wittingly
have let your wit cast forth such vnwittie and unorderly speeches to your
better. But I will say somewhat yet more gentlier of you: that I verily Master
Stap. objection of wit.
think herein your w^ts were altogether your own, and therefore ye are the more
to be borne withal. Otherwise, if your wits had taken the advice of some
other of your confederates wits, they would perchance have counseled you
more wittily, not to accuse any of such foul confusion, disorder, leaping in
and out, and making an hodge potch: and not tell at al wherein he confounds
or disordreth his matter. And they would peradventure withal have advised
you, to mark this rule your self, and to beware that you allege every thing
in his proper place, not to wrappe up in a clutter so many things under one,
nor to make one thing to seem so many. Not to prevent your matter so often
before it come, nor to repeat it so often being ^ast, all to increase your
volume. Many other things about your common places they would perhaps have
told you, if ye had taken some of their wits to counsel and not to much have
trusted on your own, they would at the least have charged you, not to challenge
another for wit, (your self therein being nothing comparable in all wise men's
judgments, even of your own side that know both him and you) least while ye
stand so much on wit, ye show your self not so wise as witty, not yet so
witty as your self ween ye be, or your friends and I for my part would
wish ye were, so that ye employed it better than ye do.

The conjectures that ye gather of his disorder, that he was encombred with
some his domestical affairs at home, that he thought his fellows protestants
would take all things in good gree. That M. Feckenham was shut up close enough
from answering. That he thought no Catholic else would take upon him to
answer his lewd book: All these are nothing else but the lewd imaginations
which that witty pate of yours has maliciously conceived M. Stay.

The third quarrel is: That the Bishop proceeds Stap. 56. a.
not now to the new Testament. I had thought, Master Horn (say you) that
from the old Testament, ye would have gone to the new Testament: and would
have labored to have established your matters thereby: belike the world goes
very hard with you in that behalf, that ye do not so: saving that here and
there ye iumble in a testimonye or two, I can not tell how, but how
vnhandesomelye and from the purpose, yea against your own self, that I wo^e
well, and ye shall anon hear of it also.

Yea, well said Master Stapleton, and tell him so to, let him hear of it
thoroughly, both here and there to, for so you shall the better increase your
Counterblast. But will ye tell it him anon in very deed? Then I pray you,
where, and how, master Stapleton, will you tell it him? Where? even here and
there, where he iumbleth in a testimony or two, I can not tell how. Can ye
not tell how master Stapleton he alleges them? then I think ye will answer
them ye can not tell how, full vnhandsomly and from the purpose, can ye tell
what? Well, I had thought master Stapleton, your wits being your own, they had
been more circumspect than I perceive they be. And that your memory could have
made one lie, to have hanged better to another. For how hanges this together:
ye will answer him, where here and there he iumbleth in a testimony or two,
out of the new Testament: and that ye say: I had thought master Horn, from
the old Testament, ye would have gone to the new Testament, and would have
labored to have established your matters thereby, belike the world goes very
hard with you in that behalf, that ye do not so? When M. St. quarrels at the
Bishops testimonies out of the new testament.
your self even in the next words confess, that he does so out of the new
Testament also. Here and there (say you) he iumbleth in a testimony or two.
Wherefore does he this, but to labor to establish his matters thereby?

Tushe say you, he does it but here and there a testimony or two. Had it
been but one testimony, M. Stap. it had been enough to prove you a liar: nor
the truth, nor force of the truth, consists in numbers of testimonies, one
true testimony were enough, had he no more. But ye confess, he had a
testimony or two, yea and that here and there a testimony or two, and I
think, when ye cast your account, there will be found more than three or
four, and so again prove your self a liar.

But say you, he does b^t iumble them in. Howsoever he iumble them in, M. St.
beware you they tu^ble not out your cause, for the iumbling in of the^, has
proved you already to have mu^bled up a lie, and a contr^tion to your own tals.

But ye say, he did it, ye can not tell how. I think the same M. St. And
therefore as I said before, ye could not tell how ye answered, nor how ye
contraried your self. For howsoever he did it, he did therein go from the old
testament to the new testament, which you both deny and grant, ye can neither
tell how, nor where, nor what. And therefore to conclude with your own words,
belike the world goes very hard with you in that behalf. For shame, M. Sta.
vpbraide not their wits unto others, and so much ouerth^te your own.

The second part is the clearing of M. Feckenham to be no heretic, consisting
on two parcels, the one altogether on railing and scorns.

In the mean while (say you) it is worth the labor, well Sta. 56. b.
to consider the excellent pregnant wit, and great skill of this man, who
has in the former treatise of master Feckenham, espied out (which surely the
wisest and best learned of all the world, I trow, besides master Horn,
would never have espied, such a special grace the man has given him of his
master the Devil, of mere malice, joined with like folly) that M. Feckenham
is an heretic and a Donatist.

Whosoever be the Donatist, every reader may see, how M. St. shows him self
a plain scoffing Lucianist, vaunting his wit, and despising all others, like a
perte Pharisee, in the mean season, answering nothing to the matter. And
therefore let this go to his proper common place.

The other parcel is to clear M. Fe. by occasion of that the bishop said, he
bewrayed his secret heresies. M. St. catches hold of this word secret.

But yet (says he) M. Feck. is somewhat beholding to him, Stap. 56. b.
that he says M. Fe. has bewrayed his secret heresies: wherein he says for
the most part truly, for if there be any heresy at all in this matter,
surmised upon him, as certainly there is none, it is so secret and privy, that
Argus him self with all his eyes shall never epsy it, no nor M. Horn him
self, let him prye never so narrowly.

Were it even so secret as ye devise master Stapl. yet M. Feck. secret heresies.
being secret, then it is: contrary to that ye affirm (as certainly there is
none) whereas certainly there is one, and must needs be, if it be secret. Yea
and be it a great deal more secret than ye ween, though Argus with all his
eyes could not epsy it, yet there is an espier, even he that saw the
Pharisees thoughts, and sercheth the reins, Math. 9. Ierem. 17.
and from whom no secrets are hid: he that sees al your secret practices and
conspiracies, even he sees all your secret heresies. Tush say you with the
wicked, the Lord sees not. But, he that made the eye, shall he not se^? Yes,
M. Sta. he Psalm. 93.
sees them, and has so detected them, that there need no Argus eyes. The
bishop sees them, and sets them out, that all the world may see and stare upon
them: Yea thanks be given to the opener of all secrets, this Donatisticall
dealing in rejecting the princes authority in eccl. matters, and M. Feck.
refusal of the examples of the old testament: if there were no body else to
reveal the same, not only M. Feck him self has openly bewrayed, but M.
Dorman also, and other your accomplices. Although therefore ye think ye be not
espied, because ye dance in a net, and play boopeepe, see me, see me not:
yet this your dealing both bewrayes it self, and is daily more and more made
apparent by others, to the view of all men's eyes.

The third part of this answer is a retorting of this crime of heresies unto
us.

Wherefore on the other side (says he) M. Horn and his Stap. 56. b.
fellows, and his masters Luthers and Caluines heresies, are no secret nor
simple heresies, but so manifold and so open, that they have no way or shift
to save their good name and honesty, blotted and blemished for ever (without
repe^ta^ce) for the obstinate maintenance of the same. VVherof many were many
hundredth years since condemned, partly by the holy fathers, partly by general
Councels.

Nothing of this being hitherto proved, but barely avouched, it may stand (M.
Stap.) for words of course, till ye bring some proof thereof.

As for that ye add in distinct letters, how the Bishop says: The Donatistes
are the Catholics ancestors: ye deprave the bishops words to aggrauate the
matter: he spoke the quite contrary, that the Donatistes were rather ye
Catholics enemies, who rising against them, yet clothed the^ selves with the
name of catholics, as do you like unto the^, neither of ye both, papists nor
Donatistes, being catholic, otherwise tha^ as I told ye before, of your
catholic hostess at Oxeforde: a catholic woman, that is to say, a common
queen. The bishop said, that herein M. Feck. was a Donatist, and so he
proves him, till you shall improve it. In which challenge he strayeth not from
the butt, of the princes supreme government. And having occasion therein, to
note his like subtle dealing, to elude all the examples of the old Testament,
he charge him therewith, and goes no further, as you do, shooting so wide
from the mark without any eye or aim thereto, which right now in your ruff ye
called upon so hastily, and now so soon your self have so far forgotten,
that where ye should couch you only to this matter, wherein M. Feck. not
impertinently is burdened, and you are hired to clear him: ye let go the
clearing of him, and snatch occasion thereat, to charge us again with a number
of other heresies.

Good sir (say you) may it please you favorably to hear, Sta. 56. b.
you and your masters honorable pedigree, and of their worthy feats and
prowess. You have heard of them before perhaps, and that by me. But such
things as may edify the Catholic, and can never be answered by the Heretic,
Decies repet^ta placebunt.

How should your book, M. St. arise to so fair a volume, but by such vain
extrauagant tenfolde repetitions. But ye say, ye will repeat them so often,
because they may edify the catholic, and can never be answered by the
heretic. Whosoever be the catholic, it is to be feared some of them will
detecte your self, to be the heretic that ye mean we be. To that ye say, we
can not answer them, though we have heard of them before, and that by me, say
you: this is but your fond vaunting of your self, and of your paltrie works,
M. Stap. All which is besides the matter here in question, and therefore
deserves not the answering. Howbeit, for the most part, as it is objected
often and full peeuishly, by other likewise of your side: so is it answered
again on our part, and as yet remaynes unanswered unto of you. Nevertheless,
because either the importunity of your extreme craking, might seem to
enforce a further answer: or else your gentle mockery, and buxome entreatie,
might not seem worthy to be rejected, saying so courteously, good sir may it
please you favorably to hear you and your masters honorable pedigree. Go to
therefore M. St. though it be altogether impertinent, let us hear a Gods name
what ye have to charge us with, and we will see, how we can answer thereto:
and shall we say as you said before? see ye lie not, for it ye do, be ye
assured we will make no courtesy Supra. 55 a.
eftsoons to put ye in remembrance. Though ye spoke those words to him, of
straying from the mark, and here your self stray so far therefrom.

To come therefore to the fourth part, which is a rerecharge to us, of a
number of ancient heresies.

How say you then (says M. Stapl.) to the great heretic The Heresies that the
papists falsely charge us withal. August and Epiph. de haeres. Hier. contra
Iouiniam. Ambr. Li. 10. Epi. 18. Ambros. sermon. 91.
Aerius the Arian, that said there was no difference between Priest and
Bishop, between him that fasted and that did not fast, and that the sacrifice
for the dead was fruitless? How say you to Iouinian that denied virginity to
have any excellency above Matrimony or any special reward at Gods hands?
to the Arians that denied the miracles done at Saints tombs to be true
Miracles, and that the Martyrs can not cast out the Devils, and relieve them
that be possessed? To the Bogomiles that said the Devils sat at the Saints
tombs and did wonders there, to illude and deceive the people, to cause the
people to worship them? To Berengarius condemned Euth in Panopl. tit. 33.
in diverse Councels, first for denying of the Real presence in the Sacrament
of the Altar, and then for denying the Transubstantiation? To the Paulicians,
that said these Euth. Zigab. in Paul. tit. 21.
words of Christ, take, eat, this is my body, are not to be understood of
his body, or the bread and wine used at the celebration of our Lords maundie,
but of the holy Scriptures* Hieron. co^tra Vig. Jonas Episcopus Au^elian contra
Claud.
which the priests should take at Christ's hand, and deliver and distribute
to the people? To Claudius and Vigilantius, that denied the invocation of
Saints, and enueighed against the blessed relics, and the use of lights and
other Futh in Panopl. Tit. 22. August. lib. 1. cont. 2. Epist. Pela. ad Bon if.
cap. 13. Cyril. lib. 6. co^t. Julian.
ceremonies of the Church? To the Massilians and other heretics, saying that
concupiscence as a sin remains in us after holy baptisine? And because ye
shall not say, I suppress, conceal, or obscure, the chief and most notable
persons of your auncestrie: how say ye to the Emperors Philippicus, Leo,
Constantinus, condemned with their adherentes by the seventh general Council at
Nice, that villayned by defacing, breaking and burning, the images of all the
holy hallowes of Christ, and Christ's to? to whom for your more honor and
glory I adioyne the Emperor Iulianus the Apostata. Who, as ye do in your
books and pulpits, cried out upon the Christians. O ye wretched men, that
worship the wood of the Cross, setting up the sign of it upon your foreheads
and doors: you therefore that are of the wisest sort, are worthy to be hated,
and the residue to be pitied, that treading after your steps come to such a
kind of wretchedness? To the Pelagians August. co^t. 2. Epist P^l. ca. 4
affirming that children not Baptized shall be saved? and yet are your Masters
in this point worse than the Pelagians, as well for that some of them have
said, that some infantes though unbaptized shall be damned, and some other
though Calvin in his Institutions ca. 18. In fine Argentorati impress. Anno.
1545.
unbaptized shall be saved. And some of them especially Calvin and other
Sacramentaries say, that they shall come without Baptism to the kingdom of
heaven: which the Pelagians durst not say, but that they should have the life
everlasting, putting a difference, but peeuishlie, betwixt these two. And if ye
think the race of your worthy generation is not fetched high enough, we will
mount higher, and as high as may be, even to Simon Magus him self. Of whom
Marcion Epiph. and Philast. de Haeres* Clemens li. 3. recog. Irenaeus Li. 1.
cap. 20.
and Manicheus, and after long and honorable succession your Patriarchs,
Luther and Calvin, have learned their goodly doctrine against free will. Yea
to touch the very fundation and wellspring of this your new Gospel, which
altogether is grounded upon Justification without good works, in that also ye
draw very nigh to the said Simon Magus.

In all this, here is nothing else, but the heaping up, of an impertinent,
s^launderous, and maliciouse rabble, partly of Heretics, partly of no
Heretics, some of them falsely belied, most of them falsely applied, either
they defending no such things, or some of these us Heresies, nor any of their
Heresies mainteyned of us.

First for the Arianisme of Aerius with whom M. Stapleton The Papists deface
the glory of Christ as ill as Arius or Aerius.
begins, would God the Papists had not as much, defaced the glory of
Christ, as did the Ariaus, but he finds no fault with them therefore. He
vpbraydeth to us, three other points.

First that Aerius said, there was no difference between Priest and Bishop,
and ye a^e (M. Stapleton) how say we to him?

What soever we say to him, we have first to say to you, Difference between
Priest and Bishop.
that saving the reverence of your Priesthood, there is no difference between
you and a lier, to object Aerius herein to us: Whereas (ye know well enough)
our Church does acknowledge in the ministry, a difference of Deacon and
Elder, from a Bishop, although not according to your Popish orders. For as
neither Epiphanius, nor yet Augugustine (quoted by you) speaks there of any
sacrificing Priest, so he never knew any such Pontifical prelates as your
Popish Church breeds. And yet of those that were even then in Epiphanius
time, and of their difference from the Elders or Priests, if ye know not how
it came: Hierome that lived in the same age will tell you, or if ye have not
read him, your own Canons will tell ye what he says. I them est ergo
Presbyter qui Episcopus and antequam Hieronimus ad Titum. Did. 93. can. Olim
idem:
Diabols studia, etc. An Elder or Priest therefore is the same that a Bishop,
and before that the studies of the Devil were made in Religion, and that the
people said I hold of Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas, the Churches were
governed by the common Counsel of the Elders, but after that every one did
account those to be his, and not to be Christ's, whom he had Baptized, in all
the world, it was decreed, that one of the Elders being chosen, should be
placed above the rest: to whom all the care or charge of the Church should
belong, and the seed of scismes be taken away. And a little after. Sicut ergo
Presbyteri, as therefore the Elders know that they by the custom of the
church, are subject to him, that is set over them: so let the Bishops know,
that they, more by custom, than by the truth of the Lords dispe^sation, are
greater than the Elders. This was the judgment of the ancient Fathers, and
yet were they no Arians, nor Aerians therefore. Yea Peter Lombarde the master
of the sentences, citing also Isidorus to witness, says: Apud Lib. 4. Did.
24. 1.
vetere^ idem Episcopi and Presbyter^ fuerunt. Among the ancient Fathers,
Bishops and Elders were all one. And again alleging the Apostle S. Paul, he
says, Qualis autem* etc. 1. Tim. 3.
But what manner an Elder ought to be chosen, the Apostle writing to Timothy
declares, where by the name of Bishop he signifies an Elder. And anon after:
Cumque omnes, and when all of them (he means his false seven orders) are
spiritual and holy, yet the Canons account only two orders to be excelling
holy, that is to say, Deaconship and Eldership. Because the primitive Church
is read to have these alone, and we have the Apostles commandment of these
alone, for the Apostles in every City ordained Bishops and Elders. Neither the
Master only writes thus, but almost all your schoolmen, yea though they be
them selves of the contrary opinion, yet they write this was the ancient
opinion. And so Durandus, though he make a difference between the power of
Jurisdiction, and the power of order, yet he shows Durandus de sancto
Porti^no in lib. 4. Sent. Did. 24. Q. 6.
that both the Scripture, and S. Hierome makes no difference, but only the
custom and institution of the Church. The Apostle (says he) writing to the
Philippenses cap. 1. says: With the Bishops and the Deacons, by them
understanding the Elders, since in one city as in Philippos, many Bishops ought
not to be. Again Act. 2. he says, Look to your selves and to all the flock
in which the holy ghost has placed you to be Bishops. And he spoke unto them
of the only city of Ephesus. But this appears more expressly to Titus the.
1. Where he says for this cause I have left thee at Crete, that thou should
correct those things that want, and ordeine Elders through out the cities, eue^
as I have appointed to thee, if any be blameless the husband of one wife. And
straight he sets under it, a B. must be blameless. And who^ before he named
an Elder, he calls now a Bishop. And in the. 4. of the. 1. to Timothy,
Despise not (says he) the grace of God which is given to thee through the
imposition of the hands of an Elder, that is to say of a Bishop. S. Paul
called him self an Elder, when he was the Bishop that ordained him.

Thus far and more at large Dura^dus, concluding at length, Sic ergo. Thus
therefore says S. Hierome, that a Bishop and an Elder. Olim fueru^t nomin^
synonym^, etc. were in the old time diverse names betokening one thing
indifferently, and also of one administration* because the Churches were ruled
by the commune Counsel of the Priests. But for the remedy of a scisme, least
each one drawing the Church after him, should break her: it was ordained that
one should be above the rest, et qu^ad nome^, etc. And so far forth as
stretches to the name, that he only should be called Bishop, and that so
far as stretches to the administration of some Sacraments and Sacramentals,
they should be reserved to him by the custom and co^stitutio^ of the Church.
And this would Hierome expressly, 93. Did. cap. legimu^ in Esa. and super
epistolam ad Tit. and recitatur Did. 93. cap. Olim presbyter^ etc. Consuetudo
aut institutio Ecclesiae potest dare Iurisdicti^nem sed non potestatem ordinis
aut consecrationis, quare. etc. He therefore that counts this erroneouse or
perilous, let him impute this to Hierome, out of whose saying in the fore
alleged chapter, Legimus in Esa. the foresaid authorities are taken. Where
also he puts an example, That it is of a Bishop in respect of priests, as of
an Archdeacon in respect of Deacons: unless the Deacons choose one among them
selves whom they call Archdeacon etc. In the end Dura^dus reco^ciling Hierome
says: and the authorities alleged by Hierome withstand it not, because
according the name and the truth of the thing, every Bishop is an Elder: and on
the other part, so far as stretches to the name, every Elder having cure,
may be called a Bishop, as superattendent on other, although the consecration
of a Bishop, or of the chief Priest, be larger than of a simple Priest or
Elder: but peradventure in the p^imitiue Church they made not such force in
the difference of names as they do now. And therefore they called a Bishop every
one that had a cure. Thus writes Durandus of the ancient Fathers opinions.
And will ye count him or them Aerians too?

And this also does your institution in Co^aine Council confess, N on est
tamen putandum. We must not for all this Institu^o doct. Christi de ^acr. or
dinis fol. 196.
think, that he ordained Bishops another order from Priests, for in the
Primitive church Bishops and Priests were all one. The which the Epistles of
Peter and Paul the Apostles, S. Hierome al^o and almost all the ancient
ecclesiastical writers do witness. And chiefly that place of the first Epistle
of S. Peter the ^ist chapter, is evident to declare this. For when Peter had
said, The Elders that are among you, I also an Elder with you beseech, which am
also a witness of the passions of Christ, and pa^taker of the glory to come
that shall be revealed: He joined under it, Feed or guide the slocke of Christ
that is among you, and ouersee it, not by compulsion, but willingly, according
to God. Wherein it is spoken more expressly in the Greek, (...), that is to
say, Superattendent, from whence also the name of Bishop is drawn. Wherefore
Priesthood is esteemed the highest order in the Church. In the mean time, no
body is ignorant, that this order is distinguished again, by a certain order
of offices and dignities. Thus do your Schoolmen and Divines witness: First,
that in the Substance, Order, or Character as they term it, there is no
difference between a Priest and a Bishop. Secondly, that the difference is but
of Accidents and circumstances, as degrees of dignity, Jurisdiction, Honor,
etc. Thirdly, that in the Primitive Church, this difference was not known, but
they were merely all one and the same. Fourthly, that this difference was
taken up by custom, consent, and ordinance of the Uniuersall Church when it
once began to be dispersed in all the world. Fifthly, that it was done for the
auayding of factions and sects that grew in the time of the ministers
equality even anon after the Primitive Church, and some of them in the
Apostles time.

But quite contrary to this Judgment of your Divines, are all your Canonistes,
your Divines make seven orders. Et in hoc says Angelus de clauisio, concordant
co^muniter theologs. Summa angelica L. ordo.
On this the divines agree commonly, but the Canonists hold, that there are
nine orders according to nine Hierarchies, that is to wite, the first notch or
psalmist, and the order of a Bishop, and that the first notch is an order, the
text is in C. cum contingit and ibi do. Anto. and canonist^ de (...). and
quali. or. similiter quod Episcopatus est ordo and quod imprimatur Caracter
indi^io meo facit inconuincibiliter, tex. in C. 1. de ordinatis ab Episcopo
etc. and sic secundum Canonist as erunt nouem The Papists controversy about
their holy orders.
ordines. And so according to the canonistes there shall be nine orders. Great
ado your Scoolemen and Canonistes make about this, in so much that Aerius
heresy will draw very near to one of you, light on which side it shall. But
your self may hold on both sides M. Stapleton, being both a Bachelour in the
one, and a student in the other. As for us, ye do falsely burden us. Our doing
is apparent therein, acknowleging all due obedience and reverence to our
Bishops. But as for your Popish Clergy, there is in deed little difference in
this point or none, which barrel is better herring, B. or Priest, both stark
naught, or rather neither of them either true Priest or B. by S. Paul's
description.

Secondly, you object that Aerius said there was no difference Difference
between fasting and not fasting.
between him that fasted and him that did not fast: wherein also as in the
other, your conscience (have ye any) knows, that ye wittingly slander us,
and babbling of fast, do lie as fast as a dog does trotte. For we allow Bbb.
ij. and commend fasting as godly, and exhort all men thereto as needful.
Only we inueigh against the superstitions of the Popish fastes, that bind
fasting to necessary and superstitious laws, to difference of days and
meats, wherein the kingdom of God consists not, that ascribe a merit to
their fast, and make it a matter of conscience and religion. Such errors we
disalowe, and if this be heresy, the Apostles, and the chiefest of all the
ancient fathers, were heretics also, who made concerning conscience, no
difference of meats, or of days for their mmates, in their fasting. Montanus
the heretic, says Apollonius, was the first qui docuit nup^ias solus and qui
^orum leges primus imposuit. Fuseb eccl. hist. li. 5. ca. 18
That taught the dissolution of marriages, and first of all appointed laws of
fasting. For before it was free to fast as they would. As Ireneus (blaming
Pope Uictor for his pertinacie, in being the author of such a schism, for
diversity of using the feast of Easter) does witness Non solum. Eccl. histor.
lib. 5. cap. 24.
etc. Not only (says he) the controversy is moved of Easter day, but also
of the very form of fastinges. For certain do think that fast should be
kept but only one day, other two days, other more. Yea many fast forty
days, but so that they reckon the day accompting the hours of the day and the
night together. The which variety of keeping their fast, began not first now,
nor in our times, but long before us, of them (as I deem) who not retayning
simply, that which was delivered from the beginning, have afterward fallen
into another custom, either by negligence or by folly.

Socrates writing further of this diuersitic not only of fasting times, but of
the meats also, says on this wise. Sed Tripartit. hist. lib. 9. cap. 38.
etia^ ciboru^. etc. but of the meats also they have not the like abstinence,
for some altogether abstain from living creatures. Other of living creatures
eat only fishes* some with fishes do eat fowls also, saying that these (after
Moses) have their substance of the water. Other are known to absteyne from
inwards and eggs. Some will eat only dry bread, some not so much as that,
some fasting until nine a clock, are refreshed without any difference of
meats. And innumerable customs are fond among diverse men. And because there
is no ancient record found therein, I think the Apostles left this to the
mind of every man, that every man might do that that is good neither by fear,
nor by necessity.

In which testimonies are to be noted: first the free liberty Fonre things to
be noted in the fastings of the ancient Church.
for every Church to fast as they thought good, without any fear of
conscience, or any necessity enforcing them thereto. Secondly, that this
liberty, was both in the time of fasting, and in the meat, without any
difference of fish or flesh. Thirdly, that this was the order of the
Apostles, and the primitive church. Fourthly, that they which began to alter
this custom, and to bind them selves to days or meats, swarued from the
beginning by negligence or folly. This was the former estate for fasting. But
after Montanus the heretic began first to prescribe laws to fasting, many
superstitions ensued: Some began to have scruple in eating flesh, as Bishop
Spiridions weary ghest, before whom when he set a piece of porke on a fasting
day, his ghest refused Trip. Hist. li. 1 ca. 10.
to eat thereof, Christianum se profitente, because he was a Christian. To
who^, quoth Spiridion, propterea magis refutare non debes: Even because thou
art a Christian, thou ought the more not to refuse it. For all things are
clean to them that be clean, as the word of God has taught. But for all
this, after Montanus laws, superstition began to grow so fast, that even
Hierome, a great co^mender of fasting, was feign to exhort them to moderation,
yea, to cry out thereon: Tantum tibi. etc. Appoint unto thy self such a
measure of Hieron. ad Nepotianum.
thy fasting, as thou can bear. Let thy fastings be pure, chaste, simple
moderate, and not superstitious. What avails not to taste of oil, and to
seek for dayntie meats, and hard to come by, puddings, pepper nuttes, the
fruits of palms, meal, honey, craknels, all the trimming of the gardens is
tossed, that we should not feed on common bread. And thus, while we seek
delicates, we are drawn quite from the kingdom of God. Yea, besides this, I
hear say of some, that contrary to the rule and nature of men, will drink no
water, nor eat bread, but delicates, suppings, and chopped pot herbs, and the
juice of Beetes, nor will not suppe it in a cup, but in a shell. Phie for
shame, Blushe we not at these toys? do not these superstitions irke us? If
Hierome cried out thus in his days of such superstitions fastings, and yet be
no heretic, are we heretics that cry out of the popish superstitions, a
thousand parts more toyishe than in Hieromes time, and a thousand times more
delicate knacks found out to fast forsooth withal? But as the saying is,
show me not the meat, but show me the man. Look upon your chief fasters,
your popish chaplaynes, your religious monks and The Popish chief fastest.
Abbots, what gorbelly paunches, what fat cheeks, what rich noses and high
faces, your stalfed fasters had? they showed well what porrige they loved, in
so much that Aerius made not so little difference between a Priest and a
Bishop, as every man made less difference between a Monk and a burstenbelly
churl. Even Chawcer that describes a Monk, does give him this praise,

He looked not like a forepyned ghost, Chavvcer in the Monks Prologue.

A fat swanne he loved best of any roast.
Such were those that even by profession pretended to be chiefest fasters,
when they had filled them selves till they swet again, with all dainty
viandes, then they cried hold belly hold, O quantu^ patimur pro amore Christi,
what pains we suffer for Christ's sake. And yet because they eat no flesh,
no not an egg on a fasting day, except it were in Aduent, the inwards,
tripes, and trullibubbes, for that was no flesh, we must understand: O they
were holy catholic fasters. And because we reject these foolish toys, and
superstitious fastes of these bellygod Epicures, they cry out upon us, we are
Heretics, we are Aerians, we make no difference between him that fasteth, and
that fasteth not.

But as herein ye slander us, so ye beelie Aerius also, and that even by the
judgment of your great champion Alfonsus de Castro, who alleging S. Augustine
to witness, says: Non dicit. etc. He says not that he quite contemned Lib. 7
de (...). 2. her.
fasting, but he ascribes this unto him, only that he should say, certain
appointed fastings are not to be observed but each one should fast when he
would, least he should seem to be under the law. Aerius therefore speaks
not against fasting, but only against the laws of fasting, by no manner means
admitting, that the Church can bind us to fast, because, although fasting be
healthful and profitable to the soul, yet will he not that any should be
constrained.

Thus says Alfonsus of Aerius opinion for fasting, M. St. belieth Aerius.
and not as you say, master Stapleton, that he made no dyfference betvveene him
that fasted, and that fasted not. Whereas Aerius made a great difference, and
Alfonsus clears him of that you accuse him. But howsoever Alfonsus in the
other point (wherein you let him go free) accuses Aerius by S. Augustines
testimony: if he altogether contemned all manner of fasting ordained by the
Church, then are we cleared from being charged with him, for we refuse only
the superstitious necessitis of the Popish The Church of England allows
fasting.
Churches laws. As for the true Church of Christ, if upon any occasion, some
laws of fasting should be made by her, toll us where we have said, we would
contemn them. Yea, it is apparent we yield obediently to those laws of
fasting ordained by the Queens Majesty, and her realm, the Church of
England: which be not superstitious fastes, nor binding the mind of the
faster with any necessity of conscience, but made for the necessity and
policy of the Realm, and state of our country. And if the whole Church of
Christ, ordeine like laws for fasting, we show hereby how little we would
with Aerius despise the same: but we with the word of God, and with the true
Church of Christ in the Apostles times, in the Primative age, and in the
ancient fathers days: reject all such superstitions in fastes, as the
Popish laws and customs ^o burden the Church withal.

And thus does even S. Augustine (that notes Aerius) writing to Casulanus
against one Urbicus in Rome, who would have it observed for a law, and made a
foolish book thereon, that men should fast on Saturday and other days, saying
that Peter did so, (whom he calls) as the papists Saturday fast.
do, the head of the Apostles, the porter of heaven, and the foundation of the
Church) when he convicted Simon Magus. S Augustine improueth this tale, by
Peter's concord with all his fellow Disciples, that used no such fast. And
after long proving and improuing, he concludes thus: Si autem quontam huic
quantum potus, etc. But (because I think Aug. Epi. 83.
I have answered this as sufficiently as I could) if ye ask my sentence
hereon: I reuoluing it in my mind, do see that in the Evangelical and
Apostolical writings, and in the whole instrument that is called the new
Testament, fasting is commanded. But on what days we should not fast, and on
what days we should fast, I find it not defined by the commandment of the
Lord, or of the Apostles. And by this, I deem that fasting agrees fitter,
not in deed to obtain righteousness, which faith obteineth, wherein is the
beauty inward of the kings daughter. etc. Howbeit in this fast or dinner on
the Saturday, nothing seems to me herein to be kept more safely and
quietly, than that he which eats, despise not him that eats not, nor he
which eats not, despise not him which eats. For neither if we eat, we
shall Romans 14.
abound, neither shall we want if we do not eat. That is to say, while we
keep company with those among whom we live (and with whom we live to God)
without offense taking in these things: For as for that the Apostle says is
true, it is ill for the man that eats through offense, so is it ill for the
man, that by offense does fast. etc.

Thus far saint Augustine against the precise appointing of fast on the
Saturday, in whose time it was free for every Church to use her own custom.
Yea, as he concludes with answer of Ambrose hereon: When I am at Millaine I
fast not on the Saturday, when I am at Rome, I fast on the Saturday. And to
what Church ye come keep the order thereof if ye will neither give, nor take
offense.

Thus we see, first how the fastes of the Church of Rome, The Church of Rome
appointed not laws for fasting to other Churches
were no such law to all other Churches, to receive from her their order or
days of fasting, or else they had been Aerians: for then had both S. Augustine
and Ambrose to, been Aerians by master Stapletons rule, and by the Popes
obtrusion of his Churches fastes, to all other Churches now. But the Church of
Millayne even under his nose, besides those of Afric, were at that time of
contrary orders.

Secondly, as it was of Saterdayes fast, so was it also Fridayes and Saterdayes
fasts no more than other days by the scripture.
for Fridayes fast, or any other days or day, as appears by Saint Augustines
general rule, in appealing to the Scripture, and there finding no day at all
appointed. As he says afterward again, Sed quoniam no^ in^enimus etc. But
because we find not (as I have rehearsed above) in the Evangelical and
Apostolical writings, which properly perteyne to the revealing of the new
Testament, that on any certain days it is evidently commanded we should
keep fastes. etc.

Thirdly, that what days soever they did keep fast, they No difference of
merit in fasting or not fasting.
did it not as any meritorious act, to obtain righteousness thereby. For this
was the difference that the Papists put, between him that fasted and that
fasted not, which is a thousand parts worse heresy than was that of Aerius.

I ask none other witness herein, than even one of your own side, Friar
Ferus, who inueying against the Phariseys for ascribing righteousness to their
sacrifices and ceremonies: Ferus in Math. Cap. 9.
But we (says he) do all things preposterously, placing righteousness in
these things, which of themselves are neither good nor bad: neglecting those
things wherein true righteousness consists. But one error draws on
another. For from hence follows, first, that we make to our The Papists
confess they make greater conscience on man's decrees tha^ g^ds word
selves a greater conscience of the transgression of the Churches or Monkishe
decrees, than of the transgression of the divine precepts. Secondly, hereon it
comes, that we easily judge other that observe not the same, as here did the
disciples of John. When Paul notwithstanding teaches: let no man judge you
in meat or in drink, or by reason of a feast Judging of the faster, or not
faster.
day. etc. Item, he that eats not, let him not judge him that eats. etc. To
conclude, it is far an other thing to do the work, than to put a trust in
the work. It is good to fast and to keep the Churches decrees, but to put a
trust in them, is The work, and the trust in the work.
not only not good, but wicked. For this cause therefore Christ required not
fasting, and other bodily observations, he exacted not of those that are his,
or prescribed ought at all of these Why Christ prescribed not orders in these
things.
things, not that he judged such things of themselves to be evil or unlawful,
but that they should not ^all thither again, that is to were, to a trust of
works, from which he would have them most far. The which surely had
chanced, if he had exacted any such thing of those that are his, as now we
perceyne is committed in the Churches constitutions. For even as soon as ever
these co^stitutions began to be given, men began also therewith to trust in
them. And so by little and little we The Papists confess them selves to be
Phariseys.
have degenerate from true godliness, into a kind of Pharisaical
righteousness, or rather into a show of righteousness, the which is more
clear than that it can be denied. And afterward complaining further of the
Popish fastes and other abuses, he says: His similes sunt plerique nostrum.
etc. Ferus in ca. 12. Math.
The most of our men are like unto these (he means the Phareseys) that judge
they keep the laws then, when they follow externally the letter of the law,
when they do nothing less, as appears by them that are idle on the feast
days, and give themselves to riot, neglecting those things that are
perteyning to the Sabbath. Of those also that think Misiudging in fasting.
they fast, when they eat but once a day, but so daintilye, and they so glutte
themselves, that they feel no hunger all day long. On the contrary, they
judge not him to fast, but to transgress the commandment, that compelled by
poverty, necessity, or labor, does eat but sparingly often times a day. And
a little after: These things do flatly fight with the doctrine of Christ. For
first it impugneth the faith, secondly charity, which two Christ did chiefly
touch. For this cause therefore he does so often blame them. But if we mark
our selves, we shall see our selves to be even the most culpable in the same
things. For commonly our righteousness The Popish righteousness worse than
the Phariseys. Outward things. Two things commanded in keeping the Sabbath.
Two things in every precept the heart and the outward work Ecclesiastical
constitutions. Apparel.
is set most in outward things. I damn not outward things, for who having
his right wits would or could so do? But I say they suffice not to
salvation. And as I said a little before, of the precept of keeping the Sabbath,
two things are commanded. First, the bodies rest, secondly and principally,
the rest of the old man from his works: so say I now, every precept requires
two things, that is to wete, the outward work, and the heart, and that
principally, which Christ declared enough. Math. 5. But we neglecting that
which is principally exacted, do stick only in the external things. The same
may I say of the ecclesiastical co^stitutions, they give not holiness but
show it and further it, as for ensample, true religion consists not in this,
that thou should wear, this or that habit, but in this, that if thou be dead
to the world, thou live to god: and to this point, outward things do also not a
little further thee: so the true worship of god is, if that in spirit and truth
thou worship the father. But hereto the external worship does stir thee up.
The same also is to be said of fasting, confession, prayer. etc. which chiefly
consist in the heart. But we neglecting The Papists abuse in all these things.
these things which are most necessary, do please our selves about the
outward things only. Thus says Ferus of your Popish fast, containing far
worse errors than Aerius not putting of difference, but belike he shall be an
Aerian to.

The third thing M. St. obiecteth to us out of Aerius, is Sacrifice for the
dead.
that he said the sacrifice for the dead was fruitless.

If you were not also dead and fruitless, for any troth Aerius again belyed.
in you Master Stapleton, ye would never make such a lying sacrifice of your
Priests lips for shame. As though Aerius were counted an Heretic, for
denying the propiciatorie sacrifice (as ye call it) of the Mass, which ye say
is auaylable and meritorious, not only for the living, but also for the dead,
to deliver them from the feigned pains of purgatory. Whereas if he had
affirmed at that time any such thing, he should himself have been counted a
strange and new monstrous Heretic. For as then, nor long after, neither your
pardons and indulgences, nor your trentals and Diriges, neither your
satissactions nor your oblations, neither your Mass of Requiem, nor your soul
Priests to sing or say it, were extant or devised.

Errors in deed there were about the dead, both then and long before, and
such as after gave occasion to these your gainful devises. And if Aerius had
denied such errors, or such errors had then been practiced, he had been no
Heretic for denying them, but rather such Heretics as had mainteyned them.
Which the godly fathers did not, but acknowledged and knew of no other place,
either of joy or torment after this life but only of heaven and hell. A third
place (says Saint Augustine, that writes of this Hypognost. lib. 5.
Aerius) Penitus ignoramus, We are utterly ignorant of, nor we can find any
such in the scriptures. And yet must Saint Augustine needs have known and
acknowledged such a third place of deliverance of the dead, if he had meant
of prayer and oblation for their deliverance as you do mean. But he flatly
denies the knowing of any such place: it follows Saint August. knevv not of
any purging place for the dead.
then, that writing thus of Aerius, either he was in the same Heresy, denying
any place for the dead to be helped out of, (and whereto then should such prayer
serve, or oblation for delivering them out of a place of torment, since there
were no such place of torment) and so he confirmed Aerius his saying: or else
he must run yet into a greater error and absurdity, that the dead being in
one of these two places heaven or hell, they were there helped by such prayers
and oblations.

But for those that are in hell, the scripture is flat, their Mark. 9.
worm shall never die, their fire is unquenchable and everlasting, the rich
Glutton could not get from thence, nor Luke. 16.
find any never so little ease from his torments. Ab inferno nulla est
redemptio. From hell there is no redemption. And this knew saint Augustine
well enough, that says: Duae De verbis Apostoli Sermon. 18.
quippe habitationes, vna in igne aeterno, altera in regno aeterno. There are
two dwellings the one in fire eternal, the other in the Kingdom eternal. And
again: Scitote vos. etc. Know De vanitate s^culi.
ye, that when the soul is parted from the body, streightwayes either it is
for his good deeds placed in paradise, or else certainly for his sins, cast
headlong into hell fire, choose now that you like, either to rejoice
everlastingly with the Saints, o^ without end to be tormented with the wicked.

This was the foul and great error of Origene, Saint Origens error of the
damned.
Augustine was not infected therewith, nor any godly father of his time, much
less Epiphanius, that was an earnest condemner of Origene. Although the
Papists be not clear of this error, that say they have delivered, and can
deliver souls even out of hell, as they tell how Pope Oregorie The Pope
delivers out of hell.
delivered Traian an infidel Prince: and how his mother (condemned and
tormented in hell fire for her whoordome) was delivered from thence by him
through a trentall of Masses.

Now as for the souls that on the other side be in heaven, The souls in
heaven need no prayer for delivery.
the other place: I think Saint Augustine was never so far ouershotte, to
say or think that such prayers could ease or deliver them from pains, that
were in the joys of heaven. What then remains to think of saint August.
noting Aerius of Heresy herein. The Grecians and Egyptians errors about the
dead.


We shall the better perceive this, if we mark the errors that many of the
Grecians and Egiptians, had at that time about the dead, yea even those says
Epiphanius, Qui Epiph. in lib. Anachoratus.
primas sib^ far videntur. etc. That among certain exercisers of godliness
in Egypt, seemed to bear the chiefest sway, and also of those in Thebaida and
other Regions, that denied the resurrection of the body, Et Graeci quidam.
etc. And certain Grecians there were that utterly denied the resurrection. On
the other part there were some that granted it, but with very fond and
strange opinions, that partly they had received of the heathen Philosophers,
partly they had devised of the^ selves. For this has been always one of the
devils chief practices, to abuse and deceive the living by the dead.

And from hence, as S. Ambrose and S. August. affirm, Ambro. in Romans 1.
August. de ciu. dei. Iud. Epist. August. de mirabilibus sacrae script. lib. 1.
Cap vlt. 1. Cor. 15.
by worshipping the pictures of the dead, sprang all Idolatry, and therefore
the Devil stryued so much for the body of Moses, as diverse learned fathers
note thereon. And of all errors, the most ancient are those that have sprung
about the dead. As with the Saduces among the Jews before Christ's coming,
by other among the Corinthians in S. Paul's time baptising over the dead, and
these above said Heresies in the east Church. As likewise in the west, by
thrusting the communion bread into the mouths of the dead, by conceyuing
opinions of their estate such as they had learned out of Plato and Uirgill, of
their pains August. Enchi. ad Laurent.
and torments, of their ease and deliverance whom they loved and wished well
unto, of whom says Saint August. Humana quadam beneuolentia mihi falli
videntur, and as even Epiphanius says, Quum vero tales a via vera
discesserint, and Theophil. in ^or.
veritatem dei ad fabulas conuerterint: When such men swarued from the true
way, and converted the truth of God into fables, Such as Origens conceytes and
allegoryes were, such as the morals of Oregorie are full of, such as the
Heretics fathered of the Apostles names, Saint Peter's Gospel, Saint Thomas
Gospel, Nichodemus Gospel. etc. Then no marueyle, if not only the Heretics
had ill opinions of thedeade, but also some of the godly and learned fathers in
this behalf, were either somewhat deceived, The godly fathers errors about the
dead.
ouercuriously searching and affirming, that they knew not, or carried to much
away with the sway of the peoples abuses.

Yea and by his leave, though he were an excellent and Epiphanius defectes.
godly writer, yet in this point Epiphanius somewhat ouershotte himself.
Although I speak it not to accuse him, nor to excuse Aerius, for no doubt as
Aerius was The drift of Aerius.
an open Artian, that denied the divinity of our Savior Christ: so conertly
he shot herein against the resurrection with the foresaid Heretykes, as
appears by Epiphanius his confutation of him. Who not only confuteth him,
but also shows why at that time they used such an order for the dead,
which in the latter end of the Book, showing the diverse rytes of the
Christians in his Country then, he expounds what it was: In his The ancient
fathers memories for the dead were but thanks giving and praises.
autem qui vita defuncti sunt, ex nomine memorias faciunt, orationes ad deum
perficientes ac cultus diuinos and mysteriorum dispensationes. But as
concerning those which are dead, they make memorials by name, while they make
their prayers to God and divine worship and dispensing of the mysteries. That
is, in their public prayers of the divine service, and receiving the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, they made a thankful memorial of such as were departed
in the Why they praised God for the dead.
faith of Christ, giving God praise and thanks for them, to confirm the faith
of the living in the hope of the deades resurrection.

Now, that they meant not by these doings, any such deliverance out of pains of
Purgatory, or any such other thing as the Papists dream of, and would
deceive the people withal: Epiphanius himself does plainly declare, not to
much regarding what the Heretyke did pretend, as what he mente to destroy
the hope Epiph cont. Haer. lib. 3. to 1. Haer. 75.
of the Resurrection, and being an Artian to abase the prefection of Christ:
Postea vero (says he) de co quod proferantur nomina defunctorum. etc. But
afterward, concerning that the names of those that are departed this life, a^e
brought forth, what can be more profitable than this, what more commodious
than this, and what more worthy admiration? that these that are present,
believe that they which are departed do live, and are not none, but they are,
and are living with the Lord. Whereby it appears that those prayers, were
principally to confirm the hope of the immortality of the soul, and the
bodies resurrection: and rather confute the Heresy of Pope John. 22. than
confirm any Popish Mass or Dirige for the dead.

Notwithstanding, for that that follows, Epiphanius is not altogether
excusable, though to be borne withal, more than you bear with him for rending
the picture of Christ, In Epist* ad 10. Hierosol. epist.
and not suffering so much as an Image on painted cloth, no not of Christ
himself, to stand in the Church, although it served but for the use of a
veil. What would he have done trow you, if he had come into one of your
Churches, all to be dashed with Images, not only painted on clothes, but
carved in wood and stone? no doubt he would have broken them all to fitters,
and have cried out on your open Idolatry. And so, had he seen what horrible
errors and superstitions, your Church mainteyneth about the dead, and that his
words should after have given occasion, to pretend in his name a defense of
such superstition: undoubtedly he would have told you to your faces, that
you wrested his words, and abused him, and were far worse your selves than
ever Aerius was: and would (as did Saint August.) have revoked such words, as
whereby ye should have picked any such occasion. But he foresawe not this, as
he saw the other. But rather (as ye say afterward of Nicephorus) was carried
away in the sway of the common error, and so Stapl. 77. b.
defended that which ye now pretend to boulster your errors by.

As for any authority for this usage, such as it was, Epiphanius alleges
none at al, out of the word of God: yea, Prayers needless for the saints in
heaven.
and that was more fond in the doing, he says, they prayed for the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists. Wherein ye will grant, I am
sure, M. St. both your self and your Church does swerve from him. And your
own Popes Decree says, Iniuriam facit martyri, qui orat pro Ca. Cum Marthae
decele. Missae.
martyr he does injury to a martyr, that prays for a martyr. The reason, he
is in bliss already. But wherefore (says he) made they this prayer for the
saints already in heaven? for soothe to separate Christ from the order of
men, by the honor they gave him, that he excelled all creatures, were they
never so holy. Which though it be most true, and withal confuteth your
adoration of Saints departed, yet their reason herein was very fond, that
therefore they should pray for them that were already in perfect bliss and
glory. And as fond was it to pray for those that died in their Prayer ^lesse
for them that dyed in their sins.
sins, against whom the scripture is plain and plat: and hereto accords
the best of the learned fathers, as I have declared before of S. Aug. who^ ye
quote with Epiphanius. If therefore Epiphanius meant more than thanks giving to
God, for his mercies to the saints, in saving them, and praising God for his
justice to the wicked in condemning them, and withal to confirm in the living
the hope of the resurrection of the dead: then is Epiphanius not only contrary
to the Scripture, and S. Aug. but also to him self, and to the best of all the
fathers besides, whose traditions is the only argument that Epiphanius
pretends.

Ciprian (who also admits the memorials and oblations Ad Demetrianum Tom. 1.
of thanks giving for the faithful martyrs departed) yet in this point of
doctrine to pray for any departed, as to help them by their prayers, or that
they be in case to need and find such help, he utterly denies. Quando
istin^ excessum fuerit, etc. when we are departed out of this life, there is
now no place for repentance, no desire of satisfaction, life is either lost
here, or gotten here by the worship of God, and the fruit of faith,
eternal salvation is provided for: neither is any body hindered, either by his
sins or his years, that thereby he might the less come to the obteyning of
salvation. To him that is abiding in this world repentance is never to late.
etc.

Athanasius likewise, Animae a nobis profectae vbi and quomodo Lib. de varijs
quest. Q 19.
sint. etc. Where the souls departed from us, are, and how they be, is a
strange and horrible question, and hid from men: for God has not suffered any
to return from thence, which should declare it. Notwithstanding out of the
scripture we learn, that the souls of sinners be in hell, and the souls of
the just be in Paradise. (Without any mention at all of Purgatory.)

The judgment of S. Hierome is very plain, and inserted among your Popish
decrees; In praesenti siculo. etc. 13. Quest. 2. c^. in praesent.
While we are in this present world, either by prayers or by counsels, we
may one be helped of another: but when we shall come before the judgment seat
of Christ, neither Job, nor Daniell, nor Noe can do ought for any body, but
every one shall bear his own burden. And again, In Esai. ca. 65.
he that while he lives in this body, shall not have obtained the forgiveness
of sins, and so shall depart out of his life, perishes unto God, and ends
his being, although to him self he be in pains.

He that has not washed away his sins (says Chrysostom) Chry. ad Heb. ca.
2. hom. 4.
in this present life, shall not afterward find any consolation. For in hell,
says he, who shall praise thee? and vvorthily said, for this is the time of
cares and conflictes, and wrastlinges, as for that is the time of crowninges,
of retributions, and rewardinges. And again, De Lazaro co^cione. 2.
If thou art made any man's enemy, be reconciled before thou come to
judgment. Dispatche all things here, that without grief thou may behold
the judgment seat. While we are here, we have notable hopes, but so sone as
ever we shall be departed from hence, it lies not in us afterward to repent,
nor to wash away the faults we have committed. Yea, he says more. After the
end of Mat. 11. hom. 37.
this life, there are no occasions of good works, as wrastlers have then no
occasion of getting the garlande when the wrestlings are finished. And as
Theophilacte says: after Theophil. in Mat. ca. 25.
this ly^e there is no time, either of repenting, or of vvishing.

All which sayings, if they be true, it follows there is no place of purging
and helping them, that are already dead in their sins: since the s^ules so
departed can not repent, but there is no forgiveness without repentance: since
at occasions of their delivery are past, yea, they be past wishing any
goodness to them selves, that is to say, they utterly despair of al mercy,
knowing, that wishing booteth not, much less the wishing of others for them:
as Theophilact a little before said of the foolish Uirgins: The virtues of my
neighbor Ibidem*
will hardly suffice for his own defense, so far off is it from helping me.
Thus are all these Doctors contrary to Epiphanius herein, if Epiphanius were
to be expeunded as you would have him. And will ye make all these Aerians too?

But to all these your usage is, to clap down as many or The Papists usage of
the allegation of the doctors.
more Doctors of the contrary opinion, yea to bring even these that I have
r^cited, to witness the quite contrary. In which doing, thinking to discredit
us, ye not only lose credit^ your self, by wresting them, but also ye
diminishe their credit (have they any with you) that make them speak contrary
to them selves. True it is, that every one of these fathers, as they had their
faults and errors, so they bare much also, in these matters of dead men,
with the common sway, although S. Augustine and Chrysostom, more than the
rest, do often times chide the people, for using about the dead, such fond
abuses, as at that time they did. Chrysostom tells how they would strippe
their arms, make them bloody, tear their hear, scratche their faces, and
wear black apparel, and hire mourners. All which he greatly blames: and
although Chriso. in cpi. ad Heb. cap. 2. hom. 4. Naughty cu stome.
they pretended custom for them, saying: Consuetudinem quero, etc.
consuetudinem requiro, etc. I seek to keep the old custom, I require
custom. Yet does not Chrysostom allow their sayings, but calls it, pessimam
consuetudinem, a most wicked custom, ineptias, toys, such as he was ashamed
of, hypocrisy and such as long ago ought to have been driven clean away.

Thus earnestly writes Chrysostom against the abuses about the dead. And also
for that opinion, that even then in his days was a common and constant opinion
among The souls of the dead walk not.
the people, even as it is yet among al papists, that the souls of diverse do
walk after their death, and moan them selves to us alive, to be helped by our
prayers. Which, how false an opinion it is, appears by Chrysostom.

Shall I be persuaded (says he) because thou have heard the In Mat. cap. 8.
Hom. 29.
devils often times cry, I am the soul of such an one? but this saying comes
also of the devils fraud and disceite, for it is not the soul of the
departed, which says these things, but the devil that feygneth these things
to deceive the hearers. etc. These things are to be counted but old wives, or
rather dotardes tales, and toys for children: for the soul being separate
from the body, can not wander in these regions. As for the souls of the just,
they are in the hands of God. The souls likewise of the Infantes, for they
have not Sap 3. He means the Infantes of the faithful being regenerate.
Luke. 16. Act. 7. Phil. 1. Luke. 12.
sinned. But the souls of sinners are carried away even staight after their
departure, the which is made plain by Lazarus and Dives. etc. And by many
places of the scripture it may be proved, that the souls of just men after
their death, do not wander here For both Steven said, Receive my spirit,
and Paul desired to be loosed and to be with Christ. And also in another
place the Lord says, this day shall they take thysoule from thee. The soul
therefore when it is once gone from the body, can not wander here amongst us.
And the Scripture says also of the Pattiarche, he was put to Genesis 25.
his father and died in a good age. But that also neither the souls of the
sinners can abide here, thou may harken what the rich man says, and mark
what he craves and can not get it, if the souls of men might be co^uersant
here, he would have come him self as he desired, and have warned his kinsmen
of Hell torments. Out of which place it appears also plainly, that the souls
after their departure from the body, are carried away to a certain place,
from whence at their will they can not get, but do there abide, expecting that
terrible day of judgment.

These words of Chrysostom well weighed, infer Four notes of Chrysostom
for the state of souls departed.
four things: First, that there be no more estates of the dead than two, the
just and the wicked, and so there are none to be purged after-death. Secondly,
that there be be but two places also, Heaven and Hell, and so the purging place
called purgatory is excluded. Thirdly, that the souls once departed from their
bodies, come forthwith to one of these two places, and there tarry continually
till the day of dome, without wandering here on the earth: and so purgatory is
again excluded. Fourthly, that all appearings of any, that say they are the
s^ules of such and such, etc. are the Devils frauds, old wines fables, fools
tales, and childrens toys, and so again, not only the opinion of purgatory
is improued, but also all the Popish reuelatio^s thereof, proved to have been
the Devils illusio^s. But of this, more hereafter. I note it now only to show,
that this error (though nothing like to that it has since) was so crope^ into
the Church then, that Chrysostom was feign thus sharply to confute it.

S. Augustine also rebukes other errors cropen in by De moribus Eccl. lib. 1.
ca. 34. Abuses about the dead in S. Augustines time.
custom about the dead. Nou^ ^ultos esse, etc. I know (says he) that there
are many worshippers of sepulchers, and of pictures. I know there are many
which most riottously drink over the dead, and making banquets to the corses,
bury them selves upon the buried, and these their gluttonnies and
drunkenness, they accoumpt for Religion. These and such like wicked customs
and errors about the dead, grieved S. Augustine, wherefore he devised with the
godly Bishop. Aurelius, how he might remove them. Though therefore Epiphanius
allowed the praying for the dead and other ceremonies there aboutes, that even
the popish Church does not use, and pretend custom for him never so much:
yet none of these fathers are of his judgment herein. Nor his argument, from
custom beyond the word of God, binds us: but that rather we may follow S.
Augustins rule, Magis veritatem quam consuetudinem sequi debemus. We ought De
Baptis. paruulo^um.
rather to follow the truth than the custom. Yea, although al these Doctors
had been contrary hereto, the Scripture being so plain therein.

Epiphanius argument therefore, is very mean to force any Heresy of denying
this erroneouse custom. And yet is not Aerius excused, because he withal
covertly (as appears by Epiphanius proves) denied the Resurrection, else, had
their been no further meaning in those words, than that Prayer or Sacrifice was
fruitless for the dead, it had been so little any Heresy, that Epiphanius was
rather in an error thereof, by yelding to corrupted custom, as I have proved
by the Fathers to whose tradition he appealeth: and by S. Augustine, that also
notes this thing in Aerius. Howbeit I speak it not, to deface the worthy
commendation of Epiphanius, but I do as you do, when ye talk with him for
Images. Although I might note in him further, not only his too bitter contention
with Chrysostom, but also that he is not all sound for doctrine, no not in
every point of the Trinity: not that I lay it to him as any Heresy, but as an
error: no marueyle then though he were deceived herein, and you also M.
Stapleton that ground on him, to slander us with Aerius heresy, which was
against the resurrection, and that the dead Sunt nulli, are none, and are
resolved to nothing. I have been the longer in answering you to Aerius, because
ye urge it so much, and triumph in so vain and false a matter.

Your next objection is about virginity.

How say you to louinian that denied virginity to have Stap. 57. a. Virginity
and Matrimony.
any excellency above Matrimony or any special reward at Gods hands?

Or ever I say any thing to Iouinian, I answer to you M. Stapleton. If you
should receive such reward at Gods hands, as your slaunderouse and lying
tongue deserves, I think your virginity (presupposing that ye were so good a
virgin Priest as ye pretend, although I will not swear for you) would at that
great day of reward stand ye in little steed. Your self know well enough,
that although we attribute to the honorable state of Marriage, that reverence
and liberty among all men, that Christ and his Apostle S. Paul bids: yet,
do we not deface or despise, but esteem honorable also, the excellent gift of
continency. Yea and confess with the Apostle that in him that has the gift
thereof, it is, in those respects that the Apostle mentions, more excellent
than Matrimony. Because such are more free to tranaile, in the preaching and
ministry of Wherein virginity is to be preferred before marriage, and wherein
it is not.
Gods word, with less trouble, care and charge, chiefly in time of
persecution. But not for any excellency of virginity it self, as an holier
virtue, deserving heaven, which you call a special reward at Gods hands,
meaning thereby a merit or deserte of a greater glory in heaven than
Matrimony.

This fond presumption of merits we disalowe, and would have ye say with
Gregory your Pope: Let them Gregorius Papa in pastorali part. 3. ca. 29.
know that virginity so excels marriage, that the unmarried extol not
themselves above those that be married. You and your popish Priests do not thus,
but in that ye be unmarried ye prefer your selves above the married, craking of
excelle^c^e and special reward above others, as did ye boasting Pharisee. Luc.
18.
And God wot are so far from that virginity which ye crake of, that not only
ye burn within with most filthy lusts How far the popish votari^s are from
true virginity. 1. Tim. 4.
of your pampred bodies and unmortified flesh, and so by reason of the scruple
of your vow, have your consciences marked with an whote Iron, and yet
virginity, as your selves (to your own greater condemnation without your
greater repentance) testify, is quite lost, being polluted in the assent of
the mind. But what speak I of the mind? which I would commit to God, to
judge upon, saving that all the world cries out of your fornications,
adulteries, incestes, sodomitrie, the cry whereof is ascended unto heaven.
Your own books swarm in exclaiming it, and almost every Cronicler notes it.
But what need notes of Chronicles, when your licenses and dispensations for
your Priests concubines, your open mainteyning of courtezanes, stews and
harlotrie, are so apparent, that ye can not deny it? Would God yet ye could
blushe, and be at the least ashamed of it. But why wish I shame, in so
shameless maiden Priests, if ye can be maidens, that neither have maidenhed
nor shamefastness in you? are ye not those Locustes that S. John says, should
come out of the bottomless pit, having on their heads as it were crowns
like unto Apoe. 9. A figure of the popish votaries.
gold, and their faces were as it had been the faces of men, and they had
hear as the hears of women, that is to say, a show and countenance of
maydenly virginity, having notwithstanding tails like Scorpions.

Surely Eneas Siluius your Pope called Pius. 2. did not The judgment of Pope
Pius 2. for priests marriage.
for naught so commonly use this sentence: that where the Fathers, not without
great consideration at the first, forbad Priests to marry, and to keep them
selves single: they should now not without a greater cause, suffer them to
marry. In the which words, he not only notes the popish Priests
abominations, but also that this forbidding of marriage is not of any
commandment of Christ, but merely of men's prohibition: but such prohibition,
as were much better revoked, even by the best learned Popes opinion (as the
writers of his life do note) that ever satte in that s^ate.

Of the same judgment was Erasmus, who seeing the Erasmus opinion of prests
marriage. Declarationes Erasmi ad ce^suras ^uteuae* Tit. 20.
abominable life of the popish Priests, abosing the simple under the n^e of
virginity* Mu^ (...)* etc. Many causes (faith he) ^o persuade a change of the
law of single life in ecclesiastical persons. And when your Sorbonistes of
Paris stamped hereat and wrote against him, boasting as you de of the
excellency of virginity shining in holiness: Erasmus answered them: Qui
tract^nt, etc. They that lay those that meddle with the divine mysteries and the
administration of the heavenly word, chastity does most become them, they say
true and godly, and I allow their judgment very well: but they do consider,
what the thing it self requires: I consider* what the imbe^ilitie of men
requires. Many discommodities (I grant) might follow, if wives were permitted
unto Priests, but such discommodities as either the Church, or the
carfulness of Princes, might easily with certain constitutions remedy. But
now in so corrupt manners of men, their most silthie single life has far
more grievous discommodities. Would to God so many as are priests would turn
their mind to cleanness.

Thus said Erasmus of your birginly Priesthood not only with wh^, but even
with S. Paul, we say: it is 1. Cor. 7.
better marry than to li^e in such wicked burnings and viciouse living. Yea
although the party had never so much vowed virginity before, yet if he could
not keep his vow but burn in lust, it were far better for him to marry,
and his marriage (as S. Angustine says) is perfect matrimony. De bono con^.
Marriage after the vow of single life is lawful. ^erem. 5.
And not whoredom as you and your Papists slanderously do terine it* But no
marvel if ye slander our Matrimony, that not only live your selves in such
wicked demeanor, and he such stalions as the Prophet cried out of, that
neighed after their neighbors wines, rather than with the honest care of
Matrimony, ye would have any of your own: since, as ye defiled others ^eddes,
so ye accoumpt and write of all matrimony as a polluted state. For so says
Durandus, and so ye say all: Matrimonium tollis puritatem, and maculat Durandus
in li: 4. Did. 37. Q 1. Heb. 13.
corpus, Matrimony takes away cleanness, and de^ileth the body. Whereas the
Scripture calls it, Cubile impollutum, An undefiled bed, and an honorable
estate. And yet for simple fornication it is a common question moved among you,
whether it be a mortal sin or no. So favorable ye are to wickedness, and
so hard to Matrimony. To live in Matrimony, is with Papists to In decretis
Siritij Pp. dec. 7 Rom 8.
live after the ^eash. Which what is it else with S. Paul but to live in sin,
to offend God, to deserve death? S^ secundam carnem vixerit^ moriemini, If ye
live after the flesh ye shall die. Qui in carne sunt Deo placere non pofsunt.
They that are in the flesh can not please God. And therefore they reason that
Priests may not live in Matrimony. But to sorsweare Matrimony, to live a
single life, how soever he live it, Si non cast (...) cause, If not chastely
yet closely. This with Papists is virginity, this is an excellent life, this
at Gods hands deserves a special reward.

This hypocrisy, of fained virginity, this defacing and The causes why M.
Stapl. calls the protestants louinians.
destling of honorable matrimony, because we cry out upon, we are (...).
Because we reprehends your forced single life, that compels Priests not to
marry, whether they will or no, o^ whether they have or no, the gift of
virginity, which is not of them selves, but a gift, and that of God, and that
a rare gift, as Christ says, and as experience Matthew. 19.
has proved, a most rare gift among your votaries: we are therefore
Iouinians. Because we prefer marriage before such unclean virginity, as the
honorable, necessary and undefiled means to avoid fornication: Because we
say virginity (I mean not Popish virginity, but true virginity) is in it
self no such virtue, as you make it, of especial reward, but in respect of
avoiding some hindrances: as also Matrimony, in respects of avoiding greater
cuils, therefore we are Iouinians, and make them both alike.

But what say we herein, that even your Schoolmen Durandus opinion of
virginity and Matrimony. Durandus in magist. sent. li. 4. Did. 39. Q. 4.
say not* Durandus aforesatde, upon this self same question whether
virginity be to be preferred before matrimony. Aliquod est (...), etc.
Something is good in it self, something accidentally or inrespect of another
thing, that is, because it remoueth an evil or inconvenient thing. After the
first sort, meat is good to the body. After the second for^e, medicine is
good. We must say therefore that virginity is not good after the first
sort, but after the Virginity not good it self but in respect.
second: which appears three ways. First, thus: to abstain from that that
is convenient in it self and good, can not of it self be good. But by
virginity we abstain from Matrimony, which of it self is good: therefore
virginity of it self is not good. I^ which words (omitting his
contradiction to his own tale) he makes in it self Matrimony to be better
than Uirginitie. But what stand I on Durandus, when all your Priests
(incurring therein worse contradiction) make Matrimony a Sacrament, but
Uirginitie they make none? If therefore we be louinians, be not you louinians
to? y^ rather, per syncopen, be ye not louinians as good virgin maidens as ever
Jupiter was?

But to supply that wantes in you, ye press us with The papist^ objection of
S. Hierome for virginiue.
S. Hieroms authority. To whom though ^ might fully answer ye, with the
learned censure^ of Eramus on that S. Hieromes (...) against (...), yet for
your further satisfiyng your de^ ^ will refer ye to (...) excellent learned
father, and even fellow student with S. Hierome, and one also that had written
against (...). Whereby ye may see how far S. Hierome ouershotte him self
(...). (...), and. H^ (...), (says Ruffinus in Hieron.
Ruffinus to Hisrom speaking of Iouinian) did first set upon this work, and
peradventure being compelled. And no marvel if he wauered at the first yet
should not occasion there at be snatched, of derogating from the Christians,
but rather the profit of amendment be sought for. If you had written S.
Hieroms foul ouershooting him self in de^ending virginity against (...).
those things unto him, should ye not have given both greater grace and
edifiyng, either unto him* having his beginnings in the fear of God, or else
unto others being readers thereof: than now the same your inuectiues do give
more grief and confusion to all that fear? which both in you do show a most
foul lust of back biting and in me a (...) of answering. For, as I have said,
in your books wrttten against (...), you be found now to affirm the self
^ame things, with which ye reproved him* Howbeit now ye are fallen so far,
that ye affirm, the filthes of marriage ca not be washed away, no not with the
blond of martyrdom. etc. And after this again says Ruffinus on S. Hierome,
besides this we have (...) showed; that it is this man's fashion to derogate
(...) all good men and (...) this point he takes (...) to be somewhat, if he
may repre^ende a^ wi^e men and those that have any name in ^earning* I have
showed also how vnworth^ly he has rayled on the Ministers and Priests of
Christ. No he has not spared the Mokes, no nor the virgins whom he has
praised, nor the continent* yea (...) infamed with his fou^e ^ibels the estate
and degree of (...). etc.

And so Russinus tells, how unworthily he defaced S. Ambrose and (...), whom
before he placed among the Prophets and ^postles, and afterward places them
among those that teach strange things, (...) neither did nor new writers,
Martyr nor other. All this I (...) M. St. ou^ of (...), not to detect the
Fathers (...), but only to show how weak your argument is, in (...) us, and
that with (...), for this article of ^ourman (for, his other matters ^ set
(...)) (...) S. Hierome calls (...), and (...) him up therefore, declaring
rather his own impotencie (though otherwise; being a very godly Saim, and a
notable learned Father) than herein confuteth his adversary.

Your third demand, is to (...) what we say to the A Sta. 57 a. The Papists
ob^ection that we be (...) and (...)* for deoying ^cles at San^cts tombs.
rians, that denied the miracles done at the saints tombs to be true
miracles, and that the (...) cannot cast out the diuils, and relieve them that
be possessed. And to the Bogomiles, that said the devils sat at the saints
tombe^, and did wonders there, to illude and (...) the people, to cause the
people to worship them.

We deny not, M. Sta. with the Arians or (...), the power of Christ (...) his
wondrous works, at the (...) Difference between the ancient mi^acles, and the
Popish illusions.
of the (...) the^: because we deny the feigned (...) of your (...)* and
images now, Between which (...) and their (...) then, was as much difference
(...) it between (...) miracles and false illusions, between the sincere
worship of God, and open Idolatry. So that this, as the other, is your false
slander also. And if ye make al (...) and (...), who, though they did (...),
(...) at that time (...) wrought (...) his (...), to confirm the faith among
the (...), yet would they not make any ordinary prescript (...) of miracles,
nor by miracles measure true or false doctrine, nor asscribe any holiness to
the (...) or places, nor such miracles to be of the martyrs doings, nor to be
done for their dese^uings, nor the (...) or the martyrs them selves, to ^e
honored with spiritual worship: Then will ^s make S. (...), (...), Cyril, and
other godly fathers to be Arians and (...) also.

^,(says S. De vera rel. cap. v^t.
Aug.) Let not the worship of dead men, be religion to us. For if they have
lived well* they are not so to be accounted, (...) they would seek such (...)
but they would have (...) to be (...) of (...) who (...) us* they rejoice that
we are made) (...) of (...). They are How sainct^s are to be hono^ed, how not.
therefore to be honored for imitation, they are not to be worshipped for
religion. (...), you (...) worship them for religion, dedicate temple^ to them,
offer (...), kneel, pray unto them, and make these great points of How the
Papists honored saints. Apoc. 21. Act. 14.
religion. The angel of God in no case would suffer any such kind of
worship to be done unto him, but for^ad S. John to do it. Peter would not
suffer Cornelius, nor Paul and Barna^as the Lyaconi^s this to worship the^.
Which if they refused being alme, think ye they desire you to worship them
being dead? in deed so do your popish saints.

Francis the author of the begging Friars, as your legend Legendum san cto^um
in vita Francise^.
tells, releysed on a (...), and laug^ed greatly, and being demanded the
cause of his laugh^er, he answered, it was, because ^e should after his death
be worshipped for a saint. And in many your other saints, ye tell ^s, how they
appeared to such or such a Priest, F^ier, Monk, or (...): commanding this
or that ceremony, church, prayer, feast, or holyday, to be made in their
honor. This did not the true saints and good angels of God require, nor the
Church of God yield unto them: as says S. (...) (...) Augu. de vera relig*
ca. vlt.
^ do we build Churches to them, for they would not so be honored of us. But
as Cyrill says, Sanctos martyr^s (...) Cyrill. contra ^ulian. li. 6.
(...). We neither call the holy martyrs, Gods, no^ yet use we to worship
them. (...) rather we praise them with high^ honors, that they have stoutly
fought (...), and (...) the sincerity of the ^aythe, in so muched at they
(...) their own life, and (...) the (...) of death (...), they prevailed in
great dangers, and were of such strength, that they would raise up, as it
were, (...) of their life. And therefore it is not unworthy, yea rather it is
also nec^ssarie, to honor them with perpetual praises, which are glorious by
so noble dee^es.

As for other kind than this, of prays^ng them for their virtues, Cyril (...)
none to the Christians, (...) says* Cyril contra lulian. li. 6.
To worship dead (...) otherwise* is the property of heathen (...).

Now where ye measure (...) and saints by miracles, S. (...) says, ^ fieri
Christianum, non (...) sanctum. etc. It is possible Aug. de eccl. dog. cap. 84.
and. 85. Saints not to be mesured by miracles. S Thomas of Cantorbury, and S.
Aug. of ^ng land no saints by S. Aug. of Afrikes rule.
that a Christian by signs and wonders may be made famous, but he can not be
made a Saint by them, if he use intemperat and rough (...)* (Such an one as
your Chronicles write that Augustine the Italian was, which came hither from
(...), nothing like this S. Augustine of Affrike: such an other proud and
sharp saint, as was you^ S. Thomas (...), of whose shrine and miracles your
legendes babble much.) Temperatis (...)* etc. say the S. Augustine, but by
temperate and soft demeanor* we believe that a man may well be made both a
saint, and perfect, and a man of God, yea (...) without the efficacy of
miracles. And so says Cyrill on S. John the Baptist, Cyril. (...). Ioh. lib.
7. cap. 13.
in that he wrought no miracles: (...) in aliquo derogat sanctitate (...). etc.
Neither does this in any point derogate The best saints wroughte least
miracles.
from his holiness* than (...) there (...) not a greater, as our Savior does
(...). For to (...) miracles adds no holiness or (...) to a man, si^he it
serves as well for the ill and reprobate, as the Lord wit nesseth: have not we
(said the Hypocrites) O Lord, cast Mat. 7.
out devils in thy name? And therefore says Chrysostom Chrysostom. in John.
cap. 2. Hom 21. No need of miracles to the faithful and them that love God.
to such as in his (...) required miracles, and asked why they had not
miracles, so well (...) the old time, Si fidelis e^. (...). If (...) art
faithful, as thou ought to be, if thou love Christ* as he ought to be
loved, thou need no miracles, for miracles are given to those that are
unbelievers. It is a (...). M. Stap. that your Church is an vnbelee^ing
Church, since it so vaunteth of miracles, and that of such miracles, as either
are plain The popish Church an unbelieving Church.
illusions of wicked spirit^s, working, strongly in the children of vnbelee^e,
to de^ayne them still in error: or else are nothing but ma^yfest forge^ies,
and iugglings, such in very deed as the (...) and (...) the christians then
withal.

But that your (...) are not s^aundered there with now, I report me to those
your Images that could sweat, Miraculous ^mages.
roll their eyes* move their hands, turn round about, sense the Church,
walk up and down the aultare, speak, weep, laugh, frown, and do) many
other pretty miraculous knackes. Of which (...), all the world now sees the
marueytous legerdemaine, the best of your s^rt, are either forced with shame,
to confess the abuses, or else to ^est out the matter with scoffs, as sir
Thomas Moo^in in his book of pilgrimages and miracles does. But none durst
crake of them so impudently as do you, comparing your false miracles, to the
ancient true miracles, calling us Arians and (...) a^ though we denied those,
when we only deny yours, at the which if not the Devil himself, yet his
ministers sat, if not at saintestombes, yet at your Zoolatrous shrines, to
illude, yea to rob and spoil the simple people, to derke your gorgious
shrines and Images, but chiefly to enriche your ^es.

But as Christ come says, Martyrs non gaudent. etc. The spoil of the (...)
to honor the dead.
The Martyrs rejoice not when they are honored with that money* for which the
poor do weep. What virtue of justice is that to reward the dead and
spoil the living? etc. what manner of men then be they, that spoil men, and
make buyldings of (...)? What would Chrysostom have said, had he seen with
what rapine^ your Popish shrines were decked nothing like the reverent tombs
of those holy Martyrs, which yet they worshipped not, nor the Martyrs in the^,
what true miracles (...) were wrought at them* and therefore Chrysostom wa^th,
Ne a^endas cin^res De 7. Match. Hom. 7.
^ of the ^es bodies, nor the imbe^ of the fl^ relics, and all their bones,
which in time (...) consumed, but open the eyes of thy says, and see the (...)
with (...) power.

And in such sort says saint Augustine* Honoramus sane De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 8.
ca. vit.
memorias martyrum tanque sanctorum ho^ Des. We honor in d^ede the memory of
the martyrs* as the holy men of God: Not (as he says afterward) as the
heathen do, Lib. 22. ca. 10.
that to their Gods buy^de Churches, and erect aultars, ordeyne Priests, and
make sacrifices. Nos autem. etc. But we (says he) do not buy^de Churches to
our Martyrs, as though they were Gods, but make memories of them, as dead men
whose souls do live with God, neither do we erect altars there, whereon we
might sacrifice to Martyrs, but we offer Sacrifice to the one God, both of the
Martyrs, and of us. At the which Sacrifice the men of god which in the
acknowledging of him, have overcome the world, are in their place and order
named, but not of the Priest that sacrifices, although he sacrifice in the
memory of them, because he is Gods Priest, not theirs. But the sacrifice is
the body of Christ, which is not offered to them, because they are this same
body. Which saying of Saint Augustine, as it confounds your gross opinion
of this spiritual sacrifice that next ye lay to our charge: (for he says the
sacrifice is that body of Christ, the which they them selves be also, that is,
the mystical body, and not his natural body) so it shows what a
difference between those old tombs of true Martyrs, and your Saints shrines
there is.

You builded and dedicated Churches to them, so did not How the fathers used
the memories of the martyrs. How the Papists use them.
they. Your schooemen say they have numina, and therefore ought to be
worshipped, so did not they. You erected altars to them, so did not they. You
sacrificed to the^, so did not they. You ordained Priests unto them, and
besides Priests, you instituted Monks, Nuns, Friars and Chanons to them, so
did not they. You worshipped them with divine honor, so did not they: and yet
ye call us by the name of those Heretics, that rejected their Martyrs miracles
and memories, because we reject your illusions and Idolatries.

Now as you thus meruelously slander us, so are ye Sermons falsely fathered on
^. Ambrose.
either deceived your self, or would deceive others under Saint Ambrose name,
where as the book ye cite (which also Alfonsus stands much upon) is none of
Ambrose his works, but some feigned forgers in his name, as Erasmus very well
does prove.

If ye will know the very mind of S. Amb. turn to his commentary on the
first to the Romans where he says: quanta agritudo, etc. What a great grief,
what a great folly is it, for those to call themselves wise men, to their own
damnation, among whom the dead can do more than the living, and the dead are
of better power than those that are alive, These are Ambrose his own words
making flatly against you. But whosoever those Sermons be that ye quote, they
touch not us, as is declared. We yield to the old Martyrs, so much as these
fathers require. We only deny to yours, that you require, and would extort,
to enriche your selves, and delude the people, neither sparing to belie us, nor
the fathers, and face us out with false cards in their names.

But letting go your forgeries of the fathers, what say ye once again to Friar
Ferus herein? Uulgus hominum. etc. The common people (says he) esteems
Saints by miracles and counts him the greater, that has done more miracles,
but they err manifestly that so judge: miracles are in deed (to use Saint
Paul's words) the operation of great works, the gift of the holy ghost. But
hereon they are not only esteemed Saints, else the blessed virgin and John
Baptist were of all saints the least, that are read to have wrought no miracle.
We may not therefore esteem Saints hereupon. Math. 9.
Moreover, oftentimes miracles are given to the evil, for many shall say in
that day, Lord, Lord, have we not cast out Deuilles in thy name, and I shall
say to them, I have not known you, etc. And thus will Christ say of your
miracles, master Stapleton, and therefore let him be a Bogomile with you also.

Concerning Berengarius, because your slander both of him The cont^ouersie of
the Lords supper.
and us, in the controversy of the sacrament, is confuted by the learned
trauayles of those, that fully have answered all your cauillations therein: I
will now pass it over, as un worthy further answer. Only I bid you look to
it your selves, that charge him with heresy: least yt re^nfation that your De
consecr. distinct. 2. Ego Berengarius in glos^ 2.
Pope compelled him to make, sauer not (as even your gloss thereon does warn)
of a greater heresy than you lay to him.

Where ye ask us what we say to the Paulicians, that The Paulicians.
said, these words of Christ, Take ea^e this is my body, are not to be
understood of his body, or the bread and wine used at the celebration of our
Lords maundie, but of the holy scriptures, which the Priest should take at
Christ's hands, and deliver and distribute to the people.

I answer, let the truth of this objection to us, be a measure, on Gods name,
to all the rest: and as men find you true or false herein, so esteem you in
the other. For my part, I scarce can tell what words I should use unto you,
unless ye will give me leave to use your own, that except ye had a face
harder than any horn, M. St. yea harder than any iron staple, except the
devil at your back prompted lies unto you (for these be your own terms) you
would never for very shame charge us herewith. Your self know (save that ye
are hired as Balaam was, to speak cursed slanders contrary to your
conscience) that we hold no such opinion: but affirm even the ^at contrary.
That those words of Christ, take eat this is my body, are to be understood
both of his body, and of the bread and wine also. Both which you say the
Paulicians deny, and we confess and believe both. Only, The question between
the Papists and us, in the manner of the presence of Christ's body.
the question on the former part between you and us, is of the manner of the
bodies presence, which we with ye fathers, say is sacramitall and spiritual:
and you say, with ye Capernaits, is natural and carnal. As for ye other part,
of the bread and wine, you come a great deal nearer the Paulicians than we.
The Paulicians (say you) did say, these words of Christ, take, eat, this is
The Papists obiecting the Paulicians to us, are proved to be Paulicians the
selves.
my body, are not to be understood of bread and wine, And you say also these
words are not to be understood of bread and wine, for there is no bread and
wine there to understand the^ upon. Thus herein you and the Paulicia^s agree
together. But we say ye contrary to you both, they are understood both of
bread and wine. And so Christ plainly speaks, calling further the wine, Luke.
22.
(to be understood the better, contrary to you and the Paulicians) the fruit
of the Grape, and the bread which we break, 1. Cor. 10. (...) He^olt. in
propt. exempl.
says Saint Paul, not the flesh which we do ^asticare, as you say, champe
and chawe it, gnashing the bones, and the blood running about the teeth, as ye
caused Berengarius to confess. This is a grosser Heresy than that of the
Paulicians, and yet are you nearer the Paulicians to than we. The Papists e^uie
that we read the scriptures at the sacrament of the Lords supper.


But what should make you object this heresy to us? there is no cause, that I
can see, except ye envy at this, that at the ministration of the Sacrament,
the holy scriptures are read, that the people may understand the true
institution of it, and celebrate the Lords death till he come. And that in
your sacrament of the altar (as ye call it) there is no holy scriptures read,
that the people may understand, but only How the Papists celebrate the
sacrament.
the words are mumbled up to your selves, that the people neither hear nor
know them. And if you say yet, be ye not like the Paulicians herein: it may
well be, for ye be rather like Magicians, murmuring up a charm, than like
Paulicians, or any body else I know.

Where next ye demand what we say to Claudius and Claudius and Vigilan^ius.
Vigilantius, that denied the invocation of Saints, the blessed Relics, and
the use of lights, and other ceremonies in the Church.

First, to Claudius I answer, that I can say no more Alpho^ de castr. contra
Haer.
than Alphonsus does. For he reckons up one Claudius, and names another Iuo
Carnotensis, cited out of Thomas Walden, which Iuo he confesses he had not
seen. You father it on an other called Jonas, whom also I confess, I have
not seen, nor am greatly curious to search him out. For, if he denied those
things, or any of them, no otherwise than we do, it will be hard for you to
prove him therefore an Heretic. As for Uigilantius opinions on these things,
are manifest in Saint Hieroms inuectiues, and conteyne no Heresy that I can
perceive. He misliked greatly and spoke against diverse abuses, between whom
and saint Hierome thereaboutes, fell out foul language. Insomuch that diverse
misliked Saint Hi^romes lack of modesty. But letting him chide with his
adversary, let us go to the matter. And first for invocation.

The scripture acknowledges no kind of invocation but Invocation of Saints. 2
Reg 22. Psalm. 17* Invocation only due to God by the sc^ipture. Hierem. 29.
(...) 2. and Romans 10.
only of God: Laudabilem inuocabo dominum. etc. I will make (says David)
invocation on the Lord that is to be pray^ed, and I shall be safe from mine
enemies, In tribulatione mea inu^cabo dominum, and ad deum meum cla^abo. etc.
In my trouble I will make invocation upon the Lord, and I will cry unto my
God. Inuocabit is me and ^iuetis, says god, Call upon me and ye shall live,
The Lord is rich to all that call upon him, says S. Paul. Who so ever
calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved. Thus says the scripture all
over, for the invocation of God. As for any other invocation, the Scripture
admits Esaias. 63.
none, no not of the holy Patriarchs. Tu enim pater noster, and Abrah^m (...)
nos. etc. For thou art our father If Abraham be not to be inuocated, no saint
is to be inuocated. Romans 4.
(says the Prophet Esaias) as for Abraham knew not us, and Israel is ignorant
of us, thou God art our father and redeemer. No doubt Abraham was, and is a^
good a Saint, and much better, than many in your Popes Calender (of whom some
are doubted to be Deuil^ in hell, that are inuocated for Saints in heaven) yea
Abraham is called Pater omnium cr^dentium, The father of all the faithful, and
yet in this point of invocation, Abraham is no father at all, Tu deus pater
noster, Esaias 63.
only God is our father, Abraham is not inuocated, yea, he is by name
excepted, and that as ignorant of us* If Abraham then the father of the Saints,
have no priuelege, yea leese his priuelege of fatherhoode in this behalf of
invocation: what shall we think of all the children of Abraham, the Arguments
whi^ invocation is only due to God. Exodus 20. Esaias. 42. 48.
Saints of God that have succeeded him, that they are to be inuocated? or not
rather conclude thereon, if invocation be not to be made to Abraham, then
invocation is to be made to no Saint, but all and only unto God. And the
reason is this: God is a jealous God of his glory, and will not communicate
any part thereof with any other. But the greatest glory that we can give to
God, is in our trouble to invoke him. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and
I will hear thee, Psalm. 49.
and thou shall glorify me, says God.

The schoolmen confess that invocation est virtus latriae, Summa Angelica de
inuocatione.
is the virtue of divine honor. Invocation is therefore to be made to none
but God. And if you knew or weighed M. St. how great a thing Invocation were,
ye would never for What it is to invoke.
fear of God, or shame of your self, ascribe it to any creature. I nuocas
deum (says S. Aug.) quando in te vocas deum. Hoc est enim inuocare, illum in
t^ vocare, quodam modo eum in Aug. in. psa. 30 part. 3.
domum cordis tui inuitare. Thou inuocatest god, or call upon God, when thou
call God upon thee, for this it is to invoke, to call him into thee, as it
were to inuit him into the 2. Cor. 6. Psalm. 7. Ierem. 17. 1. Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 6.
house of thy heart: but none ought to dwell in our hearts besides God, none
can search the heart and reins but only god, our hearts ought to be only Gods
seat, for we are the temple of none but of God: invocation therefore (being the
sacrifice of the heart, Sacrificium deo spiritus tribulatus and cor contritum.
Psalm. 51.
etc. A troubled spirit is a sacrifice to God, neither will he despise a
bruised heart) ought to be ascribed to none but to god, yt says, Praebe fili
mi cor tuu^ mihi, my son yield me thy heart. Proverb. 23.


Moreover as Chrysostom says, cum oramus deo colloquimur, What prayer is.
When we pray, we speak to God. And so S. Aug. Oration tua locutio est ad
d^u^, Thy prayer is a speaking with God. Sup. Psalm. 85. Super Psalm. Miser^re
mei.
Isidorus likewise, cum oramus, ipsi cum deo l^quimur. When we pray, we our
selves do speak with god. And Cassiodorus. Cum deo loquitur, etc. Prayer
speaks to God, talks with the judge. etc. To conclude, all the doctors, yea
the schoolmen themselves, (...) prayer to be directed only to god. oration
(says Hugo de sanct. Victore.
Hugo) est piae me^tis and humilis ad deu^ conuersio, fide. spe, and charitate
subnixa. Prayer is the conversion of a godly and humble mind to god, grounded
on faith, hope and charity. And in the name of Angelus de Clauisio, ^it. de
orat.
the^ all, Summa Angelica says, accipitur proprie oration. etc. Prayer taken
properly is the ascending of our mind to god. etc. and so taken, it is
diversely defined. Vt patet per Ho. in summa ti. de poenis. and lo. An. in cle.
vnica de rel^* and ve. san. Whereupon after Aug. in lib. de verbis domini:
Prayer is a certain petition: And in an other place, prayer is a godly
affection of the mind directed to god. etc. Or according to Damasus, li. 23.
prayer is the mounting up of the mind to god. etc. Or according to Raymunde,
Prayer is an heaping up of words, tending to God, to obtain somewhat. etc. By
all which sayings, appears the definition of prayer, that except it be made
to God, it is no true prayer. But invocation is prayer. Ergo, invocation must
be made to God, which except it be, it is no true prayer. Invocation therefore
unto saints, angels, or any creature besides God, is neither true nor godly.

To the confirmation whereof, Christ teaching his disciples Christ directs
prayer only to God. Math. 6. Luke. 11. None can be prayed unto, but whom we
may call father. Math. 23. Apoc. 19.
to pray directs them only to God, saying. Our father which art in heaven.
etc. which prayer ought to be the greu^d and pattern of all prayer, to pray to
him whom we may call our father which art in heaven, which term is
competent to none but God. As Christ said, ye have but one father. The
angels call themselves our fellow servants, not our father. The Saints may
be called our brethren, not our father. The blessed Uirgin, our sister, not our
father, Yea though ye should call her our mother (wherein ye should derogate
from the Church of Christ) or our Lady (as without any warrant of y^ scripture
ye do salute her, and with diverse other names invoke her) yet sith by no
means ye can call her our father, you ought not therefore to invoke or pray
unto her, or to any angel, saint or creature, but only pray to god, that only
is our heavenly father. In verb. domini secundum Luc. ^erm. 36. Romans 10.
Invocation can not be without faith, and ^herfore not to be made to saints.


Saint Augustine and all the doctor^ agree, that the fountain of invocation is
faith, according to the scripture, Quomodo inuocabun^ in quem non crediderunt?
How can they make invocation to any upon whom they have not believed? By which
rule, if ye admit invocation to saints, we must then believe on saints: but we
must believe on none but god, we must therefor invoke none but God.

Neither here can ye slip the collar with your stely distinction, The
Papists distinction of help and in^ercession.
of calling for help, and calling for intercession, alleging that ye pray to
Saints, as but to intercessors, mediators, or spokesmen for you, saying only to
them, (...) pro nobis, pray for us, in^ercede pro nobu, go between us and God:
But to God ye say, Miserere nostrs, ^a nobis, (...) protege nos, liber a nos.
Have mercy upon us, give unto us, help us, defend us, deliver us, etc: For
howsoever ye make your prayers, ye grant ye invoke, which by the nature of
prayer, by the form prescribed of Christ, by the belief to be affied on him
to whom soever ye pray, shows still your prayers to be Idolatrous.

In deed this shift is a stale shift, but as S. Ambrose calls it, it is a
wretched shift. Solent misera vti excusation^ etc. They are wont (says he) to
use a wretched excuse: saying, that Amb. in. R^. 5.
even as we come to a King by his noble men, so through righteous men we may
have access to God. Go to, is there any so mad, and so forgetful of his
health, that he will ascribe the honor of the King unto the noble man? when if
any man shall be found to have so much as meddled herein, they have worthily
been condemned The Popish similitude for imercession plainly confu^ed by S. Amb.
for traitors. And yet these men think not them guilty, which give to a
creature the honor of Gods name, and forsaking the Lord, worship their
fellow servants: as though the matter were the more, because they served God.
For we come to the king through his tribunes and noble men, for this cause,
even because the King is a man, and he knows not to whom he ought to commit
the rule of the common weal. But to come unto God, from whom nothing is hid,
(for he knows the merits of all men) we have no need to fee any intreater
to speak for us, but we have need of a devout mind. For wheresoever any
such intreater shall have spoken for us, God will give no answer at all. What
can be playner spoken than this master Stapleton, against the invocation of
Saints, admitting them no further, than even as intercessours? Wherein he not
only confuteth your distinction as a wretched shift of helps, and intercession,
takes away your common similitude, and shows that intercession of any man,
be he never so just, not only does us no good at all, but also hinders the
matter, offends and abaseth God, and makes all those plain traitors to God,
that use it. But to be even with him, M. St. for calling you traitors, call you
him again heretic, call him a Vigilant an for it.

But then must ye make Chrysostom a Uigilantian with him, that is even as
earnest against this shifte of intercession Chry* de mu* Can. (...). 16.
as he For writing upon the woman of Canaan, calling upon Christ for her
daughters health, he ^arth: (...) me^. etc. Have mercy upon me: Behold the
phisosophical mind of the woman, saying, have mercy upon me. I have not (says
she) The Popish shift of intercession to sain ctes most notably confu^ed by
Chrylost.
a conscience of good works, nor a trust to godly life, to mercy I flee, to
the calm haven of those that sin, to mercy I flee, where judgment ceasseth,
where unspeakable salvation is. Tell me, O thou woman: how art thou so bold,
sith thou art a sinner and wicked, to come unto God? I know, says she, what
I will do. Behold the woman's wisdom, she requires not James, she besecheth
not John, she goes not to Peter, nor regards the company of the Apostles.
She sought not a mediator, but in place of all them, she took repentance to be
her companion, which repentance filled the room of an Advocate, and so she
went unto the chief fountain. For this cause (says she) he came down from
heaven, for this cause he was incarnate, and made man, and I dare speak unto
him. Above in the heavens, the Cherubins dread him, the Seraphins fear him,
and here beneath, even a common woman says unto him, have mercy upon me. A
very bare saying, but containing even the mightiness of salvation, have mercy
upon me. For this (says she) thou came, for this cause thou took est flesh,
for this cause thou wast made even that which I am. O wonderful matter, above
is trembling, beneath is confidence, have mercy upon me. I have no need of a
mediator, have mercy upon me. What have thou need of? mercy I seek, says
she, etc. have mercy upon me. If my daughter were dead, she should not suffer
such things, for then would I have delivered her body into the bosom of the
earth, and in process of time, I should have forgotten these euilles, and my
grief vvoulde have paused* etc. Mark the philosophy of the woman, behold her
noble courage, she went not to soothsayers, she called not wise men, she
sought not charms to tie about her, she fetched not those ^orceresse women,
that use to provoke Devils, and augment the ^ore with their enchauntmentes.
She let go all such falsehoodes of the Devil: she contemned all purgings,
and she came unto the healthefull port of our souls. etc. The judge comes
to thee, flee thou to God, the Judge does call for thee, do thou invoke God,
which is on thy side. Is he far from thee, that thou should go to any
place for him? God is not included in place, but he is always even present at
hand: and even he that is not shut up in place, is holden yet by faith. For if
thou will enquire a man, and demand what he does, thou shall hear, he
sleeps, or he is not at leisure* or in deed even his servant will disdain
to answer thee. But unto God there is no need of any of these things. But
wheresoever thou shall be, or wheresoever thou shall invoke him, he hereth
thee: there needs no porter, there needs no mediator, there needs no servant:
but say thou, Have mercy upon me, and by and by God will be present, yea while
thou yet speak he says, here I am. etc. Let us follow then this woman of
Canan^e.

And like wise on the same story in an other place, Mauult Homil. 53.
(...) nostram. etc. God had leauer have our own prayer which are guilty, than
the prayer of other for us. And again, Non est opu^ pa^ronis apud dei^. etc.
There is no need of patrons De profectu euang. hom. 6.
before God, nor need of gadding up and down to flatter other. But although
thou art alone, and haste no patron, and prayest by thy self, yet shall thou
certainly obtain thy request: for God does not so easily grant, when other
pray for us, as when our selves do pray, yea though we be replenished De
poe^iten. Homil 4.
with many evils. And to conclude he says, Haecigitur scientes. etc. Knowing
therefore these things, let us evermore flee to God, who is both willing and
able to deliver us of our grieves. But as for men, if at any time we should
entreat them, it behooves first to meet with the porters, to move their
parasites and iesters, and oftentimes to go along way about: but in God there
is no such matter, he is entreated without mediator, without money, without
cost he grants our prayers.

Now although we see by the Scripture, and by these fathers, being yet therefore
no Heretics) that we need not, nor ought to seek so much as any
intercessoures (by The Papists ascribed more than intercession to saints,
making them helpers and Saviors.
which term ye would shifte off all the matter, saying ye make them no
helpers, but intercessors only:) yet herein your shifte is not so miserable, as
your lie is manifest. You inuocated Saints as healpers, yea and Sauioures
also. Your Primers can witness against you, your Antiphonaes, your Grayles,
your Massebookes, Hyu^als, Legendes, Portasses. etc.

Have ye forgotten this hymn to the blessed virgin Marie? What the Papists
ascribed to Saints in their hymnall.
Virgo singularis inter omnes mitis, nos culpa solutos (...) sac et castos,
vita^ pr^fta pura^, iter para tutu^, vt videntes Iesum, semper collaetemur. O
thou virgin singular among also meke: make us loose from sin, make us meek
and chaste: give us a pure life and make our journey safe: that beholding Jesus,
we may always joy. Do ye not pray in your primer to S. John and the virgin
What they ascribed to saints in their Primers.
Mary. Te etiam inuoco. etc. I invoke thee also with Marie the mother of the
same our savior, that thou would vouchsafto give me thy help with her, O
you two precious stones, O heavenly Marye, O John, O you two lights from God,
shining before God, with your rays, drive away the clouds of my sins? Do
ye not there pray to S. Christofer? O thou martyr Christofer with the godly
honor of our Savior, make thou us in mind to deserve the love of God, Christ
has promised, that what thou ask thou haste obtained, give unto the sorry
people those things, that at thy death thou askedst, give thou comfort to us,
and take away the grief of our mind, make thou the account of the judge to be
mild to all men? Pray ye not to S. George on horseback: O George the noble
martyr, praise and glory becomes thee, etc. we beseech thee with the bottom
of our heart, that our sins being washed away, we may be joined with all the
faithful citizens of heaven? Pray ye not to the. 11000. virgins: O you eleven
thousand maidens, Lilies of glorious virginity, and Roses of martyrdom,
defend you me in my life, giving to me your help, and in my death show your
selves unto me, in bringing everlasting comfort? Do ye not pray to the virgin
Mary: Exaudi me, salua me, custodi me, Hear me, save me, keep me? Do not ye
pray to the Apostles, O blessed Apostles of God, loose me from my sins,
defend me from the pains of hell, and deliver me from the power of darkness,
and bring me to the everlasting kingdom Do ye not pray to all the virgins, I
beseech you all holy virgins help me, that I may have of heart good will, of
body health, humility, chastity, and after the course of this life, the
fellowship of everlasting bliss.

Do ye not pray to all the he saints and she saints, even where ye mention
their intercession: O all you he and she saints of God, I beseech you, and
make supplication to you, succor me, have mercy upon me mercifully, and pray
for me instantly, that by your intercession, a pure conscience, a compunction
of heart, and a laudable consummation of everlasting life, may be given me of
God, that through your merits I may come to the country of everlasting
bliss? Did ye never say this prayer in your Primer: O most noble, most
excellent, and ever glorious Virgin, etc. O Lady my Queen, and Lady of all
creatures, which forsakest none, dyspysest none, nor leauest any desolate,
that with a good and pure heart, humbly and devoutly runs to thee: despise
me not for my most grievous sins, forsake me not for mine innumerable
iniquities, nor for the hardness and uncleanness of my Firm confidence put in
the blessed vir gin Mary.
heart cast me not away, from the face of thy grace and love, but for thy
most great mercy, and most sweet pity hear me, putting firm confidence
in thy mercy, and succor me most holy and most glorious virgin Marie in all
my tribulations, griefs and necessities, and also give me council and help
in all my works, and deliver me from all mine enemies, visible and
invisible, give me virtue and strength against the temptations and devises of
the world, the flesh, and the devil. etc. And in my last days be unto me my
helper, and comforter, and deliver my soul, and the soul of my Father The
blessed virgin made the principal, and Christ but an helper unto her.
and of my mother, of my brothers and my sisters, of my parents, my friends,
and my ben^factours, and of all faithful both living and dead, from the mist
of eternal death, he helping thee whom thou have borne, Jesus Christ thy son.

Prayed ye not to S. Erasmus, Receive me S. Erasmus, into thy holy faith and
grace, and conserve me from all evil by these eight days, and give unto me,
that I may pass them over with a right faith, and with all prosperity unto
the end of my life, and that ought of mine enemies will, prevail not against
me, to thee, to thy praise and honor, to me, to my consolation and grace, to
thee S. Erasmus I do commend Soul and body commended to S. Erasmus.
my body and my soul, and all that are joined unto ^in confession, and prayer,
or consanguinitie, and all my doi^ that I may live with all prosperity, peace
and joy now and for ever.

Ye have in the Primer, a notable prayer to the blessed virgin, Aue domina
sancta Maria etc. Hail Lady S. Marie, mother of God, Queen of heaven, port of
Paradise, Lady of the world, eternal light, Empress of hell. etc. Over the
head of this prayer, is set in red letters: Quicunque oratione^ seque^tem A
Pardon of 40000. years for saying a prayer to the blessed virgin.
deuote dixerit, promeretur quadraginta millia annorum indulgentiarum, and per
tot dies videbit beatam virginem ante die^ exitus sui, per quot annos
continuauerit: Whosoever says this prayer following devoutly, shall have
forty thousand years of pardon, and for so many days as he has continued
years, he shall see the blessed virgin before the day of his departure.
Likewise over the head of the prayer to the virgin Marie, called Aue rosa sine
spi^is. etc. Hail rose without thorns. etc. is printed in red letters in
English: This prayer showed our Lady to a devout person, saying, that this
golden prayer is The Papists say the blessed virgin delights to be prayed unto.
the most swetest and acceptablest to me. And in her appearing she had this
salutation and prayer written with letters of gold in her breast.

How say ye to these prayers and inuacatio^s M. St. is here nothing but Ora pro
nobis? do they make saints only intercessours as ye now would bear the simple
in hand, the prayers to them were nothing else but to desire them to be our
intercessours? is this the coming between us and God, and not rather the
placing them in Gods seat? what left they out that they fully ascribed not unto
them* could they do any greater blasphemy to God and defacing to his Saints
than this? but perhaps ye will say, this was done in the time of too gross
ignorance and idolatry. Now things are more opened, and the people pray not
after so gross a manner. Who were they M. St. that taught them thus to pray,
was it we or you? whose plackardes and pardons of sins are prefixed to entise
and tickle the people to say these prayers, ours or yours? Ha M. St. for shame
yet at the length blushe at the reading of them. All godly will tremble with
horror, to hear and see how they blasphemed God unwittingly, being deceived
by such blind leaders of the blind, the thick rymine of whose ignorance is
not yet taken away from the eyes of a great many. I promise you M. St. this
Primer (since I took in hand to answer you) I sound devoutly occupied in
the Church, of a privy friend of yours, and I dare say, had you seen it in his
hands, ye would not have taken it from him, but have commended his Idolatry.
And shall we think that in your late time of Queen Mary's reign your self
used any better Primer?

Have ye not in your English and Latin primer, printed The abominable prayers
in the Primers printed in the Reign of Q. Marie.
An. Dom. 1557. by the assigns of John Waylande, (all other primers forbidden
to be printed) in your Mattins to the virgin Marie: Thou art the door of the
heavenly king. And the gate of life replenishing. Since a virgin life does
bring, ye redeemed people rejoice and sing? And again, O gloriouse mother etc.
we beseech thee of thy pity, to have us in remembrance, and to make means for
us unto Christ, that we being supported by thy help, may deserve to obtain the
kingdom of heaven. Here^e pretend her to be but a mean maker, and yet ye
ascribe supporting and help of salvation to her, and to your selves most
arrogantly deserte of heaven. Do ye not pray to S. Michael. O Archangel Michael
come for to succor the people of God, and I shall give thee praise in the
presence of Angels: Versicle: In thy holy temple I shall to thee pray: Answer:
And thy blessed name confess always: and yet who knows not, that David
ascribes those words only to God?

Do ye not say in the prime: We do praise thee, and do pray thee, mother of
God most merciful: that thou entend, us to defend, from death that is most
sorrowful. In the third hour. The dolorouse passion of Gods sweet mother,
bring Salvation ascribed to the passion not of Christ, but of the blessed
virgin.
us to the bliss of almighty God the father. What doctrine call ye this M.
St. that omitting the passion of Christ we be saved by the passion of the
virgin Marie? In the 6. hour. O virgin Mary most gracious, O mother of mercy
incomparable, from our enemy defend thou us, and in the hour of death be
favorable. And in the ninth hour, even in a prayer to Christ: That he would
give all those that remember her compassion, prosperouse life and everlasting
glory, for her sake, which words, for her sake, in the middle of the
Salvation given for the blessed virgins sake.
prayer are (as the principal words thereof) only set out in read letters,
and all the rest in black. In the euensong: Hayle star of the sea most
radiant, O mother of God most glorious, a pure virgin always perseuerant, O
gate of heaven most gorgious, thou wast saluted with great humility, when
Gabriell said Aue Maria, establish us in peace and tra^quillitie, and change
the name of sinful Eua. Lose the prisoners from captivity, unto the blind
give sight again, deliver us from our malignitie, to the end we may some
grace attain. Show thy self to be a mother, so that he accept our petition,
which for our sake before all other, was content to be thy Son. O blessed
Lady, O singular virgin, in perfect meekness all other exceeding, deliver us
from bondage of sin, and make us meek and chaste in living, make us ever pure
life to ensue, guide us ever upon our journey, that we beholding the face of
Jesus, may joy with him in heaven always. Item, Holy mother succor the
miserable, comfort the weak sprited, give courage to the desperate. In the
complene, O Mother of God we do glorify thee, for thou ar^e she that bore
Christ, preserve all that glorify thee. Item, O thou meek mother have mercy
therefore, on wretches for whom thou had this pain, seeing thy Son that
vine cluster pressed sore. And from the pestilence of death eternal, keep us,
by voyding the feende infernal, and join us with them that renowned shall be,
with eternal life seeing the deity. Item, Hail queen of mercy, our life,
our sweetness, The blessed virgin to be our life, our hope.
our hope, all hayle unto thee do we cry, which are banished children of Eua,
unto thee do we sigh, weeping and wayling in this vale of lamentation, come of
therefore our patroness, cast upon us those pitiful e^es of thine, and after
this our banishment, show unto us the blessed fruit of thy womb Jesus. Item,
In the heavenly habitation, where the fruit of Salvation gotten by the blessed
virgins deserving. The blessed virgin the cause that the world flo^isheth in
quietness.
thy womb everlasting we may behold through thy deserving in joy without
limitation. And in the prayers following: Rejoice spouse of God most dear, for
as the light of the day ^o clear, comes from the Sun most radiant, even so
do thou cause questionless, the world to flourish in quietness through thy
grace abundant.

These were the prayers that you said your selves, and taught the people to
pray, in the days of your late tyranny M. St. and what point of invocation is
here omitted, that ye can devise to give to God, that ye have not yielded to the
Saints, correcting so little the old Primer that is a great deal worse, if
worse can be? And dare that impudent face of yours (to return your (...)
terms on your self) still bear us in hand ye made them but only
intercessours, and all is but Ora pro nobis? I have only hitherto master St.
set ye t^ learn^ your Primer, or rather to unlearn it.

Ye have a (...) for the nonce of this matter, called the Salvation for saying
a prayer to the blessed Virgin.
prayers and salutations of the blessed virgin: before which are (...) these
verse^. Vnaquaque die, deuota mente Mariae, hac decant^tur, and vita (...)
sequ^tur. Every day let this prayer be song unto S. Marie, and you shall be
saved. The first prayer is this: Exa^ds. etc. O blessed queen of Heaven hear
us, and receive our praises that singing we offer to thee, in tend to our
prayer, and succor us celebrating thy praise, reach thy hand of co^solatio^ to
us that invoke thee, and vouchsafe The presence of the blessed virgin.
to be present here with them that desire thee* etc. we consider the greatness
of thy godliness, and to thee with sure confidence do we flee, to thee we cry
lifting up our hands from the depth of iniquity, hear thou our prayer, and
deliver thou us from the snares of sins, make thou us being cleansed from
Purification of the heart ascribed to her.
all our sins, in thy praises to be found worthy, purify thou our
hearts, wherein we may worthily heap up the remembrance of thee: water thou our
hearts with the dew of thy sweetness, that the drink of bitterness which (...)
soup in may vanish away. Let our minds defiled with the gall of sins, be
moistened with the stream of thy goodness. etc. Let thy love root in us, and
expel from us, the custom of vices and offenses. Let it lighte^ our souls,
and pull away the heavy multitude of evils, let it mollify our hardened hearts,
and let it vouchsafe in them to make for it a worthy habitation: that thou O
Lady of heaven may possess the cloisters of our breast, and with thy holy
*goddeshed* may enco^passe them, give Tuo sacro ^u mine. Goddesshed ascribed
to the blessed virgin.
unto our minds continually to think on those things that are pleasing to
thee, and to our lips to speak those things that please thee, so that our
senses and our tongue in doing thee service, may please thee: that the flesh and
spirit remain always under thy protection, to thee holy Mother of God be
praise and glory and thankesgeuing, let the congregation of ^aintes glory in
thee. Amen.

What a blasphemous prayer is this M. St. and yet the second and third passes
it. Venice etc. Come you that desire the heavenly glory, and let us praise the
Empress of heaven. Let us magnify the most blessed Marie virgin, and give
glory unto her. Let us embrace her steps in humility, and pour out our
humble prayers unto her. Let us lift up to her the eyes of our mind, and put
firm hope in her, for she is the Et firma^ spem ponamus in ^am. The bl. virgin
salvation to the^ that put their trust in her.
salvation and medicine, the sweet renown and healthful refuge to them that
put their trust in her, she is the mother of mercy and godlines^e, the
merciful and most godly comforter of the miserable, for she defends all
those that serve her, from all adversities, and enricheth them with the crown
of glory. etc. In the third prayer: Thou our most merciful mother, cleanse us
from our daily sins, etc. thou a^te our true Tu vera spes and consol. nostra.
Quale tibi sacrificium immolabio^us.
hope and consolation, thou art the sweet refection of our mind, thou art
our salvation and medicine, hear us thy servants that trust in thee. What
sacrifice shall we offer to thee O Lady? with what praises can we worship thee?
what thanks can we, can our baseness, give thee? or what honor can we do to
thee, with what devotion shall we serve thee? which by thy only chastity have
found the entrance of health, etc. despi^e Sola castitate. Confidentes in the
speramus.
not us that put our trust in thee. We trust in thee, and thee our aid we
invoke, etc. In the 4. prayer. Thou with Christ possessest the imperial
honor, etc. Cast thy godly eyes on us, and search the inward parts of our
hearts, etc. In the How agrees this with: Ego Deus scrutans corda, etc. ^erem.
17. Psalm. 7. Romans 8. Horrible blasphemi^.
fifth prayer. Without thee every soul is as an unfruitful tree worthy to be
rooted up, and to be cast into the wasting fire. Our soul lusts after thee
thou noble mother of God when will thou visit it? come lady and sometimes
visit thy servants least our virtue ^aint, etc. Our soul is wi^hered and made
baren because we have not deserved to have thy grace. Come O mother come, and
moysten it, that it may sometimes bring forth fruit, that it may be fruitful
being bedewed with thy grace and bring forth pleasant fruit to thee. In the.
6. prayer: Whom God and thou the invincible mother of God wilt vouchsafe Deus
and tu.
to help, they shall endure. O Lady hear the sighs of thy servants, and
hasten to help them that trust in thee. In the 7. prayer. Spera^tes in ^e.
Regnas cum filio tuo.
Look down from thy high trone of heaven, where thou raignest with thy son,
etc. Of al wretches he is most wretch, that neglects to get thy grace, etc.
he is just indeed and worthy the fellowship of the just, that deserves in his
service to please thee, he shall not be confounded in the last judgment, when
he shall see his Lady the judges mother, and shall see thee with him judging
him. He shall Cum ipso iudica^tem eum.
cast his eyes on thee, and he shall not tremble, for thou will not forget him,
etc. In all our grieves let us run to the love of thee, etc. In the 8.
prayer. Hail praise of the continent, virtue and strength of the married,
mother of the fatherless, succor of widows, hail firm and immovable hope
of all the faithful, hayle mirth and joy of Christians, etc. behold we commend
body and soul to thee, yea all Ecce corpus and animam tibi co^mendamus.
the governance of our whole life, we commend into thy holy hands, we offer
our selves to serve thee, despise not our oblations, etc. In the. 10. prayer.
Be present with us O lady, as we trust in thee, that art the remedy of all
evil, etc. that thou being our guide we may come straight to heaven.

Now M. St. is all this neither, nothing else but Ora pro nobis? well, I could
yet bring more, and more horrible stuff tha^ this. Yea it were infinite and to
tedious, to rake out those most blasph^mous prayers, that all your other books
have. Your self could never abide the reading for shame, nor the godly sustain
y^ hearing for horror, to see God so blasphemed, and spoiled of al his honor,
of yt which he is a jealous God and will communicate no part thereof to other.
Only (to sweeten your lips withal) ye shall hear a few stories out of your
legende, The popish stories of pray ing to the blessed virgin.
and other your holy books, what ye ascribe to saints.

And first to begin even at the intercession that ye say the Saints make for
us, chiefly the virgin Marie, whom ye make far more merciful than Christ.
To prove this, ye Discipulu^ sermon. 162.
tell us: That a certain wicked sinner going about his sin, by the way (as
his manner was to salute her Image with an Quick Images.
Aue) beholding the Image of the virgin, and her son in her arms, he saw
that the blood distilled from the child, as it did from his wounds on the
Cross. Which when he saw, being astonished thereat he said: O lady who has
done this? This was don when stocks spoke then, as stones speak now.
to whom the virgin answered. Thou and such sinners do Crucify my Son
again. And she would have wiped and stanched the blood, but she could not. To
whom (quod the sinner) O mother of mercy make intercession for me. She
answered to him, You sinners call me the mother of mercy, and ye make me the
mother of misery and sorrow. And he said, not so most godly lady* but remember
that thou art the advocate How agrees this with S. John's doctrine, Si quis
peccauerit aduocatum habemus Iesum Christum? Christ belike bears a grudge to
his father that he was not heard at the first.
of sinners, and make intercession for me. And the mother said: O most godly
son, for the love of me be merciful to this sinner. And her son said to
her: No mother, nor thou ought to be grieved in that I hear thee not. For I
prayed once my father, if it were possible to save mankind some other way, and
take from me the cup of my passion, and he would not hear me. And she said, O
my son, remember that I cherished thee with motherly love, and fed thee with my
papps, forgive then this sinner. O mother (quod the son) I will show that by
good right I am not bound to hear thee. We plead not right (quod the mother)
but fly to mercy, and therefore for thy mercies sake, be merciful to this
sinner. To whom her son said, I prayde my father twice, that if it were
possible the cup should part from me, and he heard me not. To whom his mother
answered: O my son, remember my travails and pains, that I have sustained
with thee, and give me this sinner. O Mother quoth the Son be not vexed, The
blessed virgin vexed.
because I will not hear thee, but remember that I prayed thrice, and was not
heard. With that the mother set down her Son, and would have fallen down
to his feet. Which her Son seeing, said unto her: what is that ye will do
Mother? I will (quoth she) lie before thy feet with this sinner so long, till
thou grant him pardon. God forbid this mother (quoth the son) for it is
ordained in the divine Christ still bound to the law. Honora pat and mat. How
agrees this with. Propter me. propter no^e (...)* An excellent surgeon to
heal Christ, and that with a kil^.
law, that the son ought to honor his mother, and justice concludes, that
the lawgiuer fulfill himself the law. Then since I am thy son, and thou my
mother, I will honor thee in this sinner, and for thy sake forgive him al his
sins, and in toke^ of peace between him and me, let him come and kiss my
wounds, and so the sinner healed all the wounds of Christ with his kiss.

How say you M. Stapleton, was not this propre stuff to be printed, even for
information to Preachers to instruct the people, with almost so many
blasphemies as there be lines, besides the ridiculousnesse of the whole tale?
But I tell it for your conceytes of her intercession, making her a great deal
more merciful than Christ. As did Pope Siluester. 2.


The like tale within a Sermon or two after, or rather a more fond tale he
tells of an unthrift that having wasted his goods, gave himself to the
devil for riches. Of whom the devil The mother of Christ to do more against
the Devil than Christ. The mercy and pardon of the mother above Christ's
justice. A greater matter to forsake the blessed virgin than to forsake Christ.
required, that he should renie the highest, and so he did. To whom the devil
answered that his work was yet imperfect, except he renounced the mother of
the highest: for it is she that does us most harm. For look whom the son
by justice destroys, the mother by mercy and pardon does save. Which the
young man hearing, he was sore adrad and troubled above measure, and answered he
would never do it. To whom the Coniurer said: you have denied the Creator,
stick not man to deny the Creature: no (quoth he) that will I never do, I had
rather always beg my bread. And so the matter was dashed. The young man
retourning, came by a chapel, where was the picture of the blessed Virgin,
holding her child in her arms: and he began to invoke her with all his
heart, and by Not on Christ. This was done when Images could speak. A sullen
boy, it was not he that said, Venite ad me etc.
the merits of her, repented earnestly, calling instantly upon the Virgin
Marie, for he durst not call upon the highest, whom he had denied. With that,
he heard the mother speak to her son in her arms, saying: my most sweet
Son be merciful to this man. To whom her Son would not speak one word,
but writhed his face from her. And when again she besought her Son for him,
he turned his back to his mother, and said he has renied me, what shall I do
to him? when she saw this, she set down In quacunque hora. etc Conuer^mini ad
me etc.
the child on the altar, and fell at his feet, saying: I beseech thee son,
that for me thou will forgive him: and straight the infant lift up his mother,
and said: O mother, I could never deny thee any thing, behold for thy sake,
I forgive him all. Thus ye made the mother far more merciful and loving than
Christ, and that forgiveness of sins is in her name, and for her sake. And
made the people by these tales believe, that it was a more heinous offense to
deny the blessed Uirgin, than it was to renounce our Savior Christ.

The same author tells yet a more fond and wicked In Prompt. di^. de (...).
B. Maria: tit. Ma ria virg. suste^tauit mu^dum: and in Legenda in vita S. Domi
nici, Anglice.
tale. How S. Dominike on a night saw Christ standing in the air, shaking in
his hand three spears against the world, and his mother ran hastily against
him, and demanded him what he would do, and he said to her: All the world is
full of vices, of pride, of luxury, and of avarice, and therefore I will
destroy them with these three spears, then the blessed virgin fell down at
his feet* and said: Dear son, have pity. and tarry thy justice by thy
mercy. And Jesus Christ said to her: See thou not how many wrongs and
injuries they have done to me? And she answered, Son attemper The day of doom
dese^ed for the blessed virgins sake.
thy wrath, and tarry a little, I have a true servant, and a noble fighter
against the vices, he shall run over all, and vanquishe the world, and subdue
them under thy seignorie, and I shall give him an other servant into his
help, that shall fight as he does. And our Lord her son said, I am
appeased, and receive thy prayer. But I would Christ's ignorance.
see whom thou will send in so great offense. And so the tale tells,
how she fette and presented unto him Saint Dominicke and S. Frauncis, and
how Christ praised them. And thus once the world was saved by her, and her
two champions.

On the other side of the leaf, as a confirmation to this, Discip. ibidem
exempl. 9.
is declared how an other time, a devout Ladies chaplein, called sir William,
did see Christ sit in his throne, and on his right hand an angel standing
with a trumpet, whom Christ with a clear voice, in the hearing of all the
army of heaven, bad blow. And when he had blovven, the blast was so mighty,
that all the world shook, as it had been a leaf on a tree, to whom Christ
said the second time, Who heard this might ^ blast besides sir William?
Blow, and he blevve as before. But the Virgin Mary mother of mercy,
knovvyng that if he blevve again, all the world were ended, (the other
Saints being all hushed) she starte up, and fell at her Sons feet, and
besoughte him with much ado to defer his sentence, and spare the world.
To whom Christ answered, Mother, all the world is set on wickedness,
and do so provoke me with their sins, that neither I ought to suspende my
sentence, The utter corruption of the clergy and mon kerie by Christ's own*
mouth.
nor spare man. Since not only the laity, but the clergy also, yea the Monks
have utterly corrupted their vvayes, and offend me from day to day. And then
said his mother, My dear son spare them, though not for those wicked ones,
yet at the least for my friends sakes: and so Christ was pleased once again.
An other time the matter went so hard, that the Uirgin Mary's image fell a
sweating so fast Ibid em. So contemptuously they term Christ. Christ's a^ me
stayed by his mother. The Papists teach that sain tes pray for pro^o^ging the
day of doom, and Christ teaches us to prai for the hastening of it. Matthew. 6.
in the Church, that all the people marvelled. And the cause was this, The
son of Marie had even stretched out his arm, to strike the world, and if
his mother had not run the quicklier, and stayed his arm, the world had been
destroyed ere now.

This is the intercession that your Church ascribes to her M. Stapleton,
making her a great deal more prone to mercy, than Christ the fountain of
mercy, and mercy it self, by these your wicked and blasphemous fables. But
what said I* I should have said by these your holy histories and devout
sermons. But see withal what true doctrine ye teach, that the saints do
pray for the deferring of the kingdom of God, where Christ teaches us to
pray, that he would vouchsafe to hasten his kingdom, saying, Let thy kingdom
come: And wills the godly to lift up their heads when they shall hear of
the signs thereof: and says, that Luke. 24. Mark. 13. Apocal. 6.
unless God should shorten those days, no flesh should be saved: and he will
cut them off, for the electes sake. And the Martirs slain for the word of
God, do long still for his coming, and cry: How long O Lord, which art holy
and true, Apoca. 22.
will thou not judge the world, and revenge our blood, of those that dwell in
the earth. And there were given to them white garments, and they were bid
rest a while, till the number of their fellow servants and brethren were
fulfilled, that should be slain likewise. And the spirit and the spouse says
come, and he that hears, let him say, Come. etc. And Christ says, Yea I
come quickly. Amen. Yea Lord Jesus come quickly, (says S. John.) And your
Church says (As an harlot that is afraid of the husbands coming) come not.
And ye tell us that the blessed Uirgin has now three times stayed back his
arm, and will not let him come.

You have hitherto ascribed very much, and much more than ought to be
ascribed to a creature, but do ye go no further? ye pretend that the death of
Christ is auaylable: but no further than the blessed virgin does obtain it at
his hand by her mercy. What a tale is that ye tell us, even where as ye mention
the blood of Christ? how a certains noughtie religious man, using
notwithstanding to say an hundredth Aue Mary's every day, the devils brought him
being dead in his sins before Christ to be judged. Christ pronounced Discip.
de miraculis beatae Mariae.
him to be eternally condemned. With that came the blessed virgin and offered
the papers, wherein the Aue Mary's were written, desiring Christ to go to
judgment once again. The devils seeing that, brought all the books of his
sins, Christ's judgment revoked. Alan* de rupe in psalterio beatae virginis.
and when the balance was peysed, his sins did ouerwey the Auies, which
seeing, the virgin besought Christ, saying: Thou art my son, the blood that
thou have, thou have of me, I pray thee give me one drop thereof. To whom
(quoth Christ) O mother I am not able to deny it thee, then Marie put in the
balance the drop of blood together with her merits, More ascribed to the
blessed virgin than to Christ.
and then that part weyed down to the ground: so that the devils went crying
away. Our Lady is too merciful to Christians, we ever fail where she medleth
with us. O Lady it is not good contending with thee. What a derogation is this
to Chist?

And where ye grant most to the blood of Christ, where ye would salve the
matter with intercession, even there ye say, not that he will vouchsafe to
grant her petition, but that he is not able to gainesay it, yea that it is not
lawful for him to deny it, For (says Cardinal Uigerius) Dixit Vigerius
Saonensis Cardiralis decacord: 4. can. 12. Christ bound to deny no petition
to his mother.
Solomon. etc. Solomon said to his mother, ask mother what you will, for it is
not lawful for me, to turn away my face from her that bare me. What shall
we think other than this, the Lord Jesus Christ to say to his mother, who is
far wiser and iuster than Solomon? And his reason is this, Salomons mother
had midwiues, nources, bearers of the child and instructours: but Marie was all
this her self, and so Christ is more bound to his mother, than Solomon to
Bethsabee. And therefore if we will worship Christ, we Jacob. de Vorag. sermon.
1. in die pascae.
must first go to his mother. For as says Iacobus de Voragine: as Eve was in
the midst between the serpent and the man, so Marie making our
reconciliation, is in the midst between God and man.

What a dubble blasphemy is this? First that our reconciliation The blessed
virgin made the reconciler, and mediator between God and man. Romans 5.
is made by any other than Christ, of whom the Apostle says: If when we were
yet enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his son: much more,
seeing we are reconciled, we shall be preserved by his life, nor yet only so,
but also glorying in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now
obtained reconciliation. Secondly, that we have any other mediator than
Christ, where as the apostle says: Unus deui. etc. There is one God 1. Tim. 1.
and one mediator of God and man, the man Christ Jesus, neither will your
shift serve you to cloak your blasphemy, that ye make her a mediator of
intercession: for lo here, he makes her a mediator, of making the atonement
and reconciliation between mankind and God, which as it is our very
redemption, so is it the proper office of Christ alone. ^pse est pax nostra.
etc. He is ou^ peace, which has Ephesians. 2.
made one of both, and has broken down the wall that was a stop between us,
and also has done away through his flesh the cause of hatred, that is to say,
the law of commandments, contained in the law written, for to make of
twain one new man in himself, so making peace: and to reconcile both unto
God, in one body through his Cross, and slew hatred thereby. For through him
we both have an open way, in one spirit unto the father. Whereupon says S.
August. Enchirid. ad Laur. ca. 32.
Nes per mediatorem Christum reconciliamur deo. We are reconciled to God by
Christ being the mediator.

What blasphemy then is this in you, to spoil Christ hereof, and give it to
the virgin Marie, and make her as much the instrument and mean of our
reconciliation, as Eve was the instrument and mean of our perdition. But in
this entrance of our perdition, though both Adam and Eve were culpable, and
both (being one flesh) are comprehended under the name of one, and that of Adam
the husband, as the Apostle says, Death reigned from Adam to Moses, eue^ over
Romans 5.
them also that sinned not with like tra^sgression as did Adam, which is the
similitude of him that is to come: Yet afterward S. Paul noting the mean, by
whom properly the sin 2. Tim. 2
entered first, affirms that Adam was not deceived, but the woman was
deceived, and was in transgression. If then ye make the like proportion of our
reconciliation from Adam to Christ, from Eve to ye virgin: then as Eve properly
was the very original and cause of the transgression, though Adam (being the
assenter) bare the name thereof: then properly the virgin is the very original,
and cause of our reconciliation, and Christ is but an assenter, and so bears
but the name thereof. What a wicked doctrine is this M. S.* and is this now
nothing else but ora pro nobis? Might not Christ rather say ora pro nobis to
her, sith ye give her all, and him a bare name only?

Now to the confirming of this blasphemous doctrine, comes in another of her
Chaplayues, crying, O foemina Robertus de Licio sermon. de sanctis ser. 24. de
co^cept. beatae Mariae ca. 1.
super omma. etc. O woman that art above all things, and blessed of all things,
the fore elect and most worthy vessel, framed of the first artificer, the
treasorie of the divine gifts, god has chosen and forechosen thee, that God
and man might dwell nine Months in thy tabernacle. I dare boldly say, that
even for the Virgin conceived in Gods mind, many thousand years before she
was borne, mankind was preserved in his being. For it is evident that for
their first transgression, Adam and Eve deserved not only death, but even the
utter rooting them out to nothing. And the divine vengeance which knows not
the accepting of persons, as it left not unpunished the angels offense, so
would it not have left unpunished mankindes offense: but our first parents
were preserved, that they were not consumed to nothing, for the chiefest
reverence that he had to the virgin, for he loved her above all creatures that
should be created, and not united unto God. The reason is, that this Maiden was
in the loins of Adam, as concerning the sede. And the power of bringing forth
the maiden, was imprinted in the first father, till she were in deed brought
forth. But of her Jesus ought to be borne, who was in Adam only, after his
bodily substance, to be brought forth of the virgin, and of none other: God
therefore did spare our first parents, nor consumed them to nothing, because
that so she had not been borne, and by consequence Jesus neither, nor God had
put on flesh. Therefore by this noble creature, God did save our first parents
from the transgression: and Noe from the flood: and Abraham from the slaughter
of the Kings: Isaac from Ismaell: Jacob from Esau: the Jewish people from
Egypt, from Pharaos hand, from the red Sea, from the force of diverse
Kings and Tyrauntes, from Nabuchodonozor, and from the captivity of Babylon:
David from the Lion, from Goliath and from Saul. And to conclude, all the
fauourings, and deliverances made in the old testament, I doubt Nisi pro Amore
huius puellae and reuerentia.
not but God did them, for the love of this maiden, and for the worship of her,
whom God had from without beginning foreordeyned to be set above all his works.

O outrageous blasphemy where is Christ? How agrees this with S. Paul's
doctrine, that Christ is the image of the Col. 1.
invisible god, the first begotten of all creatures, for by him were all things
created, things that are in heaven, and things that are in earth, things
visible, and things invisible, whether they be Majesty or Lordship, either
rule or power, al things are created by him and in him, and be is before all
things, and in him all things have their being, and he is the head of the
body, that is to wit, of the congregation, he is the beginning and first
begotten, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence, for it pleased
the father that in him all fullness should dwell, and by him to reconcile all
things to him self, and to set at peace by him, through the blood of his
Cross, both things in heaven, and things in earth. Here is no mention at all
of her, but all of him (master Stapleton) for whom all things were made. But
even these properties of Christ, this blasphemous doctor applies to her, and
says: your Church does so. For a little before he says: Sed hoc loco. etc.
But in this place is to be asked whether the blessed virgin were brought forth
before all creatures? For of her says the Church that saying. Eccle. 24. Ab
initio and ante secula creata sum. From the beginning and before the world was
I made, and again in the Epistle of this solemnity, the Virgin is brought in
saying that sentence. Prou. 8. The Lord has possessed me from the beginning of
his ways before he made any thing, even from the beginning, from everlasting I
was ordained, and from of old before the earth was made, as yet the depthes
were not, and I was already begotten, as yet the fountaynes flowed not with
water, nor as yet the mountains in their great compass were settled, before
all the hills was I begotten. Which words do seem so to sound, that she
was brought forth, before the bringing forth of any other thing. Who is he that
knows not that these words are spoken of the eternal son of God begotten
before all ages, and is even one with that S. John John. 1.
says, In the beginning was the word? and yet because it is spoken in the
feminine gender, under the name of the eternal wisdom of God, he most
ignoran^ly and Idolatrously transferreth it to the virgin Marie. Neither he
alone, but he says your Church does so, so that all your whole Church
Blasphemy in all the whole popish church.
is a blasphentous Church. And thus ye ascribe the promise of the blessed
seed, to the blessed virgin saying, not it, but she shall tread down the
serpents head So where David Genesis ^. in Prolog. eiusdem ad sermon concep.
Iacobus de Vorag. sermon. quarag. 50.
says, Non est qui se abscondat a ^alore (...), None can hide him from his
heat: ye say none can hide him from her heat. Likewise where the wisdom of
God says: In the well-beloved City gave he me rest, and in Jerusalem was my
power. Iacobus de Udragine, applies it to her, saying, Primo pater. etc.
First, the father has made her mighty to help. Eccle. 24. in Jerusalem was
my power: for she is made so mighty, that she can help Ibidem.
us in life, in death, and after death. etc. Again where Christ says, I am
exalted like a Palm tree about the banks, and as a rose Palm in Hierico, as
a fair Olive tree in a pleasant field, that ascribes he to her, saying: Sunt
enim quidam. etc. There are some Saints, who when they are prayed unto, follow
the information of their conscience, and therefore often times they will not
pray to God for us, because they have a conscience, that they are not worthy
to be heard. Other Saints there are, that when they are prayed unto, they
follow the straightness of Gods righteousness. And therefore if they be
desired, and know that this is not fit for Gods justice, they dare not ask:
but the blessed Virgin, neither looks to conscience, nor to justice, but to
mercy. As who should say, let them keep their consciences to themselves that
lust, and let them that will, look to Gods justice: I will always hold me to
mercy, and for this so excellent Modesty she says of her self. Eccle. 24.
I am as a fair Olive in the fields. Yea you say she has such exceeding and
excelling mercy, that not only it passes all the Saints, but that, illud
quod dicitur. Eccl. 18. de Ibidem.
Domino, potest dici etia^ de Domina etc. That the which is spoken Eccle. 18.
of the Lord, may be spoken of the Lady. The mercy of a man is toward his
neighbor, but the mercy of the Lord is over all flesh. Thus ye rob God of
his glory to adourne her, attributing all to her. And say that the father has
written in her his power, where Christ says contrary, Ibidem.
all power is given me of my father in heaven and earth. etc. that the son
has written in her his wisdom: that the holy ghost has written in her
his goodness and mercy. Again, the father has made her his Treasorer, Ide^
in quad^. ^ 8. and in assu^. sermon. 8.
whereby she has conquered the Devil, and povvreth into cur minds divine
knowledge. The son has made her his Chamberlayne. The holy ghost has made
her his Cellerer. The whole Trinity has made her Almosiner of heaven. She
is Chancellor to the holy ghost, she is Porter S. Peter is turned out of
office belike. But Christ said ego sum ostiu^.
of Paradise. Ipsa nanque est ostium. etc. For she is the door, by the which
we enter into Paradise, which by Eve was shut, and by her is opened. Ipsa
enim est quae nos suis meritis in atrium principis introducit. For it is she
that by her merits brings us into the porch of the Prince. VVhervpo^. Ioh. 18
it is said. A Damsel, that was the door keeper (the blessed A proper reason
and well applied.
virgin calls hirselfe an handemayde or Damsel) let in Peter into the
Princes porche, Ipsa nanque virgo. For even the virgin is the vvindovv vvherby
God beholds us with the eye of mercy. Uirgo autem Maria. The Virgin Marie
is the In assump. sermon. 7.
throne of mercy, grace and glory: she is the Sun to the just, the Moon to
the Saints, the faithful witness to sinners, the advocate of mankind, the
drop that softneth all hardness. God unmerciful. Christ clean forgotten.
There were three things that once were hard: God, that received none to
mercy: Death that svvalovved up all to hell: the Devil that enraged with
enmity. But the Virgin Marie so mollified God, that he received all men to
mercy. She so trodde death under foot, that now he can not take away the
Saints. She overcame the Devil that he can now* deceive none, but him that
lust to be deceived: that now she may say I forsake you not, but as a drop I
abide with you, because my odor abides with you, vvherevvith I have
mollifyed God, I have trodden down death, I have overcome the Devil.

This is one drop of her grace, master Stap. but what can ye ascribe more to
all the drops of the blood of Christ. To conclude ye make her all in all, She
^lenseth us from Sermon. 5.
our sins* she lightneth us from ignorance, she strengthens us from our
infirmities. Et per ipsam virg. etc. and by the blessed virgin Marie. Quilibet
tanque per portam in coelum ascendit. Every man even as by a gate, ascends to
heaven.

By these immoderate praises, or rather outrageous blasphemies, Master
Stapleton, ye stirred the people (quite neglecting Christ) to invoke the
Uirgine Marie. And ye exemplify it by fables to confirm the people therein.
Ye The Papists blasphemous examples of inuocating the bles. Virgin Discip.
exemp. 40. In Lege^da fest. assumpt.
tell us how an Abbot and his holy Covent sailing in a tempest: one called on
Saint Nicholas, an other on Saint Andrewe, and every one upon his peculier
Patron (but none called upon God) the Abbot chod them all, and bad them call
on the mother of mercy. Which when they did forthwith the Seas were calm. Ye
tell us of many other, that being vexed with spirits, have sought many
remedies, now holy water, now one thing, now another, yea they have called
upon Christ, upon the Trinity, and have had so little help, that they have
rather been much worse: only, when they were taught to lift up their hands,
and cry, Saint Marie help me: then forthwith the spirit has fled away all
afraid, as he had been smitten with a stone, and said the cursed devil
enter into his mouth, that has taught thee that: and so being vanquished,
never came again. Johannes de monte in suo Mariali.


Ye tell us a noble Story of a Spanish woman called Lucie, to whom for
saluting the virgin Marie, the virgin, at the deliverance of her child, came
and was the midwife, and at the Christning the Godmother and Christ the
Godfather, and the child was named after the Godmother, and called Marianus.
And how at her Churching, Christ himself sang Mass, and how at the
offertorie, Lucie was preferred to go and offer and kiss the Priests hand
before the virgin Marie, and what honor the Uirgin gave her above her self,
saying, This is your day of Churching now, I was churched long ago. And all for
saying the Aue Marie.

Ye tell us of a Strumpet, that all her life did no good Discipulus.
work, save that she would say an Aue Marie, and hear a Mass on Saturday
(which ye call our Ladies day, as Sunday is called the Lords day) and on her
death bed this harlot said, O Lady Queen and mother, though I did never any
good, yet I trust to thy mercy, and to thee I commend my spirit. And when
the fiends would have taken her soul, the mother of mercy took her soul
from them, saying, do ye not know that she saluted me daily, and every
Saturday heard a Mass, and at her death commended her soul to me? And when
they alleged her sins, I tell you (quoth she) that soul was never damned
that served me, and commended it self to me, and so she drove them away and
carried the soul with her.

Ye tell us of a knight that never did other good, but at Disc. exem. 57.
morning and Evening say an Aue Marie, and by the grace of the Virgin he was
saved. And hereon ye conclude a rule, Quod orandum sit, etc. That at the point
of death we must pray, mother of grace, mother of mercy, defend thou us from
the enemy, and keep us in the hour of death. And then we are safe. Yea as
Anselme says. Impossible est vt pereat. It is impossible he should perish,
sith by the virtue of the Aue Marie, the world was renewed. And that
Redempturus deus genus humanu^ vniuersum Alanus de rupe
precium contulit in Mariam: sine ea nihil possumu^, sine ea miseri sumus, sine
ea factum est nihil. God going about to redeem mankind, conferred all the
price thereof upon Mary. Without her we ca^ do nothing, without her we are
wretches, without her nothing was made.

To conclude, ye make her to be all in all. And as Albertus Magnus in his book
of her praises, says: Est autem opus, Albertus Magnus episcopus de ^anlingen.
(...).
etc. The book of the beginning of the Lords incarnation, describing the
mystery of our redemption, to the praise, honor and glory of the most
glorious, and alonly, truly, honorable above every Creature, the virgin mother
of God. By the most special confidence of whole help, we take this work in
hand. And in the mercy of her, even as in the most firm anchore of our hope,
we look for the end of the perfourmance, and the reward of the labor. Who
is the moouer of the will, the cause of the work, and the beholder of the
intention. Thus blasphemously ascribes Albertus, all these things to her, even
in the Preface of his book. But what exceeding more blasphemies he fills his
volume withal, were infinite to recite. Look your self M. St. if with shame
ye can sustain to read them.

Neither is all this, the errors of private men, but the The papist^s shut
that these were but private men's errors. Missale in officio Beatae Mariae.
doing of all your whole Church. For, even in the solemnities of your Mass,
have ye not in the Sequences of our Ladies Masses (as ye call them) Aue terrarum
domina, etc. Hail lady of the earth, holy queen of heaven, let the heavens
and all the company of saints bring forth melody to thee, the lands, the
floudes, the woods, and groaues resound, etc. By thee mother, we crave that the
childrens sins be abolished, and we be all brought to the everlasting joys
of Paradise.

Again, Seda nobis bella, Appease thou wars, hayle, star of the seas, thou
mother give to us the true peace, give us help, changing the name of Eve. Drive
away our evils, drawing us without bitterness, forgive us our crimes, ask al
good things, let the Son and the Father be given by thee O mother, The Father
and the Soon given by the blessed virgi^.
etc. that which Eve has taken away, thou only, O mother, give. Through
thee, the people recover their former lost strength, thou art the gate of the
high King, by the which gate we enter into the court. etc. And again: The
lady of the world etc. is the cause of our salvation, the gate of life.
Salutis causa vitae porta.
Again: Pray every man to her in every hour, and call thou upon her defense.
Sing, sing, Aue Maria, with the force of thy heart* with thy voice, with thy
vow, etc.

And in the third reason that ye give, why ye dedicate the Saturday to her, as
the Sunday to the Lord: ye say in read letters, Tertia ratio est, etc. The
third reason is, because the Saturday is the gate and entrance to the Sunday,
but the Sunday is the day of rest, and betokens eternal life. Whereupon
when we be in the grace of our Lady, we are as it were Cum in gra^ia sumus
Dominae nostrae.
in the gate of Paradise. Therefore, because even she is to us the gate to the
kingdom of heaven, which is figured by the Sunday, we keep for the solemnity
of her, the Seventh day, which goes before the Sunday. Thus does your whole
Church (yea and that in your holy Mass book) ascribe to her even as much as
any of the other.

What say ye now to all this M. Stap. have ye any shifte of descant to run
unto, any distinction behind to allege, any fig leaf to cover your shame,
that all this kind of invocation may be thought no Idolatry to a creature,
nor blasphemy to God? well, if all this will not serve, give me I pray you
occasion hereafter, to show yet further many mo and far worse abominations
than all these. But I think you be ashamed already, and will confess, that
there are at the least some abuses. But what soever you will grant, I dare say
some of your side (that would never have believed such wickedness to have been
wrought, such doctrine to have been taught and printed) will hereafter have
more regard of their own souls health, than to believe such false Prophets
as you. For, how will ye spare to deceive them, that spared not to blasphenie
God?

If ye say it was not general, I have showed you in many of your own
confessions, yea even in the Mass book, that it was the public service of
your Church. If ye say All the Papists shifts about invocation confuted.
it was reformed in the later times: I have showed ye, even your last Primers
and Mass books, set forth and authorized in Queen Mary's reign, to
conteyne as Idolatrouse and blasphemouse prayers as did the other. If ye say it
was but Intercession and meditation: I have showed ye, that it was not only
help, mercy, grace and everlasting life, but even as much that ye ascribed
to the mother of Christ, as for your lives ye can devise to give to Christ, yea
and that many times ye give much more to her than to him. If ye say now, that
one breaks no square, all this is but to one, and that to the Mother of God:
Although this were to vile an excuse, for any Christian ears to hear, and the
question is, whether any besides God is to be inuocated: yet not withstanding,
it is even as false, as all your other excuses. For ye have not so stinted, ye
have not only inuocated other besides, and that not only as intercessours,
with Orate pronobis: but ascribed help to them also. Yea there is not almost
one Saint mentioned in the whole Legende, to whom ye attribute not some or
other proper virtue, wherein ye invoke him or her, not only to be an
Intercessour and Advocate, but to be an helper, patron, defender, deliverer,
and the giver of it.

Yea as it is declared in the life of S. Peter, even as the Heathen did make
men their Gods, you make likewise the Saints your Gods. Do ye not tell us,
how in the time of S. Cornelius the Pope: Greeks stale away the Legenda in
vita S. Petri.
bodies of the Apostles Peter and Paul, but the Devils that were in the Idols,
were constrained by the divine virtue of God. And cried, and said, ye men of
Rome succor hastily your Gods, which be stolen from you. This ye say, they
cried being constrained thereto by the divine power. And thus as ye make them
Gods to go before you, and help you in every thing, so ye invoke them, and
give them godheads.

If now Vigilantius were living, and should cry out of your blasphemouse
invocation, should he be an heretic therefore? yea surely should he with you M.
Stapl. and all that speak against you. But I pray you, let S. Augustine be his
companion in this heresy. Non ad creaturam (says he) debemu^ De (...). arb.
lib. 3.
tendere, sed ad ipsum creatorem, de quo si aliud quam oportet, ac sese res
habeat, nobis persuadetur, perniciosissimo errore decipimur. We ought not to
go to a creature, but even to the very creator, of whom, if we persuade our
selves any other thing, than the truth is, we are deceived with a most
perniciouse error. This is his judgment of all these your wicked fables. As
for the assertion that we hold against you, that we have to God no other
advocate to call upon, but our Savior Jesus Christ, would he have called us
Heretics, or Scismatikes, think you, or Uigilantians therefore? no says he,
Iesum Christum iustum ipsum etc. In epist. Ioh. Tract. 1.
We have even Jesus Christ him self the advocate to the Father, he is the
propitiation of our sins, he that has held this has made no heresy, he
that has held this has made S. Aug against the papists shift of intercession.
no Scisme. So that we are here cleared of heresy, and the Scisme and Heresy
lights on your self Master Stapleton.

As for your fond distinction, S. Augustine rejects, of intercession
between God and us, as false, and no true Religion. Religat nos religio
(says he) vni omnipotenti De vera Rel. Cap. 55.
*Deo, quia inter^mentem nostram, etc. Religion is that, that binds us to the
only almighty God. Because, between our mind, with the which we understand
the Father, and the truth, that is the light by the which we understand him,
there is no creature put between. And as S. August. thus confuteth your
distinction of intercession, so would he have S. August. judges the Saints
dishonored by inuocating them.
your foolish dotage on Saints corrected, in thinking you did them honor in
serving them, when they rejoice if we serve only God, and are offended, that
ye should ascribe such honor and service as ye did unto them. Non libenter
(...), They take it not (says he) in good The Popish saints that desired to
be worcester shipped, we^e but either illusions of devils, or Papists forgeries.
part, yea they know it is not lawful to give it to any but to God, Cui vni
fas esse nouerunt, To whom only they know it is lavvful. And therefore those
Saints that ye write, appeared to such and such Heremites, Monks, or Nu^nes,
and would thus and thus be honored, fasted for, prayed unto, served and called
upon, were but either the devils illusions in their names, or your own
inventions: and he would have coun^elled you in this manner: No^ ergo creaturae
pu^ius ^ creator^ serutamus, ^e euan^scamus in cogitationibus nostris, Let us
not rather serve a creature than the Creator, lest we vanish away in our own
imaginations, as in these fables you have given to a creature, more than to the
Creator.

Neither the excellency of the creature can excuse you, The P^pistes exception
of the blessed Virgin from other creatures. Deciuit. dei. Li. 10. ca. 19.
that because she is so excellent a creature, ye may make supplications to her,
although ye might so do to none besides: No says S. Aug. Uni deo, and semper,
and in omnibus, nulli autem quantum ut^ excellenti creaturae supplicandum. We
must make supplication to God only, and that always, and in all things, but
to no creature never so much excellent. Thus will S. August. make all you
Papists heretics.

But since ye would before have proved us heretics by Epiphanius: let us see
if now ye will stand to Epiphanius judgment, in the invocation even of the
virgin Marie. For even then began this error, by the seducing of false and
ignorant priests, and the superstitious people, to take root, so that in
deed ye may vaunt of antiquity of this The antiquity of the error of
inuocating saints.
error, but other than a wicked error, be it never so old, neither you can
make it now, nor Epiphanius took it then other wise. He calls it folly,
superstition, blasphemy, fury, madness, the worship that certain women gave
her in his time: and yet was it not the hundredth part so much, as Contr. haer.
l. 3 cont. collyrid. Mar. and Antidicomarit.
the Papists in our time have given to her.

Reuera sanctum: etc. In deed (says he) the body of Marie was holy, but God
it was not. The Virgin was a Virgin in deed and honorable, but she was not
given to us to be worshipped, but her self worshipped him that was borne of
her, who came to her from heaven out of his fathers bosom. And for this cause
does the Gospel arm us, telling that which the Lord spoke, woman, what
have I to do with thee, mine hour is not yet come, least any should think,
the holy virgin to be more excellent, he calls her woman, as it were,
prophesying such things, as by reason of sects should come to pass on the
earth. Least that any body maruelling too much at the holy Virgin, slip
into this heresy, and these dotages. For, all the handling of this heresy, is
but a mockery, and as a man may say, an old wives tale. For what Scripture
has ever declared, which of the Prophets commanded man to be worshipped?
much less a woman, she is in deed an excellent vessel, but a woman: and
nothing changed from her nature. She is honorable in honor, both in
understanding and sense, even as are the bodies of the Saints. And if to her
glorifying I should have said somewhat more, even as Helias a virgin from his
mother, and so still remaining, was translated, and saw not death: even as
John that leaned on the Lords breast, whom Jesus loved: even as saint
Thecla. Yea Marie is yet more honorable, for the dispensation of the mystery:
wherewith she was made worthy: But neither Helias is to be worshipped,
although he be yet alive: neither is John to be worshipped, although by his
prayers he obtained his wonderful sleep, or rather he obtained grace of God:
Nor yet Thecla, neither any Saynct is worshipped. For the ancient error shall
not master us, that leaving the living God, we should worship those things
that are made of him. For they worshipped and honored the Creature more than
the Creator, and became fools. If he will not have Angels to be adored, how
much more will he not have her, which was engendered of Anne, which was given
to Anne of Ioachim, which by their prayers, and all their diligence, according
to the promise to her father and mother was given, yet was she not engendered
beyond the nature of men, but as all are of the seed of a man, and the womb
of a woman. etc. For it is impossible for any to be engendered on earth,
beyond the nature of man. Only it was sitting for him: nature gave place to
him alone: he, as the work master, and having power of the matter, fourmed him
self of the Virgin, as it were of the earth. Who being God the word,
descended from heaven* and put on flesh of the Virgin Mary, but not that the
Virgin should be worshipped, not that he would make her a God, nor that we
should offer in the name of her, etc. he suffered her not to give baptism, nor
to bless the disciples, he bad her not rule in the earth, but only that she
should have her sanctification, and be made worthy of his kingdom. From
whence then comes again to us the round Dragon, that wrappeth him self on a
heap? fro whence are these Councels renewed for any cause? Let Mary be had in
honor: let be worshipped the father, the son, and the holy ghost let no man
worship Mary. I say not a woman, no not a man. This mystery is due to God, the
Angels receive not such glorifying. Let the things evil written, he rased
clean out of the heart of those that are deceived, let the lust of the tree
be taken out of their eyes, let it turn to the Lord that framed it, let Eve
with Adam fear God, that she may vvorshippe him only, least she be led
by the Serpents voice. But let her abide steadfast in Gods commandment, eat
not of the tree. Let no body eat of the error that is for saint Mary. For
though the tree be fair, yet it is not to be eaten: although Mary be most
fair, and holy, and honorable, yet is she not to be adored. But these Arabicke
women worshipping Mary, do renew again the mixture to Fortune, and prepare a
table to the Devil, not to God, as it is written, they are fed with the meat
of wickedness. And again, And their women do boult flower, and their children
gather sticks to make cakes kneaded with oil to the Q. of heaven. Let such
women be put to silence by Hieremie, and let them not trouble the world, let
them not say, we honor the queen of heaven. etc. Thus says Epiphanius, and
much more, neither for her only, though chiefly for her, but in general for
all the Saints. Non conuenit colere sanctos. etc. It is not mete to woorshippe
the Saints beyond comeliness, but it is meet to honor the Lord of them,
let the error therefore cease of those that be seduced.

Now if ye say unto me, all this is spoken against the The Papists shift
that they offer not sacrifice to saints.
worship of offering to her, and sacrifising to her, not for invocation of her:
first this shift is false M. Sta. for Invocation in deed is the chiefest
worship that we can give, not of the lips so much as of the heart, far above
any outward sacrifice of the body, and therefore to be much more given to
God alone, as S. Aug. reasons. Sicut orantes. etc. Even De ciuit. Dei. li.
10. ca. 10.
as, when we pray and praise, we direct signifying vows unto God, when we
offer the very things in our heart, the which we signify: so sacrifycing,
we know that no visible sacrifice ought to be offered to any other than to him,
to whom we our selves ought to be an invisible sacrifice. As therefore no bodily
sacrifice may be directed to any but to God, so knew Epiphanius, that all
spiritual sacrifice is only due to God. And therefore he so little ascribes
it to her, or any other, that both in the beginning of his treaiise, and in
the end, he makes his inuocations only to God. Saying in the beginning: Nunc
autem clare. etc. But let us now clearly speak of the heresy it self, and
inuocating God, as we will adioyne confutation against it. etc. And in the end
thereof: Ad vnam illam. etc. Let us proceed to that only heresy, which is
yet untouched, inuocating God that he would help us. etc. Thus ye see to whom
he ascribes invocation, not to her of whom he writes, or to any other
saint, but alonely to God. This shifte fails therefore, in saying he
writes only against offering and sacrificing to her.

But setting all this aside, have not you, I beseech you, offered and
sacrificed to her? I pray you turn back again The Papists offered sacrifice
to saints.
to those your prayers, which I have cited, that plainly confess the facts,
and glory therein. Neither could they tell, by what means they should
worship her inoughe. But if it yrke ye to turn to that, which was so
yrkesome to read before: I will sh^we you, yet once more, so plain a
testimony, that all the shifts of Proteus can not turn it away.

Iacobus de Uoragine says: Secundo est regina coeli. etc. De assumpt. Mar.
sermon 5.
Secondly, she is the Queen of heaven. Ierem. 44. Let us sacrifice to the
queen of heaven, and let us power out drink offerings to her, and let us make
cakes, as we and our fathers have done, and The Papists confirm their
invocation by the Jews I dolatrie.
were filled with bread, and it was well with us, and we saw no evil: but
since that time that we have ceased to sacrifice to her, we want all things,
we are consumed with famine and sword. But as it is said in the
ecclesiastical stories, there was a threefolde distinction of the things that
were offered to God, for either they were an offering of beasts, and that was
called sacrifice: or it was of a dry thing, as of flower, bread, or such like,
and that was called oblation: or else it was of moist things, that is to wit,
of wine, or oil, and that was called drink offeringes. But this threefolde
distinction is touched here. First, the sacrifice, when it is said, let us
sacrifice: the drink offering, when it is said, let us pour out drink
offeringes: the oblation, when it follows, let us make cakes. But to the
queen of heaven we ought to sacrifice our bodies, by the mortifying of vices:
to pour out our moist hearts, by the compassion of tears: and to exhibit
cakes, that is, quiet consciences, by our inward purification.

What greater sacrifice can be given than this, M. Stap. even to God? can we do
any more to him, than as the Apostle Romans 12.
exhorts us. Obsecro vos. etc. I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God,
that ye give up your bodies a living sacrifice: holy and acceptable to God,
which is your reasonable worship of him? And have not you unreasonably here
given all this worship to her? This passes, M. Stapl. the saying of a Mass,
and yet ye have diverse Masses of her also, even as well as ye had of the
Trinity, or of the Holy Ghost, whereof ye have heard some of the Sequences. But
to see this testimony, (I omit here how iumpe ye play those Idolaters parts,
measuring religion by the belly, and tell us what trouble and scarcity has
been since massing was left, and what a plentiful world it was, when the
Mass was up) I note it chiefly, to show, both how wickedly and how fondely
ye allege their sacrificing for the proof of yours, which is both condemned
flatly of God by the Prophet Hieremie, for he alleges it not, that we should
follow it, or confirm ought upon it, but abhor it: and also Epiphanius
cries out upon it, and upon them that made an argument therfrom, to defend
their doings, and calls them wicked, and yet do you (as did they) fette
arguments from thence, to confirm your worship of her, and both of you,
making her Queen of heaven. But besides this worship of sacrifice, as
Epiphanius says also, she is not Queen of heaven, so he says, God would not
have her rule in the earth neither. And you quite contrary, call her ruler,
lady, Queen, and Empress thereof. And so it follows even in ye next words of
the author cited, Tertio, est Domina Iacobus de Vor. sermon. 5. Assump.
mundi. etc. Thirdly, she is the Queen of the world, and therefore all other
mediators set aside, it shall be lawful to appeal to her, as to the Lady and
Empress, if any man be grieved of the devil, or of a tyrant, or of the flesh,
or of the justice of God.

And thus ye are flat against Epiphanius, his saying being as directly against
you, as against those in his time. Which proves you (all your shifts
notwithstanding) to be stark heretics your selves in invocation, that object
heresy in invocation to us. Yea, whether you be more blasphemous heretics,
than ever they were, or no, let the reader judge. But from what judgment will
not you appeal, that will appeal, even from the just judgment of God him
self, to the virgin Mary? I can not read, that th^se heretics in Epiphanius
time, durst ever attribute half so much unto her. Clear your selves, M. S. of
these heretical and blasphemous inuocatio^s, and the^ prove us heretics for
denying the same. Relics.


Now if your invocation were gross, much more were your abuses in Relics,
lights, and ceremonies. In which the chiefest part of your religion did
consist, as ye made the simple people believe. First, to your blessed relics
I answer, that christian religion, nor ye worship of god, nor our belief, nor
our salvation, nor remission of our sins, nor any such virtue lies in clou^es,
in sticks, in bones or stones. Which if it did, as your Lege^ds tell how
miraculously they wroght outward, and how virtuously inward, to those yt
honored the^ with crouching, kneeling, kissing* or bearing the^ about, and hurt
the^ that co^te^ned the^, then would they do much harm now to those yt set not
by the^. We see yet many of your blessed relics exta^t, and they neither do
us good nor harm. They can neither bless nor curse, nor they work any
miracles now. If ye say we want faith, al consisted in the believer, ye make a
plain witcherie of the^, and blasphemy to God. But ye Belief in Relics.
show how ye abused those that believed you, making them believe the Moon was
made of a green cheese, as they say: but were those blessed relikes so good as
the cheese paring? Were they not such as even Erasmus said: Yea, does this
Declar. 61. fol. 384. The doutfulnesse of Relics whose they were. Declar. 3.
ex collo. fol. 334 Jerusalem and Rome douted whether they stand there where
they stood in the old time.
also pertayne to faith, to kiss a rotten piece of leather, and filthy linen
rags, etc. Especially since it may be, that the shoe which they force us to
kiss, may not be S. Thomases, but some butchers, or some bawdes shoe. Or (as
Chaucers pardoner bewrayed them, even at that time that they were in greatest
price) the old rotten bones of some Jews sh^pe.

Frequenter audiuie doctis, says Erasmus, I have often times herd say, of
learned men, that went to Jerusalem, and probable it is, that the certayntie
at this day is not known, where Jerusalem in the old time did stand. For
even I see it doubted of the learned, whether Rome should have been there, or
no, where it is now showed to be. Saint Hierome that lived in that country,
reckoning up certain things, which at this day are showed there to strangers,
says it is reported, and they say so. What shall we think now, after so
many incursions, so many mutations of human matters, that in a thousand years
and more are wont to chance, of which sort, Veronica, the pillar of Solomon,
the chair of Peter, and his sepulcher, which are showed at Rome, are said to
be?

Shall we now believe your Lege^d, better than Erasmus: but that also is so
uncertain, that ye can not tell whether ye have many of the saints right
bodies, or no: and so by your own false doctrine, ye can not tell whether ye
commit Idolatry, or no. One of your Churches says: We have such a saints
body scalp, arm, leg, or hucklebone. That is not so, says an other church, we
have it. Nay, says the third, neither of ye both have it, but we. Here the
one party or the other say not true, and yet al work miracles after their
miraculous manner. But will ye know the truth, they were false harlots al, and
deceived ye seely souls, that now (God be praised) understand the knacks of S.
Wenefrids needle, the renewing of the blood of Nails, the filth of S. Francis
breeches, etc. These were your blessed Relics. They were so blessed, that as
your great champion, friar Alfonsus says, where he defends them: your
blessed counsel of Laterane under your blessep Pope Innocent the third, was
feign to make this prouiso for them, that is put in your decrees. Cum ex eo.
etc. Seeing that the Christian religion is defaced, and Alphons aduers. haer
li. 13 The Popes religion consists in Relics. If it were good the showing of
it would not deface it.
may be defaced in time to come, upon this, that certain do set out to sale
the Saints Relics, and every where show them forth: we have ordained by this
present decree, that from hence forth the old Relics shall in no case be
showed without a cause (that is to say, without a piece of money to see them)
nor shall be set forth to sale, and that such as shall be found out of new,
no man presume to worship them, till they shall be allowed by the authority
of the Bishop of Rome that is to say, till they have paid their fees to him,
for before, they be so little blessed, that they be not worshipful) and as for
Prelates, they shall not suffer those The Popes own confession that in most
places the people were abused with relics.
that come, for to worship at their Churches, to be deceived by sundry feigned
forgeries and false teachings, as for lucre sake it is accustomed to be done in
most places.

This decreed your Pope and your Council M. Stapl. against your blessed
relics. Were not here your Pope and his whole Council heretics also? you
were best to say so. For this saying proves your Prelates, Priests, and
Pardoners, to have been false teachers, and deceyuers of the people for Lucre:
and the people having been deceived by them, to have committed Idolatry: and
the Relics, that we were borne in hand were blessed things, as ye call them,
to have been feigned forgeries and false teachings: and not in one place, or in
some places, but in most places, that is, all over your Church: and that not
once or twice, by a escape: but of custom, which how long time it prescribes,
search you. This was the general state of your universal Church (for
universal comprehends the most part) concerning your blessed relics, even
by the Popes own definitive sentence, and all his council, which, often times
you boast, can not err.

But though the Pope confess thus much, as ^e could not for shame deny so
manifest a matter: yet he knew what he did well enough, when he made this
statute. For what losses so ever other poor Priests and Pardoners should
feel, he made sure for him self to get thereby, not so much by retayning the
old relics in estimation, that then, as stale and common, began to decaie: as
to relieve the Churches hutch (whereof he says he is the coaferer) by
authorizing new blessed relics. But though he gained much by this device,
yet much water goes by the mill, that the miller knows not of. And many
miriades of blessed relics more and more increased, and never fette the Popes
blessing from Rome, for their warrant, so blessedly they multiplied, but had
this Popes decrie been plainly meant, or truly kept: both old and new, and all
your blessed relics, had been banished from all blessedness and worship,
long ago: as nothing but lies and forgeries, invented to enrich your selves,
with the spoil of the peoples Idolatry.

I grant, ye have some antiquity to pretend for Relics, Antiquity for
Relics.
not only of S. Hieromes time, but somewhat before also: that with great
reverence conserved the bodies of the glorious Martyrs. But trow you, they
worshipped, kneeled, crept, and offered to them? and yet some might, yea some
did ouershoote themselves herein even then. But did the learned Fathers allow
it? Does not even S. Hierom (of whom Alphonsus says, Qui duriu^ and (...)
pugnare solet, that was wont to fight more hard and bitterly) say to
Uigilantius, Quis enim O insanum caput aliquando Hieron. contra Vigila^t.
martyrs adorauit: For who, O thou frantike head, has at any time worshipped
the Martyrs? He tells how they translated them honorably, as noble martyrs,
but they worshipped them not. And where other began to attribute an opinion of
virtue to their vestiments, Chrysestome (if the work be his) greatly blames
them. Alij autem qui sanctiores, In Mat. 23. hom. 43.
etc. Other there be (says he) that would show them selves to men, to be more
holy: and tie and hang about them a part of their hem or hears. O
wickedness, they would show a greater holiness in their garments, than in the
body of Christ. He which is not healed feeding on his body, would be saved by
the holiness of his garment. In so much that he trusts in the vestiment of
man, which despayreth in Gods mercy. Yea? what did Paul? did not he give his
napkins, that the sick might be helped? yes, before those men had the knowledge
of God: and the reason was, that by those men's health, the power of God, might
be known. But now it were madness. For, after we have known the power of
God, whereto is it necessary that we should know the power of man? No (says
he) as I showed before: Neattenda^ cinerem, De. 7. Math. hom. 7.
etc. Regard not the ashes of the saints bodies, nor the Imbers of the
Relics of the flesh, and all their boanes that in time are consumed.

Yea your own feigned Epistle in the name of Clement Clemens ad lac.
says, Nothing is more wicked and unthankful, than to receive a benefit of
God, and to give thanks to stocks and stones. S. Augustine tells of
Hypocrites in his days, Augustinus de ope^e Monac.
that carried about with them Relics for sale. Alij membra and ossa martyrum,
etc. Other fell the members and bones of Martyrs, if yet they be Martyrs: other
extol their hems and gardes, etc. Thus there is some antiquity to be
pretended for Relics, and that they were worshipped also, but not of the
godly and learned Fathers: but of wicked and supersticious hypocrites. Against
whom, they cried out, but what would they have said, had they seen the
plain Idolatry to your forged Relics. Of the which even the defenders of
them have cried out, and confessed their abominations. For, besides your Pope,
your Council of Council. Colo^ in explic. Decalogi.
Coleyn even in defending them, says: Hi^ tamen, etc. Notwithstanding here
(which we can not deny) the governors of the Church did after a marvelous
fashion sleep out the matter. And anon after: Sed nostro saculo, etc. But in
our age (and that through the sloth of the parish Priests, we can not deny
it but that we erred. And again, Expositae sunt passim, etc. Relics are
every where set forth for gain, and those uncertain Relics, and perhaps
herevppon occasion was given, not to a few being yet but ^elie Christians, of
putting confidence rather in Saints bones, than in More confidence in
Relics than in God.
the living God, which ought not to have been done. And thus do your own Pope,
Councels and writers condemn your selves, for the horrible abuses of these
your blessed Relics, and therefore we may worthily reject them.

To your Lights I answer, true it is the Church in Lights. The first
occasion of lights in the primative Church.
the time of S. Hierome, and long before, used Lights. But as he witnesses
himself, they used the^ for their necessity in their Morning and Evening
prayers: which first sprang of this, that the Church in time of persecution,
assembled as they might closely in caves, in cellars, and other privy places,
coming together very early in the morning, and very late in the evening, yea
in the dead of the night, to invoke God, to hear his word, and participate
the Lords supper, so that lights were necessary for them. After the time of
persecution, keeping still those hours of prayer, they likewise served for
their use, till by little and little, as other things, they also began eue^ about
S. Hieromes time, to be abused. The abuse of lights.
And not long after about Gregory's time, to be kept light even in the broad
day, and to be set in golden candlestickes, which the former fathers counted
and called heathen customs. For the Heathen used lamps burning day and night,
The heathens use of lights.
and tapers before their Idols on their aulters, besides their torche lights
even as the Papists used.

But you will say, not they only used lights, but God also The Papists
objection of lights taken from the old Testament.
ordained lights to be used in the Temple. Indeed if ye could prove us to be
bound to the ceremonies of the old law, or that Christ had renewed them, and
not rather abrogated them, nor ordained any other like them in their places:
then should ye say something to the matter. But what need ye labor to reduce
the law, since ye are not From whence the popish lights did spring. Polygr.
postil. Pars. 3 in die purifi.
ashamed to confess it came from the Heathen usage. Polygrane confesses and
braggeth of it, that all your candles on Candlemasse day came from the wicked
and old superstition of the Ethnikes. Tradunt enim hystoriographi, etc. For the
historiographers tell, that the heathen Romans had a custom, that always at
the fifth year in the month of February, they kept the feast of going about
the clensing, with torches and lights in the honor of Februa the mother of
Mars, whom they took for the God of battle. And also in the same month, the
Roman women with the like worship of candels, kept the memory of Proserpina:
whom (being ravished of Pluto the God of hell) they feign that her mother
Ceres sought her eue^ to mount Aetna. Which superstition was first of the
Grecians, because of a most grievous pestilence in the year of health. 551.
turned into the foresaid worship of solemnity. But afterward of Sergius
Bishop of Rome (who first changed his name, for the deformity thereof, being
called Os Porci, Swines face, or Hogs snout) it was turned into a common
religion, as also the feast of all the Gods, was dedicate to all Saints. Which
was about the year of the Lord. 694* that the Christian people should make
memorials, not so much of Februa, and Proserpine, as of Christ and Marie.

Iacobus de Uoragine agrees somewhat herewith, though herein he agree little to
himself, and least of all to the truth, besides his impudent Idolatry to the
Uirgine Marie, quite forgetting Christ, and ascribing all the honor of your
candels unto her. First he says it came up herevppon. Quod In die purifi. sermon.
Simeon lumen Christum vocauit, ideo consuetudo inoleuit in Ecclesia, vt hodie
lumina deferamus. Because Simeon called Christ a light, therefore grew the
custom of the Church, that on this day we carry lights. For even as this day
Marie, Joseph, Simeon and Anna did after the order of Procession, carry a light
in the Church: so do we after the order of Procession, carry Candles light unto
the Church.

As this is a most evident and gross lie, for neither then, nor long after,
they knew what Procession m^nt: nor carried any light in the Temple, which had
been quite beyond Gods commandment: nor any such doing is in the scripture,
but only that this blind author followed to much the pictures in the Primer,
or the Mass book, that painte out the midwife, or Joseph holding a Taper: so
it neither agrees with the other common opinion, nor yet with himself. For
even immediately after. But we must note (says The Papists triple reason for
lights.
he) that there is a triple reason of this observance and custom, the one a
literal, the other a spiritual, and the third a moral. The literal reason
i^ this, for because the Romans in the old time did celebrate three feasts
with lights, the First in the honor of Proserpina, the Second in the honor
of Februa, the Third in the honor of all the Court of hell* etc. to appease
them and induce them to mercy, that they would more mildely punish the souls
of their friends departed. But because it is a hard matter to forsake things
accustomed, the Romans after they received the says of Christ, did yet also
keep these feasts of lights in February. Pope Gregory This is quite
contrary to Poligrans former saying. Pater luminu^ is forgotten.
therefore did change this feast into the honor of the mother of light. That
in her honor we should bear lights, that bare unto us the true light. Nor
that now it should be made to Februa the mother of the God of battle: but to
the honor of the mother of the GOD of peace. That it should not now be to the
honor of the court of Devils, but to the honor of the Queen of all Angels,
and worthily was this translation made. The Romans did therefore honor
Proserpina, that so she might obtain grace of her husband. They honored
Februa to obtain victory of her son. They honored the Devils that punished
the souls, to incline them to mercy. But these three things we receive of the
mother of God, that is to wit, grace, mercy, and victory. And therefore the
Church sings, Marie mother of grace, mother of mercy. For she gives grace
to the living, and therefore is called the mother of grace. And to the dead
obteyneth mercy, and therefore it follows, mother of mercy. And to the
universal Church she obteyneth victory of their enimyes, and therefore it
follows, defend thou us from the enemy. etc.

Thus says Iacobus de Uoragine of the original of your feast of lights.
That it was but a chaungeling of the Infidels, hatched of your Pope, on this
ground, that it was hard to forsake an old Heathen custom. But thinking to
change these lights to the better, have ye not blasphemed God, even by his
Saints, as ill or worse, than they did by their Idols.

Your Legende disagreeth from this latter devise of Proserpina. etc. And
says, This feast is called Candlemasse, Legenda Anglice in die Purif.
and is made in remembrance of the offering that our Lady offered in the
Temple as said is. And eueryeche bears this day a Candle of Wax, which
represents our Lord Jesus Christ. This is yet somewhat better than the
other. And yet in effect no better, for as this mystery was not understood,
so was it not regarded. All the honor was to her. And therefore your Legend
tells us a full worthy story, that even in her honor of her lights, Christ
himself sang Mass to his mother.

We read an ensample (says your Legende) of a noble Lady, which had a
great devotion in the blessed Virgin A noble ^ale of a Mass that Christ ^ong
on Candlemas day.
Marie, and she had a Chapel in the which, she did do say Mass of our
Lady daily by her Chaplain. It happened that the day of the Purification of
our Lady, her Chaplain was out, so that the Lady might that day have no
Mass, and she durst not go to another Church, because she had given her
mantell to a poor man for the love of our Lady. She was much sorrowful
because she might not hear Mass. And for to make her devotion, she went into
the Chapel, and tofore the altar she kneeled down for to make her prayers
to our Lady, and anon she fell a sleep. In which, she had a vision, and her
seemed that she was in a Church, and savve come into the Church a great
company of Virgins, tofore whom she favve come a right noble Virgin crowned
right preciously, and when they were all set each in order, came a company of
young men, which sat down each after other in order like the other: after
entered one that bare a burden of Candles, and departed them to them above
first, and so to each of them by order he gave one, and at last came this man to
this Lady aforesaid, and gave to her also a Candle of wax. The which Lady
savv also come a Priest, a Deacon and a Subdeacon, all reuested going to the
altar, as for to say Mass. And her seemed that S. Laurence, and S. Vincent
were Deacon and Subdeacon and Jesus Christ the Priest, and two angels bearing
tofore them Candles: and two young Young Angels.
angels began the introit o^ the Mass: and all the company of the virgins
soong the Mass. And when the Mass was soong unto the offering, her seemed that
thick virgin so crowned, went tofore, and after, all the other followed, and
offered to the Priest (kneeling much devoutly) their Candles. And when the
Priest tarried for this Lady, that she should also have commen to the
offering: the glorious Queen of Virgins sent to her, to say that she was not
courteous to make the Priest so long to ^arie for her. And the Lady answered,
that the Priest should proceed in his Mass forth, for she would keep her
Candle and not offer it. And the glorious Virgin sent yet once to her. And
she said she would not offer her Candle. The third time, the Queen said to
the Messenger, go and pray her that she come and offer her Candle, or else
take it from her by force. The Messenger came to this Lady, and because in no
wise she would not come and offer up her Candle, he set hand on the Candle
that the Lady held, and drew fast. And so long he drew and haled, that the
Candle brake in two pieces, and the one half abode still in the hand of the
Hard hold between a Lady and an Angel for a Candle.
Lady aforesaid, which anon awooke and came to her self, and found the piece
of the Candle in her hand, whereof she much marueyled, and thanked our Lord
and the glorious Virgin Marie devoutly, which had suffered her that day not to
be without Mass. And all the days of her life after, she kept that piece of
that Candle much preciously like an holy relic. And all they that were
touched therewith, were guarished and healed of their maladies and sickness.

Thus word for word, says your golden Legende, in the honor of your
Candles. And is not here a golden* piece of work, for a waxen piece of Candle?
Here is, lo, one of your blessed Relics that before ye spoke of, but it was
gotten with hard hold, hale and pull, not all they could get it out of her
fingers, neither the Aungel could pull it away, nor our Lady was obeyed any
whitte, yea Christ the poor Mass Priest was caused to tarry, and could not
go forth with his Mass. If this then be true, as it must needs be, being
written in so holy a golden Legende, (where fors^th is no lie) neither was it a
dream, for the Candles end was in her hand, to make mention of her hold
fast: Is not this a foil to Christ, to his mother, and all the Saints in
heaven, that a Candles end was thus wroong from them all? Well howsoever that
was, will ye say, this shows a further original of Candles: even Christ, his
Angels, and Saints in heaven, do use them at their Masses. I think well
master Stapleton, at their Masses. But if they have no Masses in heaven, and if
they have no Candles in heaven, then leaving these childish and impudent lies
for very shame, of Candles original: ye were best to stand to the former
devising of them, from the heathen custom, and return to your Popes change
at Rome.

Now after these Romish Pagan customs aforesaid, Hallowing of lights.
were taken up in Christendom, they began in Spain, and after in other
Countries, to fall after a coniuring manner to hallow Pascall light^ with
exorcismes. But upon what simple reasons, Alphonsus declares in the defense
thereof. Contr. haerese^ li. 6. de exorcis. Conc. Tol. 4. ca. 8.
Concerning the halowing of lights* I will only birng (says he) the decree of
the fourth Toletane Counsel. Ca. 18. At certain Churches a Candle and a
Taper, are not hallowed at their Vigils, and they enquire of us why we hallow
them? We hallow them solemnly that we may receive the glorious mystery (that
came at the time of this auowed night) by the blessing of the hallowed Candle.
And because this observation is commended in many Countries, and Kingdoms of
Spain, it is fit that for the unity of peace, it should also be kept in the
French Churches. Neither shall any escape unpunished, but be under the fathers
rules, that contemns this.

Thus we see the original and creeping up of your lights to depend on men.
Whereupon, though Alphonsus cry out most bitterly, calling us coniurers and
enchaun^ers of the people from the truth of the faith, because we set not by
them, but call such superstitious manner of halowing lights, to be the very
coniuring in deed, as even their names of exorcismes does import: yet is he
feign to confess, that Talis ceres benedictionem omi^ere, no^ sit contra
fidem: The omitting Not against the faith to om^ holy candles.
the hallowing of such a Taper is not against the faith. And if it be not
against the faith to omit them, then are not we Heretics for omitting them,
especially in so just considerations, of so great supersition and horrible
abuses, as of late time more and more they have grown unto, being at their
best, but constitutions of men, and grown at the length to a very plain
coniuring, that Coniuring by candles.
an holy Candle could drive away lightning, and tempests, yea the Devil and
all it could: that such mysteryes, such virtue, such confidence, such
service of God, such forgiveness Virtues in lights.
of sins, consisted in burning a Candle, in setting up a Lamp, in offering a
Taper, in mainteyning a light before an Image, or bearing it in Procession.

Do ye not say in your hallowing of them at Mass? Benedic Missale and Pro
ces^onale in die Purif.
Domine Jesus Christ hanc creaturam. etc. Bless Lord Jesus Christ this creature
of wax Candle, at our supplication, and power into it an heavenly blessing, by
the virtue of the holy Cross, that thou which have given it to man's use to
repel darkness, it may receive by the sign of thy holy Cross, such
strength and blessing, that in whatsoever places being lighted it be put, the
Devil may depart thence, and tremble and fly away pale, with all his
ministers, out of those houses, nor presume to disquiet them any more. Again
in the next prayer. Ut has Candela^. etc. That these Candles prepared to the
use of men, and to the health of their bodies and their souls, either on land
or water, by the invocation of thy holy name, and by intercession of S. Mary
always virgin whose feasts are this day devoutly celebrated etc. And in the
third prayer, that thou vouchsafe to bless, hallow and kindle them* with the
light of the heavenly blessing: that we by offering them to our God, may
deserve to be kindled with the holy fire of thy most sweet brightness, and to
be presented in the holy temple of thy glory.

All these virtues and many more ye ascribe to your Candles. Neither do ye (as
here ye pretend) offer them up only to God, but to the Saints also, chiefly to
the Uirgin Marie, Sermon. discipul.
which as it was so common, that it cannot be denied: so to confirm the same,
your Legend tells us a tale of one, that never did good deed in his life, but
that he offered a Taper to A tale of a da^ ned soul that beat the devils with a
candle.
the virgin Mary. And when he died he was of Christ condemned, and the devils
had already gotten his soul. Then came the virgin Mary, and put the Taper in
his hand, and had him shift with the devils so well as he could, the soul
having gotten the Taper, stood therewith at his defense, and ever when the
devils came nere him, he ^oyned one in the face, and hit another here, another
there, and so lustily he laid about him, yt he drove with the Taper all ye
devils away. So notable a force ye ascribed to a Candle offered to the blessed
virgin, and made the simple people believe what ye would, by these outward
Ca^dles, in the dark night and mist of error: having put out, and Psalm. 118.
hidden under a bushel, the true holy Candle, the light of our feet, and
lantern to our steps, the blessed word of God, that Ioh. 1. Luc. 1.
should have showed Christ unto us, the very light of the world, that came to
give light to those that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death. Which
spiritual light of Christ, and the glorious beams of his Gospel, the dim
eyes of your soul cannot abide to look upon. Qui male agit odit luce^. etc.
Ioh. 3. The Papists fly the (...) light and set up external lights. ^phe. 5.
He that does ill (says Christ, our true light) hates the light, and comes
not to the light, least his works should be reproved.

Sith therefore, even as the Owl flies the light, you sly the word of god:
all these other lights are but mere and unfruitful works of darkness,
lulling the people a sleep with these your dreaming fables. Yet these fables
were let forth in the mother tongue, yt every man might understand them, but in
no case, the true ca^dle might shine unto them. In steed whereof ye set up a
Candle before the devil. For the godly christians are not taught by Christ, his
Apostles, nor the learned ancient fathers, to set up any such Candles before
Christ, which Lactantius calls plain madness. Candles in the ^ib. 6. ca. 2.
Church so well as in other places we allow and use, as did Saint Hierome. And
therefore, where ye object Uigilantius to us, we return even Hieromes words to
you. Cereos Hierom adversus Vigil.
autem in clara a luce. etc. But we light not wax Candles at broad day light,
as thou slaunderest us in vain: but with this comfort, to mitigate the nights
darkness, to keep us awake at the light, least we should sleep in
darkness, being blind with thee. And thus Saint Hierome makes even you
master Stapleton, and your Church, that have them in the clear day light, and
that to such blind and Idolatrous ends: both Uigilantians and Dormantians to.

Now to Ceremonies: I answer, that such as be decent, Ceremonies.
laudable, and to edifying, and may set forth Gods glory, we refuse them not.
We reject (I grant) and that in good considerations, the rabble of such heathen
and Jewish ceremonies, that you laded the spouse of Christ withal. We are free
from the yoke of the law, much less need we tie us to the bondage of
Paganism. And from one of these, the most of your ceremonies were derived.
Saint Augustine complained in his time (and he lived even in the time of
Uigilantius) The Church ouerburdened with Ceremonies in S. Aug. time. August.
epist. 119.
That they oppressed the Church, which God had set free, with such slavish
burdens, that the state of the Jews was more tolerable, who though they knew
not the time of their liberty; yet were they but under the burdens of the
law, and not under the presumptions of men. Thus speaks Saint Augustine of
Ceremonies, even where he mitigateth the matter, and bears with them so much
as he could. But what would he have thought and said, had he seen such an
infinite number, as have crept in since his tune, obtruded with such severity
urged with such necessity, esteemed with such opinion of holiness, as nothing
more: yea preferred before the knowledge and express commandments of God,
being nothing but the traditions and inventions of men?

If ye object Uigilantius to us as an Heretic, for improuing such ceremonies,
and the abuses of them: why call ye not Christ M. St. a stark Heretic also?
for he objected even the same matter to the Scribes, Pharisees and High
Priects, that they worshipped God with the traditions of men, and therefore
says, ^n vanum ^olunt me. They woorship Marc. 7.
me in vain: he charged them that they over burdened ye people with such load
of Ceremonies, whereas his yoke Matthew. 11.
was light and easy, and reproved them, that for those their ceremonies, they
neglected and transgressed the commandments Matthew. 15.
of God. I warrant ye, they said, as you say by us, that he was a rank
Heretic, and accursed, and excommunicated Ioh. 9.
him, and all that held with him. And do you speak any better (of his
Ministers I mean not) but even of his word it self, in respect of your
ceremonies than did they? I omit as now to tell how ye have defaced his
word, how many things ye prefer above it, only I will note this, how
sawcely in the defense of your ceremonies and your other errors, contrary to
the Scripture, ye exalte your selves above Gods word.

Pigghius (who might for his writing be called Hogghius How the Papists exalt
tho^ selves above Gods word. Pigghius de inuocat. sanctoru^ controuers. 13.
well enough) one of your chiefest porkelings, in his defense of the invocation
of Saints, against the word of God: He groyneth out this saying: Ego certe
maiore ratione, etc. Truly I will with greater reason deny thee, the
authority of all the Scriptures than that thou shall call me into doubt, the
belief and authority of the catholic Church, since that unto me the
Scriptures have no authority, but all only of the Church. What a wicked and
swynish saying is this, of a proud Popish borepigge, against the everlasting
word of God, that it has no authority at all from God the author of it, but
all from man, all from the Church of Rome, for that is the Catholic Church
that he means, the Pope, his College of Cardinals, and his assemblies of
Priests, for this they call the oecumenicall and representative Church. What
the Papists mean by the name of the Church.
All the authority that the word of God has, it has it from them alone.
Which if it were true, then indeed, as he says, by better reason he may
deny all the Scriptures, than so much as call into doubt the belief and
authority of the popish Bishops and Priests. Why may they not then add too,
and take from, and make what and as many Ceremonies as they please, and good
reason to?

But since it is no reason that the word of God should be thus trod under the
foot of man: that Gods word should give place to man's word: that Gods word
should have all his authority of the word of Priests, and none at all of God:
that the Wives word should control, check mate, What manner of huswife the
popish Church ^s.
and ch^ks up her husbands word: that the wife may speak and appointe as
much as she thinks good, and the husband which has but a few words to say,
can not be heard: that the wives word should bear the streake, and give
authority to the husbands word, according to the common saying, As the good
man says so say we, but as the goodwife says so it must be: if this be no
good reason, nor any reason, but clean against all reason: then may we reply
to Pigghius and you M. St. that with better reason* all your Churches
authority and belief, ought net only to be called in doubt* whether it
agree to Gods word or no, but also ought to depend wholly and only on the
authority of Gods word. And rather than the authority of the word of God
should be called into doubt, much less denied, as wickedly he presumes to
speak, it were much better reason Matthew. 11.
that he were cast into the sea, as Christ says, and in sleede of a millstone,
that all his ceremonies were hanged about his neck, and all such blasphemous
swine, as this Pigghius, were carried hedlo^g into the sea with him Yea says
Christ, Heaven and earth shall pass, but my word shall not pass. Matthew. 24.


If your Catholic Church M. St. were the true wife and spouse of the Son of
God, she would with all lowliness, humility and reverence, here regard and
obey Christ her husbands word. And be content to be commanded by it, not to
countermaunde it, not to think it were not of force, unless she gave
authority thereunto, not to add or diminishe to or from it, not to command
one thing when he commaundes another, not to compel the children and household
of the faith to observe her word more than her husbands, not to have twenty
commandments for her husbands ten, not to use other fashions and customs
than her husband bids her, yea such as he forbids her, not to have all the
words and her husband not one word, yea to shut up his mouth and not to
hear his word: these are impudent whores and bold strumpets fashions, a
godly Christian matrone, a virtuous and faithful spouse, would never do thus.
But since your Church does thus, call her catholic so fast as ye lust, she is
nothing else but a common catholic queen, and not the humble and faithful
spouse of Christ. And your selves that defend her, have good reason indeed
The children of the mother Church of Rome.
to defend your Mother: but such Mother such children, that to hold with
their mother despise their Father, and make her word to give authority to
his, and say that with better reason they may deny the authority of their
Fathers word, than so much as make a doubt of the belief and authority of
their mother. Yea that is a good ladde I warrant him and a well taught child,
that will help the Mother to beat the Father, is he not worthy his Mothers
blessing for his labor? but such bastard rebels shall be sure of the Fathers
curse. For indeed they are not his Children: Ues ex patre vestro Diabolo
estis. You Ioh. 8.
are of your Father the Devil. Qui ex Deo est verba Dei audit, propterea vos
non auditis quia ex Deo non estis. He that is of God hears the word of God,
therefore you hear it not, because year not of God. The true children of God
above all, other things, yea more than Father, mother, wife, children,
friends, yea than their own life, love God, and the hearing of his word.
Otherwise they were not Matthew. 10. Ioh. 10.
worthy of God. Thus do all the sheep of Christ, (...) meae v^cem meam
audiunt. My sheep hear my voice: As the Father has bidden them, Hunc audite,
etc. This is my well-beloved Matthew. 3.
Son, in whom I am delighted, hear him, that is to say, Level all your
faith and life by the only authority of his word: Who only knows the
Fathers will, and Matthew. 11. Coll. 2. 1. Cor. 1. Job. 14. Ioh. 1. Romans 10.
in whom all the treasures of his fathers glory are couched: Who is the
wisdom of God, the truth, the way, the life, and the word it self. The
Son which is in the fathers bosom, he has declared it. Hear him. Auditus
autem per verbum Dei, But hearing comes (not by the Mothers authority) but
by the word of God.

Thus did the godly children unto God, whom we call Fathers unto us, both
before, and in Uigilantius time. Nullum imitemur, etc. Let us follow none,
(says Origin) and if In Ezech. homil. 7.
we will follow any, Jesus Christ is set forth unto us to follow, the Acts of
the Apostles are described, and we acknowledge the doyngs of the Prophets out
of the holy volumes, that is the firm example, that is the ^ounde purpose,
which who so desires to follow, goes safe. Thus also says Cyprian, both for
Gods word, and for your Mothers ceremonies: The Ad Pompei^ contra Stephanum.
Heretic says let nothing be devised of new, besides that which is by
tradition delivered. From whence came this tradition? came it from the
authority of the Lord, and of his Gospel, or came it from the commandments
of the Apostles, and their Epistles? for indeed that those things which are
written ought to be done, God witnesses, and sets forth to Jesus of Nauee,
saying, let not the book of this law depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall
meditate therein day and night, that thou observe all things that are written.
Likewise the Lord sending his Apostles, commands that the nations be
baptized, and taught to observe all those things that he commanded. If
therefore it be commanded in the Gospel, or in the Apostles Epistles, or be
contained in the Acts. etc. Then let also this holy tradition be kept.

And anon after he says: Quae ista obstinatio. What an obstinacy is this,
or what a presumption, to prefer an humane tradition before Gods ordinance.
Nor to consider, that God takes indignation and wrath, so often as an human
tradition loses, and goes beyond the commandments of God, as he cries by
his Prophet Esaias, and says, this people honoreth me with their lips, but
their heart is separate from me: they worship me in vain, while they teach the
commandments and doctrines of men. The Lord also in the Gospel, blaming
likewise, and reproving, puts forth and says, ye have rejected Gods
commandment, to establishe your tradition. Of which commandment S. Paul
being mindful, does likewise warn and instruct, ^aying: if any teach
otherwise, and contenteth not him self with the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and his doctrine* he is pufte up with blockishnesse, having skill of
nothing. From such an one we ought for to depart. etc.

And in the same Epistle he says further: But if so be, O most dear brother,
the fear of God be before us, if the tenor of faith prevail, if we keep
Christ's commandments, if we maynteyne the holiness of his espouse
incorrupte and inuiolate: if these words of the Lord stick fast in our
understanding, Luc. 18.
and in our hearts which he said: think ye that when the son of man shall
come, he shall find faith in the earth? Because then, we be the faithful
soldiers of God, because we wage under him, with faith and sincere religion,
let us with a faithful manhood keep his camp committed to us of God. Nor
the custom that crepte in among some, ought to hinder us, that the truth
might the less prevail and vanquishe. For custom without truth, is the
antiquity of error. Wherefore, forsaking error, let us follow the truth.
Knowing that the truth says, as it is written in Esdras: The truth
florisheth 3. Esdr. 3.
and preuayleth for ever. etc. If we return to the head and original of Gods
tradition, man's error cease. And behold the reason of the heavenly
sacraments, what obscurity soever lurked under the miste and cloud of
darkness, it is opened with the light of the truth. If a conduite of water,
which before did slow plentyfully and largely, do sodaynely fail: do we not
go to the A notable similitude of Cyprian.
spring, there to know the reason why it fails? whether by the increasing of
the veins it be dried in the head: or else flowing from thence whole and full,
it stop in the middle course. And if it come to pass, by reason the pype is
broke: or if it soke up the water, whereby the stream can not still keep on
his course continually: the pype being repaired and amended, the water is
fette again as plentyfully, and as holesomely, as it springs from the
fountain. Which thing now also the Priests of God ought to do, keeping the
commandments of God. That if so be the truth stagger, and waver in any
point, let us then return back to the Lords, and his Gospels original, and
the Apostles tradition. And from whence both the order and original arose,
from thence let the reason of our doing arise.

Mark this general rule of S. Cyprian, M. Sta. and I pray you set all your
ceremonies unto it, and ye shall tell me another tale, and say with Hilarie,
they are well taken away. Omnem plantationem, etc. Every plant which is not
Hilarious in Matthew. can. 14
of my fathers setting, is to be pulled up, that is to say, the tradition of
man is to be rooted out, by the love whereof, they transgressed the
commandments of the Law. And therefore are they blind leaders of the
blind, promising the way of eternal life, which them selves can not see, and
so being blind them selves, and guides of the blind, they tumble into the
ditche together. Such Pharisees are you, M. St. with your blind ceremonies,
and such Chrysostom (if the work be his) calls you and all other, that
s^ande so much on ceremonies. Per obseruationes. etc. They enlarge their own
sayings Chrisostomus in Matthew. cap. 23.
by the observations of days, as though it were even the Phariseis broad
gardes, and in their preaching they show them continually to the people, as
though they were the full keeping of the Law, and the getting of their
salvation. Such were they of whom Christ said, they worship me in vain,
teaching the doctrines and commandments of men. The large hemmes of their
garments, he calls the magnificall extolling of their commandments. For
when they praise those trif^ing and superstitious observations of their own
righteousness, as though they were excellent, and very much pleasing God: then
do they set out the hemmes of their garments.

If y^ say, it is to be doubted, whether this be Chrisostomes own opinion of
ceremonies, or no, in likenyng them to the Pharifeis hemmes: ye shall hear
even his own opinion. Unde patet multa. etc. It appears heerevpon, In Matthew.
15. homil. 32.
that many things were of new brought in by the priests, and although
Moses with a great terror had threatened them, that they should neither
add too, nor take away anything, ye shall not, says he, add any thing to
the word that I speak to you this day, nor take therefrom: yet for all this
had they brought in very many new things, such as were those, not to eat
meat with unwashed hands, to rince their cups and brazen vessel, and to
wash themselves. And whereas they ought in process of time to have contemned
such observations, they tied them selves to more and greater. Which thing
came to so great wickedness, that their precepts were more kept, than were the
commandments of God. In so much that now they seemed worthily to be
reprehe^ded, that did neglect their observations. In which doings, they
committed a double fault, for both the bringing in it self of the new
things, was no small crime: and in that they sharply punished the contemner
of their observations, having no regard of the commandments of God, they
became thrall to grievous offenses. So right in every point thief doings of the
Phariseis, hit on the thumbes, and lively portray out your popish Priests
doings. M. St. that oppressed the church of Christ with the like, and m^
superstitious ceremonies than ever the Phariseis did.

Now where they pretended, as you do, that they received Pretense of
Auncesters and forefathers.
these ceremonies of their ancestors: Although (says Chrysostom) he make no
mention of their Elders, yet in accusing these, he so dasheth down those, that
he shows even that to be a double fault, first in that they obeyed not God,
then that they did them for because of men, as though he should say, I tell
you even this destroys you, because in every thing ye will obey your elders:
which is one of your greatest reasons (M. St.) for your ceremonies

Here if ye say for all this proportion between your doings and theirs, yet
are not we so straightly bound from The Papists shift that their traditions
are not like the Pharisees traditions. Ibidem.
the fathers traditions as they, because the Jews otherwise had ynowe
commanded them, and very few in the new Testament are left to us
Christians: Chriso stome tells you, that Christ's Disciples ought to keep
the doctrine of God, not of men. For otherwise, Christ blaming the Pharisers
for keeping the doctrine of men, if he had suffered his Disciples to keep any
doctrine of men, they Doctrines of men.
would have replied that wherein he reprehended them, he himself was
culpable. If now the Disciples be bound to this rule, are not your Priests
also? Yea are not all Christians bound thereto, not to worship God with
doctrines of men?

As for the doctrine of Christ, to be even as full, yea and The sufficiency of
the Gospel. In epist. ad tit. hom. 1. The similitude of a crier and a preacher.
much fuller than was theirs, for all it has not your ceremonies. Chrysostom
says: Omnia enim Euangelium continet. etc. For the Gospel conteyneth all
things both present and to come, the honor of God, godliness, faith, yea al
things are shut up together in the word of Preaching. etc. For even as the
crier proclaymeth to all that be at the assembly, even so (says he) do we
publicly preach. After this sort, that we add nothing, but preach only
those things, which we have heard, for that is the virtue of the crier, to
prosecute all things truly that he is trusted with, not to put to, nor alter,
nor take away any thing. Which is so heinous a fault, that from hence as
Saint Ambrose says, the Devil gat the first hold, when our first mother Eve
did but a little alter in telling the words of God to the serpent. Whereupon,
we learn (says he) that Li. de paradiso ca. 12.
we ought to join nothing to the commandment no not to make us the more
wary. For if thou put too, or drawest away any thing, it appears to be a
kind of transgression of the commandment. And that the pure and simple form
of the commandment is to be kept: we must follow the fashion of witness
bearing. Commonly The similitude of a witness bearer.
a witness, while he puts too some thing of his own de uising, to the
manner of the deeds doing: he stayneth with a piece of a lie, the whole
credit of the witness. For here at the first show what offense has it,
that the woman added, Nor ye shall touch any whitte of it? for God had not
said, ye shall not touch, but ye shall not eat. But for all that, heereon
came the beginning of the fall. For the words that she added, either she
added them as superfluous, or adding them of her own, she thought that the
commandment of God was but half perfect, (as you speak of Gods word, and
the infancy of Christ's Church, in the primitive state thereof, while it was
yet without your additions.) The treatise therefore of this present lecture
teaches us, that we ought not to withdraw any thing from the commandments of
God, nor add thereto. For if John gave judgment on this writing, If any,
says he, shall add to these things, God shall add to him the plagues that are
written in this book, and if any man shall minishe of the words of this book
of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life: how
much more must no man withdraw from Gods commandments.

This says S. Ambrose to all your unwritten verities, and loades of
ceremonies, all beyond, and many against the word and commandment of God.
Therefore I may safely, for all doctrine, say with S. Aug. (if it be his
sentence) Se^m. 6.
Whatsoever ye here alleged out of the scriptures, let that savor well unto
you, whatsoever is besides the scripture, fly it, least ye wander in a cloud.
Let us not make (says he) religion of our own fantasies, for what truth
soever it be, De vera rel. ca. vlt.
it is better than all that we can devise after our will, who soever be the
deuyser, how wise, how holy, how great soever he were. We must despise
him, as S. Augustine says on this versicle. Effusus est contemptus super
principes. etc. Why were they contemned? because they declared an other In
Psalm. 160.
thing: who are contemned? those that are accursed. For whosoever shall declare
any other thing than that ye have received, let him be accursed. etc. Are they
Princes? are they learned? are they great? are they precious stones? What
will thou call them more? are they Angels? and yet if it were an Angel from
heaven, that should declare ought unto you besides that ye have received, let
him be accursed. And are your Priests or Pope more priuileged herein than are
the heavenly Angels? if he be a Prince, as he pretends by his crowns: if he
be learned, as he says his breast is the closet of all learning (though
indeed many Popes have been as simple Clerks, as even the simplest minister
in all England, whose lack of learning so often ye rail upon:) if he were
never so great, as he calls him self, Pontificem maximum, the greatest
Bishop: were he a precious stone him self, as in his Pontificalib^s he is all
to be dashte with precious stones. Yea, were he an angel that came from
heaven, as he is but a man that came from earth: yet for all this, if your Pope
make ceremonies, and establish them for necessary doctrine of religion, besides
the word of God: then is even he, and all you that so maynteyne them, before
God accursed, and so to be counted as accursed, how fast soever with Book,
Bell, and Candle, he curse other, that forsake him and his accursed ceremonies.
And have not we then good cause to refuse them, seem they ueuer so plausible?

But as S. Augustine says of man's doctrine: The saying of man seems to have
reason for it (as the Papists allege In Esa ca. 2.
many goodly reasons for them) till it be laid to the divine knowledge: but
when the lie (that is, man's doctrine, omnis hom^ mendax: every man is alyer)
shall approach to the truth, it is devoured, and perishes even as towe laid
to the fire. And all the opinions of falshoode, which now are called Idols,
because they be feigned and forged, shall be utterly wasted away. And this is
their very destruction, that as Gamaliell said Act 5.
they be not of God Demand of them this question, for their doctrines: An ex
Deo sint, an ex hominibus, whether Luc. 20.
they be of God, or of men. and ye shall pose them, as Christ posed the
Phariseis. For even as Ise melts at the rays of the clear sun, so these
ceremonies waste away, and leese their estimation, whersoeuer the word of God
begins to take place: and are maynteyned, only where the word of God is
kept in hucker mucker, and the people in ignorance, believing these
ceremonies to be of as much, yea of much more force, than the word of God.
And therefore as Eckius, Piggi^s, C^ingius, Peres^us, Canus, Fisher, Petru^ a
S^, Cocleu^, Catharinus, Hosius, Alphonsus, etc. before you: so all you stand
now with us stifely at this baye, that they are even as necessary to
salvation as the word of God. And if ye let go this tackling, all come down
on anheape.

Which Alfonsus fore^eeing, or ever he would make his book, as he terms it,
against heresies. Iaciendum est Iib. 1. ^a. 5. Human traditions the chiefest
Bulwark and fou^dations of the Popish doctrine.
solidissimum fundamentum. etc. We must lay (says he) a most sound
foundation, wherewith we must hereafter most often defend our selves against
heretics, as with a most sure bulwarck, that the traditions and difinitions
of the universal church in those things that pertayne to faith, although the
evident scripture fail for the proof of them, are of no less authority than
the holy Scripture it self. And again, Mihi horum per tot seecula. etc. The
authority of these most approved men by so Ibidem.
many ages, should suffice to me, although I had by no former reason convicted
it. Let us therefore say, that the Church must be obeyed in all things, that
are to be believed, or to be done, although the authority of scripture want.

Thus do you esteem and stoutly stand to the defense of your ceremonies,
quite contrary to all the foresaid ancient fathers, that give, as we do, all
especial prerogative to the only scriptures. You were best therefore, to call
them heretics How the Sorbonists dealte with Eras^. for speaking against
popish ceremonies.
and Uigilantia^s with us, for so your Sorbonists played with Erasmus. Though
he allowed many of your popish ceremonies, and durst not speak open mouthed
against any of them, for it had been to hot for him, since he did but touch
them full softly, and yet they cried out upon him, a Uigilantian, an Aerian, an
heretic, as here you do. A sore ^adde ye know, is soon broken: and they
are tender ware, and dayntie to be delte withal, the least word in the world
against them, will make a marvelous heretic.

Erasmus had but said: Quo magis haeremus. etc. How Declarat. ad Cesuras
Facultatis. tit. 11. propos. 58.
much more we cleave to bodily ceremonies, so much the more we incline to
Iudaisme. And did but wyshe on this wise: Opto omnes esse tales. etc. I wish
that all men were such, that they might not much need bodily ceremonies, or
not give so much unto them. And that Christ said: Discipulis nihil istarum
reru^ prascribo. I prescribe to my Disciples, naught of these things: eat this
meat, abstain from that, now rest, now labor, be clad thus, touch not this,
handle not that: if I were their master, they should not once learn to trust
in these bodily things, least they should remain weak always. He said but
thus, and less he could not well say, and say any thing: but Lord what
stir the Sorbonistes made at the matter, and how they all to be heretiked
him, Aerian, Aetian, Iouinian, Uigilantian. etc. So that he was feign for fear
so much as he might, to set a good color on these Frasmus excuse.
your ceremonies, and when he had salued the matter as well as he could: what
said he then in this retractation for them? Iudaismun appello ^on Iudaicam
impietatem: Ibidem.
I call them Iudaisme not Judicial impiety. And yet for all his excuses and
commendations he was feign to say: Quanquam si Ecclesia tribuitur, etc.
Although, if that be attributed Ibidem.
to the Church, what so ever is prescribed of the Bishops, or is done in the
churches: there are many co^stitutions of Bishops, of the which, not with out
cause, all men make a public complainte. There are many ceremonies in certain
Churches, the which ye may call either to no purpose, or else foolish, or else
superstitious, for commonly either some idle Deane, or else some other mean man
like him, has devised them. Often times some old wife (giving money therefore)
obteyneth that this or that be done, now and than certain creep in, or if not
so, they break in, even by the violence of the common peoples custom. He
should therefore not speak wickedly, that should say, the liberty of the
Christian people is burdened with such constitutions and ceremonies, especially
when among them there are not a few, that do no good at all to godliness, but
either to lucre or ambition.

Thus was Erasmus (even where he defends your ceremonies) Ibidem.
constrained to confess. Yea where he speaks even the best of them. In his
obseruandis, etc. In observing these (says he) although they were ordained to
godliness, the mind of many Christians is Iewishe, either while they rest
there, neglecting those things that are of the spirit, or else, while with a
preposterous Judgment they attribute more to those outward things, then to
true godliness, which is settled in the affections. But even as the hardness
of the Jews was to be kept in, with so many prescriptions, as it were with
bounds: so charity waxing cold in Christians, caused that the Bishops
prescribed many things, not unlike the Iewishe prescriptions, although to be
kept with an unlike mind. For they are as it were certain wagons, wherein the
infancy of Ceremonies likened to Wagons.
little children is brought unto the spirit. As he shows after an example,
Exemplicausa, etc. For ensample, the people is bid to bow their knees, or their
heads to God. By this ceremony, the people is warned to submit their soul to
God: this help, he that is perfect, need not, who submits his mind to God
in what state soever his body be.

And although that such as this the bodies comely gesture Kneeling.
of kneeling (which is not a ceremony inverted of your Bishops, but taught us
in Gods word, by Christ and his How we use well, even some of the Popish
Ceremonies, but nothing like to their using of them.
Apostles manner of prayer) we not only use, but also diverse of your
Churches, Ceremonies be not refused of us, but kept: yet are they used far
otherwise than your prelates urged them, or your people kept them, reposing in
them as Erasmus says: Proram and puppim Sanctimoniae, The whole stay of
Religion. Tali hominu^ genere quoniam, etc. Because (says he) I saw the world
full of such kind of men I now and then call them back to the studies of true
godliness, Trust in Ceremonies.
from the admiration of ceremonies. But to admonish to trust to ceremonies, I
neither thought it necessary nor safe. Of the word of trusting let other look
to it, unto me, to whom this word to trust sounds to lean principally unto,
it sounds hardly to trust to the works of men, and to trust to Ceremonies.
Neither find I these voices either in the divine writings, or in the writings
of godly men. Thus hardly was Erasmus driven to his defense about your
Ceremonies, by the Faculty of the Divines of Paris, that urged the necessity,
virtue, and confidence in them.

In the end of all which conflictes, as he says to them, so Decl. 70. ex
collo. 1. Erasmus propositions of the Popish Ceremonies.
say I to you M. Stap. Quid autem his tot, etc. Of all these so many
propositions, what is done that shoareth up Christian Religion? that the people
should believe, a Monks cowle was auailable to heal diseases? that passing
over Christ, we should with petitions solicit the Saints? That very many
should run to Jerusalem, leaving their wives and children, and think that a
meruaylous kind of godliness is therein? that we should think all the
constitutions of men to bind us on pain of hell fire? That we should put the
chiefest part of Religion in the choice of meats? that in the Churches no
decking should seem to much, but eue^ excess also should pertain to the
honor of God? that to what Ceremonies ye lust, very much should be attributed?
that boys and wenches for triflings causes, so sone as ever they repent them
of their estate, dispising their parents, should run to Monks or Nonnes?
that no man but a Divine should talk of Christ or of the holy Scriptures? that
in Saints we should put very much confidence? that we should know evil men
not to be indeed in the Church, but to be of the Church? that we should
believe the Church to be marvelously trimmed, with an exceeding and wonderful
strange variety of services and vestiments? that lawyers should be comely
appareled? that we He means Canonistes.
should kiss the shoe soles, and the shoes of saints? that nothing at all of
the Popes institutions should be released, although great profit should move
it? that they that are dying should lay-out obites? that man's mortuaries may be
made, and that in them we should repose very much trust, and other matters of
this sort? But Christian godliness is placed herein, that we should love God
with all our heart, and our neighbor as our selves. That in Christ we should put
the sum of our hope: that we should frame our manners and our life, after the
doctrine and example of him, and after the rule of the Scriptures. From the
which whosoever calls us away, by any manner of means, they do rather lead
us into the danger of Paganism.

Thus much Erasmus (so far as he durst, and so truly, that you nor all the
world can deny the^) escried the wickedness of your popish Ceremonies: which
because we refuse on these so good co^sideratio^s, ye call us Heretics. But
whether we in not admitting them, or you in urging and maintayning them, be
rather Heretics, let the Reader discern and Judge.

You ask us next, what we say to the Messalians and other Concupiscence sin
after Baptism.
Heretics, saying concupiscence as a sin remains in us after holy Baptism.

To your other namelesse Heretics, when ye name the child, we shall tell you
what we say unto them.

To the Messalians, saying sin remains in us after The Messalia^s
holy Baptism: I answer, that even your self do show by your continual
lust of lying, that concupiscence after holy Baptism, is yet a foul sin in
you. Otherwise ye would not still so lust to lie both on us, the Fathers, and
the Heretics also. Ye cite S. Augustine to declare the Messalians error, and
so he truly does, telling how they say, that Li. 1. contr. 2. epist Pelag. ad
Bonif.
in Baptism our sins are taken away, as a ra^er takes hear away, leaving
the stoompes untaken away. If ye object this unto us, your self bears
witness against you, that ye s^ander us. For we freely coufesse, that by
Baptism, the Our confession.
forgiveness of all our sins, stoomps and all, past or to come, is sealed up
unto us. So that they are all washed away, but as S. Augustine says of
Original sin him self. Non vt How original sin is taken away.
non sit, sed vt non imputetur. Not that it is not, but that is nor imputed. So
that hereby you will make S. Augustine him self a Messalian, that writes
against the Messalians.

And I may say to you, your iolie porkling Pigghius, makes Pigghius de peccato
orig. Contiouers. 1.
of S. Augustine little better account. Deinde hoc mihi videtur e^identer
falsum, etc. Furthermore (says he) this seems to me evidently false, in that
he says, carnal concupiscence, the which is in our flesh, sighting against
the law of our mind, to be properly and truly sin in those which are not
Baptized. The which should be forgiven in Baptism, that it should be sin no
more: and yet not withstanding should remain, the gilt of it being taken away.
For the which cause he is so offended with. S. Augustine, that very groynishly
he says, Ut autem haec ipsa vis concupiscibilis, etc. Ibidem.
But that this very force of concupiscence should properly be sin, a fault,
iniquity, odious of it self to God and execrable, and placing in his wrath,
indignation or displeasure: it seems to me to be spoken most absurdely* nor
no less absurdly, that the self same should remain, and not be also
abominable to God, if at any time it were so. Pigghius offended with S. Aug.
for say ing coacupiscence is finne.


Thus hoggishly someth Pigghius against S. Augustine, for making Concupiscence
and Original sin, to be verily sin, even before Baptism: and misconstruing
S. Augustine in saying it is not sin after baptism. Where S. August.
expounds himself, that it is not sin then, in that respect that it is not
imputed, but forgiven: where before it was sin in it self and in imputation
also, being not yet forgiven. Now where he says this is most absurd, to say
that it was sin before, and it still remains after baptism, the same that
it was before baptism, and that it is not abominable, and sin after
baptism, if it were so before, putting the case it were so before: It
follows then, that either The inconveniences that master St. incurreth.
you confess master Stap. with Saint August. that it is still in it self
sin after baptism, though not sin by imputation: or else that ye say with
Pi^hius that it is neither sin in it self, nor by imputation, neither after,
nor before.

If ye say with Saint Augustine: you incur that, which Pigghius calls the
most absurdity, and yet incur you a greater, making Saint Augustine a
Messalian to, that purposely wrote against them, yea and your self a Messalian
with us also, agreeing with us therein, and yet therein writing against us.

If ye say with Pigghius, thinking to escape absurdity in being against Saint
Augustine, (which notwithstanding is absurdity enough, to be against him whom
ye pretend to follow) you incur manifest falsehood in being against the
truth: yea and more absurdity to, then any yet rehearsed. For, whether is it
more absurd, to impute sin to him More absurdity to say God imputes (...)
where is none, than to say where sin is God imputes none.
that has none: or to forgive him his sin, that yet in deed has sin, and
of mercy not to impute it to him, as though he had not that he has, which is
no absurdity at all* For although where sin is, it may be not imputed, yea
as David says this is blessedness: Beatu^ vir, cu^ dominus non imputauit
peccatum. Blessed is the man whose sins the Lord has not imputed to him.
Yet can there not be imputation of sin, where there is in deed no sin at
all: as Pigghius most absurdly says.

Groyne you now with Pigghius, that it is neither sin after nor before, and
we will take Saint Augustines great absurdity on us, to defend that it is in
it self very sin and damnable sin before baptism, and remains still in
his nature very sin, but not damnable, because it is not imputed after
baptism. And now let us see, whether you with Pigghius, or we with S. Aug.
shall come nearer to the Messalians Heresy.

Your Captain Pigghius says, that original sin is in The objection of the
Messalians heresy to us, returned on the Papists.
deed no sin at all in infants before nor after baptism.

But baptism takes away from them, only original sin. Ergo, Baptism takes
no sin from them.

Again you*say, the child that is not baptized shall be condemned:

But his sins, which are the cause of his condemnation, are not taken away by
baptism, for how can it take away that that is not?

Ergo, ye make the infant to be never the better for baptism.

Now what was the saying of the old Heretic Adelphius Histo. Tripart. lib.
7. ca. 11.
unto the godly Bishop Flauianus? Os venenum quod celauit euomuit, atque dixit
nullam quidem vtilitatem ex sancto baptismate baptisatis accedere. His mouth
cast out all the venom which it hid, and said, there comes no profit at
all by holy baptism, to those that are baptized. And has Pigghius parbreaked
up again this old poison of the Messalians, and you have lapped up this
Pigges most filthy vomit?

But would to God this went no further, and that ye The Papists worse than
the Messalians.
were not herein worse poisoned than ever the Messalians were, and that it were
not directly against God himself, and quite disanulling the death and
blo^dshed of Jesus The Papists say* God con^th where (...)
Christ. For, whereas the infant (says Pigghius) has no sin in him, and
yet God cendemneth him if he be not baptized: then does GOD condemn him that
i^ a^ innocent from sin, God condemns where no offense nor transgression
is. Now does this agree with the justice of God, to condemn an infant for no
sin, or for a bare name of sin, or for another man's sin, it self being
nothing culpable thereof: for, all this Pigghius says. But God is ^ust and
righteous in all his doings: then is the infant borne in very sin, and has
but the reward of sin if he be Romans 6.
condemned. The reward of sin is death. And by sin, and very sin, not a
name of sin, came death into the Romans 5.
world, and so has ouerrunne all men, for as much as all have sinned.

Again ye say, that the death of Christ takes away only the original sin
of Infants baptized, as for other sins after baptism, our selves must make
satisfaction for them. But original sin says Pigghius, is in deed no
sin, for The Papists make original sin to be ^o sin.
all it is called sin, as my writing is called my hand, because my hand
wrote it, but it is not in deed my hand: The death of Christ therefore takes
away the only bare name of a thing. And so our satisfactions do not only more
Our own satisfactions do more than the death of Christ by the Papists
doctrine.
than the death of Christ, but in very deed our satisfactions do all, and the
death of Christ does nothing. And thus as ye ascribe to the virtue of his death
a bare name, so make ye him a redemer in bare name, and make an Idol of the
bare name of Jesus, and take away the purport and effect thereof: giving him
baptism, that ye call Primam gratiam to take away a bare name of sin, but
not to take away that which ye call sin in deed.

This is the doctrine master Stapleton of your doctors, and if ye agree with
them, of yours. Who are now the Messalians? who deface baptism? who blaspheme
God? who disanull and make of none effect the death of Christ, and all the
benefit of washing us from our sins, so fully in baptism represented and
exhibited unto us, Pigghius or S. Augustine, you or we? For shame M. Stap.
leave your lying: nay rather, for shame learn to know, should I say the
righteousness of God, and the benefit he has wrought The gross ignorance of
the learned Papists in the ^udiments of christianity
by Christ? But how should ye know this, when ye know not your selves? ye
feel not your own corruption, ye acknowledge not your sins, but make them
no sins, ye understand not yet your principles and rudimentes of
Christianity, and perceive not what Baptism is, which ye receyue^ being
infantes, and now taking on you to be writers, Doctors, and teachers of
other: ye had more need go to a young scholar again, and learn your
Cathechisme better, to know what ye were delivered from, and what remains in
you. Is it any maruayle though ye have such a number of other errors, that
have as it were thus sucked error from your infancies? he can never be good
reader that can not spell, nor good Gramarian that never learned his rules, but
often break Priscians head, and so do you break Christ's, so much as lies in
you.

If your vnskill be not of malice, learn to know your What we are before
baptism. Ioh. 3.
selves, that before baptism ye were children of wrath, old Adam, a lump and
Mass of very sin in deed, that that is borne of the flesh is flesh. And
that all even the thoughts and affections of the flesh, are very enemities
against God. Romans 8. 1. Cor. 5.
And that this leaven of sin, has sowred the whole dough. That we are not
sick, but Mortui in delictis: Stark dead in wickedness and sins, and that
all are thus, The Scripture Col. 2. Gal. 3. Romans 3. Job. 14. Psalm. 51.
(says S. Paul) has shut up all under sin. There is not one has done good
no not one. All are borne and begotten of unclean seed. Yea David himself
confesses his mother conceived him in sin. Where he accuses not his mother
for an harlot, or himself of bastardie, or ye act of matrimony to be sinful.
But that even the mass and substance of himself conceived, was corrupt with
sin, because they were sinners of whose seed he came. For such as is the tree,
such fruit it brings forth, we cannot (says Christ) have grapes of thorns,
nor figs of briers. By one man sin entered into the world, Matthew. 7. Luc. 6.
Romans 5.
and by sin death, and so death passed through all, because al have sinned.

Thus plainly as ye may see that original sin and concupiscence What
concupiscence is in us after baptism. Romans 7.
is very sin before baptism: so learn of the Apostle to know what s^ill
remains in you after baptism. For ye are not better than he that said, I
know that in me, that is, in my flesh there dwells no good thing: he knew no
pure natural qualities remaining in his flesh as your schoolmen say they know
in theirs. And think ye he mitigated the matter, or was ashamed to confess
that it was even sin in him after Baptism? Nay, he not only calls it
peccatum, sin, But inhabitans peccatum, sin inhabiting, Romans 7.
corpus peccatu^, the body of sin, lege^ peccati, the law of sin, legem
rebellante^, a rebelling law. (and is rebellion no sin with you?) fighting
against the spirit of God in him, yea leading him captive, insomuch that,
thereby he says he was sold under sin? yea it is the very body of death, upon
which he still cried out, Miserum me quis ^e liber abit a corpore mortis huiu^.
Wretch that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death. Dare you M.
St. (because Pigghius and other popish flatterers tell ye it is no sin) so
exalt your self above the holy Apostle S. Paul, to think it is no sin at
all in you, that he confessed to be so great and grievous a sin in him?

Now, and there were no other place in the scripture to prove it sin, but
even this, were not this plain enough, Romans 7. The Apostle not only calls
concupiscence sin, but proves it to be sin in deed.
that the Apostle says, Nescteba^ concupiscentiam esse peccati^, nisi lex
dixisset non concupisces. I had not known concupiscence to be sin, but that
the law said thou shall not lust. Wherein he names it not only sin, (for
that ye count no sufficient argument, but say it is so named, for that it
commes of sin and disposes and inclines to sin, and therefore is called
improperly by the name of sin) but the Apostle adds a strong reason to prove
it sin in very deed, because by the flat commandment of God it is
forbidden, therefore it is a transg^ession of Gods commandment and
displeasing God, for otherwise, God would not by his law forbid it. Which
express law against concupiscence, when S. Paul regarded better, than it
appears you does then confessed it to be sin, which before he knew not by
ignorance of ye law. Although your ignorance be of wilful malice that will
neither know Gods law, nor your own transgression of it, nor all these evident
confessions of the Apostle, and object S. Aug. against the Messalians to us,
and yet are you both agreeing with the Messalians, and flat against S. August
your selves.

For what could Saint August. write more plain than this, Sicut coecitas
cordis, etc. Eue^ as the blindness of the heart Contra Iulianum. lib. 5.
is both sin, wherewith we believe not in God, and the punishment of sin,
wherewith a proud heart is punished with worthy correction, and the cause of
sin, when ought is committed by the error of a blind heart: so
concupiscence of the flesh, against the which the good spirit does lust, is
both sin, because there is in it a disobedience, against the rule of the mind,
and the punishment of sin, because it is given for the deseruings of the
disobeyer, and the cause of sin, by the defection of the consenter, or the
contagion of him that is borne. In which words as he plainly speaks both of
the state of the birth before baptism, and of the consent, defection, and
deseruings after baptism: so he makes concupiscence not to be sin it self
only, but also the punishment and the cause of sin.

Neither is S. August. alone herein for. S. Hierom does Ieromes opinion of
concupiscence.
not only call it sin, but least ye should dally about the name, he says:
Habitans in sua carne peccatum, hoc est vitia corporis and desideria
voluptatis. etc. But if my outward man do that he would not, and work that
which he hates: he shows the commandment to be good, and that he
works not that which is evil, but sin inhabiting in his flesh, that is the
vices of the body, and desires of pleasure, the which for the posterity and
offspring, is even grafted in men's bodies. Thus makes he concupiscence not
sin inhabiting only, but even very vice it self engrafted in us, speaking
not only on himself, but even on Saint Paul also. And are you better ^ord^
all these? What proceeds The arrogancy of the Papists.
this upon, but plain arrogancy, joined with obstinacy, to conceal your
shame and flatter your selves, in your sinful burning lusts? which rather than
ye would with humility acknowledge and confess, ye spare not so to exalt your
selves, that ye deface the glory of God: so to vaunte your p^ra naturalia,
your free will and merits, that ye quite take away even the death of Jesus
Christ, and to establishe Romans 10.
your own righteousness, ye disdain to be subject to the righteousness of
God: and making us believe we had no sin at all while we were infants newly
regenerate, to deceive 1. John. 1.
our selves, and to have no more truth in us than is in you.

Go now Master Stapleton and boast that we be Messalians, or rather clear your
selves of their Heresies, besides that, ye be not only Messalians, but
Missalians, or Massalians, which is a great deal worser Heresy.

Your next objection is of Images.

And because (say you) ye shall not say I suppress, conceal, Images. Stapl.
57. ^
or obscure the chief and most notable persons of your auncestrie: how say ye
to the Emperors, Philippicus, Leo, Co^stantinus, condemned with their adherents
by the 7. general Counsel at Nice, that villained by defacing breaking and
burning, the Images of all the holy Hallowes of Christ and Christ's too.

If your guilty conscience M. Stap. do misgiue you, that ye have hitherto
charged us falsely, and have suppressed, concealed and obscured our true
ancestors, and in stead thereof have objected Heretics: it were some token of
grace and repentance in you, that ye say yet now at the length, ye will not
suppress, conceal, or obscure the chief and notable persons of our
auncestrie. Where ye ask us what we say to these three Emperors, Philippicus,
Leo and Constantinus that ye say villained Images: whatsoever we say to them
Master Stapelton, some good fellow perhaps will say this to you, that if they
be such most notable persons, ye might have spared such villainous language,
except it be natural to you to use villaynes Rhetoric on chief Princes and
most notable personages.

But I will not meddle with your well nurtured terms, only I desire you, as
ye pretend, not ^o suppresie, conceal, nor obscure indeed, the chief and
most notable persons of our auncestrie, whereby ye mean the ancient Emperors.
If ye will not in very deed, how chance ye name but these three for taking
away of Images? why suppress ye ye names of the Emperors Ualens and
Theodosius, that made a plain Images defaced by diverse godly Princes.
decree against all manner of Imag^rie, of all the holy Hallowes of Christ, as
ye call them, and Christ's to? and yet your seventh general Council condemned
the^ not, yea your self (as after shall appear) do highly commend them. What
meant ye to suppress the name of Carolus Magnus, commended In Council. Frankf.
likewise highly even by your self? and yet he abolished all Images also? Why
name ye Philippicus, Leo and Constantinus only? and tell not of all the other
Emperors before these, and after these, even til the time of Theodorus Lascaris
that yielded to your Pope herein at Lions Council, and therefore the Greeks
deprived and expelled him for his labor.

Sith then so many chief and most notable persons of the ancient Emperors (of
which your self grant some to be as godly as notable, and being before that
Counsel were not condemned by it, being as ye say, our au^cestors herein) are
altogether quite suppressed concealed and obscured: is not this very partial
and unfaithful dealing in rejecting our honorable pedigree, M. St? But I see
you will never leave your lying.

Now where ye say these three Emperors were condemned The second Nicene
Council.
by the seventh general Council at Nice. True in deed they were so, even as
you condemned all Godly Princes at your last Trident Council, that abolishe
your Idolatry. What manner a Council it was, and what manner of reasons they
have in it, for the setting up of Images, I think your self was half ashamed
to show, but much more afraid to note, by who^e authority this Council was
called and ordered, which had been perteyning to the issue between the Bishop
and Master Feck. But we shall see more thereof when we come thereto.

Ye are very straight laced For defacing and burning the The Papists defaced
the lively Images of Christ, and honored dead Images.
Images of all Hallowes, of Christ, and of Christ's Images, and this ye call
villainy, But ye make no boanes to deface and burn as villaynes and herelikes
the very all Hallowes in deed of Christ, his true and lively Images and
members, this is no villainy with you at all. But even your own books, yea
your own Pope (if Clement were a Pope, and if the work were his) condemns
you. For what do you herein otherwise the did the Heathen* If whom he writes
thus: That Serpent also is wont to allege such words as Clem. li. 5. ad
Jacob.
this, we worship visible Images to the honor of the invisible God, but this
is most certainly false: for if in deed ye will worship the Image of God,
ye should in doing of good deeds unto man, worship the very Image of God,
for in every man is the Image of God. His similitude is in no other things but
there, where is a benign and pure mind. If ye The true worship of Gods Image.
will therefore honor truly the Image of God, we open to you that which is
the truth, that ye do well to man which is the Image of God, give honor and
reverence to him, give meat to the hungry, and to the thirsty drink, to the
naked clothing, succor to the sick, harborough to the stranger, minister to
him that is in prison such things as he needs. And this is that which in
deed shall be counted given to God. These things do so much redounde to the
honor of Gods Image, that he which does them not, is thought to do villainy to
Gods Image. VVhatkin worship then of God is this, to gad up and down after
stony and wodden shapes, The false wor ship of Gods Image.
and to worship the^ as though they were godheads, being vain figures and
without life, and despise man in whom is the very Image of God. But know ye
for certainty, that he that commits murder, or whoredom, yea whatsoever
he does to hurt or injury men, in all these things is the Image of God
violated, etc. understand ye therefore that this is the Worship of ^ages the
devils suggestion.
Devils suggestion lurking in you, which persuadeth you ye may seem godly
while ye worship insensible things, and not to seem ungodly, while ye hurt
both sensible and reasonable creatures.

Thus says your Pope not only to the Heathen then, but also to you, using the
same Heathen fashions now, standing so much on the defacing burning and
villaning Gods Images as ye call them of wood and stone: And your selves
burn, de^ace and villain, the very Images of God, either not knowing the true
Images of God, but taking dead pictures for his Image, or wittingly reiecte
your Popes advertisement, and do contrary to your consciences. But as ye thus
deface Gods very Image, so deface ye God him self. Ye stand much upon his
pretended Image, and yet ye regard not him, his word nor his commandment.
Ye honor ye say his Image, and dishonor him self.

I omit the foresaid dishonoringes of him in your invocation, in iustifiyng
your wicked concupiscence from being sin, etc. ye dishonor him even in the
Images that ye made of him, to honor him by. Was not this a dishonor How the
Papists dishonored God in picturing him.
of God, to picture him out like a Creature, like a sinner, like a corruptible
man, like an old greybearded Father, yea like a monster with three faces in one
head, as the ^eathen pictured Ianus with two faces, or Gerion with three
bodies, or Cerberus with three heads? what was dishonor to God if this were
not? to set out any picturs of God, yea after the portrature of man, whose
body though it is, Formae praestamissim^, Of a most comely shape, is yet so
unsitting for God, that S. Augustine calls it Sacrilege. Yea De fide and
fi^bolo cap. 7. ^ The picturing of god makes the Papists Anthropomor phites.
God send it ^all not out, that ye mainteyne a foul Heresy of the Trinity
therein. But how cunningly soever ye shall clear your: self thereof, a great
dishonoring of God it was.

A lie can not be an honor to him that is truth and a spirit, and will be
worshipped in spirit and truth, not in a bodily Figure, and that a false
figure too? if the picture of The picture of God must needs be a lying and
dishonorable picture. Deuteronomy. 4.
God be not a lie, when saw ye God at any time? if ye never saw him, ye go by
blind ghess^. Yea, if he him self, even for this purpose, when he would most
show him self, would yet show no bodily figure, least any should Worship him
by any bodily Fiigure: will you presume to make after your fanta^ies, a bod^ly
form or rather deformity of him? how can this be but a lie, a dishonor, an
Idolatry, and presu^npteouse rebellion against Gods purpose and express
commandment? Even as Job says: Currit impuis Job 15.
contra Deum extent^ collo, The wicked runs against God even with a
stretched out neck.

Thus as you deface God, pretending his honor: so deface The pictures of
Saint^s not to be honored.
ye those Saints that ye call al ^hallowes, even under the pretense of
honoring them, and their Images For if it be not honor to God, to honor him
by a picture: think you it is than an honor to his Saints, to be honored by
pictures? and if his Saints themselves refused honor, will they have their
pictures honored?

Your shifte that ye make of unlearned and lay men's The Papists shifte of
lay men's books.
books, neither will any thing avail you, nor your selves use it otherwise
than for a shifte. For ye used them not as remembrancers, but ye honored them
as helpers. Now, if a learned man may not kneel, creep, crouche, offer, and
pray to his book, though the book were of the Saints lives never so much,
yea though it were Gods book, (Moses honored not the very Tables written
with the finger of God) by what privilege then may the Lay and unlearned
person, honor, kneel, offer and pray unto their books: yea admitting the
case, that Images were the Idiotes books, as ye call them. But God wot they
are very Idiots, that have no other, but such books. And more Idiots, that
thus honor their books. And you most Idiotes of all (I am afraid) that make
such Idiotes reasons.

The Idolatry that ye made the people to commit was to The Popish tales of
images
manifest. The practices ye used were to broad. The tales that your Legendes
tell of the works of Images, are tootoo shameful M. Stapleton.

Ye tell us, how the picture of the Uirgin Marie was Discipulus. Exemplo. 27.
Bawd to Beatrice a Nonne the space of the xv. year, while she played the
common strumpet. Ye tell us that at Spire, (Ubi adoratur Imago Sancta dei
genetricis quae ad sanctu^ Bernardum Exempl. 17.
tribus vicibus locuta est, etc. Where the Image of the holy mother of God is
adored, which spoke three times to S. Bernarde,) A boy gave her child a piece
of bread criyng Pu Pu, and the Image of Christ embraced the boy, and said Pu
pu pe, noli flere, post tridu^m mecum papabis. Whine not, and three days
hence, thou shall eat pappe with me. Another time, how the Image of Christ came
down out his mothers Exempl. 81.
arms and playde with an abbots child. Another time when the arm of his
Image of stone was broken, how blood Ex Vincentio in sper. hist. li. 8. ca. 110.
gushed out, and the stone Image of his Mother seeing the blood, rent her
garments and ornaments of stone about her, rent the Iuels about her neck,
and made naked her breast unto the pappes, for the reproach and injury that was
done to her babie. Another time, Exempl. 82.
when Auinion was besieged, they got her Image upon the gate, putting their
confidence in her, and when one standing behind her was shot at, Imago genu
erexit, etc. The Image lift up her knee, and received the stroke of the arrow,
etc. and it sticks yet in her thigh.

Ye tell us how on a time, Quidam pictor Diabolum cum Exempl. 83.
cornibus, etc. A certain painter painted the devil with horns and other
members, so vgglie as he could, but the Image of the Virgin Marie he painted so
fair as he could, whereat the Devil being angry, brake the scaffold while he
was painting her Image. Mox Imago pussimae virginis, pictori manuu^ porrexit,
and eum ne caderet firmiter retinuit, sicque eum a daemone custodiuit. With
that the Image of the most godly Virgin caught the painter by the hand, and
held him fast from falling, and so it saved him from the Devil. Ye tell us of
a Church set on fire by lightning, but when it came near to the Image: Quasi
expauescens, omnino intactam reliquit. etc. The fire as afraid of it, left it
untouched: yea a bunche of Pecocks feathers, leaning to the Image of wood,
escaped unburned also. And this miracle (says he) was done to show, quod sibi
seru^entes, ab igne aeterno liberare faciliter possit: That she can easily
deliver from hell fire those that serve her Howebeit, The Picture of our Lady
of Wilsdeane with the burnt tail.
at Wilsdean her picture escaped not the fire so scotte free, but that the one
half was burned, even with the negligence of the candles that were set about
her. But to salve this blemishe, the remnaunt of the block wrought as great
miracles, as any of the other. For when the Priest had sent to London the
residue of the Image that was saved from the fire, to be peeced out by the
Caruer: after he could not make the old and the new to frame well together,
he cast the old picture behind the stall, and made another like it. The
Priest, when he came to see the picture, where is my wife, quothe he: to whom
the Paynter showed the picture that he had new made like the other. No, quothe
the Priest, thou lie, this is an other, this is not my wife. That it is,
quoth the Paynter. No, no husband, quoth the old Image, that is not I: I am
here hidden and cast behind the stall. This was a famous miracle, and his
wife deserved to be carried home again with solemn processio^.

It were infinite to tell the tales of your Roodes that spoke, that nodded,
that sweatte, that bledde, that embraced and kissed those that came to them:
with a number of such like forgeries, to make the people believe, not only the
Saints, but even the very pictures of them had a force and influence of grace
and help in them. And so the Roode of grace, our Lady of grace, our Lady of
pity. etc. had their names. I omit your other Saints pictures, yea some of
those whom ye worshipped, that God knows were seely Saints, and your selves
doubt whether ever they were honest men and women, or no. Yea of those that
Pictures of Angels.
were neither men nor women, I mean not Angels, whom ye honored in pictures of
winged and fethered men, but of S. Sunday, of S. Savior, of S. Crosses, etc.
Neither S. Sondayes Picture.
God, nor Angel, nor man, nor woman, of whom ye might say, as the Priest
said, when he bid his beads on Sunday: Good friends, ye shall have this week
the feast of S. Epiphanie, but whether it be he Saint or she saint. I can
not tell. Of these Saints you had pictures, you had Churches, ye had
Pilgrimages, ye had offringes, and yet were there no such persons at all, but
as the heathen had the pictures of Justice and other virtues, worshipping them
also, as Lactantius vpbraydeth to them: Quid nobis ina^em Iustitiam depingi^,
Why paynte ye out unto us bare Justice? Li. 5. de Just. cap. 8.
can ye excuse this also of manifest Idolatry? Think you that your second
Nicen council would not likewise have condemned you even for very shame, as
tootoo gross Idolaters?

What says Alfonsus your own champion, writing of purpose in the defense of
Images, in handling the fact of king Ezechias, for destroying the Brazen
Serpent? ^f the Alfons. contra He^es. li. 8.
Christian people (says he) were now as prone to Idolatry, as the people of
Israel were then, nor could be called otherwise from their error: Then, if
Images were broken in pieces, I would believe, that they ought woe thily to be
broken. This is the judgment of Alfonsus upon all your Alhallowes Images, and
Christ's too. But heereto adjoining this false assumption: But the Christian
people are Christian Prin ces have no less cause to break the popish Images
than Ezechias had to break the brazen Serpent.
not now so prone to Idolatry as were the Jews, he concludes: there is no
such urgent cause why Images ought to be broken, as there was then. But if he
had acknowledged the manifest truth, and had looked no further, than in his
own country, of S. James picture of Compostella, that (as they say) can move
and stir his head by frowning, or looking cheerfully, and other proper
knackes: and had he seen the great Idolatry committed thereto, and how the
people flocked tro^ al parts thither: he should then have seen as great, if
not a great deal greater idolatry, among those that profess the name of
christianity, than ever was to the Brazen Serpent among the Jews, and that
(as he would excuse the Popish idolatry) it was not one or two deceived by a
certain simplicity, but that it was more than an hundredth, yea than an
hundredth thousand, that were so deceived by a certain fraud of your priests,
that no preaching or teaching could serve to remove their Idolatry, so long
as ye let the Images stand. Which not only ye did, but teached and preached
such fables, as more increased your gaynes, and the simple peoples Idolatry.
And therefore, even by Alpho^sus reason, your Alhallowes Images are worthy to be
defaced and broken in fitters by Christian Princes, as by Ezechias the Brazen
Serpent was.

Now to the further improofe of Alphonsus his false assumption, that
Christians are not so prone to Idolatry as the Jews: I will not press ye with
Erasmus testimonies, nor yet with Sir Thomas More, but even as I did before
with your own council of Colleyns complaynts, of the wickedness used about
your Images. Verum cum multus Council. Colo. in decal.
etiam abusus. But, sith much abuse has also by little and little crept in,
about the worship of Images, that the Images also of those things have been
brought into the Church, which have no testiminie of the Scripture, or of
approved authors: That many carved Images beyond measure, with great
sumptuousness and cost, were set up so fast in Churches, as though
herein See how the Papists confesie their own Idolatry.
a great part of godliness consisted, the poor people of Christ being in the
mean while neglected, which are the lively Images of Christ. Furthermore,
that we behold the Images so painted, and expressed, that they seemed to be
forged, not after the form of Christian honesty, but after the enticementes
of the vanity of the world. To conclude, that the rude people was suffered to
worship the Images, with a certain trust reposed in them, the which is not
altogether free from Idolatry, so that they can not be excused of Idolatry,
that have chosen to them selves any Image to be worshipped, and that either for
the fairness thereof, or the foulness, or the newness, or the oldnesse,
believing that Image to have some virtue, yea or some godhead or divinity more
than the rest. Which error is to be plainly damned. Thus do your own mouths
condemn your selves, and that not of trifling points, nor of any extraordinary
chance, but of open and ordinary Idolatry.

I omit such casualties of Idolatry, as are objected in Biga Salutis.
dominic^. 1. quadrag. sermon. 29. The worship of the Devil in an other things
likeness. The reason why the worship of the consecrate cake is flat Idolatry.
Biga salutis, if the people should worship the devil for God in any form, in
any revelation, or in the consecrate host, which ye made the people worship
(since the devil can tra^sforme him self to any such shape, yea of an angel
of light) whether ye peoples worship be Idolatry or no. I will rather detecte
your more gross idolatry, although that, of your honoring the cake were
gross enough. Neither can it be but manifest idolatry, sith there is no
proportion between the body of Christ, and such a likeness, whereas in every
Image a right and true portrature is to be required. But into that Idolatry I
will not now enter: only I will come to your next objection of the cross. To
the which ye The worship of the Cross.
committed most open idolatry, not only worshipping with cappe and knee, with
crouching, kneeling, knocking, blessing, kissing greeting, and praying unto,
but ascribing the merit of salvation to such your worship of the cross.

Ye tell us how a thief, that continuing an arrant thief Exempl. dise.
all the days of his life. Orauit vnum Pater noster, ante crucifixum, and sic
saluatus est. He said one Pater noster before the crucifix, and so he was
saved. And therefore says Discipulus: Christo valde placet cum quis orat
pr^tereundo Crucifixum in publica strata, vnum Pater noster, and vnum Aue
Maria. When one passing by in the open street, says one Pater noster, and
one Aue Mary, Christ is highely pleased.

But not content with this Idolatry, ye make humble prayers unto it, as though
it had life and soul, as though it were God it self. O Crux (...) cunctis
astris. etc. O Prayers in the Primar to the Cros^e.
Cross more clear than all the stars, famous to the world, very loving
unto men, which only wast worthy to bear the price of the world, save this
present company, gathered together this day in thy praises. Thus prayed you to
the cross in your old primer. Have you never said this prayer to the cross?
O Crux benedicta. etc. O blessed Cross, because the Savior of the world did
hang on thee, and the king of Angels triu^phed on thee, I adore thee, I praise
thee, I bless thee, with all my senses, be thou our consolation in our
trouble. etc. Again, Oro te sancta Crux. etc. I pray thee holy cross, by the
omnipotent God, that thou will deliver, and pull me, out of all my necessities
and greeues, and defend me from the wrath of God, and from the vengeance of
all my enemies, and from sudden death, and from all shame, peril, and
blasphemy, and from all sins, wherewith man's frayltie may sin against God.
I beseech thee holy cross, by the love of Jesus Christ our Lord, who has
exalted thee maruellously, above all things earthly, that thou will protecte
and defend me from the Devil, and from all dangers and evils of mind and
body. Again, Salve gloriosa splendidissima Crux. Aue inuincibilis and
insuperabilis dilectissima Crux. Salve preciosissima vere and digne in aeternum
beatissima Crux. Aue sanctissima and sine fine digne venera^da praeclarissima
Crux. Salve preciocissi^a and vere deuote adoranda sacratissima crux. Lo,
master Stap. what gallant Rhethorike is h^re to the Cross. The worship to the
Picture of Christ's face


And as with these idolatrous prayers ye worshipped the picture of the Cross,
so with the like or worse, ye worshipped the picture of the face of Christ,
which yet by the ancient describers thereof, was nothing like his face.
Neither can ye say, ye prayed not to it, but unto Christ, whom the face in the
cloth represented: for even unto the painted face it self ye prayed, in this
Rhyme dogrell: Salve sancta facies nostri Redemptoris, in qua nitet species
diuini splendoris, impressa panniculo niuei candoris, dataque Ueronicae signum
ob amoris, salve decus saculi speculum sanctorum, quod videre cupiunt spiritus
Coelorum, nos ab omni macula purga vitiorum, atque nos consortio iung^
beatorum. Salve nostra gloria in hac vita dura, labili and fragili cito
transitura, nos perduc ad patriam O foelix figura, ad videndum faciem quae est
Christi pura* etc. Ye can not say here, ye spoke this to Christ him self, or
to the very face of Christ, but your prayer is even to the very figure or
pattern of the face in the linen cloth, and ye desire that painted face, to
exalt us to the very face it self.

The like Idolatrous prayer and adoration ye make to Prayer and adoration to
the five wounds.
the five wounds, Salve vulnus dextrae manus, etc. God speed, wound of the
right hand, etc I adore thee, I honor thee, I require thee, I beseech thee,
that I a wretch now dying. etc. may never fail. Hayle thou right hand
wound of Christ, thou which waste pierced with a most hard nail. etc. We
adore thee, O wound, to thee we incline our head, as to a most sweet
fountain, by thee let it be given, that we may overcome our enemies, and
rejoice in the last day. God speed wound of the right foot, etc. God
speed wound of the left foot. O sweet side wound. etc. Aue, salve, g^ude,
vale. Hayle, God speed thee, rejoice, farewell. What foolish prayers, and
beastly Idolatry was this, master Stapleto^, and yet were these prayers
counted such notable stuff, that they are enfraunchised with great
privileges and pardons. Set in golden letters for more estimation and credit.

Ye have a goodly rubrike that says: Fuit quaedam foemina solitaria and
reclusa, etc. There was a certain woman that was solitary, and a recluse,
which desiring to know the number of the wounds of Christ, prayed God to
reveal it to her. At the length, being heard, God said unto her* The The
number of all the wou^des of Christ.
wounds of my body were so many, as if thou would honor the^ with worship,
thou must say every day throughout the year, xv. Pater nosters, and. xv. Aue
Mary's, and so thou shall salute worshipfully every one of my wounds. And he
Pardon for saying this prayer.
that shall say this prayer one year, shall deliver. xv. souls of his kin
out of Purgatory, and. xv. living shall be confirmed just and in goodstate,
and he himself shall obtain grace and knowledge of perfection. etc. And he
shall see my most holy body. xv. days before his death, etc. And I with my
well-beloved mother Marie, will come to him before his death. etc. Another
Rubricke. To all that say this prayer, between the Elevation, and the third
Agnus dei, are given by Pope Boniface two thousand years of pardon, at the
entreaty of Philip the French king.

An infinite number of lesser pardons prefixed to your Petit pardons.
prayers I omit, how Pope John. 22. gives a hundredth days of Pardon, to him
that says, Salve plaga lateris. etc. And how Pope Leo added forty more. How
Pope John the. 23 gave to another, a year and forty days, and. 22. Cardinals
added every one forty days more a piece, and how by Bull they were
confirmed. These were but paltrie pardons in respect of those in your Primer,
wherein among other is this more frankly given. Whosoever being in the A
liberal pardon.
state of grace, shall say these seven prayers following devoutly, with seven
Pater nosters, and seven Aue Mary's, before the Image of pity: He shall
deserve seven and fifty thousand years of pardon. The which were granted of
three Popes, that is to we^e of Saint Gregory, fourtene thousand years:
Secondly of Pope Nicholas the fifth, fourtene thousand years, in the year of the
Lord. 1459: Thirdly of Pope Sixtus the fourth, who composed the fourth and the
fifth little prayers of these Suffrages following, 1400. years, and has dubled
these pardons, in the year of our Lord. 1478.

Whether was this more wicked Idolatry, or foolish lies The pardon of these
Popes prove them plain heretics.
M. Stap? what say you here even to your own Popes, does not your Primar make
them very Heretics teaching a doctrine of so many thousand years pardon
after the day of Dome? How much differs this from the foul error of
Origin? Or did they think the world should continue so long, or ever the day
of Dome shall come, which Christ and his Apostles then said, was so near at
hand, and your Popes since that time have stretched it out so many thousand
years to come? or to what torment should the soul go, when his pardon
should be expired? For, be the day never so long, at the length (ye say)
comes Euensong. Should the soul at the end of those seven and fifty
thousand years of pardon, go from heaven to hell? For Purgatory lasts, ye
say, but till Domes day. Or used your Primer, Numero fin^to pro infin^o, a
determinate number for an vndeterminate number* But why then did your Popes
one after an other, increase the number, and so straightly limitte it? and yet
by your leave your Primer missed one thousand years in the account. For
promising seven and fifty thousand, it reckons up but stre and fifty
thousand. And though one in a thousand break no square, as they say: yet a
thousand years is somewhat, master Stapleton, it is little more, ye wotte,
than one thousand and a half, since Christ was borne. But go to man, since
your Popes are so liberal to pardon for so many thousands, ye shall not say,
we will stick to pardon them for one thousand back again. I would count
this but one of your Arithmeticall scapes (as ye obiecte to the Bishop) but
that your Primer is full, if not of such misreckoninges, yet of such lauishe
sums. I mentioned one before of forty thousand years. Pope John the twelf
the (say the one of your Rubrikes) has granted to all that say this prayer
So many years of pardon, as bodies have been buried in any Churchyard.
for the dead: Auete omnes (...) fideles. etc: passing through the Church
yard, so many years of Pardon, as bodies be buried therein since is was a
Churchyard. By which rule in Paul's Churchyard, a man might easily get a
nem^scu* of years of pardon.

Phie M. St. this is too gross and shameful deceyuing of the people. Whether
it he your Popes fault (as they can not be excused, since it is decreed, sealed
and confirmed by them, and their full Chapters of Cardinals, which ye say in
such authentical doings can not err) or whose faults so ever they were, in
your Primers and prayer books, they are solemnly set out in read letters, to
egg the people to pray unto your Images.

But ye will say I swerve from my purpose, some of these prayers were not unto
Images. Well, what was this M. Stapl. Subsequens scriptum, est scriptum Rom^,
etc. This writing that follows was written at Rome, in the Chapel of S.
Marie at Jerusalem in the Temple. VVhilom S. Gregory the Pope did celebrate
Mass in the city of Rome, and when he came to the consecration, the Lord
appeared to him in this Figure that is here painted. Whereupon he being moved
of compassion, granted to all that did behold such a picture, and with making
courtesy, and devoutly saying five Pater Nosters, and five Aue Mary's:
fouretene thousand years of pardon. And besides this xij. Popes his
successors have granted every one of them five hundred years of pardon, the
sum of the whole pardon is twenty thousand years. A Prayer made to the
Crown, the Nails, the Spear, the Vinegar and Gal, the Reed, the Spittle,
the dise the Coat, the Cock the Pillar, the Wh^ps, the Svvord, the Fistes,
the Buff^ts, the Ladder the Maller. etc about the Passion of Christ.
And this is registered in Rome.

And as ye gave these liberal pardons for the beholding of the picture of
Christ, so for looking on the Cross, yea the Nails, whippes, rods, ropes,
and other instraments, where with he was put to death, and for the saluting and
worshipping of them ye offer no small pardons also, of the which in one book I
have two Rubrikes. The one to this noble prayer, Crucem coronam sp^neam,
cla^osque diramque lanceam, deuote veneremur: Acetum fell (...), virgamque spum
spo^giam, i^giter veneremur: Uele^ laternam nobilens, pellicanum and cal^cem,
Arundines pungente^ tunicam inconsu^ilem, sorts columna^ stabilem, and f^nes
vigentes, flagella fustes innumerabiles, enses latronum horribles, denarios ter
denos, manus c^dentes dissimiles, cultellos duros and forcipes, vr^eos ^menos
serpents, scalam and malleum, sepulchrum lumen candelabrum, cord recolamus.
To stir us up to say this foolish and wicked prayer to worship all these
things, is prefixed this Rubrike. Quicunque hac arm^, etc. Who soever shall
behold these arms of our Lord Jesus Christ, and say devoutly this prayer:
six thousand years of pardon are granted him of S. Peter the Apostle, and of
thirty Popes after him, if he be with out deadly sin and in charity. The
second Rubrike in the same book on these verses: Lance^ Crux claus, tua
pertuls cord (...), etc: is this: Quicunque arma Domini, etc. Who soever
shall look devoutly upon the weapons of our Lord Jesus Christ, and shall
devoutly say this prayer, he shall have of his sins being truly confessed and
repenting of them, six thousand, seven hundred, and five years of pardons of
S. Peter the Apostle granted him, and granted of. 30. Popes after him. How
agrees this with the former M. Stapleton, or did The Papists jar in their
pardons.
S. Peter give this pardon twis^, and augment the sum because of the
excellency of those verses?

But these are trifles to the third that follows. Crux, coronae, spinae,
flagellis, clauis, lanciae, marcellae, spongae, laqueae, columpilae, vesti
purpuriae, a^undinae, honorem impendamus. This is good Latin I warrant ye, and
as good as the matter every whit: and so good, that, says the Rubrike over it,
Who soever say this Orison here following, shall have A lustio pardon.
great grace of almighty God, and six thousand thousand and threescore and
ten years of very pardon. This was lustely multiplied. Sit down Master
Stapleton, since ye pretend to be so perfect an Arithmetrician, and cast your
accountes, and ye shall see a fair muster of pardons to comfort your sprites
with all. Fear not (man) the Devil so long as these last, and many thousands
more there are besides, but these are easily gotten, even for worshipping the
Jews Ropes, Halters, Hammers, R^iues, Swords, their Fistes, yea their spettle
and all. But if ye be ashamed and think scorn to worship these things, as in
deed ye may well be ashamed of them: yet I have such holy Relics for you to
worship, that ye can hardely find any higher. But I tell ye you must take up
your hand and bliss you at the sight of them, and so they work meruailes as
your holy books record. And that not for the Images of all Hallowes, but of
Christ's Image, or rather of him self, that ye should know even the just
length of him, as they pretend.

Among the good prayers aforesaid, is this Rubrike: To know the length of
Christ.
Qui cupit cognoscere longitudinem, etc. He that desires to know the length of
Christ being God, let him take this
line here drawn forth, two and thirty times measured, which line was
brought out of the City of Constantinople, in a certain Gross of Gold.
Which line who soever in the day does devoutly look upon, and say the
Antiphona with a Collect, and shall sign him thrice with the sign of the holy
Cross, he shall not that day die any suddayne death, nor be vexed with
Devil, nor with any tempest, nor any evil nor any Creature shall hurt him.
And this line was brought by an Angel to King Charles the great. This is a
fair grace M. Stapl. for looking upon and worshipping a line of the length of
Christ.

But I have another length and Rubrike, that has more Iolie promises to stir
us up to worship it. Which says: This Cross fiftene times measured, is the
length of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that day ye look thereon, bless ye
therewith. There shall no wicked spirit have power to hurt you: nor thunder,
ne lightning, sleeping ne waking shall not hurt you: nor wind nor blasting, on
land nor on water shall not hurt you: nor in battle ye shall not be overcome
with your enemies, bodily, ne ghostly: nor die no shameful death, nor suddayne
death, nor of the pestilence, nor in water be drowned, nor in fire be burnt:
and if ye be in deadly sin, ye shall not die therein: and you shall increase
in worldly goods: nor ye shall not die of
wounds, nor of stroke, nor without confession: nor ye shall not be combred
with no fiendes: and if a woman have this Cross, and lay it on her womb when
she traueleth with child, she shall soon be delivered, and the child shall
have Christendom, and the mother purification of holy Church. S. Ciriake, and
S. Iulite desired this gift of almighty God, and he granted them, as it is
registered in Rome, at S. John Lateranence. Here are many more fair graces if
all were true. But some of them your Papists them selves have ^ounde stark
lies. And some of them, as that he shall not be combred with no fiende, etc. I
think may well be true, as you will grant I dare say, resolving them by your
Equipollences, on which ye stand so much in your fourth book.

As for the assurance of the truth of these lengthes, that, I remit to you M.
St. to reconcile them together: how the one came from Constantinople, the other
from Rome: how the one was granted of God to S. Ciriake, and S. Iulite: the
other brought by an Angel to king Charles the great, and yet as appears by
the prayer, it came first to S. Ciriake, and S. Iulite too. With other such
circumstances as arise in the conference of them. Only I note the lengths them
selves, and I pray you M. St. (if ye have as good skill in Geometry, as in
Arithmetike) to measure these two lengths, the one. xxxij. the other. xv. times
as they require, and see how properly they will agree. I think ye shall find
them differing, little lacking the length of both Crosses joined together. So
that the one (light on which it shall) must needs be a very lie, and have no
virtue in it at all, but those that worship it be Idolaters, worshipping a
false thing. If ye reply an inche breaks no square: although it break no
square, yet it breaks length M. St. neither ought ye to miss The one of th^se
two Crosses must needs be false
one inche in this matter, wherein ye pretend is such virtues, and so exactly
take upon ye to describe even the iumpe length, and say it came from God, and
his Angel brought it, knew not the Angel the iumpe length, or would he not
give it truly, and would have it so precisely worshipped? surely then he was no
good Angel. But the difference is more tha^ an inch M. St. or. 6. or. 7.
inches either. And would ye have Christ cut shorter by the head, to make your
le^gths even? were it not better that a great many such liers as you hop^
^edlesse before? which of these two shall we believe M. Stapleton? or is it not
best, by your counsel, to let them both go in the ^irrops name, and all their
forged virtues with them, than for greediness of their gaye promises, endanger
to lose body and soul by worshipping a lie, and committing foul Idolatry?
Well let them go for me, if ye he agreed thereto, M. Stap^.

But yet ye have one excuse as ye think to mitigate the The Papists shift
that all this hyndreth not the meditation of the mind.
matter, that how soever they missed in the Figure, either of the Cross, or
the Crucifixe, of the which some was long, some was short: this hindered not
the peoples devout meditation thereon. Although M. Stapleton this nothing
excuse the former manifest lie, where ye miss of the length, that so justly ye
pretend to set out, and yet ascribe the virtue to the just length, saying, Per
virtutem gloriosa longitud^nis tuae. By the virtue of thy glorious length: yet
to come to your meditations, that ye teach us do come to us, by the beholding
the Crucifixe: If these were as fond, as the other worship Idolatrouse, what
shall we then judge of the residue?

Three things (says Discipulus) we must consider, first, Ser. de temp. 35.
The Papists devout meditations in beholding the Crucifix.
that Christ hanges down his neck on his shoulder, to kiss you (and
herevppon your Capochini Friars hang their heads a wrie, because the Crucifixe
is so set forth). Secondly, the Crucifixe has both his hands stretched
abroad, to embrace you. Thirdly, his feet are both fastened to the Cross, to
betoken that he will not starte from you. Such toys ye imagine the Crucifixe
to represent unto us, and thereout gather your mystical significations, that a
man might look thereon till his eyes stare, and never think on kissing,
colling, or any such things. Thus did ye mock and deceive the simple people,
and made them besides Idolaters very Idiotes indeed with these your Idiotes
books. But the Book of God that sets out to the eyes of our faith, the
death and benefits of Jesus Christ, ye quite left out, and would not suffer
that Crucifixe to be looked upon. Wherein they should have seen and learned
to know most fully Christ Crucified, without any danger of Idolatry at all.

Now if ye say all this hitherto infers not yet Idolatry, The Papists shift
in distinction of worship. Latria. Dulia. Hyperdulia.
so long as ye give not to the Cross, the very worship that is due to God, but
reserve that still to him alone, which ye call Latriam, and give to the Cross
Duliam, and Hyperduliam, although this shifte be fully by others already
confuted: yet admitting the same, it so little shifteth your manifest Idolatry,
that it proves ye liers on your own heads, and Idolaters even by your own
distinction. Since, not The Papists gave their chiefest kind of worship to the
Cross.
only ye gave Latriam the Cross, but also defend that it may be given
thereto. Chiefly Thomas of Aquine your great schoolmaster, yea M. Doctor
Saunders himself one of your chiefest Louaine writers, in his especial
treatise of the defense of Images, ca^ scarce tell what to defend herein. For
first he says, we defend it for the more probable, D. Saunders in his book
of the defense of Images.
that the same degree of hononr is not due to the Image of Christ, of our
Lady or of other Saints, which is due to Christ, our Lady, and to other
Saints them selves. But there is a certain proper honor, due to a good
remembrance or monument. Thus says D. Sanders there. But in the end and
conclusion of his whole book, one while he defends Thomas, and grants the
figure of the thing, to have the same honor done to it, that is done to the
thing it self: and says the worship that is done to Christ, is done to his
purple coat also. Then flees he touch again from that, saying D. Saunders
inconstancy.
that the Church never taught, nor does teach, that the Image of Christ, must
be adoured with the honor due to God. Then again he allows Thomas his
natural reason. But after that flying as fast from Thomas, If Thomas (says
he) have been deceived in this question, it is an error in Philosophy and not
in Divinity. And why? because he alleges Aristotle. I pray you M. Stapleton
if you may be so bold, pull him by the ^leeue, and desire him to be ware how
he speaks against Aristotle and his Metaphysikes. What? is Aristotle's
Metaphysikes no good Divinity with him? if the Sorbonistes hear this, it is
to be feared they will condemn him for an Heretic, as they served Ramus.

Now when M. Saunders has thus startle^ too and fro, in docke out netle (for
belike he was ne^led with this question) notwithstanding (says he) I put it
for an undoubted truth, that all Images be honored in the Church, with an
inferior honor to that which is due to the first samplars, and principal
paterns. And yet by and by quite contrary D. Saunders contrariety to himself.
to this, he says: For whether, in any case, the honor of the Image may be
the same with the honor of his truth or no, I neither will, nor can, nor am
perfectly able thoroughly to discuss. And yet before he determined it Doctor
like, and said, I put it for an undoubted truth that Images have inferior
honor. But in conclusion, when he should defend the Papists from the peril
of Idolatry, and fully determine how far Images may be honored without
Idolatry, he concludes they must be honored with such honor, as is given
without further curious discussing, D. Saunders gives the people leave not to
care how much honor they give to Images.
whether any more may be given them or no. And tells us that how much is
dew to the Image, we need not care. When all this while, this was the
chiefest thing in this point cared for, and that he him self so much has
labored in, and one while denies, another while grauntes: one while
determines, another while says he will not, can not, nor is able to
determine: thus standing in doubt, and yet putting us out of doubt: and all
this ado is only for this question, how much or how little honor should be
given to Images, least we commit Idolatry to them, by giving the worship of
Latria after his own distinction: and after all this ado, to lap up the
doubt with saying, We need not care how much is dew, and we must honor
Images with such honor as is given, with out further curiouse discussing,
whether any more may be given or no: what is this but to open a gap to all
Idolatry? But if M. D. Sau^d. may thus rid his hands of this matter, D.
Saund. him self overthrows his own distinction of three kynds of worshipping.
by bidding the people not care how much worship they give to Images, whereto
then should we care for this your shift of these three kinds of worships, since
it is not to be cared how much worship be given them? Thus ordered you the
simple people then, bidding them honor, worship, cappe, kneel, offer, pray
unto, trust upon, and care not To what careless Idolatry the Louanistes
would reduce us. The Papists shift, that these are but the sub tilties of a
few Scholemen.
how much they gave to the Image. And this careless Idolatry M. Stapleton
would you and your accomplices bring us again unto.

Neither are these things (as M. Sanders pretendes to mitigate the matter)
Quiddities and subtilties imagined of Thomas, and a few Schoolmen only: but
all your Schoolmen for the most part, handle and toss this question to and
fro, having occasion by the exceeding great* Idolatry committed in the mean
while by the people. Yea not only the Schoolmen held their opinions: but the
Friars as fast preached the like worship, and cited the famous Scoolemen for
them.

Discipulus cites Thomas. 3. part Quest. 25. Artic. 6. Discipulu^ sermon. 35.
Crux Christi potest adorari adoratione Latriae, etc. The Cross of Christ may
be worshipped with the worship of Latria (which ye call Divine worship) because
the Cross besprent with the blood of Christ, is the very Image of the
Crucifix spredde thereon: and the Image of it also, is every wood that is
formed after the fashion of a Cross. And thus he not only proves, that the
Cross which Not only the Cross Christ dyed on, but every other cross, and
every stick made like a cross is to be honored.
Christ dyed on, but every other Cross, yea every peer of wood formed like a
Cross, is to be worshipped, and that with divine honor. Although other make a
great difference of worship between the Cross that Christ died on, and other
Crosses.

Cardinal Uigeriu^ makes this a principal argument, to have touched the ble^d
of Christ. And wrote thereon, being desired of ye College of Cardinals and
Bishops, at what time The Turks token to the Pope. Vigerius de instrumentis. A
solemn question among the prelates at Rome about Christ's coat, and the
spearhed that wounded him.
as the great Turk for a token of friendship had sent to the Pope (as he
tells) the spear head that wounded Christ, keeping still the coat of Christ
with him in Turkey: Hereupon arose a question among all the Prelates, whether the
Coat or the Spear head were more precious, and worthy greater honor. Uigerius
reasons much of Christ's shirte, having touched his sweat and his (...): of
the Nails that perced his hands: and the other instruments, posts, cords,
rods; etc. and would have them worshipped more, as they touched him more
near, or more principal parts of Christ. By which rule he might make the
stones holy Relics, that he trod upon, and why not, since your foresaid
prayers confess, that even the hands of the Jews that s^ote him, and the
spettle that they spit on his face are holy Relics, and to be worshipped with
divine honor also, because they touched Christ: if this kind of reasoning
were good divinity.

Alanus de Rupe says, Imago Christi. etc. The Image of In pract orandi
Psalterium Virginis.
Christ is not to be worshipped with the worship of Latria: The Image of the
virgin Mary, with the worship of Hyperdulia: the Images of other with the
worship of Dulia. Attributing that worship to the Image of every thing in his
What the Papists say we should conce^ue when we stand (...) fore Images.
degree, that you attribute to the thing it self. And the reason is, as he
says: Cum stabu coram Imaginibu^. etc. When thou stand before the most
holy Images of Christ and the virgin Mary, thou ought to think that there
is the blessed Trinity, and Christ, with Mary, which see thee under the eyes
of the Image, and hear thee under the Images ears, and love thee under the
Images heart, and speak with thee under the mouth of the Images, not
according to the artificial essence of the Image, but according to the
imaginatiue thereof, or the divinity of the Trinity, most blessed and present.
And that there is such a power in this sight, hearing, understanding, love,
and so of the other, as the most blessed Mary has revealed: that if infinite
worlds with all their power should see* thee, hear, love, understand, and
conserve thee: they should not do so much unto thee, as is done unto thee by
the representing of such an Image, etc. Therefore, before such Images, as being
ordained by the divine ordinance of the Church, and of the holy fathers, and
the especial ordinance of Angels, represent high things beyond other
creatures: thou ought to behave thy self with all reverence, and fear, and
al faith, and love, even as if the divine things represented, were there
present.

Neither do ye make them bare representations, but that even in the Images, the
things them selves represented, are. Yea says Alanus: Tota Trinit as beata,
per essentia^, praesentiam, and potentiam est in ^a aequaliter, quantum est ex
part deitatis, and no^ ex part operis, etc. The whole blessed Trinity is in
the Image by essence, by presence, and by power, equally, so far forth as in
respect of the deity, not in respect of the work. And by such a manner that
is, in respect of the deity, with the Ideaes or forms imagined, the virgin
Mary is in such an Image, according to her whole life, her nature, her grace
and her glory, most really, most truly, and most principally, by reason of her
Idea, or imagined form and divine He means Augustinus de Ancona, the
Scholeman.
part, which is infinitely greater (after Albertus and Aug.) tha^ is her
creature it self. Therefore the most mercyful Mary shall always be present, most
really in such an Image, not by bodily presence, but by divine presence,
according to Dionisius and Boece. And this is the manner of worshipping the
Images of saints, and of worshipping by signification the Image of the Lord
Jesus Christ, which is now whole, even the self same thing in his Image.
Therefore in these Images, thou ought to believe, that the Lady Mary does
there see thee hear thee, love thee, and provoke thee to all goodness.

Thus say your subtle Scholemen with their ideities; essencies, realities,
diuinalities, quiddities, qualities, and such other Sim subtle title
tumtatle^ies: the effect whereof is this, that the Images must have the same
honor, that the things should have which they represent and be Images of.
Whereby not speaking of the manifest idolatry committed to saints and their
images: but only of the image of Christ, to who^ ye say the same honor is due,
that is due to Christ him self: But to Christ him self this honor is due, not
only alexternall worship The image of Christ to have as much honor as
himself.
of the body; but invocation, faith, trust, hope, ascribing al our help and
salvation, thanks giving. etc. al which ye comprehend under Latria, as due to
be re^dred to Christ: the image therefore, besides ye bodily worship, must be
inuocated, believed, trusted and hoped in: al our help, salvation, and
tha^ksgiuing, must be ascribed to ye image of Christ, so well as to himself.
How can ye excuse this, M. Stap. from (...) shameful idolatry, even by your
own distinction. Was it now any marvel, The Schoolmen maynteined as much
idolatry as the people committed.
if the people (that knew not these scholepoynts, and were not acquaynted with
these distin^tio^s, but went plainly to work, doing all the worship they could
deuife, and more would they have done, could they have devised more:) gave
Duliam, Hyperduliam, Latriam. and all that ye can else invent to Images: since
your Scholemen, even by the distinctions that they would cover and shift off
the matter withal, confess as gross idolatry ought to be done, as the people
did commit to images? neither did your preachers blame the^, but cite the
scholeme^, and incite the people, setting the^ more a gogge. Yea your selves
from Louayne send us over a license, not to care how much honor is due unto
them, nor curiously to discuss, whether any more may be given them than is
given: when so much, both of the learned and unlearned was given, as more
though ye would, ye can not devise to give, for ye gave no more but all.

Now where we cry out upon this, as apparent Idolatry: you cry out again
upon us for heretics, and liken us to Iulianus the Apostata, writing against
the Christians, for the Cross of Christ. But like renegate Apostataes your
selves, it is not we, but you that renie, forsake and deface, the virtue,
effect, and merits of his death, that dyed upon the Cross. Who offered him
self a full, propiciatorie, everlasting, and perfect sacrifice of redemption,
and atonement, once for all our sins before or after Baptism. And you in
his place, offer the Cross, and other his Images, to be thus worshipped of the
ignorant people. Affirming that, Hoc modo (vt Dominus Jesus reue^auit Alanus de
^upe.
cuidam deuoto) poterit venire in breui ad amorem and timorem perfectum
coelestium By this means (as the Lord Jesus revealed to a certain devout
man) he might in short time, come to a perfect love, and fear of heavenly
things. But in the mean time, the people sticking in visible and earthly
things, fell without all fear or love of Gods truth, even to a perfection of
Idolatry. Believing too much in such faygned revelations, and rejecting the
word of God, wherein Christ has, not to a certain devout man, but to all the
world, revealed the express will of his heavenly father, in plain words,
forbidding the worship of all Images, yea of all creatures, as heathen and
wicked Idolatry. The Papists shift that their Images are no thing like the
heathen Idols.


But ye still cry, that your Images are not Idols, as the heathens Images
were, and therefore your worship of them is not Idolatry, as was theirs. I
omit the examining of this sequel, M. Stapl. And will only as now deny
the antecedent. The which though other more at large have improued, and I have
somewhat touched it before, yet because at the very instant of the writing
hereof, there came to my hands a paper, by a certain friend of youres (whom I
spare to name) wherein was contained (as he affirmed) such reasons as were
unanswerable, to prove that your Images are nothing like the Heathen Idols.
Although, perusing the same by Doctor Saunders foresaid book of Images, it
seems to be drawn from his collections, of the differences between Idols
and Images, and so by some other already may be full answered: A popish libel
of the differences between their Images and Heathen idols.
yet I thought it not amiss, even here to set it down, and see, by this
which already is spoken, how easily or hardly it is to be answered unto.

The differences between the Idols of the Gentiles, and our Images, says this
Papists paper.

First, some kind of Idols, had no truth at all in nature, The first
lisserence* of proportion to the natural truth.
but were feigned monsters: all our Images have that essential truth extant
in the world, which they represent.

I answer: first, for some of their Idols ye say truth. Secondly, for all your
Images ye make a loud lie. As for ensample, the Image of S. Sunday pictured
like a man, with all kind of (...) about him, as though he had been John of
all crafts. Whereas, for the being of any such man, there was no such
essential truth at all extant in the world that it represented. And yet for
your Images this is a general rule, that you must most firmly believe, Quod
qualem imaginem Alanus de ^upe.
vides ad extra oculo corporali, ^lem Christus habet similitudinem aed infra,
secundum esse diuinale and Ideale. That, what manner of Image thou see
outward with thy corporal eye, Christ has the same similitude inward,
according to his divine being, and conceived form. And the like he says of
the Uirgin: ^deo habeatur Imago Mariae virginis pulchra, quoniam turpis Imago
(test Maximo) non est vera Imago Ibidem.
Mariae, sed falsa. Cum ipsa Maria sit totius pulchritudinis, decoris, amoris,
regina, and domina. Let a fair Image be had of the virgin Mary, because a
foul Image (as Maximus witnesses) is not the true Image of Mary, but a false
Image, since Mary is the Queen and Lady of fayrenesse, comlynesse and love. And
M. Saunders concluding this point, says: For look what proportion is
between thing and thing, the same proportion is between sign and sign of
those things. By which rule of leueling the Image according to ye essential
truth extant in the world of the party represented by the Image: as many
other Saints, yea Christ's, and the blessed Uirgins may be proved Idols,
being pictured amiss, and swaruing from their truth represented: so by no
means can ye defend your consecrate cake, your three faced picture of God the
father, your winged and feathered Angels, your pictures of Saint Savior, and
Saint Sunday, from being manifest Idols. And therefore between these some
Images of yours, and those some Idols of theirs, there is no difference in this
first point.

Secondly, all their Idols were without truth concerning The second
difference, of Images and idols, of faith and religion.
faith and religion: All our Images conteyne such a truth as belongs to
Christ's faith and religion.

I answer: No Images belong to the truth of Christ's faith and religion. As
for religion, all the religion that Christ ordained, was without Images. Images
in diverse places are forbidden to be worshipped, Custodi^e vos a simulac^ris.
1. John 5. Romans 10.
Keep your selves from Images. And they are in no place bidden to be
worshipped. As for faith, Fides ex auditu, auditus aute^ per verbum dei. Faith
comes by hearing, hearing by the word of God. But the worship of Images is
without the word of god, yea (as is already showed by your schoolmen) it is
but of the Churches ordinance: but no faith can be with out Gods word: the
worship then of Images is without the truth of Christ's faith and religion: and
so likewise in this 2. point they differ not from the worship of the heathen
Idols.

Thirdly, sacrifice was done to their Idols, not so to our The. 3. difference,
of sacrifice.
Images, but only to God.

I answer: first, in that ye made such sacrifice to God, as God never
ordained, and made more daily renewing of sacrifices to him, not contented with
the only sacrifice that he made once for all: therein ye committed plain
Idolatry, and your massing sacrifice was the Idol. Secondly, where ye say, ye
made sacrifice only to God: I have proved already, in plain confession of
your selves, that ye made sacrifice to the blessed virgin also. Thirdly, that
ye say, they made sacrifice to their Idols, so do not you: If sacrifice be the
worship of Latria, then so do you, by your own tales. but what matter makes
this, when ye sacrificed to them, of whom the Images were the pictures: and
what differed that from the Heathens doing, that sacrificed to Jupiter, before
the Image of Jupiter, or honored him by sacrifice in his Image? which things
you did also, and therefore without any difference herein, both theirs and
your Images are Idols.

Fourthly, their Images belonged many times to very wicked The. 4. difference,
of wicked men and Saints.
men: our Images which we worship, belong always to blessed Saints.

Not always, M. St. to blessed Saints, except ye iumble God and his Saints
together. Yea some of those that ye worship for blessed Saints, are doubted of
your selves to be damned spirits: belike they were little better than wicked
me^. But, how blessed saints some of the^ were who^ ye worshipped, read eue^
your own writer, sir Thomas Mores works of Images and pilgrimages, and ye shall
see little difference between theirs and yours, except yours were the worsse,
even in that simulata sanctitas est duplex iniquita, Their counterfeit
sainctship made them double hypocrites.

Fourthly, some of the Gentiles professed themselves to adore The. 5.
difference, of the worship of insensible creatures.
the insensible wood and stone: we do not profess or teach any such thing,
but rather the contrary.

I answer, if some of the Gentiles did teach this among them: many, and those
that are counted your chiefest scholemen, do even the same, both professing and
teaching to adore the very insensible wood of the cross, and that with the
same honor that ye adore Christ him self: and all because he dyed thereon,
and because it was besprent with his blood. Neither do you it for the form
sake, as now and then ye would shift of the matter (which nevertheless, God
wot, is but a poor shift, to save you from Idolatry, for why should ye
worship a figure, more than a substance?) but even the very wodden pieces, as
ye bear us in hand, of the cross, ye worship, and many other insensible
substances, nails, ropes, pillars, thorns. etc. As for your gross
worshipping of insensible wood, stone, metal, and payntings: none is so
insensible, that he knows it not. And therefore in this point there is no
difference: if there be, it is, that your worship was the more insensible of
the twain.

Sixthly* other of the Gentiles thought a certain substance The. 6.
difference of the substance of God.
of God to lie privy in the Idol: we make our Images only remembraunces of
holy things, and not to contain any Godhead.

I answer: First, that ye make them only remembrances of holy things, is a
manifest untruth. For besides the reme^brances, ye add worshippings to them:
but to remember only a thing, is not withal to worship a thing. Secondly, you
lie, in that ye ascribed many helps to Images, many miracles to be done by
them, and that life, blood, motion, speaking, virtue, pity, grace, and power
was in them, as is already plainly showed by the ensamples of Discipulus, by
the stories of your Legendes, and by the doctrine of your Scholewriters. All
which is far more, than only a remembrance of holy things. If ye say ye
ascribe this, not to the material stocks or stones, or to the form and
Image, but to the power and grace of God in them: since the power and grace of
God, is a certain substance of God: what differs this also from that ye say
of the Gentiles, they thought a certain substance of God to lie privy
therein, and do not you think even the same? yea, and that the very essential
Idea of God, and his very Divinity Alanus de rupe.
and Godhead, lyethand is, wholly, really, principally, and infinitely, and
that not so much by his power, but by his grace, and his glory also in Images,
as I have showed ye out of Alanus, citing the Schoolmen for it: and which of
the Gentiles went so far? in this point therefore ye agree with the Heathens
Idolles, or rather ye go beyond them.

Seventhly, the wisest of the Gentiles, adored by the Image The. 7. difference,
of the governance of unreasonable creatures.
of Juno or of Vulcanus, unreasonable creatures, as the earth or the fire, and
by them certain Gods who governed those Creatures: we adore, by our Images, no
unreasonable creature, but only blessed souls, and one God their maker.

I answer: first, by this your confession, that ye adore blessed souls by
Images, and as ye said before in the fourth point, our ^ages which we worship*
belong always to blesled Saints, since both ye worship them, and by them
worship Sainct^: ye prove your seine^ liers, in saying in your fifte point, we
make them only remembrances of holy things. And so your points being not
truly knitte together, but tagged with lies, to trausse up your Images, to
make them not seem Idols? ye worship not only God and blessed souls, but
even the Devil, for he is the Father John. 8.
of lies.

Secondly, to that ye say, we adore by our Images no unreasonable creature: ye
are confuted by your adoration of the Cross, as is before alleged, unless ye
can prove the Cross to be a reasonable creature. Which except ye can do, this
also is a manifest vutruth, a^appeareth by this argument:

The cross ye Christ died on is an unreasonable creature:

But by other Crosses, ye worshipped the Cross that Christ died on, as Images
of it:

Ergo, By your Images ye worshipped an unreasonable creature. Which is contrary
to that ye say, by our Images we worship no unreasonable creature.

Thirdly, where ye say ye worship only blessed souls and one God their maker:
if ye mean by souls, the more principal and the immortal part of man, as
ye seem to mean, and is commonly taken: then is this an other lie, for ye
worship the bodies also of diverse, yea and sundry parts of their bodies,
arms, sculles, legs, etc. which are no souls. Or how soever, for part or
whole, ye take it: ye escape not a lie, because, besides your pretended worship
of God, and confessed worship of the blessed souls: ye worship Angels also
which are neither souls nor God.

Fourthly, to the doing of the Gentiles in this point of worshipping certain
Gods, who governed those creatures fire or earth* whereby they worshipped them:
even the self same thing do you, not only in your relics, which are
unreasonable Creatures, but for other unreasonable creatures also that serve to
our use, as fire, earth, seas, prisen, fetters, corn, barrenness,
fruitfulness, agues, pestilence, botches, etc. ye gave to the Saints a
governance of the^. Yea, for cattle, pigges, horses, sheep, ye ascribed to the
Saints a protection of the^, as your Legende is full of such patrones for
sundry things. If ye say, ye called the^ not Gods: I have proved that also,
even by your Legende. If ye say, ye gave not them the principal government of
these things, nor that which they had, they had it not of them selves, but of
God, that gave the^ such a grace and governance: what say you herein, that eue^
the Heathe^s do not say? that all that the particular gouerna^ces of their petit
Gods, comes a ^oue summo, from the great Jupiter, or a Primo motore, from the
first moouer, and so likewise herein, your Images are not different from ye
Heathe^s Idols.

Eighthly, The Devil ruled their Idols, the same Devils fear The. 8.
difference, of the fear of devils.
our Images which are set up in a right Faith.

I answer: first, this in one sense is truly said, he fears those your
Images which are set up in a right faith: but none of your Images, are set up
in a right faith: he fears therefore none of your Images. A right faith is
grounded (as is Romans 10.
said) on Gods word: (...) Gods word* biddes not Images to be set up to be
worshipped: therefore your Images that are set up to be worshipped, are not set
up in a right Faith.

Secondly, that the Devil fears your Images: if ye How the Devil is
afraid of Images.
mean he fears your Images should be taken away, ye say true. If ye mean
they make him afraid to see them, or to come nigh them: ye say untrue, for
both he came nigh them, and was in them, and ruled them. But he feared them as
he did Holywater, and as he did fear the great bell in the steple when he
satte upon it. But these are but childishe bugges to fear the simple people
with all. The birds berayed them, worms eat them, the spiders made cobw^bs
in them, and is the Devil afraid of them? the Devil he is as soon M. Stapl.
No, no, he delights in Idolatry. Excuse this Idolatry, that I have showed
was committed to them, and then tell us he fears them. Which, except ye ca^
do, even as he ruled the Heathen Idols: so that he ruled yours, his very
practices declared. He fears not deceit, iuggling knackes, crafty
co^ueigha^ces, forgeries, and feigned miracles: but rather is the ruler of
them. But many of your Images, yea the most famous Images, that could sweat,
frown, smile, nod, move, go, speak, etc. were wrought by such crafty
legerdemaines: as the vices and devices of them, have since been openly seen,
at the pulling down of the^. Which argues that the Devil feared them not,
but ruled them, as he did the Heathens Idols.

Ninthly, The Devils mainteyned their Idols, the same covet The. 9. Difference
of the Devils hate of Images.
to throw down our Images.

I answer: this is in effect, all one with the other. For Quem ^etuuni
oderunt, que^ oderunt perisse expetunt. Whom they fear, they hate: whom they
hate, they wish to perish. But (as is showed) he feared them not, but
delighted in the^. Ergo, he hated them not, nor coneted to throw them down,
but mainteyneth them, with all his might and main, with all his craft and
illusions, and makes such stir against the word of God, and the setters
forth thereof, for them: that neither the Priests of Baal made the like against
the Prophets, nor Alexander the Coppersmith against Paul, Act 19.
and other Heathen Idolaters against the Christian martyrs: as your Pope, and
you his Priests do, against the Gaspel and the Protestants, to mainteyne the
worship of your Images. And to say the truth ye have greater loss, by the
decay of the worship of them, than ever the Coppersmith (which had gains for
making the Images of Diana) had loss by S. Paul for speaking against them.
Infinite was the gains that came toombling in by your Images. And all this fat
is in the fire, by throwing them down: If then Images mainteyned such filthy
lucre, their maintenance must needs be of the Devil. And God by his word is
the very overthrow of them, as he was before of the Heathen Idols.

Tenthly, to be short, their Idols were dedicated by Infidels, The. 10.
difference, of a verruous and good intent.
to an Heathenish purpose: our Images be dedicated to a verteouse intent.
Therefore our Images being so far different from the heathenish Idols, are
injuriously called Idols.

I answer: First, this common argument of good or verteouse intent, is not
sufficient for to make a difference herein. Especially, the Heathen even in
worshipping their Idols, having likewise as good an intent and verteouse, (as
teemed unto them) as your good and verteouse intent seems unto you. They
thought they did well, and so do you: and this verteouse intent, as it serves
you both, so it serves all Idolaters. But you ought to make a distinction of
good in deed, and good in appearance, else ye are more unskillful than the
Heathen, Two kinds of good.
that made a difference between, Reuera bonum, and that quod videtur bonum,
That that is good in deed, and that that seems good. This distinction
herein, ought you to have made: and not stand on the intent, which was in
the^, as good as yours, as they thought: for they purposed not to do ill, but
good, though they did ill and not good. And why? because they did not order
their purpose, by Gods purpose, yea by Gods commandment, not only in the
worship of Images, which he statly forbids, but even in the worship of God
himself. We must not do that which seems good in our own eyes: but that
which God has commanded, we Deuteronomy. 12.
should do, and in no point swerve therefrom. If we do swerve, the heathens
good intent will no more bear us out, than it did the heathen, no more than it
did Saul, or 1. Reg. 15. 2. Reg. 16. John. 16.
Uza, no more than it shall do those that Christ says, shall kill the Prophets
of God, and think they do God good service. All these are a like in good
intent and vertuons purpose, but not in good matter nor virtuous cause.
Wherein, you failing together with them, your intent makes so little
difference of your Images, from their Idols, that it makes them more alike.
And therefore the conclusion, for any of these ten points alleged, may well
be inferred: your Images are not injuriously called Idols.

Thus much, to answer one of your muttring Libels, that ye scatter among the
simple people, whining that we slander you with the term of Idols for Images.
By this little, let them judge whether we slander you or no for Idolaters: and
whether they be Idols or no: and how faint and feigned shifts ye make to
find out difference between their Images and yours. Wherein also ye would
bleare the simple, for who denies, but that there is a difference of the one
from the other? but not such as may make either the one or the other no Idol.
If they were no such Idols, they were as ill, if not worse, but were they not
so ill, yet ye prove not them no Idols for all this. Well, you have spoken of
the difference, and now might I, if I had not been ouerlong already, requite
your ten differences, more than with twice ten likenesses of your Images
and theirs, to prove them Idols both.

But you will say, all this is an outroad, neither properly your matter. Be it
so for once, if you will, although in deed it be not, but is directly to your
quarrel of Images. Yet to draw nearer to your charge of Iulianus the Apostata
for the Cross. If ye affirm that in Iulianus time the Christians worshipped
the Cross: then, as he slaundered those Christians, so do you slander them.
Helene, that ye say found out the Cross, worshipped it not. Epiphanius that
saw the picture of Christ in a place prove to be worshipped, rent it in pieces.
Cyrillus that answers this slander of Iulianus, obiecting to them that they
worshipped the Cross, does he grant that they worshipped it? He says no
such thing, he only mencioneth, how they had it as a memorial of Christ's
death, and to move them to think of mortifying themselves. And where had they
it, in their Churches? had they Roodlofts to set it in? set they it on an
altar? had it any sensing to it? creeping, kneeling, capping, crouching,
praying, offering to it? if there had been any such matters, we should by some
of your side, have heard of it ere now.

No M. St. there was no such Idolatry then, as your Romish Church has now,
far passing the Idolatry even of the Emperor Iulianus. He was an open enemy
to Christ, and for his sake, to his Cross, and to all that was his, but you
are privy enemies and hypocrites, that under the pretense of The comparison
between Iulianus and the Papists.
friendship and honor, as it were with Herodes pretensed worship, and Judas
kiss, salute Christ and his Cross, and rob him of the price that he paid upon
the Cross, spoil him of his glory, and bereue him of his people. Thus do you
that pretend such worship of the Cross. Which Judas treachery and manifest
Idolatry, only because we escrie: you cry out upon us, that we be like
Iulianus the Apostata, your selves being worse than he. We remove these abuses
from the wodden Cross, that Christ himself might be glorified, and we with S.
Paul might truly say, Absit mihi gloriari, nisi in cruce domini Gala. 6.
nostr^ Jesus Christi, God forbid I should glory, but in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ: that is, in the merits and victory of his death and passion, and
not in ye wood that he was crucified upon. Which notwithstanding we hate not,
but we speak against the confidence that you put therein, the worship that ye
make thereto, and the lies and fables that ye forge thereon.

Erasmus says, the Cross is so grown among you, and has so many pieces,
that if al were put together, a whole ship would not bear it, and yet when
Christ suffered it was but one man's burden. How ioylylie the Cross is grown
among the Papists.
So iolily have you multiplied it since, by your lying Arithmetike. Now, all
those pieces, by your doctrines, must have divine honor: yea to all your
Images, we must not care, how much honor we give, and yet all this
notwithstanding, there is no Idolatry committed, and we yt speak against it,
are heretics and apostataes, and you forsooth are good and holy catholics

Ye ask us next, what we say to the Pelagians, affirming Stapl. 57. b
Pelagians.
that children not baptized shall be saved.

I answer, if you had any regard of your salvation M. St. ye would not still
thus wittingly stain your conscience with slanderous and notorious untruths.
We deny not baptism to infants, either as the Pelagians did, nor at Infantes
baptism.
all. Nor we make it to no purpose as did they, that held the infants were not
borne in sin: and that original sin was properly no sin. These are the
Papists assertions not ours. And hereon did Pelagius reject baptism. But we
say Psalm. 51. Our confession.
with David the infant is conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity. And that
this original sin, is both his own sin, and very sin. And that he must
be regenerate, or else he cannot be saved, and that this regeneration is
especially wrought from about by the spirit of God, which Christ adioyneth to
the water. And that the water is the outward sign ordained of Christ, as
necessary to seal up unto our faithes, Gods spiritual adoption and
regeneration. Only, we deny such absolute necessity of this outward sign,
that god which ordained it to be the ordinary sign, is necessarily tied The
Papists presumption in judging no infantes saved that be not baptized.
thereunto, as you Papists affirm. And there upon presumptuously determine,
that no christian infants can be saved, except they have the outward sign
also, and so ye bury them out of the ordinary burial of Christians as damned.

This hard and hasty judgment we reject and confute, even with your own
schole Doctors: that make three Three kinds of Baptism.
kinds of baptism, Fluminis, flaminis, and sanguinis, Of water, which is
ordinary: of the spirit, as where the ordinary baptism by water fails:
and of blood, that is to wete, by Martyrdom.

Moreover baptism succeeds circumcision, but the faithful Jews, did not
judge their children condemned, that died before the day appointed for
circumcision, but rested in such cases on Gods promise to Abraham. Vt sim deus
tuus and seminis tui post te, That I might be thy God, and the God Genesis 17.
of thy seed after thee. And if he be likewise now our God, that are the
spiritual seed of Abraham and true Israelites, is he not also the God of our
seed so well as of theirs? why shall we then measure his grace or mercy
(which is both ordinary, and extraordinary, and above all his works) by his
ordinary sign? Chiefly when Christ the author of Baptism, and into whom
by baptism we be not only initiate, but incorporate, testifying that he
which believes Marc. 16.
and is baptized shall be saved: reuersed not his sentence so hardly as you do:
He that is not baptized shall be damned: but, he that believes not shall be
damned. So that the apprehension of salvation, is ascribed of Christ to faith.
Which faith, the outward sign^ of baptism seals up unto us. As Saint Paul
reasons of Abraham, in the fourth to the Romans. Beatus vir cui non
imput^it. etc. Romans 4.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin. Came this
blessedness then, upon the circumcised, or upon the Baptism not the cause of
salvation.
uncircumcised? We say verily, how that faith was reckoned to Abraham for
righteousness. How was it reckoned in the time of circumcision, or in the
time before he was circumcised? not in the time of circumcision, but in the
time he was yet uncircumcised. And he received the sign of circumcision, as a
seal of righteousness, which is by faith, which faith he had yet being
uncircumcised, that he should be the father of all them that believe, though
they be not circumcised.

And as Saint Paul reasoned thus, and Saint Stephen Act. 7.
likewise makes the same reason against the Jews, that tied salvation to the
Sacrament of circumcision: so do we use the self same reason against you,
holding the error of the necessity of the outward sign of baptism, that
the Jews held of the sign of circumcision, saying that all were The Papists
in the opinion of Sacraments very Jews and Pharisees.
damned that were uncircumcised, as you say, all are damned that are not
baptized in water. Thus are you become very Jews and Phariseys, that upbraid
to us that we be Pelagians.

But you say. Your Masters are in this point worse than the Pelagians, as well
for that some of them have said, that Stapl. 57. b
some infants though unbaptized shall be damned, and some other though
unbaptized shall be saved.

What mean ye to reckon thus by sommes, M. Stap? Were those some worse than
the Pelagians, that said, some though unbaptized shall be damned? how much
the^ are you worse than they, who say all that be unbaptized shall be The
Papists worse than the Pelagians.
damned? And if you may say all such shall be damned, may not we say some such
shall be damned? as though all includes not some, and so your selves are worse
than the Pelagians were. And I trow, it is yet somewhat surer, or at the least
less danger, to say some unbaptized shall be damned, than to affirm it on
all. And do ye think, this is so heinous a matter to affirm it on some? I
pray you, how say ye by the Turks, Jews, and Heathens infants unbaptized,
may we not say it of some of them, if we let ours pass? Now, if this be so
sore a saying, belike you hold opinion, that none of their infants though
unbaptized shall be damned: and if ye do so, why sound ye fault with us
before, for saying some unbaptized shall be saved? If we may neither say some
unbaptized shall be saved, nor yet some unbaptized shall be damned, what will
ye have us say Master Stap? But look how your own sayings hang together. All
unbaptized shall be damned, and yet all unbaptized shall be saved. For what
do ye else say in condemning us, for saying, some not baptized shall be damned*
the contradictorie whereof must needs be this, all not baptized shall be
saved. And so by your co^tradiction to us, ye speak flat contraries to your
self immediately together.

As for that you reprehende some of us, for saying, some unbaptized shall be
damned, and some unbaptized shall be saved: neither is there between these
sayings any repugnancie, both may be true well enough: neither is there
anyflashood in either saying. For, as it is true to say, some vncir cumcised
were damned: so is it true to say, some unbaptized shall be damned. And as some
uncircumcised in the flesh, were saved: so some unbaptized in water, shall be
saved. For, circumcision then was that to the^, that baptism is now to us.
Thus, as these some, that say either of these sayings or both, of some
unbaptized, said nothing but the evident truth: so your warbling thereat
shows not only your falsehood, but your envy to be so spiteful, yt whatsoever
we say, ye will control it be it true or false, only because we say it. Yea
although The Papists care not what they say against us, so they say somewhat.
your self say the same, and much more to ye same effect. But howsoever ye
contrary your self and cannot tell what ye say: yet so that ye say somewhat
against us, be it true or false, good or bad, wise or fond, all is wisely,
well, and truly said. Thus has pride sotted your affection on your selves,
and envy blinded your judgment on us. But you leave us not thus.

And some of them (say you) especially Calvin and other Stapl. 57. b
sacramentaries say, that they shall come without baptism to the Kingdom of
heaven, which the Pelagians durst not say, but that they should have the life
everlasting, putting a difference, but peeuishly, betwixt these two.

In deed it was a very peevish putting of a difference betwixt Peeuishe
differences.
coming to the kingdom of heaven, and to everlasting life, but I pray you M.
Stap, do not your self, and that even here full peeuishly, put this self same
peevish difference: ye say, that some of us say, that infants unbaptized shall
be saved. And some of them (say you, as though it were another manner of matter
and far more heinous) specially Calvin and other Sacramentaries say, that
they shall come without baptism to the kingdom of heaven. What difference is
there between these sayings, they shall be saved, and they shall come to the
kingdom of heaven? Is not this as peevish a difference, as between the coming
to the kingdom of heaven, and the having everlasting life? what differs
either of these from being saved* If ye say, ye make the difference between
those that be unbaptized, and those that be without baptism, this is as
peeuishe as the other, if not more peeuishe of the twain. Now, if there be no
difference between these sayings, some though unbaptized shall be saved, and that
they shall come without baptism to the kingdom of heaven: is not this the^ most
peeuishly put of you, to say some of them say thus, and some of them,
especially Calvin and other Sacramentaries (for so ye please to term us) say
thus? and yet all these sommes, special sommes, and other sommes, agree in one
some, without any some or other special or not special difference at all,
saving in bare words. Do ye not herein shew^ your selves as peuishe as the
Pelagians? For what did Calvin especially, or the other, in saying they should
come to the Kingdom of heaven, more than the other before did say, that they
should be saved? But that ye would show a difference that ye have of special
spite to Calvin, more than to any other.

Are ye able to prove this difference, that some shall be saved, and not come
to the kingdom of heaven* or that any shall come to the kingdom of heaven, and
not be saved? I have never read this difference before M. St. And therefore it
sounds like a very peeuishe difference in mine ears. I have heard and read
of your peevish differences, between Lymbus Lymbus patium.
patrum, and heaven, but what is that to this difference? for if they shall be
saved, they shall come to the kingdom of heaven. Purgatory.
Yea, you tell us that those that be in your Purgatory, which besides the
continuance ye say, differs little or nothing from hell, yet say you, they
shall all be saved that are there, that is to say, they shall come from thence
to the kingdom of heaven. I have heard likewise on the other part, how ye say
there is a difference between being damned, and being in hell: but God wot a
peeuishe difference also, feigned of Plato and Uirgill, and that ye shall find
master Stap. if ever ye come together. But God save the child as they say, the
worst I wish you master Stap. is that ye never feel that difference. But that
God in time give you grace, to repent these your peevish and fond striuings
against his truth, and malicious slaunderings of his ministers. And so master
Stapleton, ye shall find no difference betwixt the being saved, and the
coming to the kingdom of heaven.

Now where ye say, ye will mount higher, to fetch the Stapl. 57. b Simon
Magus. Marcion. Manicheus.
race of our generation, even to Simon Magus, to Marcion and Manicheus of whom
Luther and Calvin have learned their doctrine against free will.

Ye did well master Stapleton, to mount higher betimes, for if ye had gone but
one ynch lower, when ye objected Pelaganisme to us for Baptism, ye had plunged
into Pelagianisme your self, even in your free will, as we shall see when we
come thereto. But no marvel if your malice makes you willing and free to
slander us, with the opinions of Simon Magus, Marcion, and Manes in freewill:
ye were soddenly mounted up so high, like a Buzzarde, that your eyes could not
discern the great difference between The heresy of Marcion and Manes, for
fatal necessity and mo Gods (...) one.
those Heretics false fables, and the true doctrine of Luther and Calvin
thereon. They ascribed all things to a fatal enforcing necessity proceeding
from diverse good and bad Gods as they said. And look you to it in the
honoring of your Saints as I have showed, that you make not more Gods that
they did, besides your other errors. And what is this Heresy of theirs, like
the godly doctrine taught by Luther and Calvin, out of the word of God,
against your free will, making your selves as it were Gods with Simo^ Magus, to
mount up to heaven at your own free will and pleasure?

But had ye mounted a little higher, the^ should ye in deed Luther and Caluines
doctrine against free will.
have found out, of whom Luther and Calvin learned their doctrine against free
will: eue^ of the holy Apostle S. Paul, that confessed he had no such
freewill, to do good or ill at his choice, no not being regenerate. In respect
whereof, he had indeed a will to do good, according to the inward man: but by
reason of the outwardman, this will was hindered, and so not free but imperfect,
as he says of him self, S^ enim quod Romans 7. What little freedom of will S.
Paul had.
lex, etc. For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under
sin, because I wot not what I do. For what I would do, that I do not, but
what I hate, that I do. If I do now that which I would not, I grant to the law
that it is good. So then now, it is not I that do it, but sin that dwells
in me. For I know that in me, that is to say, in my flesh, dwells no good
thing. To will is present with me, but I find no means to perform that which
is good. For I do not that good thing, which I would: but that evil do I, which
I would not. Finally, if I do that which I would not, then it is not I that do
it, but sin that dwells in me, does it. I find then by the law, that when
I would do good, evil is present with me. I delight in the law of God
concerning the inward man: but I find another law in my members, rebelling
against the law of my mind, and subduing me unto the law of sin, which is
in my members. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body
of death? I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then, I may self in
my mind serve the law of God, and in my flesh the law of sin.

Lo M. St. this is all the will that S. Paul felt and confessed to be in him
self, while he lived, even in respect of the inward man. But God wot, this is
far from free will. If then the will of the Saints of God be thus hindered by
the The infirmity of will in the regenerate man. 1. Cor. 2. The will of the
unregenerate man.
flesh, that it can not freely will nor work: what shall we think of the will
of the fleshly man? forsooth says S. Paul, Animalis homo non percipit ^a quae
sunt spiritus Dei, The fleshly man understands not those things, that are of
the spirit of God, for they are folly to him, neither can he perceive them,
because they are examined spiritually. But what will has man in that, whereof
he has no perceiving? Yea, is he not rather altogether unwilling, to that,
which seems folly to him? and for this cause, the flesh strives Gal. 5.
and rebelleth against the spirit. He has therefore no will to any goodness
at all. Where are then those Pura naturalia, the pure natural qualities of
inclination, conversion, and will in man of himself, to move God with all, that
you and your Schoolmen crake so much upon?

The question here, is this, whereas our first parents The very question of
Free Will.
before their fall, had in them selves free will to have sinned, or to have not
sinned, and misusing them selves and their free will to sin, lost them selves
and their free will to have not sinned also: whether, after this corruption of
man's nature, it has yet free will will to good, or not to sin, as it had
before it fell. To this question, if ye had (as I said) mounted S. Paul's
reasons against Free Will. Ephesians. 2.
so high as the Apostle: he would have answered you, that we were dead in
sin. Cum mortui essetis in delictis and peccatis: When ye were dead in
offenses and sins: but a dead thing has no will at all: When therefore we
were dead to sin, we had no will at all to goodness. He would have answered
you that we are not able of our selves, to think any 1. Cor. 3.
good thought at all: but if we have a will to any good thing, we must needs
think some thought thereon: we are not therefore of our selves sufficient to
have a will to any good thing. And if we have any good will, this comes not
of our selves, but of God: not of old Adam, but of new Adam: it is not a
natural virtue of man, but a supernatural gift of god. Deus est enim qui
operatur^n vobis and velle and perficere pro Philip. 2.
bona voluntate. It is God that works in you both to will and to perform it,
according to his good will. If then it be Gods gift, Quid gloriaris quasi non
acceperis? why boastest thou (O proud Papist) as though thou receiuedest it not
of God, but thou had it of thine own, to move God as thou say, Ex congruo
ex part liber^ arbit^ij, of congruitie, to deserve Antoninus part. 4 tit. 9.
cap. 7.. 1.
heaven for thy works in consideration of thy free will.

If ye had mounted thus high M. Stapl. you may see how S. Paul would have
pulled down, this surmounting pride of yours. But, had ye s^oonke by him never
so free, and mounted up to Christ, he would have told you in plain speech,
that ye were but thorns, briers, and ill trees of your Luc. 6. The reasons of
Christ against freevvil. John. 3. Math. 16. John. 8.
selves, on which no grapes, nor (...), nor any good fruit can be gathered.
That ye were but flesh, and that nothing but flesh could come of flesh, and
that flesh and blood reuealeth not Christ. He would for your free will, say
unto you, as he said to the craking Phariseis* Uox ex patre Diabolo estis, and
desideria patris vestr^ vultis facere. You are of your father the Devil, and
your will is to do the lusts of your father. This is all the free will that he
ascribes to man of him self. And if he have any better will, it is not but of
him that says, Sine me nihil potestis facere, without me ye can John. 15.
do nothing. We can not do, nor will, ought that good is without him. Yea we
are (before he give us a will thereto) so unwilling, that we are even drawn
thereto, Nemo venit John. 6.
ad me nisi pater meus traxerit e^m: No man comes to me (says Christ)
unless my father draw him. Omnia traham ad John. 12.
meips^, I will draw all things to me. We came not the^ of our own free will if
we were drawn to him. Ensample of this draught, eue^ in S. Paul himself. I
grant, our unwillingness Act. 9.
is changed to an obedient willingness, and to a free will also. We are free,
in respect of delivery from ye chains of darkness and bondage of sin: S^ v^s
filiu^ liber auerit vere liberi er^is: If John. 8.
the son make you^ free then are ye free in deed: but this is the freedom
of ye spirit, and the spirit helps our infirmities, Romans 8.
which infirmities yet hinder the freedom of this will, even in the Saints of
God, as I noted in Saint Paul's complaint before. Yea even Christ our Savior
who took our infirmities without sin, in his agony to his Father said, Non
sicut ego vol^ sed sicut t^ vis, Not as I will, but as Math 26.
thou will, subduing his own will for our ensample, to his fathers will, and
will you wilful Papists crake of your free will?

But if ye let pass Christ also, as ye use to do, and fetching a further race
of all mankinds, mounting so high as Adam the first man of all: you should
there have found in Alams will.
deed this your free will. But there ye should have seen it lost again, and
in his loins, all our free wills with all, and him self and us also. Saving
that a second Adam has found us, quickened us, and made us free again, of
his free mercy, not of our freewill works. So that what we have now either in
will or work, to do any thing acceptable to his most blessed will and
pleasure: the same in deed is in us, because his spirit is in us, but not of
us, but of him, bringing forth in us, Uelle and perficere, Both to will and
Phil. 2.
to work, as fruits of his holy spirit within us. And if this agree with the
pestiferous Fables and lies of Simon Magus, Marcion, and Manes: then ye have
mounted fair and well. If not, had ye mounted far higher than they write
Simon Magus did, yea than ever Lucifer did, yet as Simon Magus fell down and
brake his neck, as Lucifer was thrown down to hell fire: so must you M.
Stapleton with shame come down again, for fear ye be hurled down with them.

Now, if as ye rashly mounted up, ye will orderly come down, through out all
ages, as it were by steps, ye may descend by this doctrine, even to your
own time again. But I pray you M. Stapleton in your coming down, let The
affinity of the Papists with Pelagius.
Pelagius be your host. What, man, drink with him at least, one free draught
of his erroneous doctrine. He is a free companion, and will let ye drink at
will, freely, and he has pleasannt licour well sweetened with pure natural
drugges, and brewed with strong spices of your own ability, perfection, and
merits, delectable to the palace of man's selfeloue. But sweet soppes must
have sour sauce, they say* This pleasant error, is but a sugared poison, and
as ill on the other part, as S^no^ Magus fatal necessity was, if not a great
deal worse.

But ye will come near us, and touch (ye say) the very Stapl. 57. b
foundation and well spring of this your new Gospel, which altogether is
grounded upon Justification without good works. In that also ye draw very
nighe to the said Simon Magus.

Do we draw nighe him, M. St? God send grace you Justification.
draw not with him, and that many of your works, yea even of your good works,
and such as ye ascribe justification unto, be not such as Simon Magus and his
disciples works were. We ground not upon justification without good Good
works.
works, you ground upon lies without good consciences, that thus do slander
us. Justification in deed may well be without your good works, yea, it can
not be with them. The good works that God commands, justification brings
forth, and therefore it can not be without them, because they be the necessary
fruits of Justification, we sever not them therefore from Justification, but
discern them from the Act of God in justifying. Not to make our selves our
own iustifiers, in whole, or in part. We discern the^ from the causes of our
justification, and ascribe the causes to the love, favor, and mercies of God
the father, for Christ his sons sake, by the sanctification of his holy
spirit. We discern our works from the merit and deserte of justification,
much more from the merit of our salvation, and say, it is only wrought by
his merits, and given to us gratis, freely. All have sinned (says S. Paul)
and want Romans 3.
the glory of God, but they are justified freely by his grace through the
redemption which is in Jesus Christ, whom God has appointed to be the
reconciliatio^, through faith by his blood coming between. Which word
freely, is contrary to merit, and excludes it, as S. Paul reasons. S^ ex
gratia Romans 11.
iam non ex operibus, alioquin gratia non est gratia. If it come of grace, then
comes it not of works, otherwise grace is not grace. That is to say, it is
not free favor, but bound favor, as deserved or bought As Barnard said, No^
Super cantic. Sermon. 17.
est quo gratia intre^, vbi iam meritu^ occupauit. Where merit has taken up
the rowme, there is no place for grace to enter

And so S. Aug Haec est electio gratia. etc. This is the election of grace,
because all good merits of man are prevented. For Lib. de Patientia. cap. 2.
if it were given by any good merits: then were it not given free, but rendered
as ought. And by this means, it is not by a true name called grace, where
reward is. As the same Apostle says, it is not imputed according to grace, but
according to duty, but if that it be true grace, that is to say, freely
given, it finds naught in man, to whom it may be worthily owing. Infinite are
the places that may be cited out of the fathers, and many are by others at
large collected in this behalf: yea, I have showed you Thomas his judgment
already therein, who is the prince of al your scholeme^. For merit of works
therefore in justification, we are of S. Paul's mind. Arbitramur hominem
iustificari fide absque operibus Romans 3.
legis: we suppose that man is justified by faith without the works of the law.
Thus, in the point of justification, works are excluded, as he said
immediately before: Where is then thy boasting? it is excluded. By what law,
of works? no, but by the law of faith. Although our How works are
excluded, and how not.
works are not at all excluded, in respect of the fruits of those that are
already justified. For they are ipsius factura. etc. His workemanshippe,
created in Jesus Christ in good works, which God has prepared that we should
walk in them. But Ephesians. 2.
before this workemanshippe of Justification, we were but very enemies. And
therefore, as saint Augustine says: Quae merita bona tu^c habere poter amus,
quando Deum non diligebamus? Contra Pelag. and Coelest. de gratia Christi. cap.
26. Faith. Romans 11. Romans 14. Phil. 1.
What good merits could we then have, when as yet we loved not God?

Without faith it is impossible to please God. And, what soever is not of
faith, is sin.

Now, this faith, (which likewise is not of us, but is the gift of God) we
discern from works: because it has relation to the only mercies of God,
promised in Christ unto us. Which promises, faith catching hold upon, is the
only means and instrument that God has given us, to receive the free offer of
his grace, and to apply to us forgiveness of our sins. And so steadfastly
beleening the same, we are justified, by God only, as the efficient and active
worker: by Christ only, as the formal cause, in whom our righteousness
consists: and by faith only, as the instrument given of God unto us, whereby
we receive the same. And this says S Paul, exemplifying it by Abraham. Quid
enim dicit scriptura? For what says the scripture? Abraham believed God, and
it was imputed to Romans 4.
him for righteousness. But to him that works, reward is not imputed
according to grace, but according to duty. But unto him that works not, but
believes in him that justifies the vvycked, his faith is imputed to
righteousness, according to the purpose of the grace of God. And this is that
we say, faith only justifies, that How faith only justifies.
is, faith is the only eye that sees, the only hand that catches hold
upon, the only means whereby we receive, the only instrument wherewith we
apply to our selves the mercies of God, pardoning our sins, by not
imputation: The favor and grace of God, offered in Christ unto us, by
imputation, of his righteousness, works and merits, and not of ours: but the
father accepting his as ours, because we are incorporated into him, and depend
by faith on him, in whom the father is only well pleased, and this is our
Justification. Which is so sealed up in us, by the spirit of God, sanctifying
us to do all true good works, that by the shining of them, God is glorified,
the flesh subdued, the spirit quickened, our consciences appeased, our faith
assured, our lives bettred, our fruits yielded, our duties discharged, our
neighbors helped, the godly rejoiced, the weak confirmed, the mouths of the
enemies stopped, Gods commandment obeyed and practiced, and the works of the
devil, manifest evil, or hypocritical, detected, abandoned, and destroyed.
Not that these things be perfectly done, but that we strive to perfection by
them: not that we are clean dead to sin, as the Monks boasted, but that we
dye daily, as S* Paul says, and still mortify the old 1. Cor. 15.
man. Not that we fulfill all the law of God, or supererogate more, as the
Papists vaunt, but that fighting continually with Satan, with the world,
with flesh and blood, all our works are imperfect. Much less, that by our
good works, we satisfy for our ill works. But that when we have all done, we
are unprofitable servant, for any satisfaction. Luc. 17.
For how can any imperfect goodness (which notwithstanding is not ours, and
so we can not boast thereon, Si accepisti, quid gloriaris, if thou have
received it, why boastest 1. Cor. 4.
thou?) make satisfaction for perfect wickedness. Least of all, that for any
work we can do, or for any trouble we can suffer, that we should merit ye
fruitio^ of God, the most perfect thing of all. Non sunt condignae passiones
huius te^poris Romans 8.
ad futura^ gl^ria^ quae reuelabitur in nobis. The afflictions of this life are
not answerable to the glory to come, that shall be revealed in us. But that all
the goodness of our good works, and all the reward of them, is of him, that
freely for Christ's sake, accepts them: and for his sake will crown them,
because we be Christ's, and Christ is his, and he is all in all in us. This is
our doctrine of good works, M. Sta. descerning our own works from the fruits
of the spirit of God, working in those, whom he has justified, holiness and
righteousness, all the days of their life, till time h^ glorify them.

And thus in deed set we forth the doctrine of justification The ground of
this our doctrine of Justification.
without all works, be they never so good, yea without our selves too, in whom
this justification is wrought. Confessing God to be all in all, and our selves
the workmanship of his hands. And this was the ground, the foundation, and
welspring, not of our new Gospel, as ye term it, but of the new Testament,
and ancient Gospel of Jesus Christ. Upon which foundation we being grounded:
farewell al your merits, your supererogatorie more tha^ merits, your masses,
your Justification is the overthrow of all Popery. Romans 10.
traditions, your ceremonies, relics, Images, miracles, inuocations, vows,
purgatory, and all this bag and baggage, and what soever your other not
written verities, or rather false forgeries, which (being not subject to Gods
righteousness) ye have soght before me^, to justify yourselues withal.

Thus much, M. St. to the heresies ye charge us with, for Stapl. 57. b
This shall suffice (ye say) at this present, to make open to all the world,
that they are no secret nor petit heresies, that ye and your fellows mainteyne.

What we maintain, M. St. is in deed not secret and hyd, John. 18. Luc. 22.
Luc. 12. Matthew. 21. Math. 5. The word of God is the holy candle that can not
be put out. Act 24.
(as your mysteries and secret conspiracies are) but as Christ said of his
doctrine, is daily taught openly in the temple, is proclaimed on the house
top, the corner stone is not cast aside in a hole of our builders, but is
made the head stone of the buylding. The candle is not hid under a bushel.
The people may see it, and see by it (as thanks be to God they do more and
more full sore against your wills) neither all the puffes of your counterblast
can blow the light of this holy candle out. But ye cry, all is heresy,
heresy. In deed such as was laid to S. Paul's charge, is this heresy of
ours. It is soon said, to call it heresy, as ye have done all this while, but
it would cumber you to prove it heresy, as yet ye have not done.

Ye have here laid many things unto us, where either we defend not any such
thing at all, nor any such like thing. And your selves for the most part
defend them, or the like, or else a contrary as ill or worsse. As for such
doctrine as we in deed defend, except your slanderous railing, ye have
brought not one word against it, to prove any one heresy or error, aperte or
privy. Nevertheless, because of your instant crying, and importune craking, I
have answered a great deal further, than either the principal issue about ye
princes supremacy, or the volume could well suffer, or than I minded or needed
to have done. For, to say truth, ye have not, nor ye can, object any thing,
that your masters have not objected before, and is not answered already by
others, chiefly by that Reverend father in Christ, the Bishop of Sarisburie,
whom you so often snatche and snurre at, and not you alone, but all the pack
of you, as at him whom God has raised up, as a singular Iuell and instrument
to open and confute all your falsehoods.

Yet since your impudency is so extreme, still to cry out upon us, as though
nothing were done or speke^ in the matter, saying: Come forth once, and clear
your self of this Stapl. 57. b 58. a
only objection, if you can, being so often pressed therewith. If you
maynteine old condemned heresies, what are ye less than heretics them
selves? if you maynteyne them not, or if they be not heresies that you
maynteyne, clear your self if you be able. I assure you master Horn, you and
all your fellows will never be able to avoid this one only objection. etc.

Since ye thus still cry and call upon us, as though non^ The cause why I have
thus largely answered these objections of the Papists.
had answered to these obiectio^s, I have therefore thus much at your earnest
entreatie, digressed thus far from the principal question, to satisfy, if
plain truth (for Rhethorike I leave to you and other) may satisfy your
importunity: and fed withal your vain humor, that where ye have made and
translated many brave books, to the which your margin oftentimes sends us,
to put us in remembrance what a ioly writer you be, and think you must
needs be answered, or else al is marred, and then ye might say with the
Soluters dawe, oleum and operam perdidi, I have lost all my cost and labor,
if no man should regard my works: ye still cry out therefore to be answered,
and bid us come forth and we dare, as though it were Golias: and yet any one
poor seely stone of our David's bag, will make you, M. Stap. so tottle up
your heels, that we may safely cut off your head, the Pope, even with your
own weapon, for all these your cries and crakes.

But like a lusty champion, as though ye had made a sufficient conquest, ye
say ye will forbear at this time to speak Fol. 57. b.
of the residue of our noble progenitors.

Coragiously said, M. St. when ye have done the worste ye can, and spit out
all your poison, then tell us ye will forbear us. Well then, at the length,
thanks be to God, ye have done with our ancestors, as ye call the^: and have been
answered as ye have heard. Now let others in gods name judge of us both, as
they shall find ye falsehood or verity of these matters.

May it now please you (M. Sta.) to give me leave a Supra 56. b The aunciente
heresies and errors that the Papists maynteyne. The Pharisees Matthew. 23.
while to run at rando^ the same race that you have done, and to use your
own words: Good sir may it please you, favorably to hear your and your
masters honorable pedigree, and of their worthy feats and prowess.

First, what say you to the Phariseis, that severed them selves from all the
people in their strange apparel, in their fastings, prayers, and other points
of hypocrisy, described out by Christ, in so much that they preferred them
selves above Luc. 14. and 18. Sects of religion.
al men, and so were counted, as in who^ religion did only or most consist: so
like in every point to your Monks and Friars, divided from other men by their
rules and profession, and esteemed and called only or chiefly religious men?

What say ye again to the Phariseis, that kept the key of Math. 23. Keeping
the key of knowledge.
knowledge among them selves, and would neither them selves enter in, nor
suffer other to enter, but rather be blind guides and leaders of the blind: so
like to your Prelates and you pretending to be the pastors of the people, and
keepers of the word of God, but so to keep it, that not only ye kept the
people from it, but for the most part your Priests were ignorant of it, and
blinder guides of the blind then ever the Phariseis were.

What say ye again to the Phariseis, that brought traditions into the Church,
besides the word of God, and transgressed the word of God for their
traditions sake? Wherein, Traditions. Math. 15.
for one tradition of the Phariseis so brought in: the Papists have brought in
a score at the least, and if I should say, an hundredth, I spoke within my
bounds.

What say ye to the same Phariseis, that defended a man Fulfilling of the
law.
might do all that the law commands, and obtain justification, and heaven
thereby? But here the Papists go beyond them, that say, we not only may do
all, but more than all that ever God commanded, works of counsel, of
voluntary, and of supererogatio^, like to the Fox, with more Aesopi fab.
than a thousand wiles, in comparison of the poor catte: but the Phariseis
herein were nothing stored like the Papists.

What say ye to the Saduces, that said: we have power and Saduceis. Joseph.
li. Antiq. 13. cap. 8. Eseni.
free will to do good or badde?

What say ye to the Esseni, that lived in woods and solitary places, and eat
only roots and herbs, counting all righteousness to consist in straight
rules of life: although herein, you be but counterfeits to them, and I do them
iniuiurie in this comparison to you, whose Friars, Monks, Heremites, and
Anachores, were nothing comparable but mere Pharisaicall hypocrites.

What say ye even to Simon Magus your self, with Simon Magus. The^doretus li.
1. hae^t. fab. Act 8. The Pope rather the succes^our of Simon Magus, than of
Simon ^eter. Act 8.
whom you charge us? that first began to mingle the Jewish and heathen
ceremonies with Christianity.

What say ye again to Simon Magus, that would have made sales of the gifts of
the holy ghost, as the Pope makes sale of his Indulgences and graces? What say
ye again to Simon Magus, that came to Rome, and there was honored as God? as
the Pope not like Gods vi^ar, as he pretende^, but like God him self, is there
honored, and claims here in earth to have the power of God, according as
Simon Magus named him self the power of God.

What say ye once again to Simon Magus and all his offspring Fornication.
that mainteyned filthy fornication, as the Pope does stews, courteianes and
Concubines? What say ye to the Sethi^ni. August* de Haeresib. Orders of Angels.
Heretics called Sethiani? Of whom says S. Augustine, Multa de principatibu^
and potestatibus van^ssima (...). They faigne many most vain things of
principalities and powers: according as do your fabling books, of the
celestial Hierarchies, in the name of Di^nisius and other like.

What say ye to the Carpocratians? that to maintain Carpocratians Theodoretus
and I^naeus. Traditions.
their wicked lives and false opinions, did say that Jesus taught those things
to his Disciples and Apostles aparte from his written word, and delivered them
by tradition to be kept: as the Pope and all the Papists say for defense of
traditions and unwritten verities (as they call them) besides the written word
of Christ.

What say ye to the Cainites that made invocation unto Caynites. Th^odoret.
I^uocation of angels.
Angels? but the Papists made inu^cation not only to Angels, but to dead men
and women also, yea and to things insensible.

What say ye to the Theodotians? that would take from Theodotians. Theodoret.
and put to the word of God, and that they had authority to correct th^se
things that were not well, and said they were therein wiser than the holy
Ghost: as do the Papists add to the word of God their traditions, and
suppress and ^iminish Authority of Gods word.
the authority of Gods word, saying, their Church is of greater authority by
them, and they have further knowledge of Gods spirit than is cont^ined in the
written word of God.

What say ye to the Basilidians, that to their Disciples (...). Theodoret.
Silence.
commanded ^ue years silence: as your Monks, Friars, Heremites, Ana^hores,
etc. enjoined to their nouices silence at certain times, and did all by beckes
and noddes, and if a word were spoken, all their perfection were marde.

What say ye moreover to the Basilidians? that painted Theodoretus. The image
of Christ. Cerdonia^s, for rejecting ensamples of the old Testament.
Montanistes* for superstitious laws of fasting. Unwritten veriti^s.
and carved the Image of Christ and worshipped it. As I have showed the Papists
did, what kind of worship socuer ye would excuse the matter withal.

What say ye to the Cerdoniaus? that rejected the ensamples of the old
Testament: as you M. St. and M. Dorman in this controversy of supremacy do.

What say you to Montanus? that first appointed laws of fasting, which before
were free, as is showed already in the Article thereon. That said the holy
Ghost taught him more, and better, and greater things than Christ taught in the
Gospel: as your Papists say for their unwritten verities and works of
supererogation. Ascribing a greater perfection to such voluntary works, than
to the works expressed and commanded in the word of God.

What say ye again to the Montanistes? that abrogated Nicephor. Theodoret. The
authority of Gods word abrogated. Mysteries.
the authority of Gods w^rde: as I have showed ye in Pigghius and Alphonsus
that the Papists do.

What say ye again to the Montanistes? that boasted much of mysteries, but
nothing so many nor so mystie, as the Papists were. That said to accuse and
condemn themselves to be sinners, was to sclaunder them selves, as the Papists
that can not abide the Letanie, for saying so often, Confession of our selves
to be sinful.
Lord have mercy upon us miserable sinners, and for saying Amen to the curses
recited against the wicked. Besides that I have showed already, how they
justify them selves with purity of nature, with freewill, with preparatiue
works, meritorious, more than m^ritorious, and works of perfection,

What say ye to the same Montanistes? that under the Offerings.
pretense of offerings craftily gathered and extorted of the people great
sums of money. But not the hundredth part that the popish Priests offerings
brought in. Blind prophec^es.


What say ye again to the Montanistes? with whom the Prophicie^ of Priscilla
and ^aximilla were in greater honor, than the holy Gospels of Jesus Christ:
as likewise the blind Prophecies of the Papists, to the which they give more
credit, than to the true Prophets, that have set forth Gods word. Contempt
and dissolution of matrimoni^ for religion.


What say ye once again to Montanus? that taught the dissoluing and contemning
of Matrim^nie for religion sake: in all which things how nere your Papists
follow Montanus steps, is very apparent to the easy conferrer.

What say ye to the Tessarescedecatitae? which used and The
Tessarescedecatitae. Apocrypha.
alleged forged books in the Apostles names, called Apocrypha: as the
Papists make Canonical the books so called, besides that they allege and
set out their S. Thomas gospel. Nichodemus gospel. The acts of S. Peter. The
fables of Lazarn^, the birth, life, death, and assumption Books forged in the
fathers names.
of the blessed virgin, and many such other counterfaite books, to establishe
their Mass, Purgatory, Relics, Traditions, and other such errors by them.

What say you to the Seueriani of Seuerus? that said a Augustious. Seuerians.
Inspirations, dreams, re^elations, visions, traunces, miracle^.
wench called Ph^lumene was enspired with the holy ghost to foretell things to
come, to whom declaring his dreams and burnings of his mind, she would warn
him secretly as it were of things to come, and that she should see fantasies
come unto her in the likeness of a child, which child appering would now and
then say he were Christ, now and then S. Paul, and that the spirit told her
such things as she told the people, and that she wrought such miracles, of
which this was the chief: that she would put a great loaf into a glass
having a narrow mouth, and with the tippe of her fingars take it out again
vnbroake^, and that she eat nothing else but that, as sent her from God.
Compare these things with the Popish practices in their visions, trances, and
miracles of their she ^incts. S. Bridgits Revelations, the trances of the holy
maid in Kente, the P^ell of France, the she saint that Sir Thomas More
tells of in his book of Pilgrimages, and see how much they differ.

What say you to the Taciani? that would admit none The Ticiani. August.
Renunciation of marriage.
into their rules and orders, were they men or women, that renounced not
Marriage: as none may be admitted to the Popish orders or rules of their
religions, that have not vowed not to marie. The Alogiani. August. Unwritten
verities. The Angelici. Worship of Angels. August. Apostolici. Apostolic
title. Refusal of marriage. Community of goods. August.


What say you to the Alogiani, that as is said before stood upon unwritten
verities, and rejected the written word of God?

What say ye to the Angelici, that bowed them selves down in the worship of
Angels?

What say ye to the Apostolici which most arrogantly called them selves by this
name (as do your Popes call the^ selves Apostolical) and they receive not into
their communion, those that use wives (as your Papists will admit no married
Priests to consecrate at their Mass) nor they received any that profess any
propriety of their goods (as your Monks and Friars do p^tende) of whom says
S. Augustine, Quales habet Ecclesia and Monachos and Clericos plurimos: Such as
the Church has many Monks and Clerks, No marvel then if your Monks and
Priests do so now, for the Heresy of your Apostolical (as ye call it, but in
deed apostaticall Church herein) is of fair antiquity. The Manichei
Forsaking marriage. Aug. con Faus. Manich. Abstinence. Continence. The forsaking
of al things. Addition and diminution to the Scripture. The pretense of the
Scripture.


What say you to the Manichaei, with whom ere while ye falsely charged us? They
forbid (as S. Augustine says) marriage, so much as in them lies. They said,
that by chastity, Prayers and Psalms, they purged their lives and sent them
to heaven. They craked of false Abstine^cie and Continency to deceive the
simple. They boasted that they forsook all things for God, and did arrogate to
them selves all the blessings mentioned in the Gospel. They added and took
from the Scriptures so much as they pleased, pretending they had been or might
be corrupted, and preferred the books called Apocrypha. They said the promise
of Jesus Christ, concerning the holy ghost the comforter, was fulfilled in
their Archmanichee: as the Papists besides all the other aforesaid, say the
same promise of the holy ghost, is fulfilled in their Arch prelate the Pope.
And as Manicheus called himself the Apostle of Jesus Christ, so your Pope in
Authority Apostolical. Flesh and white meat. Propriety of goods.
his Bulls prefixeth the authority Apostolical of Peter and Paul. Moreover
they rejected flesh, eggs and milk, which the Papists d^ on certain days,
they rejected also the propriety of goods, as due the begging Friars.

What say ye to the Hierachitae, that likewise as these would receive none into
their society but unmarried men The Hierachitae. Single life. The Aerians,
August. de Haere. The Psalliani and Euchi^ae, Mumbling up of prayers. Idle
Monks.
and women? Such were also your Aerians, whom falsely you object to us, being
more like to them your selves, admitting none but such as were continent, as
renounced the world, and would possess nothing of their own.

What say ye to the Psalliani and Euchitae? that were all given to mumbling up
of prayers, and said that Monks ought not to labor to get their living, and
therefore they professed themselves to be Monks, because they would do no
work but pray. Whom Erasmus in his defense against the Sorbonists, being
appeached only for saying, Christu^ in orando damnat multiloqu^um. Christ does
condemn much Frasmus de Precatione vocali tit. 19. pro posi. 1.
babbling in prayer) likeneth the Papists unto: Denique Psalliani sieve Euchitae.
etc. To conclude, the Psalliani or Euchitae have augmented the beadroll of
Heretics, who living in idleness, dispatched up an heap of psalms, with a
marvelous rolling of the tongue. Aug. de haere. The Pattalorinc^ae. Silence.
The Aquarij. August. ibide^, Wa^er with the wine in the sacrament. August.
ibide^. Barefoote hereukes.


What say ye to the Pattalorinchitae? which did so give themselves to silence,
that at such times as they thought they must hold their peace, they would lay
their fingers on their nose and lips, least they should speak^ a word: as I
noted before of the Basilidians, both whom herein your religious men resembled.

What say ye to the Aquarij, which mingled water with wine in the Sacrament, as
all the Papist and do?

What say you to the barefoote Heretics, that walked up and down barefoote,
and would wear no shoes, like the barefoote Friars. The Priscillianistes.
Dissembling and keeping no faith nor promise.


What say you to the Priscillianists? that had this rule among them, Iura
periura secretum prodere nol^. Swear and forswear, bewray not the secret:
not only like the dissembling Papists practice among us, that will swear and
forswear themselves to the Prince with false hollow hearts in truth* and yet
in falsehood trusty to their confederates, nor will bewray their secret
conspiracies: but also like the rule of your Pope, and all his perfect
faithful ones, Nulla ^ides tenenda Haereticis. No faith must be kept to
Heretics, as ye call us. But sith ye protest to be so unfaithful, you might
call them fools to, that would believe, either any open or dissembling Papist.

What say ye again to the Priscillianists? that say men August. ibid. Destiny
of stars and pla nets.
are tied to the destiny of the stars, and that our body is composed,
according to the twelve Signs of heaven, placing (as those do that are called
the Mathematikes) a Ram to rule the head, a Bull in the neck, Twins in the
shoulders, a Crabbe in the breast: and so running through the other Signs by
name, they discende unto the soales of the feet, which they allotte to Fishes,
which of the Astrologians is called the last sign. Upon these and such other
fabulous, vain, and sacrilegious things, which were to long to prosecute is
this Heresy compounded. Thus says Saint Augustine. Now if this be so heinous
an Heresy, as Saint Augustine makes it, all your Popish Church are A Caveat
against popish Almanacks.
infected with it. And I would wish all good Christians to beware, how far
they believe the blind Prophecies of many Almanackes, that fill the Papists
brains with hopes and murmurings, and fear the sielie people with doubtful
expectations. All which by Saint Augustines judgment is but Heresies, But God
grant say I, it tend to nothing else. Sigeber^ns, The Acephali


What say y^ to the Acephali? that said women may be she Deacons (such as
were your Nonnes.) Women Deacons. August. Sep^on of (...) for (...). The books
called Apocrypha authorized. Allegories. Theodoretus. The Messalians. Praying,
sleeping, and eating. Revelations, Fleeing of ha^dycra^s. Celles. ^ightes.
Purgatory. August. Epiphanius. The abbeyes of idle Monks in the old time
burned.


What say ye again to the Priscillianistes? that those whom they could
persuade to their sect, they parted the man from his wife, against the wives
will: and parted the wife from the husband, against the husbands will. And
that although they refused not the canonical scripture, yet they joined there
with the Books called Apocrypha, counting them likewise of authority: and in
the canonical scriptures whatsoever ouerturneth their error, they turn it
into allegorical senses.

What say ye to the Messaliani, with whom ye burden us? but how near your
selves draw to them, appears in that they spent their life in Monkishe idle
praying, sleeping and eating: not so like the foresaid Euchitae, as like the
Papists. They craked that they saw revelations, and fled from all handie
crafts and labor, and builded themselves Celles and Oratories, and Evening
and Morning with many lights and Caudles burning gathered together, and
deceived themselves with long prayers, and told strange fables of purging of
souls. Epiphanius confuting them, imputes all this to a fond and naughty
zeal, wherewith they were so blinded, that they durst attempt such things
contrary to the holy Scripture. This Heresy so increased in every place,
that the fathers had much a do to ^oote them out, yea diverse Monasteries
were feign to be burned up, that were infected herewith. And yet all the
Popish Abbeys, had even the self same lubberly devotion, and all the other
errors, superstitions, and fables, if not an infinite number of worse, and
therefore no maruayle if God have rooted up, and do most justly destroy the
dens of such ancient and so pernicious Heretics. Wherein the Papists
differ from the Messalians. Epiphanius.


In this point notwithstanding the Papists are contrary to the Messalians: who
said, there are many Gods, and yet do worship but one GOD almighty. But the
Papists will say, there is but one GOD almighty, and yet give such worship,
as is only due to him, to many m^ besides. Of which contraries, it is hard to
judge, which barrel is better herring.

What say ye to the Aetians? that said, for a man to lie The Aetians.
Epiphanius, Simple fornication.
with a woman without matrimony, was no more a sin, than to pick his ear,
so that he were of their religion: and does your Pope make much more of the
matter? so that ye be a Catholic, and pay a fee for a whore, which is yet
somewhat more than to pick his ear, for by such filthy gaynes the Pope did
pick their purses.

What say you to the Theophroniani? that trauayled The Theophroniani.
chiefly in Aristotle's Categories, and interpretation of words and
propositions, in subtle and absurd disputations, in curious scanning of names
and words in the scripture: like for all the world to your Thomists,
Scotists, D^camists, Sorbonists, and all the sects of schoolmen, making of
Aristotle's The schoolemens subtle quiddities. The Aerians. Continency.
Philosophy, good divinity: being altogether occupied in curious and subtle
quiddities.

What say ye to the Aerians your selves, with whom ye charged us so fast? that
as the other abouesayd Heretics, admitted none to their communion, but such as
were continent, without wives, and forsook the world, and had no propriety
of their goods: as all your Cloysterers pretended.

What say ye to the Colliridiani? or Ladies Chaplaynes The Colliridiani.
Sacrificers and offerers to the blessed Virgin Marie. The Anthropomorphitae.
The picture and form of god. Aug con. haer. A three formed God.
(as ye term your Priests) that worshipped and offered sacrifice unto her: as
the Papists doing the same or more, is showed sufficiently.

What say ye to the Anthropomorphitae, that held, that God had form and
parts like a man? if ye say you beleus not so, why then do you (contrary to
your belief) picture out God in such a fashion? and so by your own rules, the
figure not being like the truth, it implies an Idol as is confessed. Yea,
are ye not like herein to those Heretics, that S. Augustine notes to make
triformem deum, a threeformed God? whereby if those Monks were by ignorance
deceived, how much more were many thousands deceived by such pictures, taking
God in deed to be even such an one, as he was portrayed out in the Image,

Ye have called us Pelagians, and worse then Pelagians. The Pelagia^^
But do ye not say we are worse because you like them well enough, but for the
name sake only? Else, what say you to the Pelagians errors?

The Pelagians held for original sin, that it can not Aug. li 1. ^on. ^ul
cap. 5. Original sin Arbitrament and will. Pighius de orig. peccato. Aug. de
peccatorum meritis cap. 19. Pighius ibide^. Free will. Hilarious Arela ad Aug.
Prosper de ingratis.
be sin, that is in infants, for because infants want will: but sin cannot
be where will does want: Ergo, it is no sin. And is not this the Papists
saying Uoluntas est seeds pecc^: Will is the feate of sin: but infants have
not will, nor liberum voluntatis arbitrium: The ^ree arbitrament of will:
infants therefore have no sin. For it cannot have the nature of sin that
wants these.

The Pelagians sayd^, that sin can not infect, corrupt, change, nor be in
the nature and substance of man. And is not this the very self same saying of
Pigghius?

As for free will, did not the Pelagians say, that if there remain by nature
no free will in man* then all exhortation, preaching, and the law of God is
commanded in vain? And that the taking away of freewill, takes away the
study and care of Godly life? And does not Pigghius say even the Pighi. ibidem
same, that we are not, nor can be bound to any law of God, to keep the
commandments, where we have not faculty, freewill, and might, to satisfy
and fulfill those things that are commanded: and that this doctrine of grace,
destroys all good works, as taking away free election and will?

Did not the Pelagians say that the law of God is easy to Hier. in epist. ad
Ctesiphont. Fulfilling gods law.
be fulfilled, and all the commandments of God are possible to be kept? And
do not all Papists defend the self same doctrine, yea and say they can do
more?

As for grace, the Pelagians granted a first grace of God in our creation,
even before any merits, likewise, a second Prosper* in Epist. ad Augu. de
reliquijs Pelag. haereseos. Three sorts of Grace.
grace of preaching, whereby God sends his word unto us, and either of these
come without any merit or occasion in us. But the third grace of God, to hear
his word, believe, and follow it, is prevented by our own preparatiues, and
dispositions, of seeking, asking, and knocking, and not to resist grace when it
comes, is in our selves, and in our own nature from the creation of us: and
does not Alpho^sus say ye same, although many Papists be far worse, and say
that the first grace and all, comes Propter praeuisa opera, For works that
God foresaw?

Of predestination, the Pelagians say, that the number of Predestination.
Prosper ad August. Ibidem. Hilar. A relat. in epistola ad August. Aug. lib 2.
de bono perseuerantiae cap. 14. Justification. Augu. cont. 2. epist. Pel. li.
1. cap. 21. Li. 4. ca. 2. Faith.
the elect, may be increased or diminished, and that God has no determinate
number. That God has predestinate them, that he foresaw should deserve it, by
their works. That the predestinate can be, or can not be saved: and leese or
keep at their voluntary, the graces of God given unto them. And that the
doctrine of predestination is not profitable to be preached. And what point is
there of all these, that the Papists do not openly defend.

The Pelagians said of justification, that althe Prophets, Apostles and
Saints of the old and new Testament were saved for their virtuous life.

The Pelagians said of says, if thou beleuest thou shall be saved, the one of
these twain is commanded, the other is offered. That which is commanded is in
man's power, that which is offered is in the power of God.

The Pelagian concerning good works and evil, says Hieron. in dialog aduers.
Pelag. Good works.
thus. I have said, that a man can be without sin, if he will, not as some
men slander me, without the grace of God, the which so much as to think is
very sacrilege, but simply, that he can if he will, so that we understand
it with the grace of God. And this I affirm, he that can one day abstain from
sin, he can abstain also another day. And he that can abstain two days,
can abstain three days. And he that can three, can thirty, and so by order
can abstain three hundredth, and three thousand when he will. All this said
Pelagius, and do not the Papists likewise say, that it lies in their free
will to abstain or not abstain, joining with their will the grace of GOD to
help them? And although you confess (as ye cannot choose) that every man is
a sinner: yet for mortal or deadely sin, you Discip. sermon. 162. Deadly sin.
say: that every man can live clean without doing any deadly sin all his
life long, and that to hold the contrary is an error and an Heresy.

Where likewise ye falsely object unto us, the saying of the Messalians, for
that we say concupiscence is sin after baptism: The affirming that
concupiscence is no sin, is the very saying of the Pelagian, that reasoned
thus as Pigghius does, concupiscence is natural, Ergo, it is no sin. In
Pigghi. de peccato orig.
all these points, besides many other, what say you (M. St.) to the Pelagians?
But I trust you will say no hurt unto the^, that are your elde friends and
alies. I omit the Donatists; and their bands, till your self come unto them.

What say you to the Eutichians? that said the humanity The Eutychians. The
co^founding the propernes of chri stes humanity with his divinity.
Transubstantiation, the very doctrine of the Eutychians and an heresy patched
up of many heresies.
of Christ glorified, by reason of the personal union had also the properties
of the divinity, to be in infinite places at once, to have no lineament, part,
quantity, form, or circumscription. Which heresy i^ no simple nor small
heresy, Theodoretus calls the defe^der of it: Eranistes or Polymorphus as
though it were made of sundry colored patches, like a beggars cloak, an
Heresy botched up of all Heresies together. And what say ye to your doctrine
of transsubstantiation, if it be even this Heretics doctrine, and his
principal argument to mainteyne the Entichians heresy withal: and the
contrary (by taking away of tra^substantiation) be the true Catholics
doctrine, to defend the verity of Christ's body against the Eutichians
heresy* and in proof hereof, what say ye to ye heretik Cranistes his
argument, reasoning thus? Eue^ as therefore Theodoretus dial. 2. Inconfusus.
the signs of the body and the blood, are other things in deed (that is to
wit the norishme^t of the seeds, bread and wine) before the Priests invocation:
but after the invocation, they The heretics argument of Transubstantiation to
prove his heresy.
are changed and are made other things, (that is to w^te, the body and blood
of Christ it self:) even so the body of the Lord after the assumption, is
changed into a divine substance. Thus says this beggarly patched Heretic to
defend this heresy. But what replieth the true catholic to him again? The
reply of the true catholic against Transubst^tiatio^ to prove the humanity
of Christ to be vnco^founded.
Thou art taken (says he) with the nets that thou have knit thy self, for,
as for the mystical signs, they go not from their nature, after the
sanctification, for they remain in the same substance, figure, and form, and
can be seen and felt, even as they could before the sanctification. This was
then the Catholics doctrine against all transubstantiation, as the very
argument and pillar for the Heretic, to mainteyne all his diverse colored
patches of Heresies withal.

What say you now master Stapleton, to all this crewe of Heretics? Is not
here a fair pedigree of you and your Masters honorable progenitors? And yet
there are many mo behind, that (as ye call for them hereafter) will come forth
also, and show their faces: In the mean season, to borrow your own words,
till I pay you again, If you, Stapl. 18. a
Master Stapleton, mainteyne old condemned Heresies, what are ye less than
Heretics your selves? And what is the doctrine of Popery, but a misshapen
lump of sour dough, leauened and hotchpotched up together, of a number of
old condemned Heresies? a good and catholic doctrine I warrant you, Master
Stapleton.

Now (say you coming to your fifth part) as I have proved Stapl. fol. 58. a
you and your companions open and notable Heretics, so shall I straight way
purge M. Feck. to be no Donatist.

I think the same Master Stap. As ye have proved the one, so you will purge
the other: but ye have not hitherto proved the one, nor any one jot of it, nor
have alleged any thing but slanders, and your bare sayings, after your ^acing
manner without any proves at all. Nevertheless, let us see, how ye will purge
the other.

But now M. Ho^e (say you) beware your self, least this Stap. fol. 58. a.
unjust accusation against M. Feckenham and the Catholics, whom ye compare to
the Donatistes causeless, most justly and truly redownde upon you and your
fellows heddes.

Is this (M. Stapleton) his purgation to charge another? Master Stapletons
charge to us that we b^ Donatists.
yet if your vain so serves you, that ye will needs charge us, it had been
your duty, first to have cleared him, and then to have charged us. But go to,
we must follow still your perverse order, especially ^ith ye giu^ v^ so fair a
warning piece, saying:

Beware I say, for I suppose, I will lay more pregnant matter Sta. fol. 58. a.
in this behalf, to your and their charge, than ye have or possibly can do, to
M. Feckenham or any other Catholic, whereof I dare make any indifferent reader
Judge.

True indeed (M. Stapl.) without supposall, ye have an head as it were a
counting house, full of pregnant matter, such as these your vi^ and crakes,
with other your common places of sclaunderouse rayling^are: wherein ye excel
all your com^, (...) wherein for my part I will not contend with you, but
only set it (...), that (as ye say) every indifferent reader, whom you dare
make your Judge, may behold, Judge, and co^d, your pregnancie therein. And if
ye have any pregnant matter t^ charge us, as ye vaunt, it shall suffi^ me aft^r
my h^y manner, (not contending who has more pregnant matter, wherein ye grant
ye may be charged by us, in some pregnant matter,) to discharge our selves of
the charge if we can, and again if we can also, to return the charge on your
necks, or else let it stand for me indifferent, to whom the readers
indifferent judgment shall awarde it, whether you have more pregnant matter to
charge us, or we have more and more true matters to recharge you, and discharge
our selves, in this heresy of the Donatistes.

They were all (ye say) called first Donatistes, but as they Sta. fol. 58. a.
first^ fell from the Church Catholic, so fell they afterward from their own
Church and master, into an horrible division of the Maximianists,
Circumcellions, Rogatists, Circenses and others. A lively pattern of the sects
sprung from your Apostle Luther, as in their pedigree in the Apology of
Staphilus, M. Stapl. takes witness of his fellow.
every man may see.

Every man may see M. St. that he is a good cocks^re witness of your side, and
therefore it is pregnantly done of you to send us to him, but saving your
reverence M. Stapleton I have heard say ere this, that two false harlots need
no broker.

Your argument is vicious diverse ways, but chiefly it stands of your common
fallacion, A non causa vt causa: and so does the most of this your pregnant
matter. For else, by the like argument, ye might make another lively pattern,
from Christ's own words: Necesse est vt Scandala veniant, Matthew. 18.
It is necessary that offenses come. And Christ him self (as Simeon said of
him) is, Positus multis in ruina^, Placed to Luc. 2.
many to their ruin. And so he calls him self a stombling stone: and his
gospel (as says S. Paul) is to the Jews Matthew. ^1. 1. Cor. 1.
an offense, and folly to the Gentiles. What a number of Heresies sprang up,
even in the Apostles time, through false Apostles? of whom says S. Ihon, They
went out from 1. John. 2. De symbolo ad (...).
us, but of us they were not. Does not S. Augustine (describing the Church of
Christ) confess, H^reses (...) de illa exi^runt tanquam sarmenta inutilia de
vite precisa, ipsa autem manet in radice sua. All Heresies went out of the
Church as unprofitable boughs cut of from the vine, but it self remains
still in the root thereof. Ye should discern between the sower of the wheat,
and the sower of the darnell, M. Math. 13.
St. and then your argument were answered.

Although it be also a sclanderous lie, to Father those sects on the gospel,
or from Luther, that are rather derived From whence these sects did spring.
from Popish errors, with which they more agree, as sprung out of such
superstitions and ignorance, as you had noseled them withal. But if ye will
fetch, in this point, an argument from the (...): how forgatte you the Secte^
of religions among the Papists.
plentiful sects of your false Friars? all sprange first from Francis and
Dominike, but what swarms full, not of the Friars only, who as Cha^er tells
came driuinge like bees out of Sathanas tail, but of the diverse sects of
Chaucers opinion of Friars.
them, that have sproug^ out since, the one no more like the other then an
Apple is like an Oyster, and all agreing The sects of Scholemen.
together like catt^ in a ^tter. Ye might have told us of Peter Lombarde, of
Thomas, of Scotus, etc. And of the sects sprung out of their loins, divided
so bitterly among them selves, with great (...) and ^artakinges, and that in no
small pointe^ of (...): and (...) ye might have made a fitter comparis^n to the
(...).

Such pregnant (...) a^ your first charge is, such is your second charge.

The Donatistes (say you) would sometime crake and brag Stapl. 58. b
of their multitude, and bring it as an argument that the truth was on their
side, as does your Apology* which being restrained by the Emperors laws, and
daily diminishing* the^ they cried, the truth rests with the few elected and
chosen persons, then cried they, O little flock fear not, as ye did, when ye
were as yet but in corners, rotten barnes, and luskie lanes.

If these be good arguments (M. Stapl*) to pr^ue a Donatist, The Donatists va^t
of multitude.
to crake and brag of multitude, and to bring it as an argument that the
truth is on their side: then are all Papists Donatistes and we (...) For it is
your crake, and almost your only vau^t, of (...) of greatest multitudes of
people: asking us in contempt where our Church was, when for the The Papists
Donatists in craking of multitude.
most part (ye said) all is ^urs, as the Devil said when he looked in at
the C^ (...), as tells the old by word. And if now it has (...) Go^, by
the preaching of his ^lessed* word^ ((...) he pro^ed) after t^ general
defection, so to detect the man of sin, and to chain up Satan, that he
should not so much dectine the world, but that we may (...) and e^race the glad
and true tidinges of our salvation: we do not crake nor brag thereof. Rejoice
The joy of Christians in the gospells prosperity. Matthew. 11. Luke. 10. Matthew.
9. Psalm. 126.
in the Lord we may, praising God, that he has revealed these things to the
simple: and to lift up our heads Christ bids us, when the harvest waxes
ripe and great, praying him to send more workmen into his harvest, to reap
the sheane^ with joy, the seed whereof we sowed before in tears. This we may
do, and be I trust no Donatists. As for craking of multitudes, it is proper to
your Church M. St. we make no argument to or fro thereon.

And if on the other part, in the time of persecution, when iniquity had the
upper hand, we comforted our selves with The consolation of Christians in the
persecution of the Gospel.
this consolation of Christ, Fear not O little flock, and the truth rests
with the fe^e ele^ed and chosen persons: If ye scoff at these words, and
he^vpon infer us to be Donatistes, because they said the same: by this
argument, ye will ^oue the author of them Jesus Christ him self to be a Donatist
to. The words are godly and true who soever use the^. Only, ye should have
proved, that we applied them falsely as the Donatistes did, or elsye prove
nothing. Ye say we cri^d thus when we were as yet but in corners, rotten
barnes, and lusky lanes. Were you never in corners, rotten barnes, and luskie
lanes M. Stapl? I will not say for what purposes, but God forgive ye and I do,
but I think ye werenot there for Religion. And though it seems by these your
lusty crakes, where ye are n^n at Louaine, that ye would be thought no
hedge^reeper* nor ^uedropper (as s^ of your brood, are peaking here in lus^y
lanes, and lurking in corners, and yet they court the^ selves no more
Donatistes than you): Notwithstanding it appears, for all your crakes and
bragges, ye have not that stout courage f^r your ra^se, but that ye like
Louaine better than M. (...) ^ging, and had rather blow your (...), like (...)
l^ytorer in a lusky lane, or hide your head (...) the corner of an old ^otten
barn, rather than warm your self with a ^aggot a^ a ^ake in Smithfielde,
such as was the cruelty of your Popish tyranny to those that constantly
abode the terrible brunt thereof.

And although other giving place to your fury, either of Fleing in persecution.
their own infirmity, or that God preserved them to a better opportunity, did
then flee or hide them selves: what did they herein, that Christ gave them not
license, example, and commandment so to do? Ye might as well object this, to
those Saints of God, of whom S. Paul tells, that they went about in the
wilderness, of whom the world Heb. 11. 3. Reg 19.
was unworthy. Why say ye not, Elias lurked in lusky lanes, when he sted the
face of Iesabell? Why say ye not, that Athanasius crepte into corners, when he
hid him self seven years in a Cesterne, an harder harborough than a rotten
barn? For shame M. Stap. learn to make a difference Distinction between
persecution it self and the cause of it.
between the perfecution, and the cause of it: or else this were an easy
argument to make all Donatistes, yea your selves also. And would to God all
corners, rotten barnes, and luskie lanes, were well ransacked, some luskes (I
think) would appear in their likeness, whom ye would be loath should be found
out, M. Stapleton. Stapl. 58. b


Thirdly ye say, The donatistes, when they could not justify The Donatists
leaving the doctrine fell to railing.
their own doctrine, nor disprove the Catholics doctrine, leaving the
doctrine, fell to railing, against the vicious life of the Catholics. In this
point, who be Donatistes, I refer me to Luthers and Caluines books,
especially to M. Jewel, and to your own Apology.

Ye n^ede not, M. Stap. refer your self so far, refer What a notable
grace of railing M. Stapl. has above all the Popish writers.
your self to your self a Gods name, yea, go no further than this your
Counterblast. I warrant ye, you blow such a blast herein, that ye may well
encounter master D. Harding, master D. Sa^ders, M. Dorman, M. Marshall, or any
other of your writers, though they have all godly gifts in this point, yet
this your Rhel horicall grace of railing, goes so far beyond them all, that
they are scarce worthy to carry the wispe after you, M. Stap. Only at this I
marvel, that like the wiseman, when he told how many were in the company, he
never reckoned him self, that you having so pregnant a vain herein, do still
forget your self. But belike it is for this cause, that as ye surmount all
your company: so ye go beyond the Donatistes also, who (as ye say) rayled
only against the vicious lives. But you, where ye find no vicious life to
rail against the Protestants, fall to slaundering and reuiling, even their
godly and virtuous lives.

Fourthly ye say, The Donatistes refused the open known Stapl. 58. b The
Donatists refused the known church.
catholic Church, and said, the Church remained only in those that were of
their side, in certain corners of Afrike. And sing not you the like song,
preferring your Geneua and VVittenberge, before the whole Church beside?

The Donatistes (as you say M. St.) tied the Church to Affrike, and wrested
the scripture for it, forsaking the open known catholic Church in deed. But
you should have proved your popish Church to be that open known catholic
Difference betwenee the Church of Rome then, and the church of Rome now.
Church now, which they refused then. If ye say, you prove that, because they
refused the church of Rome then, and your church is the church of Rome now: if
ye understand the church for the congregation of the faithful, ye utter a
double untruth. For they-refused not only the congregation then at Rome, but of
all the world besides: and again your church or congregation of Rome now, is
nothing the same, or like the same, in religion, that it was then. If ye mean
by the The Papists Donatists that tie the church to a place.
church of Rome, the City of Rome, and the Popes chair there: then ye prove
your selves to be Donatistes, that tie the church of Christ (dispersed every
where) to the seat of Rome, as they did unto Aphrike. And if ye mean by the
open known catholic Church, the multitude of people acknowledging your Popes
s^ate at Rome: then again are ye Donatists by your second point, in craking of
multitude, depending on Rome a corner in Italy: as ye say, the Donatistes
craked of their multitude, depe^ding on their corners in Affrike.

As for us, we depend neither upon Geneua, nor VVittenberge, We depend not on
Geneua and Wirtenberge, as the Papists depend on Rome.
nor tie the Church of Christ unto them, nor prefer them, either before the
whole catholic church, or any part thereof: nor refer men unto them, for
the trial of the Church, or to any other place else: but allow them, and all
and singular other places, where the word of God is sincerely set foo^th:
where Idolatry, errors, and superstition are abolished. We (...) to the
mountains, as Chrysostom Chrysosto in Math. 24. homil. 49.
expounds it, Qu^ sunt Christiani conferant se ad scriptura^, They that are
Christians, let them get them to the scriptures. And why not to Rome,
Jerusalem, and such other mountains, but only to the scriptures? Because,
says he, since that heresy has possessed the Churches there ca^ be no trial
of true christianity, nor refuge of Christians, that would try out the truth
of faith, but the divine scriptures. Before, it could have been known diverse
ways, which was the Church, which was Gentilitie. But now there is none
other ways to know, which is in deed the very church of Christ, but all only
by the Scriptures. If they therefore set forth the Scriptures, we acknowledge
them to be of the Church of Christ. Let Rome do this, and we will as gladly
acknowledge Rome to be of the Church of Christ, as either Did. 23. Ca.
Legimus.
Wittenberge or Gen^ua* Yea as S Hierome says, which is also put in the Popes
own decrees, Eug^bium, Constantinople, Rhegium, Alexandrie, Thebes, Guarmatia,
or any other place, if it profess the truth with Geneua and Wittenberge. For
on this consideration (says S. Augustine, Why the church is holy and
catholic.
the Church is holy and catholic, (not because it depends on Rome, or any
other place, nor of any multitude obedient to Rome, both which are
Donatisticall) but, quia recte credit in Deu^, because it believes rightly on
God. This is our song, M. Stap. of Geneua, VVittenberge, Africa, yea, and of
Rome too. And if you can sing any better note, I give you good leave for me,
only I would wish you (howsoever ye sing) to leave your flat lying tune in
saying

Fifthly say you: The Donatistes corrupted the fathers Stapl. 58. b
books wonderfully, and were so impudent in alleging them, that in their
public conference at Carthage, they pressed much upon Optatus words, and
laid him forth as an author making for the^, who yet wrote expressly against
them, and in all his writings condemned them. Is not this, I pray you, the
usual practice of your Apostles, Luther and Calvin of M. Jewel and your own
too in this book? as I trust we have, and shall make it most evident. And here
let M, Dawes bear you company too, in the crafty and false handling of his
own dear brothers Sleidans story, where he leaves out Alexander Farnesius
Oration to the Emperor, wherein he shows the Protestants dissentions.

If this be an argument to prove a Donatist, belike your Popes, Boniface and
Innocent, learned it of them, so impudently, in the public conference, and
Council at Carthage, The Popes Donatisticall impudency.
to allege, lay forth, and press much upon the Nicene Council, as making
for their superiority: though all the true Copies thereof condemned them, as
impudent corrupters of the fathers Decrees. What fathers books, and Councels
have these Popes successors spared since to falsefie, chalenging authority
over all fathers and Councels, to do with the^ as they please? And as the Popes
own sons, this is not only the usual, but the chief, and almost the only
practice of all Popish writers, in the alleging of the fathers, even as the
devil alleged the Psalms to Christ. Neither do you only corrupt the fathers
books, but father on them whole books of your own deuisings, falsified in
the fathers names: as Erasmus exactly observing, has found out many such
evident corruptions. As for us (thanks be to God) ye name not one father
corrupted by Luther, Calvin, the Bishop of Sarum, or of Wint. nor of any other
as yet. Only ye find fault with M. Dawes, for omitting an Oration in
Sleydan, no ancient father, but a late Hystoriographer. I know not his
consideration in good sooth M. St. if I did, I would answer you. But he is a
lives man, and can answer you him self.

Your argument is very fond, to infer a Donatist hereupon, yea, be it that we
were culpable in this behalf, as it is but your flaunderous lie: and yet, be
it further, that it were any argument to prove a Donatist, not only the
parties whom ye name, have proved your good masters Donatistes, but your self
would prove your self to be as great a Donatist as the best.

Sixthly ye say: The Donatistes to get some credit to their 6. Stapl. 59. ^ The
Donatistes pretended many false visions. A tale devised of a dead man to
slander the Gospel withal.
doctrine, pretended many false visions and miracles, and they thought that God
spoke to Donatus from heaven, and does not M. Fox in his dunghill of stinking
martyrs pretily follow them therein, trow you?

So clenly, M. St. your thethorike proceeds from those sweet lips of
yours. Ye challenge M. Fox with unsavory terms, ye prove or improve nothing
against him. Only ye scoff at Luthers visions: and tell us a tale of a man in
Hungary (I can not tell where nor whom) feigning him self to be dead, and
pretending to be raised again to life, to confirm the doctrine of the
Gospel, but in conclusion was found to be dead in deed.

Has not (say you) the like practice ben attempted of late Stapl. 59. a. In
li. Teut. ad Senate. Germa.
in Hungary, to authorize the new Gospel, by pretending to restore life to an
holy brother, feigning him self to be dead, and by the great providence of
God, found to be dead in deed?

What witness of this, M. St? Forsooth ask your fellow if ye lie. I warrant
ye he will say, all is true, and who shall prove him a liar, that the party
would so have feigned him self to be dead, or would by such toys, go about to
confirm the Gospel of Christ? whom whispered he in the care, while he was on
live, that he meant any such matter? Well, the party is dead, ye say: then say
I, it is easy for a false varlet (thereby to deface the Gospel) to devise a
lie by a dead body, or so suborite or bribe another to witness a lie. For the
party (ye say) is dead, ^us Le^ (...) morde^ a dead Lion (they say) bytes not.
But if he be dead, (presupposing there were any such thing in deed) God send
grace there were no false packing to murder him among you, and then to say so
by him: I have heard of such Popish shifts ere now.

But how soever the matter were, yea grant it had been so, that some noughtie
fellow had attempted such a wickedness, is the same to be objected to the
Protestants, or the Gospel of Christ to be defaced thereby? or not rather the
more to be confirmed thereby, that God abhors such false means to set out
his truth, and destroys such dissemblers, as he did Ananias and Saphira: and
will have Act. 5.
his truth simply and plainly set forth, as (thanks be to God therefore) it
is in many places, and with good success and increase he blesses it.

No, no, M. St. and that ye know full well, we use no such false visions, or
feigned miracles, to further Gods truth: no, we seek no visions or miracles at
all, but seek the truth it False visions is one of the chefest practices and
foundation of the Popish church, not of the protestants.
self. It is the practice of your Church, to co^me^de your false doctrine unto
the simple, by pretending many false visions and miracles. What have ye else
for purgatory, but a number of revelations, that were showed forsooth to such
or such a Monk or Friar? what else for devising all the sects of Friars and
Nonnes, but such and such a revelation? What have ye for your Ladies Psalter,
for her Rosarie, for her feast days, for the invocation of Saints, for the
most of al your tru^perie in the Mass and Diriges, for Relics, shrines and
pilgrimages, for worshipping this or that saint departed, but your feigned
revelations, your false visions and miracles* Look your Legends who shall,
your paltry Friars postils, your Louanian scholemen, look who shall on Marulus
reuelatio^s, on Tundalus visions, on S. Bridgets revelations, on the miracles
of the blessed Uirgin set out in Latin and English. etc. He shall find for
this point such stuff, that both his ears will glowe to read it. And these
practices are not devised by us against you in the name of a dead man: but they
are set out in print, and published by your selves in good sad earnest, to
deceive the simple withal. If therefore this be an argument to prove
Donatistes by, then as it clears us, that seek no such means, so it
proves you to be Donatistes, that in thus many points of your religion stand
so much thereon.

Seventhly say you, Did not the Donatistes prefer and 7. Stapl. 59. a
more esteem one National erroneous Council in Aphrica, than the great and
general Council at Nice: keep not ye also this trade, preferring your forged
convocation libell, before the general Council of Trident. And this is set
out with a Marginall note: They prefer a National Council, before the
General.

As for forged Libels is but your forged lie, master Sta. National and general
councels.
if we prefer a National Council, before your General: no marvel, the
leg of a lark is to be preferred before the body of a Kyte. If ye crake of
Generality, for the multitude: once again you make your self a craking
Donatiste, although in deed, there were no such General assemblies, at your
Trident Council, as ye brag upon. If ^e mean, for the free liberty and
order of it: it was not only National of Italians in Italy, as the Donatistes
was of Aphricans in Aphrica, but also more partial, violent, and nothing but
tongtyed bondage and compulsion, far worse than was the Donatistes.

Eighthly say you, The Donatistes said, that all the world 8. Stap 59. a.
was in an Apostacy before the coming of their Apostle Donatus: and is not
Luther the same man to you, that Donatus was to them?

We esteem Luther as a notable organ of God, to detect A general defection.
your falsehoods and open his truth: although we grant he were not without his
infirmities: but what does that excuse your apostacy, or argue him to be a
Donatist? Yea, though he had said such words now as then Donatus falsely said.
Might not an universal apostacy have been since, or be now, because there
was none such then? and yet Luther charged not all the world, but al your
popish Church with this Apostacy. And what does he therein, that is not
manifest? what said he, that the Apostle S. Paul foresaid not, there should
come a defection before ye coming of christ? 2 Thessalonians. 2.
what said he, that eue^ at your last Trident council (that ye craked on last)
the French Legate did not openly say to your Prelates faces? Verily we must
even of necessity confess Sessione. 4.
this (quoth he) whether it has been perchance by man's infirmity, or by some
negligence of the Prelates of the church, or else by their preposterous
godliness, if I should name no greeuouser thing, that there has crept into
the Church very many things, worthy to be abolished, abrogated or restrained.
Yea, what said he, that even your Pope has not confessed? We know (says
Pope Adrian to the Princes Orthwinus Gratius in Fasciculo rerum sciendarum.
of Germany, in his Cpistle, wherein he chiefly inueigheth against Luther) that
even in this holy seat, many abominable things there have been already now
certain years, abuses in spiritual matters, excesses in commandments, to
conclude, all things have been changed into peruersitie: not it is marvel, if
the sickness have descended from the head into the members, from the chief
bishops into the inferior Prelates: all we, that is to say, the eccl*
Prelates, have erred every one in his own ways, nor there has been any this
long while the which did good, no not one. This general apostacy (lo) your
own Pope confesses, both for him self, for his predecessors, for all other
Prelates and Priests under him, and for all the Church besides. And weye these
words well, M. St. for they serve against you in many matters touched before,
chiefly whether the Pope and al his Prelates, yea all the visible state of the
Church may err, or no.

But ye were best make this Pope a Donatist too To the author of the
harboroughe ye are answered by other, as I hear say. And it is but your
peeuishe quarrel.

Ninthly, say you, The Donatists being charged and pressed 9. Stapl. 59. ^ The
beginning, continuance and succession.
to show the beginning and continuance of their doctrine, and the ordinary
succession of their Bishops, were so encombred, that they could never make any
convenient answer. And are not you I pray you with your fellows Protestant
Bishops fast in the same mire? If not, answer then to my third demand in
the fortress annexed to Saint Bid.

This is Satis proimperio, More than enough, for your authority, Master
Stapleton, to command our Bishops to answer your vain demaundes, and
pelting books, or else they must be Donatists. But even so played the
Donatists with the godly Bishops then, as you play now with ours. Your humor
is all on vain glory, to set out and vaunt your own works. But it is a
sign ye lack good neighbors at Louaine. For, one of them, not your self,
should have commended to us your Demaundes, Fortresses, and Translations. But
your self must be feign I see, to put us in mind of them, for your brethren
seek their own glory likewise in their writings. And why then should not
you seek yours as well as they? But for my part, as I have not your noble
Fortress, so I think your Demand be not worthy the seeking for, much less
the aunswering. I pray you pardon me, if I think amiss: for I measure it by
many other Demands of this your Counterblast.

As for the beginning of our doctrine, is already showed, The beginning of our
doctrine.
even he that is the beginning and the ending, the Alpha and Omega, he began
our doctrine, and has ever continued and preserved it. We say with Chrysostom
(as is before said) Ad montes, Let us flee to the mountains, that is to the
scripture: Chrysostom. in Matthew. Cyprian. ad Pomp. Fsai. 8. Math. 11.
we say with Saint Cyprian, Ad fontein, Let us go to the fountain, that is to
the Scripture: we say with the Prophets, Ad legem and testimentum, To the law
and testimony, that is, to the Scripture: we say with him that is the
beginning himself, venite ad (...), come unto me and we admit only that, Quod
suit ab initio, rejecting that doctrine of which we may say, Non suit sic ab
initio, It was not so at the beginning, this ye say the Donatistes being
charged and pressed could not do: but we show you here the very beginning of
all our doctrine.

Now if a man should demand of you, to show the beginning Matthew. 21. The
beginning of the popish doctrines besides the Scripture.
of all your doctrines, and ask you, as Christ teaches us to demand of you,
the originals, is it of God, or is it of men: then are you for a great many of
them, bemyred fast with the Donatistes, and can not tell how they came up,
saving that they crept in by custom, and many retained of the old
superstitions of the Pagans, little or nothing turquesed: but none of them al
came up otherwise than by me^, none were set forth of God in his holy word.
And so again ye are Donatists, or worse than they, and the worse, in that (as
the French Kings Ambassador aforesaid, told your Sessione. 4.
Trident Fathers) ye hold fast with tooth and nail all things that ye have
received of long custom. But the old fathers tell you, from whom ye father
your customs: We must not follow the customs of man, but the truth of God.
Yea your Cyprian. ad Pomp contr. ad cp^. Steph. Did. 2. Can. Si consuetudine^.
Distin. 11. Hoc vestr.
old Popes them selves, Felix, Gregory, Nicholas, and Leo, can tell you, that
all customs should give place to the Scriptures, for Christ said not he was
custom, but the way, the truth and the life. That we should not go one Jot
from the Apostles institutions. That such ill customs are no less to be
avoided than a pestilent infection, which except it be taken out the sooner, the
wicked will take hold of it, as duty of privileges. And that such
transgressions and presumptions being not forthwith suppressed, will be
reverenced for laws and celebrated like privileges for ever. Here is the
coming up and beginning of the most of your doctrines, and therefore what
hable ye of your Bishops, since your Bishops them selves say thus of your long
customs beginning and continuance of them?

As for the ordinary succession that ye crake of, ye have neither succession of
Bishops nor Bishops at all, according Ordinary succession of Bishops.
to the beginning and the Apostles orders. Which as it is now twice already
proved, so is it easy to see, by conference of the Apostles rules and
principles of a Bishop, with Succession of the person, and succession of the
doctrine.
your Popish Bishops orders quite contrary thereunto. Where therefore ye
crake and brag so often of succession (although it be nothing in the person
succeeding, except it be in the doctrine succeeding also) yet even for the
person ye neither can allege any ordinary succession but degenerate The
Papists can not sufficientlye prove so much as the succession of the person.
succession, nor ye have any certainty of that beginning thereof, that ye
pretend, no not of the Bishop of Romes beginning and succession from Peter,
which not only examined by the infallible Scripture, will so encomber you,
that ye can never make any convenient answer thereunto, but be fast in the
same mire that ye say the Donatistes were.

Tenthly ye say, The Donatistes finding fault with Constantine, 10. Stapl. 59.
b Fleeing for succoure to evil Princes.
Theodosius, and other Catholic princes, ran for succor to Iulianus the
renegate, and highly commended him: and does not M. Jewel I pray you, take for
his president against the Popes primacie Constantius the Arrian, against Images
Philippicus, Leo, Constantinus and such like detestable Heretics by general
Councels condemned? do not your self play the like part in the Emperor
Emanuel as ye call him, and in other as we shall hereafter declare?

By this rule should Hosius, Staphilus, M. Harding, M. Dorman, and your self
also be Donatistes: that take arguments from your adversaries, yea from
Heathen men. So might ye make S. Paul a Donatiste also. Ye had need therefore
make your comparison more advisedly. And thus might ye have fit it very well:
The Donatistes finding fault with Constantine, Theodosius, and other Catholic
Princes, ran for succor to Iulianus the renegate and highly commended him:
And does not M. Stapleton, M. Harding, and other popish Priests, finding fault
with their most Christian and natural sovereign Lady, ^unne over to Louaine,
and to Rome, to a foraigne Apostaticall usurper and highly commend him? this
had been a fitter and truer proportion M. St. of the twain. And what do you
herein, that your graunde Captain the Pope him self did The Pope run ning to
a traitor gat of him his supremacy.
not? Pope Boniface ran to the cruel and detestable tyrant Phocas, that most
traitorously had murdered his natural Emperor: and first obtay^d of him this
title of Primacie, that never any godly or lawful Prince did grant before
this traitor Phocas, one usurper to another usurper, a good beginning of so
good a claim. Again, did not Pope Gregory the third stir up all Italy to
rebel against the Emperor? and he and after him Pope Zachary ran from their
natural Prince, to the Princes of France, Germany, and Italy, highly
commending them, that mainteyned them selves against their sovereign Lord and
Emperor, and after that bereued him of the Empire of Rome also? did not Pope
Stephan teach the nobles of France to forsake their liege King, and to run to
Pepin an vsuper, whom you highly commend as one of your chiefest Patrones? Did
not Pope Leo the fourth run from the true and lawful Emperor, to his
Tygerlike and unnatural mother Irene the usurper, whom he highly commended for
maintayning Images? and do not you M. St. even here for the same only cause,
run unto, and highly commend her and her Council, crying out of the lawful
Emperors, calling them detestable and condemned Heretics, because they
abolished the worship of Images? but I reserve the examining of these
Donatisticall doings, and the trayterouse practices of your later Popes, to
your several counterblastes thereon. In the mean season by this it appears
who be more Donatistes, we, that allege an example (by writing) of those
Emperors, were they as ill or worse than ye call them: or your Popes, that
run in deed from their natural Princes, to detestable murderers, and
traiterous usurpers. Thu^ had ye fitte^ your comparison, ye should lively have
showed, who had been the very Donatists: the Protestants or the Papists.

Eleuenthly ye say. Now who are I pray you Donatists, St^pl. 59. b 11. The
Donatists cruelty to the Catholics.
for the defacing and overthrowing of aultars, for villayning the Chrisme, and
the holy sacrament of the altar? which they cast unto dogs: which straight
ways by the ordinance of God, fell upon them, and being therein Gods
ministers, made them feel the smart of their impiety. It were a tragical
narr^tion, to open the great and incredible cruelty that the Donatists used
toward the Catholics, especially their horrible rauishment of religious
Nuns. And yet were they nothing so outrageous, as your Hugenotes have been of
late in France and the beggarly Guets in Flaunders, namely about Tourney.

First here master Stapleton, ye show your self a Donatist, after your first
note, in corrupting the fathers words, as though those holy Uirgins, were
such Nuns as your popish Church mainteyned. Again ye corrupt Optatus
Optatus wrested.
words, in telling us of the sacrament of the altar, as though there hanged
in his time such a God in a Pire over the aultare: or as though there were then
any such altar: to make the people conceive by your tale telling a great
antiquity, in your later vpstarted ^olatrie and superstition. And this ye do
in several letters, as though they were the proper words of Optat^, wherein
ye show your self a Donatist Secondly, it is not alike to compare the rooting
up of Idolatry, and abolishing of naughty superstitious customs (which even
your Popes, as I have showed before, The Papists in horrible crueltie^ far
pass the Donatistes.
allow not) to the naughty doing of the Donatists, for the outrages of
souldiou^, if any such were. And put case there were any such (as (...) doubt,
to slander the Gospel ye aggrauate many lies, and will make a mountain of a
molehill) yet me thin^ ye should remember that if cruelty be a rule of a
Donatist, your selves that show far passing cruelty and horrible outrages
to the poor Hugenotes and beggarly Guets, as ye term them, (having made them
beggars, and made as many beggarly Papists to) such is the papists love to
their own side, but chiefly their immortal hatred to the Protestants,
murdering them by heaps, Put to this the horrible murder in France since
this was written.
burning, sacking, tormenting, yea even the Carcases of the dead, and sowing
salt on the ground for spite, with infinite other unnatural and unspeakable
cruelties besides your secret practices. Me thinks this might have been
remembered also. But hem quoth sir Harry, harp no more on that string, for then
were you Papists double and treble Donatists. Although ye were worse than
Donatists herein also, that so much perverted, altered, abused, and profaned
hypocritically, all those things that ye mention. And abused with so much
filthy abomination even those your religious Nuns, that many of your side
were ashamed and complained thereon, and therefore God has justly rooted them
out*

Twelfthly say you. The Donatists said of the Catholics: Stapl. 59 b. 12.
Vaun^ of scriptures, and co^play^t of the Prince^ Char^.
Ill^ portant multor^m imperatorum saer^. Nos sola portamus Euangelia. They
bring us many of the Emperors letters, we bring them the only Gospels. And is
not this the voice of all Protestants whatsoever? only Scripture, only the
Gospel, only the word of God? and for the first part, what is more common in
the mouths of the German Lutherans, of the French Caluinists, and now of the
Flemish Guets, than this complaint, that we press them with the Emperors
diets, with the Kings proclamations, and with the Princes placards? to the
which they obey as much as the Donatists, when they have power to resist. The
allegation of the only Scripture for doctrine, no sufficien^e argument of a
Donatist.


Remitting your railing Rhetorike (Master Stapleton) to your common places:
your argument is very fond and faulty. First, if this be a simple and
general proof of Donatists, to say we bring the only Gospels, you will make
Christ a Donatist to, for he brought the only Gospels. And his Disciples and
Apostles Donatist^, for they brought the 1. Cor. 2. 1. Cor. 11. Gal. 1.
only Gospels, and said they knew nothing but Jesus Christ crucified, they
delivered no other thing than that they had received, and accursed him that
should bring any thing besides this only Gospel. Ye will make the fathers
Cyprian, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, etc. become Donatists: that
will us in all trialles of any point of doctrine, to bring the only Scripture,
the only Gospels, the only word of God?

Again, for the other part, if this were a proof of a Catholic, to bring,
(...) imperatorum sacra, the letters of many Emperors, and to complain
hereon, the token of a Donatist: then was Athanasius and diverse other godly
Bishops Donatists also, and the Arrians Catholics. And your self with M.
Feck. allege the complaints of Athanasius, belike to prove him a Donatist.
This therefore (M. St.) thus simply set forth makes but a simple argument. Ye
should either prove, that we do bring the only Gospel, and complain of your
Princes diets, Proclamations, and placards, after the manner that the Donatists
did, or else ye prove nothing but your self a malicious slaunderer. We bring
the only Gospels to you, as Christ his Disciples and the holy fathers brought
them to us, and yet bring we not the Gospel so alone, that we bring not also
the fathers writing thereon, we also bring both Princes diets, Proclamations
and placards, so far forth as they mainteyne, set forth and agree with the
How vvebring the only Gospel.
doctrine of the only Gospels. Otherwise, can ye wit Athanasius, if he
complained when he were pressed with them? Can ye wit the poor Protestants in
Germany, France, and Flaunders, if they so much as complain that ye press
them wrongfully, even as your self in plain words confess that ye press
them in deed, with the Emperors diets, with the kings Proclamations, and with
the Princes placardes? Nevertheless, if ye pressed them lawfully, and as
Constantinus pressed the Donatists, I warrant ye no Protestant would once
complain thereon. But ye press and oppress them, with nothing but mere
violence to maintain your errors, besides and against the word of God. How
the Papists herein play the Donatistes parts.
And to this purpose, your selves play the right parts of the Donatists, for
as the Donatists perverted and wrested the scriptures, to shake the authority
of princes from themselves, which otherwise they admitted so far as pleased
them: so do the popish priests pervert and wrest the scriptures, to reject the
Emperors and other Christian princes authority over them, and vpbraid us
saying, Ill^ por^ant multoru^ imperatorum sacra, They bring many of the
Emperors letters, that is, we press them with the authority of princes, when
we require that ye give as much and no more authority unto Princes, than the
only word of God does warrant them. But you will give them no more, nor yet
their sacra, their diets, proclamations, or placarts, than shall serve your
turn. And thus your selves are most Donatists in this point.

Your last comparison, is of the Donatists murdring of 13. Mu^hering and
canonizing of saints.
others and of themselves, and yet canonizing of such for Saints and
Martyrs. This comparison ye stretched out with large outroades, nothing against
the Bishop, nor to the matter, and in deed nothing but extreme railing and
scoffing against master Foxes book, to whom I remitt^ the quarrels that you
lay unto him, who is able at the full to answer them. As for me I will
answer, only to the comparison for murdering and canonizing, wherein the
Papists excel all other. If ye had master Stapleton alleged the Monk that
poisoned himself, to poison his prince: the Pope that to poison his welthie
Cardinals drunk him self of the wrong Bottell: had ye told that men said of
the death of the two late Cardinals in England: or how good a medicine for
the head ache your Popish Priests have made of the Sacrament of the aultare
as ye term^ it: and what Princes they have poisoned therewith: If ye had told
of your Italian perfumes and Spanishe figs for the pippe: ye might well
master ^tapleton, have confirmed your comparisons from the Donatists murders.
But what need such prini^ tokens in so open a matter? Your hate charity, to
heap burning coals on your adversaries hea^s too many have felt, and all the
world does know. For murder, the Donatists be nothing comparable, nor yet
Baraba^ the Jew, nor nere a thief in Newgate, to the bl^dthirstie Papists.

Ye say Saint Augustine says of the Donatists viueb ant vt latrones,
mor^eba^tur vt circumc^liones, honorabantur vt martyrs. They lived like
robbers, they died like Circumcelions (meaning they five themselves) they were
honored as martyrs.

True in deed master Stapleton, and ye put me in remembrance of another
saying, that went in three parts to, I trow it was of an honest man of your
religion, of whom Bonif 8.
it was said, (...) vt vulpes, regnabat vt Leo, moriebatur vt canis: He entered
like a Fox, he reigned like a Lion, he died like a dog. And yet ye count him
one of Gods holy vicars. And I pray ye call to mind another common saying,
that went also on three parts, even of your Popish canon^zed Saints, that
some were worshipped a^ Saints in heaven, that lived full wickedly here in
earth, and are now tormented with Devils in hell: this did men say master Stap.
an^ they were Papists that said so to.

Ye t^ll us of the Montanists that worshipped one Alexander Stapl. 60. a
for a worshipful martyr, though he suffered for no matter of religion, but for
mischievous murder.

What is this to the Donatists master Stapleton? or that which ye tell us of
the Manichees worshipping the day The Papists and Donatistes worship of the
dead. What memorial of Saints we kep^.
of their master Manes death. The worship of dead men good or bad, or the
keeping of solemn days as in the honor of them, is proper to you popish
(...) not to us. We keep a memorial I grant, but of these only whom we are
most infallibly assured that they be the blessed Saints of GOD. Howbeit, we
worship not them, nor the day for them, nor them by the day: we worship
only John. 4.
GOD in spirit and truth, as Christ has taught us. But you that so worship
dead men, will ye worship none for Martyrs, but those that dyed for matters
of Religion? Why worshipped ye then, and that with such high worship to, your
solemn Saint Thomas Becket, that Thomas Beckets death no martyrdom.
dyed for no matter of Religion at all? But either for his obstinacy against
his liege Lord, and against all the Barons Spiritual and Temporal of the
Realm: or if ye color it never so fair, yet was it but in mainteyning his
honor, and the privileges of the Clergy, and that contrary to the ancient
custom of the Realm: except ye will grant that the Popish Religion does
consiste herein. Which if ye be ashamed to confess, vpbrayde not then for
shame false Martyrs unto us, nor yet the Canonising of wicked Saints. We use
no such Canonization of Saints.
Canonization at all. It redoundeth on your self, on your Legende, on your
Popes, and on your Pope holy Saints. Whom, by this rule, you make both
Donatists, Montanists, Manicheans, or what soever Heretics ye can object
besides.

As for all these Comparisons hitherto, between the Protestants, and the
Donatists, wherein ye think ye have be stowed great cunning, there is not
(...) poy^ that is not violently wrested, to make it seem to touch us: and not
one point, that (being returned on your selves) does not rightly and fully
hitte you home again. And therefore, I for my part am content, as you
concluding say you be.

To end this talk with the whole conference, leaving Stapl. 61. b.
it to the indifferent Reader to consider, whether the (Popish) Catholics, or
the Protestants, draw nearer to the Donatists.

To come new at length to the sixth and last part of this Chapter, which
consistes in rem^ing such motives, as the Bishop alleges, to burden Master
Feckenham with the practice of the Donatists. First master Stapleton deuideth
these motives in twain.

Let us then (says master Stapleton) proceed forth, and consider upon what
good motives ye charge master Feckenham to be a Donatist, which are to say
truth, none other but falsehoode and folly. But, as ye surmise, the one Stapl
61. b. The motives that moved the Bishop to challenge M. Feckfor following the
Donatistes practice.
is because he craftily and by a subtle shifte, refuses the proves of the
old Testament, as the Donatists did. The other, because he with the said
Donatists should avouch, that secu^er Prince^ have not to meddle in matters of
Religion, or causes ecclesiastical: nor to punish any man for such causes.

These two motives (ye say Master Stapleton) are to say the truth none other
but falsehoode and folly. In deed they are the wors^, by coming through so
false a marchantes hands as yours. For shame either tell the words as they
^e, at least the true and full effect of them: or never set them out in a
distinct letter, sy^ you so often, but ever falsely, vpbrayde the Bishop hereof.
Else all the folly and falsehoode will prove to be in your self, and not in
the Bishops motives.

The Bishop sp^ke not of Princes meddling or punishing for Ecclesiastical
(...), as though the Donatists simpli^ denied that, an^ y^ granted Princes yet
so much, as to meddle or punish for your Ecclesiastical causes, that is to
say to be your executioners therein, as though the Emperors and other Christian
Princes (...) more upon them at that time. But the Bishop told how the godly
fathers craved aid and assistance of the magistrates and rulers, to reform
them, to reduce them to the v^itie of the church, and to repress their
heresies, with their au thoritie and godly laws made for that purpose, to
whom it belonged of duty, and whose especial service of Christ is, to see,
care, and provide, The Princes especial service of Christ.
that their subjects be governed, defended, and mainteyned, in the true and
sincere religion of Christ, without all errors, superstitions and heresies.
This is that the Bishop wrote, and to prove this he alleges Saint Augustine.
Thus did Christian Princes govern in Ecclesiastical causes then. This did the
Donatists then deny unto them, and this do now the Papists deny: and ye come
sneaking in and tell us, the Bishops motive was this, In charging Master
Feckenham to follow the Donatists: by cause he with the Donatistes, should
auouche, that seculer Princes have not to meddle in matters of Religion or
causes Ecclesiastical, nor to punish any man for such causes. As though the
controversy had b^ne for any kind of meddling, or punishing: which you,
s^ming to grant to Princes, to be your servant and droyles in such
ecclesiastical causes, and so far as you assign them, might therefore seem
not to play the Donatists, when ye play their parts so lively as can be, and
so subtly, that the Donatistes were but Babes unto you: in seeming to give
them some How the Papists play the Donatists parts.
meddling or punishing in Ecclesiastical causes. but if they meddle with or
punish you, or any other, otherwise than ye command and restrain them, you
so little then suffer them to meddle in Ecclesiastical matters, that with
solemn curses ye debar them from meddling in any temporal and civil
matters too, so far ye pass the Donatists. For shame master Stapleton, tell
your tale plainly, that we may see whether M. Feckenham played the Donatistes
part or no: or else your doubling will declare your self to be a Donatist also
for company. But let us see how ye answer these motives even as your self
propounde them.

The one is (say you) because he craftily and by a subtle shifte, refuses the
proves of the old Testament, as the Donatistes did. Your Stale Iestes M.
Stapleton of a fine blast Stapl. 61. b
of a horn* of a ^oule slawe, of a blind betell blunte shifte, I over pass
them.

When M. Feckenham (ye say) offers to yield, if ye can Stapl. 62. a
prove this regiment, either by the order that Christ left behind him in the
new Testament, either by the Doctors, either by Councels, or else by the
continual practice of any one Church, think you M. Horn, that this is not a
large and an ample offer?

The largeness of this offer is not here in question M. St. the offer is large
and ample enough* and taken of the Bishop at his hands, and proved unto him at
his own demand. It remains then that he stand to his promise, and yield
to the truth, or else he shows that he minded to offer more, than he purposed
to perform. Only now it is examined, why here he specifieth the new
Testament, and quite leaves out the old Testament* This doing, in this point,
says the B. smells of a Donatist.

Nay say you, There is not so much as any conjecture, to gather Sta. fol. 61. b
this upon, yea the old Testament is not by this offer excluded but verily
included. For if the new Testament, which rehearses many things out of the
old, have any thing out of the old Testament, that make for this regiment: if
any Doctor old or new, if any Council have any thing out of the old Testament
that serve for this regiment, then is Master Feckenham concluded, yea by his
own grant. For so the Doctor or Council has it, he is satisfied according
to his demand. Whereby it follows, he does not refuse, but rather allow
and affirm the proufes of the old Testament. How M Feck. expressly denies, and
yet inclusi^ gra^ teth the examples of the old Testament.


It might in deed follow M. Sta. but it does not always follow* A man may
refuse manifest proufes of the old Testament and yet grant such things
besides, that he may be concluded yea by his own grant* And so is M.
Feckenham here concluded as granting the new Testament, the Councels, and
Fathers. For since al these allege he proufes of the old Testament: he is
forced by conclusion of necessary consequence, to grant also to the old
Testament. Except he be as peevish as the Donatistes, that granted thus much
also and yet refused the manifest proufes and examples of the old Testament.
Although their own peevishness convinced the^, but still they stood on the
bare words as you do, and refused inclusiue proufes followed they never so
necessarily. And so did your self before require the Bare title of this
supremacy Supra page 344.
to be showed in the examples of the old Testament, el^ you reject the
examples, agree they never so much in matter. But now contrary, ye say, M.
Feckenham does allow and affirm the proufes of the old Testament, because they
may be included in those points that he alleges, but he would be loath they
should be included, as thanks be to God they be: and so, Uolens, uolens,
beyond his expectation, is enforced with them.

But what is this to excuse him more tha^ the Donatists, if he had not of set
purpose slonke from the manifest proof and examples of the old Testament? for
otherwise, he might as soon have expressly named the old Testament, as he
expressly named the new. And so should he have gone directly and simply to
work, and not indirectly with a Circumquaque, have referred the old Testament
to such inclusions, as you here would shake off the matter withal: chiefly
since the old Testament, having no included but express proufes, is so
expressly urged of us. And yet if he would have included the old Testament, (as
you say) under the name of the new Testament, why specifieth he the one so
plain, and not the other at all? if he did it for brevity, he might most
briefly have said, the Scriptures: which word had comprehended and included
both, and so had he showed, that he allowed the proufes of the old Testament
also. Ha M. Stapl. Ueritas non querit angulos: The truth seeks no inclusiue
corners, go plainly man to work for very shame. For yet, for all your
inclusions here to color the matter: in other places where this is not laid
unto your charge, both your self and M. Dorman, quite excludes the examples
of the old Testament from the new, as not fit paterns for Princes to follow.
Doing herein (what pretenses so ever you here include) even as M. Feckenham
does, and the Donatistes did before. And that Master Feckenham did no other,
but even of purpose conceal the old Testamentes examples, as foreseing that
they made against him: I will ask no better witness than your own self
Master Stapleton that by all these couerte inclusions go about to excuse him.
But when ye can not make any good excuse: in conclusion, yea in your next
words, ye bewray all the matter, ye could hold it no longer for your life,
blabbe it wist and out it must.

And surely (say you) wise men use not greatly to show that Stap. 62. a M.
Stapl. here bewrays the very cause why M. Feck. forsook the examples of the
old Testament, because they made against him.
makes against them, but most for them.

Hold your hand from the book M. St. ye never said truer word in all your
life. Ye hitte the prick there in deed, and tell the very cause why he
concealed the name of the old Testament and showed it not in his large and
ample offer. Because (say you) wise men surely, use not greatly to show that
makes against them, but most for them: but M. Feckenham surely is a wise man:
Ergo, he shows not in his offer the name of the old Testament because the
proufes thereof make against him, but only put the name of the new Testament,
because he thought that made most for him. True, Master Stapl. thus do the
children of this Luke. 16.
world (being wiser in their generations than the children of light) not show*
as ye say, but conceal the truth of God, because they see, it makes against
them. But herein M. St. for all your iolie wit and wisdom, that ye vaunte
upon so often, your wisdom ouershot it self. Surely ye did not like one of
these wise men, but rather like one of the wise men of Gotham, God turning your
wisdom into folly, that confess those examples and proufes to make against
M. Feckenham, or at least wise that he so feared, and therefore he shows not
the name of the old Testament, but concealeth it. And thus, while your drift is
to prove that he shifteth not off those proufes and examples, you confess that
he of very purpose, (not minding, as ye said before, to include them, but to
exclude them) leaves them out and shows them not, but shifteth them of, and
that of a shameful purpose, only because they make against him. Where if he
had any spark of truth and conscience, he would not hide that in Gods word
that makes against him. But perceiving that those prouses make against him,
would withal perceive him self to be in a manifest error, and never let
worldly wisdom so overcome him, that he should be ashamed openly to confess,
that he strives against the truth. And you M. Stapleton had ye any grace,
confessing the truth to be against him, (except ye be a very Manichee, that set
the old Testament against the new,) M. Stapl. defends Mast. Feck. against
his own know ledge and conscience.
would perceive, that if the old were against him, then the new were also
against him: and would even here, hurl away the pen, that should defend
such a shifter off, and hider of the truth, against your conscience. So far
would ye be from this impudency to write that he affirms and comprehends
that, which of wisdom as ye call, it he purposely concealeth: and that he
allows that, which he hides as making against him. Which is no point of
wisdom M. Stapleton but rather of stark folly, and mere contradiction to
it self, and to all your former excuses. And thus speaking of wise men, to
show your self in the number: ye speak against him, whom ye are hired and
labor to defend: ye speak against your self, yea against your cause and
all. So does God make them show their own shame, that wittingly will be hired
with Balaam to resist his open truth. Confusi sunt sapientes. etc. Hieremie. ^.
The wise men are confounded (says the Lord) they shall be astonished and taken
for lo, they have cast out the word of the Lord, what wisdom can be among
them. And so has God here infatuate M. St. that when he has bewrayed the very
cause why M. Feck. showed not in his offer, the name of the old Testament, so
well as of the new, to be, because he thought it made against him, and therefore
did like a wise man, to leave it out: he concludes most fo^dly, even the quite
contrary.

Wherefore (says he) it is incredible that M. Feck should Stap. 62. a
once imagine any such sifting or shifting, as ye dream of, having won his
purpose against you, even by the very old Testament, as we have declared.

By your own declaration, M. Stap. (all your inclusiue shifts for him not
withstanding) ye have declared the quite contrary: That he wisely (as he
thought) left it out as against him, which (when ye have said all that ye can
to salve the matter) is in very deed nothing else but sifting and shifting,
and that full shameful too.

Now where ye urge your conclusion further, saying:

And therefore it is spoken but in your dream, when ye Stapl.. 62. a.
say, ye have thereby with marvelous force shaken M. Feck. hold, which surely
is so forcible, as will not beat down a very paper wall. And marvel were it,
if ye should so batter his hold, when that these your great Canno^s come not
nigh his hold by one thousand miles.

Have ye measured the miles, that ye reckon them so iumpe, M. Stap? else it is
possible ye might be deceived. For if the proves of the old Testament be
against master Feckenhams cause (as you have confessed) there is no doubt but
they would shake and beat it down al to fitters, if they were bent and shot
against his hold were it never so strong: which in deed is nothing else but
the very paper walls ye speak of, as your M. D. Harding, while he was a
Protestant, called Purgatory. And therefore M. Feck* more worldly wise than you
his defender: like an old beaten soldier, knowing they were against him, or
at least so fearing, and mistrusting withal his paper walled hold durst not
abide the battrie of those great Ca^nons, the proofs and examples of the old
testament, and therefore, as ye confessed before, would not show that which
made against him, but purposely left it out, wherein how wisely soever he did,
your self, I think, spoke and wrote all these follies and contradictions in
your dreams, which, had ye been well awake, ye would never (I deem) have
confessed for very shame.

Again (say you) this accusation is incredible. For master Feck. is so far
from this suspicion, that he him self brings Stapl. 62. b
in against you* many and good testimonies of the old law (as fol. 109 and.
123.) by the force whereof only he may be thought to have shaken and
overthrown to your rotten weak hold, underpropped with your Sampsons posts,
as mighty as Bulrushes.

If the proofs and examples of the old Testament seem to you as mighty as
bulrushes, how mighty then did M. Feckenham think your cause? much weaker
belike than withered grass, that perceiving these bulrushes were against it,
durst not abide the brunte and pushe of them, but like a wise man, that is to
say, like a subtle Donatist, paste them over in silence. But as therein
(laboring to show master Feckenham to be a wise man) ye showed your self not
to be all the wisest: so haerein (going about to clear him of refusing the
old Testament, and so to be no Denatist) ye not only your self with him
refuse these proofs, like the Donatistes, but worsse than the Donatistes, call
the proofs of the old Testament in contempt, as mighty as Bulrushes. So did
Golias account the might and slingstones of David, to give as small a 1. Reg.
17.
stroke as a fillip, or as your bulrushes, master Stapleton, but yet the little
stone of David rushed him top side turny. So did Holofernes captains esteem
the Bethulians, saying, Judith. 14.
these mise are come out of their holes and dare provoke us to fight with them.
But such a God is God, that by the 1. Cor. 1.
weak things of the world he confoundes the mighty, and even with his
bulrushes ouerturueth all your bulwarks.

Ye think, M. St. it is incredible that M Feck could be a Donatist, because
he brings in many and good testmonies of the old law, as fol. 109. and. 123
by the force whereof only he may be thought to have shaken, and overthrown
too, our rotten weak hold. etc.

He may (as ye say) be thought so, M. St. of some of your side. But the
question might be demanded, what he has done, and not what he may be thought
to have done. Ye say his testimonies be many and good. But how many, ye durst
not tell for shame, nor ye goodness of the^ to prove the Popes supremacy, but
wisely also let them alone, and say he may be thought by them to prove the
Popes title, whereas they make nothing for it, nor against the Princes
government any thing at al. But what is all this to ye purpose, to clear M.
Feck of a Donatist? if it be incredible that he is a Donatist, which refuses
all these proofs out of the old Testament, because he admits other proofs,
such as he thinks make for his purpose: then is it incredible to believe, that
How the Donatists and the Papists allege the old Testament alike.
the Donatistes them selves were Donatistes, which is not only incredible, but
impossible. Did not the Donatistes for their Church in the corners of Afrike
cite the Canticles and other places in the old Testament, and they said they
were many and good also, notwithstanding they refused these proofs and
examples of princes government. And yet no man thought it incredible nor
impossible, that they should still be Donatistes. So, is it nothing incredible
nor impossible, but that, for all your testimonies from Aarons priesthood and
ceremonies, which ye allege out of the old testament, that bind us not: and
yet refusing the manifest proofs and examples of Princes, that bind us: ye
may, for all this, be Donatistes still. Yea herein also ye play the Donatistes
parts.

But I perceive (say you) by your good Logike, your law Stapl 62. b
and like divinity, silence makes a denial, and because M. Feckenham makes
no mention in this place of the matter to be proved by the old Testament,
therefore he subtly refuses the proves thereof.

What need many words master Stapleton, your self have confessed that this
making no mention of the matter to be proved by the old Testaments ensamples:
was a wise man's part, because they were against him. Which, what it is in
Logike, let Logitians descant. What it is in law, (which is your profession)
to play such wise men's parts: I commit to the Lawyers. But in divinity
(Master Stapleton) of which ye say ye are now a student, if you study till
your brains ache, ye shall find this wisdom, that concealeth the truth,
which makes against it, to be nothing less than a subtle refusal, which is
the fairest name ye can cover the Donatists error withal.

But ye should rather (say you) me think, induce the contrary, and that he
consents to you for the old Testament: Quia qui tacet consentire videtur:
(as the old saying is) for he that holds his peace, seems to consent: and
so ye might have better forced upon him that all was yours, presupposing that
you had proved the matter by the old Testament.

Do ye leave your Logike, Law, and Divinity, so soon, Silence argues not
always assent.
and fall to proverbs master Stapleton, and old sayings? In deed it is an
old saying, that he that holds his peace, seems to consent: But yet this
(seems) proves not that he does consent. A man may refuse some things, and
because he refuses them, will not answer them. A man may (seeing a thing
against him) of purpose hide it in silence, and Old sayings.
so, thinking to slip the collar, he subtly refuses it. A man may play
coll under Candlestick, see me, see me not: and who is so blind as he that
sees and will not see? A man may lay his hand on his mouth, mumbudget, whust,
not a word for a thousand pound, least he open a gappe, and rippe up a matter
against him self. And what does he here, grant it or refuse it? does he not
of set purpose subtly refuse it, and thinks him self no small fool, yea,
perhaps a great wise man, in so refusing it? and God wot, a full simple man is
he that perceives not this to be a plain refusal. If leaving Logike, law and
divinity, ye run for succor to old sayings: These are no new sayings, M. St.
I think ye have heard also of another homely old saying: When the rain
raynes and the goose winkes, little wottes the gosling what the goose thinks.
And a full seely gos^ing would ye make your self, M. St. if, seeing how M.
Feck. as subtle as a goo^e winkes at these matters, and will not of purpose see
them, when he is so pressed and urged with these examples and proves, that as
it were they rain upon him: ye think not that this is a refusal of them, but
perhaps ye will say, ye be wiser than the gos^ing, and that ye perceived as
much as did the winking goose, when ye said, he seems to consent that
holds his peace, for ye tell not what he seems to consent unto. He seems
in deed to consent unto this, that they be against him as ye say, and for this
cause like your wise man, he purposely refuses them, in burying them in
silence, so much as lies in him, even as the Donatistes did.

Now that neither logike, law, divinity, old sayings, nor yet the wise man's
shifte, will serve to clear master Feck. from being a Donatist: master Stap.
will once more (for an old grudge) have a ^ing at us, and to see if he can
fasten any thing on us, be says:

But you will needs drive your reason another way. Let Stapl. 62. b 63. a
us see then, what we Catholics can say to you for your Apology by the like
drifte. You and your Colleges seeing themselves ^arged with many heresies, to
wipe away that blot, if it be possible, and for your better purgation, take
upon you, to show your whole, full and entire belief. And thereupon you recite
the articles of the common Creed. But now good sir, I ask you a question,
what if by chance you had omitted any one of them, would ye gladly be measured
by this rule* ye measure M. Feck. by? would ye be content, that the catholics
should lay to your charge, that ye subtly refuse that article, that ye have
foreslowne to rehearse? If ye would not, then must I say to you with Christ:
Quod ^ibi non vis fieri, alteri non facias. Do you not to another, that ye
would not have done to your self. If ye say that ye are content to stand to
the very same law, as if ye be a reasonable and a constant man you must needs
say: Lo then good sir, you have concluded your self, and al your companions
plain heretics, for the refusal of the articles, Conceived of the holy
Ghost, which ye omit in the rehearsal of your Creed, which article, I am
assured, ye find not there. Then further, seeing the Archeheretike Eutiches,
and before him Apollinarius in the reciting of the common creed ran in a
manner the same race, you following them at the heels* as fast as may be,
pretermitting also these words: Incarnatus est de spiritu sancto, here might we
even by your own rule and example, cry out upon you all as Apollinarians and
Eutichians, and that with more colorable matter, than you have, either to make
M. Feck. a Donatist, or that your Apology has to make the worthy and learned
Cardinal Hosius, a Swenkfeldian: wherein your rhethorike is altogether as good,
as is this yours here against master Feckenham.

To let rhethorike go, M. St. with your law and logike, I will only come to your
question, and then to your illatio^ ye infer thereon Your demand stands on
this presupposall.

What if we, by chance, have omitted any article of the common creed? would
we be charged, that we subtly refused that article?

This similitude, M. St. is nothing alike, from any article, either M. Sta.
unlike similitude to disburthen M. Fecknham.
by chance (as ye say) omitted, or not required, or not in question at al, or
not pertine^t to the purpose and issue in hand, but granted and agreed upon of
both parties, without any controversy: to a thing not by chance, but of
purpose omitted, as your self have confessed, M. Feck. did omit the proofs of
the old testament, because he was a wise, otherwise called a subtle man: he
being so much urged of his adversary therewith: the matter chiefly in question
and properly belonging to the purpose and issue in hand: yea, and him self
making a chalege to be tried by the scriptures, fathers, councels and practice:
and to strike off before hand (as it were a debar) the one half of ye same
scripture, or rather ye part thereof, that sets it out most plainly: and to
do all this, only because it makes against him: what can this be thought else
but subtle refusing and shifting off, as did the Donatistes? and to liken the
other chance unto this, which (all the world may see, eue^ by your own
confession) is most unlike, what is this but another shameful kind of
shifting off also?

Thus you see, that ye can rightly lay no such thing to our How falsely M.
Sta. chalengeth us for heretics, for leaving out an article of the common
creed in the Apology.
charge, although, as ye say, by chance, some article of the common Creed had
been by us forslowne. We refuse not the rule of Christ, in this or any other
behalf: neither do we so to you, as you have done to us: but require you rather
to do so to us, as we have done to you. But then, ye say, we conclude our
selves and al our companions plain heretics. And how so, M. St? for that (say
you) in the apology in the reciting of the common creed ye omit these words,
incarnatus est de spiritu sancto, conceived of the holy ghost.

First and formast, M. St. this assertion of yours, is a wilful lie, and not a
escape forslowne or ouershot by chance: if ye have seen the Apology your
self, as I dare say, ye have done, and narrowly pried for the matter, and
think ye have espied more than your master could epsy, or thought worthy to be
noted. For where as ye tell us, both in your text, and in your margin for
failing, that the Apology recites the common creed: this is most evident
false. And your M. D. Harding him self, I dare say, if he he a lives man, will
say ye err fowly therein, who finds a peevish fault with Thapologie, even for
this, that it recites not the common creed.

But can ye say your common creed, M. St? For it may How cunning M. Stap.
himself ^s in the common creed.
be (to conster it to the best) that this your error is rather of ignorance. I
think ye say your common Creed in Latin oftener than in English, for in
English ye re^ke not how few can say it, and yet ye hitte it truer in
English, than in Latin. But you that reprehende the bishop and other for
Grammar, in englishing of words so exactly, I pray you, by what new found
figure of Grammar, do ye M. Stap. notes the Bishop and other for gra^mar, and
^o what a Grammarian he shows himself to be.
english, Incarnatus est de spiritu sancto, He was conceived by the holy
Ghost? In good sooth, M. Stap. ye were here somewhat conceived amiss your
self. And this was a greater ouershotte than any of your common petit quarrels,
besides this foil most of all, that ye can not perfectly say the common
Creed, nor write it rightly in your book, that almost each plow boy can say
without the book. Ye tell us Thapologie reciting the common Creed, omitteth
Incarnatus est de spiritu sancto, whereas those words are not in the common
Creed. The words of the common Creed are these, Qui conceptus est de spiritu
sancto, with which agrees Damasus Creed, and not Qui incarnatus est de
spiritu sancto. Thus have all the books that I have seen, and yet I have
looked a good many, to see if any write it as you do, whereby I might the
rather hold you excused. The words that you recite are the words of the
Nicene creed, which ye have put in your Mass. But belike ye sing Mass oftener
than ye say the common Creed, and so took that which ye commonly used, to be
the common creed,

Well, say you, howsoever it be, ye have here omitted both incarnatus and
conceptus too* And therefore by your own rule and example, here might we cry
out upon you all, as Apollinarians and Eutichians.

In deed M. Sta* no man can let ye to cry out and crow out, that we be, what
soever it please you to cry out upon us. But how well and truly ye may cry
it out, that is another matter. For, by the same rule and example, you might
cry out also upon Ireneus, that omitteth this article in his Creed. Ye might
cry out of Tertullian, that Contr. Valent. lib. 1. cap. 2. and lib. 3. cap. 4.
De praescript. haereticorum.
likewise omitteth it. Ye might cry out upon S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine,
that are said to have compiled the himne Te 'Deum. Ye might cry out upon
Athanasius Creed Quicunque vult: And upon diverse other, that omit this
Article of the conception of Christ by the holy ghost. And yet are they neither
Apollinarians nor Eutichians. But look you to it whether any of their Heresies
touch your or no, even in maintenance of their heretical doctrine.

You stretch the rule to far and to generally (M. Stap.) every forflowne
omission by chance, as your self say, where no special occasion is given, is
not a subtle refusal: Nor so M. Feckenham is charged, your self have showed
he did it wittingly, yea wisely as you say, and he thought to omit that that
he is chiefly charged withal, because it made against him. If the fathers, and
the Apology did thus in their omission: then hardly lay it to their charges,
and therein ye shall do but well. For otherwise, as you would retorte this on
us: see how sone, and how sore it might be returned on you, yea and that in the
self same place where of very purpose ye say the common creed, and say to the
Fol. 423. li. ^ Diuis. 159. cap. 4. M. Stap. takes on him to teach the bishop
his Catechism
Bishop in your fo^rth book about the number of the articles, that ye will
bring him to his Catechism, which unless ye thought your self a cumming
student in Divinity, and specially well traueled in your ab^e, ye would not
else take upon you to teach a Bishop. In deed your Bishops were very blind,
but thanks be to God our Bishops are no such blind guides, that they should
need to learn their Catechism of you. But let us see how do ye teach him
when ye come even to the common creed, and how ye number the Articles,
(although concerning your quarrel at the number of the articles) I will answer
(God willing in his proper place.

The first article then is (say you) I believe in God. The second, I believe in
God the father. The. 3. I believe that he is Stap. fol. 423.
omnipotent. The. 4. That he is the creator of heaven and earth. The. 5. I
believe in Jesus Christ. And here proceeding to M Sta. in saying the Common creed
leaves out these words. And in Jesus Christ our Lord.
other Articles, ye leave quite out these words, his only son our Lord.
Why do ye thus M. Stapleton? do ye not believe that Jesus Christ is the son
of God, and that he is the only son of God, and that he is our Lord? Look
well to this gear M. St. here is first, after the manner of your accounting,
three articles omitted, and one of them such a special point, as we charge you
with, that ye take away his Lordship, and now ye take away his sonneship too.
Will ye say this was ouerhipped by chance or forslowne? well be it-so,
although, even in saying the common Creed, such a forslowne escape might
deserve a yerking in a young scholar, but more shameful it is in a Divine, yea
in such a Divine as will take upon him to teach a Bishop. But why not? would
not the sow take upon her, to teach Minerua? but let us see your further
teaching.

The sixte, I believe that he was conceived of the holy Stapl. 423. a M. Sta.
leaves out again, in saying the common Creed, these words, crucified, dead,
and buried.
ghost. The seventh, that he was borne of the virgin Mary. The eight, that he
suffered under Pontius Pila^us.

Here once again, ye omit these words, crucified, dead, and buried:
containing also (after your reckening) three other articles, and ye leave them
clean out. Whether it be, that ye cannot say the Creed perfectly, which were
a foul blotte: or which is worse, that ye purposely leave them out, like the
wise men, that use not greatly to show that, that makes against them. For,
the popish doctrine is so flat diverse ways, against the death of Christ:
that it quite takes away the virtue and effect thereof. And therefore the
Papists seek to be saved, by so many means besides. But whether ye leave it
out for this, or any other priuier cause or open: I remitte it to your own
purgation, and to other men's conjectures. You proceed and say.

And the ninth, that he descended into hell. The tenth, that Stapl.. 423. a A^
other article left out by M. Sta. in saying the common creed, That he sits
at the right hand of God the father almighty.
he arose from death. The eleventh, that he ascended into heaven. And the
twelfth, that he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

Thus again have ye left out an other Article, that he sits at the right
hand of God the father almighty. Which is also material, in the controversy
between us of your transubstantiation, which error as it clean confuteth, so
it argues you to be the very Eutichians, your selves, as is already proved
out of Theodoretus. More things are to be noted about this your dealing in in
the common Creed, only now I note, but these your shameful omissions, and
that not once, nor twice, but thrice: and that in principal matters in
controversy, and all in reciting even the common Creed, which almost every
child with us of any discretion (thanks be to God) can say without book, and
you master Stapleton, a shorn priest, a Bacheler of law, a student in
divinity, a writer of Louaine, a translator of books, a doctors proctour, a
defender of a quondam Abbot, and one that not only will teach and control
all other, but crake that ye will bring a Bishop to his Cathechisme, and teach
him his Creed, and cannot say the common Creed aright your self, but make so
many scapes: surely, and ye were a boy again in Winchester schole, ye were
well worthy so many lashes, as ye have left out words, and as well laid on,
as the words are weighty and material. Ye may escape the lashes now ye be
adultus, but and ye were a doltus to, ye can not escape the shame. On the other
part, if ye say ye left these articles out of purpose, and not of such truandly
ignorance, even where of purpose ye went about to leave out no article, and
yet left out so many: how was not then your witting purpose, even a wilful
refusal of those articles? Whereby, how many herelies ye bewrappe your self
withal, well nigh every man may perceive and judge.

And thus with too narrow sitting of small matters in other men, for the
defense of M. Feckenham: ye have not only not hurt the^, nor helped him any
thing, but brought your self into the same and greater briers than he was in,
and can not rid your hands of them, either without blemishe of many
Heresies, for wilful omitting such weighty matters, and that so nere points in
controversy, forseing that those articles were against your errors: or else
(not to press ye so sore, yet at the least to impute all to ignorance or
retchelesse foreslouth) it is a foul fault in so great a student, and the
greater foil, the more ye take upon you to control the Apology of so many
excellent learned and famous men, and will teach the Bishop his Catechism and
your self can not your Creed. If M. Feckenham hear of this his defenders
foil, he will perchance of pity or charity pray for you, and have you in
his Pater noster, that God would make ye a better scholar, or a wiser man:
but, and he would follow mine advice, ye should never come into his Creed,
since ye can not say your own.

Now M. Stapl. cry out and yell upon us, that we be Heretics, so loud as ye
can, if for very shame ye can open your mouth at all. Ye say ye ca^ do it to
us, and that with more colorable matter than (we) have, either to make M.
Feckenham a Donatiste or that (our) Apology has to make that worthy and
learned cardinal Hosius a Swenkfeldian.

I think so even in deed M. St. that ye may cry out upon us with more
colorable matter. For other matter than colorable, to cry out upon us for
Heretics, have ye none. Whether Cardinal Hosi' be justly challenged to
maintain the Swe^k feldians heresi^ or no.
But since it is but your painted colors, and not any matter at all in deed,
the more ye cry out, the more ye show your shame. Cardinal Hosius, whom ye
so much commend, the matter wherewith he is charged to be a Swenkfeldian, or
worse than a Swe^kfeldian, is no colorable matter, but apparent, and confessed
by him self. And if ye make M. Feckenhams case to be such as his, ye have well
helpen him up M. St. then is this no colorable matter, that he is charged
with, to be herein a Donatiste: but a very plain and true matter. And then is
his case worse than it was before* when he of set purpose (thinking to play a
wisemans part) left out the old Testaments proufes, and therein showed him
self a Donatiste: does also with Hosius deface and blaspheme both old and new
Testament, and therein show him self a Swenkfeldian also. And thus the further
ye wade to save M. Feckenham your client from the spotte of one Heresy, ye not
only help him nothing therein, but go nere to draw him into an other. It is
best therefore M. Stapleton both for him and for your self, let him craule out
him self so well as he can: for ye do hitherto but hinder him, and bemyre your
self. Which when at length belike ye begin to perceive:

Neither (say you) do we greatly pass how the Donatistes Stap. 63. 2.
in this point demeaned them selves, and whether they openly or privily shunned
proufes brought and deduced out of the old Testament.

Ye should have told us thus much before M. St. and not all this while to have
labored so earnestly in and out with all these shifts, only for obiecting
this practice of the Donatists to M. Feckenha^, and to remove the Bishops
motives, which now ye see ye can not do: you say, ye greatly pass not how the
Donatists in this point demeaned them selves. And I am even of the same opinion
also that ye greatly pass not of it. But if ye took the Donatistes to be
Heretics in deed, and had not a certain affinity with them: ye would not
thus after all your stir, relent to the accusation, and say, ye pass not how
the Donatistes in this point demeaned them selves, since you be charged with
their demeanor in this point. Which, what is it else, than to say, ye paste not
in this point, whether ye be Donatistes or no. If ye had a good zeal to the
truth, or your conscience were clear of this crime: ye would rather have said
with Hierome, Errare possum, Hereticus esse nolo. Err I may, but I will not be
an Heretic. As therefore ye confessed right now, that all your defense
hitherto has been but colorable matter: so now ye care not in this point,
whether ye be culpable or no. Yea you go about to defend and clear the
Donatistes, and to post off this accusation to the Manichees. For what mean ye
else to say?

In deed the Manichees denied the Authority of the Stap. 63. ^
books of the old law and Testament, which I read not of the Donatistes. Yea
in the very same book and chapter by you alleged, Petilian him self, takes
his proof against the Catholics out of the old Testament, which you know
could serve him in little steed, if he him self did reject such kind of
Evidences. This now shall suffice for this branche, to purge M. Feckenham that
he is no Donatist, or Heretic otherwise.

How well all this suffiseth to M. Feckenh. purgation, either of the Donatistes
heresy, or rather of blemishing him with other Heresies, and how good a
compurgatour you have been, or rather a partaker of his Heresies: we must both
refer to the Reader (M. Stapleton) as judge in his conscience, to cast or
aquitte M. Feckenha^ herein. Ye think by clearing the Donatistes of this
objection, ye have cleared withal M. Feckenham. But while ye go about to
clear them, ye accuse S. Augustine that is their accuser, who says, they did
refuse the proufes of the old Testament. And you say ye have not read it, had
ye read S. Augustine or so much as the words taken out of him that the Bishop
cites, and you take upon you to answer unto for Master Feckenhams defense,
how could ye not have read it? but ye would slip off the matter under the
color of the Manicheans refusal, because the Donatistes did not refuse it as
they did, therefore they did not refuse it at all, whereas The D^natists did
not simply refuse the old^* testamente, as the Manichees did, but sub^ly as the
Papists do.
the Manichees did simply and utterly refuse the old Testament, which the
Donatistes did not, but refused it like such wise men as the Papists, when
they think it makes against them* and admit and urge it when they think it
makes for them, thus did they, and thus do you: and therefore for this handling
of the old Testament ye be like the Donatistes. But for your handling of the
new Testament ye be like the Manichees, of whom S. Augustine says, Ipsi^sque
nou^ Testaments, etc. And they so read the sentences Aug. de haere^. Ad quod
vult.
of the new Testament, as though they had been falsified, that what they lust
they take from thence, and what they like not they reject, and as though they
contained not all the truth, they preferred many books that were Apocrypha:
And said that in their Archemanichee the promise of the Lord Jesus Christ was
fulfilled, whereupon in his letters he called him self the Apostle of Jesus
Christ, because Jesus Christ promised to send him, and sent in him Jesus
Christ. Which how nere it touches your Popes practice, look you to it, and
clear him of it M. Stapleton, else ye will not only prove Donatistes I am
afraid, but also Manicheans.

Thus much then for the former motive that the B. had to charge M. Feckenham
with the Donatistes. And if this suffice (as you say) for this branche to purge
M. Feckenham, content is pleased, and so am I, let it suffice in Gods blessed
name, I commit it to the readers judgment. Now to the other motive.

Concerning the other (say you) besides your falsehood, Stapl. 63. a. b The
second motive that moved the Bishop to challenge M Feck. to follow the
Donatiste^.
your great folly does also show it self too, as well as in the other, to
imagine him to be a Donatiste. And to think or say as you say they did, that
Civil Magistrates have not to do with Religion, nor may not punish the
transgressors of the same. Master Feckenham says no such thing, and I suppose
he thinks no such thing. And further I dare be bold to say that there is not
so much as a light conjecture to be grounded thereof, by any of M. Feckenhams
words, unless M. Horn become suddenly so subtle, that he thinks no
difference to say, the Prince should not punish an honest true man in steed
of a thief, and to say he should not punish a thief: or to say there is no
difference betwixt all things and nothing. For though M. Feckenham and all
other Catholics do deny, the civil Princes supreme government in all causes
Ecclesiastical, yet does not M. Feckenham nor any Catholic deny but that
civil Princes may deal in some matters Ecclesiastical, as Advocates and
Defenders of the Church, namely in punishing of Heretics, by sharp laws.
Unto the which laws, Heretics are by the Church first given up, and
delivered, by open excommunication and condemnation.

Here first as ye did in the other motive, so again ye charge the Bishop with
falsehood and folly, but take heed M. Stapleton the falsehood and folly light
not on your own pate, as it did in the other. Whether it be folly in you or
craft, let other deem: certainly falsehood it is, that when ye come to the
setting down of the Bishops words in a distinct letter, ye dare not for both
ears on your head, set down the full words of the Bishop, nor of S.
Augustine, nor yet of the Donatistes, whereby it might have been known, what
the Donatistes attributed or denied to Princes, and how near, or how far, ye
had come unto, or diffred from them. Thus durst ye not do, and thus should ye
have done, which argues your own falsehood. But ye turn the catte into the
pan, and say, that the Donatistes said, Civil magistrates have not to do
with religion, nor may not punish the transgressors of the same, but (say
you) M. Fecke^ham says no such thing and you suppose he thinks no such
thing, and further ye dare be bold to say there is not so much as a light
conjecture to be grounded thereof by any of M. Feckenhams words, and hereon
you conclude him to be no Donatiste.

Now since ye will be thus bold for M. Feckenham as to enter into his thought,
ye should not have been afraid with the Bishop, to have set down his plain
written words, or so much as the full content thereof. Did ye fear they would
bite ye? in deed they would have showed you to have been a Donatist, and they
would have showed how ye have altered the Donatistes refusal, and S.
Augustines complaynt on them, to make it seem you were none.

Ye say M. Feckenham and you grant, Princes may deal with matters
ecclesiastical.

Why? M. Stapl. so di^ the Donatistes too. Have not Supra page
your self confessed, that they ran for succor to Iulianus the Apostata,
and highly commended him? And ye know in Cecilians controversy, that they
refused not the Emperors dealing, till he delte still against them, and
therefore, as you say, you do not, no more did they simply deny, that princes
might deal in matters of religion. Ye should therefore have adjoined the words
that the Bishop recites out of S. Augustine, how, and after what manner they
denied their dealing in matters of religion, and punishment of heretics.
Whether they denied it as you d^, that they should not dealing as supreme
governors, as punishers by their own authority, yea or no, for this you
deny. Now that Princes had and t^ke upon them, and ought to have this kind
of dealing, the Bishop proved out of S. Aug^stine, Diuis. 18. page 11.
that magistrates and rulers ^ught to reform the^, to reduce them to the
unity of the Church, and to repress their heresies with their authority and
godly laws made for that purpose, to who^ it belonged of duty, and whose
special service to Christ, is to see, care and provide, that their subjects
be governed and maynteined in the true and sincere religion of Christ, without
all errors, superstitions and heresies.

This was the manner of the Princes dealing then with religion, and this you now
deny to Princes, to deal on this wise* And on this fashion said the
Donatistes. The seculer How the Donatists and Papists deny the Princes
government in Ecclesiastical cau ses, and ref^rie it only to the clergy.
Princes have not to deal in matters of religion or causes eccl. That God
commits not the teaching of his people to kings, but to Prophets. Christ
sent not soldiers, but fishers, to bring in, and further his religion.
Pretending the ordering and disposing of all eccl. causes to be in the Clergy,
and by the Clergy they meant them selves. As you do likewise when ye say,
heretics* are by the Church given up, and delivered. By the Church, that is,
say you, only by What the Papists mean by the Church
us that are the Priests. Heretics ye say are first given up by the Church,
unto the civil Princes sharp laws: do ye not here make your selves only
the Church? Yea do ye not make these two distinct members, the Church that
gives them up, and the Prince, to whose sharp laws the party condemned is
given up, and so excl^de the Prince from the Church, as no member at all
thereof? And herein ye agree, or rather are worsse than they. So that still the
similitude holds, between M. Feckenham and the Donatists, both of them
refusing the old Testament for the proof of Princes supreme government. Yea
although the Donatists had gone further than the Papists do, where in deed
the Papists go further than did the Donatistes, what soever liberality ye
pretend to give Princes to deal in religion, wherein ye dare be bold, ye say.
But yet for all that M. St. be not over bold, in allowing Princes a dealing in
religion, for fear your friends (that allow not Princes so much as to talk
of religion) count your boldness, to proceed of Bayards blindness.

Although your self espying by and by your over hardy and M. Sta. re^oketh his
grant.
hasty boldness, step back again, and so qualify this your bold grant of
Princes dealing in some eccl. matters, that in conclusion, ye say as the
Donatistes said, or rather give Princes less than they did, either making
them the enrichers of your coafers, which ye term by the name of advocates or
defenders of the Church, or else the executioners of your cruelty, and to
deal not one io^e further. Which being no ecclesiastical matters at all
(except to defend or put a man to death be an eccl. matter) your bold grant,
that they should deal in some eccl. matters, is so cunningly resolved, that
when all co^mes to al, they shall deal in none at all, but only be the
defenders or executioners of them that are the only dealers there with. Thus do
ye play in words mockholiday with Christian princes.

Do ye think (M. St.) that Christian princes did nothing else, nor had any
other authority but this, in punishing the Donatistes in S. Augustines time?
the words of S. Augustine are against you, the story of Cecilians cause does
confute you, yea, even the ^ning and refusal of the Donatistes shows the
plain^ (...). And think you if princes had at that time no f^her authority to
punish the Donatistes, than ye limit princes now, that the Donatists The
Donatists exclaming on the Princes for Ecclesiastical causes, argues that the
supreme gouernemente of them was in the Princes.
would have refused and cried out upon the Emperors authority therein, if they
had been but the only executours of the fathers judgments? Nay, they
would then have cried, that the fathers, as principal, had had naught to do
therein, and that the Princes were misruled by the fathers, and that the
fathers had made the Princes their executioners: Thus no doubt would they, and
needs must they have cried, if they would have cried out at all;
presupposing Princes had then no more to do in matters of religion* than the
fathers would permit, appoint, and allow them, as you order Princes now.
But the Donatistes cried not out so, nor in deed they could, but they cried
out chiefly against the authority of the Princes: it arg^th then the Prince^
had the chief authority, to s^t forth the true religion, and to suppress^
theirs, (...) all other heresies, and not the fathers and Bishops* Now what
difference is t^ere between your cry and the D^ies?

Why? say you, is there no difference between al things, and nothing.

Yes, M. Stap. there is something betwixt them. For Stap. 63. b
who says the Prince has, or may have the doing of all thing? obiecte it to
them that say so. We say, the Prince has under God the supreme government
over all things ecclesiastical. That is to say, to ouersee and direct, that
all things be duetifully done by them, to whom they belong. Now in this
behalf, you give the Prince not so much as any something, but bare nothing,
under a name of something. Whether then it be something, or it be nothing, ye
still are like the Donatistes about this matter in every thing.

Is there no difference (say you) to say the Prince should Stapl. 63. b M.
Stapl. example of the Princis punishing an honest man for a thief.
not punish an honest true man (...) stead of a thief, and to say, he should
not punish a (...)?

Yes for soothe, M. Stap. there is a great difference. But does this example
also make any thing against the Princes supreme authority, in dealing in
ecclesiastical matters? Go too then, let this stand for an example. As the
Prince, though the right of his authority stretche not so far, that he
should punish an honest true man, in steed of a thief, yet, to punish a
thief, he has authority: so although the right of the christian Princes
authority stretch not so far, that he should punish a true and faithful
Christian in steed A thief in christen religion. John. 10.
of a false thee^ishe Christian: ( A thief in this behalf is he that
follows not the doctrine of Christ, of whom he says, Omnes qui venerunt ant^
me fures sunt, and latrones* All that came before me were thieves and robbers,
because they rob God of his glory) yet to punish the very thief he has
authority. Now, M. Stapl. by what authority does the M. Sta. simili tude
returned upon himself.
Prince punish the thief, does he not punish him by his own supreme
authority next to God? you will say, he punishes him by his laws. But who
makes the law forcible, does not (next under God) the Princes supreme
authority? Yea, what though the Prince him self sat not on him, nor
pronounced the sentence, nor executed the punishment of the thief, yet is not
all this done, by theirs, to whom these offices appertain, but by the Princes
supreme authority. The Prince is not the Judges executioner, but the Judge and
the officer are the Princes. If then your similitude hold, even there where it
should principally hold, and in the matter in controversy between us, then
that authority, that the Prince has to punish spiritual thieves, Idolaters,
heretics, false Prophets. etc. is next under God, his own supreme
authority. And though he him self pronounce not the sentence on the heretic,
nor execute the punishment of him, yet is it done by his supreme authority:
Nor the Prince is the Clergies executioner, but the Clergy therein and the
officers, are rather the Princes executioners. Thus ye see how your own
similitude directly and playuely applied, makes clean against you.

Now for the testimo^ies that the bishop cites out of S. M. Stapl. lets go
the testimonies of S Aug. alleged by the Bishop.
Aug. to open and confu^e the practices of the Donatistes, which should hau^
shewe^ how like your doing had been to theirs: as though ye heard not on that
^ide, or as though ye would counterfeit the wise man your self, that uses not
greatly to show that that makes against him, ye quite omit them, saying:

As for S. Augustines testimonies they nothing touch M. Stapl. 63. b
Feck. and therefore we will say nothing to them, but keep our accustomable
tale with you.

Ye do well to call your answer a tale, for ye have hitherto told a fair
tale, and a well told tale, and therefore I pray ye, M. Stap. tell on your tale,
till ye have read us out this worthy chapter. And see that the residue of your
tale be accustomable (as y^ say) to this ye have hitherto told us.

The. 19. Division.
THe Bishop (for that M. Feck. with the Donatists) refuses Winton. page 12. b.
the proves of the old Testament ^or Princes supreme government) joins with
Saint Aug. against the Donatists and the Papists, alleging out of S. Augus^.
many The special (...) o^ christian princis.
sentences: first, to prove this to be the very duty and special service of
Princes unto God, to have an especial care, diligence and oversight, to see
Gods laws and true Religion set forth and kept, and to punish and remove all
things to the contrary. Secondly, to confute this refusal of the Donatists and
Papists, besides the foresaid proves and examples, he alleges o^te of Saint
Augustine Further examples of the old Testament alleged by S. Aug. for princes
dealing in ecclesiastical matters.
the examples of the King of Niniue, of Darius, of Nabuchodonozor and others:
proving thereby, that the Histories and testimonies cited out of the old
Testament, are partly figures, and partly Prophecies of the power, duty and
service, that Kings should owe and perform in like sort, to the further^uce
of Christ's religion, in the time of the new Testament.

Master Stapletons answer to these testimonies is Stapletons order to this di
uision.
threefolde. First he labors to restrain all the testimonies of Saint
Augustine, only to punishing of Heretics. Secondly he laboreth to prove that
these testimonies make against us. Thirdly he goes about once again, by the
Bishops illation on these testimonies, to clear master Fec^enham of the crime
that the Bishop charged him with, for refusing the examples of the old
testament. The first part he parts again in three. First he gathers a
contract and sum of all these testimonies, to the which he yeldeth. Secondly,
he shows that this was his old and former opinion. Thirdly, he limitteth all
the matter only to punishment. And first of all he says:

^o, now have we mo testimonies out of Saint August. to Stap. 65. a
prove that, for the which he has alleged many things out of S. Aug. already,
and the which no man denies. For what else proves all this out of S. Aug.
both now and before alleged, but that christian Princes ought to make laws
and constitutions (even as M. Horn him self expounds it. fol. 12. b) for
the furtherance of Christ's religion?

Are ye afraid M. Stap. to be oppressed with the number Number of testimonies.
of testimonies? What man, and your cause be good, the mo the merier they say:
but because your cause is naught, the fewer belike with you the better fare:
although by your leave ye make a pretty lie in the beginning, to say that he
alleges these testimonies of S. Augustine, to prove that, for the which he
has alleged many things out of S. Augustine already. For, the abouesayde
allegations Whereto the former testimonies of S. Aug. were alleged. Whereto
serve the authorities present.
were directed to detecte the Donatistes, in refusing the Princes authority,
and the examples of the old Testament, and to see how like to theirs, your
dealings to Princes, and your refusal of the same examples were. But these
testimonies present, are to confirm the Princes authority, and the examples
of the old Testament, for Princes, against both Donatistes and Papists
denial of their authority, and refusal of thexamples. But let this pass,
sith whatsoever those or these be, ye say no man denies them.

For what else (say you) proves all this out of S. Aug. both now and before
alleged, but that Princes ought to make laws and constitutions for the
furtherance of Christ's religion? this thing no Catholic de^ieth.

Mean ye plain dealing and speak ye in good sadness Here M. Stapl.
confesses, that Princes ought to make l^wes for the ^rance of Christ's
religion.
M St? does no Catholic deny, nor no man deny, that Princes may make laws
for the furtheraunce of Christ's religion How chance then you run from the
obedience of your own natural and most gracious sovereign, that makes so
godly laws and constitutions for the furtherance of Christ's religion? and
deny that she has authority to make any laws and co^stitutions in that
behalf, but that she must only be obedient to your Popes and his Priests
laws and The Papists denying the Queen to make laws, and say no catholic
denies it, deny them selves to be catholics. The Papists subtle meaning in
their plain speeches. The hold of a Papists word, and the hold of a weat
Eele by the tail.
constitutions? And for this matter, ye compile the most of your works. And
now ye say, no man nor catholic denies it. By this rule you be no catholics,
that ye crake so much of. Nay ye be no men neither, for it is most evident
that ye chiefly deny this thing. And your self in your Preface, make it to be
the most principal controversy of all other, and most to be denied.

If ye be a true Catholic, and a true man, deal plainly, For no doubt, ye
mean that there is a padde in the s^rawe. Ye have a knacke in your budget,
whereby ye think ye may well grant this, which for shame in open words ye
dare not deny but grant. And yet ye think we shall have no more hold by
your grant, than he that holds a wette Ele by the tail. For in the end,
ye come in with such a qualification: as all the world may perceive a flat
denial thereof. And yet at the first blushe, no man would think, but that
the matter between us and you were full concluded.

We say, all the authority that the Queen has is only to this end in
effect, that she ought thereby to make How trimly the Papists and we do here
agree in words.
laws and constitutions for the furtherance of Christ's religion. This (say
you) no man denies, but that they ought to make laws and co^stitutions, for
the furtherance of Christ's religion. Here you agree with us, to a simple and
plain dealing man's judgment. Ye are become a Protestant, I hope. But what
will your good masters at Louaine, and your friends with us say to you, when
they shall hear of this grant? they will affirm with one voice that they
utterly deny it, and ask ye, how ye have defended master Feckenhams quarrel.

Tushe will you say to them, hold your peace sirs, all is See a subtle*
Papist.
well enough, there was no remedy but I must needs grasit to S. Augustines
words, they were so manifest, and so pressed, that there was no help but to
grant it, yea and to bear down the matter that no body denied it. But I
have At a dead life, well fare a papists shift. M. Stapl. renueth an old
knacke of Arrius.
such a distinction for it, that they shall be never the near, for all my
grant. Did ye never reed (may ye say to them) the practice of Arrius? that
when he was so urged, that he could not deny it: he yielded to the true
beleuers, and wrote also, as I have done, deposing that he believed as he had
written: but when his co^plices herefore expos^ulated with him, he declared to
them, that for all the show of his grant in words, in deed he had granted
nothing. He said, he believed as he had written, and look here quoth he
(pulling a paper out of his bosom containing his Heresy) this is the writing
to the which I referred my words. And so may you say to your friends M. Stap.
true in deed I have granted, that both I and you deny not this, that the
Queen How finely M. Stapl. can turn his tale.
ought to make laws and constitutions for the furtherance of Christ's
Religion. And if ye mark it, all this matter lies in this word furtherance.
Furtheraunce I granted. But I warrant ye, I raunced no f^rder. I told not as
yet how far nor how much, nor how little, this furtherance stretches. Do ye
not know that every thing, that ye^ any whitte, be it never so little, is yet a
furtherance? and every thing yekes quoth the wrenne when she pist in the sea,
as the old Proverb faith: and even as much furtherance in this matter (as you
shall see me bring it about) have I granted Princes, and ye know as good
never a whit as never the better. They shall be never the better for this my
grant, no more than when I made them like the Heathen Princes. Only now,
being pressed, it stands me upon, to alter my words, and give them a Title
of furderance for a clawe, but so cunningly handled, that they can go no further
than we allow them. And so may ye turn this furtherance to their hindrance, as
you shall perceive anon will you say. In the mean season, ye enter solemnly
into your second parcel, to confirm this your strange grant, that might
otherwise seem news to your friends and to us, saying:

And for my part M. Horn, that you may not think I Stapl. 65. a. and. 65. b
have now been first so advised upon sight of your book, I have forced that
argument with many examples of godly Emperors and Princes in my Dedicatorie
Epistle to the Queens Majesty, before the translated history of the
venerable Bede.

It seems ye want good neighbors M. St. at Louaine, Belyke M. Sta. wantes
good neighbors.
that thus are driven to set out your worthy volumes. But belike they take
you, if ye have said as much there as ye have done here, to be a false
dissembler, pretending in cloked words a furderance, and in deed minding none
but rather an empayring of their estate: and so perhaps ye may go beyond
them all. And thinking ^eatly to defeat us, suppose that your friends will
like well of this daliance, and that we poor souls can not see how trim ye
dance naked in a net. Yes M. Stapleton thanks be to God our eyes be not so
dim, but we may see this disobedience, yea all the world may see it. And i^
no man could epsy it except it were declared, your self will open your
falsehood, ye can not keep your own council, but by and by bewray al your
former grant of making laws and constitutions and all the Princes furtherance
therein, in conclusion to come to nothing, or as good as nothing, or rather
worse, if worse may be, than nothing.

Briefly (say you) all ^. Augustines words force nothing Stapl. 65. b Here M.
Stapl. bewrays all the ^etche of his former grant.
else but that Christian Princes may make laws to punish Heretics, and ought
to fortify the Decrees of the Priests with the execution of the secular
power, when obstinate Heretics will not otherwise obey. Lo Masters mine, may
ye say, to your fellows M. Stapleton, now ye need not fear that I granted
over much to Princes, when I denied not but that they might and ought to make
laws and constitutions for the furtherance of Christ's religion, and yet is
nothing lost from our Popes religion by this grant, yea thus it serves our
turn very well say you. In deed M. Stapleton if ye can bring all your iolie
mighty grant to this: if ye can thus quickly ^hwite a post to a
puddingpricke: I will say also with you, ye have turned it so well, that ye
have made it serve your turn very well. And that so well, that God wot, of
all these laws* constitutions, and furtherance here is nothing left at al, the
qualifying of your grant has taken it clean away.

For, if I should reply, that though ye have taken away the making of laws
and constitutions, for the setting forth of Christ's religion, yet have ye left
to Princes, laws for punishing Heretics, if they see any Bishops or Priests
that be teachers of false doctrine, they may call them before them, they may
examine them, and if they find them such, they may by their laws depose
them, or otherwise punish them: Fie, no no, will you reply, ye are quite
deceived man, Gods for^ode, that I should have granted Princes to make laws,
for punishing Heretics on that fashion, then as good have granted all unto
them. Nay (will you say) ye should have marked what followed, and how cunningly
and warily I limited their making of laws. I said they ought to fortefie the
decrees of the How cra^tyly M. Stap. limited the Princes making of laws.
Priests. Which argues that the Priests, not the Princes, must make in very
deed all the laws of punishment. And (w^te ye well) if they make them, they
be no babes, they can tell on which side their bread is buttred, they will so
make them, that they will keep them selves harmless, be ye sure.

But soft M. Stapleton, said ye not the Prince must make laws* yes, but the
Priests must decree them, say you, and then a Go^s name let the Prince make
them, when the Priests have decreed them. In (...) there ye went beyond me an
ace, M. Stapleton.

But go to, yet the Princes (ye say) ought to fortify the decree that is to
say, they must establish and give force by their royal authority, unto that
the Priests haus decreed to be convenient, and otherwise it is not of force.
Nay, in any case (will you say) beware that, I mean not so, but thus I declare
my meaning further, they shall fortify the Priests decree, with the execution
of the seculer power, that All M. Stapletons ioly grant to Princes, is now
come to nothing, but to make them the clergies slaughtermen and droyles.
is to say, by their riches, armies, swords, and might, they shall put to
death, or fight against, such as we Priests (that be the Church, shall decree
and appoint them, being seculer. Why M. Stapl. what is all this? this is
nothing (in plain^ English) but to make Princes your very butchers,
tormentours, and slaughtermen.

Nay (say you) they shall not do thus much neither, when they will, but if ye
mark, I said in the end for failing, when obstinate Heretics will not
otherwise obey, then will we assign Princes to hamper them. Now forsooth
gramercie horse, that ye can not, or will not do your selves, that ye thrust to
Princes to be your drudges therein, are they not well helped up by this your
liberal offer? they are much beholding to you for so large a charter. The
text of your grant gave much, but your gloss takes all away again. But
Maledicta glassa* (say I) qu^ corrumpit textum: M. Stapletons fay^e text, and
foul gloss.
all be shrewd be that gloss, that corruptes the text, so long as ye limite
your text with such a gloss, ye may give your grant to what Princes ye shall,
a fair catch they shall have thereof. They ought (says your grant) to deal
in Ecclesiastical matters, and make laws and constitutions for the
furtherance of Christ's religion. That is to wete (says your gloss) to let
the Priests make all decrees, and they with their swords, villes, bows, and
gunnes, to lay on, and strike, only when the Priests bid them, and those only
whom the Priests appoint to be slain. Now forsooth and forsooth M. St. this is
a proper dealing of Princes in Ecclesiastical causes, and a goodly kind of
making laws and constitutions for the furtherance of Christ's religion. Well
whatsoever it be, this is all they are like to have of you, and yet will ye
keep touch with them in your grant to.

But think ye M. St. was this all that princes ought to do? and nothing else
but to punish heretics on this fashion? nothing else, say you, for that was in
deed the very occasion why S. Aug. wrote all this. A ^a M. St. then I perceive
S. Stapl. 65. b.
Aug* wrote something more, than ye would perticulerly answer unto. Well say
you, what soever he wrote, this was the very occasion why he wrote it, to make
laws for punishing Heretics, and nothing else. How M. St? to make the Emperor
that then was, none other dealer in their punishment, than your Pope makes the
Emperor now? or than your Prelates made Q. Marie of late your executioner, and
the Nobility your droyles, whom soever ye determine to prick, by your
excommunication and condemnation? what fools were the Donatists then, to cry
out upon the Emperor?

This were like the fury of the angry Dog, that being bitte with a stone,
wreaketh his anger upon the stone, and not on him that hurled it. What fellon
is offended with the executioner, or lays his death to the beheaders charge,
when the Prince commands to behead him: but to the Prince? But in this case
you are the Princes, that are the Priests, and the Prince is but, as it were
the stone in your band, is but the executioner of your sentence. Why should
the Donatists then have blamed the Prince, except the Prince then had been,
not the Priests instrument, but even the principal in making laws of
punishment for them? And so did Saint August. acknowledge the Prince. He
decreed not laws, for the Emperor to put in execution, but desired the
Emperor to reforms them, by such sharp laws as seemed best to himself.

And although this were the very occasion (as ye say) why How S Augustine
acknowledged the Prince.
Saint Augustine wrote all this, Yea, though it were the only occasion to, of
writing all that he wrote: what is that to this purpose? For whatsoever the
occasion were, the occasion is not urged, but the words that he wrote. A
particular occasion may have general proves. The occasion of Saint
Augustines writing (ye say) was the punishing of the Donatists. And yet would
Saint Augustine so have written, though they had been other Heretics. And it
serves against all Heretykes. Why? because his proves are general,
whatsoever were the occasion.

And yet his occasion was not only about the punishing of the Donatists, for
the Donatists denied more than his authority in punishing them, they denied
his authority to ^ette forth the true Religion, and to ouersee that it be in
all estates duly preserved. This said they, was committed to Fishers, not to
Soldiers, to Prophets, not to Kings, as you now say the like, it was
committed to the Apostles and Priests, not to Kings. This was another very
occasion also, and many other besides might be, why Saint Augustine wrote all
this. But what is this ( All this) that ye speak upon? I pray ye tell us at
M. Stap. tells of all this that August. wrote, but what this (all this) is,
he duist not utter. August. contr. Gaudent. epist. 2 li. 2. c^. 26. Epist. 50.
The testimonies of S. Aug. to prove the princes dealing in ecclesiastical
causes to reach further than making laws for punishing heret^kes.
least the sum of all this that saint Augustine wrote. And then shall we see,
if it be all none other, but laws, of punishment for Heretics, that he laid
and meant, or no. And whether you have hitherto truly said and meant or no, all
your falsehoode will then appear.

Let us here therefore resume some of those Testimonies of Saint Augustine. God
does inspire (says he) into Kings, that they should procure, the
commandment of the Lord to be performed or kept in their Kingdoms. Is this
only master Stapleton for punishing of Heretics? Again, In that he is also
a King, he serves in making laws of convenient force, for to command just
things, and to forbid the contrary. Is this only meant of laws to punish
Heretics? Again, The Ensample of the King of Niniue that it apperteyned to
the Kings charge, that the Ninevites should pacify Gods wrath. Was this
only mente of making laws, for punishing Heretics? What Heretics were in
Niniue? Heathen Idolaters there were store, but of Heretics we read none. And
who made the decree of their fasting and repentance? not the Prophet: he only
denounced the wrath and justice of God: nor high Priest of Aarons order was
there any among them, that the Scripture mencioneth. Idolatrous Priests no
doubt they had more than ynowe, but the law of that Ecclesiastical
discipline, was not set out by them, but by the King.

Generally to conclude, Saint Augustine says: that Epist. 48.
the ancient acts of the godly Kings, mentioned in the Prophetical Books,
were figures of the like factes to be done by the godly Princes, in the time
of the new Testament. Were now these their doings and ancient acts,
nothing else but laws and constitutions, for punishing Here^ykes, and false
teachers? Were all the constitutions and doyngs of Moses, Iosue, David,
Solomon, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, and others, nothing else Master Stapleton,
but this? O good GOD, that ever any that should profess the study of
divinity, should be found so false and shameless, not only thus to dally
with Princes, but also to delude the fathers and the Scriptures, and all to
enfringe and takeaway the Princes interest and authority.

Now that ye have thus in your first part brought the M. Stapl. would return
S. Augustines words upon us.
matter about, giving a grant in words, and expounding the words, have taken
away the grant again: ye enter into your second part, to set a fresh on us,
as ye did in your former Chapter, and would make these testimonies of S. Aug.
to serve against us, which ye go about two manner of ways. First, having now
abridged the princes authority to nothing else, but to make laws to punish
Heretics, ye cry out upon us that we be the heretics, and that they must
punish us* Secondly, ye would prove that we be the Heretics, to be punished,
for denying even this title to Princes of punishing Heretics. And for the
first part ye say:

But now that master Horn may not utterly leese all his Stapl 65 b.
labor herein, let us see how these matters do truly and trimly serve
against his dear brethren and master Foxes holy Martyrs.

Here is all made sure on every side, every way prevented, How sure the
Papists make all points against the Protestants.
least the poor ^elie Protestants should escape your violence, by any
starting hole. First, you your selves our enemies, will only have the making
of the decrees and laws, what shall be true religion, what shall be false.
Secondly, the Prince shall have nothing to do in examining the matter between
us, who have in deed the true religion, who have the false: but they must
believe before hand, that that which you shall say against us, is al and only
true, and all that we reply is stark false. Thirdly, the Prince must not
condemn us, but you our enemies and accusers, must sit upon us and condemn
us. Fourthly, the Prince must, as you bid him, put us to death, and for more
assurance to catch us, ye give him this liberty, that he may make any law
to attache us, to emprison us, to head, hang, or burn us. Provided always,
that this law be nothing else but for punishment, and that of those that you
appoint, and will cry ou^ upon for heretics, and to deal no further. Here is
all things made sure against the poor protestants. Who sees not, that even
as sheep appointed to the slaughter, they must needs die, if you but please
to bid the prince to kill them, they must needs be heretics, if once you call
them so And now that ye have brought your matters to this pass, let us see how
ye cry out against us. Stap. 65. b


We say with S. Aug. (say you) that princes may punish wicked deprauers of
religion. And we further say that you are those.

O master St. that ye would stand to your word and say as S. Aug* did. But
it may be, ye will say it with S. August. but will ye also mean it with S.
Augustine, for there is little trust to your saying without your meaning.
Ensample right now, of your last grant, wherein you spared not to belie S.
Aug. if ye mean with S. Aug. plainly, that Princes may punish wicked deprauers
of religion, as did the Emperor How Princes punished deprauers of religion in
saint August. time.
in S. Augustines time: there is then yet good hope of equity, and that you
shall not be your own Judges, and our condemners to. But the Prince shall
appoint delegates uprightly between us both, yea the matter may come to be
heard and discussed before the prince himself, and to be judged of him, who
are in the right, who are in the wrong: for thus did the Emperor in S.
Augustines time, and S. Augustine lyked well of it, but of all things you
cannot abide this, and yet ye boast for fashion sa^, that ye say with S.
August. Princes may punish w^, deprauers of religion. But ye add withal at
the hard heels thereof, And we further say that you are those. Whereby ye
signify how far ye will allow their punishing. And that the prince and all
must be ruled by your bare saying, for ye allege no reason or argument to
preue it, but only avouch it, saying:

And we further say that you are those. As though your bare so saying, were
full proof of the matter, and reason good enough, to cause the prince to
punish us.

But if the Prince take that ye have granted him, to punish the wicked
deprauers of religion, as Saint Augustine says he ought, and the Emperor
then did: then so fast as you shall say that we are those, we will also, not
say only, but prove, that you are those. And a righteous Prince will
punish as he sees proves, and not as he hears only sayings. Now therefore
if ye will say with S. Augustine thus, tell on your tale hardilye, and we fear
not your malice.

We say with Saint Augustine (say you) that Christian Stapl. 65 b.
Princes may make a decree, ye a of death, as did Nabuchodonozor against the
blasphemers of God, and carefully provide that God and his Sacraments be not
lightly contemned.

This is well said of you master Stapleton, and even the same with tongue and
heart say we, and have proved it already with many ensamples. But you say it
from the teeth outward, how chance else that ye said not thus much before?
Yea how chance ye said that Saint Augustine The Princes laws for
blasphemers.
meant no more but of their laws for punishing Heretics? Here are laws for
blasphemers also. And though every Heretic be a blasphemer, yet is not every
blasphemer an Heretic. And ye know Nabuchodonozors law was not of Heretics,
but of Heathen blasphemers. And yet besides the l^. of their punishing, how
chance ye forgot also this part of their authority, carefully to provide The
Princes careful providing.
that God and ic^ Sacraments be not lightly contemned? Is all this careful
providing, nothing else but punishing Heretykes? yes master Stapleton it
imports much more, and even as much as we ascribe to Princes, and as the
Queens Majesty takes on her. And now that ye have once again granted
thus much to Princes: spare not a Gods name to charge us with the worst ye
can, only stand you to your tackling, as we will stand to ours.

We say (say you) you are as great blasphemers as ever the Stap. 65. b
Church of Christ had.

How prove ye that M. Stap. say we? why say you, we M. Stapletons strong proves.
say so, and that is proof good enough for us. In deed it is proof good
enough for you, yea the best proof that ye have. For bad ye any better I know
ye would not spare to lay it in our dishe. But remember master Stapleton, that
ye have given the Prince that authority of punishing blasphemers, that Saint
Augustine gave to the Emperor in his time. That is to wete, not to punish he
wottes not what, but by his authority either to appoint Delegates, or himself
to sit and here the trial, and judge who are the blasphemers, and who are not.
So that now your saying we be, will not serve yuo in steed, unless ye prove
your saying. Else might we put it to a double post, and say pass to you, you
are greater blasphemers, yea the greatest blasphemers, that ever the Church of
Christ had. And to prove it not only on you, but even of your head also, your
holy father the Pope: whose blessed lips can they blaspheme trow you? I pray
ye remember who said, he would eat Porke and despetto de d^o, even in
dispite of GOD. But let this blasphemous Porkeling go, and say you on master
Stapleton.

We say (say you) you be they that have contemned Stapl. 65. b. Contempt of
Sacraments.
Christ's sacraments, making of seven two, and using those two after such a
sort, that the old proverb may (the more is the pity) in a manner take
place, as good never a whitte as never the better.

Here is still nothing but we say, to answer therefore we say, with we say:
we say again, that you are those Sophisters that by the art of
multiplication, whereof ye Popish Sophist^e can make 7. of. 2.
spoke in your Preface, have learned much more comning than had the scholar
of Oxeforde that would make three eggs of two, you will make seven of two,
and coming out with your five eggs (as the Preuerbe also says) every one of
them are rotten: making of two Sacraments seven. But five of them are of your
own hatching, Cocks, eggs without yolks, no sacraments at all. And two of
them, the one, baptism fowly profaned, the other hurled quite away, and an
Idol (even by your own definition of an Idol) put in place. This lay we to
your charge, prove us liars and ye can. And to that ye say we contemn Christ's
Sacraments, we briefly say again ye say untruth, except ye can prove we do so.

We say further (say you) that not only the general Stapl 65 b. Councels.
Council of Trent, but that the whole Church has condemned your opinions, by
general and national Councels many hundredth years since.

We say further also, that as your Council of Trent, so did the Priests, the
Lawyers, Scribes, and Pharisees, assemble together and held a council against
Christ in his absence, and Matthew. 26. Ioho. 11.
Caiphas gave judgment on him, that one man (meaning Christ) should die for
the people. And so has your Trident Council in their absence condemned Christ
in his members. The residue of your saying is but your lying vaunt of the whole
Church, where in deed ye mean but the popish Church* ye crake of many hundred
years, but ye tell not how many they be, nor what is condemned, nor by who^,
nor where, nor when, nor what Council general nor provincial, The Papists
maynteyn condemned doctrines.
but carry away the matter in generalities. But we say to you again in
general speech, that not only General and National Councels have condemned
many of your doctrines many hundredth years since: but even Christ him self
and his Apostles, yea some of your own Popes, yea 1. Tim. 4.
some of your own selves, habentes cauterizatam conscientiam, having their
consciences marked with a hot iron have condemned them. And all this, partly
has been already sufficiently, and partly shall be further proved in
particulars, as we descend thereto. And if we go no further than the present
matter and issue in hand, concerning the Princes authority: yea, even with
your own mouth, or ever we have done, ye shall yet more than once again
condemn this your own saying, that the Princes government in ecclesiastical
matters stretches no further, than to make laws and constitutions to punish
heretics.

Now, when ye have thus with bare sayings, charged us to be heretics, ye
would charm the Prince also in putting him in remembrance, that his duty
stretches not now, to stand in examining all this that ye lay to us, nor to
judge thereupon, whether it be true or false, but on the credit of your bare
honesties and words, to make forthwith some sharp laws of attaching, hanging,
sacking, drowning, or burning us, for condemned Heretics, because you have so
called (...) To this purpose therefore say you:

And that Christian Emperors, christian Princes, as well Stap. 65. b
in other countries as in England, especially the noble and worthy king Henry
the fifte, have made sharp laws, yea of death against Heresies. We do not
nor never did disalowe these their doyngs, as repugnant either to the old or
new Testament. Why then call you for this respect the Catholics, popish
Donatistes?

The Bishop s^ called them M. St. not with Bare sayings How the Bishop called
the Papists Donatistes.
as you have here called us, deprauers, blasphemers, and condemned Heretics.
But the ^. has so proved his sayings, that, as ye have heard, all your
improuinges were to no purpose, but to bring M. Feckenham more in the mire, and
to prove him a greater Donatiste and your self also in his defense.

Ye say ye do not, nor never did disalowe, as repugnant to the old or new
Testament, Christian Emperors and Princes doings, nor king Henry the fifte his
sharp laws, yea of death against herefies.

If ye do not so disalowe them as repugnant, then be they conformable. But how
chance then your self excusing M. Feckenham, said he omitted them because
they made against him? if they make against him, they are repugnant to him. And
if you disalowe them not as repugnant, then are you repugnant to him, and to
your own excuse for him. How dark and subtly M. Stapl. speaks.
Yea, what repugnancie your words present do implie, or what doubtful
understanding ye mean, in saying, we do not, nor never did, I leave to your
own expounding, whether ye mean ye did never, or ever, or sometimes disalowe
them: and in adding, as repugnant, whether ye mean ye disalow them in other
senses or (...). But interpret your own sayings as ye lust, if ye say to
conster them to the best, ye disalowe them not as repugnant, that is, ye allow
them as agreeable in those doings of Princes in the old Testament* then, as
King solomon displaced Abiathar the high Priest, so may the Emperor displace
the Pope, and other Princes their Bishops, when they be unworthy of their
roumes and offices.

But, besides the punishing of false teachers and Heretics by their laws,
that ye allow in the Princes of the old Testament, for Princes under the new
Testament to do the like, did they nothing else? made they no other laws and
constitutions ecclesiastical? or do ye allow them only for their laws in
punishments, and disalow them for all other How far the examples of the old
Testament stretche to direct christian princes.
laws and constitutions that they made? Well, what soever you allow or
disallow, God allowed them and liked well of them. And therefore to all
Christian Princes, they ought to be paternes to do the like, not only in zeal
of punishment of heretics, and abolishing Herefi^, superstitions, Idolatries,
and all errors: but also in setting forth the true and sincere religion of
Christ's gospel, and ouerseeing that the Prelates and Pastors, the Nobility,
the Magistrates, the people and all subjects what soever, do every one their
duty, in receiving and aduauncing the same. But this ye utterly disalowe in
Princes, if they go one inche further, than laws of punishment of those, whom
ye give up to them to punish, and the defense of your persons and goods,
making Princes either your waighting guard, or else your slaughtermen: and there
is al, say you, that in these matters Princes have to deal. And for this
respect, we not only call you, but prove you popish Donatistes.

Now that by crying out upon us, you think ye have fully cleared your self,
ye enter into your other point, to burden us with this crime of the Donatistes,
even to deny that little which you grant unto Princes. Which surely were a
cunning poin^ (...) do, to prove that we deny with M. Stapl. will prove that
we deny that whi che we affirm.
the Donatistes, that which we affirm against the Donatistes and you too.
First, we affirm that it appertains to the Princes supreme authority next
under God, by the advice of their godly and learned estates, to make laws What
it is that we affirm of the Princes authority.
and constitutions, to punish Heretics, ^ismatikes, erroneous teachers, and to
abolishe all their false doctrines. And also to make laws and constitutions
for the setting forth of all true doctrine, and to appointe godly learned
setters out thereof. This say we before hand: if now you can make us believe
we hold the contrary to this, that were worth the seeing.

But will ye know M. Horn (say you) who be in this point Stapl. 66. ^
in very deed the doltish devilish Donatistes? hearken on well, and ye shall
hear.

On to M. Stapleton hitherto we hear nothing but your black Rhetorike not
worth the hearing, which remitting to your common place thereon, tell on your
tale and we will hearken. Stap. 65. a Who be the true Donatist^ for saying
Princes may not punish in causes of God^ religion.


The Donatistes as S. Augustine reports said it was free to believe or not
to believe, and that faith should not be forced. Was not this I pray you the
common song among the Lutherans in Germany and England at their beginning?
was not this your Apostles Luthers opinion, that no man should be compelled to
the faith? and as there are many dissentions, divisions, Scismes, betwixt you
the Sacramentaries, and the Lutherans: so are you divided also in this point.
For your Master Calvin writes that a man may lawfully and by Gods law be put
to death for heresy, as he practiced him self also, burning Se^etus the Arian
at Geneua.

See how your self being blinded with pure envy M. M. Stapl. himself cleereth
us of that he falsely burdeneth us.
Stapleton, while ye study with all bitterness of terms to deface us to the
simple, to all wise me^ ye clear acquit us of the crime ye object against us.
Ye say we are Sacramentaries and that Calvin is our Master. Ye say further,
that our Master Calvin writes, that a man may lawfully and by Gods law be
put to death for Heresy.

I ask ye here, if this were the opinion of the Donatistes? if they then said
the contrary to us, and we to them, then have your self discharged us of this
crime, that even contrary to your conscience and wittingly, ye sclaunder us
with. Which is so evident a matter, that every man hereafter may justly take
you for a common lying sclaunderer. Do not your self also complain in many
places even of this counterblast, that we would have the Prince execute more
severity toward you, and that we seek your blood, and such other things?
wherein, although in that matter ye sclaunder us, yet even your sclaundering
purges us in this matter. And do ye not say here present, we are divided in
this point? and so again ye clear us of this crime.

But (say you) all Luthers scholars in Germany are not Stapl. 66. a
so forewarde.

I know not all Luthers scholars, for my part, M. Stapleton* and I guess you
know them not all, neither. But suppose, (as ye say) all be not so forward:
yet if they be forward, they are again discharged of this your lying crime.

Yet say you, this was Luthers opinion, and their common song in the beginning.

If slaundering were not your common song M. Stapleton ye would never sing thus
purposely out of tune. It is well known the reverence and obedience that
Luther teaches subjects to yield to their Princes even to the death. But
wilfully ye pervert and wrest his words: he spoke How Luther said, Faith can
not be forced.
not of faith simply, among professed Christians: but of some doubts of faith.
He said, they should not be only forced without outward violence, but rather
with persuasion and arguments if it might be: if not, then the Magistrate
might lawfully punish the obstinate, for his error or Heresy. So he declared
of Muncer and other Heretics (seeing their perverseness) that the Magistrate
might lawfully punish him and his adherents, yea that he ought so to do, and
thereto he vehemently excited them. This was Luthers opinion, and what fault
find you therewith. In deed against those that are Infidels, Turks, Jews,
Heathen, or any any other not professed Christians, he said Christians ought
not (being not provoked by them) to set on their realms, and provoke them,
only of purpose, by force of arms, to make them become Christians. And in
this behalf, he spoke much against the foul abuses of Croyses and Turkishe
wars.
the Pope, in his Croyses and practices about the Turkish wars. But what is
this to this purpose in hand? yea what is all this, either of Luther or
Calvin (if there were such division in this point between them, as you,
like a makebate, would set, where none is) to the matter in question.

The question is, whether the Prince may punish heretics, The question
whether Princes may punish heretics by death.
and that by death. Which both Luther and Calvin grant ye may. But the
Donatistes denied this, because (they being apparent heretics) perceived it
made against them, you should likewise have proved, that Luther and Calvin,
and that we were heretics, or else it touches us not at all. For, would ye
have the Prince put to death the faithful Christian? Luther and Calvin might
well (ye know) and ought to speak against that. They saw the violent practices
of you Papists, in murdering and devouring the poor sheep of Christ, and
can ye wite them if they co^playned thereof?

Ye should have first proved us to be the heretics. But How the Papists
prove us to be heretics
you will say, that I have done already. Ye have done so in deed, M. St. after
the Popish manner, that is to say, ye have called us heretics, and stark
heretics, and condemned heretics often inoughe, and if that will do it. And ye
have told even right now, that ye say, we be heretics, and al to naught, with
we say, and we say, on the head of it. These sayings we have heard, as ye bad
us harken, but we have heard never The Princes duty where any are challenged
to be heretics.
a proof. Now what must the Prince here do? (...) he not examine and
search out both our proofs: and punish, not the faithful be leeuer, but
whom he finds to be the heretic? And thus, if ye will needs have death the
punishment, in Gods name even death be it. But then M. St. I think ye will not
be half so hasty: no, ye had rather (I dare say) keep ye still at Louayne.

Here enters M. St. again into an inuectiue against An inuectiue against M.
Fox.
M. Foxes book. For that book, and the bishop of Sarisburies, are his
chiefest eyesores, so that I blame him the less, that he startleth so often at
them: as all his companions M. Foxes book and B. Jewels, great eyesores to the
Papists.
and masters do besides. For, the one for their practices, and the other for
their errors, have almost marde all their estimation with their friends. But
his by matters I will not answer, only to the question now in argument.

Yea (says he) some of your holy martyrs auouche, that Stap. 66. a. Sir
Thomas Hitton priest.
the King can make no law to punish any manner of crime by death, and that al
such laws are contrary to the Gospel. This was the opinion of sir Thomas
Hitton priest.

Where find ye this master Stapleton? this is (you False slanders and
malicious misseconstructions of the faithful.
will say) an article laid unto him that he defended. Yea, but are you sure,
master Stapleton, that he in deed defended this, as it is here set out: and
that it is not rather altogether devised for malice, or perverted and
misconstrued, as many other have been? the false witnesses wrested the sayings
of Christ, that he should deny tribute to Caesar, that Luc. 23. Matthew. 26.
John. 19. Act. 6.
he went about to destroy the temple, etc. Yea, the title let on his cross (if
the Priests might have had their will) should not have been written as it
was. The like wresting of his sayings used the Jews with S. Steven. And in the
primitive Church, were many articles objected to the poor Martyrs, of
refusing obedience to magistrates, of licencious life, of unnatural
commixtures, of murdring and eating children. And even such malicious
misconstrued articles, the Papists devise on the Protestants: Hew the
Papists deal with the Protestants and their articles. Math. 5.
that in the mean while are gagged, nor suffered once to speak and declare
their innocence. But blessed are you (says Christ) when men revile you, and
speak all evil on you for my name sake.

But you say, this is no slander, it is of master Foxes own setting forth.

I grant, M. St. he is the chronicler, and sets down that he finds. Does
that argue that he acknowlegeth for true, every such article as he sets
down? nay, he makes often exception to the contrary, that many of such
articles are falsely objected, which nevertheless he sets down.

Yea, but there is more things laid unto him than this.

By whom, M. Stap? Forsoothe even by sir Thomas More. A trusty witness on
your own side. But go to, be it, he said even so. Yet is this iniustly done
of you master Stapleton, to charge all Protestants with his opinion in The
uneven dealing of the Papists.
this point, when they manyfestly maintain the contrary. We deal not so,
with you, we burden not your whole Church (where ye openly defend the
contrary) with the several judgment of every writer: much less of every
obscure author, and such an one, as of whom we have nothing but heresay: and
that such heresay, as his adversaries love to report, and wrest, to make it
odious to the hearer: this is not upright dealing.

But yet for all this, ye can not here upon fasten that which so feign ye
would, that therefore he is a Donatist. The Donatistes denied to Princes the
punishment of heretics, and would have belief free, This man denies neither
of Sir Thomas Hitton priest no Donatist.
these. First, his quarrel was not of faith alone, but as ye tell it, for any
manner of crime to be punished by death, and yet it follows no more hereon,
that he would have faith free, to believe what each man would: then he would
have it* free for any manner of crime, to do what each man would. Secondly,
though he deny the punishment by death, yet he denies not, but there^*
grants, that Princes might make laws of other kind; of punishment, which
if he grant them, your self clear him of being a Donatist.

But leaving him ye tell us of greater business concerning Sir John Oldcastell.
sir John Oldecastle, who^ ye rattle up with a susurrauit, calling him traitor
and detestable Donatist.

And now (say you) all the weight rests to prove this substantially to you,
and to master Fox. And to stop all your froward quarellings, and
accustomable elusions against our proofs. Well, I will bring you (as I
think) a substantial and inevitable proof, that is master Fox him self,
and no worsse man.

Here is a lusty crake M. Stap. to bumbaste the matter withal, out of doubt
we shall here have some great foil. But let us see what all this heinous
matter is. Forsoothe M. Fox sets down the articles, that the Papists have
composed to be sir John Oldecastles articles, the tenth article whereof is this.

That manslaughter, either by war, or by any pretended Stap. 66. b. ^
law of justice, or for any temporal cause or spiritual revelation, is
expressly contrary to the new Testament, which is the law of grace and
mercy.

Why, M. Stap. is this your substantial and inevitable proof, that is, master
Fox him self, and no worsse man? this is none of master Foxes saying nor
opinion, he does but write* plain and plat what soever articles it pleased
his enemies your ancestors to devise, in the name of Sir John Oldecastles
articles. Stap. 66. b.


Lo thus he writes (say you) of this worthy Champion, and that even in his
own huge martyrologe, who doubts but to the great exalting and amplification
of this noble work and of his noble holy martyr.

The worthy praise of this noble work in deed, and of this noble and holy
martyr, are no whit blemished by these your sco^ and raylings, M. St. but what
kind of argument M. Stapletons weak argument.
call ye this? he recites this article among the rest, and therefore out of
doubt he allows it, and sets it out to his great exalting and amplification.
By this argument your self allow the article too, for ye have here also
recited it. Master Foxes synceritie in the Papists falshoodes.
But what would ye have said if he had subtracted it? and the one of the
twain he must have done, either have left it out, or set it out as he found
it.

But how chance you left out that, which in many places of his work M.
Fox notes, of the Papists corrupting of those martyrs articles: and yet
(which is in deed to his great exalting and amplification) he sets them
down, even as he found them. For, the thing, to any indifferent reader, will
easily show it self.

But yet go to once again. Were this article his or not Sir John Oldcastle
proved no Donatist.
his, it proves not him a Donatist. First, the Donatistes allowed manslaughter,
though unlawfully done, as your self have proved before of the Circumcelions.
But here ye grant that he utterly disalloweth all manslaughter, and so ye
clear him herein of being a Donatist. Again the Donatistes utterly rejected
(as your self say) all the Princes authority, and all punishment in false
religion. Contrariwise Sir John Oldecastle allowed their authority, yea over
the Pope and his Prelates, to punish them for their false religion. And
though he disallowed manslaughter, yet can ye not gather, that he allowed no
punishment for false religion. Unless (as ye showed in the days of your late
cruelty) there be no punishment with you but manslaughter. Whereby we may
more justly gather that he acknowledged their authority, in willing Princes
to punish, though not by death: than you can any way gather heereon, that he
utterly denied all kind of punishment.

And if ye would deface his martyrdom for this, or count Sir Thomas More
himself mislyked the punishment of manslaughter in many offen ce^. The
aunciente punishment of of heretics.
it Donatisticall, of the same mind was even sir Thomas More him self your
own merry martyr (whom ye cited to witness a few lines before) as appears
in his Vtopia, although more covertly, yet he quite disaloweth manslaughter,
and deuiseth other punishments in stead thereof. Is he therefore a Donatiste?
And I pray you, what was all the ancient order in banishing heretics, was it
death? or were they Donatistes then, because they allowed not punishment by
death? So was S. Augustine a Donatiste also, whom ye cite against the
Donatistes. For it was long or ever he came to this opinion, that the
Donatistes might be slain, and upon what considerations, I will show you out of
that learned clarke Erasmus, who for this matter also, had great conflict with
your Sorbonistes.

I deny (says he) that ever I readde that Bishops Declar. Erasmi tit. de
puniendis her. 76. 77.
sholude have stirred up Kings to kill Heretics. For, this is not to warn
Princes in general, but to appoynte out unto them a kind of punishment. But
I speak in my reprehension, not of these times, but of Saint Augustine, and
the Bishops of his age. For, now certain Abbotes The myld spirit of popish
Bishops and Abbots.
and Bishops think it a most acceptable sacrifice to God, if they may kill
a great many with their own sword, and their own hand. And to confess the
truth, in that they tell how Saint Augustine was first of that opinion, that
he denied the Emperoures power to be called upon, but when he saw the heresy
succeeded, he changed his mind: even so is it as true that I wrote. But then
had they to do S. August. opinion of the pu nishement of heretics.
with Donatistes, that were more than heretics, who most pernitiously raised
up a schism of the whole Church, and had Circumcelions, both a mad and
fierce kind of men, which murdered with swords, maimed with Sythes, and The
Circumcelions.
with Lyme mingled with Vinegar put out the eyes of the true believers. And
what could the Emperor do, but chastise such, that deserved any punishment
whatsoever, although they had held no heretical error besides? and yet
notwithanding even against these, the punishment of death was so little
defired, that even S. Augustine did withstand the Shiriffe, when he sent out a
sharper edict, fearing that he should kill any. And so brought to pass, that
a Punishment by the purse.
more mild edicte was set forth. For as then, all the Emperors punishment
consisted in a forfeit of money, in taking away their goods from the Donatistes
churches, and giving the^ to the churches of the true beleuers. And if the
bishops could Banishment.
not be corrected by any remedy, they were banished, but of killing there was
no mention at al. And therefore against Pelagius, there was never any motion of
craving the Emperors aid, because he did not on this sort trouble the
tra^quilitie of the common weal, yea and that is more (by the entreatie of the
Bishop) they which had paid their forfeiture, had their money given the^
again: and their bishops retained their dignity still in their Churches, if
they would change their opinions So great was the lenity of those days
toward heretics, and that such heretics to. There are many kinds of
punishing, besides the punishment of death. Very far in deed are they from
this lenity, which now a days for every word The popish cruelty.
that either is strange to them, or not understood, they cry forthwith, to
the fire, to the fire. Here therefore between these deuines and me thereis no
dissension but this, that they considering what a great plague of religion it
is, that the The difference herein between Erasmus and the Popish Bishops.
church should be divided into such factio^s, seem more inclined to slaughter.
On the other side I am more slow, considering whereto the parable of the Lord,
whereto the most holy men's interpretations, whereto the lenity and mildness of
the ancient Bishops, and of the Emperors, against heretics calls us: then
also thinking on this, how now and then men's affections mingle them selves in
this business, and how often such remedies fall out otherwise: last of all
that sometimes the truth is doubtful, and now and then it happens that he is
in error himself, that lays the heresy to an others charge many times
neither party understands other, and they agree in matter while they jar
in words. neither does S. Hierome speak rashely in the dialogue against the
Luciferians (under the person of the true believer) S. Hieroms opinion herein
and the resons moving him thereto.
after this manner: no body (says he) can take upon him Christ's victory, no
body can judge of men before the day of judgment: if the Church be now
cleansed, why reserve we the clensing to the Lord? there is a way that to men
seems right, but the ends of it lead even to the bottom of hell. In this
error of judgment, what certain sentence can there be? etc. What Hierome
meant by these words, is clear to the learned. Truly they have hitherto so
moved me, that I am of opinion, that we ought not to come to the last
remedy, before all means be tried. Least perchance (either through a corrupt
judgment) the innocent, or at the least he that might be recovered, do perish:
or else even that which is right be condemned for ever.

Thus much and a great deal more writes Erasmus on this matter. But by this,
first we see Erasmus judgment, and yet is he not counted a Donatiste.
Secondly, he so describes the Donatistes, that these two witnesses of Jesus
Christ (which most patiently took their death, nor invaded any others life)
be fully cleared of this cri^ Thirdly, he so sets the Donatistes out, that
beyond all the former comparisons, the Papists of all other rome The Papists
in cruelty come nearest the Donatistes.
nearest them, in cruel bloudsucking, in provoking, and setting upon other
that prouoks them not, in far more cruel torments than of swords, sythes,
lime, and vinegar, yea, they have left no unnatural cruelties, nor
mischievous trecheries vndeuised and unpracticed. Fourthly, he shows (against
this popish tyranny) even where they will not suffer the examination of the
truth, how contrary it is to the fathers and ancient Bishops, whom they
crake to succeed. Fifthly, where you M. Stap. falsely cite S. Augustine
against us, Erasmus truly ^iteth him against you, showing what clemency the
Emperors used even to manifest heretics, and what cruelty you practice
against the true believers.

In times past (says Erasmus) the Ecclesiastical mildness Eras. decla. tit.
de pun. h^.
did mitigate the severity of Princes. And now the cruelty of certain
Monks, except it were mitigated by the mildness of Princes, would burst out
into more than the Scithians unmerciful rage.

Thus we seethese two that ye ^ayte at, are not alone, they shall have good
company, if they be Donatistes, for disallowing manslaughter. But now, what if
these two rejected it not at all, but only showed the exact difference
between the old law, or man^ politic laws, and the Gospel. The mercy of
the Gospel.
Will you deny that the Gospel (that is to say the glad tidings of
reconciliation, forgiveness, and salvation wrought by Jesus Christ) is the
law of grace and full of mercy? I think M. St. ye will not deny this, for
shame. Though the Gospel takes not away politic laws or punishments, yet
is there a (...) between them and the Gospel. The Sorbonistes confession. In
declar. bras. tit. de pun. haer.
Then should ye consider, that the Gospel (in it self) kills not, but
labors to sa^e, it sends killing to the law: the exercise, threats, and
external punishment whereof, is not altogether taken away by the Gospel, but
is forcible to the transgressors. Nor the Gospel takes away civil or
polytike laws from Princes, nor the sword to execute them on the evil doers.
And yet is there a manifest distinction beti^eene the one and the other, and so
are even your Sorbonists driven to yield to Erasmus: Quamuis Euangelium, etc.
Although the Gospel do not expressly and plainly show, that Heretics should be
burned: yet the laws civil (which are conformed to the law natural) which
the Gospel does not abrogate, do decree that they should be put to death and
burned. So that neither be such laws comprehended in the Gospel, nor
otherwise allowed than indirectly, that is to say, for the importunity of the
wicked. And in this sense their words are not amiss.

But what sense soever ye make of their words, ye can not prove them
Donatists. And yet if thus much also were granted you, does this either charge
us that we be Donatists, not allowing them therein, if they had any such
opinion* or does it clear you? Nay, it once again proves you How the
Papists yet nearer resemble the Donatistes.
more Donatists. For in very deed the Denatistes refused not simply, that the
Prince should punish heretics, no nor by death neither, if he would have held
with them, and at their bare instigations have punished the true beleuers by
death: they would have then allowed it, and set him more on, yea, have laid to
their own hands, and have thought they had done God good service too, so that
he would have maintained them. And do not you even so? what else makes ye cry
upon ye Princes beyond the seas, with all kind of torments to destroy the
Protestants? If Princes would advise them selves or ever they believed you so
lightly, and would not destroy their subjects, till they had sit in iudgm^t and
heard and discussed both parties causes thoroughly: ye would not be half so
hasty. Ye would then cry to the contrary, that you must only be judges, they
must only believe you, and strike only them whom you shall bid them strike.
Contrariwise, where the Princes (espying your falsehood) forsake your errors,
and set out even very mild laws against you: then ye change your coppie,
and cry out, every thing is extreme cruelty, ye are too too sore handled and
oppressed, then ye extol beyond the moon, lenity and sufferance, and winche
like a gald horse at the least thing that touches you. And thus every way do
you still show your selves, to be the very Donatistes. Now that ye have, as you
conceive with your self, given us so great a foil: ye enter into your third
part saying.

We may now proceed to the remnant of your book, saving Stap. 66. b. and.
67. a
that this in no wise must be ouerhipped, that even by your own words here ye
purge M. Feckenham, from this crime ye laid unto him even now, for refusing
the proufe^ taken out of the old Testament.

Now for God (M. St.) since hitherto ye have cleared him so sclenderly, that ye
have more bewrapped him, and your self also in this crime, let nothing in any
case be forgotten, or ouerhipped, that any ways may help the matter forward
for hitherto it rather has gone backward, but now there is good hope, M.
Feckenham shall take a good purgation, even of the Bishops own making, that
you M. Stap. will minister to him which will so work upon him, and make him
have so good a stool, that he shall be clearly purged of this crime of
Donatistes. ^o to then M. Stapl, and let us see how apothecarylike you can
minister the same.

For if as ye say (say you) the order and government Stap. 67. a
that Christ left behind in the Gospel and new Testament, is the order, rule
and government in ecclesiastical causes, practiced by the Kings of the old
Testament, then will it follow that M. Feckenham yelding to the government of
the new, does not exclude but ^ather comprehend the government of the old
Testament also, both being especially, as ye say, all one.

Is this the purgation M. St. that ye will minister to M. Feckenham, would to
God ye could make him receive an^ brook this sentence, and if you would take
it also, I warrent ye it would so purge you of your old leven and sour dough,
that ye should no more be Donatists nor Papists neither if ye receive and well
digest this little sentence. The order and government that Christ left behind
in the new Testament is the order rule and government in Ecclesiastical causes
practiced by the kings of the old Testament: For then How M. Feck. yeldes not
to the examples of the old testament, and yet yelding to the new Testa meant,
is comprehended by it, though he comprehended it not.
give ye Princes that, that ye have all this while denied the^. But do ye
think M. Feckenham will wittingly and willingly receive this sentence, and
that which in deed follows necessarily thereon? The sentence is true, but M.
Feck. for all that may be a lier and you another. For I warrant you M. Feck.
grants this no ^urder, than (as the Donatists) he may temper it to make it
seem to serve his turn.

Why? say you, if he grant the on^, he does not exclude but rather comprehend
the other.

Nay M. St. M. Feck co^prehe^des it not, but shoonnes it, as against him by
your own confession. But the old, being comprehended by the new, Master
Feckenham is contrary wise, by force of argument, granting the new enforced
by the old. Not that he comprehends it, but is comprehended of it, and
driven to yield thereto of his adversary, by conclusion of reasoning, the one
including the other. But rather than he will do this voluntarily, he will
rather exclude them both, the old and the new testament also, and as he has
done, burn them both together.

The. 20. Division.
THe Bishop in this division, first, gathers his full conclusion Page 14. a.
of all these testimonies into this argument:

What government, order, and dutifulness so ever belonging to any, God has
prefigured and promised before hand, by his Prophets in the holy scriptures
of the old Testament, to be performed by Christ, and those of his Kingdom:
that is the government, order and dutifulness, set forth and required in the
Gospel or new testament.

But that faithful Emperors, Kings, and Rulers, ought of duty, as belonging
to their office, to claim and take upon them the government, authority,
power, care, and service of God the Lord in matters of Religion, or causes
Ecclesiastical, was an order and dutifulness for them, prefigured and
forepromised of God by his Prophets, in the Scriptures of the old Testament,
as Saint Augustine has sufficiently witnessed: Ergo:

Christian Emperors, Kings, and Rulers, owe of duty as belonging to their
office, to claim and take upon them the government, authority, power, care,
and service of God their Lord, in matters of Religion or spiritual and
ecclesiastical causes: is the government, order and dutifulness setforth and
required in the Gospel or new Testament.

The Bishop having thusfully concluded these Testimonies, he yet confirms
them further with more authorities of the Prophet Esaias, with Lyra his
exposition thereupon, and the example of Constantine for proof of the same.

At this master Stapleton, first carpeth by certain marginall M. Stapleton
cap. 7. fol. 68. a
notes, or ever he blow up the Chapter of his Counterblast thereto. The minor
of the Bishops conclusion for the Princes government, authority, power, care,
etc. he grau^teth, but not such supreme government (says he) as the oath
prescribes. He grants also Saint Augustine to witness this the Princes
government, but no such large and supreme government as we attribute now to
them. Again, he grants this supreme government is in causes
ecclesiastical* but not in all causes ecclesiastical. And so granting that
the Bishop concludes well in some such thing, you conclude not (says he) in
all things and causes, and therefore you conclude nothing against us. Lastly,
he grants all the Bishops testimonies concerning Constantine, but he denies
that it makes any thing for us.

Now after these marginall notes prefixed, he enters M. Stapl. order in this
division
into his Chapter: pretending to open the weakness of the Bishops conclusion,
and of other his proves out of holy Scripture. And first, his answer to
this division he deuideth in three parts: First, he grants all that the
Bishop has said, but denies that it is sufficient. Secondly, he quarrelleth
about this, that the Bishop calls the Emperor Constantine, a Bishop, as
Eusebius names him. Thirdly, he chalengeth him for calling Idol Image. Now to
the first part, to see whether all these grauntes make sufficiently for us,
and conclude against him yea or no.

Now ye may conclude (says master Stapleton) that there Stapl. 68. a. M. Sta.
now at the length is driven to grant Princes some regiment in Ecclesiastical
causes.
is some regiment that Princes may take upon them in causes Ecclesiastical.

Thanks be given to God (master Stapleton) that yet now at the length,
contrary to all your fellows, and to all your own wranglings hitherto, the
force of the truth has enforced you to yield thus much to the B. ye grant Now
that Princes have some regiment in ecclesiastical causes, which hitherto
(except the making a law of burning or punishing be an eccl. cause) ye have
altogether denied unto Princes.

But what is this some regiment that ye grant the^ now? for neither we grant
them al regiment but some regiment also, that is to say a supreme regiment. And
you also deny not in your marginall note, that they may take upon the^ in M.
Stapleton grants also to Princes supreme government in all ecclesiastical
causes.
ecclesiastical matters supreme government, authority, power, and care, but not
(say you) such supreme government as the oath prescribes, so that here, we
both agree of supreme government, but the kind of supreme government is
denied. And to specify your meaning herein, how large a kind ye grant or
deny, ye add he should have concluded in all things and causes, else he
concludes not against you, signifying that you deny to them a supreme
government in all things and causes ecclesiastical: but ye grant them a
supreme government, authority, power, and care in things and causes
ecclesiastical.

First M. Stap. this is but a iangling and shifting quarrel In natural and
ordinary propositions, the indefinite betokens the universal.
in words, about things and causes ecclesiastical, and all things and causes
ecclesiastical. For not only the Bishop when he speaks so indefinitely
understands all, but also it is an ordinary speech, and allowed in Logike in
all things that be natural or necessary, where the indefinite is counted as
much as the universal. As to say, a man is a reasonable creature, or man is
mortal, is as much as precisely to say, all men and every man is reasonable
and mortal. And the saying in the next division, he came to fulfill the law,
and the Prophets, is all one with this, he came to fulfill all the law, and
all the Prophets. And likewise this, give unto God, that belongs to God, and
to Caesar, that belongs to Caesar, is as much to say as this, give unto God
all that belongs to God, etc. and even your self do commonly speak thus
indefinitely, ecclesiastical matters, when ye mean all ecclesiastical
matters, though now when ye be thus ^iuen to grant the effect of the matter,
yet would ye find some shift of descant to frustrate all the matter, and say.

If ye mean of such regiment as ye pretend (where ye know Stap. 68. ^*
well enough none other is meant) ye make your reckoning without your host, as a
man may say, and conclude before ye have brought any proof that they ought or
may take upon them such government.

Whether this some regiment be such regiment, or such government (for thus M.
St. ye love in terms to dally) though the Bishop has proved it sufficiently,
and you have granted it, standing only like a dainty Nicie besetter, on this
quaint point, in things, not in all things: yea whether this Nice restraint,
defeat the full proof of the question in controversy between master
Feckenham and the Bishop, shall appear (M. St.) by calling them ^ath coram, to
reckon better with their host, that is, (as you have like a thriftie tapster
called upon so often before, though still ye brought in false reckonings) to set
before them, and mark the issue, that they M. Stap* confesses that the Bishop
has proved the full issue in question between M. Fecknham and him.
condiscended upon, that is to we^e, Any such government in ecclesiastical
causes. Lo here the demand of the host himself, be requires but, any such
government, and that without putting in, all, in the reckoning. Where therefore
ye grant ye B. has proved it in some eccl. causes, which satisfies the
demand of any ecclesiast. causes even according to your own wrangling ye
confess the Bishop has concluded the very issue that was concluded upon.

Thus master St. even by your own reckoning, the B reckoned with his host, at
the full, and has paid and satisfied that he promised, and M. Feckenham
required.

But now look you, what reckoning you will make to your friends, that have
here brought your self so far in the lashe, that taking upon you to impugn
the Princes government in ecclesiastical causes, ye have granted and yielded
to it. How will your credit hold with your friends? yea how will your
reckoning hold with it self? here ye have granted some regiment, yea supreme
government, though not such supreme government in ecclesiastical causes. In
the last Chap. ye would grant the^ nothing but punishment of those whom you
had condemned, which is no ecclesiastical matter at all, to hang or burn a
man. And yet ye gave them no regiment, much less supreme regiment, therein
neither. For you would have all the appointing who^ he shall punish, and the
prince has nothing else to do, but to execute him whom you deliver up unto
him, which agrees nothing with this yt now ye have granted, least of all with
yt ye further grant, saying:

For though I grant you all your examples ye have alleged, Stap. 68. a M.
S^apl. grant of all that the Bishop has hitherto alleged.
and that the doings of the old Testament were figures of the new, and the
saying of Esaias that kings should be nourishing fathers to the Church, and all
things else that ye here allege: yet all will not reach home, no not
Constantine the great his example.

How agrees this grant (master Stap.) with all that ye have done all this
while? Why have ye denied the Bishops ensamples heretofore of Moses, Iosue,
David etc. and made such a long and earnest a do in the matter to be granted
at length? Did ye stand in it then, to dilate your book? or do ye grant it
now, to brag of your skill? or did ye resist the truth then, contrary to your
conscience, and repent ye now? or be ye forced to grant with some color, that
ye cannot for shame in plain speech deny? howsoever it be, many odd
reckonings will fall out in your account against your self, although you never
^ecken with your host for the matter.

Ye grant the saying of Esaias also, that Kings should be Esai. 49.
nourishing fathers to the Church, and all things else that the Whether the
Bishops examples and allegations being granted of M. Stapl. reach home or no.
Bishop here alleges, yet will not all reach home, no not Constantine the
great his example.

Will not all this reach home Master Stap. to prove the issue, that even your
self do confess the Bishop has already proved? For that is the home that it
ought t^ reach unto, by master Feckenhams demand. But go to, measure it with a
true yerde master Stap. and ye shall see it fair and easily, without any
stretching at al, reach even as full home The prince supreme governor of all
and every ecclesiastical cause.
as you besides can require, even for the supreme government of all manner
ecclesiastical causes, look what ye reckon most upon, and that is even the
feeding with the word, under which the Sacraments also are comprehended, not
that he is the Minister of the word and Sacraments (as What this supreme
government is?
you captiously gybe and cavil) for that belongs not to supreme government.
But that he is so the supreme governor in ouerseeing the consecration and
delivery of the true food, wherewith the people of God ought to be fed:
that even he ouerseeth the feeder himself.

And for this cause, the King is called of the Prophet, Why kings and Queens
are called Nourishers and Nurses of Gods Church.
the nourishing father, and Queens are named Nourses, that although the
ministry of feeding pertain to the ministers, yet the provision for the
food, the oversight that the children of God be duly fed, with the right
milk, with the true bread and water of life, belongs to the Princes. And
therefore have they the name of nourses, not to nourishe them in civil matters
and corporal f^de only: but as in civil, so in ^acte verbi, in the milk of
the word of God also. Is this only the cherishing of the good child, by
giving lands, revenues, maintenance, and living to the Church? Is this
only the displing of the froward child^, or as ye call it the punishing of
the heretic. No M. Stapleton Lyra his exposition and yours do not agree. He
says they are nourses, what to do? to feed, whom? the faithful ones,
wherewith? with the milk of the word, whose word? even the word and
sacraments of God. Whereof since the ministry and execution belongs not unto
them, but to the ministers: it follows necessarily thereupon, that the
provision, direction, appointment, care, and oversight, which is the supreme
government, belongs to them. And this is that which Lyr^ confesses and the
B. urges of Constantine, that he was such another nourse, as did keep, defend,
maintain, uphold, and feed the pore faithful ones of Christ, yea carried
them in his bosom, as it were, and procured them to be fed, did set forth
proclamations not only against false religion, but also to set forth, to
exhort, and allure, unto the Christian faith, caused not only the Idolatrous
religion to be suppressed, but caused also on the other part the true
knowledge and religion of Christ to be brought in and planted among his
people, and did not only make laws for punishing heretics and Idolaters, but
also reformed all manner abuses about Gods service.

Thus says the Bishop out of Eusebius, did Constantine St^p. 67. ^
play the nourses part. Now what say you to all this M. Stapleton?

All this of Constantine (say you) is granted and makes nothing for you.

Whether it makes for us or no, we will not contend. But it makes for the
matter, and being granted, it makes up the matter. For and ye will grant
thus much from your heart inward, which ye now grant from the teeth
outward, by compulsion of the manifest truth: ye might come home well enough
with a wannion, and bestow your wit and travel better, than thus to grant
unto, and yet with pieuishnesse to wythstande the manifest truth of the matter.

The Queens Majesty's oath requires no more of you to give to her, than here
ye grant to give to Constantine, to M. St^p. grantes to Constantine this
supreme government, and denies it to the Queens Majesty.
set forth Christ's religion, to make laws and constitutions, not only of
punishment, but of reformation of all manner abuses about Gods service, to
provide that the Church be fed with Gods word, and in all points above said
show her self a very nource of the Church, committed to her government, as
the child is to the nourse. What one thing ecclesiastical is not here
comprehended? or can ye show cause, why she ought not to have the same
authority in her dominions, as well as Constantine (to whom ye grant it) had
in his? if ye say she does not this, but the contrary: this is but your
wicked slander M. Stapleton. But grant her her interest, and then try that.
Her right is one thing, and whether she discharges well the same or no, is
another thing. Grant her her right, as you do to Constantine, and then spare
not to improve, what ye can prove amiss.

Now, having granted thus much, which in deed concludes M. Stap. goes now
about by wrangling to defeat all his former grant.
up all the matter, least he should utterly be discr^dited of all his
friends, he goes about so much as he can, in wrangling of words, to defeat
once again all his former grant, according to his practice in the Chapter
before. For, where the Bishop by the example of Constantyne, proves the Prince
to be herein not only a nourse to the people, but also to be appointed unto
them of God, as it were the common or universal Bishop, as Eusebius testifies
of Constantine, and Constantine to other Bishops calls himself a Bishop,
signifying his careful oversight over all his people, in setting forth Gods
true religion: Master Stapleton first snappeth at this word Bishop,
secondlye he challenges the Bishop for curtalling Eusebius sentence.

And when Eusebius (says he) calls him as it were a common or universal
Bishop: I suppose ye mean not, that he was a Bishop in deed. For your
self confess, that Princes and Bishops offices are far distincted and
disseuered, and that the one ought not to break into the office of the other.

The Bishops meaning is evident master Stap. and so The princebeing called
Metaphorically, as it were a Bish. makes no breach into the offico of a Bishop.
are his words. But your meaning is to brabble, and to tickle in the Readers
head a suspicion, that he confounded these offices. Is there no difference
between these sayings, he was as it were a Bishop, and he was a Bishop in
deed? Yes M. St. and ye were not a very wrangler in deed, ye might perceive by
these words ( as it were) he plainly meant, (and as it were) spoke it, that he
was no B. in deed. And what though he were no Bishop in deed, in the function
and office of a Bishops ministry? no more was he also a nourse in deed, nor
the people were suckling babes in deed, nor the word of God is milk in
deed: yet, as these things be not falsely What these words Bishop and nourse
betoke^, although in deed the Prince be neither nourse nor Bishop.
spoken, but being borrowed speeches, in their senses import not only a true,
but a more excellent understanding than the bare words usually betoken: so the
Emperor being named to be as it were a common or universal Bishop, and yet in
deed, being no Bishop, it argues that he had this name, because of his common
and universal government oversight and care over all Bishops and causes
Ecclesiastical. This shift therefore, to slinke away from the manifest meaning
of the words, by threaping on the Bishop this kindness, that he should mean
to prove him a very Bishop in deed, is a very mean shift, though it have in
deed a shrewde meaning Master Stapleton.

And if you did so mean (say you) Eusebius himself would Stap. 68. a.
soon confound you, if you rehearse Constantines whole sentence that he spoke
to the Bishops.

What a good year mean ye M. St. ye urge this meaning further than needs,
that the B. should mean to make the Emperor a Bishop in ye Bishoply
ministry, and therefore curtalled as ye call it Eusebius sentences. If
Eusebius sentence (set it down as whole as ye list) confound them yt mean to
confound these offices: it will never soon or late confound the B. the popish
Bishops it may rather confound, for they confound their offices, turning
Bishops not as it were into lay men but into lay men in deed. What the Bishops
words do mean is most plain to a man of mean wit, that list not to Iangle
about nothing, neither the words importe any such meaning, nor this is any
thing in question, the ministerial office, but the supreme government, which
are two far different things. But since that to no purpose, ye challenge the
B. for curtalling Eusebius words: let us behold how you do set them down.

For thus (say you) he says to the Bishops, Vos quidem Stapl. 68 b
eorum quae intus sunt in Ecclesia agenda, ego vero eorum qua extra sunt
Episcopus a Deo sum constitutu^. You are Bishops (says he) of those things
that are to be done within the Church, I am Bishop of outward things: which
answer of his may satisfy any reasonable man, for all that ye bring in here
of Constantine, or all that ye shall afterward bring in, which declares him
no supreme Judge or chief determiner of causes Ecclesiastical, but rather the
contrary, and that he was the ouerseer in civil matters. And the most that
may be enferred hereof is, that he had the procuration and execution of Church
matters, which I am assured all Catholics will grant.

Ye would feign I see M. Stapl. revoke your grant and it could be cleanly
conueyde, or so to limite it, that it might not appear ye have granted that,
that all your fellows deny. But this reuocation is to late. Nevertheless
fuli pretely ye compass the matter, to defeat all these most plain not
words but doings of Constantine, by shoouing at this name B. shop in the
Emperor, which in any case ye ca^ not abide. And therefore, as who though B.
went about to M. Stapl. false translation of Constantine^ words.
confound the offices of a Bishop and of a Prince, and thereto had concealed
Eusebius words: ye solemnly take on y^n to set them out both in Latin and in
English.

But tell me by that false faith of yours M. Stapleton, why ye have not
translated the words aright in English, that ye have set down in Latin? did
ye see in deed they made nothing for you, but rather much against you? is the
English of intus in Ecclesia, within the Church? And the English of eorum quae
extra, Outward civil things or matters? or, Ego vero, etc. Episcopus a 'Deo
sum constitut^. I am a Bishop? what is manifest corruption of plain words,
and evident sense, if this be not? this is past cutting of the tail M. St. or
slitting his nose, and paring his ears, to dress it like a perfect curtall,
but even to cut both buttockes and head away, and make it a carrion
karkasse, this translating is trans I ordanem in deed.

But the words of Constantine and the sense are plain: The sentence of
Constantine and the true meaning thereof. Eusebius. de vita Constable. li. 4.
You (says he speaking to the spiritual pastors) are Bishops of those
things that in the Church are to be done within or inwardly. But I am
appointed of God a Bishop of those things that are forthout, or outwardly. As
who should say your Bishoply office in Gods Church, is in the ministeris of
those things that work inwardly, that perce the heart, enter into the soul,
cleave the thoughts in sunder, and properly belong to the inward man: the
lively word of God. My Bishoply office in Gods Church, is distinguished from
this, and is in things without, that is, in the outward setting forth, and
public direction of Gods word, to be duly taught by you. Thus both their
offices were in Gods Church, the matter and groundworke of both their
Bishoprikes, was Gods true religion. But the doing of the one was pertaining to
the inward man, the doing of the other to the outward man.

And this is the very distinction that Constantine makes which (being not
falsely translated, as you do, and so misunderstoode) may satisfy as ye say
any reasonable man. But How M. Stap. understands inward things and
outvvarde things, and how we understand them in Constantines sentence.
your understanding is very unreasonable, to understand by inward things,
things ecclesiastical, and by outward things, only civil things, in deed
they be out, and quite out of the consideration of the Church. But wherefore
then called he him self a Bishop also with them, yea an universal Bishop, as
Eusebius terms him, but to declare that his ouersighte was in the same matter
that was theirs? the matter was Gods truth and Religion in both, the manner
was outward or inward, as eithers Bishoprike required. The matter and manner
of either Bishoprik
Otherwise, if he had meant only of civil matters as you expound, he had
been no more a Bishop thereby, than the very Soldane or great Turk, or any
other Heathen Prince, that ouersee their civil matters very circumspectly. And
so as ye did in your fourth Chapter, ye make Constantine (for all these notable
things in him, that your self before have granted) no better than an infidel
Prince in this behalf. For by outward ye say, is meant civil matters. Stapl.
29. b. As M. Stapleto^ understands this sentence, the Turk is as good a
bishop as a Christian* Prince.
But the civil government (ye say also) reaches no further than the peoples
quietness, wealth, abundance and prosperouse maintenance, and that these
things are common as well to the heathen as to the Christian government.
Think ye M. Stapleton these Fathers meant no further government, nor in other
matters than these, when they called Constantine an universal Bishop? and that
Constantine measured his office no further, when he called him self by the name
of a Bishop* for shame M. Stapleton deface not to Christian a Prince, after so
Turkish a manner, nor thereto so manifestly falsify your author, nor abuse
your reader with such a shameless impudence.

Well say you, And the most that may be inferred thereof is, that he had the
procuration and execution of Church matters, which I am assured all Catholics
will grant.

May we be assured M. Stapleton on your word, that all your popish Catholics
will grant even thus much? For I verily fear they will grant it no further
than it pleases them. And where ye are so ready to assure us of others
graunts, what assurance have we had already of all your own liberal graunts.
when ye were disposed to wrangle, as now again ye do? for how agrees this
even with your former grant, that Princes might make laws and constitutions
for the furtherance of Christ's religion, that Princes might take some regiment
upon them in Ecclesiastical causes. yea, might do as much as all these
ensamples specify: Procuration and execution of Church matters.
and that now ye make, the most to be but the procuration and execution of
Church matters? Although, what ye mean by these words ye tell not, would ye
have them only the Churches (that is, as you mean by the Church, only the
Priests) proctours and executioners? now truly The Papists would have Princes
to be b^t the Priests proctours and executioners* at the most.
ye limite them a full fair office. But think ye the name of B. and
universal B. did importe nothing else? was that the most that may be inferred
thereof? and yet that is more than only to be their executioner, (as ye said
before) to be, as ye add here to it, their proctour also. Yea, it is much more
than not to meddle in Church matters at all.

But as ye falsely expounded Eusebius before, so here ye controlle and falsefie
your own saying, affirming that the most which may be enferred hereof is, that
he had the procuration and execution of Church matters.

If this be either the most or ought at all, then your former exposition of
civil oversight, was at the least a false corruption of you. But and ye mark
it well, ye shall find (and never go to the most for the matter) that this
title and other the doings of this noble Christian Emperor, comprehended much
more th^n either to be a Priests proctour, or executioner in Church matters,
yea to betoken in very deed a chief and supreme governor.

Your third part of this division is altogether an impertinent quarrel of
Images chalenging the Bishop of an untruth and therefore (besides that is said
already sufficiently, on the same argument) is answered in his proper place.

The. 21. Division.
THe Bishop having thus fully proved that the ensamples and prophecies of the
old Testament, were figures Fol. 69. a.
to be performed in the new: enters into the confirmation thereof by the new
Testament.

And first, in this division proves by two allegations of The Bishops
allegatio^s ou^ of the nevve Testament.
our Savior Christ, that this authority of Princes in the old Testament, is
confirmed by Christ to christian Princes in the new.

But the Princes authority in the old Testament, stretches not only to
civil matters, but also to the oversight, mayntenance, setting forth, and
furtherance of religion, and matters ecclesiastical.

Ergo, Christ has confirmed in the new Testament, that christian Princes
power stretches not only to civil matters, but also to the ouersighte,
mayntenance, setting forth, and furthera^ce of religion, and matters
ecclesiastical.

The minor is proved already, by these foresaid examples of the old Testament.

The mayor the Bishop proves by two testimonies of Jesus Christ. The first
generally in Matt. 5. that he came to accomplish the law and the Prophets.
The second out of Math. 22. where he commanded all men to give that unto
Caesar, that belonged to Caesar, and bounded the Princes authority by the word
of God.

To the minor master Stap. says not one word, neither in his marginall notes,
nor Counterblast. Belike, that he relenteth to it, according to his own rule:
Qui tacet cons^re 62. b.
videtu^, he that holds his peace seems to consent.

The mayor likewise he grants, in saying:

Master Horn goes yet needlessly forward to prove that Stap. 69. a ^. Sta.
grants the Bish. argument.
Christ did not destroy the rule of Princes in Church causes, figured in the
old law.

Whereupon, till M. St. shall deny one of these two propositions, the
conclusion follows of necessary consequence against him. Only, M. St.
thinks it enough for him to euerturne all the argument, if he deny the
proves of the mayor granting to the other proof, and there upon bends all
his answer against this sentence, Give unto Caesar that belongs unto Caesar.
But this no whit hinders the argument, so long as he grants the other
proof, yea though he denied that also, so long as he grants the mayor it
self, to the confirmation whereof, both these allegations were brought
forth. But let us see how properly he handles them.

And now at the length (says M. St.) catches he one Stap. 69. a
testimony out of the new Testament to prove his saying: which is, give unto
Caesar, that belongs unto him. Which place nothing at all serves his turn,
but rather destroys, I will not say any figure of the old Testament, but
master Horns foolish figurative divinity.

I fear me, master Stapleton, that you which vpbrayde others for foolish
figurative divinity, will even in this division show, not the wysest
divinity in Louayne: I had almost said also, your own more than foolish
divinity, without any figure at all. But first, let us see your false
divinity. The Bishop here together cites two testimonies M. Stapletons
divinity.
out of the new Testament, and you come in, saying. Now at the length catches
he one testimony out of the new Testament to prove his saying. But to wink
at this false divinity, with what wise divinity do ye improve this one
testimony?

For it is so far off (say you) that of this place master Stap. 69. ^.
Horn may make any ground for the ecclesiastical authority of Princes,
that it does not as much as infer that we ought to pay so much as tribute
to our Princes, but only that we may pay it.

Surely M. Stap. this is a trim divinity, and as trim logike as divinity.
Christ commands us, saying, give that M. Stapleto^ up braydyng the Bishops
divinity, see what good divinity he him self makes. M. Stapl. Logike.
unto Caesar, that belongs unto Caesar: Ergo, we may, but we ought not to give
it him. Where have ye found this new logike and divinity M. Stap? Is it
Louayne stuff? a (...) would have thought this reason better of the twain,
that if we ought not then, of right we neither might nor should give unto
every body, that belongs to them, and so deny to the Prince that belongs
to him. But this we may not, nor should do, but to give him and all men their
duty, therefore we ought to do it. But still see how ye wrap your words in
contradiction.

Ye grant that this sentence, Give unto Caesar that belongs Matthew. 22.
unto Caesar, does not destroy any figure of the old Testament, if it do not
destroy it, then it confirms it, and The new Testament confirms the figure
of the old Testament.
ratifieth to the Prince, that belonged to the Prince, and that the Prince had
in the old Testament: but the Prince had then authority in ecclesiastical
matters, as ye confessed in the two last divisions: Ergo, by this sentence the
same authority is now confirmed. How then say ye here, it makes no ground
for the authority of Princes in ecclesiastical matters? since their
authority was a figure, and this sentence ye say does not destroy it, but now
you have made this sentence destroy the figure quite. For that duty That
subjects may pay tribute* but they ought not.
that belonged to Princes before, stood not on a may bawe, it lay not in the
subjects choice to choose, whether they would yield the Prince that belonged
to him, or no, as though they might if they would, they need not if they
list, but they must and ought of necessary duty and obedience have yielded to
the Prince whatsoever to him belonged, in the time of that figure of the old
Testament. And this sentence, say you, has not destroyed the figure, Ergo,
This sentence now binds and confirms it, with as great duty and
necessity, and not less.

But say you, this sentence does not so much as infer that we ought to pay
so much as tribute to our Princes: Ergo, This sentence has destroyed the
figure, and set us at liberty, in that the figure bound us. And thus not
only ye speak quite contrary to your self, and to all reason: but besides
with your good divinity, have taken away al humanity. All humanity i^
destroyed by by M. Stapletons good divinity.
For what policy can consist in any sure estate, if their subjects be not
bound of duetis, but at their pleasures may, or may not, yield their duties
to their sovereign Lords?

The Pope in deed dispenses at his pleasure with subjects oaths and homages,
to deny that duty to their natural Princes, that be longs to them. But
this is a case reserved to him self, except ye can show your legacy a latere.
And yet this your licenciousnesse to subjects is more than his dispensation.
But what good motive has moved you here unto? how do ye confirm it, that
this sentence imports not their duty, but their voluntary in rendering the
Prince his own?

For the question (say you) was framed of the captious Stap. 69. a The captious
questions of the Jews.
Jews, not whether they ought, but whether they might pay any tribute to Caesar.

Here, M. Stap. ye show your self yet more captious than those Jews. Is
this any necessary cause of sequence, The flat and general answer of
christ.
the Jews propounded their question, not whether they ought, but whether they
might pay tribute to their Prince, or no: Ergo, Christ answering flatly, and
generally, commanding them to pay all duty to their Prince, that
appertains to him, must be understood, not that they ought, but that they
might pay it? Which argument though follow nothing at all, let us yet go
onwarde with M. St. and so see how he proves it.

Caesar was then an external and an infidel Prince: Ergo, the question of the
captious Jews for paying him tribute, M. Stapl. dea le^h as captiously as the
Jews.
was not whether they ought, but whether they might pay tribute, or no.

Ye had need make this argument more perfect, M. St. but to grant ye, they
propounded it as captiously as you can frame it, will you as captiously thereon
conclude, that we must under stand the answer of Christ, to co^teine no more
than their captious question propounded? You should prove that Christ's
sentence infers no more, than that they might pay tribute: and you like a
captious sophister, run to the captious Jews, that their sentence inferred
no more. But kin will creep I see where it can not go. But whether ye reason
from their question, or Christ's answer, are these sufficient and reasonable
reasons M. St? Because their prince was an external or an infidel prince,
were they not therefore his lawful subjects? Was not the Emperor of Rome the
Prince of many other Countries besides? all which in the natural situation of
the provinces were external to him, An external Prince.
might they therefore have reasoned that their obedience and tributes were not
of duty to be paid? No Master Stap. they considered that though their
country were external, yet because they were under his government, their
policies and his were but one Monarchy, and therefore he was not to be counted
an external prince unto them, no more than other princes, that have in their
possession diverse Countries, and Realms under their signiorie.

But yet say you, there remains a greater matter, he An infidel Prince.
was an Infidel: Ergo, they might, but they ought not to have paid him
tribute. But I pray you master Stapleton, what was Nabuchodonozor any other
(when he subdued Zedechias and the Jews) than an Infidel Prince? And yet was
it not lawful for Zedechias to deny him his Tribute. Mardocheus, Tobie,
Daniell, Esdras, and other godly fathers, had no skill of this Divinity, that
they might, but not that they ought have paid their duties to Cyrus,
Ahasuerus, Darius, and other Princes, because Luc. 2.
they were Infidels. Joseph and Marie traueyled with all obedience to pay their
tax to Augus^us Caesar, as of duty: although they knew well enough that he was
an Infidel. But to return to master Sta. he proves his consequence ab
absurdo.

For if (says he) M. Horn will say these words importe a Stap. 69. a. b
precise necessity, he shall have much ado to excuse the Italians, Frenchmen,
Spaniardes, and our nation which many hundredth years since, have paid no
tribute unto Caesar.

The argument is thus made perfect.

If these words give unto Caesar that belongs to Caesar, be to be understood
that he ought to have it, the^ the Italia^s Frenchmen, Spaniards and
Englishmen, all which nations have paid tribute to Caesar, ought still to pay
it.

But these nations have paid no tribute to Caesar, many hundredth years, nor
ought now to pay any to him:

Ergo, The words of Christ importe no necessity nor are to be understood that
they ought, but that they might.

For the minor I will not examine, how many, or how few hundredth years it is,
since the Italians paid tribute to the Empire. And by what means, and whose
practices they have left off paying it: may be better showed hereafter. Only
for our nation, we have good cards to show, how the Romans them selves have
remitted their tribute, and all their Empire over us.

The mayor of this argument follows not, the folly whereof By the name of
Caesar, Christ comprehe^deth all princes.
consists, in the wilful misconstruing this word Caesar. Whereby Christ
means not only the Emperor or state Imperial but he simply means the
Prince, whosoever he were. As like wise says S. Paul generally (though at
the same time the Christians, to whom he wrote, were under an external and
Infidel Prince) Cui tributum, tributum. etc. Pay tribute to him, to whom
tribute is due. And so Christ, though he answer them with their own word,
yet thereon he teaches a general doctrine, not to them alone, but to all
Subjects, toward all Princes, whom he comprehends by the name of Caesar,
whom they had named to him. And not only all men's duty to their Prince, but
all men's duty to God, and not the Jews duty to God alone. And therefore,
although he confuted their particular caption, yet his answer was general
Christ's answer a general commandment.
to them, and all other, both then and for ever. And so he spoke generally*
not, give this penie, nor give tribute only, but give that (what soever it be)
unto Caesar that belongs unto Caesar, and that unto God that belongs unto God
whatsoever it be: reasoning on this. Every man not only may have, but ought to
have that that is belonging to him. Which includes withal ye particular that
your selves testify, this belongs unto Caesar, ye ought therefore of good
right give it him, as his own, and not ye may give it him. This is the evident
reason and doctrine of our Savior Christ, that every one ought to have his
own.

From the which, how far this doctrine of M. Stap. swarueth, besides the
danger of it, that we may lawfully (if we please) give every one his own, but
we be not bound of precise necessity, nor ought so to do: let every body
judge, as he shall see occasion, what inconvenience might quickly breed
beereon. But master Stap. thinking that he has sufficiently proved the former
part of Christ's sentence to importe no more than he bears us in hand: on
the other part he endeuoreth to set on the Bishop, chalenging him to have
left out that part thereof, that is concerning our duty to God.

But I pray you M. Horn (says he) why have ye defalked Stapl. 69. b.
and curtalled Christ's answer: why have ye not set forth his whole and
entire sentence: Give to Caesar that belongs to Caesar, and to God that
belongs to God? which later clause, I am assured, does much more take away a
supreme regiment in all causes ecclesiastical, than necessarily by force of
any words bind us to pay, yea any tribute to our Prince.

This quarrel, M. St. is an evident untruth, for the Bishop M. Sea. manifest
vntru^
has not left out the other part of the sentence, but mentioned it in the next
words immediately following. Admonishing notwithstanding al princes and people,
that Cesars authority is not infinite, or without limits, (for such authority
belongs only to the king of al kings) but bounded and circumscribed within
the bounds assigned in Gods word. Which words of the bishop, not only make
plain relation unto, but also comprehend the sentence following, and quae dei
deo, and giving unto God that pertains to God. And this limitation your
self anon afterward confess, that the Bishop specifieth, though here ye
deny it according to the manner of your quarelling disposition. But whereto M.
Stap. move ye this quarrel?

This latter clause I am assured (say you) does much Stap. 69. B
more take away a supreme regiment in causes ecclesiastical, than necessarily,
by force of any words bind us to pay, yea any tribute to our Prince.

Are ye so well assured hereof, M. Stap? but by your leave, for all ye be so
well assured, if this sentence must be understood of may, and not of ought,
then perchance it may neither take away that supremacy that belongs to the
Prince, nor that supremacy may hinder our duty to God. Yea what if this same
may, or might, and ought not, may become an argument for all popish traitors
against their Princes, teaching subjects that they may give them their
duties, but they ought not? For I am assured on the other side, that the
Priests and Bishops to their Princes, yea By M. Stapletons exposition of
Christ's, Sentence not all obedienc^ to Princes (...) se^e at liberty, but all
obedience to God.
the Bishop of Rome him self to the Emperoures, as you understand Caesar, have
yeeded their service, obedience, yea and their tributes also ere this, how
soever since they have wrong them selves from that old obedience that they
ought to Caesar.

And if to subtracte this, ye may thus dally on the former clause, why may not
all Papists for the later clause of the sentence to uphold their honor of
Images, their invocation of Saints, their own traditions, and unwritten
verities, against Gods express word and commandment, allege for them that
they may give to God that, that belongs to God, but not that they ought, as
bound thereto The one part of the sentence binds as much as the other.
necessarily by force of any words? For this I am sure of also, that these
words of Christ do make no more mention of duty toward the one part of the
sentence, than to the other, the one comprehends not may, and the other
ought: but though the duty to God be greater, and more excellent than the
duty toward the Prince, yea and boundeth it (as the Bishop said) yet duty
belongs unto hothe, and both ought to have it. And we be not here licenced,
but flatly commanded to give that that is duty to either party. The words
are manifest (...), Reddite, Render you that Matthew. 22.
unto Caesar that is Caesar's, and that that is Gods to God. So that if reddite
Caesari quae sunt Caesaris, be no more but this, ye may give unto Caesar those
things that are Caesar, then may reddite Deo qu^ sunt Dei, be also by as good
Latin, ye may give to God those things that are Gods. What figurative
divinity, M. Stapletons Grammar.
yea what figurative Grammar call ye this? whereof ye crake so much, and find
such fault in others, and can not see in your self, how your Divinity either
marres your Grammar, or your Gra^mer your Divinity. And yet both must go for
excellent good, for why you are assured of the matter that the imperatine mode
is in the one clause no more than the potentiall, commanding to do, is no more
but to say ye may do: though in the other clause, it retains still his force.
Besides this good Divinity, that we be not necessarily, by force of any words
bound to pay, yea any tribute to our Princes, and so may deny them both that,
and all duties else, as do the Papists when they be disposed to refuse their
lawful obedience to their sovereigns, as you and your Louanistes do. This is
a holy divinity. Did ever any of the ancient Divines, give this liberty to
subjects against their Princes, or thus expound these words, and not rather
al with one, consent, yea your popish writers hereo^ also, The judgment of the
writers of this sentence clean contrary to master Stapleton.
so many as I have read, gather here upon a necessary duty of al subjects
obedience, tributes, honor and al other prehemine^ces belonging to Princes? and
chie^y on this sentence, write of purpose upon this common place, of subjects
dutiful obedience to their magistrates: and you make so light a matter of it,
yt ye say it binds us not so much, as to pay any tribute at al unto the^.

But that all the world may see how falsely ye wrest the words of Christ, ye
shall see some of the fathers judgments on these words, give unto Caesar that
that is Cesars: that they infer not that they may give, but that they ought
to give them. Tertullian an ancient Father says: Alius est denarius Lib. de
fug. in persecution.
que^ C^sari debeo, etc. It is an other penie that I owe to Caesar, that
pertains to him, whereof it was the^ moved, that is to say, a tributarie penie
due to be paid of tributarie, and not of free me^. I pray ye M. St. what is yt
English of Debeo and of debitus? Origin likewise an au^cie^t Father says: In
te^pore ergo Christi, In Matthew. 22. tract. 21.
etc. In the time therefore of Christ, when they were commanded to give tribute
to the Romans, there was a thought and counsel among the Jews, Utru^
deberent, whether they ought that were Gods people and his portion, to give
Princes tribute, or rather take arms for their liberty, except they were
suffered to live as they lusted. And the story tells that one Judas a
Galilean, of whom Luke mencioneth in the Acts of the Apostles, The same says
M. Stapl.
drawing away the multitude of the Jews, taught, No^ oportere, they ought not
to give tribute to Caesar, and call Caesar Lord. But he that was at that time the
tetrarch hastened to persuade the people, and that they should regard the
present state, and not wilfully take arms against the stronger. But be content
to give tribute. And truly the word of this present gospel, not in deed
manifestly, yet it shows these things. But he that diligently co^sidereth the
sense of the present words, shall find this, yea eue^ in this place. For the
Phariseis had not had occasion (being willing to take Christ in his speech,
sending their disciples with the Herodia^s) to ask him whether it were lawful
to give Caesar tribute or no, if it had been manifest amongst them, that they
ought not to give it, and that there had been an agreement of all their wills,
that they should not give it. etc.

Thus we see that the question they moved to Christ, was whether they ought to
pay tribute or no. And yt this was a great question betwixt the^. And yt Judas
Oalileus a mouer of conspiracy, and a rebellious traitor, and M. St. an
English renegate, and a like mouer of sedition: are of one opinion, y^ tribute
ought not to be paid. But Christ was of a contrary opinion. and all true
subjects ought to follow Christ's opinion, that tribute ought to be be paid.
And so does Origin expound Christ's Orig. ibid.
words. When they showed Christ a penie, and Christ asked whose inscriptio^ it
was, and they said it was Cesars. He answered that they ought to render unto
Caesar the things that are Cesars, and that they ought not to defraude him of
those things that are his own, under the occasion of godliness. And likewise
the same Origin says, Some think it simply In. 20. Luc. homil. 38.
spoken of our Savior, render to Caesar that is Cesars, that is to say,
Tributu^ reddite quod debetis, render the tribute that ye owe, Quis enim^ostru^
de tributis reddendis Caesari co^tradicit? for who gainesaith it that tributes
ought to be paid to Caesar?

Forsooth that does M. Stapl. saying they might but they ought not. Hilary
likewise an ancient Father says: Igitur In Mat. c^. 23. In regula Monachorum.
an violaret, etc. Therefore they try him, whether on the condition of the
question propounded, he would violate the worldly power. An videlicet reddi
tributum Caesari oportet, whether tribute ought to be rendered to Caesar, etc.
And when they said it was Cesars, he said, Caesari reddenda esse, etc. The
things that are Cesars, ought to be rendered to Caesar. And again, when he
decrees that the things that are Cesars ought to be rendered to him: Likewise
Basilius Magnus, When they had said Cesars, he replied, render, etc. wherein
we be manifestly taught, that those are bound to the tribute of Caesar: with
whom the money of Caesar is found, etc. Likewise In Matthew. 22. homil. 71.
Chrysostom: That the things that are Cesars ought to to be rendered to him:
Likewise S. Ambrose, Et tu si vis. In Luc. lib. 9. cap. 20.
etc. And thou if thou will not be bound or thrall to Caesar, have thou not
those things that are of the world, but if thou have the riches of the world
thou art bound to Caesar. If thou will owe nothing to the earthly King, forsake
all things and follow Christ. And before, decerne ye well what things ought
to be rendered to Caesar.

Likewise S. Augustine: Sed quia Manichaei, etc. But because Contr. Faustu^
Manichaeu^ lib. 22. ca. 74.
the Manichei use openly to blaspheme John, let them hear even the Lord Jesus
Christ, Hoc stipendium iubente^ reddi Caesari, Commanding (not, permitting)
this stipende to be rendered to Caesar. And on these words of S. Paul to the
Romans, Omnis anima, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. Si quis
ergo: If therefore any body think, that because he is a Christian, he ought not
to render tax or tribute, or that honor ought not to be given due to those
powers that care for these things: he falls in a great error. But that mean
ought to be kept which God him self prescribes, that we should give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are of God.

Likewise Theophilactus: Arbitrati se, etc. Thinking In. 22. Math.
they should smooth him with praises, they flatter him, that being milked, he
should say, Non deberi Caesari tributum, Tribute ought not to be paid to
Caesar, and thereupon they might take him as a seditious man and moving the
people against Caesar, and therefore they bring the Herodians with them that
were the kings men, to apprehende him, as a sturrer of new things. Thou
regardest not, say they, the person of any man, that speak nothing to get
the favor of Herod and Pilate. Tell us therefore, Debemus and hominibus.
Ought we to be both tributarie to men, and to give them tax, as well as to give
tax to God, or shall we give to God only, or else to Caesar also? this they
spoke (as I said) that he should say that tribute ought not to be given to
Caesar, etc. Thus we see again their question whether they ought, or no. But
Jesus by this coin that was figured in the Image of Caesar* Persuadet illis
debere Caesari, Persuades the^ that those things are owing to Caesar, that are
his, (that is) those that have his Image. Both in corporal and in outward
things we must obey the king, but in inward things and spiritual, only God.

Thus al these ancient Fathers are flat against ye M. St. Lyra in Matthew. 22.
and expound this saying, not that they might, but that they ought, and that we
ought to obey our Princes. And thus do your own popish writers although
partial to your Pope yet herein reprove you. Reddit etc. quia reddere debitum
est bonu^ and iustum. Render, etc. because to render that that is due, is good
and just. And all the popish Postilles, that I have seen, Poligra^, Ferus,
Hofmeister, R^yard. etc. affirm on these words, that tribute ought to begiuen
to Caesar, and obedience ought to be given to Princes. And none of them that I
can yet find, found out this fine conceyte, that they may, but not that they
ought to do it.

Now on their side, ye stretch so far the other words, give that unto God that
belongs to God, that as though they were clean contrary to the former, ye
say: they take away a supreme regiment, but see how while ye would seem so
knuckle deep in Divinity, ye quite take away your Popes challenge and all. For
if it take away a supreme regiment, how does your Pope challenge a supremacy?
in deed ye spoke truer than ye wist, for such a supremacy as he claims, is
only due to Christ, God and Man: and to no simple Creature, Prince, Prelate,
or any other. Wherefore he ought not to usurp it, but give it unto the owner.
The supremacy that is due to godly Princes, is neither such as the Pope
claims, nor is derogatorie, in any Jot, from the duty that is to be yielded
to God. But is the ministry appointed by God, to govern and direct according
to Gods word, the bounds of Gods Church that God has limited to his rule and
oversight.

And therefore that which you allege out of Hosius of Spain, and S. Ambrose
that used even these words, Et quae Dei Deo, against the Arian Emperor
Constantius, and Ualentinian the younger, are quite besides the purpose. The
Queens majesty takes not on her, nor claymeth any such absolute supremacy
and dealings as they twain usurped, It is but your common sclaunder. But since
ye only touch it saying, whose words we shall have an occasion hereafter to
rehearse, I will therefore with you refer the examining thereof to that your
occasion of rehearsal, only here I note this your folly and contradictio^ in
citing these fathers allegations.

If this sentence be only to be restrained to the Jews M. Stapletons
contradictions.
bare demand: if it meddle only with Tiberius Caesar then Emperor, and stretch
no further: If it determine nothing but money: If it infer no necessity or
duty but only give license: how then did these Fathers allege and urge this
sentence against these Princes? and how do you allege them against the Bishop?
do ye not see how ye speak against your self? but I forbear you till ye come
to your appointed place. Although further here I might admonish you, since ye
rehearse here no words of those authors, but referr^ yourselfe to another
fitter occasion: not to stand dalying in so often preuentions and rehersalls,
and all to no purpose, but only to increase your volume. Much less, to
triumph therevppon, till ye have set down some proof, either of them, or
of other to confute the Bishop: for else ye do but triumph before the victory,
and such commonly in the end do l^se the victory. For hitherto ye have
alleged nothing against the Bishops allegation, and yet say you:

This ill hap has M. Horn even with his first authority Stapl. 69. b.
of the new Testament extraordinarily and impertinently I can not tell how
chopped in, to cause the leaves and his book and his lies to make the more
muster and show.

This was an happy hap for you M. Sta. (to ruffle in your Rhetorike) that it
happed the B. to have so ill an hap by alleging this sentence, for hereby ye
have showed first your truth and honesty. That where the Bishop cites two
plain sentences out of the new Testament together, to confirm his assertion,
you say he alleges here but one. Where the Bishop cites this of Caesar the
later of the twain, you quite omitting the other, say: this is his first
authority of the new Testament. Good hap have you M. St. to have chopped in
two lies so round together, to make the more muster of lies in your book, but
happy man happy dole they say. With the like happiness have ye found out
this grammar rule, that Reddite is ye may give. But chiefly this happy new
Divinity to refuse your Princes lawful authority, that necessarily by force
of any words, ye be not bound to pay so much as any tribute to your Prince.
All these happes was it your hap, first to find out. And therefore all your
side have good cause M. St. to count ye an happy man.

But M. St. not content withal these happes, stormeth yet against the Bishop
for adjoining these words:

Admonishing not withstanding all Princes and people, that Cesars authority is
not infinite or without limits (for such authority belongs only to the King
of all Kings) but bounded and circumscribed within the bounds assigned in
Gods word.

This M. St. calls, a foolish and a frivolous admonition Stap. 70. ^.
without any cause or ground, and grounded on M. Horns fantastical
imagination, and not upon Christ, as he surmiseth.

Is this M. Stapl. a foolish and a frivolous admonition? a groundless
fantastical Imagination, to say that the Princes authority is not infinite,
but circu^scribed within the bounds assigned in Gods word? what would ye have
had ye Bishop to say? that it had been infinite without any bounds, and such
as only belongs to God? but how would ye then have triumphed at the matter?
and in deed ye had had good cause. This admonition godly and necessary.
Where now ye have none, but that ye be disposed to quarrel at every thing, be
it never so well spoken. Neither was it without cause or ground, sith the
words that immediately are joined so together, make an express limitation,
that the former part of the sentence, is bounded with the later part: that the
Prince ought to have such due belonging to him, as hinders not ye yielding of
that due that belongs to God. And therefore the Bishops admonition was not
only godly and true, but grounded on Christ's words, yea and comprehends
them also, and was no less necessary for the Bishop to have used, both for
that it makes a distinction, of that supremacy that your Pope chalengeth,
intruding and incroching on those things that are only due to God, and not
suffering his authority to be limited by Gods word, and would rule Gods
word, and go beyond the bounds thereof: And also for that, to the ignorant
and simple of your side, ye slander the B. and other setters forth of gods
word, yea the Queens majesty her self to take on her, and we to yield to her,
such an absolute and indefinite authority, as takes from god, from his word,
from his ministers, that authority that belongs unto them. Which sith it is
your usual lying and malicious slander, to stir offense to the simple, to
bring the Prince and Preachers in obloquie, and the authority in suspicion and
hatred, it was not a frivolous and fantastical imagination, as your
fantastical brain imagines, but a most necessary cause for ye B. to have
given that admonition, to show what authority we allow in ye prince, and the
Prince takes on her, agreeable to that, that Christ co^mau^ds to render. Nay
(say you) it is not grounded upon christ.

Who wills that to be given to Caesar that is Caesar's and Stap. fol. 70.
to God that is Gods: but determines and expresses nothing that is to be
given to Caesar, but only payment of money. And yet if we consider, as I have
said, what was the question demanded, it does not determine that neither,
though the thing it self be most true.

Does this M. St. determine nothing but money, yea not so much as that neither?
why, what does it determine then? nothing (say you) if we consider, as I have
said, what was the question demanded. In deed M. Stap. if we considered as
you have said, it would be a very mean determination of any thing. And yet if
you would better have considered, even that you have said, ye should have
found this your saying, to have been said without your considering cappe. For
then ye told us, that though it forced not that we ought to pay tribute, yet
it forced that we might pay it, which inforceth yet somewhat more than bare
nothing. What a proper determination M. Sta. makes of Christ's sentence.
And even here present ye say, that Christ determines and expresses nothing
that is to be given to Caesar, but only payment of money. And by and by ye say,
it does not determine that neither. And so ye tell us it does determine
nothing, and yet it determines something, and that something it does determine,
and yet it does not determine it. If we consider it, as you have said it,
how would ye have us consider it, master Stap. when your self so
inconsiderately have said such contradictions?

Besides this, as repugnant as the rest, before ye said, his words imported
only that they might, which is not to will a thing to be done, but to permit
or license that a thing may be done, or may not be done. And here ye plainly
say, he wills that to be given to Caesar that is Cesars, and to God that is
Gods. But Christ's willing a thing to be done, is his commandment that it be
done: and not a license that may or may not be done. It lies not in our will,
that we may if we list, give God that that is Gods, but we must and ought so
to do, because it is Gods will. And so likewise for the Princes duty, he
has willed that he should have that belongs to him, yea your self say, it
is most true, and therein ye say truly: and it is most just and reason by all
laws (except your Popish laws) that every man have that is his, and then
much more the Prince to have that that is his: no body ought to take away
another right and due, much less his Princes: then if it be most true, most
reasonable and just, and Christ's will, was not this most true, just, and
reasonable will of Christ, a sufficient determination, that the Prince should
have all that belonged to him, but that he might have it, if it pleased his
subjects to give it him? Nay, it was not so much, say you, no not for so much
as his own money, yea he determined nothing at all. What a strange answer of
Christ had this been to the Jews demand, or rather a daliance to have
determined nothing at all? but this is your most false and fantastical
imagination, M. St. For upon their particular demand Christ gives a
determinate and general doctrine, that all Princes should have, not only
money or tribute, (as they moved their question) but all things else that
belong unto the^, as likewise God, to have althings belonging to God, and yet
their demand mentioned not God at all. But Christ's answer determined that,
and more than they demanded. And therefore he answered then not again, that it
was lawful to give tribute to Caesar, but gave them flat commandment, for all
things not only belonging to Caesar, but to Good also, because they pretended to
be exempted from the Emperors subjection and taxes, being Gods peculier
people, as the Popish prelates claym^ to be exempted from the government and
tribute of their Princes, because they be (as they pretend) the spirituality.

The residue of M. St. answer is nothing but words of course, and slanderous
bye quarrels.

First that this admonition of the bishop serves him, and Stapl. 70. a
his brethren for many and necessary purposes to rule and master their Princes
by at their pleasure. That as often as their doings like them not they may
freely disobey, and say it is not Gods word, whereof the interpretation they
refer to them selves. M. Stapleton measures our doings by his own.


Herein M. St. you measure us by your selves, none seeks another in the
oven, they say, that has not hid him self in the Oven before. This that ye
clatter against us, is the common practice of the Pope and his Prelates, so
they use Princes, and so they use the word of God. So long as the Greek
Emperors enriched the Popes, and The practice of the Popes with christian
princes.
suffered them to set up Idolatry, your Popes lyked well of them, but when they
began to pull down Images, then your Popes rebelled against them, add
stirred up Pepia and Charles the great to invade the Empire. So long as the
French Emperors endowed and defended the Popes seigniories, they were the
Popes chief and white sons. But so soon as they began to challenge their
right in Italy, then your Popes fearing the French power, berefte again the
French Emperoures of it, and gave it to the Germane Princes. But even in
Germany, as any Princes would claim their right and interest of his estate,
to be Emperor in deed of Rome, as he is called in name, then the Popes did
excommunicate him, and stirred his people to rebellion against him. And thus
likewise in England: so long as king John withstoode the Pope, and his Bishops
practices, he was excommunicated, and his kingdom given to the French kings
son, and the Dolphin willed to in^ade England. But when king John had made
him self the Popes vassalle, and to hold the kingdom in Capite of the Pope,
he was absolved, and the Dolphin forbidden and accursed. So long as king Henry
the eight wrote against Luther, he had a golden Rose sent him, and was
entitled, Defendour of the faith. But when he in deed began to defend the
faith* and abolish the corrupter of the faith and his corrupt Idolatry, then
he was excommunicate with book, bell and candle: and al Princes that the Pope
might move, were set against him. And this practice he used with other
christian Princes, calling one his eldest son, another the most Christian
king, another the Catholic king* etc. With such claws to master and rule
Princes by, at his pleasure. But as often as any Princes doings like him not,
then to cause their subjects to disobey them, and renounce their oaths of
allegiance.

And whereto else serves all this your present wrangling and wresting of this
text, Reddite Caesar's quae sunt Caesaris: but to this purpose, that being not
necessarily bound by force of any words to pay, yea any tribute to our
Prince, and that it stands only on a case of license or possibility, we may
if we please, it is lawful if we do it, but we ough^ not, we be not bound, it
is not a precise necessity of subjects. What is a gappe to all disobedience
and rebellion, if this be not? and yet he obiecteth this to us. No M. Stap. it
is your own, we acknowledge it to be a command meant, due, and necessary,
that the Prince have all things that belongs to him, and what belongs, in
this controversy, is proved out of the old Testament, which Christ here
confirms, and limiteth it by the duty given also to God, putting no mean
of Pope nor Prelate between God and the Prince, as you do. And this limitation
ye can not deny to be good and godly, for all your scoffing at it, to limitte
the Princes authority by Gods word. Which we do, not to disobey our Prince,
but rather to give to our Prince her own, knowing which is hirs, and which is
Gods, least we should with you intermingle these duties that Christ has
severed, as your Pope usurps both Cesars and Gods also, because he will not
have his power measured by Gods word, but will rule the word of God, and
refers the interpretation thereof to him self. It is manifest in him that
he does so. To lay it to us, is but a manifest slander. And this is a greater
matter of all on your side, than the refusal of a cappe or a surplesse (whereat
ye quarrel) in some Protestants on the other side, which does nothing abase,
but rather (in comparison) show the more your stubborn disobedience in all
points to your Princes authority, besides your abusing of Gods word, whereof
ye say we make a very welshmans hose. Or but yet do you, M. St. and a great
deal worsse too, but ye were best to cry, stop the thief by another, for
fear ye be espied to be the thief your self.

But I pray you how do ye prove that we or the Bishop Sta page 70. ^
so use Gods word?

For (say you) we plainly say that this kind of supremacy is directly
against Gods holy word.

Is this an argument M. St. that we abuse the word of God, because you plainly
say, this supremacy is directly against Gods word? In deed I hear ye say
it, and say it plainly, and as plain as ye can say it, and that very often
too, and make it a sufficient cause, saying: For we plainly say: But ye should
once at the least prove it as plainly withal, and not so often tell us that ye
plainly say so, and then we should plainly see, and say also with you, that
ye used plain dealing, as well as plain sayings.

The. 21. Division.
IN this division the Bishop proceeds further with other The Bishops
further testimonies of the new Testament, with the fathers judgments thereon.
testimonies out of the Apostles, with the fathers expositions thereupon.
First, where Saint Peter. ^. Ep. cap. 2. and Saint Paul. Romans 13. do not
license but command obedience unto Princes. Chrysostom stretches this
obedience to every kind of Ecclesiastical person, so well as lay person. And
makes the obiecte or matter wherein the Princes government is exercised, to
be for the furthering and aduauncing of all virtuous actions, the correcting
and repressing of all vices: and that not only in all matters of the second
Table, between man and man: but of all matters in the first table, between
God and man, so well as of the other. To the confirmation whereof he cites
again S. Paul. 2. Timoth. 2. stretching the duty of Princes, not only to
honesty of life, but also to godliness. Whereby Saint Augustine means, the
chief or proper worship, service, and religion of God. Showing at large by
Saint Augustine, (who reasoning on the thirteenth to the Romans confuteth the
Donatistes herein) that Princes have authority for the furtherance and
setting forth of true religion, and suppressing of all heresies, schisms, and
other ecclesiastical abuses: so well as the furtheraunce and setting forth of
civil justice, and the punishment of moral vices.

To this M. Stapletons answer is parted into four. The order of M. Stapletons
answer.
First, gathering a contraction of the Bishops allegations, he grants unto
them, and proves that he and the Protestants agree heerevpon.

Secondly, he pincheth and restrayneth his grant, and endeuoreth to prove
contradiction in the Protestants.

Thirdly, he enters into the answer of certain words and testimonies by the
Bishop alleged.

Fourthly, he replieth on the bishop with other allegations out of Chrysostom,
and thereon frames an argument on them, for his Priests superiority. The
residue of his answer to S. Augustine he passes over in words of course. In
the first says M. Stapleton:

Here is nothing, M. Horn. that imports your surmised Stap. page 71. b
supremacy. The effect of your process is, Princes have authority to
maintain, praise, and further the virtues of the first table, and to suppress
the contrary, wherein only consists the true religion and spiritual service
that is due from man to God And that he has authority herein not only in the
virtues or vices bidden or forbidden in the second table of Gods
commandments, wherein are contained the duties that one man owes to
another. This is granted M. Horn both of the Catholics, and of the soberer
sort of the Protestants (for Carolostadius, Pelargus, Struthius, with the
whole rabble of the Anabaptists deny it) that Princes have authority both to
further the observation, and to punish the breach of Gods commandments, as
well in the first table, as in the second, that is, as well in such actions
as concern our duty to God himself, as in the duty of one man to another.

This were meetely well said M. St. that here again thus liberally ye
grant, if it made any great matter what ye M. Stapletons manner at first to
grant, aoo^ after by some wrangling distinction to revoke his grant.
granted or denied. The bishop and you should soon agree saving for your
instabilitie, that after you have made your large graunts, ye still revoke the^
again with some pelting distinction or qualification of them. Your grant is
this.

Princes have authority both to maynteine, praise and further the observation,
and to suppress and punish the breach of Gods commandments, as well in the
first table, as in the second that is, as well in such actions as concern our
duty to God himself (wherein only consists the true religion and spiritual
service) as in the duty of one man to another.

But thus well have Princes authority to maintain and further, or to suppress
and punish in actions of the duty of one man to another contained in the
second table: that no such actions be exempted from their authority, but they
ought to praise, maynteine, and further al such actions as are bidden, and
suppress and punish al such actions as are forbidden, and that to do with
most great care, diligence, and oversight, yea and supreme authority also
under God therein:

Ergo, They may do so, by like right, in all the actions of M. Sta. grants
the Prince has the oversight as well of the first as the second table.
the first table, concerning the true religion and spiritual service of God.
Or else this (as well) that ye put in twyce together for more confirmation,
comes an ace behind, and is belike as much to say, as not as well, the
quite contrary to as well.

Thus if ye stand to your own words that the Princes authority is as well in
the one as in the other: they sufficiently importe all that we demand, and
are as much as this, The Prince is supreme governor, not only in all
temporal* but also in all ecclesiastical causes.

And therefore where ye say that they be Anabaptists that deny it, ye
conclude all the Papists to be Anabaptists, for they deny it. And your self
are in the table also, that have pu^te out this your Counterblast, chiefly to
ouerturne it. Although, when ye be pressed, ye oftentimes grant that which
ouerturnes your self. Neither does your distinction help* ye, to the which
ye run for succor even to your enemies.

But all this is (say you) as not only the Catholic writers, Stapl. page 72.
but Melancthon him self, and Calvin do expound: Quod ad externam
disciplinam attinet: As much as appertains to external discipline. And the
Magistrate is the keeper and defender of both Tables, says Melancthon, but
again he adds. Quod ad externos mores attinet: As much as belongs to
external manners, behavior and demeanor.

Ye promise here again to agree with Calvin and Melancthon in all this,
which ye have granted, that the Prince has authority as well in the first
Table, as in the second, this only excepted as they except. Quod ad externam
disciplinam and externos mores attinet. So long as appertains to outward
discipline and outward manners.

But al Ecclesiastical causes and orders for setting forth religion, are
either outward disciplines or outward rites, manners, behauiours, or
demeanoures, (for as for inward actions or thoughts the Prince meddleth not
withal, but God alone: the minister only pronounces Gods threats or promises
for them*)

Ergo, Even by this your own distinction ye confess once again the Princes
supremacy in all eccl. causes.

Neither does your reason following help ye any thing at all.

For (say you) in the first Table are contained many offenses Stap. page 72.
and breaches, of the which the prince ca^ not judge, and much less are by him
punishable: As are all such crimes which properly M. Stapletons shifte of the
court of conscience.
belong to the court of conscience, to we^e, misbelefe in God, mistrust in his
mercy, contempt of his commandments, presumption of our selves, incredulity
and such like. Which all are offenses against the first table, that is,
against the love that we owe to God. Contrariwise, true belief, confidence
Melancth. v* supra.
in God, the fear of God, and such like, are the virtues of the first table,
and of these Melancthon truly says, Haec sunt opera prime tabulae, These are
the virtues of the first table.

All this M. St. that ye speak, is beside the question, concerning The Prince
deals neither with the first nor second table, in respect of the court of
conscience, but of the outward fact.
such crimes or virtues of the first table properly belonging to the court of
Conscience. What need ye stand so long descanting on the first table? as
though in the second table many such vices were not lurking in the hart^ of
man, for which the Prince also can make no law. For, he can not compel his
subjects to bear no hate nor wrath in their hearts: nor to lust or desire in
their hearts unlawfully their neighbors wife and goods: nor to love another
as them selves. All which are of the second table, properly also belonging to
the court of conscience. You might as well have added these of the second, as
the other of the first table, but then had your falsehood been espied, going
about by this means to revoke all your grant for the first table, that
because the Prince cannot punish such inward and peculiar breaches: therefore
he can not judge upon the doctrine and open causes, and so ye simply conclude:

The punishing, correcting, or judging of these, appertain Stap. page 7^.
nothing to the authority of the Prince, or to any his laws, but only are
judged, corrected and punished, by the special sword, of excommunication, of
binding of sins, and enbarring the use of holy Sacraments, by the order and
authority of the Priest only and spiritual Magistrate.

Ye might M. St. as well conclude this of the second table also, and quite
debar the Prince of all dealing in either table, because the inward action of
either table, the Prince can not punish, and so defeat all your grant which
before ye confessed, that the furthering or punishing for both the tables as
well of the first as of the second belongs to the Princes authority, Quod
ad externam disciplinam and mores attinet: So far as belongs to outward
discipline and manners. And now ye say the quite contrary, he can not punish
nor Judge the offenses of the first table, if ye mean* the open offenses
thereof he can do it by your own limitacion, Quod ad externam disciplinam and
mores attinet. And so you make a fallacion, a secundum quid ad simpliciter
except ye mean (as your reason pretends) properly as yet belonging to the
court of conscience between God and him. Then, whether it be in the first, or
in the second table: the Prince in deed can not judge or punish the secret
offense, no nor properly the minister but so God alone. The minister does but
pronounce Gods sentence: and the Magistrate punishes it, be it in the first or
second table, come it once to ye breach of external ^tes and discipline, as
your self do limite their authority, and there in have promised to agree
with Calvin and Melancthon.

But as in this your first part ye have granted so much as suffiseth all the
matter, besides the referring your self to Caluins and Melancthons judgment:
so in your second part, ye wrest and wrangle about your grant, and labor to
prove contradiction in the^, though in deed you can find none, and yet (would
ye look on your self) ye should find an heap of foul and manifest
contradictions, besides those foresaid even in this present chapter.

Again (say you) whereas, the chief virtue of the first table Stapl. 7^. b.
is to believe in God, to know him, and to have the true faith of him and in
him, in External regiment (as to punish open blasphemy, to make laws against
Heretics, to honor and maintain the true service of God) Princes especially
Christians, ought to further aid, and mayntaine the same: but to judge of it,
and to determine, which is the true faith in God, how and after what manner he
ought to be served, what doctrine ought to be published in that behalf, the
Prince has no authority or power at all.

See how ye first pinche and wrest your former grant M. Stapl. after his
pinching takes clean away his own grant.
M. Stapl. and inconclusion take it quite away. Before ye said, Christian
Princes had the regiment in external matters, now ye come in with external
regiment. Right now, the Prince had authority to further and punish, over the
one table as well as the other: and now, he cannot determine so much as which
table is which. Right now, he had authority, Quoad externos mores as much as
belongs to external manners: now, he must not judge how or after what manner
God ought to be served. Right now, he had Externam disciplinam, the outward
discipline: now, to know what doctrine or discipline ought to be published, he
has no authority or power at all. This geere hangs trimly together, and
have we not gotten a fair grant? we thought as the Papists had wont to say,
we had God in the Ambry, but, the Devil I see was in the Horologe.

Now after he has renoked his grant he begins to M. Stapleton would prove
contradiction to Melanctho^.
quarrel with the Protestants, with whom before he said, he and all his
fellowship would agree, and first he begins to prove contradiction in
Melancthon. His argument is thus.

Melancthon says, that Princes ought to look unto true Stap. fol. 72. b
doctrine, to correct the Churches when the Bishops fall of their duty, yea
and to consider the doctrine it self.

Again, the same Melancthon says, they must make no new doctrines in the
Church, neither institute any worships.

Ergo, Melancthon either recanteth as better advised, or writes plain
contraries to him self.

How has malice blinded you M St? can ye see no lesser difference than
contrary, between looking to the old and coynyng new, between considering
and instituting worships? Surely, then can ye never consider, nor well look
unto (not the truth) but even your own folly, that dream of recanting and
contradictions in other, having your self scarce written a line before,
wherein so plainly ye contraried your own words, in recanting your former
grant.

Thus, as in vain ye seek for co^tradiction in Mela^ctho^s words, so as
fondly do ye conclude thereon your purpose.

Mela^cthon would not have Princes make new doctrines and worships of God, nor
have the functions of both Magistrates spiritual and temporal to be
confounded:

Ergo, he takes away all authority from Princes in judging and determining of
doctrine.

But what dealing call ye this M. St? that in translating M. Stapl. subtle and
false translating.
Melancthons sentences, ye both falsely wrest them, and add^ of your own unto
them. Where Melancthon says, Nec instituant cultus, Neither let them institute
(or appoint of new) any worshipping of God, you translate it neither appoint
any worshipping of God. As though they might not appoint that true worship of
God, that God has appointed him self to be worshipped by. Where Melancthon
speaks only of appointing other new devised worships, such as the Popish
worships are. Likewise speaking of the functions, ye clappe in of your own
these words (of both Magistrates) calling the ministers magistrates, which
words Melancthon has not. And thus ye love al^e to tell your fale falsely. And
as you thus deal with Melancthon, so from him ye run to M. Nowell, and say:

Yea, M. Nowell him self with a great stomach bids Stap. fol. 73. a. M.
Stapletons cavil agayoste Mast. Nowell.
us show where they deny that godly and learned Priests might judge according
to the sincerity of doctrine. As though when the Prince and his successors
are made supreme governors without any limitacion, it fall not often out, that
the Bishop be he never so learned or godly, shall not once be admitted to judge
of true doctrine except the doctrine please the Prince.

Ye will never leave your falsehood M. Stap. w^ says that Princes made supreme
governors without any limitation? Who says the Bishop be he never so godly or
learned, shall not once be admitted to judge of true doctrine, except the
doctrine please the Prince? I^ there any that says so, or does so, except your
Pop^e He in deed chalengeth a supreme governance without limits, in as large
and ^ple (...) as belongs unto Christ. He will suffer no doctrine but that
which pleases him, and he will be the only chief Christian Prin ces claim
not supreme go^ement without limitation, but the Pope clamyeth it.
Judge thereof. This is not the governance that we ascribe to Princes, but such
as is limited by Gods word, such as stretches not further tha^ the (...) of
their dominions, such as suffers godly and learned Priests according to Gods
word, to judge of the synceritie of doctrine, for this you confess that
master Nowell says, and therefore ye confess your self to be a (...) liar,
and to speak contrari^, when ye bring in the the Protestants, to acknowledge a
limitation, and ^t (...) say, we make a government without any lymitation.
Neither is (...) any contradiction in master Nowels saying to be any more
gathered, than of Melancthon^ words: Princes are supreme governors, Ergo,
Prelates may not judge of true doctrine. Which is as wi^e a sequel as the
other against Melancthon. Ye might well conclude it against your Pope, that
chalengeth such as absolute (...), that all the judgment of doctrine should
(...) to him to judge according as he please bot^ quite besides, and quite
contrary to Gods word. Stapl. 73. ^ The act of parliament.


As though (say you) there had not been a statute made declaring and enacting
the Queens majesty, yea and her highness successors (without exception or
limitation of godly and vng^dly, and yet I trow no Bishops) to be the supreme
governor in all things and causes as well spiritual as temporal. As though
M. St. this were a good argument.

The statute declares her highness supreme government* without limiting it
under the Bishops government.

Ergo, the Bishops can not judge of true doctrine, and the Princes government
is without all limitation.

As though their were no difference between supreme government, and every
other government, or between government and judgment. And as though the
statute ex(...) not it self, what kind of supreme government is y^^lded in
all things and causes Ecclesiastical, nothing debarring the Bishops and
ministers of their judgment and ministry, but rather ouerseeing them to give
their judgment and administration rightly.

As though you master Horn (say you) had not written, Sta. page 73. ^
that in both tables the Prince has authority to erect* and correct, to
farther and restrain, to allow and punish, the virtue and vices thereto
apperteyning.

As though your self M. Stapl. had not written also, and granted the same
even right now, and that not for your self only, but for all your follows
besides, to agree with Melancthon and Calvin therein.

Or as though (say you) the governor in all causes, is not Stap. page 73. a
also a judge in all causes*

Or as though M. St. his government or judgment were any prejudice to the
government or judgment that belongs to the Pastors office.

Or as though (say you) it were not commonly so taken and Stap. page 73. a
understood of a thousand in England, which have taken the oath to their
great domna^ion, but if they repent.

Or as though not rather on the contrary, it were not your so wilful and
malicious mistaking of it, with a peuish obstinacy to withstand the manifest
truth, that refuse the oath of your dutiful obedience, to your great damnation
in deed, but if ye repent betymes. And thus still aunswering your As though,
with another as though: ye can find no contradiction nor absurdity neither in
Melancthon, Calvin, Master Nowell, nor the Bishops sayings herein. As though*
your self i^ the mean time were clear aboorde, and not in every one of your
quarrels, either m^st fond and absurd, or quite contrary to your own sayings
and graunts made so late before.

The conclusion of this your second part, is this.

You therefore master Horn* which talk so confusely and generally of the
Princes authority in both tables, do yet say nothing nor prove nothing this
general and absolute authority in all things and causes, as lustily without
exception the oath expresses, and therefore ye bring indeed nothing to prove
your principal purpose, to the which all your proves should be directed.

For general and confuse talk of the princes authority, What manner of
authority the oath of the supremacy requires.
you belie the Bishop master Stap. he made so plain and flat a limitation
that you could not abide it* it is your Pope that chalengeth such a general
and absolute authority, and your self that talk of the Princes authority
confusely, to deface Princes, as confounding and intermedling* in the office
and authority p^rteyning to the clergy, which the oath requires not,
further than such supreme authority, as ouerse^th, cares, provides for,
directs, and governs all matter persons Ecclesiastical and temporal, so
well in matters of the first table, as in the second, that is to say, so well
in all spiritual or ecclesiastical matters, as temporal. Quod ad externam
disciplinam, Quod externo^ mores attinet. So far as perteynes to external
discipline, and belongs to external behavior. And this is not only the issue
in question, but also (as is proved) comprehe^deth the oath and principal
purpose, whereupon ye call so fast, to have all the proves directed thereto, as
the Bishop here has done, and your self has granted the same.

Your third part is a quarelling at the sentence of s. Paul cited by the B.
Tim. 2. that kings and rulers are ordained of God for these two purposes, that
their people might live a peaceable life, through their government, both in
godliness, and in honesty, comprehending in these two words, whatsoever is
commanded in the first or second table. Here as ye see has the Bishop cited
once again another sentence out of the new testament: how fitly to the
matter, and how effectual to the purpose, we shall see anon. Only now I note
it to show your former untruth M. St. saying the Bishop only cited a sentence
or two out of the new testament besides your froward blindness the more to be
noted herein. For as there ye could not, or would not see this sentence, as
other that you omit likewise: so here ye note particulerly nothing so much as
this only sentence, yea you will not let escape the advantage (as you
conceived) of one word, and yet the word, and al, when al is done, makes
clean against you. For where, in citing this sentence, the B. (by the way of a
parenthesis) M. Stapletons quarrel at the Bishops interpretation of this word
godliness.
alleged S. Augustines interpretation for the word godliness, to import the
true and chief or proper worship of God: M. Stap. obiecteth falsehood and
untrue report, or at least mistaking of S. Augustine. And concludes thereon a
general (...), so aptly and truly ye allege your doctors.

Alack master Stap. that ye should be driven to these thiftes, that finding
no just matter wherein to improve the Bishop, ye run to such trifling quarrels
as this: As though lib. 1. de trin. cap. 14.
the Bishop had some great foil by Saint Augustines words, or they had been
so dark and mystical, that they could not lightly have been understood.
Saint Augustines S. Augustines exposition.
words are these: Sed loquemar de hominis sapientia, etc. But we will speak of
the wisdom of man, howbeit of true wisdom, that is according to God the
true chief worship of him, which in one word is in Greek called (...) Which
name our men (as we have already declared) willing also to interpret it in
one word, called it godliness. When godliness among the Greeks is more
usually called (...), but (...), because it can not perfitely be interpreted in
one word, is interpreted better in two words, so that it is rather called
Gods worship. Thus far S. Augustine: and what is here that swerueth from the
B. saying? That S. Augustine interprets godliness the true worship of God.
Which as it is true in both words (for what signifies (...) but ageed, just,
lawful, and godly worship) so S. Augustine understood it in both words,
although the one in usual speech want a proper Latin name, as has the other.
And likewise in our English tongue, while we would express Gods worship,
which is two words after the Latin, and would term it in one word, we call
it Godliness, as S. Augustine tells how the Latins called it Pietas. True
it is that S. Paul uses the word (...) which the Bishop denies not. Neither
have ye any more fault to find with his, than with S. Augustines, or any
others translation calling it godliness. If ye be so angry that the Bishop
should say it means Gods service, why be ye not angry with your self? Do ye
not see how like a blind hobbe about the house (as ye merrily term it) ye r^p
your self upon the sc^nce? for did not your self both in the beginning of
this Chap. tell us, that in the first table consisted the true religion and
spiritual service that is due from man to God? And also even in this your
further finding fault, ye confess, that by their peaceable government we
might with more quiet attend to Gods service: and that this was S. Paul's only
meaning, and no further: which were it so, yet thereby then ^ement, not only
godliness of life, but also Gods service as your self interpret it, and yet ye
blame the Bishop for saying S. Augustine s^ interpretes it. But the Bishop not
only proved this to be S. Augustines mind by this sentence alone, but by m^
sentences afterward, all which it pleased you to let alone, and go sneaking by
them, and come peaking in with this. Howbeit, even in this to satisfy The
exposition of other fathers.
ye further, ye shall see that this is not only S. Augustines exposition, by
this word Godliness, to understand Gods service and true religion: but the
exposition of other fathers also.

Chrysostom understands this word Godliness so Chrysostom. in 1. Tim. 2.
bomil. 7
largely, that it comprehends al truth offaith, doctrine, religion and
integ^itie of life also. Omne inquit dogma. etc. Every opinion (says he) is
made perfect not only with godliness, but also with integrity of life. I or
godliness is also to be sought for in that part. For, what avails it, if
keeping the godliness of faith, thou art wicked in works. Likewise S. Ambrose,
Vt in pac^. Amb^osius in 1. Tim. 2.
etc. That in peace, in tranquillity of mind, and quietly we might serve God
the Lord. etc. That therefore these things might be kept, quietness is
necessary, that acceptable obedience might be rendered unto God. So Hai^o,
Pietas ^st ^ulius and religio o^nipotentis H^ymo in. 1. Tim 2.
des. etc. Godliness is the worship and religion of almighty God. So the^
gloss interlined. Cum omni pietate and castitate, with all godliness and
chastity, id est, ^ultu, and religione, Glossa interlineata. ^ytanus. Hugo
Card.
and integritate fides, that is to say, the worship, and religion, and
integrity of faith. And Lyra himself, In omni pietate, id est, cultu dei
debite, In all godliness, that is to say, in the dut^full worship of God. So
likewise High the Car^inall, In omni pietate, in cultu and religione diuina* In
all godliness, that is, in the worship and divine religion. Et (...).
integritate fides, hac duo sunt necessaria, vt fides interior seruetur
incorr^pta, and cultiu exterior diuin^ in omnibus teneatur. And in chastity,
that is, in the integrity of faith, these two are necessary, that the inward
^ayth should be kept incorrupted* and that the outward worship should be
holden in all divine things. This suffices to clear the Bishop of wresting
the signification of the word Godliness, affirming it to mean the true,
chief, or proper worship of God, contrary to your peeuishe wresting, although
therein ye contrary your own self, confessing also that it means Gods
service, and yet ye quarrel thereat in the Bishop, saying: As though Princes
having charge thereof, should also have authority to appoint such worship.

If ye mean by appointing such absolute authority as your Stapl. 73. b.
Pope usurps: that the appointment, of what he please to appoint for a
worship and service of God, belongs to him: it is but your ordinary sur^ised
slander, and is the proper doing of your Pope. If ye mean a charge to appoint
or command, that the only true religion which God has appointed, be set
forth, and by the ministers of God observed: It is plain, ye S. Paul and al
these fathers meant no less.

Nay say you, S. Paul speaks here of no such, or of any authority Stap.
fol. 73. b
at all in Princes, but only that by their peaceable gouerme^t, we might with
the more quiet attend to Gods service.

What, M. St? speaks S. Paul there of no authority at all in Princes? says
he not in most plain words: for kings and all men that be in authority? Have
those that be in authority, no authority at all? What a saying is this, and
yet see how your self confute your self. Going about to embarre their
authority, ye say, he me^^ioned their peaceable government* He did so in deed
M. St. But what government, or what peaceable estate of government had they, if
they had no authority at all. It see meth that while ye (...) to say somewhat
against their authority,)) ye neyt^, o^ regard nor can tell what ye say of
them, nor of the Apostles ^eyther, to maintain your false quarrel.

Now, as ye further proceed, so still ye bring your self Stap. fol. 73. b.
more in the briers.

But will ye know (say you) M. Ho^ne, why thapostles both Saint Peter and
Saint Paul so earnestly taught at that time obedience to Princes?

Ha, go to then M. St. belike they tau^ht obedience to Princes, more earnestly
than your Popish Prelates have taught or pract sed since that time, or than
your self have her^ taught us, not over earnestly, but God wot full
s^enderly, or rather by all shifts and fetches of your wits, have sought to
deface and impu^nt their authority. But how agrees this with S. Paul earnest
teaching. Yea* how would ye make Saint Paul agree to himself? To say that
he speaks there of no authority at all in Princes, and yet that here he
taught obedience to Princes so earnestlye. What obedience taught he, if he
taught not their authority at all? What earnestness used he then therein? but
let us see (as ye would have us) what was the cause of the Apostles
earnestness.

This was the cause. In the beginning of the Church some Christians Sta. 73. b.
The cause why the Apostles taught obedience so earnestly.
were of this opinion, that, for that they were Christian men, they were
exempted from the laws of the Infidel Princes, and were not bound to pay
them any tribute, or otherwise to obey them. To repress and reform this wrong
judgment of theirs, the Apostles Peter and Paul by you named, diligently
employed themselves. And was this a wrong opinion and judgment M. Stapleton,
and with such earnestness and diligence employed of the Apostles Peter and
Paul to be repressed and reformed, that Christians, for that they were
Christian men, were exempted from the laws of the Infidel Princes, and were
not bound to pay them any tribute, or otherwise to obey them? What a right
opinion and judgment then was this of him, that affirmed not only the same of
Infidel Princes, but of Christian Princes to? that we be not bound by force
of any words of Christ's sentence (which as ^latly commands us, as any of
these the Apostles sentences do) to obey or pay so much as tribute to our
Christian Princes? Do ye not know who this was that held this wrong opinion
M. Stapleton? Well, who soever it was, I think be must with shame say that of
him self which he spoke of another, that either he recanteth as better
advised, or else writes plain contrary to himself. Stap. fol. 72. b


But now says M. St. for the Apostles sentences.

Whose sayings can not implye your pretensed government, Stapl. fol. 73 b
unless ye will say that Nero the wicked and heathenishe Emperor, was in his
time the supreme head of all the Church of Christ, throughout the Empire, as
well in causes spiritual as temporal.

As before (M. Stapleton) you captiously restrained Christ's general
commandment of obedience to Princes, only to the Emperor: so do ye here
again, besides, that ye stick also in the person, abusing his office, and let
the duty of his office go. Whereas S. Paul writes generally, not only for
those then present, but for all kings or any other in authority both then and
from thenceforth for ever. And A distinction between the the Princes person or
vices and his estate or office.
so do all the Expositours gather a general rule, for all Christians toward
their christian Princes, although Nero and other princes then, were wicked and
Heathenishe infidels. Yet in the duty of their estate, to the which God had
called them, they ought neither to have been wicked nor Heathenish Infidels,
but godly and faithf^ll defenders and setters forth of Christ his true
religion. To reason therefore from such persons abuses, thereupon to deny from
all princes the duty of their lawful authority: is as naughty an argument,
as Nero himself was naughty. And Chrysostom flatly confuteth this cavil of
the Princes person, Neque enin de quouis. etc. For neither I speak now (says
he) of Chrysostom. in Romans
any one of the Princes, but of the matter itself. And again, Propterea non
dicit, non enim princeps est. etc. Wherefore he says not, there is no Prince
but of God, but he disputes of the matter it self, saying there is no power
but of God. The powers that are, they are from God* As when any wise man says,
that the woman is knit of God unto the man: he says no other thing, tha^ that
God has ordained marriage, not that every man, how so ever he dwells together
with a woman, is joined unto him of God, for, we see many dwelling together in
evil, not according to the laws of marriage, which yet notwithstanding we
impute not unto God. This cauillation therefore (how naughty soever the Prince
were) restrains not the Apostles meaning which tends to the office and not
to the person, least of all to those present persons then living. For were they
never so wicked, other were good, that knew the duty of their estate and
government, exercising it both in the direction of virtues and punishment of
vices, as well of the first as of the second table, and this your self have
confessed to be the duty of Princes, and why had it not been Neroes duty to?
And I pray you what lacks this of all ecclesiastical causes, the virtues
and vices of the first and second table? But ye think to escape with this
your common exception, saying:

And yet in temporal and civil matters I grant we ought to be Stapl. 73. b.
subject not only to Christians, but even to infidels also being our Princes,
without any exception of Apostle, Evangelist, Prophet, Priest, or Monk, as
ye allege out of Chrysostom.

And do you think thus in deed M. St. as ye say? and shall we have any
better hold of you in your grant once again, be it even but for temporal and
civil matters? And yet this fails much of that ye granted before, of the
first as well as of ye second table. Be Princes ye Clergies superiors now?
Before ye sayds that Princes should take to much upon them to think themselves
ecclesiastical persons superiors, speaking simply of superiors without your
distinction of civil and The Pope claims superiority in civil and
temporal matters.
temporal or spiritual and ecclesiastical matters. But see M. St. what ye
have granted here. It is not unknown to you that the Pope in no case can
abide, no not for civil and temporal matters, to be subject to any Christian
Prince or Emperor, but contendeth even therein also to be the far superior:
and wears three crowns where the Emperor wears but one: and that one he
has set on and turned off with his foot, and made him kiss his foot, and
troad upon him with his foot, and as his page to hold his stirrup to his
foot: and claims to give or take away his estate. And you say here (for all
estates of the clergy,) We ought to be subject not only to Christians, but
even to Infidels also being our Princes, without any exception of Apostle,
Evangelist, Prophet, Priest, or Monk. What? and is your Pope none of these
Master Stapleton? an Apostle he is not without a pseudo: nor he calls
himself an Apostle, but Apostolical. Much less he is an Evangelist, and
least a Prophet, except a lying Prophet. Sometimes in deed he has been a
Monk, but is there any Pope not a priest? If he be a Priest, then ought he by
your own confession, to be subject to the Emperor, and in refusing this
subjection, what can ye make of him, but, as your self to your Prince: so he
to his Prince, a very rebel and usurper against his prince.

If ye say the Emperor is not his prince: why is he then named the Emperor of
Rome, is not ye name of an Emperor, The Pope ought to be the Emperors
subject by M. Staplet. own grant.
ye name of ye chiefest Principality? And then if he be Emperor or king of the
Romans, how ought not the Pope (being a Roman, or dwelling at Rome within
this Princes kingdom or Empire) be subject to this king or Emperor at the
least (as ye say) in temporal and civil matters? Do ye think to escape, in
saying, We ought to be subject to our Princes without exception, but he ought
not? I had thought ye had spoken of all Christiana, and had simply m^nt as
Chrysostom did (to whom ye refer your self) who speaks in general of
every man (...) fuer^, or whosoever thou art, which words ye dissemble and
omit. So that if your Pope be of (...) calling, and he be no more a Priest than
Pope Ioane, (...) he a soul, be he a body: he ought by your own grant to
(...) subject to the Emperor of Rome in these matters, (...) not (...) the
Emperor to be subject unto him. Which (...) the Pope shall understand, ^owe
for his (...) in (...), and for all his civil and temporal matters, you
would bring him to his old obedience (...) the Emperor, as he has been: I
think he will (...) s^all thank Master Stapleton for your labor.

But all this subjection (say you) is but granted in temporal and civil
matters. Does Saint Paul (Master Stapleton) allege this distinction, or
Chrysostom, to who^ ye reforro your self? no M. St. they make no such
restraint, but stretch this obedience, as to al ecclesiastical persons, so
principally to all ec^l* matters, and to the setting forth Gods religon* And so
Pauledoth call the Prince Gods minister* And Chrysostom says, Neque enim ista
subiectio pi^tatem subuertit, for neither this subjection ouerturneth
godynesse. And upon these words, He is the minister of God, a revenger to him
that does evil: He says, Again, least thou should start back, Chrysosto. in
Romans 13. homil. 23.
hearing of punishment, correction, and the sword: he mentions again that
the Prince fulfilleth the law of God, for what though the Prince himself know
it not? yet God has so formed and ordained it. If therefore either he punish or
advance, he is the minister of God, maintaining virtue, abolishing wickedness,
even because God would have it so. By what reason repugnest thou in striving
against him, that brings such good things, and goes before thee, and
prepares a way for thy affairs? for many there are, which at the first
exercised virtue for respect of the magistrate, but at the length they cleaued
thereunto even for the fear of God. For things Why the Prince is called gods
minister.
to come do not so move the grosser sort, as present things. He therefore that
prepares the minds of many both with fear and honor, that they may be made
fitter for the word of doctrine, is worthily called the minister of God. In
which words he plainly shows that the Princes ministry, whereby he is called
Gods minister, consists in making us fit and apt receivers of the word^ of
doctrine, which the minister teaches, and the Prince by punishing or rewarding
goes before, and prepares a way, and brings to us, making us apt to
receive, either for fear (...) love this benefit by his minist^rie. In which
work as ye Apostles and Preachers, for the vttera^ce of ye word of doctrine,
are called the workers together with God: so the Prince in preparing this way
to the word, and making us apt to it, is likewise said of Chrysostom, that he
works together with the will of God. Wherein as we must not rep^gne against ye
prince, so this obedience that we owe unto him, is not only in temporal and
civil matters: but in making us apt for the word of doctrine, in which all
eccl. matters are comprehended.

Now after M. St. has thus stood quarrelling in vain with the B. allegations,
he fourthly enters into a reply upon the B. with other allegations collected out
of ye same father Chrysostom. and thero^ frames an argument against ye Princes
superiority. In ye forhed whereof he prefixeth this marginal note, ye Priesthode
is above a kingdom, which note as it is true in ye sense that Chrysostom.
understands it: so makes it nothing that he is about him in ye supreme
government and direction of all eccl. causes, which is ye present question, and
ye thing that M. (...)* calls so oste^ at other times upon. But now says M.
St.

As contrariwise the Prince himself is for ecclesiastical and spiritual
causes, subject to his spiritual ruler. Which Chrysostom himself, of all men
does best declare. Alij sunt termini. etc. The bounds of a Kingdom, and of
Priesthood (says Chrysostom) are not all one: this Kingdom passes the
other: this King is not known by visible things, neither has his estimation,
for precious stones he glistreth withal, or for his gay golden glistring
apparel. The other King has the ordring of those worldly things: the
authority of Priesthood comes from heaven. Whatsoever thou shall bind upon
Stap. fol. 73. b. Chrysostom. homil. 4. de eo quod scripsit Esa.
earth, shall be bound in heaven. To the King those things that are here in
the world are committed, but to me celestial things are committed: When I
say, to me, I understand to a Priest. Andanon after he says. Regi corpora.
etc. The bodies are committed to the King, the souls to the priest. The King
pardons the faults of the body, the Priest pardons the faults of the
soul. The King forces, the Priest exhorts, the one by necessity, the other
by giving council: the one has visible armor, the other spiritual. He
warreth against the barbarous, I war against the devil. This principality
is the greater, and therefore the King does put his head under the Priests
hands. And every where in the old scripture Priests did annoint the Kings.
Among all other books of the said Chrysostom, his book de sacerdotio, is
freighted with a number of like and more notable sentences, for the Priests
superiority above the Prince.

For the other sentences in Chrysostom, I can not directly answer them
master Stapleton, till ye set them down. I think they will all come in the
end, to the effect How M. Sta* cites Chrysostom.
of this sentence here, so often by all yourside alleged. Ye cite Chrysostom,
as though it were at the full. Where in deed ye cut off both the head the
middle, and tail of his sentence, whereby (considering the occasion and
purpose of his words) we might see that they should not be wrested from his
meaning. Chrysostom upon these words of the Prophet Esaias, Factum est anno quo
mortu^s est Ozias rex. It came to pass in the year that king Ozias died: after
a Preface made of Priests marriage, taking occasion of the Prophet Esays wife:
tells of Ozias presumption, Uerum hic Ozias, etc. but this Ozias, when he was
a crowned King, because he was just, waxed hawtie in mind, and conceyuing a
greater courage than was for his estate, entered into the temple. And what says
Esaias? He entered into the holy of holies, and said I will offer incense. He
being a King, usurps the principality of the priesthood. I will (says he)
offer incense because I am just. But abide within thy bounds. And so
Chrysostom proceeds in the sentence cited by you, Alij sunt termini: The
bounds of a kingdom, and of a priesthood are not al one. etc. Which sentence
ye truly cite, til ye come to these words: When I say, to me, I understand a
priest. And there ye strike of m^ words of Chrysostam, than ye cited. Which
belike ye do for two purposes. Partly, for that ye could not abide to hear of
any vices or discommendation in priests, and therefore ye cull out only that,
which sounds to their praise and dignity. Partly, for that this would have
made the purpose of Chrysostom, playner, reproving them that dis^erne not,
between the office, and the person. At which fault your self so late did
stu^ble in princes, not discerning between Neroes vices, and a princes office.
As in Chrysostoms time, same despised the office of a priest, because of the
faults of diverse priests. The words of Chrysostom (following those you cite)
are these: Therefore when thou see an unworthy priest, slander not the
priesthod. For thou ought not to condemn the things, but him that evil
uses a good thing. Sith Judas also was a traitor, howbeit, for this the order
Apostolical is not accused, but the mind of him. Neither is it the fault of the
priesthood, but of the evil mind. And thou therefore blame not the priesthod,
but the priest, that uses evil a good thing. For if one dispute with thee,
and say, see thou yonder Christian^ answer thou: but I speak not to thee of
the persons, but of the things, or else, how many physicians have been made
slaughtermen, and have given poisons for remedies? And yet I despise not the
art, but him that evil uses the art. How many shipme^ have guided evil
their ships? yet is not the art of sailing evil, but the mind of them. If the
Christian man be wicked, accuse not thou the profession and the priesthood, but
him that evil uses a good thing. These are Chrysostomes words, which you
omit, and then follows as you recite, Reg^ corpora etc. The bodies are
committed to the king and so forth, as ye say, til ye come to the knitting up
of the sentence with Ozias, which again you omit. Veru^ rex. etc. But that king
going beyond his bounds, and passing the measure of the kingdom, attempted to
add somewhat more, and entered into the temple, willing with authority to offer
incense. What therefore says the priest? It is not lawful for thee Ozias, to
offer incense. Behold liberty: behold a mind that knows not bondage: behold
a tongue touching the heavens: behold liberty that cannot be restrained: behold
the body of a man, and the mind of an angel: behold one that goes on the
ground, and is co^uersant in heaven. Thou saw a king, thou saw not a
diadem. Tell not me it is a kingdom, where is the transgression of laws. It is
not lawful for thee (O king) to offer ince^se. It is not lawful for thee to
come into the holy of holies. Thou passest thy bounds: thou sekest things not
granted to thee, and therefore shall leese the things thou have received. It is
not lawful for thee to offer ince^se: but this is given unto the priests. This
is not thine, but this is mine: have I usurped on me thy purple? usurp not
thou my priesthod. It is not lawful for thee to offer ince^s^ but only for the
sons of Aaron.

By this, it plainly appears whereupon Chrysostom. speaks, to wete, of the
several functions of the spiritual pastor and the prince and that it is not
lawful for the prince to intrude himself into the office of the divine
minister. He may not more take upon him to administer the divine sacraments of
christ his church now, although he be the prince (to the which not with
standing you admitted women) tha^ might Ozias sacrifice then. For as then God
had appointed who should sacrifice, so has he appointed who should now minister
his sacraments. Now if ye had showed that the supreme government over
ecclesiastical causes, the oversight and direction of the setting forth of
Gods true religion, the abolishing of false religion, and the deposing of
Idolatrous Priests, that obs^inately mainteyne errors, against the express
word of God, be the like doing to this fact of Ozias: if ye had proved that
the Prince has ever done or does, The fact of Czias wh^me the Papists
allege, makes against themselves, not against us.
or claymeth to do the like fact to this of Ozias, in ministering the sacrament:
then had you alleged this sentence to some purpose, else makes it nothing to
the purpose, but makes against your popish mid wives, they rather play the
part of Ozias: It makes not against ye Q. Majesty, but most of all against
your Pope himself, that thinks he playth the high priests part, and is so
far therfrom, that none is more like than he to this usurper, entering into
the holiest place, and usurping the priesthood, the sacrifice, the power and
the honor that belongs only to Jesus Christ himself.

As for the office of the true minister of God (which neither Wherein the
Pastor, being the minist^r of God, surmou^teth the Prince being also the
minist^s of God.
your Pope nor you his sha^elings ar^) is in deed as Chrysostom says both a
distinct function from the princes, and has other bounds, and also we grant
surmounteth far the bounds of the Princes office, in respect of his
spiritual ministry, of administering the sacraments, of preaching the glad
tidings of salvation, of denouncing to the obstinate sinners, the threats of
Gods wrath and vengeance: to the penitent, the most comfortable promises of
Gods mercy and favor: whose sentence being rightly applied in earth, God has
promised to ratify the same in heaven. And for this cause does Chrysostom* so
highly extol this priesthood, referring all his praises to the dignity of his
ministry, in respect whereof, the Princes ministeris is but outward and
earthly, meddling nothing with the administration of this high function, but
only with the supreme charge, oversight, and government, to see that the
Priest do not abuse this so excellent and spiritual ministry, but exercise
rightly the same according to Gods word. Who, so doing, the Prince so well as
any other Christian, obeys his preaching and ministry, and submits his
head (as Chrysos^ome says) under the ministers hands, as to Gods messenger,
steward, and dispenser of his heavenly mysteries.

But if the Priest be not such an one as Chrysostom describes: Wherein again
the Princes ministry surmounte^h the pastors ministry.
if he do not denounce Gods promises, and threa^es, nor his word at all, but
as Christ says of the naughty servant, strikes his fellow servants, and
subtrac^eth their spiritual food of Gods word from them, and would poison
the^ with such erroniouse food as he would give them, besides and contrary to
the word of God: if he will not be centent with his own bounds, but will
usurp also the dignity that is not due unto him, but belongs to the Prince:
shall the Prince suffer this at his hands, him self to be spoiled of his
authority and royal estate, and his subjects pilled of their goods, yea both
he and al his subjects, by such a false usurper and tirant Priest, to be robbed
and spoiled of their souls food and salvation? Here has the Prince
authority to suppress such wicked Balamites, such counterfaites, such
Antichrists what soever they be, and to place in their places true and godly
ministers, such as Chrysostom here speaks of. From which kind of ministry
your Pope M. St who is your great high Priest, and all the inferior rabble of
Priests that depend on him, are so far different: that Chrysostoms sentence
not only makes nothing for you, but is clean against you. For first, take
your own words, that you cite out of Chrysostom, lay them to your Pope and
Prelates, and see how they agree together. This king (says Chrys^stome of the
minister or Priest) is not known by visible The sentence that the Papists
cite out of Chrysostom for their priests, makes clean against them.
things, neither has his estimation for preciouse stones he glistereth with
all, or for his gay golden ghstering apparel. Contrariwise your Pope and his
prelates (to get the more estimation thereby of the people) are not only
known by visible things, but set out them selves, and all their ceremonies to
the uttermost, in gay golden glistering apparel, with most gorgeous ouches of
silver, of gold, of pearls, and precious stones. Again, this Priest says
to the King, I have not usurped thy purple: contrariwise, the Pope has usurped
Emperors purple, the Emperors Diadem, the Emperors throne, the Emperors
Empire and all. Again, ye tell us out of Chrysostom, that the bodies are
committed to the King, the souls to the Priest: the King pardons the faults
of the body, the Priest pardons the faults of the soul: the King forces,
the Priest exhorts: the one by necessity, the other by giving counsel: the
one has visible armor, the other spiritual: he warreth against the
barbarous, I war against the Devil: Contrariwise the Pope warreth against
Christ, and with the Devil, as his general vicar and Licuetenant, and takes
not only upon him the Emperors part, by warring against the barbarous
Turks and Saracens, but also the Devils part by warring against the Saints
and truth of God, and that with more horrible treasons, murders, and villainies,
than ever was practiced among the barbarous. And entermedleth with faults of
the body as whoredom and fornication, not only bodily to punish them: but
also beastly for filthy lucre to maintain them, and condemns in Gods
ministers godly and honorable wedlock: which besides the other is a manifest
argument, that he is a Priest of no such kind as Chrysostom here commends.
For had you M. St. looked better even in the same Homely, but the leaf
before: ye should have seen what a notable commendation Priests marriage.
he makes of the marriage of Priests upon the prophets words, Vidi dominum,
etc. I saw the Lord sitting Chrysosto. d^ verbis Esa. homil. ^.
in an high I hrone, etc. Quis hac loquitur, etc. Who (says he) spoke these
things? Esaias that beholdet of the celestial Scraphins, which had to deal
with marriage, and yet extinguished not grace. You have harkened to the Prophet,
and you have heard the Prophet this day. Go thou out and lasuph thy son,
neither must we ouerpasse these things. Go thou out and thy son. Yea? had
the Prophet a son? if he had a son, he had a wife also, that thou may
understand that marriages are not evil, but whooredome is evil. But so often
as we talk with any of the vulgar people saying, why live thou not well?
wherefore expressest thou not perfect manners? how can I (say they) except I
should go from my wife, except I should bid my children farewell, except I
should bid my business adieu? Wherefore can thou not? does matrimony
hinder thee? a wife is given thee for an helper, not to lay a snare for thee.
Had not the Prophet a wife? neither did wedlock hinder the grace of the
spirit, and yet he kept company together with his wife, and was a Prophet
nevertheless. Had not Moses a wife? and yet he brake the rock, he changed the
air, he talked with God, he stayde the divine wrath. Had not Abraham a wife?
and yet he was made a father of Nations, and of the Church: for he got his
son Isaac, and he was to him a matter of notable affairs. Did he not offer
his Son, the fruit of his marriage? was he not a father, and withal a lover
of God? might not he see him self a sacrificer to be made of his own bowels?
a sacrificer I say and a father withal: nature to be overcome, godliness to
overcome: his bowels to be trodden down, and his godly deeds to surmount: the
father to be cast down, and the lover of God to be crowned: have thou not
seen the whole man, both a lover of his son and of God? was matrimony here an
hindra^ce? but what say thou to the mother of the Machabees? Was she not a
wife? added she not seven sons to the fellowship of the saints? did she not
see them crowned with martyrdom* did she not stand by as a looker upon, and
not ^aint in her mind? stood she not by exhorting every one of them, and
being the mother of the martyrs, suffered h^ self seven martirdoms? for while
they were tormented she received the stroke. Neither yet without affections
beheld she ^he things that were done. She was the mother, and the violence done
to nature, declared her proper virtue. But she was not overcome, etc. But what
say we to Peter, the maine pillar of the Church, that vehement lover of Christ:
he that in speech was unlearned, and conqueror of Rhethoritia^s: he that was
unskillful, and stopped the philosophers mouths: he that dissolved the Greek
wisdom, no otherwise tha^ the web of spiders: he that travailed through the
world, and cast the net into the sea and fished the world? but what says the
Gospel? Jesus entered unto Peter's wives mother, being sick of a fever. Where
a wives mother is, there is a wife, and there is wedlock. But what say we to
Philip, had he not four daughters? but where sour daughters were, there was
both a wife and matrimony. But what then does Christ? he was indeed borne of
a virgin, but he came to a marriage, and brought his gift with him. They have
(says she) no wine, and he turned water into wine, with virginity honoring
marriage: commending with his gift the thing that was done, that thou should
not abhor marriage* but should hate whooredome. For at my peril I behoof
the salvation, although thou shall wed a wife. Look to thy self, a woman if
she be good, is an helper to thee etc.

All this and more says Chrysostom, in the commendation of the ministers
marriage, even in the same Homely cited by you M. St. which estate of marriage
to be joined in, since the Pope and his Priests can not abide, and allege such
impediments as here Chrysostom confuteth: it is an evident argument (by the
way) that they (...) nothing less than such Priests as Chrysostom ascribes
this spiritual kingdom of the ministry of Gods word and Sacraments unto.

and where Chrysostom (as your self have cited him) says that the
Princeforceth the Priest exhorts: the one by necessity, the other by giving
counsel: the one has visible armor, the other spiritual: Contrariwise, your
Pope not only exhorts, but extorteth and forces too not only by counsel,
but by necessine and extreme violence. Not only pretending spiritual armor,
such as he calls his curses with book, bell, and candle: but also with
visible armor, muironed about (where he rides, or on men's backs is carried)
with a guard of Swar^trutters and Switchers, with gunnes, Harquebushes,
partesans, glayues, and weapons, as if it were Judas with his armed band to
take our Savior Christ. And he claymeth thriurisoiction of ^oth the swords,
wresting thert^ the words of the Disciple: E^ce (...) gladi^ hic: Behold
here are two swords: to the temporal and visible armor, so well as to the
spiritual: Whereupon Eonifacius the eight, did not only hang seven keys at
his girdle, in token of his spiritual power: but girte him self also with a
sword, in token of his temporal power. These Prelates the refore are not such
kind of Priests as Chrysostom speaks of. Neither not^ I this, as a fault^
in this or that person, but as errors defended and maynteined by them, for the
advancement of their naughty Priesthood. What makes then this sentence of
the excellency of the Priests ministry, for the ministry of the Popes
Priesthood, that is all the quit^ contrary? Such false Priests therefore
the Prince has authority to remove them, and to place such^ Priests as
Chrysostom speaks of, and so to bow his head under their hands, that is, to
o^ey their ministry, which is no derogation to the matter in hand of the
Princes supreme government. Thus much M. Stap. to your sentence alleged out
of Chrysostom, upon the which you and all your side do harp so often, and yet
(being well considered) it not only makes nothing for you, but much against
you. Now to your argument that ye gather here upon, saying:

Now then M. Horn, I frame you such an argument. Stap. fol. 74. a
The Priest is the Princes superior in some causes ecclesiastical: Ergo, The
Prince is not the Priests superior in all causes ecclesiastical. The
antecedent is clearly proved out M. Stapletons argument.
of the words of Chrysostom before alleged. Thus. The Priest is superior to
the Prince in remission of sins by Chrysostom* but remission of sins is a
cause ecclesiastical or spiritual: Ergo, The Priest is the Princes superior
in some causes ecclesiastical or spiritual.

To this argument being thus framed (upon the which The answer to the
argument.
M. Stap greatly triumphs,) I answer, it has three fallations in it for
failing. The first, in this word superior, being understood two ways,
either in respect of the ministry or function, or in respect of the public
oversight, ordering and direction. In the former sense the mayor is true. The
Priest is superior to the Prince, in respect of his ministry or function.
But this word superior, being thus understood in the conclusion, for
superiority only in the ministry or function, concludes nothing against
the Princes superiority, which is only the public oversight, ordering and
direction, that this superior ministry and function be not abused.

Now if the word superior be not thus understood, but simply to be the
superior: or in the later sense, that is to say, the Priest is superior in
the public oversight, ordering and direction, that the office be duly
administered by the minister: then is this mayor false, for the Priest is not
thus the Princes superior.

The second fallation is in the words remission of sins. If he mean thereby
the ouersighte to see such remission be duly made by the Priest: then is the
mayor also false. The Priest is not the Princes superior therein. If he means
by remission of sins, the action of remitting them, or the function of the
office, in pronouncing them remitted: then is the mayor true, but the minor
false: For so remission of sins is not a cause ecclesiastical, but an action
or function ecclesiastical. Whereon arises the third fallation of these words
ecclesiastical cause Which the statute and the title mentioning, that the
Prince has supremacy in all ecclesiastical causes, he wilfully wresteth, as
though all actions and functions eccl. were yielded to the Princes supremacy.
Where neither the Prince requires, nor the statute and title yields any such
supremacy in the actions, but only a supremacy in the causes, not to do
them, but to see them rightly done. And thus by resolution of these words, it
appears how the Priest in one sense, as Chrysostom says, is superior to
the Prince, not only in this one thing of remission of sins: But in all other
actions of his duty, and the Prince is far inferior to him: and yet the
Prince in the other sense of the general direction, and public oversight, is
in this and all other causes eccl. superior to the Priest, and the Priest
far inferior unto him. And so the superiority of the Priest hinders
nothing the supremacy of the Prince.

Master St. (having now as he thinks by this mighty Stapl. 75. a.
argument won the field, and quite confounded the Bishop) sets out as a
tropha^m or monument of his history this marginall note.

Evidently proved by S. Chrysostom, the Prince not to be the supreme governor
in causes ecclesiastical.

And cries out for joy:

Which being most true, what thing ca^ you conclude of al ye have Stap. page
75. a
or shall say to win your purpose, or that ye here presently say?

And thus on the triumph of this argument, M. St. rejects all that the B.
has said as insufficie^t, and would return upon him the sentence of S.
Augustine against the Donatists, that the Bishop cited against M. Feck. Wherein
he brings nothing a fresh, that is not before declared and answered unto,
besides vain words of course, worthy no other answer, than to be returned
upon the^ selves, to who^ they properly appertain: who in deed deny both
Christ the head, and Christ the body, that is, his catholic Church. And that
as the Donatistes sect was condemned by Constantine, Honorius, and other
Emperors, the high kings of Christendom. So have they withal condemned you
master Stapl. that follow the Donatistes, and so may and ought all christian
Princes, and the Emperor now (whose high kingdoms, besides a bare name in
any matter of Christianity, ye make nothing) to pull down such usurpers of
their high kingdoms, and set up true and godly ministers in their places: to
whom they might and ought to submit their heads, under their spiritual
ministry. To the which sort (as is showed plainly out of Chrysostom) your
Popish Priesthood is clean contrary. And therefore to return your words
upon your self: Ye are Stap. 74. b.
they that cut in sunder the unity and peace of Christ's Church, and rebel
against the promises of his Gospel. Which Gospel ye can not abide should come
to light, and therefore the high kings of Christendom should remove and
condemn you. Which is a better argument than yours, M. Stap. and is
sufficient to infer the supremacy of these high Kings and Princes.

The. 23. Division.
THe Bishop in his division prosecuting still the words Fol. 75. a.
of S. Paul Romans 13. proves further out of Chrysostom and Eusebius, that as
the Prince is Gods minister: so this ministry consists not only in civil
and temporal, but also in the well ordering of the Church matters, and their
diligent rule and care therein. The effect of his argument is this.

The Prince (as Chrysostom says) prepares the minds of many to be made more
appliable to the doctrine of the word, and is the great light and true
preacher and setter forth of true godliness, as Eusebius says:

Ergo, His ministry consists as well in ecclesiastical as civil causes.

The antecedent Eusebius proves by the example of Constantine, that his
ministry stretched to the setting forth of godliness to al countries, and
that he preached God, and not only civil laws by his Imperial decrees and
Proclamations. And this he confirms by Constantines own confession, that he
taught by his ministry the religion and law of God: that thereby he caused
the increase of the true faith. And by the same put away and euerthrewe all the
evils that pressed the world.

But the world in Constantines time was pressed with diverse schisms, errors,
heresies, false religions, and many ecclesiastical abuses and superstitions,
besides the heathen Idolatry:

Ergo, His ministry stretched not only over temporal causes, but also
ecclesiastical. Yea he counts this his best ministry: Ergo. It belongs
to the Prince as well, if not more than the other. And so the Bishops argument
follows heerevpon, that the Apostles sentence (the Prince is Gods minister)
argues the Princes charge and government, in all manner causes
ecclesiastical, so well as temporal.

These proves of the Bishop being so evident, M. Stap. Stapl. cap. 19. fol.
75. b
answers they are all insufficient, saying:

I see ye not (master Horn) come as yet near the matter.

I answer, who is so blind as he that sees and will not see? Were ye not of
the number of those, of whom Christ says, I came to judgment into this
world, that those that see not, should see, and those that see should be
made blind: Ye might then both clearly see, that he both comes John. 9.
near the matter, and satisfies it at large. Except ye be as blind of the
matter also, as ye pretend to be of these the Bishops proufes. But if ye
would have followed your own counsel, ever to have set before your eyes the
state of the question in issue between them: ye should well by this time have
seen, that the Bishop digressed nothing from it. And that your self of self
will or malice, will not look aright thereon, but clean awrie, still starting
aside and swaruing from the mark for the nonce, to pick occasions whereon to
wrangle. For, wherefore I pray you do ye not see, that the Bishop comes not
near the matter?

I see not (say you) that Constantine changed religion, plucked down Altares,
deposed Bishops, etc. But that he was diligent in defending the old and former
faith of the Christians.

Whatsoever you see or see not in Constantine, master Stapl. all the world may
see false dealing in you: and how like an unnatural subject, to your natural
Prince ye be. As though ye saw that the Queens highness had changed
religion, except ye mean false religion, and that ye might have seen in
Constantine also. He changed the heathen religion of the Paynims, and abolished
it, with all Constantine changed religion.
their Altares, Bishops, Priests and temples, and set forth the true religion
of Jesus Christ. He changed likewise and abolished such superstitions,
Idolatries, schisms, errors and heresies, as troubled the Church of Christ
in his time. Which you might easily have seen in Constantines own words by
the Bishop cited, That he put away and ouerthre we all the evils that pressed
the world.

If you say, ye can not yet see that he meant all spiritual and ecclesiastical
evils, so well as temporal: put on a pair of spectacles, master Stapl that
are not dymmed with affection, and then shall ye see, that of such kind as
the good things were, which he set forth, of such kind were the contrary
evils, that he put away and overthrew: but the good things that he set forth,
were true godliness, decrees of God, the religion of the most holy law, the
most blessed faith. etc. All which are matters most spiritual and
ecclesiastical: Ergo all the evils that he abolished, were so well spiritual
and ecclesiastical as civil and temporal matters.

If ye say, yet ye see nothing but that he was diligent in defending the old
and former faith of the Christians. True in deed, neither can ye see any other
thing in the Queens Majesty, nor any authority is given hereby to Princes,
than as Constantine was, to be diligente in defending the old and former
faith of the Christians, founded by Christ and taught by his Apostles. And if
any other since that time, have brought in any things besides that old and
former faith, to remove the same, and reduce us to the old and former faith of
the Christians. For as Tertullian Tertull.
says: That is of the Lord, and that is truth, that was before delivered,
but that which afterward was thrust in, is both strange and false. And so
says Constantine, I both called again mankind (taught by my ministry) to
the religion of the most holy law, and also caused the most blessed faith
should increase and grow under a better governor.

Now seeing that many points of the Popish faith and The Queens highness
has not altered, but restored the old and former faith.
doctrine have cropen in since that time, and many of later years, besides and
contrary to the old and former faith of the Cheistians, taught by Christ, and
left us written by the finger of the holy ghost, sealed and confirmed by so
many miracles, to endure to the worlds end, and never to be altered, added
unto, or taken from: all such novelties besides or contrary to the old and
former faith, has the Q. highness (god be thanked therefore) removed, as
Co^sta^tine did, and all Princes ought to do: and has called us again to the
religion of the most holy law, as a most diligent defender of the old and
former faith, from the Popish corruptions in faith that have sprung up since.
And as Constantine What Bishops the Queens Majesty has deposed.
deposed such Bishops as obstinately maintained those later errors, and not
the old and former faith (except on their repentance and submission they were
by him restored) so has our most gracious souer aigne, deposed such Popish
Bishops and Pastors, as obstinately defended and maintained their later
errors. Wherein she has showed her self, a most diligent defender and
recouerer, of the oldest and foremost faith of the Christians.

Thus as her doings swerve not herein from Constantines* (as you pretend) so
has she no less right and authority in her dominion, than Constantine had in
his, and all Princes ought to have in theirs: being all (as S. Paul says)
Gods ministers in this behalf. To the which sentence of S. Paul, with
Chrysostomes and Eusebius judgment thereon, full coldely, ye say:

If S. Paul call the civil Magistrate a minister, because Stap. foll. 7^, b
through fear he constrayneth the wicked to embrace the godly doctrine, as by
your saying S. Chrysostom construeth it, we are well content therewith.

Now well ye be content therewith, as your obstinate refusal of this the Princes
ministry, the storms and counterblastes ye raise agayn^st it, do declare: so
also, that ye be not half pleased with Chrysostomes construction thereon (how
well soever ye would seem to be contented) appears in this your pinching and
wringing of Chrysostomes sentence by ye Bishop cited. For neither the Bishop
cited him as you Why the prince is called the minister of God.
say he does, neither you cite Chrysostom fully nor rightly, which argues ye
are not very well contented therewith, Chrysostom shows not, that ye prince
is called ye minister of God, only because through fear he constrayneth the
wicked to embrace the godly doctrine, but also he speaks of honoring
commending, or advancing, whereby he prepares men's minds to be the more apt
to receive the word of doctrine. Which phrase of Chrysostom, the word of
doctrine, The word of doctrine.
ye could not also abide, least ye should have ouerturned thereby, all those
points of doctrine, that are not contained in the word of God, which
nevertheless ye term godly doctrine, though God in his word has not allowed
the same, but are the traditions and commandments of men. And thus making
what doctrine it likes you godly or ungodly, and reserving to your selves the
authority thereof, ye say, ye are well content that the civil magistrate be a
minister, because through fear he co^strayneth, that is to say, ye make him
serve your turn, to hang, to draw, to burn, to rack, to banish, to emprison,
and to force men to embrace what doctrine you appoint and tell him, is godly
doctrine. This ye be well content withal. This ye call his best ministry.
And that this is his setting forth of Christ's true religion, and that this is
his preaching the same with his imperial decrees and proclamations. But if
once he take upon him carefully to examine by the word of God, whether those
doctrines and that religion that ye pretend to be godly, and the old and
former faith, be so or no: and finding them clean contrary, he remove them,
and by force co^straine his subjects to embrace the doctrine of Gods word, and
so prepare them to receive the truth, by punishing the wicked and obstinate
seducers, by placing in their roumes, and honoring the godly setters forth of
the word of doctrine: then in no case ye are well content therewith, but rail
at, and sclaunder the doings of such a Prince, and devise all the trecheries
that ye can to his destruction.

Nevertheless would ye well consider what here once again M. St. you have
granted, That the best ministry and Stapl. 75. b The Princes best ministeris
and service.
service of the great Constantine rested in the setting forth of Gods true
religion: Then if the setting forth thereof, be the Princes best ministry and
service: may he not Judge of his best ministry and service? yea how shall he
set forth that, whereof he shall not judge? Of other parts of his ministry
he may judge, and may he not Judge of his best ministry? are the setting
forth of civil laws, properly a part of his office, because they be a good
part of his ministry, and is the setting forth of true religion, being the
best part (as ye are content to call it) no part at al thereof? or not rather
if it be his best ministry, it is the best part of his office also. And seeing
the setting forth of true religion is not properly a civil matter, but
distinct therefrom: then does the best part of the Princes office consist in
the ministry of an ecclesiastical matter, and that of such an one, as
contains the oversight of all other matters ecclesiastical. For as in true
religion they are or ought to be all contained, so in the setting forth of the^
is contained their oversight and direction. For how can he well set forth any
thing, that he ouer^eeth not, nor directs? which oversight and direction
being the supreme government that the Queens Majesty only claymeth and we
ascribe unto her: how have ye not granted withal (M. St.) that this
supremacy over all causes Ecclesiastical, above all other things belongs to
her Majesty? But, for all this that he him self has granted, or the Bishop
has inferred, says M. Stapleton:

Neither this that ye here allege out of place, nor all the residue Stap. fol.
75. b
which ye rehearse of this Constantine (with whose doings ye furnish hereafter
six full leaves) can importe this superiority, as we shall there more at
large specify.

This is alleged out of place ye say M. St. for Constantine. But who sees
not, that this is but a pelting quarrel? the Bishop on good consideration and
order declares, both by Chrysostoms exposition, and Constantines example, how
this sentence of S. Paul, that the Prince is Gods minister, stretches not
only to his ministry, in civil, but also in causes Ecclesiastical. But this
is alleged out of place* say you. It is no marvel M. Stap. if it seem out
of place with you, for all is alleged out of place, that having any place
displaceth your assertion. And thus pretending it is alleged out of place: ye
pass it over, and post us off^il an other time, when ye will declare it more at
large, ad Calendas Graecas, when ye shall have more leisure. But sir, had ye
any leisure at this time, ye might better have satisfied your Reader, to have
fully answered here, to that is here objected, and not thus to dally off the
matter till another time. But there is no remedy, the reader must have
patience, and wait your further leisure. Nevertheless, when ye shall (M. St.
vouchsafe to meet again, to common further of Constantines doings, I M.
Stapletons shifting answer.
pray ye do not, as hitherto ye have done in other answears, telling the reader
ye will specify it more at large in such a place hereafter, and when ye come
to the answering of that place, ye tell him again, that ye specified that more
at large before, and so send your Reader from hence thither, and from thence
again hither, to trotte up and down, and he satisfied in neither place.
Howbeit, this is a good ready answer for you, for by this shift, one answer
serves both places. Nevertheless what need any more large specifying either
hers or there? For ye tell us roundly to make a short tale of the matter that
all is to short.

Neither this, say you* that is here alleged, neither all the residue, which ye
rehearse of Constantine, (with whose doings ye furnish hereafter six full leaves)
ca^ import this superiority.

This is in deed a round answer and a short, and if it Stap. 75. b.
were withal as true* ye need not M. Stapleton promise to specifi^ it more at
large hereafter, but belike ye thought this answer was to short, and therefore
ye do well to refer the Bishop further. As for the Bishops present allegation
out of Constantine, fully imports this superiority, that the ministry of
the Prince has to set forth Ecclesiastical causes so well as Temporal, or
rather much more, in so much as it is the Princes best ministry, to set
forth by his decrees the true religion, the law of God, and the most holy
faith, and to remove and punish all evils, that trouble the world, such as
chiefly are errors, Heresies, Schisms, superstitions, abuses, false or wicked
pastors, etc. all which is evident by Constantines own auouching. And I pray
you M. St. mark all these things a little more advisedly, and tell me then
what wants of the issue in question between these parties, that the Prince
has supreme government, so well in Ecclesiastical causes, as in Temporal.
And whether these be facings without proof or half proof in the world, as ye
say: or rather these be not your to to impudent facings and bracings, without
any proof Stap. 75. b.
or half proof or any jot of proof in the world, but say only it imports
it not, and neither tell* how nor why: and say it is here alleged out of place:
and ye will specify it there more a^ large: and so shift it off here
unanswered: and there say here ye have answered to it: and neither here nor
there meddle further withit. Does (this trow) you importe a full and sufficient
answer?

The. 24. Division.
WHereas the Bishop on S. Paul's sentence declared before, out of Eusebius,
commending Constantine, that the Princes best ministry consists in setting
forth all true Religion, and abolishing all false doctrine and errors: in this
Division he confirms the same with the judgment of another later
Ecclesiastical historier, Nicephorus, whom the Papists set out for Catholic:
Comparing Nicephorus judgment of the Princes supremacy.
in these things, these two Emperors, the one with the other, Paleologus with
Constantine, commending this Emperor of Greece above al other things, for this
his rule and dealing in reforming religion, as did Constantine. For which
cause, as Constantine called it his best ministry, so Nicephorus calls it,
a virtue among all other belonging to an Emperor, and most seemly for his
imperial dignity. which what it is, and wherein this ministry does chiefly
consist, the Bishop gathers together diverse sentences, out of the Preface of
Nicephorus to the Emperor, in his commendation, for his zeal, his defense,
his chief authority, his governance, his restoring, his clensing, his
establishing, his setting forth of true religion, and pulling down the
contrary: whereby Nicephorus (protesting that he speaks nothing for fanor,
or statterie) declares his judgment to agree with Eusebius on Saint Paul's
sentence, that the Princes supreme government in these things, is his best
ministry, and most properly belonging to his charge and office.

To this allegation of Nicephorus Master Stapleton deuideth his Counterblast
into two winds. The former blast proceeds altogether out of his stinking
breath of railing Rhetorike, to deface not only the Bishop his adversary, the
Bishop of Sarum, and the Homelies set forth against Idolatry, chalenging them
for lies and forgeries: but also to deface the authority of Nicephorus and the
Emperor, whom he affyrmeth to be wicked and wretched Heretics. In the other
blast, admitting the authority of Nicephorus, he blows as fast to overcome
the force of the Bishops allegations, as insufficient to prove his purpose.

In his first part, to get the more credit for plain and true dealing with
his Reader, and to blemish the Bishop with suspicion of cloked dissembling, he
promises, saying:

But first, we will dissipate and discuss the mist that master Horn has cast
before thine eyes, where indeed none was, for the Bishop most clearly set
down the words of Nicephorus. Stap. fol 76. b M. Stapletons Miste.
Master Stapleton himself of purpose rayseth a miste, whereby not only he
dimmeth the Readers eyes, but also wandreth in his own mist up and down,
slun^bling at many impertinent matters, and al besides the purpose. For whereto
else serves all that he discourses about the Gre^ians Heresy of the holy
Ghostes proceeding, or the Council of Lions, of Michaell Pale^logus that
agreed with the Latins therein, of the ^recians revolt, of the malicious spite
of the Greek Bishops, of the denying Michaell his burial, what need all
these declarations? Which if the Bishop had set forth, as he had nothing
thereby opened the matter, so had he given occasion to Master Stapleton of just
reproouing him for straying of purpose from the mark, and dal^ying in vain
circumstaunces. And now that he has not stood in any such long (...) and
fodings off of the matter, master Stapleton says he casts mistes. And thus
which way soever the Bishop take* Master Stapleton would find an occasion to
pick a quarrel. And pretending to dissipate and discus^e a myste, in the
fair and clear Sun shine, he rayseth such a smoke, that blundering forth
he wotteth not well whether, he st^uibleth he can not tell on whom, and
falls into a bitter innectiue at the author of the Homely* against
Idolatry, only upon this occasion, that he chanced on the name of Michaell
Paleologus.

Wherein he plays, as I heard once of a ^opishe Priest in Cambrige that in
his Sermon naming Abraham in his discourse, to dissipate and discuss all
mystes, as he pretended, but most likely to stretche out his matter, began to
tell what manner a man Abraham was, and having named his son, began to tell
of Isaac, and so of Jacob, and on a row of all the twelve Patriarchs, and of
Egypt, of the land of promiss, of the wilderness, and waded so far that he
had quyte lost himself in the Wilderness, and his theme be began withal.
After which sort fares Master Stapleton, because the Bishop mentioned
Michaell Paleologus, herevppon he enters into an exclamation against the
Author of the Apology. All which though it be a plain digression from the
Bishops answer, and the issue in question, being about Images and
Idolatry: yet such is his importunity, we must follow master Stapleton, not
whether the cause requires, but whether his idle brain pleases to run at
randon. Otherwise, the principal part of this Counterblast being rejected to
his common place of other impertine^t bibblebables: he would cry out that he
were not answered in such a weighty matter. And yet when all is done, as it
is nothing to the present purpose, so is it to no effect in any other matter at
all.

For, all his quarrel consists in these two points. M. Stapletons in^ect ^e
against the homily of images.
The one, that the Homely wrongfully named Theodorus Lascaris, for Michaell
Paleologus. The other, for a decree of Ualence and (...) against Images. For
the former, what Authors the Author of that Homily followed, I know not,
how be it he names not Theodorus Lascaris, as you say, master Stapleton, but
only Theodorus, neither this missing of the Emperors name (to him that would
have regarded the matter contained in the Homely) might be thought worthy
so great an outcrye, except it were to you master Stapleton, that still use to
stumble at a sirawe and leap over a block, like to the Phareseys, that
Excolantes culicem Camelum glutiebant, Were stiffled with a g^atte, and Matthew.
23.
yet swallowed a Camel. Neither was this so great an oversight, sithe
Theodorus and Michaell were both of one time. The one expelled the other, and
both still retained the name of Emperor. For as Uolaterane says,
Michaeligitur Paleologus. etc. Michaell Paleologus therefore Anthropol, lib. 23.
at the same time invaded the Empire, which two most noble houses of
Constantinople, that is to say, the house of the Lascarie, and the house of
the Paleologie, the one decayed, the other lift up her head. Theodorus
Lascaris being thus expelled from the City of Lascaris.
Constantinople, yet reigned he still at Adrianople as the Emperor of Greece.
And it is not unlikely, the occasion of his exile to have been about Images, so
well as other matters. Sith the Greek and Latin Church have stryued The
contention between the greek and Latin church for images.
about the controversy of Images nothing more, and none so hot. For which
matter chiefly, the Pope rebelled from his allegiance, and raised all the
division of the Empire in the Church of Christ, that has been the chief decay
and ruin thereof, which only sprang of the question of Images. And yet says
master Stapleton, giving us no other warrantiss thereof, than this his bare
word for Images:

Which had customably continued in the Greek Church Stap. 76. b.
many hundredth years before, and so reverently afterward continued, even
till Constantinople was taken by the great Turk, and yet this good Antiquarie
and Chronographer, will needs have the Gr^cians above seven hundredth years
together, to have been Iconomachees, that is, Image breakers.

Are ye not ashamed, master Stapleton, to speak such untruths even where
your self challenge other of lies? For, the author of the Homelies notes not
here, nor hereupon, the dealing against Images all that space, nor names any
Iconomachees nor medleth any thing there with those. 700. years that
customably continued till Constantinople was taken by the Turk. But only of
those years that customably continued from the primitive Church, till the time
of the Empress Irene.

The words of the Homely are these. These things In the homily against
idolatry.
were done in the Church about the year of our Lord 760. Note here I pray you
in this process of the story, that in the Churches of Asia and Greece, there
were no Images publicly, by the space of. 700. years, and there is no doubt
but the primitive Church next the Apostles times was most pure.

Now where the words and meaning of the Homily are most plain, and so true
withal, that ye could not gainsay it, nor your Master D. Harding could
improve any point of B. Jewels challenge, about the same article: ye wittingly
wrest the words of the Homily to the. 700. years preceding the taking of
Constantinople by the great Turk, chalenging the Homily to allege the
Gretians to have been Iconomaches all that while, thinking to fasten as ye call
it a notorious lie on the Homily. But the Homilies truth is manifest, and the
lie lights on your self, besides your rashness to affirm without the book
on your own fingers, that for many hundredth years before, Images customably
continued in the Greek Church? and so reverently afterward continued even
till Constantinople was taken by the great Turk. For the which, though it
would go hard with you to put you to your proof, and to let it hang in
suspense of a lie till ye haus confirmed it: yet letting it pass, I only
demand, that if your Images have such great force as your Legendes pretend,
how chance they kept the City and their worshippers no better from the
Turks? can they do no morethan the dumb Idols that the Prophet speaks of?
Habent gladium and securim Baruch. 6.
in manu se autem de bello and latro^ibus non liberant, they have a sword and
an axe in their hand, but they deliver not themselves from war and from
thieves. Or rather (if it be as ye say) were the Grecians not delivered over to
those enemies, as for their other vices, so chiefly for that their Idolatry,
as the children of Israel for the like were led captive into Babylon?

The other thing that Master Stapleton notes in the Homely is this.

Many other shameful lies are there (says he) to disgrace, deface, Stapl. 77.
b.
and destroy the Images of Christ and his Saints, especially one, whereas he
says that the Emperor Valence and Theodosius made a proclamation, that no man
should paint or carue the cross of Christ. And thereupon gaily and iolily
triu^pheth upon the catholics. VVheras the Proclamation neither is, nor was, to
restrain all use of the cross, but that it should not be painted or carved
upon the ground. Which these good Emperors, not Valens (for he was the
valiant captain and defend^r of the Arians) but Valentinianus and Theodosius,
did of great godly reucre^ce that they had to the cross, enact. And yet as
gross, as soul, and as loud a lying fetch as this is, M. Jewel walks even
in the very same steps, putting Valens for Valentinian: and alleging this
edict, as general against al Images of the cross.

You take upon you lustily M. Stapl. to challenge in your broad language both
the Homily, and the B. of Sarum* But it is your manner, there is no shift, ye
must be borne withal, chiefly in this your extrauagant by quarrel. Otherwise
if ye had considered more indifferently ye homilies and the B. allegatio^, no
doubt you would have tempered your pen with more sobriety, ye challenge either
of them for two lies in this allegation, the one, for putting the name of
Valens for Valentinian, the other for citing that simply that was conditional.
which though it were as ye pretend, yet neither of these the The Bishop of
Sarum and the author of the homily discharged of M. Stapl. challenge
B. or the Homilies author, are to be charged with any lie herin: who have both
faithfully set down their author Petrus Crinitus, (except ye will dally also
about the Printers escape, that for Crinitus put Erinilus, placing E. for C.
and l. for t.) and quoted the place, and cited his words. Which to your better
contentation, least ye should say any thing is not fullye satisfied, I will
set down the whole ad verbum.

Sed libitum est verba ex libris Augustalibus refer. etc. Petrus Crinit. l b.
9 cap. 9. de honest. di^c.
But it pleases me to declare the words out of the Imperial books,
whereby the whole may be known, for because both Valens and Theodosius
Emperors, did write on this wise unto their Governor the Pretour, Since that
we have a diligent care in all things, concerning the religion of the high
Godheade, we will suffer no body to carue, or ingraue, or paint, the sign of
our Savior Christ either in colors, stone, or other matter, but whatsoever
sign is found, we command it to be taken away, punishing them with most
grievous punishment, whosoever shall attempt the contrary to our decrees and
commandment. In the which saying, if perhaps any man require an author,
let him read the Decrees and Edictes of the Emperors, which of the most
learned men Tribunianus, Bassilides, Theophilus, Dioscorus, and other, are
collected by Satira in the reign of this most noble Emperor Justinian.

Thus ye see Crinitus worde^ (whom only and truly they allege) how simply
he cites it, and also in Ualens name. If ye be so heinously offended at the
matter, go and pick your quarrel against Crinitus, from whom they have it,
challenge him, not them therefore. I warrant you Crinitus being a Papist, had it
been otherwise, would not have set it down so simplye against you: and being
so famous a Lawyer among you, referring the Reader to the Edict it self,
would not set it down otherwise than he had simply read it, howsoever your
later false* Iuggling (as is more likelye of the twain) has thrust in such
condicionalles, of the ground, to make it seem done of more Idolatry, and
not to take away all occasion of Idolatry.

But howsoever it were, both the Bishop and the Homily bring their
warrantise with them, to clear them Te Papists offended at our Homelies.
of making any lies therein, and ever the lies do light upon your self. As
for that ye snatch occasion hereon, to digress further into one of your
inuectiue common places, against the Book of Homilies, and commends unto us
your Homilies of Bid and others: neither is this a proper time and place of
the trial of ours now, neither it appears ye can find any point of false
doctrine in them. Which no doubt you would not have spared to have noted, that
would quarrel at such petit matters as ye do: neither do I vtterlyd
discemmende the Homilies of the venerable Bede, although otherwise Bedes
Homelies.
he smatc^th of many corruptions of his cor^upted time. But whatsoever his or
others were, that ye boast of so have been read in the Church by you, what I
pray you was the Church the better by the reading of that, whereof they had no
understanding, what was read? as they have in the Homilies now set forth unto
them.

But it is more than hie tune M. Stapleton, that for shame at the length ye
remember your self, your matter, your adversary, and your Reader. And not
thus to run at randon, and wander for the nonce in mistes, having promised to
dissiptae and discuss the mist that M. Horn has cast before the Readers
eyes. Here is hitherto no mist at all of the Bishop. At least wise ye have mist
it, and not discussed it, or meddled any thing at all with the Bishops sayings
to or fro. Go to therefore M. St. have the B. reised any mist, let us see how
your counterblast will blow away and dissipate the same.

Yes say you, M. Horn calls ignorantly Emanuell, him who^ Sta. 79. a. and. b
he should call Andronicus. And here, to show your cunning, ye enter into those
Emperors pedegrees. Mistaking the name of an Emperor.


Why M. St. is this so sore a mist to have mist the Emperors name? were all
these circu^quaques for this matter, to have foiled the B. for mistaking a name
by ignorance? which were it so as ye would have it, what prejudice is here
done to the matter? for what soever this Emperors name was, whom Nicephorus
does commend, it greatly for^th not, but the matter forces. The author
sets forth in this Emperor, such virtues, that as Langus notes, ought to be
Langus in pr^fa. Niceph.
in every good Christian Emperor. What mist was therefore in the matter cast
before the readers eyes, if by ignorance he had misnamed y^ man? Neither could
you (if envy against the B. and pride of your self pricked you not) vpbraide
this mistaking of the name to the Bishop, for vnclerkly or unfaithful handling
as ye do: except ye will do the like to the most, and most famous
Hystoriographers, that have written thereupon. For the same author Uolaterane
(whom ye quote) Anthropolog. lib. 23.
being a Papist, and imputing all their decay to their often for saking of the
Pope, says of the Hystoriers of these Emperors, that almost all the writers do
err^ in the most part of things, and take Caloiohannes for Andronicus the
younger, and so confound all things, reckoning up. 16. or. 17. famous Greek
writers, that do all disagree among themselves in the Treatise of the
Emperors. No marueyle then if the Bishop might mistake the name of one,
without any his rebuke of vnclerklinesse and ignorance, least of all, of ani^
unfaithfulness, or casting of mistes for the matter to the eyes of any
indifferent Reader, except to the eyes bleared with malice, of such a
counterblasting Momus, as is master Stapleton.

Nevertheless to his further satisfying and contentation (if any thing may
content him) he might well have seen the Bishop discharged, and to have
followed good reason and authority, in alleging this Emperor by the name of
Emanuell Paleologus, and not Andronicus Paleologus, had master Stapleton,
either been so cunning as he makes himself, or would have dealt justly, to
have accused them The Papiste^ themselves call this Emperor as the Bishop did.
of mistes, vnclerklinesse, ignorance, unfaithfulness, (being famous writers
of his own side) that have so named him, and so set it cut in print, and that
not by a escape, but of purpose, in setting out of the story, and are allowed
and authorized. Whose judgment the Bishop following, the blame (if any blame
be) lights on them, and not on him. For as the Bishop names him Emamuell, so
also does the volume of Nicephorus printed at Basil by Io. Oporinus, and
Heruagius, Anno domini 1555 Mense Martio, which print is set forth (least you
should reject it) Cum priu^legio Romans vegu Ferdinandi and Fra^crum regis Hemi^.
2. perused likewise and approved by the Doctors of the faculties of Sorbon and
of Louaine, translated and set forth by Io. Langus, and commended as a worthy
work to the Emperor Ferdenande by his honorable, learned, faithful and
beloved Counceller and Hystoriographer* Wolfangus Lazius, if all this will be
able to content you.

Io. Langus, in his Preface Dedicatorie to Ferdinandus has these words.
Uirtutes vero Maiestatis ^uae, etc. I purpose not here to rehearse otherwise of
your Maiestyes virtues, both for that I have to small ability for so great a
work, and better it were not to speak at all of a matter of weight, than not
to be able to prosecute it, as the worthiness of it requires. And also for
that Nicephorus in his Preface, when he consecrateth the travail of this
History to Emanuell Paleologus the Emperor of Constantinople, (for so being
moved by conjectures I take him to be) he lively expresses as it were in a
Glass, the most of those self same virtues.

Besides this, where Nicephorus in the beginning of his Preface Dedicatorie,
does call the Emperor to whom he dedicateth his work, Pricipem omnium
Christianissimum atque humanissimum, A most Christian and most courteous
Prince: Herevppon John Langus makes his first marginall note, Uidetur is esse
Emanuel Paleologus: This Prince seems to be Emanuell Paleologus. And after
that in the same Preface, he adds another note thereof, Emanuels nato
praedones Turcae Constantinopoli eiecti sunt: When Emanuell was borne the
Turkishe spoylers were driven out of Constantinople. And again, Imperatoris
Emanuelis infanti^: The infancy of Emanuell the Emperor. Likewise another.
Successor eius in Imperio Constantinopolitan^ Emanuel filius: His successor in
the Empire of Constantinople was Emanuell his son. Another. Diuini numinis
erga Emanuelem gratia and favor: The grace and favor of the divine Godheade
toward Emanuell. Another. Trib^untur Emanueli praecipue Imperatoriae
virtutes: The chief virtues of an Emperor are ascribed to Emanuell. Another.
Palatiu^ Imp^riale ib idem ab Emanuele constructum. The Emperors Palayce was
buylt by Emanuell. Another. Eam videlicet Constantinopolim per Emanuelem
Christiani retinuerunt: The Christians held it (that is to say Constantinople)
by Emanuell. And yet another. Dedicatur Ecclesiastica hystoria Imperatori
Emanueli, and veluti corona capiti cius imponitur. The Ecclesiastical history
is dedicated to the Emperor Emanuell, and is set on his head as it were a
crown.

Now master Stapleton might not all these notes upon the Preface made by
Langus a learned Papist, move the Bishop to name the Emperor, Emanuell
Paleologus, and clear the Bishop of unfaithful dealing and raising of
mystes? And if he were deceived, he was deceived, for that he gave to much
credit to such famous Papists, as Lazius and Langus, the Doctors of the
faculties of Sorbone and of Louayne, that take upon them Censoriam potestatem,
To have the authority of Censors, in allowing and approouing the most of all
your Books. If therefore ye blame the Bishop for this, (except ye will
show your self over partial) ye must needs condemn all these for the same.

Now master Stapleton having (as he thinks) about this name, gotten a great
triumph, pretending to drive away the myste, and clear the coasts, doing
nothing him self but trampling in the duste, and raising vain smokes about
bare names, letting the matter alone vnaunswered, the more to dim the Readers
eyes: tells us how this Andronicus the elder, son to Michaell, after his
fathers death, summoned a Council of the Gretians, wherein he and they
anulled and Stapl. 77. a.
revoked that his Father had done at the Council at Lions, namelye concerning
the proceeding of the holy Ghost, and for the which Nicephorus Master Horns
Author, being also carried away with the common error, as with an huge
raging tempest, does so highly advance this Andronicus. And so withal ye see
upon how good a man, and upon how good a cause, master Horn has builded
his new supremacy to pluck down the Popes old supremacy. For the
infringing whereof, the wicked working of wretched Heretics is with him, here
and else where, as we shall in place convenient show, a goodly and a godly
President, as it is also with master lewell for to mainteyne the very same
quarrel, as I have at large in my return against his fourth article declared.

What ye have there declared at large or at brief, (Master Stapleton) is not
our matter, nor I have it to see, and I recke not to look, for I deem it by
this: If I judge amiss, GOD forgive me. Only herein all the What a bragger M.
Stapl. is
world may see, what a iollie bragger ye be. Ye are ever telling us of your
For^resle, your Translations, your Replies, your turns and returns, besides
this your Counterblast, nothing must be forgotten of all your clerkly
Pamphletes. If ye want good neighbors, ye will not spare to commend them to
us your self. As for me, I will for this once, return your return empty to
your self, and answer only your present quarrels. The effect whereof is
to deface the Bishops allegation, as grounded upon the doyngs of an Heretic,
and avouched out of the sayings of an erroneous author.

And to this purpose, first ye threape upon the Reader: the Prince to have
been Andromens the elder, and not Emanuell. And yet for all ye would make it
so clear a case: ye see the Doctors doubt (as they say) and all your own
Doctors, and that the chief in judgment. Secondly, ye would make the fact
and doings that are commended by Nicephorus in this Emperor, to be about the
anulling and reuoking of that Michaell had done at the Council of Lions,
namely concerning the proceeding of the holy ghost, whereas all your Doctors
abouesaid, name it chiefly to be for expelling of the Turks, and preserving of
the Christians in Constantinople, besides his other virtues. For the which
cause not only Nicephorus so highlye commends him, but also Lazius, Langus,
and all your foresaid Sorbonistes and Louanians. And yet you (to make the
Emparor and the matter odious) say, that it was the denying of the proceeding
of the holy ghost, for ye which Niceph. does so highly advance this
Andronicus. Wherein as ye slander them both, so, thirdly, do ye great wrong
to Nicephorus, to slander him with so great an hereste, and say that he was
carried away with the common error, as with an huge raging tempest. But I doubt
it will rather seen M. Stapleton, your self were carried away with so huge a
raging tempest, either of the heat of some choleric passion, or some
melancholicke envy, so cankered against the Bishop and the truth of his cause,
that it makes you freat and Nicephorus selaundered*
rage even against Nicephorus also. For and ye were not carried away in the huge
raging tempest of such a sustian fume, a man might then be the bolder to pull
you by the slee^e, and gently demand if ye find any thing in this
Nicephorus, wherefore ye should so sore challenge him of this heresy, or
wherefore he should so highly commend this Emperor for this heresy: I
think ye would be better advised, and mollify this sharp challenge of
heresy in Nicephorus.

Many superstitions and fabulous tales there be found, of many things in
Nicephorus, I grant, but for my own part, I find not that any ever noted him
of heresy in this point. And I think my opinion therein to be more true than
yours, for proof whereof, I will be reported by such witnesses, as I think
you will not except against, even by your College of Di^es in Louaine. Who
affirm in their censure upon this author, that, P^a solum and religiosa com
^endat etc. Nicephorus commends only godly and religious things, Nicepho^
historia ecclesia^ ^yois mand^ etc. not only the ecclesiastical history of
faith and religion may be printed, but with much and public profit of the
Church. This could not have been true, but an evident, false lie if that the
author as you say, had so highly advanced the Emperor for restoring and
maintaining of that heresy. Moreover in the very title of the book priuileged
by the Emperor Ferdinand, he is entitled with this Epithete, scriptor vere
catholicus* a writer Catholic indeed: and so likewise by that name of a
Catholic writer he is highly commended to the Emperor Ferdinande, both by
Lazius a catholic, and Langus a catholic, (as you accept the name of
catholic) who translated him out of Greek into Latin, at the said Emperors
commandment. Who also in plain speech to the Emperor, affirms, Volumen
Nicephori de vera synceraque pietate conscriptum esse, the volume of Nicephorus
is written eue^ of true and sincere godliness.

But what need we cite all these against you? when that herein ye co^troll
your self in your fourth book of this counterblast, for although ye there say
he is no Papist, nor a lib. 4. cap. 8. fol. 468. b
Latin, but a Grecian, and infected also with their schism, yet notwithstanding
ye grant he is in all other things catholic, thus ye mollify ye matter with
ye name of scisme, and dally with Nicephor there, which is yet somewhat gentler
than to make him an heretic, and an high aduancer of heresies, as here ye do.
And there ye promised to stand to his arbitrament about you Popes praises,
why then so storm ye at him here, for his judgment in the Princes praises?

But still I see we must bear with you, and so must al your doctors,
especially since ye be here carried away in so huge a raging tempest of your
fury against the allegations of Nicephorus here cited by ye B. And good cause
ye had to kick and winch thereat, for they rub ye a little on the gall, and
therefore you not only slander Nicephorus being the author, but fourthly
also, and whereupon you chiefly stand, How M. Stap. reuileth the Emperor.
most (...) ye revile the Emperor, calling his doings, wicked working, and
his person a wretched heretic, whom, notwithstanding this your railing, not
only Nicephorus commends for a most godly Prince, but also La^gus in his
own preface, and his other notes to the Preface of Nicephorus, giving him as
great a praise: saying he was an Emperor flourishing in all virtues and many
ornaments. Again, An Emperor begotten by the very providence of God.
Praefat, Langi in Eccl. histor. Niceph.
Again, Godliness and religion was from the beginning of his Empire his
greatest care. And that to him were given, the chiefest virtues of an Emperor*
Again, In this Emperor being absolute almost in all virtues and ornaments,
is portrayed apaterne of a most excellent Prince. Yea, yt he was another Noe,
another Moses. Again, This was the Emperors chief praise that he attained
all the whole virtues of the best ancient Princes. And that the Emperors
godliness and religion is commended chiefly among his other virtues. Thus does
your catholic La^gus in his notes upon Nicephor preface set him out, contrary
to that you say was a wicked worker and wretched heretic. But whereto in ye end
do you so revile this emperor? forsooth even to this end, by him not only to
deface ye B. allegation, but also to dashe dawne the Princes supreme
government, as though it consisted altogether or chiefly hereupon. For so you
make your conclusion of this part, saying: And, thus withal ye see upon how
good ama^ and upon how good a cause, M. Horn builds his new supremacy to
pluck down the Popes old supremacy. Stap. 77. b.


As for the newness of this supremacy, and likewise the oldnesse of your
Popes supremacy, is now (M. Stapleton) no convenient place to discuss: it
has partly ben touched before, and shall God willing be examined more herafter.
In the mean season, good leave have ye to crake of old and vpbraid new, at your
pleasure, so long as you bring no new but old and rotten proves thereof, though
here ye allege neither new nor old at Whereon we buyld the Prin ces
supremacy and whereon the Papists buyld the Popes supromacie.
al, you will never I perceive leave your old fashio^s, ye threap on ye B. yt he
builds this supremacy on this emperor. No M. St. the B. builds on no such
grounds, but on ye word of God. It is you yt build the Popes supremacy on men's
donatio^s, and the most of your Popish doctrines and traditions of men's
inue^tio^s. The ground of the Bishops argument, as ye have heard, was out of
Gods word, that the Prince is Gods minister: only he showed it out of S.
Augustine and Chrysostom, and exemplified it by the example of Constantine,
wherein this ministry does chiefly consist. With whom since Nicephorus does
so agree in the description of a Princes chief ministry: were Nicephorus
otherwise an heretic, or were he not, in this he shows himself none: and
were it Andronicus or Emanuell: and were he an heretic in that point, or were
he sound: the Bishop medleth not withal, nor groundeth or builds upon him.
Only he sets forth Nicephorus judgment, either what this Prince was, or
what he ought to be. And proves ye the things which he comme^deth him for,
(whether he deserved such commendation or no, let other examine) are the
principal points of a Princes chief ministry. And what has the B. done
here, that your Catholic Langus does not? commending this Emperor to
Ferdinandus, and likening Ferdinandus unto him, saying of him, that either he
was, Sicut ^um. etc. Such another as our historier depainteth him out in his
ornaments, in the most Langi Epist. ad Ferdin.
part of all virtue to be worshipped, most like your Majesty: or else in the
person of him, declaring that he ought to be such an one as he described (which
is the manner of some Philosophers, and also of Historiographers, composing
orations and books of great Princes) he has confirmed so many and so great
ornaments of your Majesty, foreseeing as it were even then in his mind, that
his work hereafter being turned into Latin, should at length be published
under that Princes name, whom he in Greek had most truly adorned with his
praise. If it were lawful thus for your Langus to apply these Emperors praises
to the Emperor Ferdinand, may not the Bishop apply them in general, as a
pattern of all good Princes duties? and therefore, where ye scoff at this,
calling it in scorn a goodly and godly president: setting your monks aside, I
may well answer with Langus, whatsoever the Emperors judgment, or the
Emperors life were, or the author also of these commendations: these virtues
so highly commended, are both a goodly and godly president, for all Princes to
set before them.

Thus much therefore to the former wind of your counterblast. M Stapleto^s
order.
Now to the later, which after all these long discourses, draws somewhat
nearer to the matter, in admitting the author Nicephorus his testimonies, and
the Emperors doings, and answering to the Bishops allegations thereon. The
effect whereof, is to improve all that is alleged, as insufficient to infer
this supremacy. And it is quartred into four parts. First, pr^supposing
this Prince to be Andronicus, and all (...) doing about to be the reuoking of
Mich^els yelding to the Pope at the Council at Lions: he (...) to prove, that,
not (...), but the Priests (though wicked) had the chief ^uperioritie.
Secondly, he (...) against the gathering and sorting of the Bishops (...).
Thirdly, he enters into the inualiditie of the allegacions. And fourthly here
upon, he makes his triumph and (...) thanks for the victory.

In the first parcel says M. Stapleton.

But now M. Horn what if these heretical doyngs do nothing Stapl. 77. b
relieve your cause, nor necessarily induce the chief superiority in all
causes, and perchance in no cause Ecclesiastical, concerning the final
discussing and determination of the same? verily without any perchance, it is
most plainly and certainly true, it does not. For even in this Schismatic
council, and heretical fynagog, the Bishops played the chief part, and they
gave the final though a wrong and a wicked judgment Who also showed their
superiority, though ungodly upon this man's Father, in that they would not
suffer him to be enterred Princelike: them selves much more worthy to have been
cast after their decease, to the Dogs and Ravens, upon ^ durtie doonghill.

What those Priests were worthy, we have your worthy judgment M. Stapleton,
whereby we perceive your Priests can err, although they be Massemongers, and
by your former sayings, Reverent worshippers of Images too. But all will not
help, they are adjudged to be cast on a d^rtje doonghill, to be devoured of
Dogs and Raues, because they would not suffer* Michael Paleologus their
Emperor (who notwithstanding intruded him self by violence) to be enterred
Prince like.

I pray you M. Stap. be an upright judge. What then are those Priests much more
worthy that would not suffer their living Princes to use their princely
authority? what are those Popes more worthy* that have not only not suffered
their predecessors, to be en^orted Pope like, but have pulled them out of the
ground again, and hacked and mangled them? What are those prelates worthy
that have caused the Priests and the people to renounce their obedience to
their sworn Princes? I think ye will not say these should be* call out on
durtie doonghils: and yet their fault is as much as the other: and it is to be
feared least they shall be cast out into utter darkness*

But ye do a little to much charge the Greek Priests, M. Sta. burdeneth the
Greek priests to far.
with the whole burden of this crime. It was not only they as Uolaterane
says, but it was the whole nation, as Baptist Egnatius writes, as is also
noted in Laugus his margin, Ex qua tuntam ^nuidiam* etc. Whereupon he got
so great envy of the Greek notion, that neither they performed the obsequies
of the dead, and also denied him the place of his Sepulcher. But you apply it
only unto the Priests, that their superiority might the more appear. For
which purpose you direct all your tale, to set forth their superiority,
even in such as ye call wicked and heretical doings: whereas the Princes
claim is not for any such superiority in wicked doings, but only in Godly
and Christian causes.

Ye drive all the matter to (...) of the holy Ghosts proceeding, and to
Andronicus cealing therein, against the dealing of his Father. In (...) thus do
the last editions of Nicephorus, Printed at Paris, 1562. and 1566. (whether
truly or no, is doubtful to say) refer al to Andronicus, and ever in the
place of Ema^el, put Andronicus: and for dri^ing away of the Turks, put in the
anulling of the doings at Lions Council. Which sentence soever be the truer,
either the former which the Bishop followed, or the later which you follow: yet
ca^ you not go so round away with the matter, but that even Michael The
supremecie of the Greek Emperors.
which yielded to the Pope, mangre all his Priests, and made them perforce
while he lived to acknowledge the Pope, showed therein a superiority ^uer
them, which I think ye will not call a tiran^y, (...) gave it over to the
Pope. And his son in doing the contrary (even in the Council ye mention)
shows also a supreme dealing therein. And that supreme dealing that you most
stiffly deny to Princes, to w^te, the calling of Councels, the Patriarch did
it not, but the Prince, (...) as your self ha^ confessed before, that he after
his Fathers death, su^moned a Council of the Grecians. And so says Langus in
the Margin of the Preface. Imperatori^ istius ductu, etc. By the guydance of
this Emperor in the Council, the Eastern Bishops contrary to the Western,
decreed, that the holy Ghost proceeded only from the Father. But not long
after by his Nephewe John Paleologus being Emperor, in the Synod at Florence
holden in the year of the Lord, 1439. the Grecians accorded to the
determination of the Latins, in so much that they professed the holy The
Grecians opinion in the holy Ghostes proceeding.
Ghost to proceed from the Father and the Son, when they were persuaded,
that the Latins believed God the Father to be the only cause of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost, and that they accursed the being of two beginnings, or
two causes in the consubstantiall Trinity.

Which sent^nce, as it shows the (...) to be called by the (...)* so it
shows the cause of the Greeks di^ision (...) the (...), in this (...),
about which, here and in your (...), ^e make so much a do, to have been rather
of misunderstanding the one of the other, than any such (...)* as ye here ^o
often charge them, ^aunder Ni^phorus, re^ite this Prince, and afterward (...)
^o us also. And withal it shows, that this controu^rsie was not so much tho
matter between them, as was the re^enting unto the Popes obedience, which the
Greek Church could never abide, and to say the sooth, they of all other had
chief cause* for the Pope was the chief ruin (...) their Empir^.

But to return to my purpose. In this Council, the Prince has this point of
supremac^e, that he sum^oned and guided it* which M* Stapleton espying, dares
not fully affirm* that thi^ doing makes ^atly against the Princes
supremacy, but he comes f^intly in, with, what, (...) do (...) you (...). And
what if (...) shall we (...) have larkes* what (...), ^id* phie on Devil with
his shifting if (...), (...) thou be Math. 7.
the (...) of God.

And what if it do not necessarily enduce the chief supe^ Stapl. 77. b.
in all causes?

And what if it did not necessarily, if it did it, what is here the necessity
to or fro the matter? and what if it did some necessarili^ though not all? Yet
ye see here is somewhat gotten to help the matter for ward. Ye grant this
doing argues a supremacy in some Ecclesia^call causes although not
necessarily. But st^pping back again, ye* say:

And (...) in no (...) Ecc^siasticall concerning the (...). 77. b
(...) discussing and determin^cion of the same.

Well, and what if this also were granted you, that concerning the final
discussing and determination, he had supremacy in no cause ecclesiastical,
yet might it follow that in all other points (except the final discussing and
determination) he had the supremacy.

Verily (say you, waxing somewhat bolder) without any Stapl. 77. b.
perchance it is most plainly and certainly true, it does not.

And how prove you this M. Stap.

For (say you) even in this sch^maticall council and heretical Stapl. 77. b.
synagoge the Bishops played the chief part* and they gave the final, though
a wrong and wicked judgment.

And verily then (without any perchance) either your self do make a foul
lie, or else both in calling the Council, and giving the final sentence
also, the Prince had the superiority. For, whatsoever ye deni^ here, not. 16
lines before, ye gra^nted, that he ^othe summoned the Council, and also that
he and they anulled and revoked that his father had done at the Council at
Lions. Lo here, in the annulling and reuoking, which was the final discussing
and determination* ye both join hi^ with them, and place him before them. And
thu^ unawares, while ye speak against the truth, ye wotte not what, or care
not how ye wrappe your self in contradictions, and make your self a liar.

Your second parcel is only against the order of the sentences collected by
the Bishop, asking him what honor he has got for all his cra^tie cooping or
cunning* and smoth Stapl. 77. b*
^oyning, combining, and incorporating a number of Nicephorus sentences
together For all these words you use to outscoffe the mat^er, and quarrel at
the placing of them unorderly. But all this while ye answer not one word to
any one word in them, and yet set you down your marginall note with a solemn
out^rie.

O what a crafty Cooper and smothe Ioyner is master Horn.

But see how handsomely it falls out, and how orderly, even where ye talk of
order* For where ye (...) have set down this your marginall exclamation, at
the coming to his second part, saying: what honor have ye go: for all your
crafty cooping, etc. Ye set it down for haste in the matter before answered,
concerning the schismatic Council, and the bishops dealing therein, doing as
the story tells of Doctor Shawe in his sermon of the praise of king Richard
the third, that or ever the king was come to the sermon, had already said his
part, that he should have said at his coming, and so with shame enough, out
of place, and out of time, repeated the same. But you may say, thanks be to
God, ink and paper can not blushe, and although I think you can do as little
your self, yet a Gods name, let it pass, be it but the Printers misplacing of
the note, although it fell out ill fauor^dly, to light even there, where ye
reprehende the Bishop for ill joining together of his sentences, and your book
joins your marginal notes, all besides your matter.

Now having thus stood trifling in reprehending the order of the bishops
collection of Nicephorus sentences, because he sets them down together,
being not so set together, but here and there dispersed, in the great and long
Preface of Nicephorus: where the Reader now at the length should look that M.
Stap. should come to answer some point material of all the bishops
allegations: as though he had fully answered them all (having said not so much
as Buffe unto any one sentence alleged) he repeateth his former vaunt full
lustily, saying:

What honor have you, I say, won by this or by the whole Stapl. 78^.
thing it self? little or nothing, furthering your cause, and yet otherwise
plain schismatic, and heretical. For the which your handsome and holy
dealing, the author of the foresaid Homily, and you, yea M. Jewel too, are
worthy exceeding thanks.

Is not here a proper answer, thus to jest out the matter with scoffs,
crakes and raylings? Surely, M. St. what honor soever the bishop has won by
this, or not won (as he looks for none at your hands, and your thanks ye
may reserve for your friends) you win much shame to your self and your cause,
thus shamefully to ^umble up the matter, all only with out facing it. Ye say
the B. has patched up a number of Nicephorus sentences together. Why do ye not
^ip a sunder those patches' If he has used crafty cooping cunning, smoothe
joining, combining, and incorporating, it were your part to vnhoope the^, to
dissolve the^, to answer them. Tush say you, what need that? they are al
little or nothing furthering your cause. Now, M. Sta? I think then they might
be the easelier answered, and not so to skip over them like whip Sir John at
his morrow Masie. But til you answer something to the^, an upright judge will
deem them much to further our cause. Although it is somewhat that ye grant,
yt yet a little they further our cause: ^ I think by that ye reader has wayed
the^ better, he shall see they so hinder your cause, that ye thought it the best
way to let them all alone.

And that the Reader may the better behold both your dealing, and the Bishops
allegations, and so judge how much or how little they further the matter, and
whether they might have been thought worthy the answering: as the Bishop
has gathered them, so will I set them down. Who has glorified God more, and
showed more Page 17. b.
fervent zeal (says Nicephorus to the Emperor toward him in pure religion,
without fayning, than thou have done? Who has with such fervent zeal sought
after the most sincere faith much indaungered, or cleansed again the holy
table? When thou saw our true religion brought into peril with new
devises, brought in by counterfeite and naughty doctrines, thou did
defend it most paynefully and wisely, thou did show thy self, to be the
mighty, supreme, and very holy anchor and stay in so horrible wavering and
error, in matters beginning to faynte, and to perish as it were with
shipwreck. Thou art the guide of the profession of our faith. Thou haste
restored the Catholic and universal Church (being troubled with new matters
or opinions) to the old state. Thou have banished from the Church all
unlawful and impure doctrine. Thou have cleansed again with the word of
truth, the Temple, from choppers and chaungers of the divine doctrine, and
from heretical deprauers thereof. Thou haste been set on fire with a godly
zeal for the divine Table. Thou haste established the doctrine. Thou haste
made constitutions for the same. Thou haste entrenched the true religion with
mighty defenses. That which was pulled down, thou haste made up again, and
haste made the same whole and sound again, with a convenient knitting
together of all the parts and members. (To be short, thou haste, says
Nicephorus to the Emperor) established true religion and godliness with
spiritual butresses, namely the doctrine and rules of the ancient fathers.

These are the Bishops allegations out of Nicephorus, for this Princes dealing
in ecclesiastical matters. Wherein are comprehended (as each man may see) all
the chief ecclesiastical The Bishops proves that M. Stapl. passes so
slightly over prove the full matter.
causes. The true religion, the sincere faith, the divine doctrine, godliness,
making constitutions, the fathers rules, the catholic and universal church.
Neither ascribes he to the Prince herein, a power Lega^tine from Priest,
Bishop, Patriarch, or Pope: much less to be their only executioner: but
under God he gives him a supreme government, in calling him, not only the
defender, but the mighty, supreme, and very holy anchor and stay, the guide,
the restorer, the clenser, the establisher, the entrencher and maker up of all
these things. On the contrary: the puller down, and banisher of new devises,
counterfeit, naughty, unlawful, and impure doctrines, of horrible errors, and
heretical deprauers. And this, his chief dealing herein, to be most seemly for
him, and chiefly belonging to his princely office. Does all this M. Stap.
little or nothing further our cause? if it do not, then it little or nothing
hinders yours. Why grant ye not then unto it? if ye grant but thus much,
we will urge you little or nothing further: for what is not here contained,
that is either contained in the issue between the Bishop and M. Feck: or in
the oath of the O. Majesty's supremacy, that ye refuse to take?

But as light as y^ would seem to make of this, it pincheth you, and ye dare
not grant, nor answer any sentence thereof. Only ye give a snatche at a
word, and bayte at the bishops marginal note upon these former allegatio^s.
Wherein M. Stapleton lets go the principal mat ter, and quarrels at the
margin.
ye play like Alciates dog, at whom when one hurled a stone, he let go him
from whom the stone came, and wreaked his anger on the stone. So set you upon
the marginall note, that in deed hitteth you a good souse, but the allegations
from whence the marginal note does come, ye let alone, and fall to tugging of
the note. Only (as I said) ye snatche at a word, as though all the weight of
the marginall note were setched only from thence, and not from all these
sentences,

But (say you) M. Home will not so leese his long allegation Stapl. 77. a.
out of Nicephorus. He has placed a note in the margin, sufficient (^ trow)
to conclude his principal purpose. And that is this. The Princes supremacy in
repayring religion decayed. This is indeed a ioly marginall note. But where
finds M Horn the same in his text? for soothe of this, that Nicephorus
calls the Emperor, the mighty, supreme, and very holy anchor, and stay in
so horrible wavering, etc. of the word supreme anchor, he concludes a
supremacy. But O more than childishe folly. Could that crafty Cooper of
this allegation, inform you no better, master Horn? was he no better seen in
Grammar, or in the profession of a schole master, than thus foully and fondely
to miss the true interpretation of the Latin word? for what other is suprema
anchora in good English, than the last anchor, the last refuge, the extreme
hold, and stay to rest upon? As suprema verba, do signify the last words
of a man in his last will: as summa dies, the last day, supremum iudicium,
the last judgment: with a number of like Phrases. So suprema anchora is the
last anchor, signifying the last hold and stay, as in the peril of
tempeste the last refuge is to cast anchor. In such a sense Nicephorus
calls this Emperor the last, the mighty, and the holy anchor or stay in so
horrible wavering and error. Signifying that now by him they were stayed from
the storm of schism, as from a storm in the sea, by casting the anchor, the
ship is stayed. But by the metaphore of an anchor, to conclude a supremacy:
is as wise, as by the Metaphore of a Cow to conclude a Saddle. For as well
does a saddle fit a Cow, as the quality of an anchor resemble a
supremacy. But by such beggarly shifts a barren cause must be vpholded.
First all is said by the way of amplification to extol the Emperor: as in
the same sentence he calls him the sixth element, reaching above Aristotels
fifte body, over the four elements with such like: Then all is but a
Metaphore: which were it true, proves not nor concludes, but expresses and
lightneth a truth. Thirdly, the Metaphore is ill translated, and last of all,
worsse applied.

A sir, M. St. here is a whot stir and high words. A man would think
all is now answered to the full, and yet when all co^mes to all, here is
nothing of all this a do, against any one sentence of the Bishops allegations.
But the poor marginall note, and one poor seely word, of all these long
allegations, shall abye for this gear. First ye say M. Stapl. that M. Horn
will not so leese his long allegation out of Nicephorus. What ye mean by
leesing, I know not. But it appears, he may le^e or find them all, for any
thing ye will answer to them. Ye slinke for the nonce to the marginall note,
which is this:

The Princes supremacy in repayring religion decayed.

This is in deed (say you) a ioly marginal note, but where finds M. Horn
the same in his text? forsoothe of this, that Nicephorus calls the Emperor
the mighty, supreme and very holy anchor and stay, in so horrible wavering of
the word supreme anchor, he concludes a supremacy.

Is there nothing, M. Stap. in all these allegations, that ye could see,
wherefore the Bishop set down his marginal note, of the Princes supremacy in
repayring religion decayed, but only this sentence? yea only that word? do
not all the other sentences importe as much as this? that he is the guide of
the profession of our faith: the restorer of the catholic and universal
Church: the banisher from the Church of all unlawful and impure doctrine: the
clenser of the temple with the word of truth, from choppers and changers of
the divine doctrine, and from heretical deprauers thereof. That he is the
entrencher of true religion, with mighty defenses: That he is the establisher
of the doctrine, and maker of constitutions for the same: that he is the maker
up again, the maker whole and sound again of all that was pulled down. Might
not all this to an indifferent reader, be thought sufficient, to answer the
marginal note, and comprehend in all points as much as the note? yea though
ye quite set aside the sentence and word whereat ye wrangle? And yet with M.
Stap. this one sentence must bear the weight of all that the bishop alleged,
the mighty, supreme, and very holy anchor and stay in so horrible wavering.

But go to, let it do so, presuppose that the bishop alleged no more but this
one sentence: or that all the other little or nothing further the cause. Yet
does this only sentence fully comprehend as much as this marginall note
conte^neth. (Yea set also aside the word supreme, that master St. quarrel is
at) that in so horrible wavering and error, in matters beginning to faynte,
and to perish as it were with shipwreck, the Prince is the mighty and very
holy anchor, or stay, Sacris simul and prophanis, both in holy and profane
matters. Does not this mighty stay, only or chiefly under God, of the Prince,
for all kind of persons, against errors, plainly argue a sovereign helping
power, or supremacy in repayring of religion being decayed? But M. Stapl.
letting go all this, girdeth only at this word supreme, because the bishop
translated suprema anchora not the last anchor, but supreme anchor. Here
first he falls out with a Cooper, I can not tell whom for missinforming the
bishop. As though the interpretation of supremus were so high a point, that
the bishop must be taught of some* Grammarian or scholemaster, the English
thereof. And because it is The englishing of the word supremus.
not englished in good English, full scholemaster like, he takes upon him to
expound the same.

For, what other is (says he) suprema anchora, in good English, than the last
anchor, the last refuge, the extreme hold and stay to rest upon.

Be it even as you would have it, M. Stap. And thanks be to God, that when you
have nothing to say against the bishops allegation: this is your last anchor,
your last refuge and extreme stay to rest upon, to find fault with the
bishops english, for not good english. Though here neither you can prove any
false englishing (which is common with you) and when you have all done,
supremus is both last, and chief, and which way soever ye conster it,
supremus is supreme, take it how you list. Although in the very proper
der^uation of the word, supremus coming of supra, signifies the chief or
highest. And that it is called last, is but accessorie and improperly spoken
(for properly, vltimus is last, or extre^) by reason that the last things, as
added, and for the most part uppermost, and the last doings are commonly the
chiefest. But what need contention here de laua caprina, of a matter of
nothing? It were more fit ye had reserved this your earnest answer, to some
earnest matter. But as they say, In refrigidissima feru^, in f^entissima
friges. In the coldest matters you be boiling ho^te, and in the hottest matters
you be key cold. To avoid therefore contention, as ye ought not to control
the Bishops English, being not false: so am I for my part, content to admit
your English, and I think so will the Bishop to^. For (setting aside your
quareling) it co^th not hi^, but all in the end comes to one effect.

You say it signifies the last anchor, the last refuge, the extreme hold, and
stay to rest upon.

Uery well said M. St. (...) is not that the chief, which we must flee unto,
hold, stay, and rest upon, when all other helps do fayl^? And so ye grant
the Prince under God to be the chiefest refuge and stay, both to the lay and
Clergy, in all w^rings of doctrine, and err^ of Religion* Is not this now
as much, as the Bishops note contained, the Princes supremacy in restoring
Religion decayed?

You exemplifi^ the matter thus.

As suprema verba, do signify the last words of a man in his last will: as
(...) dies, the last day: supremum iudicium* the last judgment* with a number
of the like phrases*

True in deed M. St. but ye should withal remember, ^uen in these examples,
that the last will is the chiefest will, The last taken for the chiefest
and all the other former wills give place to the last will. And the last day
is the chiefest day, and by a special prerogative called Dies Do^ni, the day
of the Lord, and Dies magnus* the great day. And the last judgment, is the
chiefest judgment, when all judges shall be judged: and therefore God the
father has only given it to Christ, bica^se he is simply the chiefest of all.
And here in earth also he is the chiefest judge, that is last appealed unto.
Thus M. St. your own phrases, fit the Bishop well.

And as it does in these, so in this present phrase, Suprema anchora, say you,
Is the last anchor, signifying the last hold and stay, as in the peril of
tempest, the last refuge is to cast anchor.

And is not this then also the chiefest refuge and stay?

In such a sense (say you) Nicephorus calls his Emperor the last, the
mighty and the holy anchor, or stay so in horrible wavering and error,
signifying that now by him they were stayed, from the storine of schism, as
from a storm in the sea, by casting the anchor, the ship is stayed.

This is in dee^ M. St. the meaning of Nicephorus. And The proportion between
the stay of an anchor, and the stay of a Prince.
do ye not see what chief dealing it gives above all other only to the
Prince, in the storm of a schism or error, or other ecclesiastical matter,
wavering? is not the anchor in a storm the chiefest and most principal stay?
does any thing stay the ship more or better than an anchor? or is there any
other ordinary stay thereof? Then, by your own exposition, ye Prince is made
here, the chief, the principal, and the only stay in such cases, which fully
concludes all the matter, notwithstanding al your scoffs, and therefore where
ye conclude, saying.

But by the metaphore of an anchor to conclude a supremacy, Sadli^g ^ Cow.
is as wise, as by the metaphore of a Cow, to conclude a Saddle. For as well
does a saddle fit a Cow, as the quality of an anchor resemble supremacy. But
by such beggarly shifts a barren cause must be vpholded.

Ye have sadled the Cow M. St. ha^dsomly, and ye are the fittest man that I
see, to ride upon her, for this conclusion shows you as wise a man, according
to ye old saying, as ever spurred a Cow for admitting ye metaphore of an
anchor, no further than your self have said, that as by it the ship is stayed
from storms in the seas, so by the Prince, all the people are stayed from
Schism and wavering errors, in religion: if the anchor be the chiefest stay
next to Gods help in ye one, is not the Prince the chiefest stay next to Gods
help in the other? although therefore, ye ^elie the B. to say he concluded only
thereupon (for before ye said he concluded on the word. Suprema. which he did
not neither, but on all the whole allegacions altogether) yet holds this
conclusion, even by your own sayings better I ^row, than you will hold on
your sadled Cowes back as fit a rider as ye be, except ye sit the faster, that
the Cow cast not a calfe as big as M. St.

As for the B. shifts what they are, and what beggarly shifts they are, every
reader will soon judge, yt sees how you shift off the matter. Ye answer
nothing to any sentence of the B. allegatio^s: ye run at randon to other ^lim
flamtales: ye find fault at other ^thours about other matters: ye pick
quarrels about bare names: ye snatch at the marginal note, and let go the
matter: ye def^a^t about the only word supremus, more like ^ beggarly Pedantie,
than a grammarlike scholemaster: and all but to raise mistes and cou^terblasts,
pretending to dissipate and discuss mistes, and al but to carry the reader from
the flat and round answering of the (...) yet are al these no beggarly shifts
of yours. In deed M. St. these are no common Beggarly shifts.
beggars shifts, these are (...) shifts than al men use, or tha^ every man ca^
see, they are belike borrowed of ye beggarly friars of Louaine, but from whence
soever ye have them, the cause is both beggarly and barraine, that in steed of
good plain answering, seeks such shifte of shifts, but hold your peace (...)
the beggar, it is a bad sack that can abide no clouting.

Now having thus shifted of the B. allegations. with these shifts: you gather
them up in a brief recapitulacion, to excuse the matter. First, all is said by
the way of amplification Stapl. 78. b Nicephorus his amplification.
to extol, the Emperor (as in the same sentence he calls him the sixth
Element, reaching above Aristotels fifte body, over the four Elements with
such like.)

As though this amplifying of his estate, were any argument for you to depresse
the same. And since (as him self protests) he meant no flattery, this
amplification, means yet a truth of his excellency, and supreme estate.
Otherwise, he could not well have so called him, although he says not
altogether as you say, neither: for he micio^eth not Aristotle at all, nor any
his fifth body, nor speaks of the four Elements, but he says, Et vt ille ab
vtraque, etc. And that he receiving from both of them (speaking of godliness
and s^licitie) that which was proper to them both, might make perfect, to all
men a new, and in very deed a marvelous commodity and help, to wo^e, a
certain stable firmament, and (as I might call it) a sixth and an eternal
Element, in divine matters beginning to slide and perishing by shipwreck,
offering thee the great, supreme, and in deed the holy Anchor, of so horrible
a wavering, and error, both in holy and in profane matters. That in thee they
might represent a sownde stabilitie, to others also that are with thee.

This being the amplification of Nicephorus which is in deed a great
amplification: it shows that he meant to commend him very highly for his
supreme dealing in religion, and not as M. St. would have it, any thing to
abase the same, which is quite contrary to the authors meaning.

But then (says M. Stap.) all is but a metaphore, which Stap. fol. 78. b
were it true, proves not nor concludes, but exprefleth and lighteneth a
truth: Thirdly, the metaphore is ill translated, and last of all, worse applied.

For the translation (M. St.) it is answered before, thanks be to God ye can
not prove it false. And yet (not to contend) yours is admitted, and makes
against you too, ^ue^ by your own tale. But what hinders this, that this
word anchor is but a metaphore? does a metaphore being a true metaphore, prove
nothing, but lighten a truth? does not a true The force of a metaphore.
thing prove a truth, be it metaphore or what soever it be, be it true? as for
a metaphore, does it not prove the thing that it is resembled unto? Christ is
called bread, a vine, a stone, a Lion, a way, a door, a sheperde: do not these
metaphors prove and conclude in him, the reasons and proportions wherefore he
is so called? do we not by these metaphors conclude, that he is our norisher,
our life, our stabilitie, our strength, our guide and defense, our only means
and entrance into heaven? The Emperor is called here the chief Anchor. Yet al
is but a Metaphore say you. What the^? we go not about to prove him an Anchor.
But even as your self expound it we prove him by the metaphore of an Anchor,
to be a stay: and so being the chief Anchor, it proves and concludes that he
is the chief stay. And this is enough, that that it proves thus much. As for
the Anchor take it to your self, and get an Ass to your Cow, to carry it.

Nevertheless, if this were also remitted to you, that being a metaphore, it
proves not, nor concludes, but expresses and lightneth a truth. What (...)
this the matter? So the truth thereby be expressed and lightened, although the
Bishop thereby, concluded not his matter, but only lightened and expressed the
truth thereof. Were not this enough at least to stop your brabling and
railing against him? Except 2. Tim. ^.
ye be of I^mbres and Members disposition, that of purpose will resist the
truth, and not express but suppress, not lighten but obscure the same, as the
Phariseys did, and you Papists after them have done, and labor still to do.
But ye cannot oppress the truth for ever, yeaeuen your striving against it,
shall the more (against your wills) express and lighten the truth.

Your small conclusion is very short. Last of all (say you) it is worse
applied, but so long as ye show, neither how, where, nor why: a man might
answer you, a short horse is soon curryed. And when you apply your mind
to answer more substantially, I will take pains to reply, and cu^rie your
answer more smoothly. As for the rest of your Counterblast, it is but the
blowing up of the victory before ye have it. It answers nothing to the
matter, but is a crake of your triumph, that ye wene ye have gotten, much good
do it you, master Stapleton.

Now whereas (say you) in the beginning of your matter, Stapl. 78. b.
the substance of your proves hereafter standing in stories, yt have demeaned
your self so clerkly and skilfully here, the reader may hereof have a taste:
and by the way of prevention and anticipation, have also a certain
prejudicial understanding, what he shall look for at your hands in the
residue. Wherefore God be thanked, that at the beginning has so deciphered
you, whereby we may so much the more, yea the boldlier without any fear of all
your antiquity herfater to be showed, cheerfully proceed on.

Thou see here a iolie triumph (gentle Reader) and I doubt not, but thou
see what a great gain he has won. Do but call for his cards, I warrant
you, he will be ashamed to show them. But alas good man, give him leave, he
must crake of something to comfort himself withal, and set a fair viser, on
an ill favored visage to outface the matter, when nothing else will help it.
But God be thanked, indeed, that has thus deciphered his noughtie reckonings,
and sophistical sums, filled up with bare Ciphers in Algorisme, that
furnished a place in stead of an answer, and were in deed no answer, nor
any just account, but as they say, he that reckens without his host, must
reckon twice.

But a Gods name (as master Stapleton cries) let us cheerfully proceed on.
We are almost at an end of this first book of his.

The. 25. Division.
AS the Bishop hitherto on the words of Saint Paul's Romans 13. calling the
Prince Gods minister, has by the fathers Chrysostom and S. Augustine, and by
these Ecclesiastical historiographers Eusebius and Nicephorus, about these two
Emperors, showed sufficiently how far this ministry stretches, and
wherein it chiefly consists: so concluding this for the other testimony of
S. Paul alleged, 1. Tim. 8.
he shows the ends and bounds of the Princes government, not only to
stretch to the conservation of civil peace and outward tranquillity, but also
to the maintenance and preserving of Gods true religion. To the confirmation of
this sentence of the Apostle, he cites Chrysostom. co^cluding hereon, that these
two parts and notes of a princes government, are so knit together, that ye one
cannot be without the other, and therefore both are necessary to be required in
a prince. And that thus, the ancient Christian Princes did consider of their
duties, he cites out of Cyrill, the testimonies of the Emperors, Theodosius
and Ualentinian.

Master Stapletons answer to this chiefly stands in M Stapletons order to
this division.
three points. First, he querelleth with the Bishop, for calling these
Emperors, Christian Emperors. Secondly, he yeldeth to the Bishope allegation
of Saint Paul and Chrysostom, as rather for him, than against him, and
thereto trauayleth in bringing forth ensamples. Thirdely, to the testimonies of
Ualentinian and Theodosius, he replyeth with other testimonies of the said
Emperors.

All the first part is frivolous and to no effect, nor aunswering the argument
of the Bishops conclusion, which is this.

All Christian princes notable and godly doings, that are necessarily belonging
to their office, are paterns for other Princes to behold and do their duty to
their subjects by.

But these and such like Princes, are by the ecclesiastical writers commended
for their notable doings in the maintenance and furtherance of Christian
religion, as doings necessarily perteyning to their office:

Ergo, they are paterns, examples, and glasses for other Christian Princes to
behold, and to learn thereby to do their duty to their subjects, in the
maintenance and furtherance of Christian Religion.

To this master Stap. says never a word, but falls a railing on the Bishop
for calling this Emperor, Christian Emperor. And first, in his sum he
swears by God, that he he will not fear the Bishops conclusion, sith the
antecedent was so naught.

And shall we now M. Horn (says he) your antecedent Stapl. 79 b
matter being so naught greatly fear the consequent, and conclusion ye will
hereof infer? Nay pardie.

Well sworn master Stapleton, ye can not swear by a greater. But if one of
your company would do so much for me, as to remember you but with a good
phillip, that your foreheade smarted withal, ye would not thus lightly take
the name of God in vain, but it was done (in this your beginning ex abrupto,
and shall we, etc.) to show your bold manhood. Shall we fear (say you) the
Bishops conclusion his antecedent being so naught? nay perdie. No, in no wise,
M. Stapl. fear it not: but stand to it even as you did to the other, that is
to say, take your heels and run quite away from it. And be it naught, or be
it good, answer not a word thereto. But only wrangle about some bye word
or other, finding play with the Reader about other matters, and th^n even as
you answered the antecedent: so shall ye show your self constant in
aunswering the conclusion.

For what else is all your first part (where, if ye fear not the Bishops
consequent, ye should deny it, and show some reason thereof, or distinguish
the same, or else ye grant it) but a bare shifting off to other matters? as
this, because the Bishop called the Emperor (on Nicephorus his
commenmendation) a Christian Emperor, an example, a spectacle, a glass for
other, as one that reformed Religion to the pureness thereof: This (say you)
in such a personage as Stapl. 80. a.
ye counterfey^, can not be but a deadlye and a mortal sin.

Herevppon ye snatche occasion to fling at master Foxes book of Martyrs once
again, about M. Doctor VVesalian, of whom ye say ye spoke before.

Here again ye come to your former Qu (like the (...) Pharisey) despising the
Bishop as one that is far from the knowledge of Bishop White and Bishop
Gardener, these are Reverend fathers with you, as for the bishop now, Stapl.
80. a
is a very poor sielie Clerk, and how mete to occupy such a room, ye
leave it to others discrete and upright judgment.

There is no doubt M. Stapleton, but that ye mean some Comparison of learning
between bishop Gardine^ bishop White, and Bishop Horn.
discrete and upright judges, to judge this matter of both their learnings, ye
show your self so upright between them. But what shall those discrete men
judge of, your uprightness and discretion in aunswering? For what is any of
these things to the purpose? although (setting aside this your impudent
outfacing) what? man, it was well known what mighty great Clerks the better
of these twain, Bishop Gardener and Bishop White were, either for law or for
versifying, either for a Sophister, or a schoolemaister. And yet in these
points were they neither in primis, secundis, nor in ^ertijs. As for any deep
knowledge of Divinity, or of ecclesiastical stories, which had been fitter for
a Bishop I trow, Iwis, it was not so great but that a meaner man than the
Bishop that now is, might hasarde a comparison with the^. But comparisons they
say are odious. I speak it not to the dispraise of their learning, would God,
such as it was, they had emploiedit better to the glory of God the giver, and
the edifying of his Church, in setting forth his Gospel, as they ought to have
done. For this is ye chiefest thing in a bishop, although the other are also
necessary, and, as ye say, among other, this the knowledge of ecclesiastical
stories, which ye vpbraide to the bishop, as a very poor sielie clarke in
them. But thus much your impudency drives me to say, that neither of your
two Reverend Fathers, have taken a quarter of the studious travel in this
point, that the B. that now is has done, and has showed more fruit thereof,
than ever they did, Scripture as they say, makes mention of all three, let
your discrete and upright men, or any other search and judge who list.

But wherefore in conclusion is all this ado? forsooth the Bishop (on
Nicephorus words) commends him, for a Christian Emperor, and says he, was
a spectacle and glass for others, and as one that reformed religion to the
pureness thereof, this can not be a venial but a deadly and mortal sin,
says M. Stapleton.

Whosoever be the discrete judge, you are no merciful judge M. Stapl. there is
no pardon with you but present death I see well, I would at least ye were an
upright judge, to judge uprightly of the matter. Ye have condemned the B. for
saying an Ecclesiastical writer commends him for a Christian Emperor, but
what will you say to the same writer, if he will call him the most Christian
Emperor? is not this warrant enough for the B? he calls him an example, a
glass, or a spectacle for others. What if not only Nicephorus say the same,
and a great deal more, but Langus your catholic Clerk say even the same
also, and commend him like wise for a pattern and mirror to the Emperor
Ferdinande?

But Lord what a stir is here, for that the B. spoke Sta. 80. a.
of reforming religion to the pureness thereof? Here is the Bishop and Master
Fox challenged both of them for heretics, more than any of their fellows. Here
is Master Stapleton disposed to have his tongue roll, as though it had not
walked and run at large before.

And then (says he) that I may a little roll in your railing Rhetoric,
wherein ye unjustly rore out against M. Feckenham, may I not for much better
cause and ground say to you, than you did to him, to make him a Donatist, M.
Horn? Let your friends now weigh with aduisement, what was the erroneous
opinion of the Grecians against the holy ghost, and let them compare your
opinion and guilefull defenses thereof to theirs, and they must needs clap you
on the back, and say to you Patrisas (if there be any upright judgment in
them) deeming you so like your great graundsiers the Grecians, as though they
had spyt you out of their mouth.

How justly or unjustly, the Bishop proved Master Feck. of set purpose to
follow the steps of the Donatistes, is already declared at large, and also
how teatly you have excused him, and brought him and your self further into
the self same briers: But how vnf^tlye and unjustly here, ye would return
the Bishops words upon himself, chalenging him to deny (as the Grecians did)
the proceeding of the holy ghost from the father and the son: is not only
manifest to the contrary^, to all that know, and often hear, in public
place, the profession of his faith, to argue you to be a wilful malicious
lier, Abhominatio est domino labia mendacia, Prouer. 12.
lying lips are abominable to the Lord: but also the Bishops wordsminister no
occasion, to gather any such surmise upon. Which shows you to be a captious
wrangling sophister, for the Bishop does not flatly say, he was such an one as
reformed religion to the pureness thereof, which you make him here to say, but
he said, Nicephorus in his Preface before his ecclesiastical story does
compare Emanuel Paleologus the Emperor to Constantine, for that he did so
nearely imitate his duetifulnesse in ruling, procuring and reforming religion
to the pureness thereof, in which words the Bishop says, that Nicephorus
commends him for this. And this have I proved at large that Nicephorus does
so, which is the Bishops full discharge.

How be it this you will not see, but make it the bishops flat assertion.
Which yet notwithstanding were it so, no man, except he were set on gogge of
pure malice, would wrest this sentence of the Bishop, to any other matter,
than to the present controversy, of the Princes duty and dealing in
ecclesiastical matters, and not to every other opinion or vice, which was
either in the Emperor, or in Nicephorus, or else in all ye Gretians. And would
ye but limit your self to the bounds of the question as the bishop does: ye
could not have made this false extravagant challenge. And ye should have seen
that not only the bishop had discharged himself: but that, so far forth as
this controversy stretches, both the Emperor, Nicephorus, and also all the
Gretians (whatsoever they were in other points) in this controversy of the
Princes supreme government, it appears, they were of a sound and true
opinion, although you call it schismatic and heretical, whatsoever be
against the Primacie of your Pope, but till you prove it so to be, no wise man
will be moved with your bare so calling it.

If you now deny that Nicephorus was of this opinion, Wherefore Nicephorus
dedicated his ecclesiastical history to the Emperor.
besides the Bishops allegations that have proved it sufficiently: The same
Preface of Nicephorus is full of other proves. First, Nicephorus dedicateth his
ecclesiastical history to this Emperor, not only to have his public
protection: but also to have the Emperors censure and judgment, whether it
were sound doctrine, agreeable to Gods word, and meet to be set out among
Christian people, or no. Inprimis vero si quid minus. etc. But chiefly (says
he) if Prefa. Niceph.
anything should not have been declared of me in this work: that your
myldenesse would pardon me, and by the sharpness of your judgment, you
would cleanse my history, either by adding to, or taking therefrom. For
whatsoever your judgment shall more exactlye correct: that shall be accounted
both to me and to all other, thankful and sure. Forbicause The princes exact
judgment and censure in ecclesiastical matters.
that, of all other which have been, unto thee it has chiefly happened, by the
readynesse and quickenesse of nature, through the gift of God, to perceive and
find out such things. And because thon know, both to reason and dispute
with a just moderation, and also have skill to expound divine matters with
fear. And because thou can excellently conceive in thy mind, and with an
eloquent mouth declare that which thou think good. And moreover can in a
manner give such judgment thereon, that one thing may be thoroughly known from
the other. Neither is there any found so malapert or rash, that after thy
correction and judgment, will abide to set his hand unto thy writing* etc.
And the like sentence he has toward the end of the Preface.

Thus besides his authority, such an excellent judgment in determining and
deciding divine and ecclesiastical matters, Nicephorus ascribes to this
Prince and commends him for: even as you would do to the Pope, or any of
your most reverend holy fathers. All which you clean deny to Princes, to have
any meddling, knowledge, judgment, or determination in them: but rather
commend Princes for ignorance, and would have them only meddle with judging
mere^cuill matters. But Nicephorus, even where the Bishop left in citing his
allegations (which were sufficient to any man, except to such a brabler as you)
says to the Emperor.

Moreover thou have (with a fervent order) made more sincere and purer than
gold, the priestly unction, which sounded of a certain corruption. And also
both by setting out a law, and thy letters: thou have taught a continency of
manners, and contempt of money, by means whereof, the priestly ministry of the
common weal is become holy, the which in former times by little and little,
through a corruption of discipline and manners, was defiled and depraved. (And
here notes Langus in the Margin: Reformati^ Ecclesiae, The reformation The
Princes reformation of the priests, and of the Church.
of the Church.) And thou conceyuing always some more notable matter have
adorned the form, and state, and Image of the Church, most beautifully
polishing it unto the primitive example.

These things does Nicephorus, over the Priests, the Bishops, and the whole
Church, acknowledge in this Emperor, for their reformation as he says, so
nere as ^e could to the primative Church. Which notwithstanding, as it was not
true, in this error: so was it not (I grant also) in diverse other
corruptions, agreeing some of them with the dregs of Popery. Yet for all
this, he that says Nicephorus says so, neither lies on him, nor thereupon
fauou^eth their errors. And he that says so in this point of the princes
supreme dealing, and delivering of the Grecians from that Thraldom to the Pope,
into the which Michaell perforce had brought them: shall not only say true in
saying Nicephorus says so: but also that therein, Nicephorus or any other, so
saying, says therein most true, he reformed religion to the pureness thereof.

But now that master Stapleton will have the Bishop clapped on the back, for
an Heretic against the holy ghost, for showing only Nicephorus words, who
shall clappe on the back, Lazius, Langus, and all the doctors of Paris and
Louaine, for setting out, allowing and approving this author to be very
Catholic in all points, not making any exception of Heresy at all? If there
be any upright judgment in your self master St. let us see you roll in your
railing rhetorike, and rore against them. Go clap them on the back and say
patrisas, and ye dare. Ye might so be clapped your self by the heels, or have
a faggot clapped on your shoulders if ye did, to teach you to keep your
clattering clapper better in your head.

Your second part is somewhat better directed to the allegation of the Bishop
out of S. Paul with Chrysostomes and Cyrils judgment thereupon. Which you say
is needelesse, and far from the matter, etc. That prosperity of the Stapl.
80. b
commonwealth and true religion springs from good regiment or Magistrates,
which we deny not (say you) and that the decay of religion destroys or
deadly weakeneth the other which is also true.

I^ ye grant these to be true, master Stapleton, bow chance in your
marginall notes, and store of untruths, ye quarrel so sore thereat. There ye
say, there is no such words in Saint Paul and say:

This would be noted how ye rack S. Paul, he names not 79. ^.
religion at all, he does not attribute religion to the rule and government of
the civil Magistrate, but peace and tran^llitie only in godliness.

Thus ye challenge the Bishop there for falsehoode and M. Stapl. inconstancy
and contradiction.
racking. How truly shall appear in the answer to your bederoll of
untruths. Only now I note yo^ unconstant dealing. For here ye deny it not,
but say it is ^rue, all that the Bishop has said thereon, and grant the ^e as
not prejudicial to your cause. But mark M. Stap. what here ye grant, and
confess to be true.

That prosperity of the commonwealth, and true religion, Stapl. 80. b
springs from the good regiment of Magistrates.

If this be so as ye say: then the Princes regiment and direction in both these
next under God (is simply the principal:) is the fountain of them both. And
as the oversight, direction and chief authority of setting forth the one, so
the oversight, direction, and the chief authority, of setting forth ye other,
flows from the Prince, if either of those do spring from him. For how can
that spring from him, which M Stap. grau^teth the good regiment of magistrates
to be the spring of true religion.
ye neither make to be derived by any means from him, nor he to have any
direction or government off, nor any taste, rellishe, care, or ^edling
therewith, as nothing belonging to him. Is this to be a spring or fountain of
it? Which sith ye grant unto the Prince (whether wittingly, or unadvisedly, I
know not: nor by what cautele ye ^de to (...) off the matter) it is (...),
simply to esta^ the Bishops (...), and to (...) your cause, and (...) your
crafts, with your own plai^e words, that here ye say, it is true, and ye will
not deny it, the prosperity of the common weal, and true religion, springs
from the good regiment of Magistrates. Whereupon it follows, that not only true
religion belongs to their regiment, out their regiment being a spring
thereof, has a superiority, and i^ the head as it were, in direction and
setting forth true Religion among their subjects, as the spring has a
superiority, and is the head, in casting forth pure water into the brokes or
rivers.

Thus ye see (master Stapleton) that the Bishops allegation is so necessary
and near^ to the matter, that both it concludes the question in hand: and
your self in the end, are ^ayne, or of force driven, to yield thereto in this
point. And upon this, depends the other point, which ye grant also to be
true.

That the decay of Religion destroys, or deadly weakeneth the other.

Wherein ye say we^l Master Stapleton, if ye grant it to the purpose wherefore
it is alleged, that these two Prosperity and religion joined in a Prince
things, prosperity and religion, are necessarily ^o be combined in a Prince,
whose regiment ye have gra^ed to be a spring, from whence both of these do
come. For so, not only Saint Paul and Chrysostom expounding him, and Cyrill
also means: but even Nicephorus, the author last mentioned, in the said
Prince does commend: that Pr^fa. Niceph.
felicity, and the true worship of GOD were so knit^e in him, that godliness
by her force had drawn felicity to hi^, or rather GOD had joined and tempered
them together, to the end, that by the help of both these, he might become
both in deed a marvelous help and succor, and also a steadie stay, and
firmament, as it were, to divine o^ Ecclesiastical matters beginning to fall
away. And to this purpose are these two so joined together, in the Prince, that
(as the Bishop says, and you do not gainesay the same) The want of the one,
(especially of religion) destroyth or deadly weakeneth the other.

Since now therefore the B. and you agree that these point^ are true, (and how
nere either of these do comprehend the matter in controversy, is apparent)
wherefore do you in needelesse examples, and far from the matter, spend the
time to prove that which neither the Bishop nor you ^enye?

As the utter ruin (say you) of the Empire of Greece proceeding Stap. 80. b.
from the manifold heresies, especially that whereof we have discoursed, does
to well and to plainly testify. And therefore I would wish you and master
Fox, with others, but you two above all others, with good aduisement to note,
that as the wicked Jews that crucified Christ about the holy time of Easter,
were at the very same time or thereabout, besieged of the Romans, and
shortly after brought to such desolation, and to such miserable wretched
state, as in a manner is incredible, saving that beside the foreseeing and
foresaying thereof by Christ, there is extant at this day a true and faithful
report* eue^ so your dearlings the Grecia^s, whose error, but not alone, but
accompanied with some other, that you at this day stoutly defend, yet
especially rested in this heresy against the holy ghost, that ye term with an
unclean and an impure mouth, pure religion, were in their chief city of
Constantinople, in the time of Constantinus son to John, nephew to Andronicus
your Emanuels Stapl. 85. ^.
father, even about VVhitfontide (at which time the Catholic Church in true
and sincere faith, concerning the holy ghost, keeps a solemn festival day
of the holy ghost, suddenly by the wicked Turks besieged, and shortly after
the City and the whole Greek Empire came into the Turks hands and
possession. Wherein God seems as before to the Jews, so afterward to the
Grecians, as it were with pointing and notifying it with his finger, to show
and to notify unto all the world the cause of the final destruction as well
of the one as of the other people.

What is all this to the purpose M. Stapleton? what makes this against the
Bishops matter, or to further yours, except to lengthen your tale? although
it seems that your tale is false, neither you agree with your self therein,
it is false, because at that time the great Turk, besieged and won the
Empire of Greece, the Grecians had forsaken this heresy, yea, and that more
is, acknowledged the Popes supremacy (wherein the question lies whether in so
doing they fell into another or no) for after their agreement at Lions council
by Michaell Paleologus, and their revolt again under Andronicus the elder:
John the son of Emanuell nephewe to Andronicus the younger, whom before ye
mentioned, came to the council at Florence, that was called in spits of Basil
council, and agreed with Pope Eugenius, whom Basil Council had deposed, and
so continued in agreement with the Pope, till in Constantinus reign, brother
to this John, the The Grecians fell into the Turks captivity after this
submission to the Pope.
Turk besieged and overcame them. And so your tale is false, that say, they
rested in this opinion till their captivity. Whereas, a good while before,
they had quite forsaken it: after they fully understood the Latins opinion
thereon, which before they did not. Secondly, ye agree not with your own tale,
for both in your Preface, and hereafter in many places, ye ascribe the
captivity of them, chiefly to their not acknowledging of the Pope: and so does
Uolaterane, which is as false as the other. For at that time they were fully
agreed with him. And here (as one that had forgotten his former tale) you
ascribe the chief cause of their captivity, to the heresy against the holy
ghost, and so make your proportion between the Jews bondage at Easter, and
theirs at Whitsontide, at what time is celebrated the solemn feast of the holy
ghost. And thereon, ye take upon you (as though ye were of Gods secret
counsel) to tell us how God poynted out the matter with his finger.

But where to is all this so far fetched about? how is it brought into the
purpose? For M. St. will have nothing here that is nedelesse and far from the
matter, forsooth this must be presupposed, that the Grecians are the B*
dearlings* and that the Bishop is of the same opinion, because he alleged
Nicephorus, as is before said. And her upon he makes his marginall note, a
good aduert sement for M. Horn, to consider the cause of the destruction of
Constantinople. Where, by The Papists have as much cause or more, to beware
by the Grecians captivity than the Protestants.
this rule, he may say it is a good note for Langus, for Lazius, for the
Sorbonistes of Paris, for his own Doctors, and good masters at Louaine (where
he professes himself a student in Divinity) to beware the same, for they
have commended Nicephorus to all the world, and they allow his doctrine for
pure religion in all points, not excepting this, and therforeal the Papists be
belike the Grecians dearlings, and deny the proceeding of the holy ghost from
the father and the son, and so is it a fitter admonition for the Popish
catholics, than for the B. or any other Protestant, whose faith in this point,
and all other concerning the holy ghost, the Papists can not blemish. And yet
by your leave M. St. the Papists be not very sound in all points concerning
the holy ghost, as I shall show you further when you require the same, and
therefore they had more need of the twain, to beware of this ensample.

But since M. Stapl. will so feign have this cause considered, of the Grecians
captivity, I grant him, this their error might worthily be noted, a
sufficient cause, or any oter error, or naughtiness of life, might well
deserve the heavy hand of God, and the scourge of such a tyrant as the Turk.
But, whatsoever they or we (to whom God be merciful) at Gods hands do
deserve: not entering into Gods judgment, but speaking of men, the most likely
and chiefest cause of this Empires decay, is even the very The Pope the chief
cause of the Greek emperors decay. The Pope also the chief cause of the Weast
Emperors decay.
Pope him self, his ambitious treachery, first spoiled and divided the Empire
into twain, and made all the West part forsake their sworn obedience. And
has also so spoiled this part of the Empire in the west, that besides the bare
title of the Empire of Rome, the Emperor God wot, has little or nothing, the
Pope in effect has all. And where the Emperor of Rome had wont to be Lord to
the Bishop of Rome, and to other Bishops besides: The Bishop of Rome is now
Lord to the Emperor of Rome, and to all other Princes besides, and to attain
to his triple diadem over all Princes, he has never ceased to stir and move
such garboyles, as all Christendom has lost, only the Pope has won thereby,
and the barbarous nations have ouerrunne all Europe, Asia, and Affricke. No
maruayle then if at the length, Christian Princes powers being divided and
weakened with continual war, and chiefly set on or maintained by ye Pope,
especially against ye The Greek church never became captive to the Turk, till
they became thrall to the Pope.
Grecians: the Turks at the last have overcome ye Empire, being destitute of
foreign aid, and of themselves, given to wanton effeminatenesse. Although thus
much I may justly note, they ever well enough defended and maintained them
selves, till they acknowledged obedience to the Pope, who was the first cause
of their ruin. Which done, they never throue after, but were in short time
besieged and clean^ overcome. When they had once given their souls captive to
the tirannie of the Pope, their bodies not long after became thrall to the
slavery of the Turk. Which seems rather to be Gods just plague unto them,
wherein (to use your own words) as it were, with pointing and notifying with
his finger, he shows to all the world, to beware of these two adversaries,
the spiritual enemy the Pope, and the bodily enemy the Turk.

Thus M. Stapleton, your needless admonition touches your self and your
Pope, nearer than ye were a wist. Nevertheless, not so content, making as
though you had (as in deed ye have) ouershotte your self, you pretend to
draw nearer home.

But what speak I of Greece (say you) we need not to run Stap. 81. a
to so far years or countries, the case touches us much nearer: the Realm
of Boheme, and of late years of France and Scotland, the noble Country of
Germany, with some other that I need not name, be too too lively and pregnant
examples, of this your true, but needelesse and impertinent admonition.

How needelesse or impertinent the Bishops admonition was, is seen already
even by your own grant thereto. But how needelesse in deed, and impertinent
altogether, are these your vain admonitions, which ye call, a return: every
body may see. And how fitly they return with a recumbe^tibus upon your own
side: and how you control your self for running to far: and yet ye run at
randon further about the Countries, to Boheme, France, Scotland, Germany, and
other namelesse countries, to make them examples of your marginall note,
Heresies the destruction of commonweals. But thanks be to God, none of their
commonweals are destroyed, it is but your maliciouse slander on them. And if
they have been troubled or weakened, the Papists practices have ever been the
chief originals thereof, what soever ye pretend, (to deface the Gospel) by
calling all doctrine Heresy, be it never so pure and holy, if it be not by
your popish Church allowed: calling all countries and commonweals destroyed,
how soever they flourish in prosperity, peace and godliness: if they refuse
the Egiptian bondage of your spiritual Pharao the Pope.

But why mention you not all that part of Hungary, The countries that obeyed
the Pope, become thrall to the Turks cap tiuitie.
that acknowledging obedience to your Pope, nevertheless were overcome and
conquered of the Turks? why forget ye your mighty bulwark and holy knights
of the Rhodes? I wisse they were the Popes champions, and yet his blessing
could not save them from the Turkish bondage. You say there is some other place
that ye need not name, what mean ye thereby? Rome it self? that so many
times has been sacked, destroyed and left waste, and at this day the old
City, for the most part, not inhabited, except of owls and vermin in the
ruins thereof, and the new City deftled (besides Idolatry and superstition)
with most notorious filthy fornication and stews of courtizans, your Pope him
self being the vicar of bawdes in maintayning his estate by such filthy lucre.
And this is counted among you, the most holy common weal, yea such a mirror
to all other: that those Cities which conform them selves to this common
weal of Rome, can neither err, nor be in danger of destruction. But even so
said Sodom and Gomor, till their destruction came suddenly upon them.

M. Stapl. having thus puffed up his counterblast with Stapl. 81. ^
these discourses in both his foresaid parts, descends now to the third.

And now might I here break of (says he) from this, and go further forth,
saving that I cannot suffer you to bleare the readers eyes, as though the
Emperors Theodosius, or Valentinianus sayings or doings should serve any thing
for your pretensed primacie.

In deed, M. Stapleton it is more than high time, that you had broken off
long or this, except you would or could have answered* better to the purpose,
and not to have driven your counterblast further forth, with such heaps of
digressions, needelesse to the matter, but not needelesse to your purpose, to
bleare the readers eyes, when otherwise* you Blearing the readers eyes.
needed a material answers. But here (such is your zeal) ye can not suffer
the Bishop to bleare the readers eyes. This zeal M. Stapleton were commendable
in you, if you meant good soothe, or the Bishop had bleared the readers eyes,
and not simply and plainly set down the truth, that even the bleared eyes (if
they were not clean blinded with overmuch affection) might well behold it.
But it is rather to be feared, that as ye played before, pretending to
dissipate and discuss mistes (where in deed none was) ye raised mistes and
cast clouds, least the reader should have espied the matter as it was: so
here, though the readers eyes were clear, ye would bleare and dim them, and
if he were bleare eyed any whit before, ye would soon mende the matter and
make him stark blind. For even as ye there did, so eftsoon do you here.

The Bishops alleging of these Emperors, stays you from breaking off, and
from going further forth* ye can not suffer the Bishop to bleare the readers
eyes. And yet to any thing that the Bishop out of these Emperors alleges
(what soever the matter mean) ye answer not one word. Except this be an
answer (as they say) to set the Hares head against the Goose iublettes, to
set one allegation against another. If the Bishop has bleared the readers How
M. Stapl. answers the Bishops allegation.
eyes, he cited as long an allegation as yours, show then where he bleared
them. If he cited any thing false, name the place. But false or true, say
something to it, or to some piece of it, and not thus slinke away without any
answer at all, to the whole, or any part thereof. What shall the reader judge
(if he can see any thing) but that the Bishop goes plainly to work, and it
is you that would bleare his eyes, and put them out, if ye could, to keep the
reader still in ignorance and wilful blindness. If the Bishops allegation be
such as deserves no answer: at the least ye might have said so.

Howbeit, that you should not so bleare the readers eyes, and that the reader
should see both the Bishops plain dealing, and the plain truth of the matter,
and how fully it proves the Bishops purpose, and the Princes duty, care,
charge, and supreme government over matters Ecclesiastical: I will set down
not only so much as the Bishop alleged, but the whole Epistle. First, having
showed, that the surety of the common weal depends upon Gods religion, and
what a great kindred and society is betwixt these twain, true Religion, and
Justice: ^ith therefore we (says the Emperor) are constituted of God to
Cyril. epi. 17. ^om* 4.
be the Kings, and are the knitting together or ioynture of godliness and
prosperity in the subjects, we keep the society of these twain, never to be
sundred: and so far forth as by our foresight we procure peace unto our
subjects, we minister unto the augmenting of the common weal, but, as we
might say, being servant to our subjects in all things, that they may live
godly, and be of a religiouse conversation as it becomes godly ones. We
garnish the Wherein the Emperoures chief care consisted.
common weal with honor, having care (as it is convenient) of them both, (that
is peace and true religion) for it cannot be, that diligently providing for the
one, we should not care in like sort, also for the other. But we travail
earnestly in this thing above the rest, that the Ecclesiastical state may
remain sure, both in such sort, as is seemly for Gods honor, and fit for
our times, that it may continue in tranquillity by common consent without
variance, that it may be quiet through agreement in Ecclesiastical matters,
that the godly religion may be preserved unreprovable, and that the life of
such as are chosen into the Clergy, and the great Priesthode, may be clear
from all fault.

Thus does the Emperor protest of the guidance, care and charge that he
thought belonged to his hie office, not only in providing, ordering, and
directing public peace and justice but also as much, or rather much more, and
most of all, godliness, true religion, Ecclesiastical matters, and
Ecclesiastical persons, to live blameless in their spiritual vocations, so
well as the laytie to live in peace and justice. And that in all these points
the Prince is the knitting together and iointur^ of the one, so well as of the
other. Which flatly argues, that the direction and preserving of both causes
and persons, next under God, does appertain to his government, being both knit
alike to his authority.

What false dealing? what blearing of eyes has the Bishop here used? having
faithfully set down the Emperors own words, which as they fully show
Theodosius his mind: so they fully prove the present question, and conclude
the Princes supreme authority, so well in Ecclesiastical matters, as in
temporal. To all this master Stap. thought best to answer not one word, but
to let it go, telling us, that the Emperors sayings or doings, serve nothing
for our Obscurity.
pretensed primacie: and that this is wandering in an ob scure generality. This
may well be called a Counterblast, M. Stap. If this be sufficient answer to
the bishops allegation, let others judge. Ye complain it is obscure, it may
perchance so appear to your eyes, bleared with affection, or rather blinded
with wilfulness. So is the Gospel obscure to those that would not see, and
the savor of death to 2. Cor. 2.
those that perish. Clear light is noisome to dim sights. Every body save
you, and such as are bleared by you, may easily see a far off the playnnesse
of these proves.

Now where ye say, he wandreth in an obscure generality, whereof can not be
enforced any certain particularitie Stapl. 8 ^* b
of the principal question:

Otherwhiles, M. St. ye compain of particularities, and require the B. to
prove generalities, or else ye cry, it comes Generalities.
short. Here the Bishop having proved this generality, by your own
confession, now you quarrel at generalities. I perceive nothing will content a
froward brabbler, but any other that list not to quarrel, will soon perceive
that this generality that ye complain of, both comprehends the
particulars, and also satisfies that, that ye call so often for, to prove a
supreme government over all ecclesiastical matters in general, which fully
answers even to the oath likewise.

Nevertheless, since you would slip away by wandering Particularities.
about particulars: This Epistle of the Emperor shows his supreme direction
and government even in particulars, and that principal particulars also. This
Epistle being directed from the foresaid Emperors to Cyrillus, a chief
ecclesiastical Prelate, and Patriarche of Alexandria, after the Emperors (as
is before said) have declared, this their general care and government* so
well over ecclesiastical matters as temporal: But when (say they to Cyril)
Cyril. epi. 17. tom. 4.
we understood, both by our love to God, and our mind loving his truth, that
these things might be obtained in those that are godly, we have now often
thought it very necessary, by reason of those things that have happened
luckyly, to have a Synod most dear unto God, of those most holy Bishops
which be every where, etc. And so showing the cause of their delay, and the
necessity of the Ecclesiastical matters: they command Cyrill, with other
Bishops, not to fail, bu^ be ready at Ephesus, at Whytsontide next
following.

For (say they) the Copies of the same Synod are already sent out from our
Majesty's to the bishops beloved in GOD, throughout all the Metropolitan
Cities, that this being done, both the trouble, which has happened on
these controversies be dislolued, according to the ecclesiastical rules, and
those things corrected that are unseemly committed. And that godliness may
be, toward God, and profitable establishement to public matters. Neither
let any thing be severally innouate, in any matter of any person, before the
holy Synod, and the common sentence of it to come. And we are fully persuaded,
that every one of the Priests most dear to God, both forbicause of the
ecclesiastical and public matters, being thoroughly moved by this our
sanction or Edict: will spedyly make haste toward this council, with
diligent endeavor, and to their habilities consulte upon these matters, being
so necessary, and apperteining to the good pleasure of God. As for us, we
having much care of these things, will suffer no man lightly to be wanting,
neither shall he have any excuse before God, or before us if any out of hand
do not diligently appear at the foresaid time, in the place determined etc.

Thus even in this Epistle, in particularities also, does Theodosius show his
supreme authority. But you will say, these are not principal particulars, the
principal particulars are to dispute upon the questions, to resolve the
doubts, to debate the matter, and to indge and determine which part is the
truth thereof. These parts (say you) are the principal, these parts belong
not to the The discussing and debating Ecclesiastical matters, argues not the
supreme government of the^.
Prince, but to the Priests. That these things, master Sta belong to those,
that for their function have the knowledge and profession of them, no man
denies, no more than that lawyers should have the like debating, trying, and
determining the truth, of any doubt in the law. But this, nothing hinders
the Princes supreme authority and government in his laws, no more does it
in the debating, trying, and determining doubts in any ecclesiastical matters
(in the discussing whereof, the Prince is ignorant) debar his supreme
authority and government, in all such cases debated or defined. These doings
therefore though they be the principal in respect of the examining of such
doubts, yet in respects of the ordering, directing, disposing, setting them
out, and maynteyning them; the Princes dooinges are far more principal
particulars. As when a doubt in the law aryseth, to call all the Lawyers
together, high and low what estate soever they be off, to appoynte them the
place and time of meeting, where, and when, to direct and order their
assembly, and what they have judged to be the law therein, to ratify and
allow it, to set it forth, and maynteyne it, this doing theweth the
Prince to be the supreme governor in all Laive matters: though he neither
debate nor determine the truth thereof. Sith therefore Theodosius did thus
much, as this that is here showed, and as that, hereafter (to which ye
refer your self) shall further declare: this is inoughe to argue his supreme
government in all Ecclesiastical matters, even by these particulars.

If all this prove no supremacy, why grant ye not thus much to Princes now,
that ye see these Emperors had then? how chance your Pope will neither
suffer the Emperors now to summon a Council, to cite and call the Bishops
together, to assign them a place whereto they shall resort and keep their
Council, to appoynte the time to meet and begin their Council in? How
chance your Pope will not suffer Princes in their several dominions to have
the like synodes, but will do all, either general or Provincial, by him
self, or by his Legates* Forsoothe when he does it, then it is a principal
matter, it argues his supremacy, and therefore none can do it but he. But
now, when examples are found and alleged, that Christian Princes had wont
to do it: Ergo, They were supreme then belike therein. Nay, then it argues no
supremacy, then it is no principal matter, nor any eccl. matter How the
Papists elude the examples of christian princes.
at al. Thus you play mockhalliday with us, and boe peep, as though we were
children, it is, and is not. When the Pope does it, then it argues a
supremacy, when the Prince does it, then it argues none. And why so? for
sooth, then the case is altered. Thus do you dally out the matter, and when any
substantial proof is brought against you, either ye give it such a mock as
this, or leap clean over it, as though ye saw it not, or in steed of
answer to that that is propounded, propounde your self an other allegation,
which is, clau^m clauo pellere, to drive out one nail by another. For to the
allegation out of the Emperors Theodosius and Ualentinianus Epistle, ye
answer nothing, but set a piece of another letter of Ualentinian to Theodosius
in the teethe of it.

We, says Valentinian to the Emperor Theodosius, Stapl. 81. b
(say you) ought to defend the faith which we received of our ancestors, with
all competent devotion, and in this our time preserve unblemished the worthy
reverence due to the blessed Apostle saint Peter, so that the most blessed
Bishop of the City of Rome, to whom antiquity has given the principality
of Priesthood above all other, may (O most blessed father and honorable
Emperor) have place and liberty, to give judgment in such matters as
concern faith and Priests. And for this cause the bishop of Constantinople
has according to solemn order of Councels by his Libel, appealed unto him.
And this is written (M. Horn) to Theodosius him self, by a common letter of
Valentinian. And the Empresses Placidia and Eudoxia, which Placidia writes
also a particular letter to her said son Theodosius, and altogether in the
same sense.

Here ye clap up a marginall note,

The Popes supremacy Proved by the Emperor Valentinian, alleged by M. Horn.

And here again full triumphantly ye cry out.

Herke^ good M. Horn, and give good aduertiseme^t: I walk Stapl. 81. b.
not and wander as ye do here, alleging this Emperor, in an obscure
generality, whereof cannot be enforced any particularitie of the principal
question. I go to work with you plainly, truly, and particularly. I show you
by your own Emperor, and by plain words the Popes supremacy, and the
practice withal of appeals from Constantinople to Rome.

Here is a ioly face of this matter, M. St. But yet here is not one word to
answer the bishops allegation, but to commend your own, that ye set against
it: and so think ye answer it, because it is of the same Emperor
Ualentinian, whom the bishop alleged. But such answer as it is, sith ye can
make no other, we must take it, or none at your hands. Nevertheless, since
ye so crake, that ye walk not and wander not in obscure generalities, but go
plainly and particulerly to work: if ye meant as ye say, how chance ye open
not any of the necessary particular circumstances of the matter, whereupon the
Emperor wrote, which might have made this matter plain, and would have
showed what, and wherein they commended the B. of Rome, and what authority
belonged to the Emperor. Yea if you had but set down a little more largely,
the self same Epistles that ye cite: the matter had been a great deal more
clear. Ye say also, ye go truly to work, and yet you falsely translate, even
those very words that ye cite, and so cut them off, ere ye come to the
periode: that, that which should have showed the matter, to have been about a
particular controversy of the faith then ris^n, might seem to be generally
spoken of all controversies. And therefore ye leave out these words: For the
controversy of the faith that is sprung up: And where the words of your
allegation are, Locum habeat M. Stapl. false and subtle translation.
ac facultat^m, de fide and sacerdotibus iudicare, that he may have place, and
leave or faculty, to judge of the faith, and of the Priests: you captiously
and falsely translate it, that he may have place and liberty to give judgment
in such matters as concern faith and Priests. This subtle translation in
general ye use, to make it appear, that the Bishop of Rome has a general
authority, to be the chief Judge to decide all doubts in matters of faith,
and to be the chief Judge of all Priests, where your text infers no such
thing.

Likewise where the Emperor says, of the Bishop of the City of Rome: to
whom antiquity has yielded the principality of Priesthood above all
others: ye conclude that by plain words is showed the Popes supremacy, and
so set up your Marginall note, The Popes supremacy proved by the Emperor
Valentinian. Where in your letter are no such plain words of supremacy, nor
any proof thereof at all. Do you think that the Emperor acknowledged that
supremacy, which your Pope now chalengeth and usurps, not only over all
Priests but over all Kings and Emperors also? No master Stapleton, it is
evident, by the dealing of these Emperors, and that even in this matter, that
the Pope, ^ad no such supremacy, but the Emperor did those things then,
that your Pope does claim now: as further shall appear, in the proper
treatise thereof. Your Pope now would be loathe to be such an humble L^, and
fall down to the Egles feet, as the Pope did then to the Emperor, which
now ye make the Emperor do to the Popes feet. For why, ye may ^ay, ^empora
mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis, the times are changed, and we are changed
in them.

All the plain words and proves ye crake of, for this supremacy are these,
that the Emperor says, antiquity gave him the principality of Priesthood.
But there Principality of priest ^ode.
is a great difference between the principality of Priesthood, and supreme
head or chief governor of Priesthood, or that all Priesthood is derived out
of the Popes Priesthood, as diverse of your writers affirm, that Christ made
Peter only a Priest, and all the other Apostles had their Priesthood from
him, and so Priesthood sprung not from Peter.
all other from the Bishop of Rome, whom they call his Successoure. But as
they err in the office of Priesthood (whereof God willing we shall speak
hereafter) so whatsoever the office of their Priesthood was, their saying is
manifest ^alse. For if Peter were a man as he Gal. 2.
confessed him self to be S. Paul says, he had not his authority of men,
but immediately of God, and Peter gave him nothing, neither yet James nor John.

And here, if I might spur you a question, because master Heskins sets
out his Parliament, so solemnly before his book in pictures for the nonce,
making s. James the first that said Mass, wherein he follows the common
opinion of the Papists: I demand (if Peter was made The Papists say S.
James said the (...) Mass. Peter no massing priest.
the first priest, and al other from him) how s. James could say ye first mass
that was said? was Peter made Priest without singing or saying his first mass,
or any mass at al? then belike Peter was no mass (...) priest, and (...) pope
has not h^ principality of priesthood from Peter, nor any priesthod at all
from him, for Peter's was no massing Priesthood, such as the Popes is, and
pretends to be the principal of that order.

But at your leisure answer this, only now I note, that there is a great
difference between the principality of Priesthood, and the supremacy of all
the Church of Christ, which is your conclusion, and that that your Pope
chalengeth. But the Emperors words here do nothing prove it. And yet such
principality or excellency of Priesthood, as it was, it neither came from
God, nor from Peter, for any thing that either is plainly alleged, or proved
here, but rather the plain words are to the contrary, that this
principality was yielded and given to the Bishop of the City of Rome, by men,
for so says the Emperor, antiquit as contulit, antiquity gave it. Being
partly moved with the opinion that Peter was bishop there, and partly for that
Rome was the ancient and most famous City of the Empire, as appears in the
next Epistle of Placidia, by you mentioned, who calls it, Ciuitatem
antiquam, the ancient City, and the City that is the Lady of all the
Emperors Cities. And therefore it became them to conserve the reverence
thereof. For which considerations, that antiquity gave to it the principality,
and to the bishop thereof. Which principality of priesthood, or bishoph^, was
not above, but under the principality of the Emperors estate, as appears
even by these Epistles cited by you. For first in the Epistle whereout ye take
your allegation, Ualentinianus tells, how when he came to Rome, I was (says
he) both of the Roman Bishop, and also of other that were with him, gathered
together out of diverse provinces, entreated to write to your mildness (says
Ualentinian to Theodosius, of the faith, which being the preserver of all
faithful souls, is said to be troubled, which faith, being delivered us from
our Elders, we ought to defend with all co^pete^t devotion, and in our times to
co^serue unblemished the dignity of the reverence proper to the blessed
Apostle Peter, so that the most blessed B. of the city of Rome, to whom
antiquity has given a principality of Priesthood above all others, may (O
most blessed Lord, Father, and honorable Emperor) have place and faculty to
judge of the faith of the Priests, and for this cause according to the
solemnity of Councels the Bishop of Constantinople has appealed to him by his
Libels, for the contention that is sprung up of the faith, to him therefore
(requesting and adiuring me by our common saving health) I denied not to grant
thus much, as to move my petition to your mildness, that the foresaid Priest
(meaning the Bishop of Rome) all the other Priests being also gathered
together through all the world, within Italy (all other former judgment set
aside) may with diligent trial, searching all the matter that is in
controversy, from the beginning, give such sentence thereon, as the faith and
the reason of the true divinity shall require. For in our times, the
frowardness of multitudes ought not to prevail against religion, since
hitherto the faith has been conserved steadfast. And to the more perfect
instruction of your worthiness, we have also directed the gestes whereby your
godliness may know the desires and outcries of them all.

Thus far the Epistle. Which if ye had withal set What manner of
principality of priesthood Valentinian meant.
down, it would have dashed your Marginall note and conclusion of the Popes
supremacy. It would have showed that this principality of priesthood, was so
under the Princes principality, that the Pope was feign to labor to
Uale^tinian, and the Empresses also, to write to Theodosius, that he might have
place and leave to judge the matter. And that the place of judging it, might be
in Italy, and the Bishop of Rome might give sentence, not as he him self
should please, but conditionally as the truth should require, and that thus he
would admit the Bishop of Constantinoples appeal to take place, and so he
sends all the gestes of the matter for the Emperor to peruse and know them,
and to grant their petitions and desires. In all which things though there
were a principality of the Priests and Bishops and chiefly of the Bishop of
the chief imperial City, old Rome, so far as appertains to the
debating, discussing, and judging the doubts in controversy: yet so far as
appertains to the licencing thereto, the commanding, directing, ordering,
setting out, and maintayning even of the same Synodicall judgments, of the
Bishop of Rome or any other: the supreme principality belonged to the
Emperors. And this appears yet further by the other Epistles, that ye mention.

In the next Epistle of the Empress Placidia, to Theodosius the Emperor her
Son, for the Bishops of Rome and of Constantinople: after she has showed
with what tears the Bishop of Rome moved her to write, she shows how all
things were done unorderly at Ephesus, against Flauianus Bishop of
Constantinople, because (says she) he sent a libell to the Apostolical
seat, and to Council. tom. 1.
all the Bishops of these parties, by those which were in the Council,
directed from the most Reverend Bishop of The Epistle of Placidia to
Theodosius.
Rome. Who are accustomed (O most holy Lord my Son and Reverent Emperor)
to be put according to the Decrees of Nicene Council: and for this cause, let
your mildness (withstanding so great troubles) command the truth of the
Religion of the Catholic faith, to be kept undefiled. And so ascribing a
principal prerogative to the Bishop of Rome, she desires the Emperor, that
the judgment of the matter may be sent over to him. Which shows that the
Bishop of Romes principality was underneath the Emperors.

Likewise in the next Epistle of Eudoxia to Theodosius, The Epistle of Eudoxia
to Theodosius.
after she has praised the Emperor, saying: It is known unto all men, that
your mildness has a care and earnest heedefulnesse of Christians, and of the
Catholic faith, in so much that you would command nothing at all to be done
to the injury of it.

And after she has showed how the Bishop of Rome besought her in the foresaid
matter, to derect her letters to the Emperor: saluting you (says she) I
desire right, that your tranquillity would vouchsafe to have care to the
letters, and those things that are ill done ye would command them to be
amended, until that all things that also already are determined, be altogether
revoked, the cause of the faith and Christian religion that is moved, in a
Council gathered together in the parts of Italy, may be fetched out. For it
is written that all this contention raised, comes from hence that the Bishop
Flauianus might be removed from the Ecclesiastical dealings.

Thus do these Empresses write for Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople, and for
the Bishop of Rome. Wherein though they ascribe the dealings to the Council
and to the Bishop of Rome, yet the license and authority to do any thing, or
to stay any thing, they al ascribe to the Emperor. And as they ascribe this,
in these Epistles unto him (which argues his supreme government in all these
matters) so the Emperor in the answers to these Epistles, that are immediately
set down to those by you cited, acknowledges and claymes his supreme
authority therein.

In the answer to the first, from whence ye bring your Theodosius Epistle to
Valentinian.
allegation for the Popes primacie, he says: The Emperor Theodosius to my
Lord Valentinian Emperor. In the beginning of your letters, it is signified by
your Majesty both that your mildness came to Rome, and that a petition was
offered up to you, by Leo the most reverend Patriarche. As concerning your
safe return to the City of Rome (O my Lord, my most holy Son, and
honorable Emperor,) we render thanks accordingly to the divine Majesty, but
as concerning those things which the foresaid most reverend man has spoken,
it is already declared unto him more plainly and fully (as we suppose) and he
knows that we swerve in no part from the Religion of our fathers, and the
tradition of our auncetours. We will, no other thing, than the fathers
sacraments delivered as by succession to keep them inuiolably. For this cause
therefore, having knowledge that certain persons with hurtful novelty
trouble the most holy Churches, we have decreed a Synod to be holden at
Ephesus. Whereas, in the presence of the most reverend Bishops, with much
liberty, and with sound truth, both the unworthy were removed from their
Priesthood, and those that were judged to be worthy were received. We
therefore know nothing committed of them, contrary to the rules of faith, or
justice. Therefore all the contention was examined of the holy Council, and
Flauianus which was found guilty of hurtful newfanglednesse, has received
his dew, and he being removed, all peace and concord remains in the
Churches, and nothing but truth does flourish.

Thus the dealing and determining of the controversy, Wherein the Emperor had
the government of the council.
remaining Synodically to the Priests and Bishops, the decreing of the
Council, the assigning of the time and place thereto, the giving them in
charge to boulte out the truth, the receiving intelligence from them of their
judgments, the allowing and ratifying their determination, belonged to
Theodosius. And in respect of this his supreme doing, though at other times he
extol the Bishop of Rome: yet here he only calls him, but, most reverend
Patriarche, and most reverend man, as he calls other Bishops. The answer to
the second Epistle has the like. Theodosius to my Lady Placidia the honorable
Empress: our highness understands by the letters of your mildness, what
the most reverend patriarch Leo has desired of your highness. To these your
letters we declare, that concerning those things which are spoken of the most
reverend Bishop, we have written often times already more fully and more at
large, by which writing it is without doubt manifest, that we have defined or
decreed or understood nothing besides the faith of the fathers, or the divine
opinions, or the definitions of the most reverend Bishops, which were gathered
together in the City of Nice, under Constantine of godly memory: or of late
were gathered together at Ephesus by our precept. But this only we commanded
to be ordained, that all persons, which by noisome hurtfulnesse troubled the
holy Churches, should worthily be removed. etc.

Thus does the Emperor command the Council to be holden. He gives a
general charge to the Bishops to ordeyne that that they ordained, to wete, the
expulsion or deposition of perturbers of the Church whatsoever they were, and
in what matter ecclesiastical soever they were. And when the Bishops had
according to the Emperors commandment ordeynes this decree, and in their
synodicall discussing of the matter, found out Flauianus (though therein they
did him wrong) to be culpable hereof: then the The Emperor decrees the decree
of the Council.
Emperor peruseth, ratifieth and confirms the same their synodicall
judgment, and says, he defined and decreed it himself, because he approved
and confirmed their definition and decree. Which is a manifest argument of
Thodosius supreme authority, over all the Bishops debatings and determinings
of their ecclesiastical constitutions.

To the same effect is the other Epistle to Eudoxia. Wherein he tells the
Empress flatly, that since these things were already decreed, it was not
possible to determine of the matter No appeal after the Emperors decree.
any more. In which denial of suffering the matter to be tried any further, he
shows also his supreme authority of debarring and frustrating any appeals
to Rome, that you make so great account upon. The Emperor will not only not
suffer it to take place, and to infringe the Councels and his own doing: but
says it is impossible to proceed on the matter already determined. And thus
he rejects Flauianus appeal from the Ephe^ine Council to the Bishop of
Rome. Which Council notwithstanding should also have been held by the
Emperors leave and appointment. But he would not allow it, although Pope Lee
labored to him, and to Ualentinian Emperors, to Eudoria and Placidia Empresses
never so much therefore.

Lo M. St. here are the generalities and the particularities also. Wherein ye
may see what belongs to either party. Hearken good M. Stap. and give good
advertisement thereto, since ye will not utter it your self, and yet would
have us listen to you. You say ye wander not in obscure generalities, but ye go
to work plainly, truly, and particularly. And yet of all this ye speak not
one word. Ye would neither answer^ the Bishops allegation, but set another
against it, which is no plain nor true kind of aunswering: neither yet for
that you allege, ye allege it either plainly or truly or particularly, as
ye pretend. But cull out a piece of that, that seems to set forth your
cause, by extolling the Bishop of Rome, and when the matter is plainly, truly,
and particularly sifted out, it neither proves any supremacy for him: and in
all points, shows the Princes supremacy against you. But ye are the more to
be borne withal, for I think ye read not the whole particulars, but either as
your common places led you, or the title prefixed tickled you, that says In
qua quoque Romani Pontifici^ authoritas com^ndatur, Wherein also the
authority of the Bishop of Rome is commended. And so greedily ye snatched at
that sentence, and let go all the residue. But, call ye this plainly, truly,
and particularly going to work, master Stapleton?

The. 26. Division.
THe Bishop having hitherto as master Feck required in his issue, proved by the
Scriptures both by the old testament and the new, and by some such Doctors
as have written thereon, and also (which was more than M. Feck. requested) by
the ecclesiastical writers, and Nicephorus, and by some of those Emperors whom
they commend for most godly, proved the like government in Church causes as the
Queens Majesty takes upon her of duty to belong to civil magistrates: he
concludes there upon, by these two parts of the request so satisfied, that they
may and ought to take the same upon them. Which done, he promises to enter
into the other twain, to prove the same by the continual practice of like
government in some one part of Christendom, and by the general Councels.

To this answers M St. Hitherto ye have not brought Stapl. 82. ^.
any one thing to the substa^tial proof of your purpose, worth a good straw,
neither Scripture, nor Doctor nor Emperor.

This is a short answer indeed, as if Jack Straw had made it, and not a
student of divinity. All is not worth a straw with you. Such was the
judgment of Esops dunghill Cock when he found the precious stone. Have ye
done nothing master Stapleton but scraped strawes? though you esteem better of
your own doings, whereupon (as it were an other Chaunticlere) ye cr^we and
crake so often: yet set not so little by the doings of other men, and th^se
that are far your betters. But what are the Bishops proves the less worth,
for this your strawish judgment. Your bolt M. St. is soon shot, but a
raylers tongue is they say no slander. Let others judge, that have more
judgment, what the Bishops proves amount unto. And let them judge even by this
your Counterblast, that ye have blown out against these proves, to ouerturne
them. Which, had they been as light as a straw, ye might have easily done, and
never have puffed up such a stormy Counterblast. But let them judge what your
Counterblast has done, and whether ye have blown away so much as one straw
breadth from the matter, one proof of all the Bishops proufes. But least I
should also be like to you, I remit ye judgment of the whole to other: yea, in
Gods name, to any of your own side, that with any indifferency will examine
both. Ye quarrel further, at the least to blemish the Bishop with suspicion of
heresy, saying:

Among your four Emperors by you named, ye have iugled Stapl. 82. ^
in one that was a stark Heretic, but as subtly as ye thought ye had
handled the matter, ye have not so crastily conueyde your galls, but that you
are espied.

Ye have told us of this often enough (master Stapleton) if that would help
you, though ye told it not so Iuglerlike as now, although with as much
bitterness of gall, as ever y^ Act. ^.
Iugler or sorcerer Simo^ Magus had. With Heretic, stark Heretic, wretched
Heretic, etc. But ye never tell how the Bishop cited him. For, were he
Heretic or were he not, (as it is a question, by Saint Augustines definition
of an Heretic) yet in that point that the Bishop cited him, ye can prove him
no Heretic. But whatsoever he were, the B. is clearly discharged, to your
own shame and to all your doctors of Louaine, where ye learn your good
divinity. And this is all that ye have to say to the Bishops proves hitherto.
Now, to that he promises to enter into the residue, there is yet one thing, yt
(after all your raylings) ye commend him for.

Yet for one thing (say you) are ye here to be commended, Stapl. 82. ^.
that now you would seem to frame us a certain fixed state of the matter to
be debated upon, and to the which you would seem to direct your proufes, that
ye will bring. And therein you deal with us better than hitherto ye have done,
seeming to seek by dark generalities, as it were corners, to lusk and lurk in.
Neither yet here walk ye so plainly and truly as you would seem, but in great
darkness, with a sconce of dim light, that the readers should not have the
clear view and sight of the right way ye should walk in, who^ with this your
dark sconce ye lead far awry. For thus you frame us the state of the question

These are but words M. Stap. to spend time and fill paper. Ye know best your
own practices. Ye tell us before hand the Bishop will do so. Tell us so when
ye come to it. It seems he minds it not, even by your own confession,
prefixing a state of ye matter to be debated upon, and to direct his proves
unto. This is not the way of one that would lu^ke or lurk with dark sconces
in corners, nor the B hitherto has gone thus to work, it is one of your
ordinary slanders, his proves are evident, name one that is not directed to
the issue set between him and M. Feck. and that fully proves it not, but that
sconce of your own has left no corner unsought, to ^usk and lurk in, and to
lead the Reader about the bush, as besides this, your common place of
impertinent matters, will (for the most part) declare.

The. 27. Division.
THe B. having proved his issue by the two forsaid parts, the scriptures, and
the Doctors, being entered into the other twain, the Councels and the practice:
since the issue requires the proof, of Any such government as the Q majesty
now takes upon her: the B. first expresses her Majesty's government, and
thereon, according to the issue, makes his general state, to level his proves
unto, ye B. words are these:

The government that the Q. Majesty most Page 19. b.
justly takes upon her in ecclesiastical causes, is the guiding, caring,
providing, ordering, and ayding the ecclesiastical state, within her
dominions, to the furtherance, maintenance, and setting forth of true
religion, unity, and quietness of Christ's Church, ouerseeing, visiting,
refourming, restrayning, amending, and correcting all manner persons, with all
manner errors, superstitions, heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, contemptes
and enormities, in or about Christ's religion whatsoever. This same authority,
rule, and government was practiced in the catholyke Church by the most
Christian kings and Emperors, approved, confirmed, and commended by the best
Councels both general and National.

The effect of M. Stapletons answer to this, is all against the state of the
question, that the Bishop here sets down, M St. order to this division.
and is divided chiefly into three points. In the first he chalengeth the
bishop to alter the state of the question in hand, and sets himself down
another state, to the which he would have the Bishop direct his proves.
Secondly, he trauayleth to show, that the Bishop concealed two clauses of the
statute, that should chiefly have expressed the state and what inconvenience
may ensue thereby. Thirdly, he alleges the excuses of the Papists, for
refusing the oath.

In his first part, being deducted into these two members, to quarrel at the
Bishops state, and to set up his own: for the former, thus says M. Stapleton.

Here is a state framed of you M. Horn, but fane square Stapl. 82. b. cap. 20.
from the question in hand. For the question is not now between M. Feckenham
and you, whether the Prince may visit, reform and correct all manner of
persons, for all manner of heresies and schisms, and offenses in Christian
religion, which perchance in some sense might somewhat be borne withal, if ye
mean by this visitation, the outward execution of the Church laws and
decrees, confirmed by the civil magistrate, roborated with hisedicts, and
executed with his sword. For in such sort many Emperors and Princes, have
fortified and stre^gthned the decrees of Bishops made in Councels both general
and National, as we shall in the process see. And this in christian Princes is
not denied but commended.

What the state of the question in hand is, the reader has often heard. How
be it, such is your importunity, that ye The state of the question.
will never leave your old warbling. But for the full satisfying of the Reader
berein, let him once again resort to the issue that M. Feck requires of the
bishop to direct all his four means unto, wherein he would be satisfied. And
that is contained in these flat words.

When your L. shall be able by any of these four Supra page 136.
means, to make proof unto me, that any Emperor or Empress, King or Queen,
may claim or take upon them any such government in spiritual or
ecclesiastical causes: I shall herein yield. etc.

This then is the state of the question between the^: whether any Prince may
take upon him any such government in spiritual or ecclesiastical causes, as
the Queens Majesty does. Now wheresoever the B. proves anything by the four
fore said means, that any Prince has taken upon him any such government, as
does the Queens Majesty in causes ecclesiastical: there the bishop keeps
himself to the state of the question in hand, and satisfies M. Fecknams
issue. What the bishop has done in the two foresaid means, is evident by
that that is past, let others judge thereon. Here, the B. entering into the
other two means, prefixeth this issue again before him to level his proves
by. The issue is now, that by any of these two means remaining, he shall prove
that any Prince may claim or take upon him any such government as the Queens
Majesty in Ecclesiastical matters does. And where the B. by any of these two
means, shall prove that any Princes have taken upon them, any such government
in ecclesiastical matters, as the Q. Majesty does: there ye B. digresseth
nothing from his question, and also satisfies M. Feck* demand. This then
being the state of the question between them, the proof of any such
government in ecclesiastical causes: the B. first sets here down the
particulars that plainly declare, what government this is that the Q. Majesty
takes on her, whereto he must direct his proves. So that now yt question in
hand is this. What is that government, and in what particulars consists it,
that the Q. majesty takes on her? Which when here the B. does specify, and
in the last Chapter M. Stapl. himself commended the bishop for his orderly
going to work therein, and now cries out, here is a state framed far square
from the question in had: whether it be so or no, and whether it be not plain
dealing of the B. and plain warbling of M. St. let any man be indifferent judge
between them.

But M. Stapl. says: the question is not now between M. Feck. and you
whether the Prince may visit, reform and correct all manner of persons for all
manner of schisms, heresies and offenses in Christian religion.

True in deed M. St. the question is not now whether the Prince may do these
things that you rehearse or no, but the question that is now in hand, being
deducted out of ye words of the issue, (any such government) demands first,
what kind of government that is, that the Q. majesty does claim and take
upon her? to the which question the B. answers: the government that her
highness takes on her is such and such. etc. And so the state of the question
is known, what kind of government the B. must prove. And look where he
proves any such government, there M. Feckenhams request is answered. And if
he can not prove any such, then M. Feckenham may complain that he is not
satisfied. And, as he is bound to perform his promise of thankful yielding:
so have you no cause to warble at this the B. diligent enumeration of those
particularities of the principal question, least, both ye should wander in an
obscure generality, and also contrary your late vaunt, that ye go to work
plainly, truly, and particularly.

But see your falshoode, how chance ye set not down the Bishops words as he
spoke them, but abridge them, and (...) of three parts of them and more,
crying: Here is a state framed far square from the question in hand? Here is
a false subtlety of you M. St. far square from any truth, in hand, or out of
hand. The Bishops words are these.

The government that the Q. Majesty most justly takes upon her in eccles.
causes, is the guiding, caring, providing, ordering, directing, and ayding the
ecclesiastical state within her dominions, to the furtherance, maintenance,
and setting forth of true religion, unity, and quietness of Christ's Church:
ouerseeing, visiting, refourming, restrayning, amending and correcting all
manner persons, with all manner errors, superstitions, heresies, schisms
abuses, offenses, contemptes, and enormities, in or about Christ's religion
whatsoever.

In place of all these words, every one being material to show the
particular things, wherein her government consists, that she claymeth: you
only for all these, set down these words, The Prince may visit, reform,
and correct, all manner of persons, for all manner of heresies, schisines, and
offenses, in Christian religion. As though the Bishops particular words,
specifying the points of her government, contained no more but this.
Nevertheless, had the bishop specified no more, but these words that ye thus
contracte: yet had he not swarued from the issue between them, (Any such
government:) nor from the direct^ answering to the question, declaring any
such government, chiefly the chief points thereof, that the Queens majesty
claymeth, and you refuse to yield unto her. For even these particularities
that you set out, ye will not grant without an exception, and that is, in
effect, utterly to deny them, although in daliaunce of speech saying in
some sense) ye would only seem to mollify them. For what else mean these
your words?

Which perchance in some sense, might somewhat be Stap. 82. b.
borne withal, if ye mean by this visitation and reformation the outward
execution of the Church laws and decrees, confirmed by the civil magistrate,
roborated with his edicts, and executed with his sword: for in such sort
many Emperors and Princes have fortified and strengthened, the decrees of
Bishops made in Councels both general and national, as we shall in the
process see. And this in Christian The supreme authority the Papists grant
to Princes, and in what sense they grant it.
Princes is not denied but commended.

Christian Princes have here gotten afaire catch by this your grant and
commendation, to become your servants, your soldiers, and your slaughtermen,
only executing with their swords, that you with your authority decree and
appoint unto them. Now forsooth a fair supreme authoriti^.

But let us see how this does hang together. Ye grant the^ to visit, reform,
and correct all manner of persons, for all manner of heresies, schisms, and
offenses in Christian religion.

This is enough, M. St. for your part, to grant the Prince thus much. Nay soft
ye (say you) I grant this but with a perchance. What? does so weighty a
matter hang by so rotten a thread? Nay, I grant not this perchance neither,
say you, but in some condition. This goes hard with Princes (M. St. to stand
at this small reuersion. But go to, let us see, how many Princes visit,
reform, and correct, all manner persons, heresies, schisms and offenses? What
is the condition ye will make? Forsooth the condition is this: look what manner
laws and decrees the Priests will make, the Prince shall only confirm them by
outward execution of them. Look what manner persons the priests do say are
heretics, ^chismatikes, and offenders, the Prince shall execute them with the
sword and kill them. Look what manner religion, doctrine and doings, the
Priests and Bishops shall in their Councels both general and national, decr^
to be heresy, schism, and offense: the Prince shall roborate, fortify, and
stre^gthen them. And this is the only sense (says M. St. that I mean, that
they should visit, reform, and correct all manner persons, heresies, schisms,
and offenses in Christian religion. Why? M. Stapl. this sense, and this
grant, are quite contrary the one to the other. The Prince shall visit,
reform and correct all manner of persons, heresies, schisms, and offenses:
that is to say, he shall not visit, reform, nor correct, any manner of person,
for any manner of all these things, but the Priest shall do it, and he shall
only be the Priests slave and executioner. Well, says M. Stap. be it as be
may, construe it as ye will, this is the only some sense that we may grant it
in, and in none other sense. And this in Christian Princes is not denied, but
commended. Is not here a proper grant to Princes? and is not master Stap. to
be commended for this some sense of christian Princes government? But who is so
senseless, that he sees not in this sense, that the Prince has no
government at all, but is made a very slave to the Popish priests authority.
And in this some sense, could master Stapl. find in his heart to acknowledge
a government to the Queens majesty, and yet not without a perchance
neither. But without perchance master Stap. your sense shows, what good
heart ye bear her Majesty, and all other christian Princes.

Now that M. Stap. has thus challenged the state which the bishop framed, and
yet grants with a perchance thereto in some sense, which sense is as you
have heard: he takes upon him to set down the true state of the question in
hand: and prefixeth these words in his margin:

The state of the question: and so proceeds, saying:

But the question is here now, whether the Prince or lay Stap. 82. b.
magistrate, may of him self, and of his own princely authority, without any
higher eccl. power in the Church, within or without the Realm, visit,
reform, and correct, and have all manner of government and authority in all
things, and causes eccl. or no. As whether the Prince may by his own supreme
authority, depose and set up Bishops and priests, make injunctions of
doctrine, prescribe order of Gods service, enact matters of religion, approve
and disprove articles of the faith, take order for administration of
Sacraments, command or put to silence Preachers, determine doctrine,
excommunicate and absolve with such like, which al are causes eccl. and al
apperteyning not to the inferior ministry (which you grant to Priests and
Bishops only) but to the supreme jurisdiction and government, which you do
annexe to the Prince only. This I say, is the state of the question, now
present. For the present question between you and M. Feck. is grounded upon
the oath comprised in the statute: which statute emplieth and concludes all
these particulars,

I had thought (seeing your earnestness, M. St. when ye What state of the
question M. St. sets down.
came to me^tioning the statute) that we should have herd all these things
(that ye have thus as it were on your fingers ends particularly named)
expressed in the statute. But when al comes to al, ye knit up the matter with
this: which statute implies and concludes al these particulars. But I see,
you employ your self (like your self) still to false co^clusions. And such as
your co^clusions are, such are your proves. You pretend here (after ye have
controlled the B.) to set down the true state of the question. But as ye played
in the beginning, so ye hold out rubbers even to the ending. Ye are still the
same man, that cried out of short and wide shoting, having set up new marks of
your own making, by this doing, both to defeat the bishops profes, and also
to deceive ye reader.

Ye would feign drive all to the oath, and make the oath the present question.
And why so? because (say you) the present question is grounded on the oath.

True in deed, both the present question, and all other The oath of the
supremacy.
questions about this controversy, and the issue also agreed upon between
these parties: is grounded (as ye say) upon the oath. And because ye present
question is grounded thereon, it is a good argument against you, that the oath is
not the^ the present question, because the present question is grounded thereon,
and a question is not grounded on it self. Ye should have marked, that though
ye original be of the oath, yet both the issue, and the present question in
hand, being by degrees deducted from thence, make now an other state. To the
which, and to this issue, if the bishop satisfy, ye can not justly challenge
him any further. As for that state of the question that you set down, and the
particulars thereof, that ye say are employed and concluded in the statute, and
that all those things are apperteining not to the inferior, but to the supreme
jurisdiction and government, that ye say we annexe to the Prince only: al these
are your most manifest untruths and slanders, nor ye can find them either
specified, emplyed, concluded, comprised, or any ways to be meant in the oath,
or in the statute, The oath and the statute sla^ de^ed by the Papists.
or in any part thereof. Neither the oath or the statute give, al manner of
government and authority in all things and causes ecclesiastical to the
Prince: but ascribe to the Prince the supreme government and authority in all
things and causes ecclesiastical. True it is, that supreme government is
Supreme government is not all manner of government.
above and over them, but yet the one is not the other, supreme government is
not all manner of government. Neither both the oath, or the statute, either in
words, or effect of words, ascribe to this the Princes supreme government,
the making of Priests, and Bishops, the making injunctions of doctrine, the
determining of doctrine, the approving or disprouing articles of the faith,
excommunicating and absoluing, the preaching of the word, and the
administration of Sacraments. Where find ye any of these things so much as
to be gathered out of the oath or statute? Why say you, they all appertain not
to the inferior ministry (which ye grant to Priests and Bishops only) but
to the supreme jurisdiction and government, which you do annexe to the Prince
only.

In deed, these things you make to appertain to your Pope, to whom ye give
such supreme jurisdiction and government, as annexeth all this to his papal
authority. But ye do wickedly herein, and injury to our savior Christ, to
whom only such supreme jurisdiction and government belongs, and under whom,
the inferior ministers may do these things, not as they please, but as he
has prescribed them. The Jurisdiction and authority appertains only to
ministers, bishops, or priests, as ye call them. To whom herein we do not
(as ye sclaunder us) grant only an Inferior ministry, but even an higher
ministry, than we How the ministers are higher or inferior.
give to Princes. In their spiritual ministration they are higher ministers:
but in governing them, ouerseeing them, directing, punishing, maynteyning,
placing, or displacing them, as they shall do their duties well or ill: the
Prince therein is higher than they, and his government under God is supreme
and chief in all such causes, as belongs to the Ecclesiastical persons, or
any other in his territories. This is that the statute ascribes, and the oath
requires far from your malicious and sclaunderous slate of the question
that you have here devised. Which (as ye say the truth therein) the Bishop
proves not, for it is no part for him to prove. But that, this is the ^slue,
he fully preueth. Yea and proves the full contents of the Oath also, to the
which ye would so feign drive the question now in hand.

After ye have thus set up a false and wrong state, and quarelled at the
very state of the question in hand, plainly and truly set down by the
Bishop: ye enter into your second part, wherein prefixing an other marginal
note, Master Horns dissembling falsehood: ye challenge the B. to omit Stapl.
83. a.
two clauses of the statute, the one at the beginning thereof, the other at the
end. The former is this.

That no foraine person shall have any manner of authority Stapl. 83. a.
in any spiritual cause within this realm. By which words is flatly
excluded (say you) all the authority of the whole body of the Catholic
Church without the realm, as in a place more convenient toward the end of
the last book, it shall by Gods grace be evidently proved.

If that be a place more convenient, why do ye anticipate it here not so
conveniently? where it appertains not to the question in hand. The Bishop now
medleth not with that parcel that excludes all foraine authority, but only
with that part that expresses what manner of authority it is, that the
Queens Majesty takes upon her. And this the Bishop plainly and faithefully
does, not here intermedlyng with other points of the statute. But where that
convenient occasion is, there ye shall see the Bishop touch that, that here ye
call for. And there a Gods name answer him if ye can. But your fingers itched,
ye could not hold your hand, but needs ye must even now have a fling
thereat for a farewell. Although therein ye proprely ouertourne your self,
and yet to make somewhat of the matter, ye play all the false play ye can.
For where The statute e^ cluding any forain persons authority excludes net
the authority of the whole church.
the Statute mencioneth only any foreign person to have no authority, you
conclude, that it excludes all the authority of the whole body of the
Catholic Church without the Realm. Where as there the Statute mencioneth
not the catholic Church at all.

And besides, who sees not a great difference between these twain, any
persons authority, and the whole bodies authority? And who sees not withal,
that if England be a parcel and membre of the whole body of the Catholic
Church of Christ, and all the members make one united body: then neither is
the whole body foraine to the members thereof, nor the particular members
foraine to the whole body? Nor in deed any part of this mystical body is
excluded. But in that respect that one countreyman is foraine to an other,
such foraine authority of any foraine person, is thereby excluded. But in
regard of the body of the Catholic church, (if ye mean Christ's holy
Catholic Church) there is neither Jew nor Greek, Scythian, Gala. 3. Coloss.
3. Ephe. 2.
nor Barbarian, nor any forayne Countreyman: we are no strangers and
forainers, but Citizens of the Saints and of the householde of God, and all
compacte in Christ, nor any is excluded out of this Church (if he be in, and
of this Church) because he is not forayne. And where ye say, the whole body
of the Church without the Realm, your words implie a contradiction to
themselves. For if the realm be a parcel of the body of the church, which
perchance you will deny: or if the realm be a parcel of the body of the
Church, which you will not deny: then that which is without the realm, is
not the whole body, as ye call it.

But lettyng this go, what is that authority, be it of the most part, or be
it (as you sa^) of the whole body of the What authority it is that the true
catholic church has.
Church without the realm, that ye would have the realm allow? If it be the
very Catholic church of Christ, then is it also the wife and spouse of
Christ, and has no authority to make any faith doctrine, or religion, besides
that her husband has appointed: neither England, France, Germany, Italy,
Spain, or any other part, or all the whole body of this spouse, has
authority to do it. And look what part does not this, or presumes to do
otherwise, becomes foraine, and as foraine is cut off, even as a rotten and
putrified member severed from the body. Every branch John. 15.
(says Christ,) that bears not fruit in me, my father will cut it away. But
if this authority be for such ecclesiastical discipline, as Christ has given
thereof no express commandment: then every several part may receive or not
receive the same, and yet is not estranged or made foreign from the whole corpse
of Christendom, yea though the most part of the church besides, authorized
and used the same. But every particular Church has in it self authority to
establish orderly, such disciplines as shall be thought best and fittest for
their estate: and yet is there no division or schism from the whole, thereby.
But since ye refer your self to a more convenient place, where ye say it
shall by Gods grace be evidently proved, it is not much convenient to stand any
more hereon, since it is here but accessorie, and ye confess your self that ye
do not, but ye will hereafter, by Gods grace prove it evidently. But I doubt
me of two things, the one of your evident proving thereof, the other, that ye
will do the same by the grace of God, the doing whereof, is against the grace
of God.

The other clause (say you) you omit, at the end of the Stap. 8^. a
statute, which is this: That all manner superiorities that have or may
lawfully be exercised, for the visitation of persons ecclesiastical, and
correcting all manner of errors, heresies and offenses, shall be for ever
united to the crown of the realm of England: wherein is employed, that if
(which God forbid) a Turk or any heretic whatsoever, should come to the
Crown of England, by virtue of this statute, and of the oath, all manner
superiority in visiting and correcting ecclesiastical persons in all manner
matters, should be united unto him. Yea and every subject should swear that
in his conscience he believes so. M. Stapl. quarrel for uniting the supremacy
to the crown.


Is this a part also M. Sta. of the question in hand, for the omission of a
part whereof ye have so sharply reviled the Bishop for a false dissembler? Is
there no difference between the kind of government it self, or the particulars
thereof, and the perpetual uniting of that government* and the same particulars
to the crown, or any other such clauses for the prefer^ing of it? If the
Bishop concealed any part of that government that the Queen's majesty takes
on her: then might ye have see ned to have had some cause, to have thus
quarelled at ye B. but then ye should have set down what clauses of any point of
government in ecclesiast matters, yt the Queen claims ye Bish. omitted. But
this neither ye do, nor ye can do, but run about the bushe, picking quarrels,
that he let not down other clauses also, that be no parcel of the question in
hand. The question is not now about the uniting to the crown the supremacy
that her highness claims, but what that supremacy is, and what are the
points, wherein it consists that are to be united. The thing it self is one
thing, and the uniting of the thing is an other thing. The B. has (...) to set
down the thing it self for his leuel, for so ye question of the issue,
demau^deth to prove any such government as the Queen takes on her, If now the
B. tell what kind of government it is, and ^o enter into his proves, to leuel
the^ thereto: does not the B. deal plainly and truly? and do you any other tha^
keep your wonted wrnggling, which way soever the B had go^ to work? For if,
when he unites himself only to his matter, he cannot satisfy your brabbling
quarrels, but even there, (such is your impudency) ye chyde because he
straggleth not from his question: If he had united any thing else unto it, and
spoken of this uniting also, as now ye would have him do: then would ye as
fast have cried out on the other side, that he shot wide, and set up new
states of the question in hand. And thus would nothing stop your mouth, ye
love of life to wrangle.

But all these quarrels are but your starting holes pretending to find fault
with the Bishop, where indeed your M. Stapl. at the end of his book would
leave a scruple in the readers head of misselyking the state.
quarrel is at an other matter, to cast (for a farewell at the end of this
your book) a boane for the reader to gnawe upon, to breed a suspicion in his
head of a great inconvenience, and so to bring him in a misliking of the
state. At least to leave him stricken in the head with a doubtful scruple of
the s^qurle thereof: As who should say crack me this nutt^, and there an end,
answer me to this inconvenience that may follow hereon.

If a Turk (say you) or any heretic whatsoever, should come to the Crown of
England; by virtue of this statute, and of the Oath, all manner superiority in
visiting and correcting Ecclesiastical persons in all manner matters, should
be united to him.

You have a mischeuous meaning M. St. all the world may see, but that ye dare
not utter it without an if. But (thanks be to God) they be no Turks, nor any
heretics whatsoever, that ye shoot at, and refuse to obey. God grant all be
(...) whom ye wish in place: as for your Pope, whom ye would give this
supremacy unto, as he is no whit better than any heretic whatsoever, so is he
a more perilous enemy than the Turk. A worsse than he, can not be feared,
except y^ will put your case of the Devil himself. And shall we leave ye
certayntie of a present good state, for doubt of an ill to come? or for fear
of a worse, run to the worste of all? Thanks be to God the Queens Majesty,
whom God of his merciful favor has placed to reign over us, and to enjoy
this supremacy, is neither Turk, nor heretic, but a most excellent and
blessed christian Queen, a most sincere defender of the true faith of
Christ, and a most godly nourse and mother of Gods people. God for his
mercyes sake, vouchesafe to bless and long continue her over us, maugre all
your spites.

But go to, will ye say, I stand not ^n the state present. It is good for
hereafter to forecast the wors^e* What if this should happen (as God forbid)
that a Turk or an heretic should come to the crown of England?

Since there is no remedy with you M. Stapleton, but The answer to M. Stapl.
inconne^ence of a Turk or an heretic to have this supremacy. Difference
between a Turk and an heretic.
we must needs answer this your wicked presupposall: for mine own part, I
will answer you thus. First, there is a great difference between a Turk and
an heretic, of both whom confusedly ye put your case* A Turk is an open
enemy to Christ's religion, professing Mahomet that seducers law. An heretic
pretends to be a christian, but agrees not with the truth of Christ's
doctrine, so that there might be a more lykelyhod of the one than of the other.
For this realm being Christian, and withal (God (...) thanked therefore) so
far from any danger of the Turk (between whom and us, both by land and
water lie many Nations) that yet of the twain, the heretics, of which there
be many and subtle ^ortes, and all pretending to be members of the Catholic
Church of Christ, were more li^ly to obtain that which you presuppose. Now
if a Turk (a^ God forbad) should come to the crown: most lykely he could
not get it, but by tyramicall usurpation, as he does other Countries and then
your question is answered for him, that of right neither this authority, nor
any other united to the Crown it self, is due unto him. Neither will he, if he
be a Turk in religion (although ^e would take the Crown, neither coulor be,
if he would, take withal What a Turk would do, if he had the crown.
this Christian kind of Supremacy upon him, which is the subversion of his
false and (...) Religion. No, M. Stapl. he would not take, any su^e kind of
Regiment, as you your self allow to Christian Princes, and unite unto their
crowns.

As for an heretic, might easilyer crepe in, to the obtaining the crown of
England, (which also God forbid) for no throne, chair, or city, place, or
people, have any warrant against this presupposall* The holy temple of
Jerusalem became a den of thieves, and their priests most wicked murderers
of Jesus Christ. And in the seat. of David sat many idolaters, yea far mo bad
than good. Besides, that no nation is exempted from this threat, Propter
peccata populi regnare Job. 34.
facit hypocritam, For the sins of the people, God makes the hypocrite to
reign* So that nothing is impossible. Our sins are such as may deserve, or
Gods trial may be such, as he may prove us with affliction under a Turk, or
heretic, or any other tyrant or usurper. But what is all this to the purpose?
Shall not lawful and godly Christian Princes, (as Gods blessed name be praised
therefore, he has so blessed England presently, with such a most happy
Princess, for all his most gracious and rare gifts shyning in her, that we
may justly say, Non tal^er fec^ Psalm. 147.
omni nationi, he has done the like in our days to no christian nation: I
speak it not to flatter her, or to blemish any other estate, but to glorify
God for her, to confirm us i^ our allegiance, and to confound your
disobedience to hi^ The Princes certain and pre sent right ought not to be
forsaken for fear of uncertain inconveniences that may be doubted to come.
highness) shall not, I say, such Godly princes unite and man sure to them and
their heirs, all such lawful authority, as belongs unto their estate,
because it may be abused by other Princes hereafter?

If ye say, it is not their lawful authority, nor belongs unto them of
right: That would beproued first, Master Stapleton: for otherwise, this
your presupposall, touches as well their authority over temporal matters,
as over spiritual. If the one may be united because it is right, why may not
the other being right als^, be likewise united, without this vain castyng
beyond the M^Wue, to let go a certentie of present right, for fear of an
uncertain danger of some inconvenience to come? And yet if any such chance
should come, ye should Difference between a Princes authority, and a Princes
tyranny.
always consider a difference, between a Princes authority, and a Princes
tyranny: between his duty, and his doing, whether he be Turk, Jew,
Heretic, Heathen, or whatsoever he be, or whatsoever he do, he ought to be a
faithful Christian Prince, and he ought to do nothing, but that a christian
Prince may lawfully do. Neither do any godly laws give the Prince that now
is, or ever shall be, any other authority than lawful authority. And as for
this clause of the statute, even your self do confess that it gives none
other superiority, to be united to the crown of the Prince, whatsoever the
Prince be, or shall be, or may be, but to do that that is lawful, and that
that he ought to do. For the words which ye cite are these.

That all manner superiorities that have or may lawfully be exercised for the
visitation of persons ecclesiastical. And correcting all manner of errors,
heresies, and offenses, shall be forever united to the Crown of the Realm of
England.

These words ye see unite no other authority, but such as may lawfully be
exercised, and so lawfully it unites to the Crown, the correction of errors,
heresies, and offenses, not the maintenance of errors, heresies, and offenses.

Now, if ye think the Turk would thus do, ye think The Statute cleared from
M. Stap. inconuenie^ce.
better of him than I can conceive, and make me to think worsse of you than I
thought. If ye think the Turk (as is most likely) would not do these things
that the statute yields to the Prince, that is to say, he would usurp that
superiority that may not be lawfully* exercised, he would maintain errors,
heresies, and offenses, he would set out the Alcaron and worship of Mahomet,
and suppress and beat down the Testament and worship of Jesus Christ: the the
statute touches him not, nor he the statute, no^ any oath is here required,
and your inconvenient presupposall is put forth in vain. For the statute
yields not all correction simply: but correction of errors, heresies, and
off ences, and that he exercise it lawfully, which the Turk will not do, nor
can do, being an open enemy to Christ's true religion.

And therefore where ye say on this clause of the statute: wherein is implied,
that if a Turk, or any heretic whatsoever should come to the Crown of
England, by virtue of this statute, and of the oath, all manner superiority in
visiting and correcting eccl. persons in all manner matters should be united
unto him.

This is your exceeding falshod to the truth, and too much injury to the
statute, and plain treachery to the crown, to say that the statute implies
this doing of the Turk, or this swearing and believing so in him. For the
statute implies nothing, but that belongs to a very christian Prince. The
statute implies no such absolute superiority of correcting ecclesiastical
persons in all manner matters. This is (to borrowe a word of your own
rhethorike) too too Turkishly and spitefully put in of you, to make it appear
^ great inconvenience. Where the words that ye cite of the statute, speak of
correcting all manner of errors, heresies, and offenses. And is there no
difference trow you, between the correcting of all manner of errors, heresies,
and offenses, and the correcting al manner matters? The one no man will deny to
be godly, to punish the evil. The other is so large in deed, that if a Turk,
or an heretic, had the doing thereof, he might punish virtues in steed of
vices, and truth in place of falsehood, and say that he punished some manner
matters, except truth and virtue be no matter with you, as it appears by this
your presuppesall, and your false implying on the statute, How much the
Papists regard the crow^e of (...).
that ye make it no great matter, either what become of Gods true religion, or
of the Crown of England. It seems ye care not greatle, whether a Turk or
any heretic whatsoever had the Crown of England, or the Crown of any other
Realm, so that your Pope might keep his triple Crown, and you the dignity
of your shaven Crown. Which to maintain in honor, what danger heretofore ye
have brought the Realm in, other can tell, and England has felt the popish
practices, to bring this Realm in bondage, and the crown thereof to strangers.
And on condition, that this clause of superiority were annexed, not to the
Prince, but to the pope: M. St. could like it well, and would spend to have it
so, the best penny in his pouch. Although a more perilous enemy to Christ and
Christ's church, than How well the Pope wishes to England.
is the pope, is neither Turk, or any other heretic, or archheretike
whatsoever: that would not care if the most royal crown of England and most
christian Realm, were on a fishpoole, because it has rejected his
superiority: and to show his good will thert^, he has abandoned it with his
great curse, to any that will come, Christian, Heathen, Turk, Jew, heretic,
or whatsoever he be, that will either destroy it, or reduce it to his
captivity, far more dangerous to the soul, than is the Grecians bodily
slavery to the Turk. But all this M. Stap. will utterly deny, that there were
any such bondage, if that this clause were united to the Popes triple Crown.

Go to M. St. were this also granted you: will not your Whether M. St.
inconvenience would not fall out, if the clause of supre macie were united to
the Pope.
own devised inconvenience as well come to pass, the pope having it for eu^r
united unto him, as if the Prince had it? What if there were an heretic Pope?
what if there were a Pope, not only by his native country a Turk, but also
one that practices privy conspiracies and leagues, yea ^reasons with the
Turk against christian Princes, and in all mischief of life, yea and errors
of faith also, were worsse than the Turk, and that the Turks erroneous
Alkaron, speaks yet more reverently of Jesus Christ, than does the pope, that
pretendes to be his vicar? What if there were a Jew pope, or one that would
cause Christians to receive Iudais^e, yea to cru^e Christ again? What if there
were a heathen Pope, or one that caused as gross Idolatry to be used, as did
the Paynims, and believed as much of heaven or hell, of God or the devil, of
the bodies resurrection or of the souls immortality, as the Epicures or the
Saduces did. What if there were a whoremaster Pope, yea a whore Pope, a
Sodomiticall Pope, a Judas Pope, a Neronian Pope, an Antichrist Pope, and such
a Pope, as has done more for the devils kingdom, than eue^ the devil him
self could have done? If this clause were for ever united unto the Pope: how
should we do then master St? I pray you help us here at a pinche out of the
briers. If ye shall deny there can come any such Popes: show why there may
not come such hereafter, as well as there has gone such heretofore. If ye
deny there has been any such Popes heretofore, and put me to my profes: well,
then I must prove it, and God willing so will I, when ye shall bid me. But if
beforehand, ye think I shall be able to do it, and you will prevent me with a
shift of descant, that though they were such ill Popes, yet, in respect they
were popes, they were none of al these things, but in respect they were me^
(for so ye afterward excuse y^ matter, to which distinction there you shall be
answered God willing) yet here admitting also this distinction: why may not I
reply, that what soever the person shall be that shall have hereafter the What
the law respects in the statute.
crown of this realm, the statute and the law respects not the man that
shall have it, but the estate and authority that ^e shall have, and entendeth
not that he is a man, but that he is a king: and so meddling not with his vices
and affections, sets out his duty and office, what he ought to do, what
manner of man he ought to be, and in this respect he has this authority. And
so every way your wicked and malicious presupposall is answered, simply, but
truly I trust, howsoever other would answer it better, or (as i^ better
deserves) give it no answer at all.

Now having cast forth your presupposition, as a snaring bayte, to breed a
scruple of some marvelous inconvenience: and after your false manner of
concluding, having inferred that of the statute, that it implies not: ye begin
to buskle up your feathers and crow, saying:

This kind of regiment therefore, so large and ample, I am Stapl. 83. a. b.
right well assured ye have not proved, nor never shall be able to prove in the
ancient Church, while ye live.

In deed for that kind of regiment master Stapleton, that you infer, and
would as a ma^e set up: it is a Papal, or Turkish regiment: and that the Bishop
shall never be able to prove it, I bold well with you, nor be goes about to
prove it, but to improve it. But that kind of regiment that he here sets
down of the Queens Majesty, that will he prove, and has already proved it,
for all this your Thrasonicall crake, which I commit to muster in your common
place thereon. And let this his fellow go with it for company.

When I say (say you) this kind of regiment, I walk not Stapl. 83. b
in confuse and general words as ye do, but I restrain my self, to the
foresaid perticulers now rehearsed, and to that platform, that I have
already drawn to your hand, and unto the which master Feckenham must pray
you to refer and apply your evidences, otherwise, as he has, so may he, or
any man else (the chief points of all, being as yet on your side improued)
still refuse the oath. For the which doings, neither you nor any man else, can
justly be grieved with him.

You may say, like a lusty Gentleman, what ye please master Stapleton. I say
this kind of regiment, and that kind of regiment, and tell us of your walks,
of your restrayntes, of your platformes that ye have drawn, but these are but
needelesse vauntes. Tell us of that regiment that is in question, walk there a
Gods name, restrain your self to that, be content with the platform that is
already drawn to your hands: otherwise master Feckenham, and all other, will
see that ye do but brabble. And as ye would draw the Bishop to drive his
proves thither, whether he is not bound to refer them: so ye do not only
deceive the Reader, but offer wrong also even to master Feckenham, whom ye
take in hand to defend, and here ye make him such a child, that he knew not
how to frame his issue, nor wherein he would be resolved But M. Feckenham (if
ye defend him thus) may bi^ you meddle with your Fortresses, and let him alone
with his cause. And if the Bishop have not in these two means, satisfied the
demand of his issue, then tell master Feckenham, that he may still refuse the
oath. But if the Bishop have proved by any of these two points, the Scriptures,
or the Doctors, master Feckenhams issue that he desired to be proved, that is,
any such government as the Queens Maiestietaketh on her in ecclesiastical
causes: then can not master Fecken. justly refuse the oath, but must with
hearty thanks yield thereunto, as he has promised by writing to the Bishop,
or else he shall be holden as an unjust man, and as obstinate a wrangling
Papist, as you show your self to be. Which wilful refusal, though it be a
grief to all the godly affected, that behold your froward blindness, yet
shall it be the less grief unto them, when they see that neither truth nor
honesty will reclaim you.

Here, after the vaunts of your self, and the excusing of master Feckenham, ye
enter into your third part, of excusing all the Papists, calling it in your
margin: A reasonable Stapl. ^3. b.
defense of the Catholics for refusing the oath. This reasonable defense has
two parts, the one, the excuse of the Papists: the other, the accusing of the
Bishop. For the former says master Stapleton.

As neither with us (master Horn) ought you, or any man Stapl. 83. b.
else, be grieved for declaring the truth in this point, as if we were
discontented subjects or repining against the obedience we owe to our gracious
Prince and country.

No man is grieved with you, master Stapleton (as ye pretend) for declaring
the truth in this point, or any other, The excuses of the Papists.
but only for your not declaring the truth, but concealing the truth, and
outfacing the matter with false countenances of the truth in this point and in
so many other. Where in ye show your self not only discontented subjects,
but in heart very rebellions, nor repining only with discontented stomachs,
but with open sayings, writings, and other seditions attemptes against the
obedience ye owe to our gracious Prince and Country. Ye call her gracious, but
God defend her gracious person from your ungracious practices, and from all
such Judas kisses of hollow hearted flattring Papists. For, how vngraclously
ye mind her highness and your Country: all that hear your sugared
wordesnowe, speaking as though that butter would not melt in your mealy mouth,
and read your common place withal, collected of your most shameful and
notorious slanders, that ye raise upon so gracious a prince and your native
Country: would marvel how that dubble tongue of yours could speak such
contraries. But ye are a Merchant for the nonce, ye study Louaine divinity,
that is to say, to bear fire in one hand, and water in another, to laugh in
ones face, and strike him with a dagger to the heart, as Ioab did with Abner
and Amasa. But let us see how trimly ye cloak this gear. I dare say never a
Friar in Louaine can play the sinoother hypocrite.

For besides (say you) that we ought absolutely to obey God Stapl. 83. b
more than man and prefer the truth (which our savior him self protests
to be, encouraging all the faithful to profess the truth, and giving them to
wit, that in defending that, they defend Christ himself) before all other
worldly respects whatsoever.

What a godly pretense of zeal is here to God? were The Papists pretense of
zeal to God to disobey their Prince.
it not for pure love they hear to God, master Stapleton promises for them,
as their spokes man, they would obey their Prince. Now surely this seems to
proceed of an holy zeal. But what is that they mean here by this absolute
obedience to God? God may be absolutely obeyed, and the Prince also next to God
conditionally be obeyed, as the chief setter forth of Gods absolute
obedience. God The absolute obedience to God hinders not the conditional
obedience to the Prince.
in his holy word never spoke any thing against obedience to the Prince,
whereby any Hypocrite might pretend a scruple of disobeying God, if next under
God, he obeyed his Prince, but God in his word commands us so to obey him.
What mean they then to allege God for their disobedience? Forsooth here is a
mystery, ye must understand by God, the Pope, for so he is called, Dominus
deus noster Papa, Our Lord God the Pope* and their obedience What the Papists
mean here by God.
to the Prince herein, is flat against this Gods obedience. And because
master Stapleton and his fellows, are priests of this Gods making, they must
therefore disobey their Prince. And this is the very matter. So Thomas Becked
How Thomas Becket died for Gods cause.
died for Gods cause, and what was that? forsooth the franchisies of the Popes
Church. For all, that is for the Pope, and Popery, and the Popish priests
honors, is only for God, for Christ, and for the truth, when it is for the
Devil as soon, as indeed it is for him the Author of all such hypocritical
disobedience, and for their own filthy lucre. But God is a good God, he must
bear the name of all* The Papists being thus (by their Attorney master
Stapleton) excused of their Disobedience: least this should not be thought
sufficient. There is yet behind one other proper way of excusing themselves,
and that is to fall in accusing the Bishop, that thereby the papists may be
thought the more excusable.

Beside all this I say (says master Stapleton) whosoever will but
indifferently consider the matter, shall see that M. Horn himself in
specifying here at large the Queens Majesty's government by the statute
intended, does no less in effect abridge the same by dissembing silence, than
the Catholics do by open and plain contradiction.

Ye charge the B. here with abridging the Queens Majesty's government by
dissembling silence. This is your former quarrel, M. Stap. yet could ye
hitherto prove nothing omitted, concerning the very government it self, and
therefore ye wrangled about other clauses of debarring the government Sta. 83.
b. The accusation of us.
from any foreine person, and of uniting the government to the crown of
England, which because the B. set not down as parcels of the government,
which each man sees are none, ye challenge him of dissembling silence, and do as
one that either has nothing else to say, or that this is some such notable
triumph, that ye thought good to end your first book therewith, as it were a
gyrde to the Bishop, and a prick fastened in the Readers mind to cause him
mislyke of the Bishops dealing, and suspect the whole cause thereby. This
indeed were somewhat oratorlyke, if it were not so apparent an untruth, that
every body might behold the falsehood thereof, the malice of you, and the
impertinencie of the quarrel. But as you thereby are able (cry it out as fast
and as loud as ye will) to prove nothing in word or deed against the Bishop,
and therefore run to byous quarrels of silence and abridging in effect: so your
self while ye would excuse your self, as not discontented nor repining
subjects accuse your self without any dissembling at all. And are not ashamed
to confess, that ye withstand her Majesty's government by open and plain
contradiction. Though therefore your accusation of the Bishop be to any
indifferent man to consider the matter, no excuse of your disobedience: yet any
that shall indifferently consider the matter, yea, though he were some what
partial on your side, since so openly and plainly ye dare open your
contradiction thereto, will hold you altogether inexcusable, and judge you on
your own mouth.

But let us see why ye are thus importune with the Bishop to accuse him so
often, now in the end of this book, whether ye have any new matter to lay
to his charge, that ye have not yet vttred, and how truly ye accuse him. For
(say you) whereas the statute and the oath (to the which all Stapl. 83. b
must swear) expresses a supreme government in all things and causes without
exception: M. Horn taking upon him to specify the particulars of this
general decree, and amplifying that little which he gives to the Queens
Majesty, with copy of words full statutelike, he leaves yet out, and by
that leaving out, takes The B. charged for omitting the Principal
ecclesiastical cause.
from the meaning of the statute the principal cause ecclesiastical* And what
is that you ask, forsooth, judgment, determining, and approving of doctrine,
which is true and good, and which is otherwise. For what is more necessary in
the Church, than that the supreme governor thereof should have power in all
doubts and controversies to decide the truth, and to make an end of
questioning? this in the statute, by M. Horns silence is not comprised. And
yet who doubts that of all things and causes ecclesiastical, this is
absolutely the chiefest.

Why M. St. are ye now of a contrary opinion to that (if ye be remembered)
that ye were before? for then ye reasoned, that omission and silence was no
denial, but concluded Cap. 63. b
the contrary, Qui t^cet consentire videtur, for he that holds his peace,
seems to consent. Howbeit, I cry you mercy, the M. Stapletons contradiction.
case is altered. For there ye defend your client, and here ye oppugn your
adversary. And belike ye have some privilege from Rome, ever to turn the
matter so, as may best serve your turn. But and it were not for this your
privilege, surely I would further ask ye how chance so soon ye have
forgotten your late vaunt, and even in this leaf wherein ye crake, that ye
walk not in general words, but restrain your self to particulars: and now
stand quarrelling about the general words of the statute, and mock the B.
for particulars: if ye shall lay forth your privilege to do this, when ye
think ye may get some advantage thereby: yet I think your privilege
stretches not, both to wrest the state of the question in hand, and of the
issue, to the statute: and to wrest and bel^e the statute as ye please, and
thereof to gather what false conclusion ye list. For first, ye do the Bishop
wrong, ^th Master Feckenham has set up his issue to be proved, M. Stap. would
drive the B from his issue.
Any such government in Ecclesiastical causes, to drive the bishop from
thence, to the words of the statute that express it, in all ecclesiastical
causes. Herein ye offer the bishop wrong. For by this issue between them,
though the Bishop in every Prince continually allege not ensamples in every
Ecclesiastical cause, but now and then in all, now and then in some (for
your Popes daily encroched on Princes, and at length got the m^st of all,) yet
has the Bishop proved and satisfied the virtue of this issue, Any such
government in ecclesiastical causes.

Howbeit, ye do him further wrong, to challenge him here for leaving out any
point of government, in any Ecclesiastical cause, that even the statute gives
her majesty, that is to say, A supreme government in all things and causes.
Does not the bishop set down this M. St? has he not specified even the same
words oftentimes already? and does not his particular specifications co^teine
as much here also? N^ say you, he leaves out the principal cause
ecclesiastical and most necessary, meet and convenient for a supreme
governor Ecclesiastical. Soft M. St. stay here, or ever we demand what this
cause should be. I demand only now why ye say supreme governor
Ecclesiastical? is this your honesty in handling the statute? The Prince and
the statute sl^undered.
does ye Queen take upon her to be a supreme governor Ecclesiastical? or does
ye statute give this title to her majesty, A supreme governor Ecclesiastical?
the statute says A supreme governor in all Ecclesiastical causes* And is there
no difference between an ecclesiastical governor, and a governor in eccles.
Difference between ecclesiastical governor, and governor in ecclesiastical
causes.
causes? but you use this your false and captious speech, to make yt people
believe the sla^der yt ye raise on her Majesty, as though she took upon her to
bean ecclesiastical person, to be a B. and a minister of the word and
sacraments, and by her chief government over bishops, challenged to be a chief
or head bishop of Bishops, like unto your Pope. And so having raised up this
slander on the Queen's majesty and the statute, ye challenge the Bishop for
omitting a principal ecclesiastical cause.

But what is that, you ask, forsooth judgment (say you) determining, and
approving of doctrine, which is true and good, and which is otherwise.

Here again M. Stapl. ye speak as captiously, for, if by How judgment in
ecclesiastical causes is ascribed to the Prince, how not.
this judgment ye mean an authority above the doctrine of Gods word (as all
your side maintains) and that the word of God receives his authority of the
Churches judgment* (which Church ye call the Priests) and is authentical,
because they have ratified it so to be, otherwise it were not true nor good:
then in deed as the Bishop has set down no such judgment, determining, or
approving of doctrine, neither so could he have done, for the Queens Majesty
^keth no such supreme government upon her, nor such supreme government is due
to any other than to God alone, who has by Jesus Christ his son already
fully determined in his holy word, what doctrine is good and true* And what
doctrine soever is besides that, is neither true nor good, whosoever take upon
him to judge, determine, and approve Gal. 1.
the same, be it either your Pope, or your Church never so much, yea, were it
an angel from heaven ^e must (...) held accursed. But if ye mean by judging,
determining, and approving of doctrine, such authority as only acknowledges,
gives testimony, admits, allows, sets forth, and strengthens the
doctrine of Christ's only word, not a^ ruler over it, but as servant unto it,
and the rejecting or abolishing of all other doctrine, against or besides that
word^ then has the bishop not left out this ecclesiastical cause in the
statute, though not judging in that manner, that the ecclesiastical governor,
Bishop or Minister does, in his sermons, or debating thereon, but for so much,
as belongs to a supreme governor. And so says the bishop. The government
that the Queens Majesty most justly takes on her in ecclesiastical causes,
is the guiding, caring, providing, ordering, directing, and ayding the eccl.
state, within her dominions, to the furtherance, maintenance, and setting
forth of true religion, buitie and quietness of Christ's Church, visiting,
reforming, restrayning, amending, and correcting, all manner persons, with all
manner errors, superstitions, heresies, schis^es, abuses, offenses, contempts,
and enormities, in or about Christ's religion, whatsoever.

Mark these words a little better M. Stap. and I trust you shall see it was
you, that ouershot your self, and left out good attention, being carried away
in a cock brain ^ume, with too hasty a prejudice. And that the bishop left
out here no part of such judgment, determination, and approving of doctrine,
which is true and good, and which is otherwise, as belongs to such a supreme
governor, as groundeth himself on Gods judgment* determining, and
approbation. What do ye think? is true religion no good doctrine with you? If
it be, the bishop has not omitted it. Can he care and provide for it, direct
and set it forth, without judgment? without the determining of it to be good
and true? without the approbation of it? On the other side, are errors and
heresies no false nor naughty doctrine with you? if they be, then the bishop
named them, and think ye the visiting, reforming, restrayning, amending, and
correcting, can be without a judgment and determination against them? Then
sith he in plain speech ascribes all this to the Prince, which fully
answers all this that ye call for, (if as I said, ye understand this
judgment, determining, and approving a right) ye show what a very continual
wrangler ye be, where no cause at all is given. But incontinent ye declare what
ye mean by this judgment of doctrine.

For what say you is more necessary in the Church, than that the supreme
governor thereof, should have power in all doubts and controversies to decide
the truth: and to make an end of questioning. This in the statute by master
Horns silence is not comprised.

True in deed, M. Stapl. this kind of judgment is not The statute slaundred.
mentioned by the Bishop* but it is most falsely mentioned by you. For where ye
say, this in the statute most maliciously ye slander the statute, for this in
the statute is neither named, comprised, or can be gathered thereon. Neither
the Queens Majesty claymeth or takes on her this kind of judgment. It is
due only to Gods word, and your Pope and popish Church violently snatcheth
it from Gods word, chalenging it to them selves even above Gods word it
self, although they agree not herein together. For the popish Church will
be above the Pope in this point of judgment, maugre his bearde, and yet they
grant the Pope to be their supreme governor ecclesiastical. Though they will
not relent to him this supreme The Popish church claymeth superiority in
iudgeging of doctrine above the Pope.
judgment, but give it to the Churches judgment. And therefore they be of a
contrary judgment to you, that say, this point is most necessary, meet,
and convenient for a supreme governor ecclesiastical. By which point you will
make your Pope either no supreme governor eccl. over you, or spoil him of a
most necessary, meet and couenient point of the supreme government that ye
give him, but these are your iarres, agree as ye will (like cats in a glitter)
about the^. This popish churches or papal judgment the Q. Majesty takes not
upon her, nor the statute ascribes it unto her, and therefore the B. had
naught to do therewith.

Yet have we one thing more, which after a couple of your slau^ders that I
answer not, but refer to your common place thereon, ye charge the Bishop
once more for this omission.

Again (say you) preaching the word, administration of Stap. 48. a.
the sacraments, bynding and loosing* are they not things and causes eccl? How
then are they here omitted by you master Horn? or how make you the supreme
government in all causes to rest upon the Queens Majesty, if these causes
have no place there?

What should a man use many words with such a brabler? who though he have
naught to say, yet will never l^e saying, of that which is naught to purpose.
Ye have been often enough, and fully inoughe, answered to this master St. if
the Queens Majesty takes not these things upon her, then the B. omitteth
not any thing, that her highness takes on her, in omitting these things.
Neither does the* sratute yield unto her the doing of them. It is but your
slanderous obtruding of ye statute. It gives a supreme government in all these
things to the Q. Majesty. And so these causes have place there, so far as is
needful to a supreme governor But from a supreme governor, which consists
in caring for, ordering, directing providing, guyding, maynteining, and setting
forth: to the executing doing, preaching and administering of those things: is
as far from any good conclusion, as you and your matter are far from truth
and honesty. Nevertheless, such is your great confidence in this your
Counterblast, as though ye had so puffed up the falsehood thereof, that no man
could epsy it: ye lustely blow up the last blast of this your first book,
saying:

Which is now better I appeal to all good consciences, Stap. 48. b.
plainly to maynteine the truth, than dissemblingly to uphold a falsshod?
plainly to refuse the oath, so generally conceived: than generally to swear to
it, being not generally meaned* But now let us see, how M. Horn will direct
his proufes to the scope appointed.

Why may not you appeal to all good consciences, M. Stap. as well as that
maiden Priest of yours, that might bid his maydenhead Goodmorrowe, and have
as good a conscience for your own part, as he for his part had a maydenhead.
And to show your good conscience for a farewell while ye shake hands, at the
very parting ye lash* out a couple of slanderous untruths together. Ye have
not many words to speak, and therefore ye huddle them up. You say the oath is
conceived so generally, that it gives to the Prince your foresaid absolute
power of determining all doubts and controversies of preaching the word,
administration of the sacraments, bynding and loosing. This lie to lap up all
in the end, was worth a whetstone M. Stapl. and his fellow that iutteth with
him cheek by cheek, is as good as he: That the oath generally conceived is
not generally meaned. But set aside your malicious meaning to wrest the oath:
and the oath is plain and all one, both in words and meaning. But how
soever the oath were not so generally conceived, your meaning is plainly to
refuse the oath. And therefore here in the end for a remembrance to all the
rest, you must needs strike up the stroke with ala lia, and desperately without
al dissembling for the, matter uphold a falshoode with falshoodes, even to the
last breathe.

Et fiunt nouissima illius hominis peiora prioris. Math. 12.
And the latter end of that man is worsse than the beginning.

The answer to four Chapters in Doctor Saunders second book of the visible
Monarchy of the Church, concerning the question here in hand of a Christian
Princes supreme government in Ecclesiastical causes.
First, of the difference of both powers, the civil and Ecclesiastical, in
the original, in the use, and in the end of either.

Secondly, whether the Prince be the Supreme governor immediately under Christ.

Thirdly, whether the Prince may judge and define of ecclesiastical matters.

Fourthly, whether Bishops may depose Princes from their estate, and take from
the realm their power of electing their Prince, if they differ in religion
from their Bishops.

Which four chapters I thought good here to answer unto, both because he is
the last writer, and chiefest now of account among the adversaries. And
these chapters above al other in his volume, both draw nearest to the question
of the Princes estate, and show vvithall, the full drift of the Papists, not
only striving against the Princes supremacy, but into what extreme slavery
they would reduce all Christian Kings and kingdoms.

The argument of the first Chapter of the difference between the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Magistrate, in the original, in the use, and in the end of
both.
MAster Saunders first beginning with the The original of both powers. Lib.
2. cap. 1. page 56. M. Saunders begins with contradictions to himself.
original, lconfesseth, that both powers are of God, but not both immediately
from God the civil power he grants to be of God but by the law of Nations,
or the consent of people and other means of man's wit put between. But
straight he corrects himself, that some thing in the civil authority was
revealed immediately from God, yea, Per multa in lege Mosaica diuinitus
instituta suerunt, very many things (pertaining to the civil power) were in
Moses law ordained of God. And thus at the first he speaks contraries.
Hereupon he concludes thus.

I think therefore, it is agreed upon, among all men, that the Saund. page 57
royal and imperial power which at this day is exercised in the church in every
cause, whereof it is not otherwise disposed in the new testament, is to be
holden of the law of nations, or of law civil.

To this I answer: First, this in part is true, but in part so false, that
himself confutes himself, making exception of diverse things in the civil
power, that sproong immediately from God, neither were those things as he falsely
says, Circa res terrenas. about earthly matters but about ecclesiastical
matters in ye law of Moses. And although their ceremonial causes and
judicials, pertaining to ecclesiastical matters in the civil power, be taken
away with the ceremonial and indiciall law of the Jews, yet the civil power
has like authority, in the like causes ecclesiastical of the new testament,
as is showed out of S. Aug. against M. St. and ye Donatistes.

Secondly, where he says all the civil power now of christian kings and
Emperors is all of the law of nations, or civil, except in cases otherwise
disposed in the new testament. I answer this may well be granted, and yet the
civil power has authority over ecclesiastical persons, in causes
ecclesiastical: for so, not only in the old testament, but also in the new
Testament it is plainly disposed.

Thirdly, to this division of the original of both these estates, that the
ecclesiastical is from God immediately, the civil by other means: I answer,
this distinction fails, both by his own tale, saying: Ciuilis a deo plerunque
est per media quaedam, Saund. 57.
the civil power is oftentimes from God by certain means. If it be oftentimes
by certain means, then it is not always, and but accidental, not of the
nature of the estate, for so it is also immediately from God. And the like
accident falls out likewise of the ecclesiastical estate, that although the
power be immediately from God, yet many causes in it called Ecclesiastical, be
also Per media quadam humani ingenij Saund. 57.
interposita, by certain means of man's wit put between.

For this cause (says M. Sand.) the civil power among the Sand. page 57.
heathen that know not god, is found to be the same that is extant with
faithful kings, although Christ would not have such power in the ministers of
his kingdom, for he said: the Princes of the nations rule over them, and they
that are iuniors exercise power over them, so shall it not be among you.

I answer, first Master Saunders, this is a like slander Supra pa. 108.
Difference between the civil power of heathen and christian Prin ces.
to M. Stapletons. fo. 29. a. b. The civil power is not found to be the same in
heathen Princes that know not God, and in Christian Princes yt know God, there
is a very great difference between these so different estates, wherein the one
acknowledges all his power to be of God, and has it described and limited by
Gods word, and the other takes it al for hu main and natural, not so much as
knowing God by your own confession, from whom the original of it springs.

Secondly, to that you say, such power is debarred by Christ from his
ministers: If ye mean by such power, such power as is among the Heathen,
such is not only debarred from them, but from christian Princes too: If
Master Saunders contradictions.
ye mean such power as Christian Princes have, is debarred from the ministers
of Christ, then say ye true. But how then does your Pope challenge and
usurp, both such and the same also? Yea, your self afterward reason most
earnestly thoroughout all the fourth chapter following, that the ministers of
Christ may have it: Wherein ye speak clean contrary both to Christ, and to
your self.

Thirdly, I note this either your gross ignorance, or your impudent
falsehood, in altering the words of Christ. He says not they that are
iuniors, or yongers, the Text is (...) they that are great, which are clean
contrary. If M. Stapleton were your adversary, he would rattle ye up (Master
Saunders) for so foul a escape.

Now to fortify a difference between the Ecclesiastical Saund. page 57 The
kingdom of Christ in this world, but not of this world.
power and the Civil, he urges that: the spiritual kingdom of Christ is in
this world, but not of this world, as for the earthly kingdom is both in,
and of this world: but the ecclesiastical power is the spiritual kingdom of
Christ, therefore there is a difference, but the spiritual kingdom of Christ
excels all worldly^ kingdoms, therefore they are stark fools that in any
ecclesiastical thing to be administered prefer the earthly kings before the
pastors of the Church.

I answer, all these conclusions are impertinent. If there be any folly, it
is to strive for that that is not in controversy. We grant a difference
betwixt both powers and kingdoms, although a question is to be moved, what he
means here by ecclesiastical power. If he take it as the Papists
Ecclesiastical power.
do, we deny that ecclesiastical power to be the spiritual kingdom of
Christ. For their ecclesiastical power is overmuch not in the world, but of
the world also. If he mean by ecclesiastical power, the spiritual kingdom
of Christ, as he in his word has ordained the fame: although there be a
difference between the power in the kingdom, and the kingdom in the which the
power is, yet we grant this gladly, that no wise man will prefer the earthly
kings in any spiritual thing to be administered, before the pastors of the
church. But this is nothing against the earthly kings preferment over the
spiritual pastor, to ouersee him rightly and spiritually to administer his
spiritual things, in the ministration whereof, all earthly kings ought to
give place unto him, which we did never deny.

And since there is no comparison between Christ the son Saund. pa. 57.
of God, who is also God himself, and a creature of the law natural or civil,
neither is there any comparison betwixt the power ecclesiastical, which is
wholly give unto us by only Christ the mediator, and the power royal, which
either altogether, or almost altogether is not ordained of God, but by the law
of nations or civil: for although God has revealed from heaven, that
belongs to the power royal, if notwithstanding that pertained not to
eternal salvation which is hid in Christ, but to contein peace among men, that
is to be reckned, to be revealed no otherwise than to be a certain declaration
which he had grafted in us by Nature, or else even necessity ought to have
wroong out of us, or profit according to the seeds of nature ought to have
brought to light.

I answer, first we grant, that the ecclesiastical power How the royal power
submits it self to the Ecclesiastical power.
(not as the Papists stretche it, but as it is given unto us by only Christ the
mediator, is far superior without all comparison, than the royal power of
Princes. Howbeit, this hinders not, but as the ministers are mediators thereof
to us, the royal power of Princes has again an other superior government, to
ouersee that there be no other ecclesiastical power exercised by ye mediation
of the Minister, than Christ the only mediator has ordained. And to remove all
popish ^oysting in giving us quid pro quo, which when the royal power has
done, it submits it self to the true power ecclesiastical as not having a
superiority of all ecclesiastical The distinction of In, and of.
matters to exercise or do them: but having a superiority in all
ecclesiastical matters to ouersee them rightly don and exercised. And this
distinction of of and In, M. Sanders him self used immediately before, and
uses again in the fourth chapter following: which also is a common
distinction, and therefore I may well use it, because it not only expresses
the manner of the Princes Supremacy, but also detecteth the Papists common
fallati^n, as though by the name of Supreme governor, the Queens Majesty
took upon her the government Ecclesiastical, when she only takes upon
her (that is due unto her) a government in causes ecclesiastical.

Secondly, I answer, that although there be no comparison between these two
powers: yet is the royal power far above that which here he makes it, that
nothing belonging to this power, has b^n revealed from heaven pertaining to
eternal salvation hid in Christ, but only to matters that conserve peace among
men, springing of the seeds of nature, either for profit or necessity.
Herein he says in deed, as St. does, but this is no less manifest untruth,
than shameful Stapleton fol. 29. a. b.
slander to all christian princes estates. The Scripture is evident to the
contrary, as well in Gods institution of the royal power, as in all the
examples of godly Princes commended Deuter. 17.
in the Scripture, not so much for their worldly policy, Justice, peace and
natural gifts, as for matters pertaining to eternal salvation, both hid in
Christ, and revealed in Christ also.

And let these things (says he) be spoken for the original of either power.
The second point of difference he makes in the use and office, saying:

But so far as belongs to the use and office of those Saund. pa. 57. The
use of both powers.
things, we know that distinction to be observed in them, that he which
had the full power ecclesiastical, might also have had in gouernyng the people
of God, without any especial consecration, as happened in Noe, in
Melchizedech, in Abraham, in Moses, in Helie, and in Samuel, and in the
Machabees. Howebeit, it was not onlyke sort true, that he which either by
the Law of Nations, o^ the Civil, was king (which is the first degree of
honor in this kind) should streightway have also the power Ecclesiastical,
except that right had been given unto him by especial consecration. M. Saunders
contradictio^. Supra page 791.


Ye confonnde your own tale, Master Saunders, and speak contraries. Before
ye said (speaking of the Civil power of faithful Kings) Christus talem in
sui regni Ministris esse noluerit, Christ in the Ministers of his his kingdom
would have no such power. Now ye say, He that had the one power, had
(without any especial consecration) the other also.

And hereto ye ^ite these holy Fathers Noe, Melchizedech, Abraham, Moses,
H^lie, Samuel, and the Machabees. Were none of these, Ministers in the kingdom
of Christ? Besides this ye confo^nde your distinction, heaping up confusedly
these witnesses, of the which but one serves proprely to the purpose, of the
former part of your distinction, for the Priests to have had the Civil How
H^lie had the civil and ecclesi^sticall power.
power: and that is Helie, to whom proprely the Ecclesiastical power
belonged, being the high Priest, and likewise had the Civil power, being the
Judge also. But yet this was not without some especial consecration or
appointment of God thereunto. For else, either it had been ordinary to his
predecessors, or he had usurped it, sith none was Judge among the Israelites
(all the while that the Civil power was directed by that kind of government)
but those that were by especial calling appointed of God thereto.

As for the other, were of diverse times and sorts. How Noe, Melchizedech,
and Abraham had both powers.
The holy Patriarchs, Noe, Melchizedech, and Abraham, had I grant also,
both powers, Ecclesiastical and Civil. But at that time before the law, when
both estates pertayned to them, by their birthrighte.

And this makes rather for the Civil magistrate to have had the
ecclesiastical power, than for the Ecclesiastical magistrate to have had the
civil power. For, the government descending to them by reason of their
birthright, was a natural or civil government, as your self before
confessed, saying: E^enim vt pater infilium. etc. For as the father has a
S^und. pa. 56.
certain power over his son, the grandsier over his nephew, and so forth,
the elder over the younger, this verily god has wrought by the law natural,
while by the manner and order of my birth, he declares him to be my superior,
which either ministered the cause why I should be borne, or else is joined in
some kindred with him by whom I was borne. And so these Patriarchs by
birthright, having ye civil power, by the law of Nature, as ye confess, had
not the civil power, because they had the Ecclesiastical, but rather had the
Ecclesiastical power, because they had Civil power by natural right, till
these two offices were by the Law of Moses How Moses had both powers.
severed. As for Moses and the Machabees, were indeed of the tribe of Leui.
Moses had power in both estates, but being before the Ecclesiastical power,
was lotted to the tribe of Leui, and being the lawemaker, in appoynting it to
the race of his brother Aaron: his example makes again for the Civil
Magistrate, rather to have had the government in Ecclesiastical matters,
than the Ecclesiastical How the Machabees had them.
in the Civil. The Machabees by an extraordinary vocation had the Civil
power. As for Samuel was also of the tribe of Leui, but ye^t no Prieue,
although a How Samuel had them.
Prophet, and the Judge also, but by especial calling of God thereto.

Now all these estates being thus diverse, both in sorts and times, he
confounds together to enforce his observation, that the Priests ordinarylye
may deal in the Princes office, but in no case the Prince may deal with any
thing belonging to the Priests, and yet his own examples make against him. But
he adds, without some especial consecration. But what especial Special
consecration.
consecration had David, had Solomon, had Ezechias, etc. to govern the Priests
in their ecclesiastical matters? We read of no especial consecration, other
than the duty of their royal power. But whereto tends all this? forsooth
priests may deal with Princes, and take the Civil power upon them ordinarily,
but Princes in no case may deal with Priests.

Hereupon (say you) when Ozias would have offered incense Sau^. page 57.
upon the altar of incense, Azarias the Priest went in after him, and with him
the Priests of the Lord resisted the king, and said: It is not thy office
Ozia, to offer incense to the Lord, but it is the office of the Priests, that
is to say, of the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to such mystery.

The example of Ozias is often ^rged of himself, and al Ozias example.
his fellows, howbeit it is mere impertinent and flaundederous. The Prince
takes not upon her (as Ozias would have done) the power, nor office, nor
administration ecclesiastical. But such power as Ozias did well take upon him
(while he was a good king) in ouerseeing the Priests do their duties, and not
him self intruding into the doing Supra page
of their duties. But of this example we have heard somewhat already in
answering master Stapleton, and we shall have more again in M. Saunders fourth
Chapter, and therefore I reserve my self to the larger answer of it.

To this he adds an Item of Iosaphat, saying, Itemque, Sand. page 57.
etc. And also Iosaphat the king of Judah distinguishing both powers, said to
the Levites and the Priests: Amarias the Priest and your Bishop, still govern
in those things that perteine to God. Moreover Zabadias the son of Ismaell,
who is the captain in the house of Judah, shall be over those works that
perteyne to the office of the king. Behold other things perteyne to the
office of the Bishop, and other to the the kings office.

This we have beholden already in Master Stapletons Supra page 670.
objection of the same, and there may you M. Saunders behold the answer. And
thus, much again for the use of both these powers. Now thirdly, for the end
thereof, says M. Saunders.

Of the end of both powers (not the last but the middle Sand. page 57. and.
58. The end of both powers. Math. 10. 1. Tim. 2.
end) that the civil power touches naught but this life, Christ says: Fear
not the^ that kill the body, but they can not kill the soul. And again, the
Apostle wills us to pray for kings, and those that are in authority, that we
may hue a quiet and peaceable life. A quiet life therefore is the last end of
the civil power, dwelling without the Church. But of that which is in the
Church it is not the last, but yet the proper end it is. While in the mean
time the eccl. power belongs to the life to come, as Christ has said,
whatsoever ye lose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

To this distinction of the ends of these powers I answer, How far the end
of the civil power stretches.
it is false: not only the last end (as he grants) but the meaner ends
also of the civil power in the church of Christ, stretche further than this
life. I appeal to the Princes institution and office. Deuter. 17. I appeal to
all the doings of the godly Kings, Judges, and civil magistrates Supra. page
117.
described in the scripture. I appeal to Constantine the great, that thought
religion to be the chief end of his government. Yea, I appeal to the places,
that even here M. Sanders cites for his purpose* manifestly wresting ^ M.
San. maymeth S. Paul's sentence.
mayming that of S. Paul to Timothy. For he says not only, Ut quietam and
tranquillam vitam aga^us. That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, and
there ends: but he adds further withal, in omni pietate and honestate, in
all Supra page 669.
godliness and honesty. In which two words, chiefly al godliness, what is
included, is at large declared against master Stapleton.

But before this place, M. Sanders cites the testimony of Christ, that the
prince can do no more but kill the body.

I answer, Christ makes not the proper end of the Killing the ^o die is not
the proper end of the Princes power.
Princes power, to kill the body, but rather (as you said before out of S.
Paul) to save it. To kill it, is an accidental tude of his power, and yet
Iwisse, Christ spoke not there only of civil Princes, but as much against the
tyranny of the high Priests, or any other that would persecute the ministers
of Christ to death, as your Pope and you his chaplaynes do. But I pray you M.
Sand. may not an ill Prince An ill Priest killes the soul.
wrest his authority to destroy the soul also, with maynteyning Idolatry and
false religion? In deed he can not kill the soul, for properly it can not be
killed. But that kind of killing that the soul may suffer, which is sin, and
damnation the reward of sin) with the one, stricken of the devil by malice,
and wounded of him self by error: with theother, stricken of God by Justice,
and deserved of him self by sin) may not the ill Prince make his power be a
mean thereto? and may not an ill priest on this wise kill the soul as well and
sooner than he? I wot what your pope Pius. 2. was wont to say, Mal^ med^ci
corpus, imperiti sacerdotes Platina de sententijs. Pij. 2.
animam o^cidunt. Ill Physicians kill the body, but unskillful Priests kill the
soul. You say your power stretches to the life to come. In deed M Sand. the
true eccl. power stretches to the life to come, I fear me yours does stretch
to life (as ye say) but not to come, but only to the present life of the body:
but, to death, of body and soul, both now and to come for ever.

Besides all this, I appeal even to your own self, M. Sand. that affirm the
civil power in the church of Christ, to stretch to far further and more
proper ends tha^ this life: for in your fourth chapter following ye have this
quotation: Christian^rum regna le^ularia non sunt. Christian kingdoms are not
worldly. Whereon ye have these words.

Moreover the kingdoms of the faythf^ll Princes, whose Page 80.
people fear* God, are not altogether earthly or worldly, for in that part
that they have believed in Christ, they have, as it were left to be of the
world, and have begone to be members of the eternal kingdom. For although
the outward face of things, which is found in kingdoms mere secular, be in
a Christian kingdom: Yet sith the spirit of man is far the most excellent
part of him, and the whole spirit acknowledges Christ his king and only
Lord, I see nothing why Christian kingdoms ought not to be rather judged
spiritual, according to their better part, than earthly. And this is the
cause why now so long since, those which governed the people of God were wont
to be anointed of his ministers, no otherwise than were the Prophets and
Priests. For even the kings them selves also are after a sort* partakers of the
spiritual ministry, when they are anointed. Not that they should do those
things that are committed to the only priests hereto orderly consecrated,
but that those things which other kings refer to a profane and worldly
end, these kings should now remember, that they ought to direct to an holy
end. For when they them selves are mere spiritual, it is fit that they
should will, that all their things should also be accounted as it were
spiritual.

Lo, M. Saunders, in these words ye confess far M. Sanders contrarieth him
self.
other proper ends, and far other estates also, in the civil power of
Christian Princes, than this life of the body, and the quiet tranquillity
thereof. And therefore what need further witness, when your self are not only
contrary to your self, but also bear witness against your self?

Now when M. Sanders has thus prosecuted these three differences of these two
estates, he collecteth his conclusion, saying:

But if the ecclesiastical power differ from the civil, in the Sand. page 58.
original in the use, and in the end: and so well the beginning of the
ecclesiastical power, as the use and end is far the more worthy: shall they
not of wise men be judged mad, which either confound these powers or else
would have the royal, that is to say, the civil power, to be superior to
the ecclesiastical?

How madly for so wise a man, ye have proved these differences, let wise men
judge (M. Saunders) and how badly, if not madly, ye make your conclusions
against us, let wise men also judge. For we neither confound these What
superior power we ascribe to the Prince.
powers, nor give both to the Prince, nor make the Civil power simply
superior to the ecclesiastical power, although we give the prince a superior
power, in respect of the ouerseeing that the eccl. power (which in the
administration thereof is higher, although not in the direction and maynteining
thereof) be not abused by the ecclesiastical person.

Now M. Saunders having said thus much of these three differences, sets
down a long sentence out of Chrysostom, wherein he extolleth the Priestly
power, above the Kings power, which notwithstanding, is nothing against this
superiority that we attribute to Princes, although the office and
administration of the ecclesiastical power, be granted to be never so much
superior, and this is answered unto sufficiently already in M. St. Yet because
we have hereafter to deal at large with M. Stapleton on the same sentence of
Chrysostom: I refer it to the proper and more fitter consideration of it.
And thus much has M. Sanders for these three differences, which he says he
speaks against three errors.

The first error is of them that say the royal power in a Saund. pa. 5^.
christian Prince, is higher than any ecclesiastical power, which opinion the
English Protestants defend. The second error is of them, that extend the
power royal, to certain causes ecclesiastical, to be known and judged by
the kings law. To conclude the third is of them that think a christian
Prince, at the least in all civil business, and in his own realm, always
and without all exception, to be greater tha^ any ecclesiastical Magistrate,
nor that for any sin that he shall commit in the Church of God, he can be
removed from the administration of the kingdom.

I answer, neither these conclusions are sufficiently proved on these foresaid
proves hitherto, nor some of them at all before mentioned. As the deposing of
the Prince, which is another question, and here as madly thrust in, as
maliciously and traitorously meant. Neither any of these conclusions touch the
English Protestants, for they defend none such as you have here set down.
Name the parties and their assertions. Else in stead of M. Saunders, ye
deserve to be rather called M. Slanders.

The second Chapter.
The argument vvherof is this. No Christian king in his kingdom is the supreme
governor in ecclesiastical causes, immediately under Christ.

IN this Chapter, as commonly else where, M. Saunders M. Sand. order in this
chapter.
rhethorically does hide his method, howbeit for perspicuitie sake. I will
divide this Chapter into three parts* The first is his arguments why he
thinks the Prince can not be this governor. The second is the reasons why
he thinks us herein deceived. The third is the me^nes to dissuade us from
the acknowledging of it, by the event and evil success that has ensued
thereon. And first for the first part, his arguments are of two sorts, the
one, a definitione, from the definition of a governor: the other, a dignitate,
from the greater dignity of Priesthood, bring the argument, by comparing the
dignity of both these estates, from the old testament to the New. His first
argument begins thus.

He that may be called a supreme head or chief governor, Sand. page 58. M.
Saunders
has of necessity the power of doing all those things, which can be wrought
by the inferiors to the magistrates of that Definition of a governor.
congregation, by their office, or by any charge, belonging properly to the
same congregation. This shall be made playner by putting of example. He that i^
chieftayne in an army, has M. Sand. examples to confirm his definition.
not only the Imperial power over al Tribunes, and Centurions, but besides may
lawfully challenge to himself to occupy the Tribunes place* or to be captain
over an hundredth, if at any time he shall think it meet for him self to do
it. He that can govern a whole common weal, can if he will, know of every
mean man, and not only sustain the turn, and fulfill the offices of the
Prince of them all, but also of his Mayor, or of the inferior Judges. He that
is a Bishop has power of baptising, and of shutting the Church doors, and
of distributing the Churches treasure, although those things are wont to be
done of the inferior ministers.

To this definition, and these examples, I answer, the M. Sand. definition
false.
definition is false, the examples are insufficient. First, for the definition
it is not true of every supreme governor, that he can or ought to work and
execute all those things and duties, that every one of his inferiors can or
ought to work and execute. For the government of things is one thing, and the
execution of things governed is another thing. Yea, these two are relatiua,
and can not be confounded the one with the other, although they have respect
the one to the other: for so, the governor should become the person governed.

Secondly, these three examples are insufficient. For although M. Sand.
examples insufficient.
we admit these three, yet we may obiecte a great many more examples, in which
this difinition holds not. Set aside the doing of all dyle and unseemly
offices, for a far more mean estate than a Prince to do, of which he has
neither knowledge, nor it were tolerable he should Diverse instances against M.
Sand. examples.
^o them: I pray ye M. Sand. how could a king ruling in his own realm, be his
own ligire Ambassador in another realm? Will ye say, he might make a deputy
at home, and The instance of an Ambassador.
be Ambassador to his deputy abroad, and so the deputy to the king, shall
be the king, and the king the deputy to the king, that is the kings deputy?

But perchance ye will admit this absurdity, because ye will not go from
your word, and say, well, the king may be so and he will. Here what if one
should do with you, as I heard once M. Feckenham tell the tale of a gentleman,
M. Feck. tale of a gentleman defending that mustard was good with all meat.
that defended, mustard was good with all meat. One said nay, it was naught
with this meat, another with that, but look what any could reckon up: he
still affirmed his saying, that mustard was good with every meat, were it
never so unsavory a sauce thereto. Now when every man had reckoned what he
list, at length quoth his own man, that waited on him: I pray you master, and
is a mess o^ mustard good with a mess of milk? Ha (quoth his master)* thou
haste marde all, thou should have heldae thy peace. This was master
Feckenhams tale. Now if master Feckenham that told this tale, should deal
thus with you, M. Sanders, that as lustily affirm the king may lawfully do any
thing, that any of his subjects may lawfully d^, as the Gentleman said,
mustard was good with all meat* If M. Feckenham would say: sir, and can the
king do all that even his own wife, or any other man's wife, daughter or maid,
in things perteyning to their duties and offices can and ought to do?
Especially, sith your self in The instance ^ of woman.
prosecuting this argument, urge the example of a woman. All the women in his
kingdom are his subjects, so well as the men. He has a supreme government
over all persons in all causes, can he therefore do their duties? and yet he can
have the supreme government to maynteine all laws of matrimony, and to
punish all whordomes, and yet not like every somoner, or other executioner of
their punishements. If ye say a woman may be no inferior governor. That is
false, a wife has inferior government in her household, and many women have
had inferior governments under kings in commonweals, as the Lady regentes in
Flaunders, etc. But what if she were not an vndergouernour, yet if she be a
subject governed, the words of your definition comprehend her, saying: A chief
governor has of necessity the power of doing all those things, which may be
wrought of the inferiors to the magistrates of that congregation by their
office, or by any charge belonging properly to the same congregation. But you
will say perhaps, that women are of an other kind, so that the king can not do
al their offices. As likewise for the ecclesiastical government, the Apostles
might not lawfully do all those things, that the widows chosen to serve in
the congregation, might and ought to do: nor the civil magistrate of those
congregations might or ought to do them. Then will M. Feckenham press you that
your definition is false, a governor can not do all things that belongs to a
subject. If ye say, a woman is not a subject, that is false. If ye say she is
not a subject in respect she is a woman, that is false also, for both men and
women are subjects to their governors. If ye say she is not a subject in
respect she is a wife: although I grant, the word wife, has an other
relation than to the king (to wife unto her husband:) yet what avails this,
sith many offices have many other relations also, the son to his father, the
servant to his master, the scholar to his scholemaster, and yet all these be
subjects to the Prince, although the Prince can not deal in all their several
offices.

But you think to salve all the matter with this exception. Sand. page 58.
Master Saunders exception.


I say not that he which is endowed with chiefest power, should straight ways
have the knowledge of every lesser office, for this perteyneth to the fact and
not to the right. Neither say I, it is always comely that he should execute
the inferior office by him self, but I say there is no law to let him, no
power wants, whereby the chief magistrate should not do those things, which
the inferiors in the same common weal are wont to do.

Go to, go to, M. Saunders, ye will still be like the gentleman, that would
feign have eaten his word if he durst for shame. Ye come in pretily, and
begin to make some exceptions already: you admit he may want knowledge of
many things perteyning not to his office, yea and that it is uncomely, he
should do them. And in deed M. Saunders if you be think ye of every subjects
doings, ye shall find many uncomely and vnreuerent things, for so high an
estate to do, and many things that he knows no more how to do them him self,
than that Cook that would put mustarde into his milk to season it. What? and
may the Prince do those things him self that are so vile, and whereof he has no
knowledge?

He may, say you, and he will, what right or law may let him? If ye talk (M.
Saunders) of a wilful fool, that will cast him self and his kingdom away:
if ye talk of a tyrant, whose will is law, that says as the Pope does: Sic
volo, sic iubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas: that is another matter. But if ye
talk of a king, and of a lawful power, The will and power of a king
restrained by law.
then I say, his will and power, ought to be restrained by law, to do nothing
unskillfully nor uncomely for his estate. I grant he may abase him self to
some inferior kind of offices to do them: but not to all, no not by the right
of his royal estate. And yet by his government all those things are done,
that are orderly done. Although he him self may not do them, though he would.

Do ye not remember S. Paul's similitude (so often used The similitude of a
man's body.
by your self M. Saunders) of a common weal resembled to our body? The head
(ye say often) governs all the parts and members, but the head it self does
not nor can not do al, that all the parts and members do. We stand not, we go
not, we sit not on our heads, our head reaches not, nor ca^ reach every thing
that our hand can reach and does. Nor the head does or can do the office of
the shouloers, back or belly, and yet ye grant the head has supreme
government over al these parts, and deuiseth laws, orders, diets, prouisio^s,
and helps for all the parts and actions in the parts of all the body. Thus ye
see not only by similitudes and examples (in which I might be infinite against
your the examples) but also by good reason, your definition of a supreme
governor fails, he may be a lawful supreme governor, and yet can not do al
ye offices of his inferiors. Yea it were unlawful for him to attempt many such
things, and yet his lawful supreme government even over all those things, that
he him self can not do, nor ought to do, is no whit thereby empayred. And
therefore this is a false principle, to build, as ye do, thereon.

Now this being thus plainly proved a false groundeworke, let us see how ye
proceed to frame your argument on it.

Which things being thus foretouched, I add unto Sand. 58.
them that the supreme head or governor of any Church, is the supreme
magistrate of that common weal, which no man having his right mind will
deny. Therefore if the king may rightly and worthily be named the supreme head
or governor of that Church, as now this good while is done in England: the
same king shall also necessarily have the faculty of working all those things,
which of that magistrate, of that Church may be wrought, otherwise he is not
the governor of that Church, in respect it is a Church. But in every
christian kingdom there are and ought to be many, that should preach the
word of God, to the faithful, that should baptize in the name of the father,
and of the Matthew. 28. John. 20. 1. Cor. 11.
son, and of the holy ghost, the nations converted: that should remitte
sins, that should make the sacrament of thanksgiving and distribute it:
therefore he that is the supreme governor of any Church, ought to be endowed
with such power, that no law should let, whereby he might the less fulfill and
do al these things. But a secular king although he be a christian, can not do
these things by the force of his royal power, o^ else a woman also might both
teach in the Church, and also remitte sins, and baptize orderly and
solemnly, and minister the sacrament of thanksgiving. For sith both by the
law of nations it is received, that a woman may be admitted to the government
of a kingdom, and in Moses Number 27.
law it is written, when a man shall dye without a son, the enheritance
shall pass to the daughter: but a kingdom comes among many nations in the
name of enherita^ce: And sith Debora the Prophetess judged the people of
Israel, Iud. 4. 4. Reg. 11.
and also Athalia and Alexandra have reigned in Jury, it appears plainly
that the kingly right appertains no less to women than to men. Which also
is to be said of children, because according to the Apostle, the heir though
Gal. 4. 4. Reg. 11. 4. Reg 22.
he be a child is Lord of all. And Ioas began to raygne, when he was seven
year old: and Josias reigned at the eight year of his age. But a child for
the defecte of judgment, a woman for the imbecillitie of her kind, is not
admitted to the preaching of Gods word, or to the solemn administration of
the Sacraments: I permit not (says the Apostle) a 1. Tim. 2. 1. Cor. 14. Gal.
4.
woman to teach. For it is a shame for a woman to speak in the Church, and
the same Apostle says, that the heir being a child, diffreth nothing from a
servant. But it is not the ecclesiastical custom, that he which remains yet
a servant, should be a minister of the Church. Since therefore in the right
of a kingdom, the cause is all one of a man, of a woman, and of a child: but
of like causes there is like, and all one judgment: but neither child nor
woman, and thereupon neither man also (that is nothing else but king) can do
those things in his kingdom, which of other ministers of the church of God
are necessarily to be done: therefore it comes to pass, that neither the same
king can rightly be called the supreme governor and head of the Church wherein
he lives.

All this long argument stands still on the foresaid principle M Saunders
argument stands all on a vvrong principle.
that a supreme head or governor must be such a person as may do all the
actions of all the offices, belonging to all the parties governed. But this is
a false principle, as already is manifestly declared, and therefore all this long
driven argument is to no purpose. The Prince for all this may still be the
supreme head or governor, over all Ecclesiastical persons, so well as
temporal, in all their ecclesiastical causes so well as in temporal,
although he himself can not exercise all ecclesiastical functions, nor do
himself all the ecclesiastical actions of all ecclesiastical persons. For
else he might also be debarred of all supremacy, over all civil and temporal
persons, in all their civil and temporal causes, because he can not himself
exercise all the civil and temporal offices, nor do himself all the civil
and temporal actions, of all the civil and temporal persons neither. And so
should ^e clean be debarred from supremacy in either power, nor have any
supreme government at all.

Now taking this your false principle pro confesso* after M. Saunders examples
of a woman and a child.
your wonted manner, ye would drive us to an absurdity, as ye suppose, by
bringing in more examples of a woman, and a child, reasoning thus: A pari, from
the like.

A woman and a child may be as well a supreme governor as may a man, and has
as good right thereto.

But a woman or a child can not be a supreme governor in causes
Ecclesiastical: Ergo,

A man can not be a supreme governor neither, in causes Ecclesiastical. For
to this conclusion the force of both the M. Saund. argument not only excludes
a women and a child, but also a man from the supreme government.
promises, naturally drives the argument. I know ye clap in a pair of
parenthesis, saying in your conclusion: neither a man also (that is nothing
else but a king:) But since these w^r des ar neither in the mayor nor the minor:
ye conclusion is plain* that a man can not be a Supreme governor in causes
Ecclesiastical. And I pray ye then tell me, who shall be the supreme governor
in ecclesiastical causes, if neither man, woman, nor child may be? whereby are
not only excluded civil Princes, but your Popes are debarred from it, Pope
Ioane and Pope John also. For if they use that order in the election, to have a
Cardinal feel that all be safe, if the Uersicle be said, Testiculos habet,
how can the quyre meryly sing in the responce Deo gratias? If he be found to
be a man, he can not be supreme gouernoure.

Master Saunders therefore must needs mende this argument, or else the
Popes, for whom he writes this book will con him small thanks, except that they
be Eunuchs.

But Master Saunders not marking the sequel of his conclusion, fortifieth the
parts of his argument. To confirm the mayor, A woman and a child may be as
well a supreme governor as a man: he cites the law, Number. 27. he cites
ensamples, Debora, Athalia, and Alexandra for women. For children, he cites
the Apostle Gal. 4. and the ensamples of Ioas and Josias. But these proves are
superfluous, since the controversy is not on the mayor, but on the minor. Which
minor is the point in controversy, and denied of us: that a woman or a child
can not be a supreme governor in causes ecclesiastical. To confirm this
minor, for a woman, he alleges that she can not be admitted to preach the
word of God, remit sins, nor baptize orderly and solemnly, nor administer
the Lords Supper, both for the imbecillitie of her kind, and for Saint
Paul's prohibition of teaching in the Church. For a child, he likewise can not
do the same things, as well for defect of judgment in his nonage, as for
Saint Paul's witness that he differs not from a servant. But the Churches use
is not for servants, to do these things: and so, not for children to do them.

Here for confirmation of his minor, master Sanders rus^s to his false former
principle: that if the woman and the child be supreme governors in these
things, then must they be able themselves to do these things. But they cannot
do these things themselves: Ergo, they can have no supreme government in them.

But this reason is already taken away, and therefore all this argument falls.
We grant it is true that neither women, nor children can do these things. And
therefore the Papists are to blame that suffer women to bapatize, and to say
or sing in their quyres their ordinary service, and read the Lessons. We
grant them also, that no men The Papists are culpable of women's doing. eccl.
actions.
neither, but such as be lawfully called thereunto, may themselves exercise
and do these things: but does this fellow they may not therefore have a
government over those that do them in their orderly doing of them? if this
were true, then take away all their government over all lay persons, and
Diverse things that women cannot well do themselves, and yet can well ouersee
them done by others.
all civil causes too. For neither women can nor ought them selves to do all
that men being their subjects can and ought to do. Will ye have a woman wear
a man's apparel? it is flat forbidden by Gods word. Will ye have a Queen
fight her self in a battle, and break a spear as a king may do? In deed
some mannish women as the Queen of Amazons, Thomyris, Semiramis and other have
so done, but it is not sitting. And by your own reason, the imbecillitie of
their kind does clear them. And a number of such other things may be reckoned
up. Shall we now say, the Queen is not supreme governor over these persons
and causes, because her self can not do them. Likewise for a king that is a
child, you know he can not fight in battle himself, neither can he himself
sit in judgment, and debate rights and wrongs in civil doubts, many mo
things can he himself not do, even because as ye say, he has a defect in
judgment. Has he therefore in these civil and temporal things no supreme
government? Thus ye see still your examples fail, yea they make clean against
you: for as a supreme governor may well be a supreme governor, in those things
that he himself can not do: so a christian princes supreme government over al
ecclesiastical persons, in all ecclesiastical causes, is nowhit hindered,
although the prince, he or she, young or old, can not do the functions
ecclesiastical, nor be an ecclesiast. person.

The second argument is, (that he so often, and all the Papists use) of the
excellency of the minister in his ministration above the Prince. To this he
cites the saying of Saint 1. Corinthians. 4.
Paul: Let men ^o esteem us as ministers of Christ, and dispensers of his
mysteries. To which ministry kings are not called. And here is again
alleged the story of ^ziae, that presumed to offer incense, and was punished
with ^eaprie. The effect of all the argument he knitteth up thus: Siergo
minister. etc. If therefore the minister of the Church of Saunders. 59.
Christ, exercise a greater and more divine ministry than the king, or any
other prince: how is the king the Supreme head of that church, wherein he
sees certain ministers greater than himself?

I answer, this is a fallation, secundum quid ad simpliciter. We grant, in
the respect of his ministry, the minister is above all Princes. But this
pertayneth to the actions and function of the minister, and not to the
oversight and direction, that all those actions and functions be orderly done.
Now this being but a common argument, Master Saunders urges it further by
comparison of either estate, the Prince and the Priest, from the old
Testament, to the new, saying:

Ac nimirum illud. etc. And this namely I seem to take by Saunders. 59.
my right, the authority of any Christian king in his christian kingdom, is
not greater than was in times paste the authority of any Iewishe king among
the people of the Jews, for if the City of God to which Christ of his own
name, Esaie. 62.
has given a new name, may verily be the more worthy, but can not be
inferior to the Church of the Jews* Surely then it follows, that a
christian king over his christian kingdom, can not obtain more power than a
king of the Hebrew nation did obtain among the Hebr^wes. For how much the
more any Common weal is subject too their earthly King, the authority of
that common wea^e is so much the less. But the authority of the Church of
Christ is not less than the authority of the Synagoge of the Jews, because
in the church of Christ those things Hebr. 10. 1. Conn. 10.
were fulfilled to the very image of the things, which in the Synagoge of the
Jews were scarce figured by the naked shadows. As the truth in deed in
greater than the image, so again, the image is greater than the shadow: but
this is evident, that the authority in times past of the only king, is lesser
than the authority of his christian kingdom, or of his Bishops. But if it be
so, then the christian king, which is both less than the church, and the
bishops of his kingdom, cannot be immediately under Christ, the head of the
church.

This argument is intricate, and full of many inuersed cringle crangles, to
show a face of deep and subtle knowledge, beyond the simple man's capacity:
which kind of reasonyng, is more suspicious than to edifying. The effect of
the argument stands all on this:

The greater authority is given to a christian king, the lesser have the
Priests and the church.

But the priests and the church have not less authority, but above a
christian king.

Ergo, the king has not supreme authority.

To the Mayor, that the greater authority is given to a christian king, the
lesser have the priests and the church: he says nothing. And yet some what
is to be said thereto, it is How the kings, or the prestes, or the Churches
authorities are greater or lesser in sundry respects.
not so clear as he makes it. For since either of these three, have their
authorities in diverse considerations: the Priests authority may be greater
than the kings authority in one respect, that is, of his divine actions and
ministry: and yet in an other, of the government and public direction, the
kings authority is greater than his. And so, although the Churches
authority in one respect, be greater than both the Kings and the Priests,
as they are both but members and children of the Church: yet in regard that
the one is a Pastor, and the other a governor, and both of them Fathers and
guyders as it were unto the church, their authorities again are greater than
the Churches.

And this also shows the falsehood of the Minor, that the Priests and the
Church have not less authority, but are above the prince. Which is not true,
but in such respects, as nothing hinder the supreme government that we give
the prince. But Master Saunders to confirm this to be simply true, the
prince to be inferior to the Priests and people, will prove it by his
comparison of the state of the old and new Testament. And first he will have
the state of the old Testament in the Churches government, to be a figure of
the new. But in the estate of the old Testament, the Prince was under the
priest and the people.

Ergo, it must be so in the new. To the mayor, we grant M. Saunders grants
the gouernmentes of the Church in the old testa meant, to be a figure of the
Churches government in the new testament.
him, the government of the Church in the old testament, to be a figure of the
churches government in the new testament. And remember this well, that here M.
Saunders buyldes upon. For if he himself shall be found to swerve from it
afterward, when he finds it shall make against him, then let him blame
himself, and let us note both inconstancy and cantradiction in him, who
plays the snayle, puttyng in and out his horns, and will say, and eat his
word, as he thinks best to his advantage. And this is the fashions of them
all, in the examples of the old testament, as we have seen the practice of M.
Feckenham and M. Stapleton, which is a subtle, false, and unsteadfast kind of
dealing. But go to we deny the minor, that in the state of the old testament,
the Prince was otherwise (than in the foresaid respects) inferior to the
Priest and people.

It remains (says he) that we prove the king of the Hebrew Saunders. 60.
nation, to have been less than his nation, and his Bishop. Who shall be a
better judge in this cause than even God himself? For he entreating of
sacrifices for sin committed by ignorance, distinguishes four sorts of
men. For either the anointed priest sins, or the people, or the Prince, or
the private person. Of these four sorts, the anointed Priest held the
first place, the people of Israel the second place, the Prince the third
place, the private man the last place Leuit. 4.


If the Priest that is anointed shall have sinned, making the 1.
people to offend, he shall offer for his sin, an unspotted 'Bullocke 2.
without blemishe, unto the Lord. But if all the people of Israel shall have
done of ignorance that which is contrary to the commandment of the Lord,
and shall afterward understand their sin, the people shall offer a Bullock
for their sin. If the Prince shall have sinned, and among many things 3.
shall do ought by ignorance, that is forbidden by the Law of the Lord, and
shall afterward understand his sin, he shall offer for an offering to the
Lord, from among the she Goats an he Goat unspotted. But if any soul of the
people of the 4.
land shall have sinned through ignorance, he shall offer a she Goat
unspotted.

Lo four sacrifices, whereof the most worthy is the Bullock, which is
offered as well for the Priest as for all the people. The he Goat is but of
the next worthynesse, the which the King offered. Therefore, even as the
Prince is prefered before the private man, so all the people is preferred before
the Prince, but the anointed Priest is preferred before them both.

This argument is taken from the Sacrifices for sins in the old Testament,
and is nothing pertaining to government, and therefore can infer no necessary
but wrested conclusion thereunto. Now as this matter is nothing to the present
purpose: so his arguments thereon, argue the greater folly, the more nicely
he stands on them. He drives the^ to infer a superiority by two reasons,
the one of the more worthy Sacrifice, the other of the order and placing the
description of these Sacrifices. Of the Sacrifice he reasons M. Saunders
argument of the more worthy beast offered in Sacrifice
on the more worthy beast, as thus: He that offered the more worthy beast, was
the more worthy in authority:

But the high Priest and the people offered a more worth beast than did the
Prince:

Ergo, the high Priest and the people were more worthy in authority than the
Prince.

The Mayor he takes for granted, after his manner*

The Minor he proves thus.

A Bullock is a more worthy beast than a Goat,

But the high Priest and the people offered a Bullock, and the Prince but a
Goat.

Ergo they offered a more worthy beast.

I answer to this worthy, if not rather beastly argument, made from a
Bullock, as I remember once a Papiste said in Cambridge of a right worthy
Doctor of his own Popish Church, his name (quoth he) is Doctor Bullock, but
per contractionem, it may be Doctor Block, and so this is a Bullockishe
argument, but per contractionem, it is a very blockishe argument, and far
more fit for Doctor Bullock, tha^ for Doctor Sanders to have made, except
that he be made Bullatus Doctor. I grant there was great differences The
difference in the things offered, made the difference of worthiness in the
offerer.
to be observed in the things offered, how beit the worthynesse of the
Sacrifice lay not in the things offered, but every Sacrifice had this or that
kind of matter appointed to be offered, as the wisdom of God thought fittest
to express the nature of that sin, or propitiation whereof it was a
Sacrifice. A Lion is counted a more worthy beast than a Bullock, and yet was
it counted an unclean beast. In the second chapter going before this alleged,
God says of flower and Corn offered, which is not so worthy a thing Leuit. 2.
as is a beast, it is the most holy of the offerings of the Lord made by fire.
In the third Chapter he says, if he offer a Leuit. 3.
Lamb for his oblation: and afterward he says, and if his offerings be a
Goat. A Goat is a more worthy beast than Lamb. But what shall we conclude
hereon, for the more worthynesse of the Persons authority that offered all
these and other more different things?

But now if a Bullock be the most worthy beast, did not many Kings many
times, offer many Bullockes? Did not also the high Priests offer other things
for themselves, besides bullockes? in the. 8. chapter of Leuit. a bullock and
Leuit 8.
^ ram was offered for Aaron and his sons, but here the bullock is still
placed before the ram, as a more worthy beast by master Saunders reason. But
in the ninth chapter Leuit. 9.
he says, And in the. 8. day Moses called Aaron and his sons, and the
elders of Israel, and then he said to Aaron take thee a young calfe for a sin
offering, and a ram for a burnte offering, both without blemishe, and bring
them before the Lord, and unto the Children of Israel, saying, take ye an he
Goat for a sin offering, and a Calfe and a Lamb, both of a year old
without blemishe for a burnt offering, also a Bullock and a ram for a peace
offering. here is a young calfe preferred before a bullock, for the Priests sin
offering: and a ram before a Calfe, yea, a bullock and a ram for the people,
and but a young calfe and a ram for the high Priest: and so the people (by this
reason) should be more worthy than the high Priest, and equal at the least
they are made, even in this place that M. Saunders so narrowly examineth, for
the Priest and the people offer a bullock both of them.

Now if the dignity of the beast sacrificed, will not infer the dignity of
the man offering the sacrifice: yet will master M. San. argument from the
dignity of the former recital.
Saunders enforce his argument further, from the dignity of the place, in the
order of naming each persons sacrifyce, as thus:

He that is former placed, is former in dignity, and he that is placed later,
is inferior in dignity.

But the priest anointed held the first place, the people of Israel the second
place, the Prince the third place, the private man the last place.

Ergo, the Prince is inferior in dignity to the Priest and the people, and
only superior to the private man.

I answer, this is as mean, if not a worser argument M. Saunders confutes
himself.
than the other, from the former place in recital, to the former place in
dignity. Master Saunders own order of his book in this self same treatise,
confuteth himself. In his first book he examineth the peoples authority. In
his second book, the Princes authority: in his third book, the Priests
authority: shall we v^gehim hereupon, that he meant to give the people
superior authority to Princes, and Princes superior authority unto Priests?
he will say be meant it not, and that he confutes it, neither can we iustlye
gather any argument of a former authority, from a former placing of the
persons or their names, which may now and then be placed the best in the
last place, or the best in the middle place, so well as in the first place,
and yet keep a good and decent order. And if Master Saunders may reason thus
in his defense for placing the Priest last, why will not his own answer
confute his own argument, that here he makes of the Priest named in the
first place?

These arguments now being thus weak and childishe to infer any necessary
consequence of superior authority: M. Saunders labors to strengthen the^
with the authorities of witnesses. Although before hand, in so plain a
matter, what need witnesses, or what could all the witnesses in the world
do, to make these good consequences? not that we contemn these witnesses,
nor yet altogether deny the matter, (as we have diverse times affyrmed) that
the high Priests office then, and all the Priests under him, and that all the
Bishops and Ministers now, in respect of their divine Ministry of the
word and Sacraments, are to be preferred, as having in dignity a most
high office before all other persons, and so their office may well be placed
before the Princes office. But this, as it nothing hinders* in other
respects, a superior office of the Prince over them: so to enforce the
dignity of the Priests office by these b^lde reasons, is rather to blemishe
it and bring it in contempt. But let us see Master Saunders testimonies.

Whereupon Philo that of these matters (as one that was a Sand page 60. Philo
in lib* de victimis.
Jew) was of necessity most cunning: it was fit (says he) that the Prince
be preferred before the private man, yea even in the Sacrifice, as likewise
the people before the Prince, sith the whole is greater than part thereof. But
the Bishop to be made equal to the people, in taking away and obtaining
pardon of sins. But this honor is counted to the Bishop not for him self,
but because he is the Minister of the people, making the vows and prayers
publikly to be performed in the name of all the nation*

The first witness here is Philo Iudeus, of whom I see The testimony of
Philo Iudeus.
no necessity Master Saunders that he should be most cunning in these
matters, neither think I that he was most cunning in them, although that he
were a Jew, and a notable learned man. And yet herein, exception might be made
against him, being rather a well liker of our Christian Religion than a
professor of it, or one that shows to have any great cunning in it. Writing
so many books little or nothing of our Christian faith: save in his book de
vita theoretica, where he commendes it, and calls it Diuinam Philosophiam,
divine Philosophy, and says among other commendations of the Christians (as
though himself were none) habent autem etiam disputationes quasdam et
interpretationes Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 17.
veterum viro rum, qui et authors ipsius (...) extiterunt. But they have also
certain dsiputations and interpretations of ancient men, who were also the
authors of that heresy or sect, whereby Philo writing on this wise of the
Christians how ever he favored them, I think he was not the cunningest in
our Religion. Neither do you ascribe that unto him, but say he was most
cunning in these matters, meaning these Jewish Sacrifices. But and he were not
cunning in the faith of Christ, he could not have very much cunning in those
sacrifices, that were all referred to Christ. But was not that cunning that he
had too much? driving all the mysteries in gods word, to Cabalistical and
Platonical numbers and figures, to allegorical and moral senses, being
himself so great a Platoni^e, that it grew to a proverb, (...), either Plato
imitateth Philo, or Philo imitateth Plato, so that, in cunning allegori^ he was
cunning, and yet not so cunning as Origin, who likeneth Origenes in Leuit 4.
herein the priest to the sense of godliness and Religion, and the Prince unto
the force of reason. But into what errors he ran by these conceits, is
manifest, although he were a far more cunning Christian, than it should
appear that ever Philo was. I speak not this in their dispraise, or
altogether to reiecte their allegories, which may be admitted so Allegories.
far forth, as they be sober and godly, and not contrary to the plain
text, although they differ from the simple meaning of it. But although they
may delight and edisie, they prove nothing of necessity, and therefore are not
to be brought in controversies, whosoeu^r the authors be, the writers of the
holy Scripture only excepted.

But let us admit Philoes allegory, what are you (Master Saunders) thereby,
eue^ one whit the nerer of your purpose, if not the further from it? the Prince
is here affirmed How Philo makes the Prince inferior to the people.
to be inferior to all the people. Howbeit, not simply inferior: but as he is a
part of the whole, and a particular member of the body politic: if ye stretch
this so generally, that he has not again a superior power, not only over
every other part, but also over all the parts: ye may quickly make a mad
politic body* If ye look but of your own example of a natural body (so often
cited) do ye not say the head rules The example of a body natural conserred
with a body polit^ke.
all the body? and what say you by your own head, master Saunders? it seems
by the head strong opinion of these your reasons, that it rules all your body
to much out of square. Although it be but one part of you, yet has it the
supreme government of all your parts. So that, this makes nothing against
the Princes superiority. But now what makes it for the superiority of the B.
or rather makes it it not inferior, and withal marreth al your first book
against the authority of the people? Philo says not that the B. is above the
people, but the B. is made equal to the people, as who should say, of himself
being but a man, he is not equal, but inferior, but is made equal to the^,
being made a Prince. Now, if the Prince have a supreme government of all the
people, for all that he is but a man and a particular member, being a part
under the whole, as likewise is the B. and so under the people to: yet as this
man is above all the people, in regard that he is made a Prince, so is he
above the B. to, that also of a private man is made a B. whereby (as Philo
says) he is made but equal to the people, whereas the Prince is made above
the people. How answer ye herein to Philo Master Saunders?

Howbeit (say you) that he says the B may be made equal Sand. page 60*
to the people, this in deed is to be understood, to have so come to pass
in the thing offered, for both offered a Bullock.

Why M. Saunders, and did ye not before in your Bullockishe reason, make the
thing offered, to be an argument of the authority of the offerer? the better
thing offered, to argue the better authority in the offerer, the worser thing
the worser authority? and why then not (by the like reason) the like thing to
prove the like authority? But ye wrests your author Philo. He says not they
are equal in re immolata in the thing offered: for that the text says plain
enough, but he says: the B. was made equal to them in the explation and
Wherefore God ordained these diuersi^ies of sacrifices.
obtaining forgiveness of sins. Wherein he shows in deed the proper
meaning of God, in ordayning these things to be offered, not to disti^guishe
thereby the difference of authorities in the persons offering, but rather to
show the difference of their sins, and the obtaining pardon for the^. Of
which difference of sins and the difference of the offerings for them, the.
1* 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. and the. 8. chapters of Leuiticus do entreat. Now because
the sins of the Priest (although ^one by ignorance, which is a harder case in
a Priest than any other, because his title professes skill and learning give
greater offense than the sins of other, therefore the Why the prists sins
are first reckoned. Leuit. 4.
Priests sins are reckoned first, as an original from whose offense, other
men's offenses spring. And so says the text, if the anointed Priest shall
sin making the people to offend, for because (says Lira your own commentar)
the sin of the Priest is occasion of sinning to the people. Where to he
alleges Lyra.
Gregory, when the pastor goes by the broken ch^es it falls out that the
flock follows to their hed^ong downfall. What is this first place now
Master Saunders to argue the Priests authority and worthiness, or n^ rather
his infirmity and unworthiness?

Neither is the thing offered by the Priest appointed to be Why the priest
offered the Bullock* L^ra in Leui. 4
a bullock, to declare any authority in him: but (as Lyra says) a Bullock
or a Calfe, in remembrance of the molten calfe or bullock which Aaron erected
Exodus 22. What is this again for his authority? but rather to lay his shame
before him, that as the beast was slain, so he deserved to be slain, for
offending by the like beast. And so referring the sacrifice of the beast to
Christ's sacrifice, that as the innocent beast was slain, so the innocent
Messiah should be slain, the Sacrifice whereof (thus prefigured in the beast,
offered and believed in the person offering) should turn the deserved slaughter
from him, and be the propitiation for his sins. Why the peoples sin is
reckoned in the second place.


And because all the peoples sins, are great, and the greater the greater
multitude, for the commonnesse of the error in an universal ignorance, as in
the Popish Church, lesseneth not the error but makes it greater: (although
they defend that the Church can have no universal ignorance or The Churches
universal igraunce.
common error, contrary to this manifest text of scripture) yet because it
sprang of the Priests, that could not pretend ignorance so well as the people
might, therefore the peoples sin is placed next after the Priests, and is
called a sin of ignorance, which was not said of the Priests Leuit. 4.
sin. I^ all the people of the sons of Israel (says the text) shall be
ignorant, and for lack of knowledge, do any thing that is contrary to the
commandment of the Lord. On which Gloss interlineata.
words the gloss interlineth, of ignorance not of knowledge as the Priests,
whereupon Peter says I know ye did it by ignorance, but the priests sinned
of knowledge, seeing all things fore told in the scriptures, and therefore
sinned more heighnously. But yet because the peoples offense was in the Why the
people offered the like thing that the priest offered.
same thing that Aarons was, therefore the people also offered a Calfe or
Bullock, in remembrance (says Lyra) of the molten Calfe wherein the people
sinned Exodus. 22. and hereto he cites Hesichius: manifestum. etc. it is
manifest that he means the sin of the people and the Priest to be all one,
and therefore in both of them he ordained the same sacrifice. And here withal
were to be noted (if the order were note worthy) that he places the people
before the Priest, even where ye text places the Priest before the people. And
therefore neither Lira, Hesichius, nor the Popish Gloss were so precise in
the order, as Master Saunders is.

But what makes it matter whether he name the Priest before the people or the
people, before the Priest? what has either Priest or people here to boast of
dignity? but rather be ashamed of their greater sins, the more they are
placed one before an other. And these causes (had Philo been of necessity so
cunning in these matters, as Master Saunders says he was) he would have
alleged. Yea, had he been no cunninger herein, than even ye necessary
understanding of the place enforces, he would not have wrested it to
superiority. Howbeit all Master Saunders cunning, can not make Philo to serve
his purpose, although he would never so feign wreste and wring him to it. For
although Philo vncunningly wreste it unto dignity, yet that dignity that he
makes the Priest to have, is but equal to the peoples dignity, and yet not
for his own sake neither, but because he is the peoples minister. Which
Master Saunders foreseeyng, we would obiecte, he preuenteth us saying:

But thou will say that Philo adds, that that honor is yielded Sand. 60.
to the B. not for him self but because he is the Minister of the people. I
grant it is so, neither was Philo deceived in that, that he judged the B. to
be the peoples minister, but that which was was not revealed to Philo being a
Jew, we Christians ought not to be ignorant of it, to wit, that he was not
only the peoples minister, but also gods minister and moreover the figure of
Christ.

In granting this M. Saunders, ye grant also contraries M. Saunders
contrarieth himself.
to your own tale. Before, Philo was of necessity most cunning in these
matters while ye thought his cunning would make for the Priests advancement.
Put now that his cunning makes against the Priests advancement* and makes the
B. but equal to the people, now Philo is not cunning in these matters, now
Philo is a Jew and no Christian, now it was not revealed unto him, that the
high Priest was gods minister, or a figure of Christ. Cunning is a fair thing
I see, and surely you have great cunning (M. Sau^ders) in these matters, that
can handle them so cunningly, one priest for an other Priests preferment. But
will every man (master Saunders) count this cunning, that is so broad before,
and so extreme on either part, that right now Philo was not only cunning but
most cunning in these matters, and now on a sudden he is so far from cunning
in them, that he took not the high Priest to be gods minister. This was a very
gross opinion for so learned a man, and declares that he is lepte from most
cunning to no cunning at all. Think ye Philo knew not thus much, Master
Saunders? verily I think yt he was a great deal cunninger the^ so, and that
he was fully persuaded Aaron the high Priest was gods minister. But to infer
such a superiority on the word ministry, as debarreth the Princes
supremacy, (which you would do) I take that Philo was not half so cunning.
But what cunning soever Philo had: we Christians ye say ought not Sand 60.
to be ignorant of it (to wit) that he was not only the peoples Minister, but
also gods Minister, and moreover the figure of Christ. For this also is
signified, when he is not only called Priest, but (...), that is, the
anointed priest. For Christ being named of annoynting, would have his
ministers called anointed. Whereupon is spoken that of David, touch not mine
anointed. For if Moses, as the servant in the house of Psalm. 104. Hebre. ^.
God, that is, in the Iewishe people, were faithful in the witness of those
things that were to be spoken: truly since the other Priests descending from
the stock of Aaron, kept the law of Moses, even they also were servants
in the house of God and of Christ, to witness those things that were to be
spoken. But they were servants not only of the people, but much more of
Christ. VVhereupon God says to Moses: Number. ^. Ierem. 33.
the Levites are mine, I am the Lord, and unto Jeremy, I will multiply the
seed of David my servant and the Levites my Ministers.

Ye run at randon, Master Saunders. Who denies that the Levites and Priests
were gods Ministers, and his servants, and his anointed? we are not
ignoraunte, (thanks be to God) of this, although many of them were ignorant
of this their office and duty, and your self show no small ignorance, to
tell us that he would have his ministers called anointed, because his name
(...) signifies anointed. As though Christ were anointed with such
Annoynting.
external ointment, as Aaron and the high Priests were: or as though Christ's
Ministers should be anointed with such external ointment: or as though the
Popish Priests greasy annoynting, were derived of Christ's annoynting, which
was only spiritual, Oleo letitiae prae consortibus, with the Psalm 44.
oil of gladness above his fellows, or as though the ministers of Christ
were only Christians, and were only anointed with this spiritual oil of
the comforter, and not al true Christians, that are members of Christ, of whom
they take this name: or as though any of these things, the faithful service
and the external annoynting then of ye Priests, and the spiritual anointing
now of all Christians, hinder the Princes superiority. These are such things
M, Saunders, that where ye say, we ought not to be ignorant that the high
priest was Christ's Minister then, you that profess to be much more his
Ministers now, ought to be ashamed that ye are so ignorant of them. And see
again how in this impertinent vaunting of your selves, ye show in your last
sentence cited, the folly of your former argument, on the order of placing the
name, to infer the greater authority. Is not here the sede of David, that is,
the royal stock, placed before the Levites, even where he calls them his
ministers? And thus Master Saunders unawares has mard his former argument.
But still he proceeds saying:

Even as therefore the Bishops in that they were ministers of Saunders. 60.
the Synagog, ought to have been less tha the people to who^ they ministered,
so in that they were the ministers of Christ, and of him placed over the
Synagog, they were also greater than the Synagog. For since Christ was the
true Lord as well John. 13.
of the Synagog as of the Church: it was lavvfull for him to do with his
own, that which seemed good to him, and to Math. 24.
make a faithful servant over his house. Neither only the Lord himself, but
also he whom the Lord places over his family, is greater then the same
family.

No man denies you (Master Saunders) that the function of his office is
greater. But as this hinders not our matter, so these texts further not yours,
although ye wrest ye sayings of the new testament to the old, to enforce then.
We grant ye, the Lord can do with his household as he will. Put that he will
do as you will, and as you say he does, prove that, and there an end. In
the mean time, note here again M. Saunders grants the ministers to be
less than the people.
your own confession, that the Bishops in that they be ministers to the
people, are less than the people: which is more than Philo said, with whom
ye found fault because he made them equal, which as it declares in you
another contradiction, so it argues lack of due consideration even in the
high Priest dignity, that ye would so feign extol, and yet because ye can
not have your own mind, ye pettithely dashe it down. For although the
Bishop minister to the people, he is not therein their inferior, but rather in
deed their superior. The Prince ministers to them also, and yet even in his
ministration he is superior to them, and in that they both minister to the
people, they are gods ministers both of them. Yea the Bishop ministers to the
king the word and sacraments of God, yet is he not therein lesser, but superior
to him. The king again ministers to the Bishop the maintenance and direction
of him, in ouerseing the Bishop do his duty, and yet he is not therein
less than he, but his superior.

Wherefore (says M. Saunders) the anointed priest (as Saunders. 60.
the minister of Christ) is placed in the first place before the people, while
in the mean season the king stands below in the third place, nor in the
reason of sacrificing, differs much from the private man.

You covet still the higher place (M. Sau^ders) like a proud Pharisee, and
despise the Prince as though he were a Publican. But his cause shall be
justified and he exalted, and you shall be brought down with shame, and go
home condemned. Yea, your own mouth has condemned you already, placing the
seed of David before the Leuits and yet ye have never dene with babbling of
your former placing.

Now when Philo will not serve: to confirm this argument better, ye run to
Josephus, who was no more a Christian than was Philo, and had much less
cunning in divinity than Philo, although a more notable historiographer. But
alack it is a poor help ye have of him but let us see it as it is.

Whereupon Josephus has left thus written upon the Saunders. 60. Josephus
de Antiq. ^udaic lib. 3. cap. 10.
same matters. The Princes also when they Sacrificed for sin, do offer the
same things that the common people do, only this is the difference that they
bring for offering a bull and an he Goat, by words Josephus signifies, that
private men brought a cow and not a bull, a she goat and nota he goat to
offering.

What is this to the purpose Master Saunders? if the argument be good as you
make it, it will make still against your self, he that brought to offering,
debilius animal and minus dignum the weaker beast and lest worthy, is him
self the less worthy. Were this true, as it is false and foolish, let us I
pray ye view what either party brought to offering. The Priest brings
vitulum, a calfe or young bullock, the king brings taurum, a bull. I pray ye
now, which of these twain have brought the weaker and less worthy beast? is
a calfe in your judgment stronger than a bull, or a bull weaker than a calfe?
surely then ye have a weak judgment. If ye say, a bull is not so much worth
as a calfe, although then our butchers would rather bye bulls of you than
calves, yet would they deem you but for a calfe in so selling them, and for so
telling them. So that by this rule, the king bringing to offering the stronger
and more worthy beast, should be of greater authority than the Priest, yea
the private man also should be of greater authority than the high Priest.
For a cow although it be not so strong as a bull, yet is she stronger than a
calfe, and feeds the calfe and is the calves damme. If ye say, this is a
gross reasoning for divine matters, it is so in deed Master Saunders, and I
am ashamed such reasons should be used, but are they not your own? And do
ye not as grossly apply Christ's parable of a shepherd and his sheep? truly I
know not your person Master Saunders, whether ye be such another forepined
ghost as Bishop Boner was, or no, that reasoning of the mysteries of the Lords
supper, compared the sacrament to a good fat Capon. But these your reasons, for
your Popes superiority, of a bull and a bullock, of a cow and a calfe, of a
strong stalfed and iustie beast, of a lean and weak unworthy beast, of the
first the second and the third place, are not only more gross and homely
stuff than Bishop Boners Capon, but a great deal more fond reason than was
his.

Yet will not Master Saunders give over this reason thus, but alleges more
authors for it, Theodoretus and Procopius, saying: But Theodoretus upon the
same matter Sand. page 60. Theodoretus in Leuiticum quest. 1.
uses these words. He teaches how great the dignity of the Priesthode is,
which he makes equal to the people. But the Prince that shall have
transgressed any law, he commands him to offer, not a calfe, but an he
goat or a goat of a year old: so far off is he from the Priestly dignity
to whom the bodily government is committed. Last of all, Procopius Gazeus on
the same place writes thus: Hereupon we may gather* that the Priest is more
honorable than the Prince, yea the people Procopius in Leuiticum.
to shine in greater dignity than the Prince. Wherefore in the old time
certain Kings adorned themselves with the Priestly dignity. If therefore the
Prince be as well inferior to the people as to the Priest, as he that after
either of them is reckoned up in the last place and offers the weak and less
worthy beast, how can he be esteemed the head of the Church immediately under
Christ, who has as well the Christian people as the Bishops Christ's
Ministers, between him and Christ?

How this superiority either of all the Church, or of the Ministers of
Christ, may well consist, and yet hinder not the supremacy of the Prince,
being in other respects, both over the Ministers and the people: is diverse
times before declared, and therefore needless to be repeated, except we
should follow this vain of Master Saunders in repeating so often one thing,
and that so mean an argument, that he might rather be ashamed once to have
penned, than thus with these fathers sclender sentences to have bolster^ it.
And yet he ca^ not drive it to his purpose, for still the priest is made but
equal at the most unto the people for which M. Saunders shook of Philo
before, as a Jew and no Christian, and here he cites Christians, and yet make
they no better for him than Philo did. But since the people are again under ye
prince and the Priest at the most is but equal to the people thou so ever his
ministration be the more honorable, yet it argues that he is under the Princes
supreme government, so well as are the people. And therefore for all these
arguments, nothing yet is brought to the contrary out of the old testament,
that the Bishops (notwithstanding all the excellency of their divine
ministry) were not still under the supreme government of their Princes. Let
us now see and ye have any better argument.

Besides this without al contradiction the Apostle says: That Sand page 61.
Hebre. 7. Leuit. 9.
which is less is blessed of the better. But Aaron stretching out his hand to
the people, blessed the people: therefore Aaron was greater then the people.

This argument (M. Saunders) is yet more handsome The Priests blessing.
and truer, than you other gross and wrested argument was, Neither deny we
any parts or the conclusion of it. For first, it concludes nothing with or
against the Prince, but against the people. Secondly, it is altogether drawn
from the action of the ministers function, which we confess belongs not to
the Prince. But to conclude simply a superiority in the person thereupon, were
a presumptuous conclusion both against S. Paul's meaning, and against God
himself, to make our selves better tha^ god because we bless him, For we say
to God: Benedicimus tibi, we bless thee, we praise, etc. O all ye works of
the Lord bless ye the Lord. etc. Ye must Daniel. 3.
make therefore your distinction of blessing, and show in what solemn action
and signification, the high priest blessed them. This done, we grant you, that
the high priest was therein the better, which nothing hinders the Princes
supreme government.

But now M. Saunders having espied where a king likewise blesses the people,
has a shift also for this, saying.

But if thou say, Solomon blessed the Synagog of Israel, and Saunders. 61. 3.
Reg. 8.
therefore was greater than the synagog: Solomon was greater than the synagog
without al contradictio^, for the scripture can not be broken, that says, the
lesser is blessed of the better. But Hebre. 7.
Solomon sustained a dubble personage, the one of a king, the other of a
Prophet. But as he was a Prophet, he was the more notable minister of Christ,
than for his kingly dignity, and by this reason was greater than they to whom
he prophesied, and so he blessed the people not by his royal, but by his
prophetical office. But the priests, not by an other office, but by the
priestly office, blessed both all the people, and much more the king that is
inferior to all the people.

Here first let us note, that M. Sau^ders himself twice places The Papists
shifte for salomons blessing the people.
the king and his office, before the prophet and his office. Solomon (says he)
sustained a duble personage, the one of a king the other of a prophet, and
again he says, and so he blessed the people, not by the kingly office, but by
the prophetical office. If then his former reason be good, ye king is to be
preferred before the Prophet. But now to his answer to the objection of
Salomo^, which is in deed but a very shift, and the common shift of M.
Harding, Dorma^, Stapleto^ and all the residue. But howsoever they dodge out
with it, it will not serve M. Sau^ders at this time. For although it be true,
that Solomon had also the gift of prophecy, yet Solomon did not this as
Prophet, but as King. And in his blessing expressly prays for the reign of
his posterity. Neither need M. Saunders run to this shift, for even Lyra
says: et Benedixit. etc. and Lira in 3. ^e. 8.
he blessed all the congregation, not with that blessing that pertained to the
priestly office, but by wishing good things unto the people, and rendering
thanks to God for his good gifts received, saying: blessed be the Lord God.
etc. And in the end of the Chapter, the people bless him also, but this
declares The people bless the king
not their superiority, although the kings solemn action declares him their
better in his royal office, for ye establishing whereof he prays.

The like shifte ye make for Moses and David, that they were also prophets.
But what say ye to Saul, that blessed David. 1. Reg. 26. he was in deed David's
superior, and he had 1. Reg ^6.
been among the prophets too, whereof the proverb arose, number et Saul inter
Prophetas, is Saul also among the Prophets? 1. Reg 20.
But trow ye he blessed him as a Prophet? and yet in blessing him, although he
himself were accursed, he foretold the truth, that David should do great
things. What say ye to Iosue that blessed Caleb. Iosue. 14. yea he blessed two
tribes Iosue. 14.
and a half, of Rube^, Gad, and Manasses. If ye except that he was a prophet
too, what say ye to Iehu that blessed Iehonadab, and yet no prophet? to Raguel
that blessed Tobias, and 4. Reg. 10. Tob. 7. Judith. 13.
yet no prophet? to Ozias the governor of Lethulia, and Achior the Ammanite
that blessed Judith, and yet no Prophets, nor all of them superiors? and
therefore this argument serves not to infer government, neither always to
infer superiority, neither is this shifte always true, that all ye bless
are priests or prophets. Although in priests (whom Saint Paul speaks of)
it argue a superiority of their function, as before is granted. But Master
Saunders having gotten hold on this word blessing, as though he had found a
new vain, proceeds, saying.

And truly when God had rather have had his people to Sand. page 61.
have been blessed of the priests of the Leuiticall kind, and of the
prophets, than to have been governed of a king: yet the people asked a King
against the will of God, which petition God in deed permitted to be fulfilled,
howbeit he saw it did tend to the contempt of his name: whereupon he said to
Samuel, 1. Reg. 8.
they have not cast thee away but me, that I should not reign over them. For
although God reigned over his people, even when the kings governed them: yet he
had seemed to reign in better signification and plainer, if the people had
obeyed any prophet or priest, or Leuite.

Now that Master Saunders former proves will fadge no better, he seeks out
all the ways he can, to deface the royal estate of a Kings authority, in
comparison of his Priests government. He says God had rather have had his
people ben blessed of the priests and the prophets, tha^ governed of kings:
dispitefully making these two to be me^braopposita, contraries the one to
other. The government of kings* and M. Saunders would make the king
government to be contrary to the priests and prophets blessings.
the blessing of Priests and Prophets. As though the people were berefte of
the Priests and Prophets blessings because not they, but kings did govern
them. But if the people had still the Priests and Prophets blessings, when
Kings governed them so well as before, then is this opposition no less false
than malicious. And that they had still the Priests and Prophets blessing, is
apparent.

But what means M. Saunders to name only their blessings* did the Priests
and Prophets naught but bless? The Popes blessing and cursing.
would he by so sweet a name revoke us to the Popes blessings? but he tells
us else where that the Pope has cur* sed us: and no marvel, for the chiefest
part of his power lies in cursing. But he loves cursing, and his cursing
shall Psalm. 101.
light upon himself, and God does turn his cursings into blessings. But
troweth he, the Priests and Prophets then, did curse and ban as the Pope does
now, by cause the kings were the supreme governors* or that the supreme
government belonged first to them, and from them was translated to the Kings?
Howbeit M. Saunders says not so, but ye the priests and prophets blessed the
people. But what is that to government? the controversy is of the priests
government, and the question here is driven to this, whether God The question.
had rather have had the priests and the prophets to govern the
Israelites, than the kings. Now M. Saunders, although this be his only
meaning, does not put, nor dare put, the question thus, as in plain speech he
ought to do. For knowing that the state then of the Churches government, was
not so much of the priests and prophets, as of other civil Magistrates called
ye Judges, it had the^ appeared he had said little to his purpose. But as
though all the state before of the kings had been of the priests and prophets,
he covers his falsehoode with this fair^ mantell of the priests and prophets
Blessings, and mentions not their gouernemente, which is the thing he
shoots at*

Whereas, all that time from Iosue the first Judge, to Among all the Judges
but one priest and one prophet governed the Church of God.
Saul the first King, among so many Judges, we read but of one Priest
which was Helie, of one Prophet which was Samuel, that governed the Church of
God And yet these neither governed it in respect of priesthood or prophesying,
or blessing, but in respect of that civil authority whereby they were called
Judges.

Thus that estate that he pretendes makes the more for him, makes as much
against him as the state of Kings that followed. For whether God had rather
have had the one or the other, it still proves God had rather have had the
civil Magistrate, were he judge or king, to be the supreme governor, although
at that time the supreme government happened (which it seldom did) to a person
ecclesiastical. But God altered this estate, and brought it to Kings. Neither
dare I say, as Master Saunders very boldly says, that God had rather have
had the other estate. For if he would, he might have kept it still, Voluntati
eius quis resistit, who resists Romans 9.
his will? but it pleased God the state should be altered, and so it was.

Master Saunders urges this, that God was much offended. I grant he was,
understanding it not so grossly as Master Saunders seems to do, but like a
Divine, so as we admit in God no perturbation nor change of mind, for God had
purposed the change before, and liked well of his forepurpose. But his
displeasure was against the sin Wherewith God was offended for the peoples
demanding a king.
of the people, who distrusting of Gods sufficient help in the former estate,
inordinately did crave a King, and not that he either mislyked the estate of a
King, or thought it the worsser government: but rather commends the
government of a King, as an estate so high, that God had reserved that unto
himself, and would suffer them to have but Judges, until that they
importunately desired to have a king, being such a supreme kind of
government, as they before had only given to God, and now they would needs
have some person among them visibly to have the same, as other nations had.

And for this cause says God to Samuel, they have not cast away thee, but
me. And as Samuel vpbrayded them: 1. Reg. 10.
ye said unto me, not so, but a king shall raygne over us, when the Lord your
God reigned over you. And so witnesses Lyra. 1. reg. 10.
Lyra, that the estate of a king is the best estate. But the reason of their
sin was this, Quia deus. etc. Because God had chosen the people of Israel to
be especial and peculiar to him before all other peoples, according to that is
said Deuteronomy. 7. The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be his peculier people,
and therefore he would be the immediate king of that people. Wherefore he
also gave them a Law in Mount Sinai, by himself (that is) by an Angel
speaking in his person, and not by man as mediator. For which purpose, he
would that the men which were the governors of that people, should be
ordained immediately from himself, as his Vicars, and not as Kings or Lords.
As it appears in Moses and Iosue, and the Judges following, of whom is
mentioned in the Book of Judges, God raised up such or such a Judge.
Therefore the Children of Israel did contrary to the ordinance of God,
desiring a mortal man to be king over them, ^ith the Lord had always retained
this to himself, and always governed and best protected them, to the peoples
profit, so long as they were good subjects: and still had so done, if the people
had stood in that good subjection to the Lord. By these sayings, the first
argument appears, that if the government of a king be the best
gouernemente, it follows that the gouernemente is better, to have GOD to be
the King immediately, how much God is better than man. And therefore to ask
against this ordinance, is not good, but ill.

In these words of Lyra, he does not deminishe the state of a kings
authority, in comparison of the former estate of the Judges authority above,
or better than it: but extolles the kings authority so far above the Judges
authority, that God reserved it only to himself, so that this high estate of
a king over Gods people, is not as M. Saunders falsely said before from God by
other means between* but immediately The kings estate immediately from God, and
above al other represents him.
from God, and above all other represents him, and long it was ere God would
suffer any to represent him in this estate, it was so high that God kept it to
himself, and was offended that his people contented not themselves with their
other inferior Magistrates, as were the Judges, which M. Saunders extolles
above the Kings estate. The Judges I grant were as Lyra says immediately from
God also, and his Uicars in his Church above al others in their times. And here
because one or two of them next before this alteration were ecclesiastical
persons, the one a Priest the other a Prophet, M. Saunders triumphs* and
commends their estate in representing God, to be so high and excellent. But
either he was very rechlesse or wilful blind, that would look no further in
this estate of the Judges, but to these two when as so many Judges went before,
but he thought not best to think on them, because they were no priests nor
prophets. And yet as Lyra says, they were the immediate Vicars of God, and
so above all the priests and prophets at their times, being no ecclesiastical
Magistrates.

This argument therefore is false, and all that follows thereon in M. Saunders
saying.

For neither any having his right wit did ever doubt, but Saunders. 61.
that the priest of God does more in government express and represent his
God, whose priest he is called, than the king, whose name is rather referred
unto the people that he rules, than to the God under whom he is.

This is spoken more like an heathen than like a Christian, M. Sanders, that ye
priest represe^teth his God whose priest he is called, howbeit I think you are
not so out of your right wit, but that ye think, dij g^ntium daemonia sunt, the
gods of the gentiles Psalm 95.
are but devils. And that ye think there is but one God, and but one sort of
those that are ^is priests. But how these priests that are of the Popish
stamp, represent God, may be called in question: if rather it be not out of
question, that The Popis^e priesthood has no resem blance of God.
both their life, their doctrine, and their order, has no resemblance of him,
but rather of Baal and Bace^us, rather of Antechrist and Satan, than of God.
As for their government, least of all does represent him. The Turk reigns
not with such cruel tyranny as the Pope and his inquisitors The tyranny of
the Popish Priests government.
do. Godly Ministers represent him I grant, and that better than kings, but
not in the visible and external gouernmente, but in the spiritual government
of administering Gods word and sacraments.

God therefore had reigned, if any priest or prophet reigned, Sand. 61.
but the priest or the prophet being cast off yea even the government of God,
to whom that priest or prophet obeyed, is understood to be cast off.

Speaking thus indefinitely of any priest or prophet that God reigned when
they reigned, God was cast off when they were cast off: ye both wreste the
Scripture, and stretch it to far, that was only spoken to Samuel: and also
hereby would make the state of the Jews to have been then best, when it was
worste. For when was the state of the Jews worsse, than in the times mentioned
in the books of the Machabees? when the evil high priests had gotten the civil
government? and represented God in the gouernemente, (whose priests they bear
the name to be) as much as Caiphas and Anna did, that put Christ himself to
death. But ye say:

Moreover the King would lead the people to Idolatry, but Sand 61.
the high priests and prophets, sacrificed duly to the Lord God in the only
Temple of Solomon. Difference between the kings v^ces and his office.


Ye should descerne (M. Saunders) betwixt the state and office of the king,
and the faults or personal vices of the king. For, al kings did not lead the
people to Idolatry, some lead the people out of Idolatry. Neither were all the
high Priests lead the people to Idolatry.
priests clear of Idolatry, no not Aaron the first high priest of al* Did not
he lead all the people into foul Idolatry, and that of a small occasion? But
how is this your saying true, that they Sacrifised duly to God, in the only
Temple of Solomon? what? man, ye forget your self, how could they Sacrifice
only there, duly, or unduly, before the Temple it self was builte, or
Solomon was yet borne? and yet there had passed thirtene high Pries^s from
Aaron to Abiathar, or The high Priests before the building of the temple.
ever the Temple was builte. And in the mean time, were all the priests, or
the high priests either, clear from Idolatry? very much Idolatry was used
before the state of kings among them. If the priests had then that supreme
government, which ye pretend: how chance they let it not, but rather let it
alone? which if it were not as ill, was the next door by to leading to
Idolatry.

As for the priests that were after the Temple was The high Priests after
the building of the Temple.
builte, till it was first destroyed, that is, from Sadocke the high priest,
until Iosedech that was carried captive into Babylon, al which time, we have
little mention of the high priests, for their restrainte or speaking against
Idolatry. But we have many outeries of the prophets, against Idolaters, yea
against the priests high and low, as abetters to Idolatry. And how good
soever you make them, Jeremy makes them all in his time stark naught, and
they again went about to procure his death for his labor.

But as for the high priests that followed after the temple was reedified,
many of them were evil. Eliasib the high priest transgressed the law, in
joining affinity with the heathen enemy of the Jews Tobias, and building a
lodging for him in the temple, which was the defyling of it. N^hem. 13.
Wherefore Eliasib was worthily reproved of Nehemias. John the high priest
killed Jesus his brother in the temple, Josephus lib. 1^* anti. ca. 7.
while they straue ambitiously for the Priesthood. After whom Iaddi and
Manasses contending for it, when Manasses Nehem. 13.
was chased away by Nehemias, for marrying the daughter of the wicked heathen
Sanballat: he erected another temple in the Mount Garrizin. Notiong after,
Onias the son of Simon was so couetons (as Josephus says) Josephus lib. 12
ca. 4.
that by denying the tribute paid before, the Temple and all Jury was
endanger. After whom succeeded Josephus with no less bryberie of the heathen
Prince, than extortion and pylling of the people. Next to whom (or as some
say, after Onias) succeeded Jesus or Jason, after much hurly burly betwixt
Simon and Onias, the one appeaching the 2. Match. 4.
other to be a Traitor, till this Jason stepped in between them, and by unlawful
means obtained to be the high priest, by giving a hundredth and sixty talents
of silver, and eighty talents of rent, and a hundredth and fifty talentes to
set up such exercises among the Jews, as were among the heathen Grecians,
and contrary to the Law of God. After whom succeeded Menelans, who being
sent of Jason 2. Match. 4.
to Antiochus, betrayeth Jason. And offering three hundredth talents of silver
more than Jason did, he got the high priesthood by bryberie to himself,
bysides that he was a Sacrilegious thief, and murderer.

But Menelaus, not paying the excessive sums, that he promised, was feign to
take his heels and run away, and left his brother Lysimachus priest in his
stead, that for his wickedness and cruel tyranni^, was slain in a tumulte
that he himself had raised.

After whom, partly by reason of these monstrous traitors, partly by reason of
the tyrant Antiochus rage and persecution: the temple lay waste, and was
destroyed these (...) time. When as for the space of 5. or 6. years there was
no (...) priest at al, neither better nor ^orsse to gui^e (...) Machabe^s
recovered Jerusalem, whose brother Ionathes, and after him Simo^, and Simons
son Hircanus, were made both Princes and high priests also who, although they
were good me^, yet were they made high Priests by the heathen Monarke, under
whom they governed, and were more like to valiant Captains (as the necessity
of the time was driven unto) rather than like to learned priests or Bishops.
In whose time, an other Onias claiming the high Priesthood, builded in Aegipt
a Temple, like to the Temple at Jerusalem Joseph. li. 13. ca 4.
to sacrifice in. And at which time sprang up the sects of the Sadu^es the
Pharisees, and the Esseni, when the residue of the high priests, Aristobulus,
Hircanus. etc. fell to knocking one another, partly for the priesthood,
partly for the kingdom, till Herod being a stranger got the kingdom from
them. And they bought and sold the high priesthood, ^ kept it by courses,
being clean degenerate from the Law of God, except some odd man amongst the
rest were just, as Zachary the Father of John Baptist, the most part were
evil, and waxed worsse and worsse, till they had put Christ to death, and
afterward destroyed themselves, and all their Country too. And yet see how
impudently M. Saunders Whether the priests or the Princes government among the
Jews were worse.
vauntes and crakes of the priests, in comparison of the Princes, where the
evil Princes having led the people (and that through the council of evil
priests) into Idolatry and to captivity: the high priests led them to the
murder of Jesus Christ, to the utter overthrow of their estate, and to the
clean casting them off from God, save that we hope some remnant shall be saved.
Judge now whether of these (...) were worsse, either the Priests or Princes.
But Master Saunders (to show himself not partial for his priests) brings
forth for witness, one that he ascribes this high^ priesthood unto, which is
Pope Gregory, saying:

Whereupon says Gregory entreating of this request of a king: worthily
complains the L. that he is cast off, worthily Sand. 61. Gregorius in 1. reg.
li. 4 ca. 4.
he grants the royal dignity, being offended. For truly so great was the
iniquity of the crauers, that si^he they desired that whereby they should go
from God, it might be permitted by the judgment of God to be forbidden
(perchance it would be better read to be allowed or approved) it could not*
And again, for those that lived under the spiritual government, to desire a
king: what is it else, than to rejoice, to turn the same spiritual prelacie
into secular government?

This testimony of Gregory (Master Saunders) co^mes Gregory brought out of
place.
a little out of place, belike it should have been set before, when ye spoke
of Samuels government, of the peoples desiring a king, and of gods offense
therewith. For here this ( Vnde Gregorius, vvherevp^n Gregory) hangs upon
your last matter, of the Priests sacrificing only in the temple as though it
were tied on with points, howbeit it hanges not so il on the residue, as M.
Saunders scarce can make it hang together with it self. For he not only
correctes the sentence, Gregory's sentence contraries it self.
saying, prohiberi to be prohibited, should better be read probari, or
approbari, to be allowed or approved: but also he corrects it with a clean
contrary exposition. For, to be prohibited is not to be allowed or approved,
and to be allowed or approved, is not to be prohibited. And so, while he
himself can not tell what to make of the sentence, and would expound it
clean contrary: what should we make of it? as for the displeasure of God, we
have showed already, by a large and plain sentence out of Lyra (which is for
his life a more cock sure papist, than eue^ this Pope Gregory was) ye it was
not because the kings estate was worse or more inferior than the state of the
Judges was, but because the kings estate, being higher, and so high, that God
reserved it to himself: they distrusted the former estate as inferior, and
desired a visible king among them. So that this, which you would draw to the
dispraise, makes in deed more to the praise of a kings estate.

Neither do we deny Gregory's sentence, in respect of the How Gregory's
sentenceis granted unto.
spiritual prelacie: but the question now is of the outward government, of
Priests or Princes. Which Gregory not only acknowledged with most humble
obedience, calling the Emperor, and kings of Italy, his Lords and sovereigns,
and lowly bowed himself unto them: but also that more is, Gregory
acknowledged the princes supremacy over himself.
so much detested the claim that the Pope makes now, that he calls the vser
of it a fore runner of Antichrist.

And where ye have this shift, that he condemns such titles of universal
Prelacie, in the sea of other Bishops, but not of his own: this is a false
shifte, he condemns it in his own Bishopric of Rome, so well as in any
other. For where Eulogius the Patriarch of Alexandria had saluted Gregory
reproves them that called him universal Pope
him with such styles, he answers: Ecce in praefatione, etc. Behold in the
preface of the Epistle, the which you directed unto me, who forbad it, ye
thought to set in the word of a proud calling, naming me universal Pope, the
which I beseech you that your most courteous holiness will no more do so.
Because, that which is given to another more tha^ rea^o^ requires, is
subtracted from your selves. I seek not to be advanced in titles but in
manners. Neither count I that, honor, wherein I know my brethren leese their
honor. For my honor is the honor of the universal Church. My honor is the
sound force of my brethren. The^ am I honored, when to every particular
person, the honor that is due unto him is not denied. For if your holiness
call me universal Pope, he denies himself to be, in that he calls me
universal, but God forbid this. Let those words go that puff up truth and
wound charity. Thus says Gregory, and this is cited even in your own
decrees, The title, chief of the priests, or chief priest improued in in the
Popes own decrees.
not only about the word Universal Pope, but upon these titles, Princeps
Sacerdotu^ vel summus sacerdos, the chief of the priests or the chief or high
priest, or any other such titles. So far was this Pope Gregory then, from
the pride of the late Pope Gregory's that have been since, for he both
acknowledged himself to be but equal to other Bishops, and him self and
all other Bishops to be under their natural Princes. The testimony therefore
of Pope Gregory, is but wrested, to urge such superiority of Bishops, as
should de^ their Princes supreme gouernmente. Now M. Saunders having thus as
he thinks fully confyrmed his proves, for ye superiority of Priests in the
old Testamente about Kings, gathers altogether and knites up his conclusion,
saying:

Wherefore sith the institution of Priests proceeded, from the good will of
God and from his free mercy: but God Saunder^. 61.
granted not the dignity of a king but in his anger, at the peoples petition:
lesser consideration is worthily had of the king than of the people, both
because he is made king only for the peoples cause, and also only at the
peoples petition. But the Priests, although they be made for the peoples cause,
yet neither only for the peoples cause, but much more for the honor of
Christ. Neither only at the petition of the people were they made, but
rather of the free mercy of God, and that for that eternal predestination of
God, which was ordained about our salvation, in the time appointed to be
brought to effect.

Ye make your comparison and your conclusion hang ill^oredly together Master
Saunders, your comparison is of the Princes and the Priests estate: and ye
conclude, that therefore less consideration is worthily to be had of the king
than of the people. How chance ye say not of the king than, of the Priests?
but belike ye thought that that was out of controversy: the Priests were so
far above the people, that much less consideration is to be had of the
people than of the priests. But master Saunders, your beast sacrificed said
not so, nor your authors Philo and Josephus: but said, he was made equal to
the people.

But say you, the king was made for the peoples cause.

I grant ye master Saunders, and was not the priest so too? yea do not your
self say^, he was made for the peoples The king and the priest made for the
peoples cause.
cause also? if this then argue an inferiorship (as in deed it does) in
respect of the end: does it not argue the priest to be inferior too, and
lesser consideration to be had of him than of the people, that is to say, of
the Church of God?

But say you, the King was made only for the peoples cause, and the priest
was made for the honor of Christ also, and for the eternal predestination of
God, which was ordained about salvation, in time appointed to be brought to
effect:

And I pray ye Master Saunders, was not this another The king^e. state made
for the honor of Christ, and represented Christ, as well and better than the
priests estate.
cause of making the King also? did not his estate make to the honor of
Christ, and represent Christ, so well as the Priests estate? was not he
called Christus Domini, The Lords anointed, so well as the Priest? yea and
better to then, by your leave. For Christ was not only figured in the kings
estate, so well as in the Priests: but also took his humanity of the race of
the kings, and not of the Priests, and so is called the son of David, not the
son of Aaron, the king of the Jews, not the priest of the Jews And though
in respect of his priesthood, he was the only sacrifice of our redemption,
whereby our sins are taken away, Christus mortuus Romans 4. How far the
kingdom of christ surmou^teth his priesthood.
est pro peccatis nostris, Christ dyed for our sins: yet notwithstanding,
resurrexit pro iustificatione nostra, he rose for ou^ ^ustification, by his
kingdom, by his power, by his victory, by his resurrection, by his ascension,
by his sitting at ye right hand of his father, in all which, his kingdom is
contained, so that it comprehends both our Predestination, and our salvation
too. And therefore, we are taught by Christ to say, let Math. 6.
thy kingdom come, and not, let thy priesthood come. And not only all our
estate in this life, and the life to come, but all the grace, and mercy, and
justice, and power, and glory of God is attributed, not so much to the
priesthood, as to the kingdom of Christ.

But ye say God was angry with the peoples request when he made the kings
estate.

I grant you Master Saunders, and told ye the reason before out of Lyra, and
the text is plain, because God him self was king unto them, which does not
abase, but so much the more advance it.

But now when Master Saunders has thus extolled the Priests government of the
old Testament, he abaseth the^ again by comparison of Bishops of the new
Testament, saying.

Since therefore the Bishops of the Church of Christ are of Saunders. 61.
no less dignity than were in times past the Leuitical priests, yea rather
since the Apostle, treating of the Ministers of the nevve Testament, and
conferring them with the old Levites, 2. Corinthians. 3.
says, that they ministered death, and the letter that killed, but these
minister the spirit which quickneth, and righteousness and therefore the
ministers of the nevve Testament are more vvorthie than the old Levites, what
manner of king shall we think him to be, which contemning the ministers of
the nevve Testamente, calls himself the supreme head of his Christian
kingdom, and that immediately under Christ?

This comparison (Master Saunders) of the ministers of Comparison between the
ministers of the old and new testament.
the old and nevve Testament rightly understood, we acknowledge. The nevve is
more worthy than the old, but the worthiness and glory of the new
ministration that saint Paul speaks on, is spiritual and not outvvard glory.
For although the ministers of the old Testament had outward glory, and some
of them by especial calling, had the visible, supreme and civil government,
although seldom: yet the ministers of the nue testament are by Christ (as your
own self have confessed) flatly forbidden it, Vos autem non sic, but you
shall not be so. And therefore, where ye would have Math. 20. Mark. 10. Luke.
22. In outward glory the ministers of the new testament are inferior, in inward
glory, superior.
them of no less dignity (meaning of outvvard glory and government, or else
your example holds not) they are of far less dignity therein,
notwithstanding in a spiritual and inward glory, they are again of a far
greater dignity than the old. Which spiritual dignity, if any King should
contemn? you might then well demand, what manner of king he were: and we
would answer you, he were a wicked King but as these are two distinct
dignities, the spiritual dignity of the minister, and the visible supremacy
of the King, so may they be, and are with us, well and godly used both of them.
Where, both the Prince has the outward dignity of supreme head or governor
under Christ: and yet the ministers spiritual dignity is not only no whit
contemned, but has his honor yielded due unto him. And therefore we deny not
that which follows.

For if he acknowledge not the Ministers of Christ over Sand page 61.
him, he can not be blessed of them. Whereupon, neither can he be pertaker of
the sanctifying spirit, whose ministers they are.

We grant (Master Saunders) that the Prince humbly receives their blessing,
and is partaker of the holy spirit of God, whose ministers they are in these
actions. Wherein the Prince acknowledges them to represent God, and is under
them. But what hinders this, that in other respects, they again are under
him, and he their supreme governor? but Master Saunders proceeds saying:

David cries: and now ye kings understand, and be ye Sa^d. page 61. Psalm. 2.
learned ye that judge the earth, apprehend discipline, least the Lord wax
wroth, and ye perish out of the right way. But if kings must be learned,
then so far forth, they must be under. For he that is learned, is learned of
some master, and is scholar to him of whom he is learned, the disciple is
not above Math. 10.
his master, but in that thing that he learneth of his master, of necessity
he is inferior.

That kings ought to be learned we gladly confess, and Kings ought to be
learned.
are glad that you confess it, although against your wylls, for ye would
rather have them altogether unlearned, whom ye have so long detained in
blindness. But why would ye have them now learned? forsothe, because you
would only The Popish priests would be princes may sters and governors under
pre^ence of teachers.
be their masters, and so they should be still your underlings, not only in
learning such ill lessons as you would teach them, but under pretense of
teachers, to be their governors too. True it is, in that the teacher teaches,
he is above, and in that the learner learneth he is under. ^ut the teacher is
not above, nor the learner under, in other things. Though Moses learned of
Iethro, yet in government How the teachers are above and under the princes
whom they ^eache. Exodus. 18. 2. Reg. 12. Judith. 8. The Simlitude of a
scholemaister. How the prince though himself not learned, directs laws
for learning.
Moses was above him. Though David learned of Nathan, yet in government he
was above him. Though Ozias learned of Judith, yet in government he was above
her. And so all princes that are taught of their schole masters, their
scholemaister may be the better in learning, but he is the worser in
authority. And though he be the master in knowledge, yet he makes even his
knowledge whereby he is master, to serve the Prince also. Yea although the
Prince be not his master in learning, yet in all causes of learning, the
Prince has a general supreme government, to see by his laws every kind of
learning maintained in his order, to forbid naughty arts to be learned: to
appoint such and such an order and method to be taught or learned, as learned
men inform him, is good and easy to the attaining of learning: to appaynt
schools and learned scholemaisters for learning: and to give them laws,
statutes, and stipendes, for the maintenance of learning: all this may the
Prince do by his supreme authority, over all learned persons, and in all
causes of learning, although he himself be altogether unlearned, and can not
one letter on the book. Although would to God all Princes were learned, not
as the Papists would have them, but as David, was and exhorts all Princes
to be. And thus, as this sentence makes nothing in the world for him, so his
example thereon makes very much against him. But for all this argument be
thus simple, he will lord us with further proves, saying.

Sith therefore it is said to the Apostles: Go teach ye all Sand, page* 62.
Math. 28.
nations, and since under the names of nations, the kings of them are
comprehended: and Bishops and Priests have succeeded the Apostles in the office
of teaching: truly in the office of teaching the Bishop is greater than his
king: so far is it off, that the king can be the Bishops head in all things
and causes. Which title notwithstanding is not only of these men given to a
king, but also by public decree of late in England, giu^n unto a Queen.

To reason from teaching to governing, is no good teaching From teaching to
governing is no good consequence.
M. Sau^ders. If ye teach this doctrine, the^ your Pope should have little
government, for God wot he teaches little, being often times unlearned, and
always to proud to teach. If ye say he teaches by others: so ca^ a prince
too. And though he could himself teach, and would also teach the truth, and
not suppress it: yet since ye say, he succedes the Apostles but Succession of
the Apostles consistes in teaching.
in the office of teaching, he is no further superior than he teaches, by your
own reckoning. Neither would this superiority be denied him, of any that he
ought to teach, if he in d^de succeeded the Apostles. But if the succession of
the Apostles consist in teaching as here ye confess: then has not the Pope to
crake much of succeeding Peter and Paul, that The Pope teaching not as Peter
and Paul did, is not their successor.
teaches not as Peter and Paul did, as would to God he did and all priests
or Bishops else. Which if they did and taught truly, this would augment and
not diminishe the Princes supreme authority, yea and the Queens too, Master
Saunders, for in government before ye made a King and Queen alone. Now to
this he adds out of Esai, saying.

Esai foretold that kings should be the nourishers of the Sand page 62.
Esai. 49.
Church of Christ, and casting down their countenance to the earth shall
worship her, and straight he adioyneth: thou shall know that I am the Lord,
for this verily is the sign that the Lord reigns in us, if we yield so much
unto his church, that the Ministers of Christ are greater than any King or
Queen.

As this sentence is placed both without all order and coherencie: so the
reason is very sclender, and stands on this, that the Priests are the Church
that Esai here speaks on, which as it is apparent false, so it is not to this
purpose. For, the supreme government of a godly Prince, gives not only an
honor to the Church, but to the Priests also, and yet his supremacy safe.
But see how this sentence hits him, as the rest. For, if kings and Queens be
likened to Nourses, The similitude of a nource.
and Nourses have charge not only of feeding, but also of governing: then do
Kings and Queens both feed the Church, although not by teching, yet by
causing the truth to be taught, and govern the Church also. And if by the
Church is chiefly meant the priests, then the same kind of Princes feeding and
governing like to Nourses, stretches to priests also, and so the similitude
makes against him.

His other argument, of dispensing Gods mysteries and Sacraments to the king,
is diverse times already answered unto, and therefore as superfluous I pass
it over. And thus far for his arguments of his Priests superiority. Now
secondly to the reasons he shows why he thinks us deceived.

But thus in this case deceives many, that they see the king Sand. 62.
is a Christian and governs Christians. For they know not, or at least will
not know, what difference it is, whether a man goueren a Christian, because he
is a man, or because he is a Christian. The king indeed governs Christian
men, but not because they are Christians, but because they are men. And because
the Bishops also themselves are men, the kings also in part are above
Bishops. The which hereby goes clear See Chrysostom. in C. 13. ad Romans
away, if we cons^ider Christian kings, not only to govern Christian men,
but even alike oftentimes Jews, now and then Moors and Tartars, for this
only that they are kings. But Bishops govern Christians, so as they can
govern no other, as they are Bishops. Since therefore the government of the
king pertains to all men alike, but Bishops principality is reached to only
Christians: and since the state of our Christianity excels the human
nature that is in us, with what sense is he endued, that pre^erreth the
gouernoure of our bodily and fleshely nature, before the priest that watches
for our souls, and that either loses our sins, if we make worthy Hebr. 13.
fruits of repentance, or binds them, if we bear about an impenitent heart?

For the Ministers binding and loosing, is an other question. Let us now keep
us to this, of the Princes supreme government. We are deceived (you say) for
lack of considering this difference, that the king. governs Christians, not
as Christians, but as men and we think you ar^ deceived your self, M.
Saunders, and would (...) others for not considering this difference in the
king him self, in who^ The respects of a king of a Christian and of a man.
we ought to consider, not only that he is a king but also a Christian king.
In that he is a king he geuerneth a^ his subjects (as ye say) a like, (so far
as the likeness, or (...) of their s^ates will permit) whether they be
Christian, Jews, Turks, Mores, ^aitars, Ethniks or whatsoever religion they
be of, not in respect of their religions, nor in ye they are (...) neither,
but in respect they are his (...). For, there are other men also that are none
of his subjectes. ^ra every man in that he is a man, is no subject to another
man, but free. Neither in that he is a christian. (to speak preperly of the
abstracte) he is under any other than Christ, in whom there is no difference
of country, state, degree, or person, as your self afterward confess in the
4. chapter. How* beit, as the king himself is of the Christian^ religion, and
a Christian king of a christian kingdom (as al kings and kingdoms ought to
be, although they be not:) so has he an other charge and government of his
christian subjects far above that they be natural men, or this or that
cru^trey me^, even that they be christians committed to his government. And
therefore this charge was given the king of Gods people, in his institution
D^ute. 17. That he should have Gods Deuteronomy. 17.
word always with him, and make religion the chief end of his government.
And this your self have granted already. page 80 except ye will contrary
your self, as ye often do. But this case is too apparent, that a christian
Prince The Christian Prince regards further tha^ the natural or (...)
regards further than the body, or than the natural or polytike man. For
being a christian Prince, he regards them as christian subjects, and not
alike to such subjects as are Heathen, Turks, and Tartars, which is a
shameful sclander. For as the christian Prince has a special regard to his
christian subjects, before his Infidel subjects: so they being subjects of
unlike condition, he gouerns them nothing a like. The one being out of the
household of faith, although in the household of his kingdom: The other being
of both the housholdes, and therefore the faithful Prince has fuller
authority over them, as well for the religion of their souls, as for their
goods and bodies. But (say you) the Bishop bath respect only to the soul.
I say still, would to God your Bishops had so. But does this hinder the Princes
superioriue, that has respect to soul and body too? The arguments of
Constantine, Theodosius, and Constantius, are somewhat touched already, and I
reserve the further handling of the^, to the practice and treatise of the
stories.

The 3. part of this chapter is a dissuasio^ from the Princes M. Saunders would
dissuade us ho^ the Prin ces supremacy by the success thereof.
supreme government, by the success thereof. Wherein first he begins with the
most famous Prince King Henry the. 8 the Queens Matesties father, the noblest
and most fortunate king, that ever bare crown in England. and now when his
soul is crouned in the kingdom of heaven with eternal glory, his body with
honor interred in his Sepulcher, and his immortal fame yet fresh and living, in
the memory and mouths of al nations: see and these spiteful Papists will
leave off, The Papists railing and s^laundering of K. Henry. 8. Sand. 63.
with more than villainous reproaches, most traitorously to rail upon him.
Saying, that he first called himself the Chief head of the Church of England
and Ireland immediately under Christ, Besides that, he was never the happier,
but much more unhappy. Upbrayding his wives unto him. The cou^terfeting of the
money, and the pilling of his subjects.

^ wicked Papists, past all shame and grace. How truly did the Apostle Jude
prophecy of you, that (...) Epistola Iudae.
^ulers, and blaspheme them that (...) authority. Was K. Henry. 8. ^claundered
to (...) his subjects
King Henry the eight a pyller of his subject* under whom his subjects lived
in such prosperity and abundance, in (...) renoune and glory, when all their
(...) ^o dradde them, for the^oble conduct and government of such a Prince, as
all things considered, we find not the like in all the ancient histories? Did
he pill them, that delivered the^ from the greatest pillar and spoiler of them,
and from al his insatiable Caterpillars, that had pilled the Prince, the S^.
biectes, and all the Realm, and had gotten almost, all the goods and l^ndes
into their clutches, yea, their bodies and souls also? Did he pill the realm,
that brought the greatest riches into the Realm (the Gospel of Christ, and
Christian liberty) that ever the Realm could have?

Ye quarrel at ye baseness of the money. Has there not bin King Henry. 8
selaundered with counterfeyting the coy^e.
worsse money in times past in England? They say that we had money of lether,
and have not the most of other Princes brazen coin? But I see you have a
brazen face, and a fond malicious head. Is the Princes coin counterfeit with
you? and if it had been a great deal worsse than it was, can ye call it
adulterate or forged? No Saunders, (for here I must needs leave out Master)
such Traitors as you be, are What coin the Papists counterfeited.
counterfeiters of money, howbeit you are far worsse traitors, and forge a
naughty coin, in the stead of Gods word, to give the people trifling
traditions of your own stamp, and take good money for them.

You obiecte his wi^es unto him. What mean ye by this, King H. selandered with
his wives.
ye wiuelesse and shameless generation, ye dispisers and defilers of
Matrimony, would ye have had him have lived like you? ye caused him in deed
unwittingly, while he ignorantly obeyed your Pope, to live with his brothers
wife. Which when he knew, he adhorred and forsook, as flat against Gods
word: Thou shalt not uncover the secrets Leuit. 18.
o^ thy brothers wife. And yet the Pope (contrary to Gods express law, and
the law of nature) dispensed with it, and you Papists maynteine it tooth and
nail, as a lawful marriage. This in deed was his greatest misfortune, to have
taken her so long (through too much credit of false Papists) to be his
lawful wife, which was not his wife at all, and yet both the parties
ignorantly offended. A^ for his first true and lawful wife: we may say
indeed he had misfortune in her too, that he so much credited the sclanderous
undermining Papists, that never stinted to procure her death, for ye hatred of
the gospel that she professed. And so at length most subtly wrought it and
made her a sweet sacrifice to God and a most holy martyr. No misfortune, but
mosie happi^ hap to her, to sustain so sclaunderdus a death, in so innocent a
cause, the misfortune was the king her husbands, to be so beguiled by such
false Papists. And yet to us, this marriage was most fortunate, which God so
blessed with such a fruit, as never the like did spring in England.

As for all King Heuries other wives (save one) were as as virtuous, chaste, and
godly Queens, as any Christian king could have. And yet the default of that
one, is not to be imputed unto him, which to die, is more than cankred malice.
Lest of al, ought it to be ascribed to the event of his supreme government.
Should M. colsfolly be ascribed to David? 1. Paral. 15.
yea, should a man's own faults be accounted for the event of his virtues?
should misfortunes following, be deemed the effects of godliness going
before? But you deny all this, that this was godly, to become this supreme
governor, and say king Henry took it first upon him. But stay your haste
Master Saunders. When we come to the practice of christian Kings before king
Henry: ye shall find it contrary, and King Henry not the first that took
upon him this supre mac^e.
ye shall find by that, that is already said to Master Stapleton, that in
the old Testament David, Solomon, Iosaphat. etc. took upon them this supreme
government in their kindomes, that king Henry did.

Ye say he was never the happier but the more vnhappier King Henrie^
prosperity after he had expelled the Pope.
after he took it on him. Whereas he never prospered better, than after he had
expelled the Popes usurped authority. For even then began he indeed to reign
and rule other, where before he bore the name of a king, and was ruled by
other, the Pope, his Prelates and Priests hearing all the (...). Besides the
happiest hap of all the knowledge of God, that by his supreme government,
then began to florishe.

Now after his railing on king Henry, he descends to king Edward the sixte,
saying:

And he being dead, God by a marvelous manner showed Sand. page 63.
unto all the world, how little this Ecclesiastical Primacie and high calling,
was agreeable to kings. For Henry the eight being dead, Edward his son a
child almost nine year old, succeeded in his kingdom. If we look to the
right that this child had in the kingdom, he was no less king than his
father was. But if we turn our eyes unto the state of the church, verily there
is a great difference, whether it be governed of a child, or of a man of
perfect age.

See the insaciable malice of these Papists, not only The Papists de facings
of K. Edward.
against the living, but the dead, and that against their late most gracious
sovereigns. It suffiseth not to have thus co^tumeliously railed on the Queens
Majesty's father of blessed memory, but also to deface her Majesty's brother,
that most virtuous Prince, king Edward, saying, he took upon The Prince
sclaundered to take an ecclesicall primacie.
him this Ecclesiastical Primacie, as though he or his father took upon him,
any ecclesiastical primacie, because they took upon them a supreme government
in all ecclesiastical matters. But will he spare for spite to sclaunder them,
that presumes to wrest and misconster Gods heavenly providence, in calling
king Edward to the kingdom, while he was yet a child? He grants he was as
full king as his father was. Then say I, he had all the right and authority that
his father If K Edward were as full a king as his father, then he had all the
right of his father.
had. But says he, there is a great difference between the right of a
kingdom and the state of the Church, whether it be governed of a child, or of
a man of perfect age. As though we talked not (M. Sau^ders) of such a kingdom
as were the Church also, or as though a kingdom (consider it how ye will)
require not likewise to be governed of one of perfect age Or as though there be
not also a great difference, between the right of authority belonging to the
person, be he child, or man: and the personal governing of him. But let us
hear M. Saunders arguments against a child. He makes exception against a
child for two reasons, first the example of Christ, secondly the saying of S.
Paul Call. 4. Of the first he says.

For if even Christ took not on him the government of the Sand. 63.
Church, before he attained to thirty years of age, how much less would he,
that the Church should be governed of a child.

I answer. First the government that Christ took at 30. Christ's age when he
began to preach.
years of age, was in his personal exercise of the ecclesiastical function,
whereto a mature age is requisite. But the kings Supremacy requires no such
personal exercise of ecclesiastical function, but is clean another matter:
therefore this example of Christ's age is impertinent. Secondly we grant the
Church should not be governed of a child, in that respect he is a child,
in which consideration he is no king, as you distinguished before between a man
and a christian man, Distinction be twen^ the kigs nature and h^s person and
his office.
and ye must so again distinguishe between his nature and his person, or his
person and his office. Now, in regard of his office, the defecte of his
nature is supplied by those, that represent him in his office, and they being
men of grave years and knowledge, you can not justly say, the government is
committed to a child.

The second argument is taken from S. Paul. 4. Gal.

Moreover a child so long as he is a little one, lives under Saunders. 6^.
Gal. 4.
Tutors and governors, and so the Supreme Head of the Church, needs
another superior Head to govern and rule him, and that not so much by chance
or fortune, as by imbecillitie of his proper nature, and the necessity of the
thing it self. How can he therefore be the Supreme Head of the Church, that
lives under an other head?

Ercept M. Saunders were bent pienishly to warble, he would not reason thus,
knowing well enough, that those of ri^er years which govern the kings person
in his nonage, be not his head, and he a member or subject under them: but
they representing him, he and they are but one in office, and their
gouernemente is not properly theirs, but is the The doings of the kings
governors in his nonage at the kings own doings.
kings own gouernemente. And so the head has no head over him but only Jesus
Christ. But M. Saunders foreseeing that by this reason, he might make the
child no king at all of his kingdom (which he before confessed, that king
Edward was as full king as his father) he preuenteth the objection, and
seeks a escape to shifte it.

For if ye say by the same reason he is not king of his kingdom neither,
because he is compelled to govern that also by Sand. 63. M. Saunders
prevention and answer to our objection.
others: the answer is easy, it is no marvel if the law of man, which
places children over kingdoms by force of succession, be found imperfecte.
But it were greatly to be marueled if the law of Christ also, whereby he
places pastors over his Church, could be accused in any part of
imperfection. For as Moses law brought nothing to perfection, so on the
contrary, the law of Christ left nothing imperfect, as whom it became to
fulfill all righteousness. Therefore there shall be none, much less any
chief head in the Church of Christ, the which by nature, can not do the
office of an ecclesiastical head. But a child can neither teach, nor baptize,
nor by any means assoile the harder questions of the Gospel.

The answer (M. Saunders, as ye say) is easy, but is it a good answer? it
were an easy matter to answer, if such easy answers may serve, that ye may
say what ye will (and contrary your self too) when ye find an inconvenience.
And such an inconvenience, as wipes away all your former reasons. Neither can
ye sufficiently answer it, that if your reason hold, of the defecte of the
kings nonage while he is a child: he may then be no governor at all, no not in
Temporal matters neither, because therein he is governed of others also, in
that he is but yet a child, and so in his kingdom should become no governor
at all. But for an easy answer to this, ye say: this is a defecte in the
law of man. A child may be a king even by Gods law.
Why M. Saunders, doye now make this the law of man, that a child might be a
King? said ye not before (and that more truly) it was gods law, Numeri. 27.
and Gal. 4. and cited for examples Ioas and Josias? and again, do ye say,
this is an imperfection in the law, that is an imperfection Imperfection of
the person infers not im perfection of the law.
in the person? nay Master Saunders the law of succession was good and
perfect. Neither your sentence that ye cite of S. Paul, the law brought
nothing to perfection, serves to this purpose. Neither was the fault in the
law, but in the defecte of the obseruer. But saint Paul speaks there of the
moral law, and of justification, which the law of God given by Moses could
not bring to perfection, confuting an other error which the Phariseis, the
Pelagians, and the Papists hold. But what is this to the present purpose?
Saint Paul complains not of the imperfection of the politic l^w of the
Jews, and therefore this is manifestly wrested: Ye object yt Christ's law is
perfect, as though S. Paul's law Gal. 4. cited by your self, for the kingdom
of a child, be not also the law of Christ: and as for Christ's law for the
pastors of his Church* we accuse it not to be imperfecte, and yet in the
pastors themselves there is no perfection, although Christ's law for them be
most perfect. But what answers this the purpose? The Prince takes not the
pastoral office on him, nor to do the office of an ecclesiastical head, as
ye term it, nor to teach, or baptize, or astoyle the hard questions of the
Gospel, either in his noneage or in his full age, either child or man. These
are but your surmised sclaunders on the Prince. But to devise sclaunders, is
with you an easy answer.

Now upon these arguments against the supremacy of king Edward, he knits up
his conclusion of the event, saying: therefore since God, after not the best
man, calling him Saunders. 6^.
self the head of the Church, did substitute a child: even by the things
themselves he admonished us, that that honor did not rightly agree to the
father, that was so evil applied to his son.

The more ye d^ still irreverently carpe at king Henry, calling him not the
best man, the more ye show your cankred stomak M. Saunders, and that your self
are one of the worst The more the Papists disco^mende king Henry, the more it
redou^deth to his commendation.
kind of me^, whose malice no not death ca^ satiate. But ye more it redoundeth
to the praise of that most noble and virtuous king, being holde^ for so much
the better man, of all good men, how much the worse man, such wicked men as you
esteem him ab illaudatis vituperari laudabile est, it is commendable to be
dscommended of discommendable men. Your interpretation of a child succeeding
him, has neither charity nor truth, neither can you frame any good argument
on it, but rather on the contrary. Where God so blessed the reign of the The
Papists argument of a childs succession to blemishe the supremacy does rather
confirm it.
child, that in so short a time, so long rooted superstitions and Idolatries
were abolished, and the word of God so truly and freely set forth: it argues
that God not only liked the title of the father, but also confirmed it in the
son, and showed well that ye childhood of his person, was no impediment to
the authority of his office, as you maliciously would wrest it.

After King Edward ye come to Queen Marie, saying:

Moreover, when men neither thus awaked, and the child Saunders. 63.
after the sixth year of his government being dead, God placed a woman over
the kingdom of England, who also ought to have been further from governing the
Church than a child, for even the kind, which at the last, displeased not
in a child, so displeased the holy Ghost in a woman (so far as pertains to
the government of the Church) that he in whom Christ spoke, doubted not to
write, I permit not a 1. Tim. 2.
woman to teach in the Church.

If you reckon the years of King Edwardes reign, to infer, The shortness
of King Edwards reign no argument against his authority.
by the taking of him away so soon, Gods misliking of his government: as you
still show your malicious and over saucie constructions of gods judgments:
so ye bewray withal the foudnesse of your arguments. Did not Queen Marie
reign a shorter while than he? and why note ye not the years of her reign
also? but this you ouerpasse Queens Mary's reign shorter than king Edwards.
The supremacy of a woman. 1. Tim. 2. The understand ding of Saint Paul's
sentence for woman's sil^ee and subjection page 59.
in silence, and turn your argument to her kind, in that she was a woman,
to argue Gods displeasure for the Princes gouernemente of the Church, but ye
allege nothing that ye alleged not before, out of Saint Paul: I permit
not a woman to teach in the Church, neither to usurp authority over the
man, but to be in silence. Trow you Master Saunders this is to be stretched
to gouernemente, that no woman may have any authority to govern a man? if
ye construe it thus, how will ye make your former saying good? that the right
of a kingdom pertayneth no less to women than to men, alleging the examples
of Debora, Athalia, and Alexandra and the law Number. 27. ye must needs
therefore confess, that he speaks there no otherwise, than ^ee does 1.
Corinthians. 14. of women not simply, but of such women as are wives. Neither
of all authority, but of authority over the husband. Neither of all
speaking, exhorting or commanding: but of the public ministry of
preaching. And thus does your own Cardinal Caietane, expound it, Docere,
Caietanus in 1 Timothy 2.
supple public. etc. neque dominari, direct hoc respicit vxores, to teach, to
wite publikly. etc. neither to rule, this is directly spoken of vviues. And so
Catharinus: hic locus manifest de coniugata Catharinus in 1. Tim. 2.
intelligitur. etc. This place manifestlye is understood of a wife, in the
same sense wherein it is read in another place, let women hold their peace
in the Churches, for it is not permitted to them to speak, but to be subject
even as the 1. Cor. 14.
law says. But by the way we must bevvare, that injury be done to
none. Although by no means it be the office of any woman to teach,
notvvythstanding if any woman be endued with singular grace of God (for God
is free from all law) that could be able to do these things when it
should be thought meet, she were not to be hindered, chiefelye having the
gift of prophecy, but it were lavvfull for her to speak freelye. As is read
of Olda and Debora that judged the people of Israel, as is apparent in the
book of the judges. Does not the Apostle also warn, that the former hold his
peace, if it be revealed to another? For we know that that glorious, and one of
the most dear spo^ses of Christ, Saint Katherine of Senes taught in times
pa^e, and has made sermons yea even in the public consisto^e of the Pope,
although she took not upon her these things but with good leave of Christ's own
vica^, who best knew in (...) to be the true spirit of God, and the feruencie
of charity to be given her to edify the Church in those troublous times,
when the scisme reigned. etc. Thus far and further says this Popish Bishop,
whereby it appears, that the Papists the^ selves understand not this sentence
of Saint Paul, for a simple debar to all women, no not to preach in the
open Church, if need so required, so that she have the Popes leave. And can
the Pope give leave in a time of scisme to maintain his faction, when two or
three Popes strive for the triple diadem, and to Saint her for her labor? And
shall it not be lawful for a Christian Queen (not attempting her self to
preach) to set forth, by the authority due to all princes, such laws
whereby gods truth may be preached, by those that are lawfully called
thereunto? may not a Queen^ by virtue of her royal office, in the open
assemblye of her own subjects, speak, exhort, persuade, and command her
people, being also the Church of Christ, to abolish al errors, and receive the
only truth of God? was it lawful for the Empress Irene, to publishe her
decrees in the Church, for the erecting of Images, against the word of God?
and is it not lawful for the Queens Majesty, by public decrees to pull
them down, and forbid the worship of them, according to gods word? this
sentence therefore even by their own witness is but wrested, to debar a
woman's government of the Church.

But Master Saunders proceeding on his argument for Queen Marie, says:

To the same purpose it came, that the great goodness of Saunders. 63.
God called such a Queen to the rule of the kingdom, that both saw this
self same thing, and confessed it. For Queen Marie not only took not this
proud title of the head of the Church, but also when she was admonished of
others* that she would be like her father, she brought forth most weighty
reasons, why she ought not to do it. Whereupon, she chiefly exhorting thereto,
that title was omitted, and the proper honor restored to the successors of
Peter.

If the title (as ye say M. Saunders) be proud, Queen Queen Mary's refusal
of this title.
Marie had done well to leave it, but your Pope not over well to take it, howbeit
this title, as King Henry, and King Edward before took it, was no proud
title, but a title of their charge and duty. And therefore she ought to have
retained it, nor did well in leaving it, and rendering it to a foraigne prelate,
that had naught to do therewith. And in who^ in deed it is both a proud, and
an Antichristian title, both spoiling Christian Princes of their principal
office in their particular estates: and also bereauing Christ of his glory over
his universal Church. Neither can he claim it as successor of Peter: Peter
never having the possession of it. And what weighty reasons soever she
persuaded her self withal, to shake it off, she taking the kingdom on her,
the weight and burden lay still on her charge before God. And if your reason be
ought of the effect and sequel of this her refusal, into what If the reason
of the sequel be ought, look on the events in Queen Mary's reign after her
refusal of the supremacy.
extreme misery was this Realm brought in so short a time, by ye Legates
spoiling, by the Prelates burning, by the Italians pilling, by the Frenchme^s
winning, by the Spaniardes oppressing, and by gods divine Justice scourging the
Realm with strange diseases, droughts, waters, and dearthes, to conclude the
Queen her self and crown impouerished, and all the Realm in danger of
perpetual thraldom and utter undoing, if God of his infinite mercy had not
delivered us from it, and yet see if these Papists, that can so narrowly spy,
and proll at every note in king Henry, and kings Edwards days, can in Queen
Mary's days, epsy any one of these great beams, that were such apparante
tokens of gods wrath, that all men saw and felt what events succeeded the
refusal of this title, and the yielding it to the Pope, nerehand the clean
subversion of this Realm, if we may judge by sequels.

Now after Queen Marie, he comes to the Queens Majesty, that now (God be
praised) most prosperously reigns over us.

But when very many given to heresies were offended at Saunders. 63.
this notable modesty of the Queen, neither would they yet understand his
Counsel in governing his Church: God brought to pass that Marie of happy
memory being dead, the kingdom of England should deuolue to such a woman, as
now vvriteth her self: The supreme gouernesse in all matters and causes
asvvell ecclesiastical as secular. That yet so at the length, by the success
it self, men of hard heart and obstinate neck, might mark, how evil king
Henry took this office upon him, the which of his heir and successor could
not duly and orderly be fulfilled. For to whom it is not permitted to teach,
which is the most necessary office of an ecclesiastical Head: how shall she
perform those greater offices, that are occupied in the chastisement and
correction of them, that ought to teach the people? or shall she which is
unworthy that she should her self teach publicly in the lowest degree,
moderate and reprehend with lavvful authority, other public teachers in the
highest degree? or if she can not lavvfully reprehend them, shall she yet be
lavvfully supreme gouernesse of the Church? I omit here the things that in
these years, which are last passed, have been (I know not how uncomely)
done and preached in England, under such supreme heads of the Church. I spare
the dignity of the^ that govern. Another time, if God will, I will handle
them particularly, how greatly both from the law of God, and from the
sentence of the ancient Church, and from right reason, that state of a
common weal is far, in which any king arrogateth to himself, the office
and name of the supreme head of the Church.

Is your part so false and weak of proves (Master Saunders) that it can win
no credit, but by discrediting of ours with sclaunders? and yet we would
pardon this in you, ascribing it either to some passion of choler against your
adversaries, or to blind affection of your selves, that ye call very many of
us, given to heresies, hard hearted, and obstinate necked, which are terms
fitter to muster in M. Stapletons common places, than to stuff up M. doctor
Saunders volumes: how they redownde upon your selves, let other judge* that
How the Papists sclander the Queen.
will read and view of both. But if we forgive you this, for our parts, shall
we still suffer you to rail upon, and sclander the Lords anointed, saying:
she arrogateth to her self the office and name of the supreme Head of the
Church, speaking at randon without limitation of the Church, as the Pope does
arrogate to himself, and takes on her to be an ecclesiastical head and
public teacher of other that should teach her? these are too too infamous
sclau^ders of her Majesty, that claims no such title, nor attempteth any
such thing. What supreme government is ascribed to her highness, we have
told you a thousand times, but I see ye will not understand it, because ye
would of set purpose sclander it.

But to knit up your argument of the event and sequel of the Queens Majesty's
reign: ye say, many things have bin done and preached in England, ye cannot
tell how unseemly. ^ think even the same M. Saunders: ye can not tell how
^ndede. But how unseemly a thing is this for one of your ^rofession, to
challenge ye cannot tell what nor how? ye set own nothing, but under a
pretense of sparing us, to breed ^et a further sclaunderous suspicion, ye
threat us that ye will ^serue the^ til a further leisure, yt is to say, ad
Kalendas graecas, til ^e shall first know them, and then be able to prove them,
in the mean season, ye take the wisest way, to say such there are, but what
they are, ye cannot now tell, ye will learn the^ out, and tell us another time,
but tell the worste ye can, ye shall never be able to tell, of any falls
doctrine preached and by the Prince approved to be preached, nor of any wicked
fact, allowed by public authority to be done. No Master Saunders in all the
Queens Majesty's reign, ye can never be able to prove any such things, but
in the reign of your Popes, we can prove many such things: as whordome
committed and maintained: murder done and maintained, Idolatry used and
maintained, and infinite errors preached and maintained by public authority
among the Papists. As for ye Queens majesty's reign that now is, if the event
The prosperous success of the Queens Majesty's reign since her first taking
on her this supremacy
and sequel may make an argument, God has so blessed it (maugre all your
spites and practices) that no Realm christian has flourished like, nor
England more at any time. The Lord be praised for it, and for his mercy sake
long continue it, that has given so goodly a token, of his well liking her
Majesty's supreme government.

The third Chapter.
The argument is, that Princes can not judge nor define in causes
Ecclesiastical.

OF those errors that are about the power of kings and magistrates ^. Sand,
page 64.
the second error is of the^ that think kings are not in deed the chief heads
of the Churches in which they reign but in certain causes Ecclesiastiall to
be even as vvorthie members as Bishops* for although in one certain thing (as
in the office of teaching) they prefer Bishops before kings, yet partly in
another Ecclesiastical matter (as in deposing a Bishop from his seat, or in
moderating any synod, they prefer kings before Bishops, partly they will
have it free for kings, that almost in every ecclesiastical matter they may
know and decerne as Judges. Of the confutation of which error, this is the
reason, that I should show in every cause of the ecclesiastical law, that is
to be known and judged, Kings to be so much in the place of private men,
that this trial can not of the ecclesiastical Judges be committed unto them,
Although I deny not, but that of some fact that perteyneth to the eccl. law,
the knowledge may be committed to Kings and Magistrates. But before the eccl.
cause be known, the king may orderly intermeddle his authority, to that end
that a quiet place may be granted, where the Bishops should judge. And also
that the Bishops may be called at a certain day to that place. And that in the
mean season, while the ecclesiastical cause is known, the public peace,
yea even in the assembly of Priests may be conserved. To conclude, after the
cause known and judged of the Pristes, the king either by the sword that he
bears not in vain, or by some other bodily punishment may correct him, if
any man shall refuse to obey the Priests sentence. Therefore we deny not, but
that both before and about, and after the Bishoply judgment, there are some
parts of kings, but in the office of judging, kings can do more than can
private men. For either of them can both give counsel, and show what they
think good: but neither of them can define, what the divine or eccl. law
declares in that matter. Which thing thus declared, let us now come to the
proof of the matter it self.

All this then either needs none or little answer (M. Saunders) being
barely anouched without any proof, to the which ye are not yet come, but
only declare what ye will deny or grant to Princes. Your grant we take, and
M. Saunders grants to Princes to assign the time and place to Councels.
see ye go not from it. But will all your fellows, yea will your Pope him
self grant so much, that the Emperor shall by his authority appoint the
certain place and day where and when the Bishops shall hold their Councels? It
was wont to be so in the old time. But will your Pope suffer this now, and
that kings shall do the like in their kingdoms? Nay M. Sau^ders, he will
mislike of this, and say, ye grant too large a thong of another man's leather:
howesoeuer you would by qualification, eat your graunt^ again, clean
contrarying your self, ascribing no more to Princes than to private men. And
yet again you grant, M. Saunders speaks contraries.
that both of them may give counsel, and show what they think good in
ecclesiastical matters, although they can not determine them.

Go to master Saunders, till you bring your proofs, we will take this grant
also of your liberality, that Princes may give counsel and show what they
think good. A good many of your side will not grant so much, nor you but
for a countenance sake neither. Although The Papists make Princes but as
private men in their Councels.
ye do them open injury, to compare them qualle (being public estates) to
private men. As for your determination of Gods law, what you mean thereby,
when ye show your meaning playner, we will answer to it. Now to your
proofs.

Master Saunders proofs in this Chapter keep this order, first he alleges
the reasons for his party. Secondly, he answers our objections. His first
reason is this.

Those things that are of God, man can not dispose them Sand. 64.
otherwise, than if God give unto them such authority* but the causes of
faith chiefly of all other are of GOD, because faith is the most necessary
gift of GOD, that no man can obtain to him self by any force, either of
nature or art: the causes therefore of faith can not be judged of other than
of them, to whom God has given that power.

I answer, the parts of this argument be true, (...) M. Saunders a^g.
vicious.
the conclusion naught, for there is more in the conclusion than in the
premises* The conclusion should have (...) Therefore (...) can not dispose
the causes of faith otherwise, Distinction of judging.
than if God give them such authority. Howebeit, we simply deny not M.
Saunders conclusion: but would have him distinguish what he means by iudgeing.
(...) he mean disposing causes of faith otherwise than God has already in his
word disposed them, (or else his argument has no sense nor sequel:) then
the conclusion, as it is not proved, so is it apparent false. Neither give we
such judgment to Princes, or to any other creature, for such power God has
given to none. Although the Popish priests falsely claim such power, to
dispose matters of faith otherwise, than God disposed them.

But master (...) will prove his, conclusion on thi^ wise:

But God has given such power to certain men, and Sand. 64.
not at large to all Christian people. Therefore none have it but they.

The antecedent he proves from Saint Paul, Ephesians the fourth.

For God has ordained, some Apostles, other Prophets, Sand. 64. Ephe. 4.
other Evangelists, other Pastors, and Teachers, to the edi^ying of his
mystical body, which is the Church. But other he made as it were sheep and
lambs, that they should be edifyed by their pastors and teachers, and too
whom their pastors should attend, that they should not be carried away with
every blaste of doctrine by the subtlety of man.

I answer again as before. If he mean by iudgeing. ^eaching with sound
judgment, it is true, and this sen^ence well applied: but if he mean as his
principal ^roposition was, whereon all dependes. Disposing thin^es of faith
otherwise. Then we deny the antece^ente and the con^equence too. As for this
sentence, ^roues no such judgment given to any of these persons,

but rather confutes it, as not to edify, but to destroy, and to be carried
away by the subtlety of men with every blast of doctrine if men might dispose
otherwise of faith than God him self has dispo^ed.

Now upon this sentence of S. Paul for Pastors, be reasons thus:

But Pastors only judge what is fit or not fit for the sheep. Saun. 64.
For, to conclude that sheep are endued with equal power to Pastors, this were
nothing else, but to take away the difference that Christ has set between the
Pastors and the sheep, and the things that he has distinguyshed, to mingle
and confound them. Kings therefore and Magistrates, if they be counted sheep
in the flo^ke of Christ (as in deed sheep they are) judge not together with
the Pastors.

The argument is thus made formal. Judgment of Pastors.


Pastors do only judge what is fit or not fit for the sheep. But Princes are
not Pastors, but sheep of the flock of Christ.

Ergo, Princes do not judge what is fit or not fit for them, The mayor he
proves thus.

To conclude that the sheep have equal power with Pastors, is nothing else,
but to mingle and confound and take away the difference that Christ has set
between the Pastors and the sheep.

But if Princes should judge, the sheep should have equal power.

Ergo, For Princes to judge were to mingle, confound, and take away the
difference that Christ has set between the Pastors and the sheep.

First, to the mayor I answer, he siftes the similitude of The similitude of a
Pastor and sheep ^irted too narrow.
a shepherde and sheep too narrow. For although in some resemblaunces it
hold, yet is it not simply true, that the Pastor only judges what is fit
or not fit for this kind of sheep. He him self confesses before, and
after again confesses, that the private man or Princes may give counsel and
private judgment. And S. Paul speaking not of The judgment of private men,
much more of Princes. 1. Cor. 2. Math. 7.
the pastor, but of the spiritual man, that is, of the sheep of God, says:
Spiritualis omnia iudicat, the spiritual man judges all things. And Christ
biddes the people beware of false prophets, which can not be without judgment.

Neither is this sufficient proof of the mayor that he alleges: to contend
that the sheep has equal power, is to confound Christ's distinction.

We grant this, it were so. But this we deny, that hereby the sheep is
made to have equal power. For, Judgment of the pastor, and power of the
pastor are two several things. Some spiritual sheep have ^ounder judgment than
their spiritual shepherds. How even the pastors are sheep. John. 10. How the
prince is a pastor.
the judgment of the pastor is one thing, and the power of the pastor is
another, although it ought to have judgment concurring with it. Neither
ascribe we judgment alike to the pastors and the sheep, although in this
spiritual kind of sheep, some of them have more sound and perfect judgment
than their pastors.

To the minor, I answer, it is not simply true neither, for in one sense, not
only the pastors them selves are like wise sheep, but also the Princes them
selves are pastors. In the former sense, every faithful Christian is a sheep
v^der Christ, the only shepehearde, and must hear his voice. And so the
Priest is a sheep also, or else he shall never be in the fold of the
Church, nor placed at the right hand of Christ. In the other sense, not
only the Prince is such a Pastor as Homer calls Aga^emnon, and rules and
feeds the body (and so the Priests are his sheep, as well as other
subjects:) but also in protection and setting forth of Gods word throughout
his Dominions: he is their pastor too, in appoynting the pastors to feed the
sheep only in Gods pastures. And in this sense we ascribe supreme Pastorship
unto him, over the Priest also. Although in the ministry of the word and
Sacraments, the Priest again is his superior pastor, and the Prince is but
his sheep. But master Saunders replies.

But if they be counted as Pastors: I ask whence they Saund. 6 5.
prove it that Christ gave them such power? for what have they that they have
not received? but Christ, as he took not away or diminished the ancient
power of kings, granted by the law of Nations, so neither annexed he unto
them a new power of feeding his sheep. Moreover, the ancient power of
kings, although it be of God, yet is it of him by the mean of the law of
Nations, and the Civil, and not by any especial and chief constitution of
the Gospel, as is before declared. If therefore Kings and polytike
Magistrates have any power in causes of faith, either they received it from
the law natural, of Nations and of the Civil, or of the law of God, that is
revealed to the Church. But (to begin with the later member first) by the
law of God, that is revealed to the Church, no such thing is granted to
kings. For nothing else is revealed in the new Testament concerning Princes,
than that that is Math. 22. 1. Timoth. 2. 1. Peter. 2. Romans 13.
Cesars should be given to Caesar, that tributes should be paid, that kings
should be prayed for, that both the King and the governors sent from him
should be obeyed, and finally, that al power proceeds from God, and that
every Magistrate bears not the sword in vain, but in that matter, is to be
acknowledged to be Gods minister. Moreover none of these places do bid the king
by name dispose of the Church of Christ, or in causes of faith to arrogate
ought to him self.

The argument in brief is thus:

If princes be counted as pastors, they have such power given them.

But they have no such power given them.

Ergo, They are not counted as pastors.

I answer, first to the mayor, rightly understood it is true, that if
princes may be counted as pastors, the authority is given them. But it is
truly to be under stood by distinction of pastoral authority.

Secondly, to the minor, that Princes have no pastoral authority given them,
it is false. Neither do his proves prove it. If any were given them, it was
given them, either by the law of Nations, or by the Civil, or by Christ in
the new Testament:

But it is given them by neither of these three:

Ergo, they have none given them.

To the mayor I answer, it is false. Because he leaves Princes have
pastoral authority given them of God.
out the old Testament, which he confessed him self before, was a figure of
the pastorship of the new Testament, and here he leaves out the old Testament
quite. Which had he named as he ought to have done, he should both have seen
Princes to have been ordained immediately of God, as Moses, Iosue, all the
Judges, Saul, David, and Solomon: and not by the mean of the law of Nations,
nor the law Civil coming between. And he should have ^ounde that the Prince
of Gods people is appointed, namely to be a pastor or shepherd unto them. Number.
27. Moses spoke to the Number 27.
Lord, saying: Let the Lord God of the spirit of all flesh, appoint a man
over the congregation, who may go out and in before them, and lead them out
and in, that the congregation of the Lord be not as sheep without a Pastor.
2. Reg. 5. All the Tribes of Israel came to David 2. Reg. 5.
unto Hebron, and said thus: Behold we are thy bones and thy flesh, and in
times past when Saul was our king, thou leddest Israel in and out, and the
Lord has said unto thee, thou shall feed my people Israel. In which words
David was made their pastor or shepherd, which was rese^bled before in his
keeping of natural sheep, as he confesses of him self. He chose David also
his servant, and took him away from Psalm. 78.
the sheep foldes, as he was following the Ewes great with young ones, he took
him that he might lead Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance. So he fed
the^ with a faithful and true heart and ruled the^ prudently with all his
power: Which word of feeding belonging to a pastor, God ascribes also 2. Reg.
7.
to all the Judges, saying* When I commanded the Judges to feed my people.
And in. 1. Chro. 11. And the Lord said 1. Paral. 11.
unto thee, thou shall feed my people of Israel. and be the prince. etc. And
in the. 3. book of the Kings, when Micheas described in his vision the kings
destruction, he says: I saw 3. Reg. vlt.
Israel dispersed on the mountains, as sheep without a pastor, and the Lord
said, these have no master. etc. By these and many other places it appears
that God appointed the Prince to be a pastor in his office: but his office (as
is proved at large before) stretchet^ to the setting ^oorthe the law of God,
and government of the priests so well as the laytie: therefore his
pastorshippe stretches so far also, although not to the taking upon him the
office of the spiritual pastor.

Secondly, I answer to the minor, it is false. For, not only by the law of
Nations, and Civil, a politic pastorshippe is committed to the Prince: but
also a Christian pastorshippe to a christian Prince, even in the new Testament
also. Which as it is comprehended in these sentences that M. Saunders here sets
down, so are there more sentences that declare the Princes pastorship.

But says he, none of these do bid the king by name to dispose of the Church
of Christ, or in causes of faith, arrogate ought to him self.

This is a wrong conclusion, M. Saunders, from judgment and pastorship to
infer disposing and arrogating. As for Arrogating.
arrogating neither the Prince nor the Priest ought to do it, nor the Prince
attemptes it, although the Priests have and do attempt it. Likewise for
disposing, if you mean Disposing.
as ye said before, disposing otherwise than Christ has done: your Priests
do so, but they ought not to do so. The Prince can not do it, nor he does it,
nor claymes to do it, nor it is ascribed unto him. Yea, though you mean by
disposing, no alteration: yet is this an hard phrase, to say that Princes or
priests either, dispose of the Church of Christ, but rather dispose of
matters in the Church of Christ. And this as the Priest may do in his
vocation, so may the Prince in his estate. Which though it be not expressed by
name, but comprehended in the new Testament: yet is it even by name expressed
in the old Testament in diverse places, of the disposing of Church matters by
Moses, Iosue, David, Solomon, Iosaphat, Ezechias. etc. And since your self
confess, the one government is a figure of the other. And that the government
before Christ, he neither brake it nor diminished it: it follows, that the^
he left it entire and confirmed it. And therefore although the Princes disposing
of Church matters be not by name expressed, yet is it by your reason,
necessarily comprehended, and so you answer your self.

Now after he has thus (as he supposes) debarred Princes from all warrant
out of the law of God and the new Testament: he examineth the other laws,
saying:

Except therefore by the law of nature, the law of nations Saunders. 65
or the law civil such power be permitted too the king, it is clear, that he
has no power at all over these things: But certain it is, that those laws
cannot give to the king any power over things, that are not subject to those
laws. For no law can establishe ought, either of other things, or persons, or
actions, than those things that fall under the compass of it. But
Ecclesiastical matters do infinitely excede the power of the law of Nature, of
nations, and the civil. For of these three the law of nature is the first and
greatest. But neither that (since it began in the earth) can decree ought upon
the mysteries of Christ, which draw their original from heaven only. For,
that I may Romans 5.
speak nothing of the force of nature being yet entire, truly after that the
nature of all mankind by the sin of Adam 1. Cor. 1.
was corrupted, and death entering by one man passed into al: it can not be,
that from that infected original, any good thing should come forth. For an
ill tree can not bring forth good fruits, neither does the fleshely man (such
as we all be, by nature) perceive those things that are of the spirit of God.

All this labor is a need not (M. Saunders) to run (for confirmation of a
Christian doctrine) from the law of God to the law of nature and the law of
man, we use not so to do Neither desire we any doctrine to be admitted, that
is not proved by the law of God revealed in his word unto us, it is you the
Papists that stand on such proves and grounds, not we. Howbeit, you do injury
to the law of nature, to measure The law of nature.
it altogether by the corruption of our nature. For, howsoever we be degenerate
from it, the law of nature remains in it self both good and perfect, and is
called likewise the law of God. Neither can I think that every ecclesiastical
thing (as ecclesiastical things are commonly understood) is infinitely above
the power of the law of nature. By which reason many petit matters, would be
far above great principles. Yea many great Ecclesiastical matters do fall
within the compass of the law of nature. It is true yt you say of the
corruption of our nature, that by the fall of Adam sin has The corruption of
nature as much in a priest as in a Prince.
infected the Mass of all mankind. Death by one man has entered into all men.
No goodness can come of such a corrupted original. An ill tree can not bring
forth good fruit and that the fleshely man perceives not the things that are
of the spirit of God. All this is true, but is it not as much against a Priest
as a Prince? for ye Priest in that he is a man is borne in sin, and dies by
death the reward of sin, nor ca^ bring forth any good fruits, nor perceive
the things of the spirit of God. And the prince, in that he is a Christian, is
washed from his sin. The sting of death has no power over him, but is a
passage to eternal life. He is regenerate by a new original from above. He
is a good tree and brings good fruits, and is become a spiritual man,
perceiving and working the things that are of the spirit of God, and that
perchance a great deal better than many a good Priest, and without all doubt,
far more spiritual than any Popish Priest. And therefore that ye speak of
the corruption of nature, is nothing to the purpose, except it be to confute
your errors of pura naturalia, freewill, preparatiue works. etc. But Master
Saunders drist is this, that only the Priests are spiritual men. and so may
only Judge of spiritual things, and Princes are but natural, fleshely and
sinful men, and so can give no Judgment of spiritual matters. But how
untrue this is, how presumptuous on his party, and iniurions to all Christian
Princes: and how contrary to his own self, that faith else where, Christian
Princes are spiritual: I think any that have but mean Judgment, may easily
Judge it. But Master Saunders proceeds saying:

But to Judge of Ecclesiastical matters is no small good Saun. 65.
thing but one of the chiefest that Christ has given unto his Church: because
he has given the power of feeding, of Math. 18.
losyng and bynding to his Apostles, that is, to the chiefest Magistrates of
his Church, even as the greatest gift, Which gift they could never well
exercise but with Judgment either going before or going with it. For he that
shall bind nothing but that that should be bound, and shall lose nothing but
that that should be losed, must of necessity before hand deliberate and
decree, that this is to be bound, and that is to be losed. But to decree
such a thing to be done, or not to be done, in Christian Religion, this is
even that that we call, to Judge in matters of Faith. Sith therefore a power so
heavenly and notable, can not spring out of the beginnings of our corrupt
nature: it follows, that it comes only of the free mercy of God. But that
mercy of God is made manifest under the time of the new Testament, partlye by
the law written, partly not written: but neither way any power is given to
Kings in Ecclesiastical causes.

This argument (M. Sau^ders) is like the hopping of a reu^d, that from the law
of the new Testament, went about to infirm it by the law of nature, and so
fetching a circumquaque, comes in again with this conclusion, that it is not
by the law of the new Testament. So that where we thought we had proceeded
^urder, we are now where we were before. But to let go the naughtiness of
the argument. We grant, that to judge aright of Ecclesiastical matters, is a
Judgment in ecclesiastical matters, and power of binding and losing are two
things.
great gift of God, but that ye judgment of ecclesiastical matters is only
to be restrained to binding and losing (as you here define, what you mean by
judging in matters of faith) this is a manifest falsehood. True it is, that
binding and losing can not rightly be without judgment, nor without right
judgment (and therefore your Pope and you do err so often herein) both
binding that that should be losed, and losing that that should be bound,
errante claue, as ye term it, your key erring: and erring also not only in
things to be bound or losed, but in the power it self of binding and losing
too. Yet notwithstanding binding and losing, and the judgment requisite in
binding and losing, are two distinct and several things: and judgment reaches
further to other things also, even in the Priest himself, besides the Princes
judgment. And therefore as this definition of judgment in matters of faith,
is preposterously brought in (for ye ought before to have defined, what ye
meant by judgment) so is it false, for other matters of faith require
judgment besides binding and losing.

Now where you say, this power comes not of the principles of our corrupt
nature, but of the free mercy of God: you say truth: But that ye add, the
mercy of God is made manifest under the time of the new testament, partlye by
the law written, partly not written: is spoken ambiguously. For, Princes judged
in matters of faith.
that Princes judged in matters of faith was also made manifest in the old
Testament, but that Princes have power to bind and lose, we grant is neither
manifest nor covert, neither in the old or new. As for the new law to be
divided Law written and unwritten.
into written and not written: is another error and impertinent to this
question. Your unwritten law of the new Testament we stand not upon. But to
affirm that by neither way written or unwritten, no power is given to kings in
Ecclesiastical matters: that we deny, and your self have rather confuted it,
tha^ hither to confirmed it. But to confirm it, ye bring out this reason:

Neither were thene at the beginning any Christian Kings Saunders. 65.
to whom Christ should have committed any power, nor the Apostles gave any
rule, according where unto the kings should judge of Ecclesiastical causes.

That there were no Christian kings then, is not material. The Papists
objection, the^ were no Christian kings in the Apostles time.
For by this rule, they should be no defenders of the faith neither, because
Princes were not the^ defenders of it. But yt the Apostles gave no rule whereby
they should judge, is false. For whosoever should judge, should judge by gods
word, and this rule Christ and his Apostles gave in general. But that Princes
might judge, is both proved from the old Testament, and by the text that M.
Saunders himself cites out of the new, yea by that he says immediately.

For if any man say kings are appointed judges in a cause of Saunders. 65.
the faith, only because by Baptism they are made spiritual me^, who judge all
things, and the spirits do try those things that 1. Cor. 2.
are of God: this in deed I grant to be true in the kind and manner of the
private, but not of the public judgment. For it is another thing, when thou
art a member of the Catholic Church, nor preferrest thy self before thy
pastors, what is necessary for thee privately to Judge (and this the unction
teaches) and another thing to take upon thee power to teach others, and to
prescribe to thy Pastors what they ought to do or teach, when thou art not
called to the public ministry of the Church as Aaron was.

We know there is a difference between private and public 1. Cor. 2. The
Papists grant Princes private judgment.
Judgment. But that this place of S. Paul, The spiritual man Judges all
things, is only to be understood of prinate Judgment: is but the private
judgment of M. Saunders. But it is well that he grants private judgment to
every Christian man. Neither is it any reason then, it should be debarred irom
any Christian Princes, neither is it any reason that the Prince (although in
his private Judgment*) rightly judging a matter of faith to be true, should
not approve and set forth ye same publicly, by his princely authority. And
so his private Judgment, directs his public Judgment. For a Prince is not
only a private man, but a public man also, not that he may do all things of
his own private or public Judgment, nor take upon him the public
ministry of the pastor in teaching, being not called, as Aaron was: for this
is not ascribed to the Prince, because he gives a public Judgment in
respect he is a public person: but his Judgment is a public approbation
and establishing of How the clergy and how the prince doc puqlikly judge
that, that is already by others Judgment* judged, to whom the discussing
appertains. In which discussing, although the godly and learned clergy
(being called as Aaron was) have the greatest skill and charge of Judgment:
yet the lay men, such as are also learned and godly, have a public Judgment
too. Or else, why says Panormitane, we should more believe a lay man alleging
scripture, than the whole council besides? but now the truth being once
found out, by these learned Judgments: the Princes public Judgment, as it
called them together, as it gave them their charge, so it prescribes what the
pastors ought to do and teach therein, without any prejudice to the spiritual
pastors Judgment in the function of his doing and teaching.

Now having thus set down his own assertions, he will enter on the other
part, to confute our objections. And first he alleges this reason of the
protestants:

In all the old Testamente we see governors and Kings The protestants
objection.
both to have prescribed to the priests what they ought to do in
ecclesiastical matters, and also to have removed them from the ministry that
have negligently done their duty.

To this obiecton M. Saunders answer is this, that this The answer of the
Papists.
reason holds not from the old Testament to the new.

If this came so to pass in the old Testament (says he) yet no reason should
compel, that the same should be so in the new Testament, since the reason of the
eccl. government is changed.

And are you changed too M. Saunders, that said before and after say, and make
all your book of it, that ye ecclesiastical kind of government has been
always one, and that is, a vi^ble Monarchy, even from Adam to Pope Pius* 5.
and said, that if the government be changed, the Church must needs be
changed t^o: and made the government of the old Testament, to be a figure of
ye new. But now that you are beaten with your own arguments, you say they hold
not by reason the ecclesiastical government is changed. But I see Master
Sau^ders you would deal with us, as the rich man dealt with his poor
neighbor, When ye poor man complained saying, I beseech your worship be good
unto me, for my Cow has goared your Bull. What has he? (quoth the rich man)
M. Saunders answers as the rich man did to the poor man the case is altered.
I tell thee plain thou shall pay for him then. I cry you mercy sir (quoth the
poor man) I should have said, your bull has goared my cow, tushe quoth the
rich man, the case is altered, that it is another matter. And so I perceive M.
Sau^ders it is with you, when the Priest is said to have any authority in the
old Testament, mark that (say you) that makes for us, and why so? because ye
old Testament is a figure of the new, ye government (and ye mark it) was for
the priest, but ye government must not alter, the states must be a like, and
all this gear. But now sir it is proved the kings government was above the
priests. Is it so? say you, that is another manner of matter, tush, the^ the
case is altered. If this came to pass in the old Testament, yet no reason
should compel that the same should be so in the new Testament, fith the
reason of the ecclesiastical government is changed. But as the proverb
says, ye case is altered, but ye matter is where it was. What a mockery is
this in so weighty and plain a matter? But let us hear your reasons Master
Saunders.

Nor without cause (say you) for the Synagog of the Jews, Sand. page 66.
although it contained in it some true Israelits and just me^, yet both it was,
and was called a earthly rather tha^ a heavenly kingdom in so much that
Augustine doubts whether in the old Testament the kingdom of heaven be ever
named or no, much less that it is promised for reward. For those things that
were done did signify in deed divine things (and so the law it self was also
spiritual) but the things themselves were not in themselves so 2. Cor. 3.
divine as our things are, in so much that the Apostle teaches, that the
glory of the Synagoge was no glory at all, in respect of the excellent glory
of that Ministry, which now is exercised in the Church by the Ministers of
the new Testament, not in the letter, but in the spirit. Therefore since the
people of God consists of a body and a soul or spirit, the carnal part
obtained the principality in the old people, and was Exo. 19. and. 20 Hebre.
12.
ordained to signify spiritual things. VVhervpo^, as mount Synai, the kindled
fire, the whirlewind, the darkness, the storm, and sound of the trumpet, and
voice of the words, was only of the earth and carnal: so now all things are
spiritual and internal. There reigned the servile fear of God, and the
bodily sword: but here is most dear love, and the spiritual sword: they
abuse therefore the holy Scriptures, that for those things that were done of the
Kings in the old Testamente: think now also that the kingdom of heaven
(which is the Church) should be subject to earthly kings.

This answer why the government is changed, is a depressing The comparison
between the state of government in the old Testament and the new.
of their estate in comparion of ours: that theirs was more earthly, and ours
more spiritual which, as in part we deny not, and yet repute not theirs so
grossly as here he makes it: yet is this comparison plainly wrested, to
infer alteration of government thereupon, from the Princes over the Priests
then, to the Priests over the Princes now. For this alteration makes the
old, not to prefigure the new: but to destroy it, as no comparison but a
clean contrariety. But the true comparison being such, as the one estate
prefigured the other: the excellency is in the difference of this above that,
retaining still the same estate of government, so that, if those godly Princes,
did so well order their government in those causes, that in comparison were
but earthly, and not so divine as ours: then much more should our Christian
Princes, order their government better, in much more excellent ecclesiastical
matters. And thus, both the figure and the comparison holds.

But M. Saunders turns all, (as though the King and the Priest were compared
together) that the kings government The earthly Princes in the old law, were
more spiritual than the spiritu al priests now.
was but earthly then, and the priests government now is spiritual. Whereas
the comparison is of ye things governed, and not of the governors. And yet to
compare those with these governors, those earthly Princes were not so little
spiritual then, but these spiritual Priests are ten times more earthly,
gross, and carnal now.

What S. Augustine douteth I remember not, but we The godly Princes then hoped
for the kingdom of heaven, so well as any priest now.
without doubting know now, that the kingdom of heaven was promised then to
them, so well as now to us, and they without doubting hoped for it, and
undoubtedly did receive it, and do enjoy it.

The comparison of glory that Saint Paul makes, that theirs was nothing to
ours, is true But he speaks not thereof, comparing visible glories, the one
with the other, S. Paul's comparison between their outward glory and ou^
inward glory.
such as the ministry of the Popish Church settes for the it self withal:
For in such outward glory, the old Law passed the new, the Pharisees passed
Christ, the Heatheus passed the Christians, both in the Apostles time, and
long while after, till the glorious ministry of the Pope has far excelled
them all. The examples of the glory and terror in Mount Synai, of the servile
fear, of the bodily sword, are iumbled together disorderly, and are compared
to spiritual resemblances or contraries, in the Gospel. But as they take not
away the Christian Magistrates bodily sword nor glory, so meddle they not with
alteration of Princes government over Ministers in causes ecclesiastical, and
therefore are mere impertinent. But if all these shifts will not serve, then
says M. Saunders, see the inconveniences.

Otherwise if the state of the old kings shall be drawn to 1. page 66.
the time of the new Testament, shall not the state of the Bishops of the
Leuiticall tribe, by the same reason be drawn Number. 3.
to our time also? let there be therefore one tribe appointed to the outward
Priesthood, let there be one Temple in the M. Saunders ob^ction, ^f the
ceremonial law be alte^ed, why could not the civil government be alte^ed
also.
world, let there be but one Bishop, and let blood sacrifices be restored. But
if thou confes^est these things are made void, wherefore grauntest thou not
also, that those things are void that kings have done about divine matters*
are only the doings of kings eternal, nor could they be changed, so far as
pertained to the disposing of holy things?

What could or what could not be done (M. Saunders) we stand not upon, but
what is, or what is not done, is the question And that the state of the civil
government is not altered, your sel^ have often granted, that the government
still was one, that the one was a figure of the other, that Christ took not
away, nor diminished the Princes authority. As for the Leuiticall Law of the
Priests, the scripture is plain in many places, that it is clean dissolved,
you cannot therefore make these alike, except you will become a Jew. And so it
seems by this your wicked reason, you had rather renounce the Priesthood and
sacrifice of Christ, and bring M. Saunders had rather renounce the Priesthood
and death of Christ than acknowledge the Prin ces supremacy
in again the priesthood and sacrifice of the old law, than you would give
Princes authority over Priests in the new law. But now that M. Sanders has
thus answered the Protestants argument, from the government in the old law,
by saying the case is altered, and the government changed: he preuenteth the
Protestan^s reply, and sets down an other objection in their name.

If those things that were done in the old law, are not to be The Protestants
objection Sand. page 66.
drawn to the time of the new Testament, wherefore flee the Papists for the
primacie of the B. of Rome, to the example of one Leuiticall Bishop: and also
for the outward sacrifice, M Saunders terms himself and his side, Papists.
to the old sacrifices.

You put our objection amiss M. San. For although it be true that you Papists
(as you term your self) do flee to ye examples of ye Leuiticall Bishops and
sacrifices, for your Pope and Mass: M. Saunders reports our objection amiss.
yet do not we in such an indefinite generality, draw these things that were
done in the old law, in the time of the new Testament. But restrain our selves
to the present matter, and bring examples thereof, out of the old Testament, to
prove ye like authority in the time of the new. And thiss. Aug. does, and your
self do the same, and it is not derogatorie to the office of Christ, as are the
other examples that you do stee unto. Neither do we make our objection so, as
allowing it to be lauful for you to flee to ye one: and why may not we likewise
allege ye other? for your refuge is altogether unlawful. As for our objection
we make it thus: that if you make exception against our examples of Princes,
because they were so in ye old law, and are not dissolved in the new: with what
face can you bring examples for your Pope and your Mass out of ye old law,
which for the points of external sacrificing priesthood, and external
sacrifices, is clean abrogated? and thus the Protestants objection is good.
But let us now see, what you answer there unto.

What soever (say you) was excellent and perfect in the old The Papists
answer. Sand. 66.
law, that worthily we grant, ought to be much more in the church of God. For
the state of the church is much more tha^ the state of the Synagog. But
externally to sacrifice unto god is a perfect thing, and therefore it was not
only received in Moses law, but also in the law of nature being better. And
that the people of God should be governed under one Bishop, is a point of
perfection, for so both controversies were ended, and peace was conserved in
the people of God. But the manner of the sacrifices, by the blood of beasts and
external fire, was imperfect those things therefore being rejected that were of
imperfection, we say well, that those things are to be retained which in
times past belonged to perfection, not indede those in the same kind and
order, but in a higher.

The argument is thus: What soever in the old law was perfect, ought to be
retained. etc. But the external sacrifice, and but one B. to govern, was
perfect, Ergo, external sacrifice and one B. to govern, is to be retained.

Here M. Saunders, first we deny the mayor, for neither The continuance of
perfect things. Sa^d. page 65.
every thing, although it were then more perfect, did still abide or is yet to
be retained: neither your own former sayings agree here unto. You said
erewhile, the state before the kings wae more perfect, and yet that state
abode not then, nor holds now. And even here in this argument, you call the
state before Moses Law, a state of a better nature, nevertheless that state
aboade not still, nor abides now: and ye know that the Judicial law of the
Jews, if they had yet a polytike government, might still remain among them.
But the Leuiticall and ceremonial law, might in no wise remain among them.
And yet I am sure you will not say, the Judicial law was the more perfect,
and better than the Ceremonial was. Your rule therefore that you build upon,
is not so perfect and general as you make it.

To the minor likewise we deny it, which consistes in ^. The outward
sacrifices in the old law no perfect thing.
points the one, for that which you make perfect, the other imperfect. You
make perfect the outward Sacrifice, and the government of one Leuiticall
Bishop. But neither of these were perfect, as S. Paul at large to the Hebrews
proves. Yea, yourselfe M. Saunders do prove it, and confute your self. The
outvvarde sacrifice (say you) was a perfect thing, and yet before you called
outvvarde things earthly, carnal, corporal, and imperfect, and perfect
things, only inward and spiritual: and that the state of the old law
should be changed, because all things were outvvarde and earthly with them,
and so they were imperfect. But you think to excuse the master with this
shift, not that the sacrifices were imperfect but the manner of sacrificing
was imperfect, because they were done by the blood of beasts, and by
outward fire. Why M. Saunders, what is this outward manner of sacrificing,
but the outward sacrificing it self? except you mean the matter sacrificed,
which was much more imperfect, so that neither in manner nor matter it was
perfect. But all their outward sacrifices were by outward shedding of
blood, and burning with outward fire: No perfection then consisted in those
outward sacrifices. And therefore God oftentimes rejects them, and preferred
obedience and the inward sacrifice of the heart before them, even in that time
that God appointed them to be used.

Well, say you, yet the people to be governed by one Bishop was a point of
perfection. The goue^a^ce of one B in the old law no per sect thing.


And why dare you not say it was perfection, you should prove this, yt it was
a perfect thing. But then s. Paul would soon prove you a liar. Yea, you would
prove your self a Jew, and one that denies the perfection of Christ's
Byshoprike.

But say you: the succession of Bishops according to flesh and blood was
imperfect.

And nothing else imperfect M. Saunders? if you had more perfectly marked S.
Paul, you should have found their Byshoprike altogether imperfect, and
therefore taken altogether away.

But yet say you: Those things therefore of imperfection being cast away, we
say well that these things are to be retained, which in times past belonged to
perfection, not those things in the same kind and order, but in a higher
sort. How the moral law remains.


We grant you this M. Saunders, in respect of the moral law, which
belonging to perfection (although man could not by reason of his imperfection
atteine thereto) remains still the same thing, in an other kind of order. And
How one B. one sacrifice still rema^eth.
if ye talk also of the high Byshoprike referred to Christ: one bishoprik
likewise remains in a higher kind of order, neither so is sacrifice taken
away. For, as we have one Priest for ever which is Christ: so we have one
propitiatory sacrifice, which is the death of Christ. But if you say this is
not still done outwardly as it had wont to be: I answer it need not, because
it was effectual once for ever, which argues the perfection of it, for to be
done daily argues Hebr. 9.
imperfection: neither lies the perfection and excellency in the
outvvardnesse, but as your self before and after confess, the more spiritual,
the more excellent: but spiritual sacrifices we have, and therefore the other
outvvarde of the Jews are gone, as those that were imperfect, and with the
outward sacrifices, is the outward priesthood gone also. But still blundring
on with your false principles, you go forward, to prove that you have taken
the best, and left the wor^ in the priesthood and sacrifices of the Jews:
saying,

For the high B. in the state of the Gospel, is not borne after Sand. 66.
the propagation of the flesh, but is elected according to the gifts of
spiritual grace. And our sacrifices consist not in shedding of the blood of
beasts, but in remembering the blood of the immaculate Lamb, and in daily
setting forth after an unbloody manner, the substance of the Lamb. And so
that which was spiritual and perfect in the law, we have not lost* but that
which was imperfect and carnal we have not kept.

You coin Maximies M. Sanders, and speak as one the might keep and leave
what he list, standing still on you^ former presupposall, that to have one
visible Bishop ouerall Gods people, is a point of perfection, and to have
outward sacrifices, is also a point of perfection. But neither of these i^ yet
proved, which should have first been done, and then y^ might have entered your
comparison, whether those or the^ were better. You prefer your Pope, because
he has (...) The election of the Pope.
high Byshoprike (as you call it) not by birth, but by election, according to
the gifts of spiritual grace: but as the election of the Pope very often
has fallen out with so small gifts of spiritual grace, yt al y^ grace was
either in the gifts of brybi^ money, of canuased factions, or of giving cuf^es
and dealing of hard blows for it: so the obtaining the high Byshoprike of
the Jews that descended by birth, was many^ times far the better. As for
sacrifices, where you say, Shedding blood in safices.
yours consist not in shedding the blood of beasts, wha^ avails it, having
imbrued your mouths with the bloud^ of Christ? for if as you pretend you
drink his very blood, ^owe are you not bloudsuckers, and your sacrifice
worsse than was the Jews. Besides the cruel sacrifices that you daily make,
in shedding the blood of men and Saints of John. 8.
God, a far worsse sacrifice than shedding the blood of beasts. For, of
that, for the time, God was the appointer, but of this the Devil is the
author, that was an homicide from the beginning.

But you say your sacrifice of Christ is not bloody. If Unbloody s^ c^fice.
it be of blood, how is it not bloody? if it be not bloody, ^owe is it of
blood? It is (say you) in a remembrance of the ^mmaculate Lamb. Would you
stand to this, Master Saunders, then indeed it were not bloody, for the
remem^rance of blood is not blood it self. But straight ways you ^onfute your
self, and come in with setting forth the substance of the Lamb. Whereas
Christ said not, his Dis^iples Remembrance and subst^ o^ the bl^ of the ^be.
should set forth his substance, but they should ^et forth his death. But
the death of Christ is one thing, and the substance of Christ another thing.
Neither does Christ make the Sacrament of his body, a sacrifice of his
^odie, much less makes he two sacrifices of himself, the Christ mad^ not
two sacrifices of himself.
^ne done once for all, the other daily done: the one for himself to exhibit,
the other for them to exhibit: the ^ne bloody, the other unbloody. These are
the sacrifices of ^our Popes making, profaning and deroga^ing from the
sa^ifice of Jesus Christ, and therefore worsse than the Jews ^crifices, that
were the figure of it, and for the time were ^ood. Now such as is your
sacrifice, such must needs your ^crificing priesthood be. You have not
therefore as you ^ake, for your sacrifice and Priesthood, retained the bet^r,
but have devised the worsse, and such as are stark ^aught.

As for the other part of the minor, for the estate of Princes The perfection
and imperfecti on of the P^n ces estate.
(...) ^aue been imperfecte, and therefore abolished: you labor (...) prove two
ways. The one admitting the Prince (...) have been greater than the Priest,
in procuring ecclesiastical matters, what a great imperfection, for diuer^
causes it had been: the other by flat denial, that the Princes were the
greater, in administering those things that pertained to ec^l. matters.

These are subtle speeches, M. Saunders, and may be doubtfully understood.
As though we meant, the Prince were a more principal executer or doer of those
things. Whereas we plainly affirm that in the Ministerial procuration, the
Priest was the highest. But in respect of ouerseeing that even the highest
Priest should do his duty: therein we say, the Prince was greater than he.
And that is proved by the first objection, that your self, M. Saunders,
propounde of the Protes^ntes: neither do you deny the truth of the objection,
but shake it of, in saying, the government now is changed, and that it was
then imperfect. Else why do you accuse it of imperfection, if it were then as
you would have it now, the Priest to be greater than the Prince? and so in
chalenging it of imperfection, you grant the thing. Neither do we deny that ye
state of those Princes, was not in all things perfect. (Although your self
have granted The state of the Prince in the old law, better than the state
of the Priesthood.
the state of a Monarchy to be a perfect state) but yet the state thereof was
in his kind more perfect than was the Priesthood: both because it was over
the Priesthood, as is objected, and you have granted, and because that the
Princes estate, although it be taken from Jews, yet it remains still entier
with us, which the Priesthood does not, nor can do. But let us see your
Reasons.

First esaias you, because Priesthood was more ancient than the kingly right.
For the receiving of Priests was partly Sand. page 67.
received from the beginning, under the law natural, yea, before the floude,
when as yet there were no kings: partly it had the superiority certain ages
after Moses, according to the law given by him, when as yet among Gods people
no king was extant, but how much more ancient a thing is in religion, it is
worthily counted so much more the worthier.

This argument stands on Antiquity, which being The validity and
inualiditie of the argum^t drawn from antiquity.
drawn from the word of God, and truly applied, makes a good argument. And
would to God you would always make gods word the ground of your Antiquity,
which would sone decipher many Popish errors, pretending great Antiquity, to
be but late vpstarts. But to reason from Antiquity, in things that are
antiquate and outgrowne, to retain them still being lawfully displaced: and
that more is, to reason from Antiquity to worthiness: may be an anciente,
but not ouerworthie reason. For, by this r^le, an old cast coat may be
better than a new. And although you restrain your self unto antiquity in
Religion, what helps this? since the bloody sacrifice of a sheep, as
pleading Antiquity from Abel, might by this reason become a more worthy
worship of God, than Baptism or the Lords Supper. Yea circumcision and the
Passover should have been better Sacraments than ours, because they wore more
ancient. If you your self Master Saunders, had been ancient, many would
have thought you had doated, but now they will think you were to young a
divine when you made this reason of antiquity.

But let go your reason, is your matter true? is Priesthood of more
antiquity? you say it is even from the beginning under the law of nature.
Were it so M. Saunders, Sand. page 56. Whether priest hood or the Civil power
be more ancient.
said you not in the first Chap. of this second book, that the Civil power
sprang even of the law of nature also, whereby the father is superior to his
son, the uncle to the cousin, the senior to the Junior? is not this as
ancient as Priesthode yea we read of no creation of Priesthood so ancient.
But you say, there were no Kings, as though we contended on the name, were he
called King. Prince, Duke. etc* so he were a governor. As for ye governors, for
certain ages after Moses, and before the kings, trow you they were al
priests? Nay, you shall find but one priest among them all* And yet you carry
away the matter so smooth as though they were all priests and say, the
creation of priesthood according to the law of Moses. You mean I know the
common cited place for the Judges determination in litigious doubts, Deuteronomy. 17.
referring it only to the priest. But Moses there expressly Deuteronomy. 17.
names the Judge, besides the high priest. And to make you see how ye confute
your own error, in taking this judge to have only or chiefly been the high
priest mark your own saying: that the state of government from Moses to the
kings, was according to Moses law. But all that while, of so many Judges
there was but one priest, therefore either it was not according to Moses law,
or else Moses law meant not only nor chiefly the Priests. And trow you,
Moses law was broken of discerning difficulties all this while, and after the
kings began to govern? I think you dare not say it was, nor accuse for ye
breach of Moses law, so many godly Princes. If not, then the discerning of
those difficulties, is impertinently alleged against the Princes superiority.
And thus not only your reason from Antiquity, ^ut also your matter for
antiquity, against the state of Princes, fails. Now to your other reasons.

Moreover (say you) the Priesthood was altogether necessary, Sand page 67.
that the figure should at no time fail. Whereby we should be admonished of
Christ's eternal priesthood. When notwithstanding the same people of God might
so have wa^ted a king, that God complained that he himself was cast off, when
Samuel his Leuite being neglected, an earthly king was demanded.

Priesthood (you say) at no time could be spared, so well as The state of a
king as necessary as the state of a priest
a kings estate. And why so? because it prefigured and admonished Christ's
eternal priesthood. True in deed (Master Saunders) so it did. But was there
nothing to be prefigured and admonished concerning Christ, but his eternal
Priesthood? Kingdom pre figured in Christ so well as priesthood.
has he not an eternal kingdom too? or was not it (...) necessary to be
prefigured and admonished, as his priesthood So that by this rule, Kings, or
(that is all one in effect wi^e kings) Princes over gods people were even as
necessary as priests.

But say you gods people might so well have wanted kings, Sand. page 67.
that God complained he was cast off, when (Samuel his leuite neglected) an
earthly king was demanded.

Here is nothing left out ye may seem to make for the defacing A Civil governor
never wanted no more than ^ priest.
of the state of kings. And yet that which he brings against it (as is
already showed) does the more commend the state thereof, and although they
might have wanted the state of a king yet could they never want the state of a
Civil governor, no more than they could have wanted priesthood. Howbeit, we
say not, they might have wanted priesthood or did want it. For they always had
priests among them, good or bad. But they always had not priests their
governors, but very seldom, and that extraordinarily, till the Priest Hircanus
was king and priest together.

Besides this (says M. Saunders) the king was granted of Sand page 67. 1.
Reg. 8.
God, at the peoples petition, to go out before the people to war, but not
to administer ecclesiastical matters, for God had provided for them already
by his levites and priests.

Is there nothing may be reckoned up (M. Saunders) besides The kings office
stretches further than in going out to war.
these twain, going out to war before the people, and administering
ecclesiastical matters? in deed these two are not very agreeable, although
your Popes and Prelates iumble them together. As for the administering eccl.
matters, was and is the Priests office, not the Princes. But besides this,
there are many more things appointed to the Prince, than to go out before the
people to war. For if there were no more, what should he do at home in time
of peace? break peace, and still go out to war? Ha M. Saunders there are
other things than warfare, for a Prince in peace to look unto, and ye could hit
them.

Moreover (says he) the Jews might ascribe to the power Sand. page 67.
of the king, the division of the people, the Apostacy of the kingdom of
Samaria, and the Captivity of Babylon. Whereupon they being returned from the
captivity, did not again chose unto them a king, that should be counted
greater than the Bishop, but a Captain, that should rule no less in
profane matters, than in holy things the Bishop should be are the
principality.

To ascribe the division of the people, the Apostacy of Samaria, The events of
evil kings are not to be ascribed to the estate of the kingly power.
and the Captivity of Babylon, to the kingly power: if it be not of wilful
malice, is of great lack either of skill or consideration, and is a fallacion
ab accidenti. By the like reason, we might accuse the Jews priesthood, because
some of them were loyterers, some of them Idolaters, some of them ambitious,
yea the most of them, in Christ's time and his Apostles, the extremest enemies
of the Gospel. What: shall There have been as evil priests as kings and done
as much mischef.
we ascribe all this to the priesthood? No, nor to any part thereof, but to the
naughtiness of the Priests that abused their priesthood, even as much, if not
much more than did those kings abuse their kingly power. The kingdom was
lightly never worse governed, tha^ when Helie being a Priest had the governance
of it. And although Samuel himself were good and holy, yet his sons were
wicked whom he made governors. But in the stock of the Machabees, when the
priests ruled all, or the most, till the approaching of Jesus Christ, and so
till the dissolution of that state, what a number of wicked Imps were there?
you can scarce fet the like paterns, except you rake hell, or search the Popes
bedroll and his Cardinals, for wicked government.

But (says M. Saunders) the Jews after their ret^re Sand. page 67. The king
greter tha^ the Bishop before the captivity of Babilo^ by M. Sau. (...). Why
the (...) h^d no kings after their captivity.
from Captivity, did no more chose a king that should be counted greater than
the Bishop. Ha, go to then (M. Sau^ders) the king was counted greater than the
Bishop before their Captivity. Yea but say you, they chose no more kings ofter
their return. As though (M. Saunders) after their return, the matter lay in
them, to have a king or no, and not rather in these kings that had subdued
them: who although they appointed or suffered petit rulers over them, yet
would they not suffer them to have a king. But while they had kings, we reason
of those kings authority. But what reason have you else, for this is a very
slender one.

But this (say you) in this kind, I will make my principal Sand. page 67.
reason, that Christ when he was in this world, and fulfilled the whole law
and all righteousness, yet notwithstanding he would in things
ecclesiastical, only that the Priest, and by no means that the earthly king
should govern.

This were a principal reason in deed, if you could prove this (M. Saunders)
but as yet you have not proved it, and I think it will be harder than you
ween, for you to do. Now to prove it, you reason thus:

For he openly refused to administer an earthly kingdom, Sand. page 67.
and therefore fled when he saw the people go about to make him a king. And he
denied that he was ordained to be a deuider between the brethren. But if so be
that after the perfect reason and mind of Moses law, it had at least been
comely, either the Church or the Bishop to be governed of an earthly King,
Christ would not have left that thing unfulfilled. For it was no hard matter
for him to have administered a earthly kingdom for some very little time, the
which when he did not, neither yet omitted he any thing that can justly be
desired to the perfect government of his Church: It has never been at any
time, or yet is, of any perfection, that an earthly king should arrogate to
him self any power in ecclesiastical matters, besides this, that with his
sword he should defend and fight for that which is defined by the Priest*
sentences.

And is this necessary in the Church (M. Saunders) that M. Saund. reason from
the personal fact of Christ, that he never took upon him to be a temporal
king.
the Prince may do thus much with his sword? But I pray you where did Christ
thus much, as to fight for the Priests decrees with a sword? If your reason
be good you must show this, or else, why reason you from the factes of
Christ, while he was here on earth? if you can show, as you promised, that
Christ would that the Priest, and by no means the prince should govern in
eccl. matters: this were to the purpose. But this you show not, but would
windelace it in with a bought, that if Christ would have had Princes govern in
ecclesiastical matters, he would have been a Prince him self, but he would
never be a Prince, and yet if he had would, he might: therefore he would not
have Princes meddle in matters of his Church, sith he would not me^le in
matters pertaining to their government. If this were a good reason, I might
reuerse it thus, that sith be meddled in their matters, when he had tribute to
be paid Math. 22. Math. 10. Luc 13. John. 19.
to Caesar, when he bad his Disciples not fear them that kill the body, when he
called Herod Fox, when he told Pilate he had no power but that was given him
from above: therefore they again might meddle in his matters, because he
meddled in theirs. This is as good a reason as yours. But ye say, Christ took
not a kingdom upon him, nor would divide lands, and yet he took upon him all
things necessary for his Churches government: what should you conclude
hereon? Ergo, the Princes government is not necessary in Church causes? is
this the direct conclusion? Nay M. Saund. either the conclusion takes away the
Princes government from the Church of Christ, or else (which it does in deed)
it hitteth your Pope, if you mark it well, who pretending to follow Christ,
takes an earthly kingdom upon him, and deuideth lands, which Christ refused
to do. The argument is thus: Christ did all that was necessary, but Christ did
not take upon him a kingdom: Ergo, he thought it not necessary. This is flat
against the Pope, but nothing against christian Princes. The co^clusio^ is
good, for it was not necessary for Christ in his person, and yet for christian
Princes it might well be necessary. It is necessary for christian Princes (as
your self confess) to use the temporal sword, in the churches defense, and
yet Christ him self did never use it. Except you will say, he used it after a
sort, when with a material whip and outward violence, he drove the buyers and
sellers out of the temple. But John. ^.
then I reply, that herein he exercised for the while, eue^ the office of a
Magistrate, and showed not only his own zeal and power of his kingdom, but
also a pattern to al Magistrates and Princes, with what zeal and power they
sh^ld exercise their authority, in reforming abuses in ye church of God.
Although Christ him self did not personally handle the sword, as they
personally may do Neither yet did Christ all those things, that his ministers
did and ought to do. It is necessary for the ministers to baptize, and yet
Christ him self (that we read of did never baptize any, he could have don it,
if he had thought it necessary. What? shall we say with M. Sand he did al yt was
necessary, but he did not baptize, Ergo, to baptize is not necessary? This
therefore is a wrong principle, that Christ must have done every thing
personally him self, that is necessary to be done in his Church. True it is,
that if Christ neither did it, nor taught it to be done, by him self, nor by
his Apostles, but would the contrary, as M. Sand says: then the argument were
good, and so it confuteth a number of Popish traditions, that were neither done
nor taught by Christ nor his Apostles, but rather yt contrary. But as for this
government of Princes (as M. Sanders him self confesses) was practiced in the
old law, which law gave the Prince his charge therein. And Christ testi^eth,
yt he came not to break Math. ^. Christ brake not the law of obedience too
Princes, but fulfilled it, though he him self would b^ ^o external Prince.
the law, but to fulfill it. And although he became not a Prince him self
(which might have seemed to have made ^or the Popes purpose) but rather
condemns it in his ministers: yet both he him self and his Apostles, obeyed
the Prince then ruling, which now the Pope denies statly to do.

But ye say, Christ and his Apostles obeyed them not in eccl. matters. Neither
was it reason, M. San. both because Christ him self was the law maker, and his
Apostles were the first teachers of it, and Princes then were Infidels. But to
reason now from the like state in ye princes that now are christia^^, and to
give in all things like authority to Bishops and pa^ors with Christ and his
Apostles, is as far from reason on the other side. Neither yet do we debar
from Bishops and Pastors that superiority over Princes, that is given by
Christ and his Apostles to them and their successors, of the administration
of spiritual and ecclesiastical things: neither do we (as M. Saunders says)
give the government We give not the government of the Church to an earthly
prince. Sand. page 80.
of the Church of Christ to an earthly Prince. For both the Prince is
Christian, and not earthly in this respect, as M. Saunders him self
confesses: neither bathe he the government of the Church, which is dispersed
in many kingdoms, but is a governor of a part thereof, or of some particular
Church.

Now when M. Saunders has thus proved (as he thinks) the imperfection of
the old law, saying: And thu^ Sa^d. page 67.
should these things be, if in the old time the kings of the Jews had
exercised any chief power in ecclesiastical matters and over the Bishops. He
turns him self on the other side, to the flat denial of this, which in the
answer to our first objection he flatly granted, and fled then to thy^
shifte, that the case was altered.

But now (says he) neither is it true, that the Kings of Sand. page 67.
the Jews were counted greater than the Priests of the Leuiticall kind, in
administering those things that pertayned to ecclesiastical matters: which by
piece meal I will not be gree^ed to show.

It will not grieve you to tell a lie, M. Saunders, but to tell the truth it
would be a grief unto you. Where did we say, that the Kings of the Jews were
counted greater than the Priests, in administering those things that pertayned
to ecclesiastical matters? But go too, let us see what peecemeale proves you
bring.

And first (say you) Moses commanded, that after Sand page 67.
the King was set in the seat of his kingdom, he should write out for
him self in a volume another cop^e of this law* taking the copy of the
Priests of the ^euiticall Tribe. But if not only other, but the king also him
self must go to the Priests for writing out of the law, how was the king the
prince in interpreting the law, the copy whereof he was compelled to crave of
other? was he not herein admonished, that he should remember that the priests
were his superiors in those things that pertayned to the law? for as every
Magistrate craving the sword of the king, and receiving it, does in so doing
declare the king in the right of the sword, to be greater than him self: after
the same sort is it, when the king receives of the Pristes the copy of the
divine law.

Is this the copy of your piece meal proves M. Sand? The taking of the copy
of Gods lavv^ ^o^ the Priests, infers not the Priests to be greater in
government. Supra. pa. 161.
he that should take a copy of your arguments might per haps have need, but
God wot should find full slender stuff in them. This argument is copied out
of Stapleton, and your other collectors, and is already answered. Which if it
were good, because the Prince takes the copy of the law from the Priest,
therefore in the government of matters pertaining to the law, the Priest is
above the Prince: then is the Register above the Chauncelor and the Bishop,
then is the Clarke above the Steward, and the Prince, because he has the
keeping of the records. And this is a more like example than that you bring
in, of a Magistrate craving and receiving the sword of the king: for in this
example the King has not only the keeping of the sword, but all the
authority of and lawful exercise of the sword under God, depends on him,
and such as he will give it unto. Wherefore he acknowleageth rightly the King
to be his greater. But in the law of God, where the kings government is
appointed to him, and by that appointment of God, he has interest in matters
of the law of God, by his kingly office, and therefore must have the law of
God about him, to direct his giuerment: and has not this interest and
authorie given him of the Priest, as the subject has the authority and
exercise of the sword given him of the king: does this argue a like, that the
Priest is superior, because he must have the keeping of the law, and the
king, that he may be sure he has a true copy of Gods law, must have it of
the Priest? Does the keeping argue the greater authority* The king must have
ye crown of the keeper of the crown, and the seal of the keeper of the
seal, is the keeper therefore the greater? Nay it rather argues (although in
looking too, that those things be well kept, and truly declared, they have a
more especial charge in their offices) yet are they rather inferiors, in that
they have (for the kings behoof) the keeping and delivery of them. And so the
priest has an especial charge of keeping and delivering to the Prince the
law of God, because of his especial vocation in the study, profession, and
administration of it. Which argues more cunning and learning, of duty to be
looked for at his hands, than at the Princes. And therefore we ascribe not,
(as you say) greater principality to Princes in the interpreting of the law
of God. Princes commit that, to the interpreters. But to the Prince is
committed a superior charge of governing all persons, to ouersee that the law
of God be rightly interpreted and administered. And for this cause the Prince
ought to have the copy of the law, not him self to interpret it, and
whereto then? to lie idly by him? no, to govern him self and all his
subjects by the prescription of it.

After this he alleges the examples of Moses, Samuel, Iosue, David,
Solomon, Constantius, and Theodosius. In Moses and Samuel, he has nothing
that is not common. To Iosue, David, and Solomon, he uses Stapletons answers,
and there is answered. The examples of Constantius and Theodosius, are somewhat
already answered, and shall be further God willing, when we come to the
practice. And likewise to the Councels that he cites.

The argument of the fourth Chapter. That Christian Princes may be deposed from
their estates by the Bishops, and their kingdoms given to other, when their
government hurts the truth of the faith and the souls health whereto they
are ordained.
IN this. 4 Chapter M. Sau^ders keeps no perfect method, and therefore we must
follow him as he proceeds. First he makes two kinds of men the earthly man,
and the heavenly Sand. page 77.
man, and so likewise two kingdoms the one earthly the other heavenly. The
earthly kingdom choseth their king by human Two kind of kings and kingdoms.
consent as Nimrod. etc. Of the heavenly kingdom that Christ has in the earth,
Christ is the king. Who although by the worthiness of his nature, he be king
of all men, yet is he called only the king of the faithful. Who coming into
the world, as he has not taken away the former nature of man but renewed it, so
has he not destroyed the earthly kingdom, but amended it. Here upon he
concludes, that earthly kings may be made Citizens of gods Church, and use all
their old right and most free government, in all those causes that di^ishe
not the faith and Religion of Christ. They may make whom they will fit Civil
magistrates. They may appoint at their pleasure lawful punishments for
malefactors, and freely do al other thing, that by the law Natural, National,
Civil, or M^nicipall shall be allowed.

To all this, as we agree with M. Saunders: (and therefore How f^rre M. (...)
gives (...) most free principa^.
I gather b^t a brief co^t^ct thereof) so let this by the way be noted, yt he
gives Princes most free Principaliue, (...) those causes that (...) not the
faith and Religion of Christ. But to place good Bishops and pastors in gods
Church, to remove evil Bishops and pastors from gods Church, ^o pu^ Idolatry
out of gods Gods Church, to set forth such (...) service as is to edify gods
church, to command ye word of God to be read in the vulgar tongue, to reform
Ecclesiastical abuses, to punish whordoms, to allow (as honorable) matrimony
in all men, to call councels, to command the Sacraments to be used as Christ
ordained the^, to ouersee al estates and degrees of persons in gods Church to
do in all things to the glory of God, to the public preservation of the
Church, and to the faithful administration of their particular callings, does
not diminishe the faith and Religion of Christ: Therefore Christian Princes have
most free principality, yt is to say supreme government, in all these eccl. so
well as in civil causes.

Now yt he has granted to Princes thus much, which co^prehendeth all the
question: he declares on the other side, what he exempteth from the Bishops:
but so subtily, that under pretense of debarring them, from having authority
in those things that he ascribes to the Princes principality, he both
reuoketh his former grant to Princes, and conueyeth all those things unto the
Bishops.

Neither Pastors of the Church (says he) do intermeddle Sand. page 77.
their authority in those things, save now and then to admonish them and
give the^ faithful counsel, neither do we defend, all dominions and
kingdoms, to be given by gods law every where and in all things, to be
subject to the pastors of the Church, but in those causes only which would
hinder the faith and Christian salvation, except they were partly forbidden, as
divorces, vsuries, and such other sins, which the nations Math. 5. Luke. 6.
Math. 25. Esai. 60. Psalm. 2.
commit without punishment: partly commanded, as giving of alms, the
defense of neighbors and chiefly of the poor, the fortifying of the Church of
Christ, and Christian Religion, and to conclude, all other things which the
law of God commands and prescribes as necessary to salvation.

In these words Master Saunders speaks clean contraries, M. Sand. spceketh
contraries.
the Princes have the most free principality, in all causes that diminishe
not the faith and Religion of Christ, and the Bishops do only admonish and
give council: and yet he ascribes all to the Bishops, both to punish all that
would hinder the faith, and Christian salvation and to fortify all that would
further it. What is not here again given to the Bishops, and what is not here
again taken from the Princes, yea their Kingdoms and all in some places, and
nothing left for Princes? for what else means he by this? we defend not all
dominions and kingdoms to be given by M. Sand. makes some king domes subject
to Bishops in all things.
gods law every where and in all things to be subject to the pastors of the
Church. As who should say some are subject to them by the law of God, where the
law of God is flat to the contrary, that no kingdoms are subject unto them.
But as Master Saunders contrary to gods law makes some kingdoms subject in
all things unto Bishops, so makes he all kingdoms subject unto them, in
matters of divorces, vsuries, Divorces and vsuries.
and such other sins (says he) as the nations commit without punishment.
Which, as it is a sclaunder to Christian Princes, as mainteining such sins,
which rather they punish, and Popish Prelates both permit and commit without
punishment of them: so he ascribes these punishments to the Popish Prelates,
for nothing but for advantage, as also the gyuing of Alms, defense of
neighbors, and chiefly of the poor. As though that Princes did not, or
could not do these things, but the Priests, who by such fetches, gat all
things into their clutches.

Master Sau^ders having thus seemed at the first to yield unto Princes great
authority, and straight to take away all again from them, and give it unto
themselves, least Princes might worthily think themselves abused, he
mitigateth the matter with this reason.

Neither ought it seem strange to any man that kings in Sand. page 77.
these matters should obey Christ, for this stands the^ chiefly upon, since
otherwise they cannot get eternal life.

As though your Pope Master Stapleton and you his Obedience to Christ.
^riests were Christ. Good reason it is they should obey Christ, otherwise (as
you say most truly therein) they cannot get eternal life. But since you are
not Christ, this reason holds not. But you will say you be Christ's, and
represent Christ. Wo^ld to God you were M. Saunders and not rather ^tichristes.
For if you were Chrittes, you would o^ey your Prince. And not have the Prince
(in authority of government) obey you, whom you ought to obey, since a
Christian Prince is Christ's also, and in authority ^f government, immediately
to Christians represents Christ. Think you that Princes can not get eternal
life, except they obey your Pope? so you tell them in deed, and make man^e
Princes afraid thereof, by which means you have gotten their government from
the^. And thus pr^tending the name of Christ, you say:

VV^en therefore we say, that earthly kings ought to be under Sand. page 77.
Christ's ministers, we say only this, that they no otherwise can be saved,
neither received of Christian people to a kingdom, or ought to be suffered in
the administration of a kingdom, than i^ they both do and pretermit those
things, that the law of Christ commands to be done and pretermitted.

If you mean the obedience to the ministers of Christ, no further than this, to
do and (...) those things that ^he law of Christ commands to be done and
pretermitted: the^ were the controversy at an end, for this obedience was
never denied. But before you went fur^er, and would hau^ the Prince to do and
prete^ those things that the law of the Pope and his Priests would have done
and pretermitted. (...) you rep^e, they be (...) of Christ and their (...) is
the (...) of Christ this would be proved. M. Saunders, for it is (...) of the
chiefest points in controu^sie. As for Christ's law, we grant, that except
the Prince obey it, he can not be saved. But, that he which in any one point,
does any thing, which The do^ng of every offense is not the loss of the kings
king^me.
Christ's law commands not, or (...) any thing, that Christ's law
commands is not to be received (...) people to a kingdom or b^ing received,
ought not to be ^tred in the administration of a kingdom: is a perilou^
doctrine. For who should the be a king, or who should no^ be turned out of
his kingdom? For, who offends not herein (chiefly expounding the law of
Christ as your selves ^ed in what danger and thralo^me to you should kings
become? so that it were better be a beggar and beg his bread than be a
Christian king and rule and be ruled on this wise, if these your rules were
true. But now to help the matter you will expound what ye mean by the ^aw of
Christ.

But what the law of Christ is, and what it commands. Sand. page 77.
can no where better be known, than out of their mouth, to whom the savior
said: Go teach you all nations, and he that Math. 28. Luke. 10. 2. Cor. 5.
hereth you hereth me, he that dispiseth you dispiseth me. For there never want
in the Church, those that e^oy the legacy for Christ, God exhorting as it
were by them. For even as other men so well as earthly kings, are reconciled to
Christ by his ministers, and by Christ to God: so they ought not only to be
under God, as they were before, but also to Christ, yea and now to his
ministers too, for in vain does does he subject himself to Christ that
refuses to obey Christ's ministers.

This is true M. Saunders, in the true ministers of Christ, How Christ's
ministers are to be he^d and obeyed.
that the Prince ought to obey them in their ministry, even as dispensers of
the mysteries of Christ and as representers of Christ also. And true it is,
they can or ought best to tell what is the law of God. But yet are they not
so to be heard or obeyed, as they do not represent Christ, or tell their own
^awe for the law of Christ. Wherein the Christian Prince ^ath an oversight ever
them, and is again the chief mini^ter and representer of Christ, And as he
obeyed them in the ^ne, so must they obey him in the other, or else they
teach ^ot the law of Christ aright.

Moreover (says M. Saunders) it is not enough for a Chri^tian Sand. page 78.
king to do those things that private men are wont to do ^xcept also he do
those things that properly belong to the 1. Cor. 7.
^ffice and dig^e of a Prince. Every man ought to serve the Ephe. 4.
lord and walk worthily in that vocation, wherein he is called. ^rte thou
called in the state of Matrimony? serve God, not only as a man, but also as
an husband. Art thou called in the state of a king, thou must serve as thou art
a king, and not only as thou art a man. But the offices of kings are other,
and the offices of private me^ are other. VVhervpo^ says Augustine elega^tly:
The king serves otherwise because he is a man, and otherwise In Epist. 50.
because he is a king. Because he is a man, he serves him in living
faithfully. But because he is a king he serves with making (by convenient
force) laws, commau^ding just things and forbidding the contrary. Even as
Ezechias served, destroying 4. Reg. 18.
the Temples of Idols, and the high places that were builded contrary to the
commandments of God. Even as Josias served, 4. Reg. 22. ^ouae. 3.
he also doing the like things. Even as the king of the Ninevites served,
compelling all the city to appease the Lord. Even as Darius served, giving
the Idol to the power of Daniel Dan. 14. Dan. 3.
to break it, and casting his enemies to the Lions. Even as Nabuchodonozor
served, in forbidding by a terrible law, all men placed in his kingdom, from
blaspheming God. In this therefore kings do serve the Lord, in so much as they
be kings, when they do those things to serve him, which none can do but (...).

(...) this we grant you (M. Saunders) kings have another The peculiar service
of kings.
more excellent and peculiar service of God, in yt they be kings, than have
other private men. But as this makes nothing against our assertion, or ye
kings estate, but more commends it: so it both ouerturneth your principal
question, for ye kings authority in ec^l. matters, and co^futeth yt you have
said before, in defacing the kings estate, and also clean beats you from
that, which you drive your present drift unto, of deposing kings.

First, you said before, that kings in that they are kings govern Sand. page
62.
all me^ alike, so well Jews, Mores, and Tartars as Christians, and have as
equal government over ye one as the other. M. Saund. examples clean overthrow
him self.
Here you confess that kings, in that they are kings, have (...) especial
service of God, and you specify this their service (...) such examples, as
declare a far more excellent service, (...) is the government of Turks, of
Mores, and Tartars.

Secondly, this especial service, consisting in such things as these examples
contain, it argues the Princes service, not only to intermeddle in eccl.
matters, but to have the supreme government of them, and to have authority to
reform eccl. abuses, and to make Laws to prohibit things contrary to the
Law of God, and to command things commanded in Gods law, which before
you ascribed to Bishops, and took from kings.

Thirdly, if none can do these things but kings, how dare you take them from
kings, and kings from them? how dare you give them to Priests? how dare you
give Priests authority to depose kings? when rather hereby kings have
authority to depose priests, and none can do these things but kings, by this
your sentence cited out of Augustine.

These things (say you) thus ordered, it shall now be made Sand. 7^.
plain, with how great equity we defend, that Christian kings which
govern Christian people, ought to be under the ministers of Christ, at the
least, in those things that appertain to faith and religion. Yea under the
pain of losing their kingdom, if first we shall propounde this one thing.

Hitherto then by your plain confession, this is not plain for it, but rather
plain against it, that kings must loose their kingdoms, if they be not
under the Priests, in things pertaining to faith and religion, that is to
say, (to make it ^plaine) except they believe, and do as you will have them,
you will plainly turn them out of their kingdoms. Indaede this is a plain
way, if you can do it, as you have attempted it. But it is an unnatural and
a traytorous way, and of all other farthest from such ways as those should
use, that profess themselves to be Christ's Ui^ars, and Gods Ministers.
Christ never used it, nor Peter, nor Paul, nor any of the Apostles, and yet
were they under Princes, that were not under them in things that pertain to
faith and religion. But you will prove this with great equity, if first you
shall propounde one thing. Go to, propounde it M. Saunders, and let us see the
greatness of your equity.

First (say you) both the law Divine and natural equity Sand. page 78.
teaches manifestly, that no other king ought of Christians, of their own
accord, to be called to administer the right of a kingdom, than he which is
himself a Christian. ^or this is that which the Lord said by Moses to the
Israelites: When Deuteronomy. 17.
thou shall say, I will place a king over me, as have all other nations round
about, thou shall ordeine him whom the lord thy God shall choose among the
number of thy brethren, neither may thou make a King of an other nation,
that is not thy brother. But by brother we understand, him that i^ a
faithful one, and a Christian. And although Christians in times past were
compelled to obey Ethnike Emperors, yet vvoulde they never have committed
this, to have voluntarily called any such men, to the administration of the
Empire. For who could suffer it, that the members of Christ, should place over
them a limme of the Devil? Verily Iouianus, when after Theod. lib. 4. cap. 1.
the death of Iulianus, he was saluted Augustus and Caesar, I can not (quoth
he) sith I am a Christian, govern the army of Julian, that is infected with
the precepts of the pestiferous doctrine. The^ the soldiers answered, that
they were not strangers from the Christian religion. But if there ought to be so
great a likeness and coherencie between the head and the members, that a
christian Emperor would govern no soldiers but christians: how much more
unequal and uncomely is it, that the Christian soldiers of their own
voluntary, should call unto government an heathen, or heretical man? For what
is this else, but to cast themselves in danger of losing their faith.

All this again we grant you M. Sand. so long as you restrain your self to
voluntary election. And see that in all your In voluntary elections Chri
stians should chose no Prince but a Christian.
proves and examples you keep your self thereto, for else you straggle from
your own demau^des. But how many Princes in Christendom have you yt be chosen
in that sort, of so fr^ voluntary choice as you speak of, or not rather their
kingdoms belong unto them, by claim of right and succession, or otherwise?
And shall these be debarred ye right of their enheritance, Whether prere^ce of
religion may dispossess or debar the Princes ^nheritance.
for pretense of religion? Well go to then, what if we say, such and such a
Prince is a papist, a mainteiner of false religion, differing from Gods truth
and our profession, therefore we will not have him to be our king, although by
law he have good title to it, yea, and be in real possession of it? Will you
allow this our refusal M. Sand. I trow you will not. If you will not, then you
break this your own rule, that you would so feign have granted to you.
Notwithstanding, where free election is t^ be had, there your rule is most true.
Let Protestants there choose Protestants, and Papists there cho^se Papists
hardyly, and so the one shall the less encomber the other. But where men can
not do as they would, there they must do as they may, and so nere as they^a^,
choose whom they think fittest. But if it lie not in them thus volu^tarily to
chose, they How Christian subjects should behave the^eleus where election is
not.
must take their lot, perchance of the worsse, and pray to God to amend that
is amiss, and receive their duetiful Prince with good and loyal hearts, yea,
though he be an enemy to the Gospel, beseeching God to convert him, or to
mollify him, to beco^me enclinable, at the least to be no persecuter of ye
truth, and so praying, for his success in goodness, obey him in truth,
dissent from him in ^ull, but rebel against him in nothing, and commit ye rest
to God that sent him. And this me thinks is a better rule of the twain,
than that he having right, should wrongfully be refused. The example that you
bring of Iouianus The example of ^ouianus r^ fusing to govern, is not like the
example of subjects ruf^sing to be governed.
is not alike. Who refused the government over Iulianus soldiers. For there is
a difference between Princes refusing to be governors, and the peoples
refusing to be subjects. If you can sh^we, that the Christian soldiers of
Iulianus, as this Iouianus one of Iulians chiefest Captains, and the Christian
soldiers under his band, renounced their obedience to Iul^an, or would not
go to war against the Persians, and fight under his conduct, but revolt from
him, because he was revolted from God: then you should show something to the
purpose. But this you can not show, yea, we can show the ^t contrary, that so
long as Julian Iouianu^ ^e u^r rebelled against (...) the Apostata.
reigned, Iouian would never rebel, nor forsake his obedience, although his
Prince were an Apostata, and renied the faith of Christ. If you replye that
Iouian ^id forsake his souldiorship in Iulians time. True it is, that ^eing a
Captain ^uer a thousand, when Julian made a l^w Hist. (...). lib. 7 ca. ^.
Socrates.
for Soldiers: that either they should sacrifice, or for sake their
Souldiorship: Iouian chose rather to l^se his girdle (which was the ornan ^nt
of his knighthoode) than to obey the wicked pr^cepts of the Emperor. Howbeit
herein ^e renou^ced not his obedience to his Princes estate, but rather
expressed his obedience, in obeying the penalty of his law. And when the
Emperor for necessity of the war, chose him again: he refused not to
become again his soulviour. Your example therefore of Iouian, makes clean
against your purpose.

This one petition being thus demanded, which we grant unto you in free
elections, although you ask but one demand, yet now on this you will
encroch an other, and set down the figure of 2. in your margin, as a second
demand, saying:

But the law of God, which commands none should Sand. page 78. 2
be placed over Christians, but a Christian: the same law commands, that
none other should of Catholic people be received to the government of a
kingdom, but a Catholic. For he that is a Catholic, although in word he
call himself, notvvithstanding he has left of to be a lively member of the
Church of Christ.

You ask but one petition M. Saunders, and we have M. Saunders asks but one
demand and ^ncrocheth ^o
granted it, but will you thereupon ask more? nay, then it is time to stop
you. You spoke before of a Christian, and now you demand the same of a
Catholic. What do you mean hereby? do you make a difference between a
Christian and a Catholic? But how chance you say not, as you said A
Catholic.
before, a Papist? For I think by Catholic, you mean a Papist, but this we
have gramited you already. Let a Papist in free election, if he will needs,
chose a Papist: Qui ^descit Apocal. 22.
sordescat adhuc He that is filthy, let him be filthy still, and let a Turk
choose a Tu^ke, sith he will choose no better. Yet then, let a Protestant
choose a Protestant, by your own rule. But that he that is no Catholic, that
is to say, as you expound it, no Papist, is no lively member of the Church of
Christ: This is an other question M. Saunders, and you desired to propounde but
one and will you now have so many? You said it should appear with how
great equity you would defend your cause and will you now offer ^o Many
Christian Princes no popish catholics
great injury to so many Christian Princes, both in the East Church, in the
Weast, in the South, and in the North, that are no such Catho^kes, that is to
say, no Papists, and therefore be no lively members of Christ's Church? Nay M.
Saunders, this must not be granted, there is no equity in it, except you be
able to prove it. For you know that the title of Catholic, is not only
called in question, whether it belong to you or no: but also in your sense
thereof, for a Papist, it is so sore battered, that it will rather fall out,
that the Catholic is no lively member of Christ's Church, tha^ that the
Protestante or Gospeller (as you call us) is none. But let us see how you
proceed.

Which things sith they are thus, this is moreover to be Sand. 68. 3.
added. Although that any when he was first made king, was a Christian and a
Catholic, if notvvithstanding afterward he become an Apostata, or an
Heretic, good reason requires that he should be removed, from the
administration of a kingdom among the Catholic people.

They say the Devil (M. Saunders) if we give him an M. Saunders further
enc^oching.
inche, will take an ell, and so play you. You demand one thing, and would
take a number, yea, and snatch at all. If you were not impudent, you would not
still encroch. First you desired that you might propounde one thing of great
equity, and you would make all plain, that Princes might be deposed. This
one thing is granted. Then you desire a second thing, and for this second,
clap down two together. That the same law should be also for the
Catholics, that was for the Christians. This also is granted, to the which
you add, that he that is no Catholic, is no lively member of the Church of
Christ. And although this, in the true sense of Catholic, is likewise granted,
yet in your sense of a Catholic, it is stark false and denied. Then you add
your figure of 3. and say, moreover this must be added, that a Christian king
being become an Apostata or an heretic, should be deposed. And this you will
have granted you also, and al under the name of one thing, and this that you
add last of all, is in deed the thing it self that you should prove.

But you work a wise way, first demand it may be M. Sand. will first have
the matter gran^ed him, and then he will prove it
granted you, and then promise that you will prove it. What M. Sanders, have
you gone to Rome to learn that knacke that the Proctour taught his client in
the chancellors court? who when a Maiden in suit of contract came to him for
counsel, he being before hand feed on the otherpartis, grant (quoth be to
her) thou made him such a promise, but ask him who is his witness. Now
when the simple Maiden was thus enstructed: I grant quothe she to the Judge, I
made him such a promise, but who is his witness. And eue^ thus would you
dodge us M. Saunders. The question is, whether a Prince erring in faith,
should be deposed? We deny it. You will prove it, but on this condition, that
we will grant you this, that he should be deposed, and then you will prove it,
that he should be deposed. But and if we will grant you this, you may easily
prove it, or rather you need not prove it at all, for we do prove it for you.
Either Master Saunders, you think* great folly in us, or this is great
folly in you, to make such propositions to prove the matter, that are the
matter it self. This is beyond the fallation called petitio principij, it is
petitio totius, the request, not of a principle, but of altogether. There is no
equity at all in these proves, for all the great equity that you promised.

Not that the Apostacy or heresy of the king should be What subjects may and
may not do in the case of the p^ ces heresy or Apostacy.
bolstered or allowed, but earnestly improued and rebuked, if it be Apostacy
and heresy indeed, and not as you call heresy and Apostacy, the forsaking
of your heresies, and receiving the Gospel of Christ. But in this your case
of Apostacy, how ever the Prince be worthy to be deposed: the deposition
lies not in any subject, or any foreyne, but in God that placed that Prince,
and in such means as he sees good to chastise such Apostataes withal,
either of Extraordinary cases.
the whole body of the Realm, or otherwise: but those are extraordinary
cases, there can be no ordinary rule of all Princes deposition, as you would
here have granted, except the state of the Princes be thereafter, as it is in
some Countries, of which sort ours is not. And therefore to coin such rules
for us (although our Prince, God be praised, be not in this case of heresy and
Apostacy, save in your malicious and erroneous conceyte) is even the Trumpet
and The Papists trumpet to rebellion.
warning piece to your traiterous confederates, to pull down the Prince, and
set up all Rebellion. And a means to keep all Princes at the beck of the
Priests, for fear they charge them with Apostacy and heresy, and so
straight ways depose them. But what reason have you for this hampering of them?

For (say you) a faithful Prince and a godly, is a matter of Sand. 7^
such moment, that neither an unfaithful, should be placed over the faithful,
neither an Apostata should remain the Prince of the faithful.

What ought to be, and how it ought to be brought about to be, We must not
only consider* what ought to be* but how it ought to be.
are two things M. Saunders* A Prince ought to be faithful and Godly, and so
to be, is (as you say) a matter of great moment. Neither ought an unfaithful
Prince to be voluntarily placed of the faithful over the^. Neither ought a
Prince to be a renegate, neither ought such a renegate Prince (in the demerite
of his fact) to remain a Prince over the faithful. But howesoeuer these
things ought, or ought not to be in him: that the Bishops ought depose him,
that God has set up: that the faithful people ought to renounce their
allegiance, and rebel against him, that God has placed over them, and they
have orderly sworn their homage unto him: I think M. Sand. you can not prove
that these things ought to be. Neither are these cases alike, that you ^umble
together, of It is an other matter not to chose the unfaithful, and to disobey
him that becomes unfaithful.
an unfaithful man, not to be chosen Prince and of a faithful man being chosen
Prince by the faithful, because he beco^mes unfaithful* not to be obeyed. For
in ye one case, ye faithful are free from the unfaithful, and if they are
bound, it is not to him, but rather to keep them fre from him. In the other
case, the faithful have bound themselves before hand to the king that was
faithful, who afterward becomes unfaithful. In what case I think the sub
iectes might better refuse obedience.
Which bond if it were conditional, and the Prince of his own voluntary so
bound expressly to them, and they interchangeablie bound of their
voluntaries, expressly to renounce him, becoming unfaithful: Then I think
they might, so it were with one consent of those that chose him, refuse him
with better reason. But where (as it is commonly) the Prince being a faithful,
has his claim by some kind of right, whom the people elect without such
indenting, on good hope of continuance in his faithfulness, or rather being
moved with his right, yield* him obedience, and bind themselves by oath to
become his subjects, there although their souls and consciences be still
free to God in religion, yet are their bodies, their goods, yea, and their
consciences to, in respect of his estate and their duties, so firmly bound to
remain loyal and faithful to the Princes authority, Esopes Fable of the
horse, before and after he commit (...) himself to ^en of the man.
that though he become unfaithful in the faith of his religion, yet may not
they become unfaithful, in the faith of their allegiance. The Fable of Esopes
^orse, when he straue with the Heart, can tell you, that there was a difference
in the horses estate, before he gave the man an enterest to ride upon him: and
after that the man had bridled and sadled him, and was set on his back, and
rode him. Might the horse then, when he was weerie with chacing the heart,
compel the man to alight, and take off the saddle, and pull the bridle out of
his mouth, and let him go at liberty? Nay soft, as ye said right now, the
case is altered. It must be then as the man will, and not as the horse will.
Well may the horse like a stubborn Jade, begin to fling and winche, assaying
to cast the man, and recover his liberty: but the man with his spurs will
tame him well inoughe, and now and then an ill ryder spoyleth many a good
horse. What Esope meant hereby is casie to wit. Not that he allowed any Princes
tyranny, but that he disalowed all subjects rebellion. And so in Samue is
declaration, he tells of many injuries that kings shall do unto 1. Reg. 8.
their subjects, as to take their wives, their daughters, and their goods
from them, and to give them where it lykeeh them. Not that kings ought to do
thus, or that God or his Prophet allows their so doing. But that they which
were free before, and might have chosen, should then not be free, and could not
choose, but suffer even injuries at their hands. Neither could they, nor their
Priests depose their Princes, although many of them became Apostataes and
tyra^ts. Yet those Apostataes and tyrants continued still their princes, till
God him self by some extraordinary means removed them.

But (say you) there grows no less danger to the subjects Sand. page 7^.
from him, who after he is placed in the royal Throne, falls to heresy:
than from him that was an heretic before he was made king.

I grant you this, M. Saunders: and the case may be How dangers may and may
not be cut off.
such, that there may grow far more danger too. But dangers must be cut
off as we may, and not as we list. If we can undo Gordias his knotte, we may
not play Alexanders Gordias knot.
part, and draw out the sword, and strike it in ^wayne. The knotte of a
subjects obedience is an harder knotte, but by this remedy it might be soon
untied. And yet peradventure tie our selves faster in greater bondage, if the
Princes used not Alexanders untying, and cut off such traitors heads from
their shoulders, that would cut off him, being the head, from governing them,
being but members of the body. But how prove you your consequence, M.
Saunders?

And truly (say you) if the Apostle took it in evil part Sand. page 78. 1.
Cor. 6.
that the Christians should go to law before ^nsidell Magistrates, that were
ordained before hand by public law: how much more unworthy would he have
taken it, if they should either of their voluntaire have placed over them an
Infidel, or have suffered an obstinate heretic to have reigned over them: for
how can they worship him as their king without heinous sin, to whom they
ought not to say so much as God speed, least they should be partakers of his
evil 2. Ioh. Epl.
works? or is it not a greater matter to obey an heretic, than to salute him?

These two places are wrested (M. Saunders) and the Why S. Paul rebukes the
Corinthians for pleadyng in law before heathen Judges.
Scripture abused, to make them serve for subjects deposing princes, and
refusing of their obedience. S. Paul rebukes the Corinthians, for that they
being Christians contended in law for trifles, and chose heathen Arbitrers and
Judges, rather than Christians, and this in deed was blame worthy, because not
only they had free choice, but men also among themselves, that could with more
quietness and less reproach, have taken up those matters. But does S. Paul
bid them in no matters, appeal to heathen Judges, or being called of
heathen Magistrates to their judgments, to refuse them, yea to refuse to come
unto them, and to renounce them as incompetent Magistrates and Judges, because
they were not Christians, and to attempt to disobey them, or to depose them? At
this you should prove (M. Sanders) if you will directly apply, and not wrest
this place to your purpose. But this S. Paul never did nor taught. The
contrary he both taught others, and him self practiced. For S. Paul both
appealed unto, and appeared in judgment before heathen Magistrates. Act. 2^.
he himself obeyed the authority of the heathen and wicked Magistrates. He
refused not to come before the judgment seats of Felix, and Drus^lla his
wife, of Festus, of Agrippa and Bernice his sister. Yea he rejoiced that he
came before the^, saying: Above all things whereof I am accused of the Jews, I
count my self happy, O king Agrippa, that this* day I shall plead my cause
before thee. Likewise he appealed to the wicked Nero his judgment and
presence, when Festus offered him to go to Jerusalem, and be judged before him
there. He answered: I stand at Cesars judgment seat, where it behooves me to
be judged. And as he appealed to him, so he obediently was judged of him, and
never refused the Princes judgment as inconvenient, because he him self was a
christian, and those princes were heathen: but because they were princes, and
he was a subject* he obeyed their judgments even to death. And as he did him
self* so exhorted he all other to the like obedience, and that also for
conscience sake, although Romans 13.
those princes had little conscience, and were Infidels, yet he acknowledged
the^ to have their power from God, and to be his ministers, and the resistance
against the^, to be against God him self. So far was S. Paul from attempting
or exhorting, or thinking to depose the^. Nay he rather prayed for them, and
wishes 1. Tim. ^.
other to pray. The like we may say for all ye Apostles of Christ, whom Christ
foretold that they should come before kings and princes, but he forewarned
the^ not to refuse to come before them. This place therefore is manifestly
wrested of Math. 10.
you M. San. And that you should not suspect my judgment, I appeal here in
even to the judgment of your own side.

Lyra writing on this place, makes this objection: Sed istud Apostoli dictum.
etc. But this saying of the Apostle seems Lyra in. 1. Cor. 6.
to be contrary to that which is said* 1. Pet. ^. Be ye subject to every
creature of man for God, whether it be to the king, as to the chief, or to
rulers as sent of him. etc. to the which is to be said, that the Apostle
forbids not this, that the faithful being placed under unfaithful princes,
should not apeare before them, when they are called: for this were contrary to
the subjection that is due to princes. But he forbids, that volu^tarily they
make not recourse to unfaithful Judges in those matters, that may be
determined by the faithful. Yea Catharinus that wresteth this place also to
the Priests prerogative, yet durst he not go thus far as you, M. Saunders,
but makes plain exception against you, saying: Insuper annotandum, etc.
Moreover we must note, that the Catharinus in 1. Cor. 6.
judgments of the unfaithful, are not here refused, sith they also have
their power from God. Neither forbids it that they should not obey their
rulers, when they call them into law, or should the least be under their
jurisdiction. But only it forbids this, that they should not of their own
accord appeal and come to them, as before whom to plead, sith they have
them selves a better power given them heereto of God. Thus by the judgment of
your own side, this place serves nothing for refusing the obedience of
Princes, although they were Infidels, Apostataes, or Heretics, as (thanks be
given to God) the protestant Princes are not, against whom ye shoot these
traiterous books, but are true christians, and faithful christian Princes.

As for the other sentence makes less to your purpose* 2. Epi. Ioh. Princes
although Heathen, may be saluted and honored with civil honor.
For he speaks not there of princes, but of false teachers* as for princes,
by S. Paul's doctrine* aforesaid, wi^ whom S. John agrees, they should both
be saluted, worshipped, and prayed for, that God would speed and pr^ per them
in their gouernementes. And this (as ye say) i^ more then to salute them. But
sith we are bound to (...) the greater (to use your own reason) much less
may (...) debar the lesser from them, and not so much as say, (...) speeds
them, or give them ^nce God morrow. Which as* is besides all civility (that
you say Christ takes not awa^ so were it wilfully to provoke the Princes
indignation* Abimelech was but an Heathen prince, and yet Abra^ Genesis 20. and. 21
dwelte with him, made a league with him, and gave him a present, and took a
present of him. Pharao was an heathen Genesis 41.
Prince, and yet Joseph behaved himself most reverently unto him, and became a
most faithful steward over his country. Ahasuerus was a heathen Prince, and
yet both Mardocheus honored him, and preserved his life from traiters, Hester.
2.
and Hester was married unto him. Benadad the king of Syria was an heathen
Prince, and yet Naaman his captain, 4. Reg. 5.
after he was cleansed from his leprie, and was become a faithful beleuer in
God, forsook not his obedience to his heathen Prince, and where he moved a
scruple of suffering his Idolatrous Prince to lean upon him, the Prophet had
him depart in peace, he had him not revolt from his Princes obedience. Darius
was an heathen Prince, and yet Daniel said Daniel. 14.
unto him, O king, God save thy life for ever. Agrippa was an heathen Prince,
and yet S. Paul both saluted him, and wished him even as himself, except his
bonds. This therefore Act. 25.
is not to be stretched unto Princes but to be taken, as it is spoken, against
false teachers, as both the text is plain, and even the Popish writers to so
understand it, although they misunderstand who the false teachers be. But who
they be, False teachers are not to be wished well unto. 2. Ioh epist.
S. Ihon describes by this note, Every one that goes from and abides not in
the doctrine of Christ, has not God. He that abides in the doctrine he has
the father and the son: if any come unto you and bring not this doctrine,
receive him not into the house, neither say God speed unto him. For ^e that
says God speed, communicates with his evil works. But this is apparent that
ye Who are the false teachers.
Papists have made the doctrine of Christ insufficient, and brought in other
doctrine besides the scripture of God: they therefore are these false teachers,
yt S. John so straightly forbids us to communicate withal. If then God
speed may not be said unto the false teachers (yt is to say, we may not
approve their doctrine, nor be familiar with them:) the^ must the Popish
teachers company be avoided, yt are here so plain described. And it were to be
wished* this were some what more straightly looked unto tha^ it is* God grant
yt bearing A ^ueat against bearing to much with Papists. ^ccl. 13.
to much with Papists, and bearing the^ company, yea and bearing the^ out also,
do not only spice us with their false doctrine (he that touches pitch, says
the wise man, shall be defiled with it) and make us partakers of their evil
works: but also provoke the heavy wrath of God upon us, and make the Papists
whom we bear so much withal, become the very cutters of our throats. For I
tell you, their faith will serve them, they have a ruled case for it, Nulla
sides tene^da haereticis, no faith must The Papists call us (...), but they
are nu^fidiaus.
be kept with heretics, as they account us to be. But I learned once this rule
in mine Accidence, ^oelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautu^. Happy is he
who^ other men's harms do make to beware. Let us not think but they can look as
fair, and think as foul, in England as in France, and deal as horribly, if
(as God forbid) they could get their opportunity. Which to compass the sooner,
this good teacher M. Saunders sets forth this doctrine, to stir the people
to rebel and depose their sovereign, and hereto wresteth these places of the
scripture, to make them seem to serve his purpose, where both (being better
considered) make clean against it. Howbeit thinking he has fully proved it.

The matter (says he) is now brought to this point, that an Sand. page 78.
heretical king must be removed from his kingdom, that he obteyneth over
Christians.

But how he has brought the matter to this point, and with what proves not
worth a point: I doubt not, but every reader will easily see, nor any subject
be moved to remove his natural Prince, for any thing yet alleged, yea
although (as he surmiseth) his Prince were in deed an heretic. But M. Saund.
presupposing that he has clearly, proved ye Prince must needs be deposed will
now prove that the deposing of him belongs to the Bishop.

And because (says he) the crime for the which he must be removed, Sand page
78.
is committed against the faith: and a little before it is abundantly proved,
that those causes should not be judged of the people, which is governed like
sheep, but of the pastors, whose duty is to discern Leuit. 10. Malach. 2.
between the clean and unclean, and whose lips do therefore keep knowledge,
that the people should require the law of the Lord out of their mouth, verily
it belongs chiefly to the Bishops, both to pronounce even the king himself
an heretic, or otherwise an Apostata, and also to declare that his subjects
from thence forth are free from giving all obedience unto him, and that they
ought to endeavor themselves, that another out of hand be chosen in his room.

Like lips, like lettyse, they say. Even a fit sentence for so The Prists
keeping and uttering the law of God, licenceth him not to depose his Prince and
set up another.
fit Bishops to pronounce. Find you me this in the law of the Lord, (M.
Saunders) that the priests should keep this know ledge? and yet better keep it
than utter it, to make the Proclamation of rebellion. Is this the law, the
people must fetch from the priests mouth? well, this law made some of them be
hanged at Durham not long ago, as all such lawless and rebel Priests deserve.
No, M. Saunders, ye find not this fraitero^s office appointed to the Priests
in gods law. Out of their mouth in deed the law of God must proceed, and
their lips must keep it, and they must discern between the clean and
unclean. Although this be but here spoken Metaphorically, for that was a
bodily cleanneste and uncleanness discerning who was a Leper who was none. But
stretch it hardily to the soul, admit also he find the soul of the king
infected with spiritual Leprie, must be therefore pronounce him to be no king?
nay, I trow, the priest served not Ozias so. Must the Priest depose him? must
be assoile his subjects from their sworn obedience* must he bid the^ chose
another* where find you this M. Saund* in what law? in Robin Hoodes law, or
Robins hoods law.
Jack strawes law? surely it is some rebels law, for in gods law you can not
show it that Priests should do such things. No? say you: It is a matter of
faith, and who should deal therein but ye Priests? Is this a matter of faith,
M. Saunders, to stir the people to violate their Faith? cannot the Faith be
kept to God, except we break our Faith to the Prince? you ask, who should do
it rather tha^ the Bishop? where of all other How, ready popish priests are
to stu^e up rebellion.
he should least do it, and to say truth, none should do it. But if any will
attempt rebellion, Popish Priests, I see, are readiest, and here M. Saunders
offers himself and his fellows. A meet office for such officers. But in
gods word, we find no such office for Priests or for any other, we see there
no such example, save of Corah, Dathan, and Abiron, of Absolon, Ioab,
Achitophel, and Abiathar, and such other traitors, whom God punished
accordingly. Godly Priests rebuked evil Princes, but they never offered them
this injury.

But if the subjects (says M. Saunders) look not in this matter Sand. page 79.
to their duty, then it belongs to the pastors, by what means so ever they
can, to provide, that he that sittes in the chair of pestilence, should not
reign in the Church of God*

Yea there M. Saunders there lo, if never a Captain for traitors can be found
among subjects, the Priests will be their Captains, and will rebel alone,
if none other will besides. The Princes throne called the chair of pestilence.
Do the Prince but once displease the Priests, then his royal throne, wherein
God has set him, is the Chair of pestilence and the Priests will provide
another king, and that by all whatsoever means they ca^, they will attempt al
waye^ The Popish Priests profess to remove the Prince by whatsoever means
they can.
possible, by practices, conspiracies, whisperings, murmurings, railings, blind
prophecies, curses, treacheries, seditions, treasons, rebellions, murders,
sorceries, p^ysonings, (...) to conclude, by what means soever they can, (for
these be his own words) to depose the Lords anointed, and to set (...)
another of their confederacy, for all these means they (...) practice, and
have practiced, and do practice, and therefore now they may plead practice for
the^. If this doctrine be not the chai^ of pestilence then out of doubt it is
eue^ the pestilence itsel^ A pestilent doctrine.
All the deinls in hell can not devise to the sclauerie and confusion of al*
kings, and to the maintenance of the Popes (...) ranie, sitting in y^ very
chair of pestilence, a more (...) and pestilent doctrine tha^ this is. Now as
though this were so cl^re a case that it were not to be so much as once spoken
against:

What (says he) is not the matter thus? what? do not pastors Sand. 78. Hebrs
13.
vvatch for souls as well of kings, as of the^ that obey kings?

Yes that they do (M. Saunders) as it appears by your tale, they vvatch for
souls and bodies, and goods also, chiefly What the Popish Priests watch for.
2. Pet. 5.
of kings. The Devil watches not (as Peter says) more narrowly, seeking
whom he may devour, than do your Pastors keep both watch and ward, to
devour both kings and subjects, and to rule all wordly kingdoms.

Then (say yeu) it is their duty to let slip naught of those Sand. page 79.
things, that they know are profitable for the soul health.

This indeed is their duty (M. Saunders) which consists in preaching Gods
word. But this they can let slip well enough, howbeit the matter now in hand,
is a worldly kingdom, and that they will not let slip in any wise, least
they should let slip those things, that they know are profitable to the
bodies health.

But who sees not (say you) that it abhors altogether Sand. page 7^.
from the souls health, that he should be suffered to reign over the
faithful, that is himself unfaithful? must not then also of necessity, the
people become unfaithful?

There is no necessity M. Saunders, but it is a shrewde The danger of evil
Princes and commodity of godly Princes to their people
likelyhoode. But firmum fundamentum Dei stat. etc. the foundation of God
stands sure, having this seal, God knovveth who are his, and God will
preserve those that are his, from assenting to such Princes unfaithfulness.
Howe^eit, the swaye of the people, turn to much after the swaye of the Prince,
which is a perilous case, as we see where po, ^pishe Princes reign, and it is
a just plague of God, propter Job. 34.
^eccata populi. etc. God makes the Hypocrite to reign for the peoples
offenses. But again, where the Prince does favor and set forth the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, there redoundeth ^s much commodity to the people, by the Godly
Princes government.

But when (says M. Saunders) Jeroboam the king of Sa^aria, Sand. 79. 3. Reg.
12
erected two Idols in Dan and Bethel, we know that hereupon almost ten
whole Tribes fell into Idolatry, and by little and little cast off the faith of
one God. Shall he therefore be worthy the name of a man, that shall affirm a
wicked king ought not to be compelled to depose himself from his Magistracy?

Can you make this conclusion on this example, M. Sand? then are you worthy the
name, not of a man, but of a cunning man, I will not say of a traitor. But what
can not you The example of Jeroboam that M. Sand. alleges makes clean
against him.
make, quodlibet ex quolibet, what you please, of what you list, to serve your
turn withal? Jeroboam we grant did make the people fall to Idolatry. But did
any Priest or Prophet, taking occasion hereupon, rebel, or provoke other to
rebel against him, or did any of them depose him, or sought to set up an
other? if you find this, you find somewhat for your purpose, if not, the
example makes clean against you. The Prophets indeed rebuked the king, and
that sharply, and spoke 3. Reg. 13. 14
against his Idolatry, and told him how God would cut off his kingdom. Yet
they themselves attempted not to cut it off, but peaceably and obediently lived
under his government. Yea, this deposing of a Prince, whom God set up, was so
3. Reg. 12.
far from any subjects authority, that it was not lawful for Roboam, to whom
the kingdom before appertained, to attempt to recover it by law of Arms, but
he and his people by Gods especial commandment, were bidden go home again.
So much this example makes against you, and yet you are so impudent to
allege it. And that hereupon the king must not only be deposed of other,
but by other be compelled to depose himself, and that he which shall not
affirm this, and that on this example of Jeroboam, is not worthy He that will
not become a traitor, is not worthy with M Sand. the name of a man. Sand. page
79.
the name of a man. But he that will not play the rank traitor, and wrest the
examples of the scripture for him, that make clean against him, has no
ma^hood in him, nor is worthy ye name of a man with M. Sand. And now as though
he had brought an invincible proof, he proceeds, saying:

But if he must needs be deposed, at least for heresy, how shall that
controversy be judged, without the knowledge of the doctors of the Church? who
only of their office, have the ordinary and lawful power to look to the
flock, in the which the holy Ghost has placed the^ to guide the Church of
God. Act. 20
But the pastors and doctors of the church, could not be Judges of any king,
except the king in that thing, were less and inferior to the^. For neither the
equal has power over the equal, neither the inferior over the superior.
VVorthily therefore we affirm, that al christian kings, in those things that
appertain to matters of faith, are so under bishops and priests* that when
offending obstinately against the christian religion* they shall Tit. 3.
persevere after one two rebukings: both they may, and they ought for that
cause, to be by the Bishops sentence deposed from the government that they
hold over the Christians.

You conclude full worthily M. San. your argument is this, if the Prince must
needs be deposed, he must be deposed by the Bishops and priests. This reason
hangs all on this presupposall, yt he has so fully proved this, that ye
Prince now in all post have must needs be deposed* And yet we have hitherto
heard no such proves, yt should enforce any such necessity, but rather
necessary, for ye bishops, priests, or any other subjects behalf, to let him
remain still vndeposed, for them, although he were an heretic. So yt we may
rather reuerse ye argument. If needs he must not be deposed: the must not ye
bishops and priests attempt to depose him. Howbeit there is no necessity in ye
consequence, yt if he must needs be deposed and that for heresy, yt ye bishops
and priests must depose hi. Yes, No good argument from the Priests judging of
the Prin ces doctrine to his judging of the Princes diadem.
says M. Sa^. for how shall that controversy be judged without the^, what
though that controversy could not be judged without the^ M. Sand. must they
therefore be deposers of him from his estate, because they judge of the
doctrine he professes? must they judge of his Diadem, because they judge of
his religion? but what if they themselves have corrupt judgments therein? trow
you priests and bishops have not had so ere now? yes, eue^ this sentence of s.
Paul that here you cite for ye Bishops and Priests authority gives a plain
warning of it. I know Act 20. Priests corrupt and blind judgments.
(says he) that after my departure, shall come among you ravening Wolves,
not sparing the flock, there shall rise up men from among your selves,
speaking perverse things to dravve Disciples after them. But (say you) saint
Paul says they must look to the flock, so much the more, in which the
holy ghost has placed them to guide the church of God. True in deed they must
so do But what if they be blind themselves, how look they to it then? And did
Christ never talk of blind guides? you post off yt, to the Phariseis and
Jewish Bishops. Matthew. 23.
But if you were not more blind tha^ they, you would see a great difference
between loking to the flock, guiding the Church of God by teaching true
doctrine, taking heed unto, and discerning of false doctrines and teachers,
preching the word of God with learned judgment: and between the clayming of
authority to depose Kings and Princes from their royal estates. Why, say you,
if they be Judges, they are above them, and neither equal nor inferior. They
may be equal, and above them too, in learned Judgment, and also in ye
dispensation of their mysteries: and yet in public authority far inferior.
And therefore your conclusion A secu^dum quid M. Sand. fallation a secundu^ quid
ad simpli citer.
ad simpliciter, fails: that because they are inferior in one thing to
Bishops, they be in all things, or in this thing inferior.

Yea, say you, they are so under Bishops and Priests, that when offending
obstinately against the Christian religion, they shall perfeuer after one or
two rebukings, the Bishops may and ought to depose them from their government
over Christians.

This is a great inferiorship, M. Sand. to be so much under How far the
Papists make kings inferior to Bishops.
them. For by this rule, if a Prince (as commonly Popish Princes do) should
keep a Paramour* a Popish Bishop may depose him. But they will not be over
hasty, to reprove the Prince for that, which they use themselves, neither
count they it an offense against christian religion, and yet in ye christian
religion i^ is forbidden, and so is against it, especially to defend it, and
mainteing it as the Papists do. But if he do wrong to any of his subjects,
and will not amend his wrong, after a B. has once or twice given him warning
of it: then by this rule the B. may straighte depose him. And in deed so they
have done, and would do, if the wrong touch them, if their lands and goods were
diminished, then by and by it is against ye Christian religion, it is plain
heresy, and except by the second admonition, it be restored with a
recumbentibus: the king must be in all the have deposed, there is no remedy nor
further respit, for not only the Bishops may, but plat and plain they ought to
do it. Is not here a kingdom brought to a goodly state? The fable of the Lion
and Fox.


But he will say, he means by offenses against the Christian religion, matters
of faith. But what helps this? for, as when the Lion proclaimed, yt al horned
beasts should avoid out of the wood, although the Foxes pricked ears were no
horns, neither needed he have gone, ye he wisely foresaw, yt this was but a
drifte to pick a quarrel, and therefore he hied him out of the wood. For since
al lay in the Lions interpretation, what if the Lion had said, his prick ears
had bin horns, or as sharp as horns? surely then the Fox had drunk for it.
And if the Bishops may have the like authority, to bid the Prince be packing
out of his realm, if he offend the christian religion: what will it boot the
Prince (if the Bishops be disposed to pick a quarrel against him) to say, he
offends not against the Christian religion, but rather defends the true
religion of Christ, against the corruptions of it? and in deed so he does, but
what avails either his excuse, or the truth of the matter, if the Bishops
shall say it is heresy, and against the christian faith, and the Bishops that
so say, shall be the Judges, whether it be so or no? were not the king as good
get him out of his kingdom at the first, or else they will depose him and set
him out with a heave and ho? But that Bishops may thus hamper Princes as they
list, where find we authority or example in the scripture? yes says M.
Saunders:

For God, which at the first so severed the heavenly kingdom Sand. page 79
from the earthly kingdom, that he suffered the kings Psalm. 2.
of the earth, to come together against the Lord, and against his anointed,
and thereby notably declared his power, while 1. Cor. 2.
by the base things of the world (thatis) by the poverty of the Apostles, and
the torments of the Martyrs, he overcame the mighty things the same God
within a while after, did so ioin together his heavenly kingdom, with the
earthly kingdom, that there also he might show no less, both power and
mercy: while some kings voluntarily made themselves subject to the pore
Ministers of Christ: But other refusing at the first to be made subjects unto
the^, yet by the spiritual power of the^, were either afterward converted to
repentance, or else were hurled down from the high degree of the Empire they
possessed that every way it should be true that God revealed to Dani. 2. 7.
Daniel: In the days of those kingdoms, the God of heaven shall raise up a
kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, and his kingdom shall not be given
to an other people, but it shall frush, and consume al kingdoms, and it shall
stand for ever. This truly is the kingdom of heaven, or the power of the
Church of God.

It is even so M. Sand* and therefore not such a worldly kingdom, as your
Pope usurps, and you proule for him to maintain: but the heavenly kingdom
of Christ, and the power of God, which is his Gospel, shall frush and consume
your kingdom with the other. Nay (say you) they did indeed once jar, but now
they agree, the heavenly and the earthly kingdom, are conjoined together.
Agreement is a good hearing, M. Sand* but what mean you by this coniunctio^^
The heavenly and earthly kingdom are not so joined that the Bishops may be
earthly kings.
that the one is become the other, and not still distinguished from it? or that
your Pope may be king, and his Bishops Princes of both? nay M. Sand. you
find not that agreement and conjunction. For Christ has put such a bar
between them, that his spiritual Ministers, can not have earthly kingdoms, nor
that earthly kings, should in the estate of their earthly kingdoms, beco^me
subject in such wise to his spiritual Ministers: otherwise than to yield
their obedience to their spiritual ministry, representing the power and
mercy of God unto them. But not to resign their crowns unto them, not to be
trodden under their feet, not to be deposed of them, and driven out of their
earthly kingdoms. The spiritual kingdom of Christ it self, (much less the
spiritual ministers of that kingdom) deals not with earthly kings in such a
fashion, which is not to agree or join with them, but to conspice against them.

You tell us of some kings, that have voluntarily yielded the^ selves subjects,
and some that were compelled and driven out of their kingdoms, but was this
done (as you say) by the poverty of the Apostles, and the torments of the
Martyrs? The Apostles and Martyrs deposed no kings.
True it is that by these base things, God overcame ye mighty things of the
world. But trow you yt they by their poverty deposed kings, and by their
suffering torments, drove the^ out of their realm? that were a hard matter.
But name the Apostle, name the martyr, name ye king, name the kingdom and you
can. No, you can not* But you shall find the centrarie, for if they were in
poverty, then were they not rycher than kings: if they suffered torments,
the^ they put not me^ to torments they were tormented, not torme^ters,
sufferers, not doers of the^. Neither suffered they as malefactors, for
co^spiring against kings, for going about to have deposed kings from their
kingdoms. Are you not ashamed, your Popes being rycher tha^ kings, and
crueller than tirante, to tell how God overcame the might of the world, and
increased his spiritual kingdom? this was Gods doing, not man's, and by clean
contrary means to your doings, and to clean contrary purposes, not to
storish in an earthly kingdom, or to dispossess kings, as al your drifte does
tend. But you have examples hereof, how you brought kings to this thraldom,
but for shame ye durst not name the^, ye stories were so tragical. But now,
this being contrary to Christ's prohibition, he propou^neth an objection
himself in our behalf, and answers it.

Thou vvilt say, do therefore By* hoppes and Pastors of the Sand page 79.
sheep of Christ, rule temporal kingdoms? properly indeed, and of it self, in
no wise. But thus do Bishops rule temporal kingdoms, if so be such kingdoms
do submit themselves to the Christian faith. For even in this, that Christian
kings and nations do desire the faith and Sacraments of Christ, they promise
herein, that they will neither govern, nor obey any earthly government,
further than the Christian faith and religion may suffer. If therefore either
the government of the king, or the peoples obedience, begin to svvarue
otherways, either they may be deposed from their government, or most justly
excluded from the power of choosing a king, by the force of the covert, or
expressed covenant, which at the beginning they made with the Church of
Christ. For what soever is so much of the nature of the thing that is done,
that if To this purpose says Po^ponius: ^* Cum quid mutuum de reb. creditis
by chance mention was made thereof at the beginning, it can not otherwise
agree, than by that one way: which although it were not expressed between
the bargain makers, yet is it holden for expressed: because it was necessarily
contained in the nature of that that was done. For ensample. A man says to a
woman: I take thee to my wise: she again making answer, I take thee to my
husband: But that they shall live together, even till death, although this
expressly is not uttered in the covenant, notwithstanding it is so contained in
the nature of the thing, that it is necessarily under stood. After the same
manner it is, when either the king, or any private man, is made a member of the
church by faith and baptism. For even in that, that he renounceth the world
and the pomps thereof, verily he promises, that he will never abuse the power
of his earthly kingdom, against the faith and church of Christ. And if so be
he shall do it, he will not refuse but that he may be deprived of the right of
his kingdom. For I ask, if this namely should come in question. Soft, M.
Sand* we must interrupt you, or else we cannot so conveniently answer you. To
your question anon, now to your argument, and your (...) there^n.

The obrection you made, was this: whether Bishops and M. Saunders objection
and answer.
Pastors of the sheep of Christ, may rule temporal kingdoms? You answer:
properly, and of it self, in no wise. But as those kingdoms do subject them
selves to the Christian says. This is a proper elusion M. Saunders, think you
to escape thus? is it all one to subject their kingdoms to^e Christian faith,
and to subject their kingdoms to the Bishops? Good (...) it is that the faith
should bear the ^heefe rule. But the objection was, whether the Bishops
should, or no? and therefore this ^inction serves not. For Christ simply,
without this or y^ respect debar^eth al his spi ritual ministers from ruling of
temporal kingdoms. Who knows not, that properly and of their own nature,
temporal kingdoms should not be ruled of spiritual pastors, but of temporal
king^? None is so simple, to move such a fond objection. But the objection is,
whether the one be coincident to the other. Whether a Bishop may take a
kingdom upon him pro perly or improperly.
Whether a Bishop to who^ properly by his Bishoply office, (...) kingdom
belongs not, may take upon him the government of a kingdom, that properly by
his kingly office belongs to a king. This i^ ye question. And you say,
properly he can not, and I say much (...) improperly. But properly or
improperly, Christ has clea^ debarred it, Vos autem non (...), But you shall
not do so. These words strike dead, master Sand* and therefore your improper
distinction may go pike him.

But (say you) when they subjected them to the Christian The Princes promise.
faith, the kings promised no longer to raygne, the people promised to obey no
power further, than the christian faith will suffer: therefore if the kings
power, or the peoples obedience swerve from this promise* the king may be
deposed, and the people can choose no other^

^ll good promises (so (...) as we may) are to be kept in^iolate, master
Saunders, especially the promise made to Christ, to keep his faith and
religion incorrupted. And would to God, all men did keep it, chiefly the
Popish Bishops, that have in so many points, swarued from the faith, and
corrupted Christ's religion, and yet have made their The breach of the Popes
and of his Prelates promises.
promise to keep it so well as others. And if they should be deposed for
breaking their promise, your Pope should be deposed first, to begin withal, and
all his Prelates and Priests should follow. And although it were to be
wyshed they were in deed all deposed and those only that repent them,
admitted, and reformed to the true ministry (...) yet can not the like be
wished for in Princes, that they likewise The Princes breach of promise,
authorise^h not Bishops to depose him.
breaking their promises, should be deposed by their Bishops. For, although
we have in Gods word, an evident example for the Prince to depose the Bishop
upon his demerites, as Solomon deposed Abiathar: yet have we not the like
example for the Bishop to depose the Prince. For in ye authority of deposing,
the Prince is higher than the Bishop. Although it is not to be wished, ye
Princes should attempt without great and evident proof, to depose any. As for
the Bishop to take upon him to depose his Prince, being his sworn subject,
is both against his own faith and homage^, and further than his authority
reaches.

The Bishops and Priests had great injury offered them The example of Saul and
David
of king Saul, yet they never cursed him, nor attempted to depose him. No,
David (although he were him self also the Lords anointed) would never oppugn
Saul, or rebel against him, but only stood at his defense, and when he had
Saul in his danger, he would neither kill him, nor take him, nor depose him,
but let him go, and committed his quarrel to the Lord, because Saul was not
only likewise the Lords anointed, but then in lawful possession of the
crown. And therefore David would never take it from What bishops may do or
not do to princes, having broken their promises.
him, although he had good title to it. Much less may the Bishops, (that
have no title to it) attempt to pull down their Prince. They may, yea they
ought to exhort their Prince, having broken his promise, and rebuk^ him, and
lay before him the terrible threats of God they may pray for him* but they can
not lay hands upon him, nor curse him, nor revile him, nor take arms against
him, nor in^ite other to rebellion, to forsake him, and to set upon him, being
their Liege and Sovereign. How Princ^ have been deposed.


I am not ignorant, that Princes have been deposed of their subjects in diverse
countries, and diverse times in England. And the like casualtie may chance in
every age and kingdom unto princes. But for those things, by what title What
rule may be gathered by such deposing^ of Princes.
they were done, God knows, and I will not descant now, but this I affirm
in general, that in respect of the people, those things were more def^cto,
than de ^ure* although in respect of Gods justice, or of the Princes
chastisement, that ^ad deserved (before God) so much and more, it was de ^ure
too. But the subjects can never justify such deeds to be done, how ever they
be borne out when they be done, nor such extraordinary deeds past, may be
drawn to ordinary examples of deeds to come, but be spectacles for princes
in beholding such tragedies past, to learn for the present to ^umble them
selves, and to level their life to come the better. And alth^gh many of these
deposings of princes, have Deposing of Princes by the Prelates practices.
^ot come so (...) by the v^ce of their unnatural subjects, as by the practices
of the Popish bishops: as the ensamples of king John in England, of Childerike
in France, the Henry's and other in Germany, and in other countries, do
testify: yet were these dealings of th^se Bishops not allowable, but
detestable, ye^ though it were granted that those prince^ ha^ deserved them,
and broken their faith and promise* Which (if it were a good faith and promise)
was no doubt an evil breac^e of it, an^ God will take the vengeance of it, it
belongs not is the people, nor to the Bishops. Vengeance Heb. 10.
is mine, says God, and I will render it. He says not, my Bishops shall, but
I will render it.

Yea but (sayt^ M. (...)) the Prince himself has made a promise, to reign
no longer, than the faith and religion of Christ allows.

I answer if he man this pr^yse; it is a good promise, What subjects may do
when the Prince breaks his promise.
and he is bou^ in conscience to stand ther^. But what if ^e wickedly break
his promise, shall the Bishope rebel* and break their promise too? is there
no remedy, but (...) pellere, to drive out one mischief with another* Nay
says S. Paul* Non faciamus malum, vt inde eueniatb^nu^, Let us not do evil
Romans 1.
that good may come of i^* Let us not^bell against the Prince, that the Prince
may be reformed. Quorum damnatio iusta est. If the Bishops do so, they heap
I^st damnation upon themselves. Were the Prince in deed such a one as the
Bishops pretend, (if it be not rather their malicious pretense) as God has
given them no such violent means to reform him, which were to make him rather
worse than better, and The right means that the B may use, when the prince
breaks his promise. The combat between the Cardinal of Column and the Pope.
to bring all in a broyle, and themselves (besides their sin) in danger* so
God has given the^ another mean, if they could see it, of preaching his word
unto the Prince, which is another manner of sword, and more fit for them to
fight withal, than to pull the temporal sword out of the Princes hands. In
deed so did Cardinal Column, when the Pope said he would pull of his
Cardinals hatte, he soul the Pope word, if he pulled off his Cardinals hatto,
he would put on a helmet, and pull down his triple Crown. These Prelates have
little skill of the spiritual sw^rde, although they crake of it, and of S.
Pet^rs keys, but they neither know how to use them, nor what they be, that
think they consist in deposing Princes and fighting against them.

But M. Saunders, not seeing the (...) of his own Bishops faith and promise*
begins narrowly to ex^mine the faith and promise of Princes* Go to the; let
us see what he lays to ye Princes charge. He made promise (says he) that he
would be no longer king, tha^ he (...) faith of Christ. And the people promised
to suffer (...) them, furd^ ^han the faith of Christ. (...) they this promise*
The princes promise in the^ baptism The Bishops promise in Paptisme is the
same that the princes is.
M. Saunders? ^t Baptism^ (say you) where they promised to renounce the world,
and the pompes thereof In deed M Saunders they made this promise* (...) their
Bapti^* to ^enounce the ^orld and the pomp^ ^ (...) this, (...) I suppose (...)
you an^ your Bishops (...) also. How you have kept it, not only God and you in
your conscience know: but all the world sees how you have broken it. And if
your deposing lay on that promise in Baptism, surely ye should all be deposed
out o^ question. But I am sure, you will make The papists shift to k^pe their
livings for all their promise broken.
exception for your worldly kingdoms, pompes, and dignities, that here you
write for* (...) and keep: that you will not renounce them, for all that
promi^, and will say, there is ^nt, not (...), but the ambitious mind in
getting and keeping of them. Wh^h am^ although you still retain, with infinite
other (...) ^pen (...): yet (...) not willingly depose your selu^ from those
worldly: promotions, (...) deposed from them. And can you make these
exceptions, excuses and distinctions, for the retaining of yours (...) your
Bis^ (...)* poralties, and will not allow them in the Prince, for the
retaining, ^ The priests partiality.
(...) of (...), (...) yours are (...) cessorie* unto yours? (...) is partial
and (...) dealyng with Prin^ M. (...)*

But how pr^ue you, that Prin^es (...) (...), promised to (...) their kingdom,
if they should forsake the faith and that the (...) their (...) promised to
(...) nounce their* (...) and t^ rebel (...), i^ their Prince should ^ might
forsake the ^ (...) (say you) ^t is contai^ed in (...) of the thing that is
promised. And here you speak somewhat darkly, like a lawyer, and quote us up
law out of Pomponius in your margin, and to make the matter plainer, you bring
in the ensample of a contract in marriage, between the man and the woman: the man
says, I take thee to my wife, the woman says, and I take thee to my husband.
In these words here is no naming of continuance (...) and ye^ ^o this contract
it is comprehended^*

Your law rol^, and your ensample are good, M. Sau^ders, but your (...) is all.
For in the nature of the promise at Baptism: ^o (...) of authority, or
obedience, is either named (...) ^hended. There is, I grant a contract made
for thef^rmei of all their lives, to keep the faith of The contracte made to
christ in Baptism.
Christ, and this all their lives they ought to keep. But that they promised
either ^o ^nounce their own estates, or their Princes estates, for the breach
of this contract: that is neither spoken nor thought upon in baptism, nor is
contained in the nature of it. For Christ^, nor the compacte with him, brakes
not the Civil and po^e ^state, of men's government or obedience but rather
(...) it. As for Kings, are not ^ommonly king^ at their Baptism, nor are made
kings by Baptism, (except you speak of spiritual kings, as The king promised
not to renounce his kingdom when he was Baptized.
they are mystical members of Christ.) and now and then, he that is a king,
was a private persons chr^de, and no man knew at his Baptism, that ^uer he
should become a king: as for the* (...), had least o^ all, any such intention:
how could (...) th^n of renouncing a kingdom, be intended in his promise at
Baptism? and much less on the subject behalts: for if in their promise at
Baptism, should be intended the condition of refusing obedience to their The
subject promised not to renounce his Prince at Baptism.
Prince then ^daid be (...) a thing, that neither lies in their power to
perform (for all subjects can not for sake their obedience, and they would
never so ^aine) neither if they would and could, they should refuse it. It is
not (as Dottor Story, far unlike a lawyer, and far more unlike a Christian,
said at his (...)) (...) ^ subi^s choice and D. Stories error in defending that
subjects misliking their princes may forsake them.
power to forsake his Princes obedience and his country, and go whether he
list, to live under what Prince he fansieth: for by this ^anes, all policics
may be soon dissolved, and subjects were even as good rebel against their
Princes, as go their way from them, and forsake their subjection to them: They
made no such promise at Baptism, to forsake their Princes authority* ^o
though^ (...) should be^me an infidel: To forsake his and all others
infidelity, and not to obey him, or any other, in his (...)* this they
promised, but not to forsake him in his authority: but rather their
authority, being an ordinance of ^d, and their obedience to their magistrates,
whatsoever they b^, being also What we all promised in Baptism.
gods commandment, they are (...) by their Baptism, not to forsake it.
Princes also, and all subjects are ^u^d in baptism, to renounce all other
sin, and as long as they live to cleave to al other virtues, and this is
directly comprehended in their covenant. If now the Prince or the people after
Baptism, shall forsake any virtue, and clean^ to any ^n, (...) they be
therefore deposed from their estates? who should not the^ be deposed?

Let us take your own example of marriage, The man says The example of a
contracte in marriage.
to the woman, I take thee to my wife, the woman says to the man, I take thee
to my husband: here is (say you) no menction made of continuing together till
death and yet it i^ comprehended. In deed M. Saunders in these words yt you
cite, it is not mentioned, but both in yours and our order of marying, eue^
those words also be by name expressed, till death us depart: and God has
expressed them saying: who^ god has joined, let not man Math. 14.
separate. But there are other words also, not intended only, but expressed,
as these, which the man promises, that he will love the woman comfort her,
honor and keep her. etc. the Promise brech in marriage.
woman likewise to the man, that she will love, cheryshe, honor and obey him.
These things either do promise to keep to other, and these things belong to ye
nature of y^ contract also. ^ disobey her husband, or (...) not, ^r honor him,
as she has promised and ought to do: if agains the man love not her, or
cherishe her not, as he has also promised and ought to do: neither only
brackes fall ou^ between them, but also ^he ^ise coutinueth (...), the man
(...) ^ forsake the other, (...) the promise ma^e in the contract is ^ and yet
they are (in the contract made between them) bound to as (...) a (...) of (...)
those virtues, as to (...) that (...)* No, they are not ^und ^ther, ^o forsake
the one thi^ other (...). In which case they may forsake* (...), they may be
^conciled, and continue together. ^ut (you (...)) in this case of swaruing from
the (...), the subject and the Prince may not continue together* ^ (...) the
man and the woman are by their contract in marriage, knit inseparably together,
(especially as As the priest (...) the man and the woman, so the B. cannot
separate the prince and the subject.
the Papists ma^e the contract, that it is never undone, for any vice, no not
for whordome, although they grant, there may be in n^ne, but (...) deed a
separation:) so the Prince and the ^ubiect, being contracted together in the
polycie of a (...) the one (...) faithful government, the (...) promising
faithful obedience, notwithstanding all their vices, that fall out afterward
between them, may not be ^ieane parted a sunder, the Prince from his
authoritio; the su^iect from his obedienc^, but till their lives ends, most
(...) together* and as the priest ^an not (...) ^ but, by your own (...) makes
(...) against you. But now ^ay ^n, and move your question, M. Saunders.

I ask (say you) if this by name, should come in question, whether Sand. page
79. and. 80.
this should, not necessarily be answered to that King, which would become a
Christian? Let it be, that King Lucius come to Blessed Eleutherius the Pope,
yea or else king Clodoueus to Blessed Remigius, and desire them selves to be
admitted into the society of the Christian people. But let us suppose, that
the Blessed Eleutherius or Remigius answer to either of them: we are glad
(most dear Son) that thou desire to be made a Citizen of the kingdom of
heaven, but this thou ought to know for certainty, that the case is not
^ke in the kingdom of heaven, as it is in the world. For in the Church, thou
must live so, that thou make captive thy understanding 1. Cor 10. Math. 19.
to the obedience of ^aith. But thou, how greater thou art in the world, may
so much the more hurt the Church of God, ^f thou shall abuse the right of thy
sword, to the defense of heretics, contrary to the Catholic faith. No
otherwise therefore may thou have entry into the Church, than if thou shalt
promise, that thou will persist in that sa^h, and defend that Church, with all
thy force, which being received from the Apostles, is continued by the
succession of Bishops until this day, and dispersed through out all the
world. But if it shall chance thou do otherwise, thou shall not refuse, but
shall go from the right of thy kingdom, and promise to lead a private life:
here if the King Lucius make answer: I am ready to acknowledge the Christian
faith, but I neither promise that I will defend with my sword, the Catholic
faith neither will I (for whatsoever I shall do) give over the right of my
kingdom. Can the Bishop to this man thus affected, minister the Sacrament of
Baptism, and deliver the sacrament of thanksgiving? can he therefore be a
member of Christ, that will not submit his Scepter unto Christ, and refuses to
serve him?

Your example and your question hang not together, M. Saunders to your last
question, I answer, that he can not be a member of Christ, that will not
submit his Scepter unto Christ, and refuses to serve him. But what is this
question to your former question, of submitting himself to the Bishop to
depose him? there is greater difference, betwixt Christ's Scepter, and the
Bishops Crosier, than between the Kings Crown and the Bishops Miter.

But to come to your examples which draw somewhat M. S^ers examples of King
Lucius and King Clodoue^s.
nerer to your purpose. First, trow you, that these two examples, of King
Lucius and Clodoue^, will answer al th^se and serve for all Kings? I suppose
they will not* For these kings received Baptism, being of lawful years, and
^ight have made a voluntary grant, to all that you pr^suppose, your Bishops
would have demau^^ed of the^, and so might have snarled themselves in their
briers and bondage. But yeuta^ The state of infants not like these Princes.
not presuppose ye like of infants, especially of those infantes, whose parents
were Christ^ Princes before, who are baptized long before they are kings. And
although they might order y^ child, as ill as they ordered y^ other, yt ^o
rawly came to Christendom: yet would not the parents being alread^e
Christened, bring their Children in such bondage. Neither could they demand it
of a child, which was not a king, nor perchance borne to a kingdom, but gat
it afterward by prowess.

Secondly these be but vain presupposals and false. For although M. Saund
presupposals of these two princes are false. King Lucius his baptism.
Clodouen^ was Baptized by Remigius: yet was not Lucius baptized by
Eleutherius, but either by the two preachers which Eleutherius sent, or as it
rather appears, by ye content of Eleutherius letters, King Lucius was
himself a Christian before, and therefore Eleutherius sent them not as Legates,
nor sent any such conditions by them, nor any laws or ceremonies of the Church
of Rome, but refers y^ King to the word of God, and was so far from taking
upon him to be gods Ui^ar, over the King and his kingdom: that in plain words
be yeldeth that authority and title to King Lucius. And as for Clodoueus,
though he call Remigius his patron and author Aimonius li. 1 de gestis
Francorum. ca. 16.
of the discipline and Religion, because he baptized him and in structed him
therein: yet as for any such covenant or condition, not to admit him to the
faith of Christ, except he would swear before hand, that if he would not
defend the Bishops and their faith, he should forsake his kingdom, and
promise to lead a private life: Remigius conditioned no such thing, no more
than Elentherins before had done to Lucius. For when Clodoneus being an
infidel, and yet having a Christian wise The order how King Clodoue^s was
bapti^ed.
which made him som^hat more enclinable: and being in battle against the
Almaines, and making his vow to Christ in his distress, to receive the
Christian faith, if he should get the victory: which being obtained, and he
returned home with triumph, willing to receive the faith of Christ: his wise
made have to Remigius ye Bishop of Remes Lxhorting him (says ^onius) forthwith
to come to the Court, that while he wauered yet in suspense, he would open to
him the way of truth, that leads to God: for (she said) she feared, least his
mind puffed up with prosperity, while he knows not the giver of these
things, he should contemn him. For things that fall out as we would have
them, fall out of our mind likewise, in continuance of ryme, more easily than
those things, that fall out otherwise than we would. The Bishop hasteneth to
obey the admonishing of the Religious woman. He presents himself to the sight
of the King, that now a pretty while had aboade his coming. The faith is
declared by the Bishop, the means of believing is taught. The King also
acknowledging the faith, devoutly promises that he w^l serve one God. As for
the peers of his Realm and army, he will prove his opinion, which what it is
of this matter, he affirms, that so much more denoutly they would submit
their necks to Christ, how much more they should see themselves to be provoked
with entreaties, rather tha^ with terrors. The condition pleases, a public
calling forth of the people is made by the Kings commandment, to whom the
King makes an oration, and persuadeth ye people to receive the faith of
Christ, and moves them to submit their necks to Christ, the priest rejoices,
that the King not yet baptized, is beco^e an Apostle of his own nation and so
the King is baptized.

What condition is here made by the Bishop unto the Here was no sech
conditions of deposing exacted of the Bishop in the Princes baptism.
King, of giving over his realm, and deposing himself? which might have done
more heart tha^ good. In what cou^nant did the people here bind themselves, to
loo^e the liberti^ of chosing their King, or promise to forsake their King, if
their King forsake the faith? here was no such bondage ^red, ^ther to the King
by the Bishop, and the King thought good to offer none such to the people, but
with gentle persuasions to all^re them. So that these presupposals of these
Bishops speeches unto these Princes, are utterly false, and forged, only to
drive in the readers heads, a surmise of seem such conditional admission to
the Christian faith, in these elde Princes days, which was nothing so nor so.
And yet by these colorable presupposals, he enforces his matter with a
question, aying:

Can the Bishop to this man thus affected minister the sacrament of Baptism
and give the sacrament of thanksgiving?

Why, M. Sau^ders, here was no such condition moved, and yet Remigius gave
Clodoneus the sacrament of Baptism* In deed the sacrament of that k^giuing,
he gave not then unto him, neither was it necessary till he were instructed in
the mystery of it. And therefore this is as fondly added in this case, to the
Sacrament of Baptism, as your case of Baptism is craftily and malicio^sly
devised, to bring Princes in bondage unto Bishops. But this King, though he
and his people submitted their necks to Christ, yet did he not thus submit
himself and his people to the Bishop. The long promises to (...) one God,
but not to (...) either the Bishop of Remes, or the Bishop of Rome* These
knackes and conditions of bondage, for Princes to promise and ^weare obedience
to the Pope and to his Bishops, yea to swear to depose themselves and become
p^uate men, if they forscke this cons^rained obedience: is of later times, as
the Popes power and tirannie has grown, and has (...) to Christian Princes,
and great hu^lie but l^s in many Christian kingdoms. But yet it never went
thus for as it The s^uerie that M. Saund. would bring Princes into pasieth the
Spa nishe ^quisition.
now should do* if M. Saunders might have hie mind, for it was never urged in
their Christ^dome before. This pasieth ye slavery of the Spanish Inquisitio^,
that no Prince nor people should be christened, except they swear to these
exceptio^s.

In the old time when the Prophets anointed kings, they told them of the
blessings of God to come upon them, and their posterity to sit in their
seat after them, and that God would build them an house to continue, if they
served him, and walked faithfully in his ways. And if they The promises and
threats of God, that the ancient prophets declared unto kings.
should do the contrary, how God would rende the kingdom from them, and
give it to another. Of such promises and threats that the Prophets told the
kings, we read, and of the promises that the kings made again to God, we
read: but that any Prophet compounded with the king before, that he should
renounce his kingdom, or that any king took either their circumcision or
their kingdom on such condition, or that the king reuolting from his promise,
either voluntarily, or by compulsion deposed him self, or was deposed of the
Bishop, Priest, or Prophet of God: these things y^ can not show us, but these
things ye should show us, if ye will make good your sayings, and directly
prove your purpose. You tell us here a tale of a tubbe, in the name of these
kings and Bishops, that they never did, nor (I think) did ever think of any
such devises.

But go too, let us now presuppose with M. Saunders, M. Saunders presuppose
admitted.
even as he imagines. A King would be baptized. The Bishop says: We are glad
(most dear son) that thou desire to be made a citizen of the kingdom of
heaven, but this thou ought to know for certayntie, that the case is not
like in the kingdom of heaven, as it is in the world, for in the Church thou
must live so, that thou make captine thy understanding to the obedience of
faith. But thou how greater thou art in the world, may so much the more
hurt the Church of God, if thou shalt abuse the right of thy sword, to the
defense of heretics, contrary to the Catholic faith. No otherwise therefore
thou may have entry into the Church, than if thou shall promise, that thou
will persist in that faith, and defend that Church, with all thy force,
which being received from the Apostles, is continued by the succession of
Bishops until this day, and dispersed through out all the world. But if it
shall chance thou do otherwise, thou shall not refuse, but shalt go from
the right of thy kingdom, and promise to lead a private life.

M. Saunders now presupposes that the king (hearing the Bishop thus begin
to indent with him) will begin his answer to the Bishop thus:

I am ready to acknowledge the Christian faith.

Why, M. Sand. is not this enough? if the Bishop seek The Popish Bishops
seek more than the Christian fauh.
something else besides the acknowledging of the Christian faith: Surely he
neither seeks the glory of God, nor the Princes salvation, nor ye increase of
Christendom, but his own sucre and authority. Well, the Bishop will have him
grant to all the residue of his conditions, or else he will not baptize him.
Here again he presupposes the king to say further.

But I neither promise, that I will with my sword defend the Catholic faith,
neither will I (for whatsoever I shall do) give over the right of my kingdom.

Ye tell the kings tale parcially, M. San* you should make it flatly to deny
that, which the Bishop exacted of him to do. Which was, to promise to defend,
not the faith but that faith, and that Church, etc. Which the king denies, to
make promise unto the Bishop on such condition. Yea? says M. Sand. and
saucely steppeth in for the B. can the B. to this man thus affected, minister
the sacrament of baptism? etc.

And why not (M. San.) if the bishop be not worse affected him self than this
man is? for you grant your self, that he is well affected toward the
christian faith and would acknowledge it, which is al one with defending it.
And if the bishop be not content with this promise, has not ye king good cause
to suspect him? he tells him of bonds and conditions to be made, to renounce
the right of his kingdom, if he per^e not in that faith with all his force, if
he defend not that church, that was received from the Apostles, continued by
succession of B. till this day and i^ dispersed throughout all the world.

May not here the king (as it is likely, by M. Sand. tale, he has wit and
wisdom enough) begin to smell a rat, and think The kings examination of the
Bishops condition.
with him self: what should he mean to put this differ^ce? I freely offered
to receive the Christian faith, and he will not take this offer, but will have
me receive that faith, and that Church, that (he says) was from the Apostles,
and is continued by succession of Bishops till this day, and is dispersed
throughout all the world. Why, and is not this the christian faith, and the
christian Church? If it be, I offered my self to it before, but he refaseth
my offer. Then surely this is not that faith and Church, that he means. And
why should he rather have me bound to the Apostles, (if they were Christ's
Apostles) than to Jesus Christ him self? shall I be baptized in their names?
why should I bind my self to Bishops succestors which what they have been, and
how ill, or how welsome of them have succeeded their predecessors, I know not,
nor I will swear for the^. And why should I then swear unto them, rather
than unto the faith of Christ, who is the chief Bishop of our souls? And why
should I bind my self to * Church dispersed throughout all the world? What
means he by this? the greatest and mightiest multitude? or the little flock
of Christ scattered in every Nation? or be it great or little, why should he
bind me more to men, than unto Jesus Christ? And why requires he to these
things, (as if it were, even to Christ him self, and to the faith of him) the
defense of all my force, and what means he by this force? that I shall for
all these things, gather all my power, and make sharp war, where, and when
he co^maundes me? and that I shall oblige my self to al these conditions, on
the forfeyture of my kingdom, and depose my self from my ^ght, and become a
private man, and leave the office and charge yt God has called me unto, for
leaving of these things. Yea and that if I should not wilfully do otherwise,
but if I should chance to do otherwise. And what if he would threape upon me,
that I chanced to do otherwise? Surely, surely, this is not plain dealing
with me, nor any good meaning to me. He seeks not my salvation, but my
kingdom, that thus would snarle me, and is not content that I freely offer to
acknowledge the Christian faith.

What if the King would cast all these conjectures, master Saunders? trow you
he has not good occasion ministered? yea, what if the King here upon, being
thus refused of the Bishop, examined these things thoroughly? should he not
find foul holes in your coat? I tell you, it would touch you to the quick.
And perhaps it had been better for the Bishop to have taken the kings free
offer, and without such conditions to have given him his baptism: for else he
might have it of some other Bishops hands, that had learned of Christ, not to
break the broosed reed, nor to quench the smoking flax, nor to cast off,
by such indentinges, this godly disposed Prince, but with all humility and
diligence, to receive, instruct, and baptize him, yea and bewray all your
Popish iuglinges. And what had ye gotten then, by these your proud
conditions? has not your pride and covetousness made you make a fair
market, and loose so rich a pray?

But now let us yet admit your presupposall further. M. Saunders
presupposall admitted once again.
The king would be baptized. The Bishop refuses, except on these conditions,
to admit him. The king sees there is no remedy, he receives these
conditions. What is his duty now to do, but with all his force to persist and
defend them* What is that? for sooth, that faith and Church, which being
received from the Apostles, is continued by the succession of Bishops, until
this day, and dispersed throughout The kings diligent travel to discharge his
charge, and perform the condition.
all the world. Now sith this is his charge, and he is bound to observe it
with all his force, on forfeyture of his kingdom: is it not g^ reason, that he
examine and boulte out, which this faith and Church is. Especially since he
hears that there is great controversy about these matters, and that there
are both wise, learned, and famous men of both sides. Yea? says he, if the
case be not clear, that I am so strayghtly bound in, it stands me upon, to
look to this gear better, and to hear both parties say what they can, that
I may know and be sure, that I keep my promise, and not to forfayt my bond.

What now (for his better assurance) shall the prince do? must he not here, call
both the parties before him, and say to The king^ ^ration.
the Bishop that took thi^ promise of him? ^y Lord, you remember what promise
you made me make unto you, or ever you would baptize me. And now I hear say,
the ^oyntes that you made me promise, to defend with all my force, and to
persist therein, are litigious. You hold them one way, and your aduerfaries
another way: you say, your faith and Church, is that faith and Church, that was
received of the Apostles, for howesoeuer the succession of Bishops have held
it, and whersoeuer it has been dispersed, the receipte of the Apostles from
Christ himself, I perceive, is the first and principal condition, that I
promised to persist in, and to defend withal my force. The other twain must
both depend on this I chiefly mind therefore to k^pe this, and the other as
they shall agree hereto. But here your adversaries, on the other p^t, (...) and
offer to prove it, that your faith and Church is not that faith and Church that
the Apostles received and delivered, but i^ a faith and Church ^egenerate, and
swarnedfromit. And therefore if you will not be your selves the cause, t^ make
me break the promise that ye made me take: ye must clear your selves of
that* your adversaries object against you, and confute them. And you she
Bishops adversaries, on the other side, must^ bring forth your proves, and
defenses of your faith and Church, and show good reason, why I should not
impugn your faith and church, and defend theirs against you. And here for
equal dealing between you both, being parties playntife or defendaunt,
neither of you your selves shall be your own, or your adversaries Judge (for
the one were partiality, the other injury) neither I (whom the matter, both
for my office, and for my promise and forfeyture, touches nearest) will be
your Judge, but an indifferent hearer of both parties. And because you both
admit the Scriptures to be Gods word, and both the Apostles faith, and the
Apostles Church, is manifestly recorded in the Scriptures, and Christ also
wills us to search the Scriptures, for they bear record of him: the matter
shall be determined by the Scriptures. Both of your fai^hes and Churches shall
be leueled by that platform, that shall be there apparently expressed. And as
the Scripture shall strike the stroke between you, I will minister (...)
rightly, to save my promise. And will de^ende with all my force, that faith and
Church, that I find in deed received from the Apostles, and will extirpate
with all my force, that faith and Church that is degenerate from it.

What if the King say thus, master Saunders? trow you the Bishop hearing this
(which notwithstanding is but right and reason, and the King even of the
Bishop enforced thereto) will he accept the offer? No, master Saundess, the
Bishop will cry out, and so will you, that the matter shall not go thus,
and that the King may not do this, howsoever it stand him upon. But you will
appeal from him, unto your selves, as Judges. Which when the King shall
hear, will (...) not judge this a mad appeal? and suspecte your cause the
worsse? and think that you plainly would abuse him? And so, to keep his
promise made unto you, turn his force justly against you? Have you not here
made a rod for your own tail, if the Prince be but indifferent, and not too
much, either of simplicity or dastardie abused by you? And thus by the
righteous judgment of God, your own tyranny is the cause of your own
plague: and that by the seife (...) means, whereby you would unjustly have
hampered the Prince, he has justly hampered you. I pray God all Christian
Princes would once take these just occasions, to examine well, but even those
duties and tyties that you put unto them, and would but minister justice to
you, even as you ha^ forced them thereto. And thus much, M. Saunders, for your
presupposed examples, between these Kings and Bishops* Let us now behold
how you proceed upon them.

How therefore said the Lord in Daniel? kingdom, and power, Sand page 80.
Daniel. 7.
and the might of kingdom, that is under all the heaven shall be given to the
people of the Saints of the Highest. Whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,
and all Kings or powers shall serve and obey him. How said the Lord (as it is
in Esaias) unto his Church? The sons of strangers Esai. 60.
shall build thy walls, and the Kings of them shall minister unto thee, and
their sons that have brought thee low, shall come and bow them selves to
thee, and all those that spoke evil of thee, shall worship the steps of
thy feet. How shall the word of Christ be true, wherein Luc. 10. Math. 16.
he said too* his Disciples, he that despyseth you, despyseth me, or that
that he said too Peter: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build*
my Church, and the ga^, of Hell shall not prevail against it.

You are a waster, Master Saunders, to make such lauishe of your proves so
impertinently, or rather, you are wrester too apply them so falsely. For the
King that here refuses the Bishops conditions: offers him self most
freely too all obedience that is here mentioned, in offering himself to
acknowledge the Christian says. As for the Lords sentence in Daniel* Daniels
prophecy wrested.
prophesying of the immortal glory, that after the judgment of Christ, shall
be given to the Saints of the most highest, and of the obedience to Christ's
everlasting kingdom: these are other matters, and are so wrested of you to the
state of this life, that it will breed you some suspicion of being a
Millenarie M Sand. to be suspected of being a Milenarie here ^ke.
heretic, except you say you meant it spiritually. But then it touches not the
kings polytike estate. But howsoever you mean it, you do great injury to
kings, and show no less arrogancy in your selves to apply that unto you,
that is spoken of the Saints of the highest. This kingdom and power, that he
speaks of, is theirs, yea kings, so well as any other be partakers of it, and
you claim it allonly to your Priestly and Bishoply power: whereas it is rather
to be doubted, that ye shall have no parts at all thereof. But your portion in
the kingdom of proud Lucifer, that not only apply this to your selves: but
also the glory and kingdom due to Christ, of the obedience to which,
Daniell plainly speaks, and you wrest it to the obedience of your Bishops.
As for this obedience to Christ, the king did offer to yield it, in offering
to acknowledge the Christian faith. But your Bishop was not content therewith.
And you to help your bishop and to dismay the king, make the bishops demand
such a necessary thing, that you ask, how did the Lord speak in Daniell,
except kings should offer to renounce their kingdoms unto priests? What,
master Saunders, wax you so saucy with God, to argue him of a lie, but the
saying of God is true, and you are liars, and the king may still keep his
kingdom from your Clutches. ^say wrested.


Your second text is a couple of textes, out of Esaias, but no less wrested
than the other, to make Princes stoop to Prelates, and kiss the ground they
go upon, to give Bishops Kings tre^ures and dominions, and make kings to wait
on Priests. In dee^e on this wife your Pope did proudly wrest the Scripture,
when he troad on the Emperors neck, when he turned down hi^ Disdeme with his
foot, when he made him dance attendance and blow his nails at his gate,
when he made him hold his ^lurrop, when he made him lead his horse, when he
made him kiss his gowtie, I should say his golden toa. But this was more than
Neroes pride, and is most far from gods liking, from Christ's humility, from
the Apostles steps, and clean from the The Prophet speaks of the Church,
and the Papists apply it to the priests
Prophets meaning. The Prophet speaks of much honor and riches to be given,
but to whom? tibi, o thee. Who was this, the Priest or Bishope have you any more
she Bishops, or Pope Ioanes yet, M. Saunders? for the words of the Prophet
begin thus: Surge, splendida esto. I trow you will not say this was a Bishop.
No, M. Saunders it was even the wife of Christ, the Church of God, whom he
calls Sion, that the Prophet speaks unto. These texts therefore being spoken
to the Church, that is, to all the faithful people, of whom kings themselves
are part so well as any other: it is malapartly d^ne of you Master Saunders,
to ascribe it only to your Bishops.

Howbeit, this arrogating the name of the Church to your selves is not so
sa^cis, but your missunderstanding of this description in a literal sense,
being spoken of a mystical The glory that the prophet understands
mystically, the Papists understand it literally.
estate, is no less gross than full of errors. The whole chapter has many
such pro^ises, of shyning, of glory, of glittering, of riches, of waters, of
Camels, of coltes, of gold, of frank insence, of sheep, of ramines, of do^es,
of ships, of buildings, of walls, of gates, of beeches, of Pines, of box, of
sucking, of milk, of brass, of stones, of Iron, of light, of the Sun, of
the Moon, of plants, of trees, and such other worldly things, whereby be
discribeth the beauty and flourishing estate of the Charche, according to the
manner of the Hebrews phrases, and the capacity of the Jews, that were moved
by such worldly things Now comes Master Saunders, and picketh me out two
sentences, and sets them together, being in the text a sunder: That the sons
of strangers shall build up thy walls and Kings shall serve thee. And to this
he adds the other sentence in the same Chap. And the sons of them that
afflicted thee, shall come to thee humbly, and shall bow themselves even to
the plants of thy feet, eue^ all they that despised thee, and call thee the
city of the Lord, Sion of the holy Israel.

Had you set the sentence down thus far, you had marred al, Master
Saunders* For then you had bewrayed your wresting of this unto ye Bishops. And
had you set down all the chapter, you had showed such inconveniences in
understanding The Papists and the Jews sored in one error of dreaming after
worldly glory*
this glory of the Church and service of Princes in the literal sense, and
after a worldly fashion: that you must needs have confessed all these things,
to have other spiritual meanings. Which the Jews not marking, in these and
such like prophecies, of the kingdom of the Messiah, and the glory of Sion,
but taking the same in the bare sense of the words, as you do, were so sotted
on a worldly glory and kingdom, that they quite despised the poverty of
Christ, and to this day despise it: looking for a Messiah that (as they sansie)
shall reign in all worldly pomp, and subdue all kingdoms and people to him,
and therefore they scrape up money so fast to help him. And so you Papists in
these prophecies of the kingdom of Christ, and the glory of his Church, have as
gross understanding as the Jews: and dispising the simplicity of the
Gospel, nor beholding the spiritual ornaments of the spouse of Christ:
think the worship of God lies in such outward glory. And hearing of
obedience and service of Kings to Christ and to his Church: think it consistes
in this, that Kings must swear to you to renounce their kingdoms, and hold
them of the Pope, and be obedient to him, and he and his Prelates must florishe
in all worldly pomp and riches. Is not this the Jews error up and down?
howbeit in oppressing of Kings you are worse than the Jews, and in se^ing
(...) honor here, very Cerinthia^s, and shall never have it else where,
except you forsake your errors.

Your third sentence, Luke 10. he that dispiseth you dispiseth Christ's sente^cs
wrested. Luc. 10.
me: as it makes nothing for you, being nothing such as those were, who^
Christ did send, so being understood of those that are in deed sent of
Christ, is nothing to this purpose. We grant that no godly ministers ought to
be despised. And if they be, Christ their sender is despised. But as they ought
not in their calling, to be despised of the Prince, so no more ought the Prince
to be despised of them, much less to be trodden under their feet, and their
kingdoms to be taken from them, as your Popes have used them, and you would
have the^ here be spoiled. Whereby it appears, yt you are not such as Christ
does send, but are of Satan's sending, to breed contempts, seditio^s, and
treasons against Princes, to maintain your pride and carnal pleasures, of
whom Saint Jude did Jude. epist.
prophecy, that defiling your flesh you despise authority, and r^yle on the
Majesty of your Sovereigns.

Your fourth sentence, Mat. 16. of Christ saying to Peter, Christ's sentenc^
wrested. Math. 16.
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it, is altogether besides the matter. It is
your chief place wrested for your Popes vsurpatio^, but I see not how it is
brought in here against ye Princes authority, except you will make a kings
estate to be the gates of hell. But as the Princes estate is the ordinance of
God, so I rather think the attempt to The gates of hell.
depose the Prince, to be, if not the gates of hell* yet one of the readiest
ways to hell, as we have example of Core, Dathan, and Abiron, that went not by
the gate, nor by the posterne, but were swallowed up and toombled in quick to
hell. And although the rebellious Papists go not down that ways, yet shall
they be sure to come to hell, and I think rebellion be one of the broadest
gates that hell has, for Papists on a plompe to enter.

Now that M. Samders has (as he thinks) with these texts, confirmed the
Bishops refusal of Baptising the king, he will admit the Bishop will Baptize
him, and see what inconvenience shall ensue.

For (says he) if the Bishop will baptize him, whom he hears Sand. page 80.
by name, saying, that he will not submit his Diadem to Christ, or, that is
all one, he not will make his kingdom subject to the ministers of Christ, even
in the cause of faith: where is that obedience of faith, which the Apostles
were sent to procure Romans 1.
in all nations? is it meet that he which denounces, that he will not want
his empire for no fault at all, should notwithstanding be armed with the name
of a Christian, and with the sacraments of Christ, to lay the greater
ambushments against his Church? for who doubts, that there is greater danger
of the domestical, than of the foraigne enemy.

Surely M. Saunders, I am of your opinion in this last sentence. Domestical
and forain enemies
Out of doubt, there is greater danger of the domestical, than of the
foraigne enemy. We see ye apparent experience in your Pope, that is so much
the more perilous enemy to the Christian faith, as he prete^deth to be the
Uicar of Christ, the servant of the servants of God a father of fathers in
Christ's What a perilous enemy the Pope is.
Church (for so his name Papa, signifies) and is in deed a robber of Christ's
glory, a hider of Christ's Gospel, a setter up of his own decrees, a spoyler
of all kings and kingdoms, a begniler of the people under a show of holiness,
an Angel of darkness shyning like an Angel of light, a ravening wolf in a
sheep clothing, a child of perdition himself, and pretending to save other
from perdition, the man of sin, and calling himself a God. There is greater
danger of such a puppet of ye devil, thus disguised like a God, than is of
the heathen, tha^ is of the Jews, than is of Mahomet, than is of the great
Turk, than is of the Devil himself. And the like greater danger is of all
dissemblyng Papists in the Courts and Realms of protestant Princes, than is
of open Papists and apparent enemies. I beseech God, they may be looked unto,
and removed from such places, yt there may be less danger of the^. Whether the
king or the B. in M. Sand. presupposal be more enemy to the Church.
As for this Prince and Bishop that M. Saunders makes his presupposals upon,
there is far greater danger to the Church of God in this Bishop, than in
this Prince. For first the Prince, not of compulsion, but of his own
voluntary, not of craft or malice, or any other sinister affection, but of
good heart and mere devotion (for so king Lucius and Clodoueus did) comes
to the Bishop to be baptized, and humbly offers to acknowledge the faith of
Christ. What danger is here toward the Church of Christ by this good Princes
offer, or not rather great benefit to the Church of Christ, to have so mighty
a Realm as England or France to become Christian, by this offer? why is not
this offer taken? for sooth, the B. refuses it. Is not here a great injury
offered to Christ's Church, by this B? but why does the B. thus? because the
Prince will not promise obedience to the Prelates, and to renounce his
kingdom, if he swerve from his obedience to them. Is this a sufficient cause,
for want of obedience to the Priest, to defeat Christ of his obedience?

Nay (say you) he made an exception that he vvoulde not submit his Diadem to
Christ.

By your leave M. Saunders, there you say not true. Look on your own
presupposall once again, yea, on the words you made the Prince to speak,
which although they were of your own devising, for you never, I suppose,
heard or read of Prince desirous to be baptized, that spoke on that fashion,
you do but tell the Princes tale to your advantage: yet find you no such
words, in the words that you speak for him, yea, he speaks the contrary,
in offering to acknowledge the faith of Christ.

But (say you) he would not submit his Diadem and make his kingdom subject
in the cause of faith, to the Ministers of Christ, and that is all one with
denying to submit his Diadem to Christ. Yea, Master Sanders? were it admitted,
ye were ministers of Christ, is Christ and you al one? and the submissio^ to
Christ and to his ministers al one? Backare M. Sa^. there is a great
difference. And yet Christ requires no submission of Diademes or subjection of
kingdoms, in such sort unto him, that he would have kings resign them up to
him, and he would take them: no, he never used that practice. He might have
had such kingdoms, if he had list, but he refused them, as your self before
have confessed. Although your Pope will have kings resign their kingdoms
unto ^pe can Christ's ^er.
him, and he will take them, and ruffle in greater pomp, than any king uses
to do. Which argues plainly that he is not Christ's minister. And therefore
the king hardyly may refuse his unlawful demand, that he would in the name
of Christ extort, as Christ's officer, which his master Christ both refused
himself, and forbad in his ministers. And therefore the Prince does Christ
no injury, because he will not bring his kingdom thrall to a false Priest,
pretending to be Christ's Minister, being indeed the Minister of the tempter,
that offers worldly kingdoms. ^tth. 4.


But (say you) he must make his kingdom subject to them, in the cause of
faith. As though the cause of faith were he cause of ^aith.
hindered, if the King made not his kingdom subject to the Priests? where as
this were the reddiest way, both to destroy the kingdom and the faith?

No (Master Saunders) the faith of Christ was never more sincere, than when
the Ministers of Christ were obedient subjects to their kings. And the cause
of faith was never more weakened and corrupted, than sith Priests have wrong
themselves out of their kings subiections, and that the Popes have made the
Kings swear obedience unto them.

But Master Saunders whines at this, crying out: where is the obedience of
faith, that Christ sent his Apostles ^edience of
to procure in all the world?

You do well (Master Saunders) to ask where it is? for surely it is not with
you, nor in all your Popish kingdom, except here and there lurking, and dare
not show her head, for fear your Popish Inquisitors, would get her by the
polle. The obedience of faith was free, when Priests were subjects: and since
Priests became Princes, they have taken her captive, and exiled her, and done
all that they could to have killed her. But she is escaped your hands, and
requicouereth that liberty, that the Apostles procured in all nations for her.
And she does so much the better, because she rereth not worldly subjection of
Princes, but lets Princes keep the estate of their kingdoms: and requires
not only obedience to her, in a more spiritual submission. Which the more
Princes yield unto her, they bring not their kindomes into more slavery, but
into more liberty, renown and honor. So that I trust shortly, they will
bring the Pope and his proud Prelates, to their old obedience again.

Why (say you) this is to arm Princes against the Church.

Nay Master Saunders, it is rather to strengthen the Church, to let Princes
have that armor that is due unto them.

What? (say you) to let them do what they will, and for nothing they shall
do, to say they will not leave their Empire?

No body Master Saunders, gives Princes authority to do what they will. The
authority that is given them, is What thep^inces will ought to be?
only to do good. Their will must not be what they will, but what Law
will. It is not with them, as it is with your Pope: Sic volo, sic Iubeo, stet
pro ratione voluntas. Thus I will, and thus I command, my will shall stand
in stead of reason. The Law is not with them in scrinio pectoris, in the cofer
of the breast, as your Pope says it is in his. I grant, there are Princes that
do thus, but that is not their duty: Neither do Princes make a profession (as
you say) that for nothing they will give over their authority, nor it is
required of them, nor presupposed. But their duty in their offic^ is
required, and it is presupposed they will continue therein. Which if they do
not, but break promise, shall the subjects depose them, or the Bishops
deprive them? by which rule they may quickly set upon ye Prince, for any
enormitie in civil matters too, for he promised to minister justice to al me^:
but he promised to none, to give up his crown, if he did not. Yea, though he
had made them some such express promise also, and brake it: yet could no
Bishop, nor any other private person, attempt to depose him, for the breach
thereof, but commit the vengeance to God. But this Prince that here is
presupposed, offers enough unto the Bishop, which if he refuse, not the
Prince, but the Bishop endamageth the Church of Christ.

Now Master Saunders, presupposing in this supposall, that he has clearly
euicted the case, where the Bishop by express words makes this condition
with the king: he will pursue his victory that he thinks he has gotten, and
prove that the king has promised, and is bound even as much, where the
Bishop at his baptism says no such words unto him.

But if so be (says he) all men will confess, that no Bishop Sand. 80.
can give baptism, without great sin, to that king, whom he sees so
proud: then truly although the Bishop by negligence, or forgetfulness, shall
say nothing hereof unto the king, notvvithstanding such is the obedience that
the king himself gives unto the Gospel of Christ, when he makes himself
a member of him, and desires of him to be saved, that will he, nill he,
this promise is contained in that fact, that he shall minister unto Christ,
and to the Church of Christ, either in making laws for it, or in taking
arms for it, or in giving his life for his brethren, and much more in yelding
or giving up his kingdom for his salvation. If any man come to me (says
Christ) and hate not his father and mother, (...). 14.
and wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his life also, he
can not be my disciple. But any kingdom ought not be deerer to a king, than
his own life. Therefore since every Christian ought to give his life for
Christ: how much more ought any king rather to hate his kingdom, than that
he should forsake Christ. But and if any man that comes to Christ, think
with himself otherwise than thus, he does nothing but deceive himself. For
in that that Christ has set this law in his Gospel, that no man should
come to him, that is to say, enter into his Church, but he that should be
ready rather to forsake all the goods of this world, tha^ leave the faith of
Christ: then in that that any Christian king is made a Christian, he promises
not only to fosake his kingdom, but his life also, rather than he should
bring offense to his brethren. If therefore the same king shall so sin
against the Christian faith, that by no means he will be amended: he may by
the ministers of Christ be deprived of his kingdom. Not that all temporal
kingdoms, are under the ministers of Christ: but because the kingdoms of all
Christian Princes, by the nature of the thing that is done, are made subject
to them, so often as it is expedient for the salvation of the people, that the
kingdoms should either this way, or that way, be translated.

Here is a fair tale M. Saunders, but a foul conclusion. Bishops translatio^s
of king domes this way or that way.
The drift of all, is this, Bishops may translate kingdoms either this way
or that way, as they shall think expedient for the peoples salvation How
say you M. Saunders, is not this your conclusion? you make exception that all
kingdoms be not under you* as though some were, as indeed you have gotten too
many under you. Where Christ says, you shall have none under you, but you
will needs have some. Yea, by this rule you will have al christian kingdoms
under you. For how are they not under you, if they may be translated this
way, or that way, and given to this man or to that man, as often as you shall
think it expedient? are not you then the Kings of Kings, when you may depose
and set up Kings, and alter clean topsie turuie) which you call translating)
the state of every kingdom, at your pleasures? Indeed Master Saunders, the
Bishop said not thus much before to the King that would be baptized. Well,
say you, it was but his negligence, or forgetfulness. And what if he said
nothing hereof? yet he meant it, yea, and the King Whether the kings promise in
baptism stretch to suffering the Bishop to depose him.
himself promised it. Where find you that Master Saunders?

Yes (say you) he promised that and more too, when he made himself a member
of Christ, and desired of Christ to be saved. For in that doing (will he,
nill he) this promise is contained, that he shall minister to Christ, and to
the Church of Christ, either in making Laws for it, or in taking Arms for
it, or in giving his life for his brethren, and much more, giving up his
kingdom for their salvation.

You iumble many things together, Master Saunders. And yet, go to, we grant
you all this, the King promised thus much, but not, will he, nill he, in
spite of his bearde: he did it willingly, in offering to acknovvledge the
faith of Christ, wherein he promised to minister to Christ, and to the
Church of Christ, as you say. But whether you be Christ or no, I think the
King will make no question. But perhaps he may move the question, whether you
be the Church, yea, any part of the Church of Christ, or no. And if he find
you to be (which I doubt me, will be an hard matter The kings mi nistration
to Christ and his Church.
to persuade the king, if it be well examined:) well then, the King shall
minister unto you. But how shall he minister? as your slave, and be at
commandment? I think (Master Saunders) you can not pick that out of his
promise.

Nay your self expound the contrary, saying, that he shall make Laws for
the Church. If you then be the Church (as ye pretend to be) he must make
Laws for you. But the Law maker to any body (by your own saying, and by
good reason) is above the parties, for whom he makes Laws, and therefore
the king, not only in the ruling of you, but even in his ministering unto you,
is above you. Now if he find you not to be of the Church: then must he make
laws, and minister justice against you, for usurping that title, and
deceiving of his people.

But (say you) he must give his life for his brethren, much more his kingdom
for their salvation. How the king ought to forsake his life or his kingdom.


You say well (Master Sanders) he ought to do so, if the forsaking his
kingdom or his life, would be his brethrens salvation. But you put a hard
case, and not commonly seen, for I think the peoples getting of salvation,
lies not upon the kings losing his life or kingdom, but only upon Jesus
Christ.

If you speak of other accidents and occasions: twenty to one, the people
are oftener in more danger by the kings death or deposition, than by his life
or gouernemente, except he be a very tyrant, and indeed his life and
government may do much hurt, and it were better he were fair buried, or did
resign, than he should govern Gods people. But God knows best what he has
to do, and can take him away when he will, or can suffer him to scourge and
exercise his people with affliction. The chafe and stubble will burn with
fire, but the Gold is purifyed, the 1. Cor. 3.
elect are tried, and are not damned by his tyranny, nor they consent unto
his wickedness, nor yet they revolt from his obedience, nor rebel and depose
him, but possess their souls in patience, and cry to God to succor them.
Lucae. 21.


Now as it falls out thus in the worste case that you can put, that no
Bishop, nor other subject may depose his Soueraign: so in a good Prince no
such thing is to be feared. And since it is to men uncertain, how the king
will prove, they judge and hope the best, because they know not the worst, and
extorte no such promise of him. Much less ought they to make a rule, that he
shall resign or suffer death, when the people will have him, and say, his life
or gouernmente hinders their salvation: or when the Bishops shall say, it is
hurtful to them: then at the Bishops so saying, the king must either lose his
kingdom, or his life: this is a hard case, M. Saunders, for poor kings, and
trow you, this is contained in their promise?

Well (say you) Christ said, if any man come to me and hate not his father,
his mother, his wife, his children, yea, his life for me, he can not be my
Disciple, much more then must Luke. 14.
he hate his kingdom, and be ready to leave his kingdom, and all the good in
the world for Christ, or else he is no Christian.

You say true, M. Sanders, he must forsake and hate al for Christ's sake. But
that he must do this for your Bishops sakes, when they will say, it is
expedient he should so do: that I find not in the words of Christ, and yet
must you beware how you expound that saying. For he is bound also, to love
and to keep to the uttermost, all these things, in their kinds, and not to
renounce nor hate the^, except they hinder him from Christ, whom he must prefer
before al things. But this love to Christ in principal, may stand together
with these loves well enough. Neither is he any more bound to resign his
kingdom, than to resign his wife into the Priests hands. Nor if he abuse
his kingdom, the Priest can no more turn him out of it, than he can, if he
abuse his goods and his wife, turn him not of his doors, and take his goods
and his wife from him, and keep her himself, or give her unto an other. This
can not the Bishop do, although the Prince and every man be bound to lose al
for Christ's cause. Yea, the Bishop is bound hereto as well as any other. And
God knows how some of them keep this bond, and yet will not they leese one
halfpennie for Christ's sake, howsoever they break it. But the kingdom is a
^oule moate in their eye, and therefore the King, poor soul, must lose all,
and they must take it from him. But now to Master Saunders other arguments.

Moreover the kingdoms of faithful Princes, whose people Sand. page 80.
fear God, are not altogether earthly or worldly. For in that part that they
have believed in Christ, they have as it were left to be of this world, and
have begone to be members of the eternal kingdom, for although the outward
face of things, which is found in kingdoms mere secular, be in a Christian
kingdom: yet since the spirit of man is far the more excellent part of him,
and the whole spirit acknowledges Christ his King and only Lord: I see
nothing, why Christian kingdoms Christian king domes are not mere seculer. 1.
Reg. 15.
ought not rather to be Judged spiritual, according to their better part, than
earthly. And this is the cause why now long since, those which governed the
people of God were wont to be anointed of his Ministers no otherwise than were
2. Paral. 26.
the Prophets and Priests. For even the Kings them selves also are after a
sort partakers of the spiritual Ministry when they are anointed: not that
they should do those things that are committed to the only Priests hereunto
orderly consecrated, but that those things, which other Kings refer to a
profane and worldly end, these Kings should now remember, that they ought to
direct to an holy end. For when they themselves are made spiritual, it is
fit they should will, that all their things should be counted as it were
spiritual. But now are spiritual things, so under the Church of Christ that
the Church may freely dispose and decree of them, to the profit of the whole
mystical body. Sith therefore the people of Israel would needs desire a
King to be given them: Samuel 1. Reg. 15.
by the commandment of God, took a cruse of oil, and powered it upon the
head of Saul, and kissed him, and said, behold God annoynteth thee, to be
the Prince over his inheritance. Which to me seems to signify, even as
though it had been said, except the Lord anointed thee to be the Prince, thou
could not rightly and orderly be the Prince over his people, which he
has chosen, and reserved out of all the world to be as it were peculiar to
himself. For in that that is gods, no man can take power to him self without
Gods permission. But God anointed Saul to be the Prince not by himself but by
Samuel his minister: wherefore whosoever rules over the Christian people (which
is no less acceptable to God, than was the people of the Jews) he, besides
the right, which he receives of God by the consent of the people, ought also
to acknowledge his power to be of Christ by his Ministers, if so be that he be
such an one that worshippeth the Faith of Christ. Whereupon to this day all
Christian kingdoms are anointed of some Christian Bishop or some other
Minister of God, referring therein their principality not only to the people,
and so unto God, but that moreover by the Priests of Christ, they refer it
unto Christ, whose Ministers they are. For Pope Leo wrote elegantly Leo in
epist. 2^. alias. 75.
unto Leo the Emperor. Thou ought to mark steadfastly, the Kingly power not
only to be given to thee, to the government of the world, but to be given
thee chiefly for the succor of the Church, that in suppressing naughty
attemptes, thou should both defend those things, that are well decreed,
and restore the true peace, to those things that are troubled.

If Master Saunders would go plainly to work, and make his arguments
short and formal, and would rather show his Logike than his Rethorike: the
truth or falsehoode would appear the sooner, the reader perhaps might be
the less delyghted, but without perhaps, he should be less beguyled, and
the answer might be the clearer and the shorter. ^ll this long argument in
effect is this:

All spiritual things are so under the Church of Christ, that the Church may
freely dispose and decree of them to the prosite of the whole mystical body.

All Christian Kings and kingdoms are spiritual things.

Ergo, all Christian Kings and Kingdoms are so under the Church of Christ,
that she may freely dispose and decree of them, to the prosite of the whole
mystical body.

And first Master Saunders travels in the Minor. To prove Christian Kings and
Kingdoms spiritual, that because the better part of them is spiritual,
therefore he sees nothing why they ought not to be rather judged
spiritual. Yea Kings were wo^e to be anointed no otherwise than Prophets
and Priests, not to do their actions, but to refer all their affairs to
holy and spiritual deeds.

And can you see this Master Sanders. Now? how chance Supra page
you could not seeit before, when you made the Christian Princes civil power,
to be no better than the Turks, or Tartars, to stretch no further tha^ to the
body and a quiet life? and have you now espied not only the ends whereunto
they rule, but the estate also itself, by reason of the better part to be
spiritual? what has made you see so clearly now? forsooth now is now, and
then was then. You were pleading then, that the Christian Princes civil
estate, was so far different and unlike, that Princes might not meddle in
spiritual matters, and therefore then was fit opportunity, to deny that
Christian Princes Civil power, had any spiritual thing in it. But now we are
in another argument, that Priests may order and dispose Kingdoms, and depose
Kings as they shall think expedient: and to prove this* we must say they be
in the Churches power, and to prove that, we must say they are spiritual*
and so, spiritual men may deal with spiritual things. And for this reason,
we can see no cause now, but that Christian Kingdoms are spiritual that we
spiritual men, which are the Church, might have the M. Saunders contradiction
and legerdemay^.
disposing of them. Well then I see also (Master Saunders) that for advantage
you can, and you can not see. And play see me, and see me not. But who
sees not, that has any indifferent eyes, that this is but legerdemain, and
that you speak flat contraries in one thing, although you turn your tale to
other purposes?

But let go that you saw not before, and let us look what you M. Saunders sees
now that Christian Princes are spiritual.
see in Princes now. Now you see that they are spiritual. And why so? not
because they do the spiritual actions of the Priests, but because of their
better part, that is, of the spirit of God, and because of the end whereto they
drive al their things, to become as it were spiritual.

Why then M. Saunders your eyes might serve you (if your heart could serve you)
to see this withal, that although the Prince can not do the spiritual actions
of spiritual persons, yet this hinders not, that he may notwithstanding be a
governor over ecclesiastical persons, in causes ecclesiastical and may
ouersee them both. And if you can see the one and not the other, surely your
sight is partial.

But new M. Saunders loking another way, will have Princes no further
spiritual, than in that they are under the Church. And here, making the Mayor
the Minor, the former the later, by a figure called Hysteron proteron, the
carte before the horse: he will prove, that all spiritual things are so much
under the Church of Christ, that the Church may freely dispose and decree of
them, to the profit of the whole mystical body: and so, Kings and Kingdoms,
(as is said before) being spiritual things, are so much under the Church of
Christ, that she may freely, to the profit of the whole mystical body, dispose
and decree of Kings and kingdoms.

But first Master Sau^ders we deny your Mayor. For although in certain
things it be true, to wit, in such things as are left to the disposition of the
Church, that is, to order and The Churches disposition of things indifferent.
dispose such things, as of their nature are indifferent, to the profit of the
whole mystical body, or any part thereof, (for these things, are called
spiritual things, not properly, in their own nature, but as in spiritual
causes the spiritual persons use them) and yet all this is not so freely left
to the Churches disposition, that some principal persons in the Church (as the
Prince, or the Pastors) have not the chiefest stroke in the disposition of
them. For if they were so free, that every member in the Church should have
his nay or yea in disposing of the^, when would they be disposed? And if at To
whom in the church the disposition of indifferent things belongs. Things
mere spiritual, and things spiritual in some respect.
length they were, it would peradventure fall out in the end, so little to the
profit of the whole mystical body, that it would be rather the hinderaunce
and disquieting of it. But besides these spiritual things, there are a great
many other, of which, some in deed are mere spiritual as the word of God,
the Sacraments of Christ, the Articles of faith, the Commandments of life,
and all such things as God has either expressed in his word, or is
necessarily conteyued in it. These things being spiritual, are not so under
the church of Christ, that the church may freely dispose and decree of them.
But they statly dispose and decree Mere spiritual things may not be otherwise
disposed.
of the church, and the church can not alter nor swerve one jot from them.
Which if she should, she should not profit her self, (for she is the whole
mystical body) but destroy her self, and dissolve the whole body, and every
part thereof. And such as these things are, is the estate of a King and
kingdom, which although it be not so mere a spiritual thing, but so far
forth spiritual as your self confess: yet because it is the ordinance of
God, and God has in his word set forth the office of a King, and declares
What kind of thing the state of a King or kingdom is.
that the setting up and pulling down of Kings, and the alterations of
kingdoms, belongs to him self, and never gave that authority to his
Church, much less to his Ministers, to set up and depose Kings, and alter
kingdoms: Kings therefore and their kingdoms, no more than other spiritual
things, are not so under the church of Christ, that she may freely dispose
and decree of them, to the profit of the whole mystical body. Neither has
the whole mystical body any more thraldom, or less fredome, that Kings and
kingdoms are not so under her, or that she may not freely dispose and decree
of them, as she shall think most profitable to the whole mystical body: than
she has more thraldom, or less freedom, because she can not alter nor
dispose the other spiritual things. Yea in this case, the Church leeseth
less liberty than in the other, for the freedom of the Church* being a
mystical The Churches freedom mystical.
body, is clean another matter pertaining to the conscience, and is a
mystical freedom, from the tyranny of Satan, from the curse of the law,
from the bondage of sin, from ceremonies, and humayne constitutions: and not
from obedience to kings, and to have superiority over them, and liberty to
depose them, and to translate their kingdoms. Which freedom and superiority
is not spiritual, but carnal and worldly. And if the Church had it, she
would not only bring kings and kingdoms, but even her self in bondage, and
therefore Christ has barred it. Which freedom, because the Popish Church
aspireth The Popish Church.
unto, and claymeth, and holds over* kings and kingdoms: she is not the
true Church of Christ, that they boast of, but rather a Iewishe Synagoge,
dreaming upon an earthly Messiah, or rather a Persian or Turkishe Temple, that
measures the freedom and dignity of Gods Church, by the pomp and might of
the world, to depose kings, and dispose of their kingdoms at their pleasures.

But to prove that kings and kingdoms pertayne not to the free disposition of
the Church, but of God: I will desire no better proves nor example than even
M. Saunders here brings forth. Sith therefore (says he) the* people of
Israel would needs desire a king to be given the^, Samuel by the
commandment of God, took a cruse of oil, and powered it upon the head of
Saul, and kissed him* and said: 1. Reg. 15.
behold God anoy^teth thee, to be the Prince over his Inheritance which to me
seems to signify, as though it had been said, except the Lord anointed
thee to be the Prince, thou could not rightly and orderly be the Prince over
his people, which he has chosen and reserved out of all the world to be, as
it were, peculiar to him self. For in that that is Gods, no man can take power
to him self, without Gods permission.

If this be true that here you say, M. Saunders (as it is The example of
Samuels anointing of Saul.
most true) if Samuels words do so sound in your ears, as though he had
said, Saul could not be king over Gods people, except the Lord anointed
him: If the Lord reserve this prerogative to him self, to appoint Princes,
and give kingdoms where he only pleases: how then is this true, that kings
and kingdoms are so under the Church that she may freely dispose and decree
of the^ as she pleases? Although the Church be the Lords spouse and wife, yet
is she not her M Saunders confutes him self.
self the Lord, nor the Lord is ruled by her, but she by the Lord, neither
has he given her this prerogative, but as you here confess, it is a thing
belonging only to him. And therefore by your own confession, Kings and
kingdoms are not so under the Church, that she may dispose and decree as she
thinks good of them.

And as your own witness thus beats your self, in your own example: So to
consider this example further. Saul was appointed King of God, and though at
the first he was a good King, yet afterward he became both a tyrant in life,
and an Apostata in doctrine, by which occasion he was a great offense to the
Church of God. What now? did the Church of God say, she had such freedom
over him and his kingdom, that she might freely dispose and decree thereof as
should be profitable for the whole* mystical body. Surely to the Churches
judgment, it appeared more profitable, if this ill King had been deposed,
and some other godly man placed in his steed, much more if David had been
placed* whom GOD likewise had anointed to be their King. Did the Church this?
No, could they have done this? No, they had no such freedom, but they let
The Church could not depose Saul, though he were a tyrante and an Apostata.
Proverb. 8. Dan. 2.
Saul alone, and committed the case to God, who, at his good opportunity, as
he only sent the king, so he only took him away, and sent them another. For
only God transposeth kingdoms, and not the Church, as he him self
testifies (who is the best Judge we can appeal unto) saying: Per me Reges
regnant, Kings rule by me, and not by my Church. And so confesses Daniel: He
changes times and ages, he translateth kingdoms, and establishes them. His
Church therefore has not the free disposition of them.

But says master Saunders: God anointed Saul to be Sand. 81.
the Prince, not by him self, but by his Minister: wherefore whosoever rules
over the Christian people (which is no less acceptable to God than was the
people of the Jews) he besides the right that he received by the consent of
the people, ought also to acknowledge his power, to be of Christ by his
Ministers, if so be that he be such an one, as worshippeth the faith of
Christ. Whereupon to this day, all christian Kings are anointed of some
christian Bishop, or some other minister of God, referring therein their
principality, M. Saunders bious conclusion.
not only to the people, and so unto God: But refer it besides, by the
Ministers of Christ, to Christ, whose Ministers they are.

Your argument is this: The King is anointed of God.

But this is done by the ministry of Gods Prophets or Ministers:

Ergo, Not only God, but his Ministers have the free disposing and decreeing
of Kings and kingdoms.

Your conclusion is not in so plain English, but colourably you fetch the
matter about the bushe, saying: therefore they must refer their
principality, not only to the people, and so to God: but refer it besides
by the ministers of Christ, to Christ, whose ministers they are.

What need this nice daliaunce and circumquaques, M. Saunders? that almost
men can scarce tell what you mean, but that you mean some fall shode. If you
mean, they should refer it to the Ministers of Christ: that is an untruth.
If you mean, they must refe^e it so to Christ by his Ministers, that it takes
the authority of the Ministers: that is another untruth. If you mean, it
must be referred to Christ, that works it by the ministry of his
Ministers (howbeit there is no such necessity neither, in the making The
Bishops ministry in the making of the king.
of Kings, although it be orderly and ordinarily done by their ministry)
yet what serves this to the purpose? Speak plainly man, and say: the king is
made king by the Bishops: Ergo, the Bishops may dispose and decree of him and
his kingdom, and may depose him, and give the kingdom to another, as they
shall think good* For this is your plain drifte. But we deny your argument,
for by the like you might make every man's baptism and says to hang of the
free disposition, decreeing and alteration of the Minister, sith these things
are received by the Minister, but the force of them dependes not on the
minister. And much less that because such a Bishop crowned the King,
therefore he may rule the King, and have free disposition to decree what the
King shall do, and whether he shall continue King or no. No, M. Saund. and if
he had the authority to make the King: yet the King being made, it follows
not, that he may mar him too. But the most that you can make of the Minister
in the Kings Coronation* is but, Causa sine qua non, that he can not well be
made without him, and yet in very deed, it is not so much, and therefore this
is but a slender argument.

But see, how you run here craftily from the Church, to the Bishop your
argument was of the Church, and your conclusion is of the Bishop. Whereby you
mean that your Prelates only are of the church* Which as it is most false, so
is it rather to be examined, whether you be any ministers or parts of the
church at al if you speak of the church of Christ. For (as was showed
before) neither the church* nor the spiritual Ministers of Christ* did ever
take upon them, this deposing of kings, and disposing of kingdoms that you
challenge. Samuel whom you cite, had been a governor Samuel.
by an extraordinary calling, being the last Judge before the Kings, but
after he had* anointed and declared Saul to be king he never took upon him,
the public government of the kingdom. And though God sent him to tell Saul,
how God would cast him off, and though also God had him anoint another: yet
would he not med^e in the government, nor depose Saul, nor incite David or the
people to depose him, although God had cast him clean off, but only mourned
for him. If you can show any example of the contrary, I am sure we shall
hear it, but as yet we hear of none.

You tell us of an elegante sentence of Pope Leo, to the Emperor Leo. But as
there is no great elegancie in Pope Leo his sentenc^.
it, so it makes nothing to this purpose: and the purpose that it makes for,
is rather for the Princes government in ecclesiastical, causes than against
it. Howbeit to allege a Pope, for the usurpation of the Pope, is to much
partiality, besides that Leo is to be burdened with ^oule crimes in this
matter, for his practices against the Emperor, as we shall God willing see
hereafter. But M. Sanders, to prove that the ministry of the minister,
argues he has authority to dispose of the King and his kingdom, proceeds
thus.

But that the government of a christian king ought to be Sand. page ^.
referred to Christ, it has flowed from nothing, but from the mystery of the
incarnation of Christ, that all Christian kings should acknowledge the
humayne nature of Christ, to be above their principality, and therefore
should understand, that they are inferior to the Ministers of Christ, in
those things that pertayne to the faith of Christ, or to eternal life. To
what purpose otherwise belongs, that solemn anointing and consecrating of
Kings, which is Chrysostom. Homil. 4. in verba Esaiae.
wont to be done by the Priests of Christ? Greater (says Chrysostom) is
the principality of the Priest, than of the King. Therefore the King
submits his head to the hand of the Priest. And every where in the old
Testamente, the Priests anointed the Kings. And truly if the people of God
differ from all people, by the gift of faith, and as the Priests are the
Ministers of setting forth the faith: so the blessing and consecration of
the Priests, that they give to the Kings, is an especi^ll token, whereby the
mystery of the Incarnation of Christ, and the principality of his Ministers
in dispensing that mystery is acknowledged.

M. Saunders still beats upon his former argument, and drives his reason thus:

If the anointing of the king has a mystery of his obedience The kinge^
anointing.
to the Incarnation and humanity of Christ: then the King must understand
that he is inferior to the Ministers of Christ, in those things that pertayne
to the faith of Christ, or to eternal life, because they are the Ministers in
dispensing that mystery.

But the solemn anointing and consecrating of kings, which is wont to be done
by the Priests of Christ, serves to no other purpose, than to declare the
obedience of Kings to the Incarnation and humanity of Christ:

Ergo, The King must understand, that he is inferior to the Ministers of
Christ, in those things that pertayne to the faith of Christ, or to eternal
life, because they are the Ministers in dispensing that mystery.

First in this conclusion here is nothing pertaining to the present purpose,
yt the Ministers of Christ may depose Kings, and dispose their kingdoms* which
is ye thing that should be concluded. There is a great differe^te between
those things that ^ayne to the faith of Christ, to eternal life, to the
dispensati^ of the mystery of Christ's Incarnation and humayne nature: and the
governing of a kingdom. In the dispensation* of the one, we grant the king to
be inferior to the Ministers of Christ. But in the dispensation of the other,
the Ministers of Christ are inferior to the king. So that this conclusion is
not to the purpose* And although this answer is sufficient to this argument:
yet let us see his handling the parts thereof. And first, we den^e the sequel
of the mayor, that if the kings annoynting has a mystery of his obedience,
to the incarnation and human nature of Christ, that then the king is
inferior to the minister of Christ, in those things that pertain to the
faith of Christ, and to eternal life, because he is the minister in
dispensing that mystery. For this is no good reason: he is the Minister whereby
the thing is done: Ergo, he is the superior in the thing that is done* We
might better reason on the contrary: he is the Minister: Ergo* in that
respect he is the inferior, for ministration is a service. Howebeit we deny
not the superiority of his ministry, but the noughtinesse of this argument.
For by this reason, see how his argument beats him self and his Pope. The
Pope is ordinarily consecrated of a Cardinal or a Bishop: Ergo, the Pope is
inferior* to the Cardinals and Bishops in m^tters of faith and eternal life*
because the Cardinals or Bishops are the Ministers in dispe^sing that mystery.
Will the Pope allow of this? and yet this is master Saunders reason, yea it is
the Popes own reason. For Bonifacius the eyghte (of whom the Proverb went.
He came in like a Fox, and ruled like a Lion, and dyed like a dagge) used this
self same arguments, from whom In Extrauag. de Maiorit. and obed. Vnam sanctam.
master* Sanders borrows it: that the Pope does consecrate the Emperor:
Ergo, the Pope is (...) to the Emperor: that Bishops do consecrate Kings,
Ergo, Bishops are superior to kings. Which argument as it is naught, so eue^
the antecedent may be called in question. For it is not long that Popes have
consecrated Emperors, neither always The Bishops consecration of a king.
have Kings been consecrated of Priests and Bishops, so that it is not simply
so necessary a thing that a King is not ^ king if he be not consecrated of
them. But as in Matrimony it is a godly and comely order, that, although the
marriage be made in their betrouthing (as you said before, when the man said to
the woman, I take thee to my wife, and the woman to the man, I take thee to my
husband) yet for the avoiding of offense: for the more reverence and
estimation of the estate, for the better calling upon God to bless it, it is
done solemnoly the in temple, in the presence of the congregation, by the
ministry, prayers, and blessing of the minister: The like and greater
solemnity is in a Princes consecration, for the avoiding of offenses, for the
greater reverence and estimation, and for the more effectual calling upon God
for his blessing of the Kings royal estate, although he were full and lawful
King before. And so the King gives the date of his reign not from his
Coronation, but from the beginning of his calling to his regiment. And at his
coronation, as the Bishop has his peculiar office, so diverse other peers
have theirs likewise, requisite to the celebration thereof. But none of them do
thereupon claim, to be the Princes superior, although one give him his
sword, another give him his Scepter, another give him the Ball, another give
him the Crown, to whom the keeping of th^se things belong. And why should
the Bishop more than all these, claim to be his superior, because he does
consecrate the King? but the ensample is evident to the contrary. For even at
the Kings coronation, the Bishops, so well as any other subjects, do their
homage, and receive their temporal^ies from the Prince, for all their
consecration of him, and therefore they can no more dispose of the Kings
temporalities, and depose him from them, than any of the other subjects can.
And thus much M. Saunders to the Mayor of your argument.

To the Minor I answer, that whether the annoynting of the King, signify any
other thing, besides the Kings obedience, to the incarnation and human nature
of Christ: it makes no matter. For this it signifies not, that the King
should be obedient, to the disposition of the human minister of Christ, which
is the question now in hand. And yet whether it signify this mystery, that
you say it only does, or no: may be called into question. For if it has such
a signification, it is a very dark mystery. And me thinks it might The
diverse significations of oil in the scriptures.
more easilye signify other things. For oil sometimes signifies mercy,
sometimes plenty, sometimes remedy against poison, sometimes it is referred
to the Priesthood, sometimes, to the kingdom of Christ, sometimes to the
mystical members of Christ, as they are Kings and Priests with him: so that
the anointing with oil (which espetially was used to Priests and Kings, who
therefore are called the sons of oil) is applied to sundry significations, and
not only to the incarnation and human nature of Christ. And yet is No
necessity of anointing Kings.
there no such necessity of anointing Christian Kings, as was of the Iewishe
Kings. For they had commandment so to do, and it was a ceremonial figure of
diverse things in Christ. Which commandment and ceremonies, Christian Princes
are not bound unto. It is cropen up of a custom I cannot tell how, to imitate
the Jews herein. But as for the nature of a Kings estate, he is never a whit
the less King, if he want the anointing with oil, and as the Papists
superstitiouslie do use it, it were much better away. But the Papists make a
great matter of anointing Kings with oil, yea, says Master Saunders, they
were wont to be anointed no otherwise than were the Prophets and Priests: as
though they should be so anointed still. And true it is in one sense, that
they should no other wise be so anointed still, that is to say, neither of
them should be anointed. No? say you, should not the Priests be anointed* We
are. In deed you be, Master Saunders, and all your order. But the Apostles
and Disciples of Christ were not, and therefore your order is differing from
theirs, and all godly ministers should differ from yours, be ye shorn, or be
ye anointed.

But if it be true that you say kings should be no otherwise anointed than you:
how chance then ye are anointed otherwise than kings, as your gloss does
reason: that upon the King is powered oil, but upon ye Bishop is powered
Chrisme. Kings are anointed on the right shoulder, but Bishops and Priests
are anointed upon their heads: but the head is better than the shoulder, and
Chrisme is better than oil: Ergo, Bishops and Priests are superior unto Kings.
Were In Extanag de Maiorit. etc
not they which anointed their pamphlets with such greasy arguments, to perch
up their balde crowns, above the imperial crowns of their natural
Sovereigns, worthy by ye Princes commandment to be well anointed with
vnguentum baculinum, to make them acknowledge their due subjection, if they
rather deserve not sharper instice? but let us proceed unto M. Saunders other
arguments.

Let us put the case, that Christ himself is at this day conversant Sand. page
81.
in the earth, as he was conversant in times paste. Can any man doubt, but in
that he is man, al Christian kings, ought to be under his government both in
all eccl. and in those secular causes, that may promote the cause of the
Chruche: for he shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever and there shall be
no (...). 1.
end of his kingdoms. If therefore earthly Kings are part of the house of
Jacob, Christ shall reign over them, and shall subdue their Kingdoms to his
spiritual Kingdom. But whatsoever power was necessary unto Christ to
eternal salvation, he transformed the external and and visible ministry
thereof unto the Apostles, when he said, as my father has sent me so I send
you. The Apostles therefore and their successors, do no Ioh. 20.
less rule in spiritual causes over Christian Kings, so far as the visible
Ministry, than Christ himself is in truth over them so far as the holy
power of his human nature. Whereupon says Epiphanius: Christ has given a
kingdom to those Epiphanius in Hares. 29.
that are placed under him, that it should not be said, he proceeds from
little things to greater. The throne of Christ abides, and of his kingdom
there is no end, and he sits upon the throne of David, so that he has
translated the kingdom of David together with the Bishoprike, and has given
it unto his servant, that is, to the Bishops of the Catholic Church. Behold
so well the priestly as the Kingly power, is 1. Cor. 15.
communicated to the pastors of the Church of Christ, that by that means,
Christ should be declared, to reign for ever, yea, even as a spiritual and
heavenly man. And this truly does that annoynting testify that the Kings
receive of Priests.

The argument is thus: If Christ himself were conversant in earth, in his
human nature, as he has been: he should have over all Christian kings, all
eccl. and secular power, in those things that might promote the Church.

But Christ has given to his ministers in the visible ministry, all the
power necessary to salvation over Christian kings, that belongs to himself
in his human nature.

Ergo, he has given his Ministers in the visible ministry, all
ecclesiastical and secular power in those things that may promote the Church.

First this argument stands upon another presupposal, M. Sand. case if Christ
were here bodily conversant in the earth.
which as it is no less false than the other: so is it more impossible, being
flat contrary to the worte of God, and to the will of Christ. He puttes a case
that Christ would come again, and in his human nature be conversant upon
the earth as he was from his nativity till his death.

Good Lord M. Sau^ders is your cause so bad and false, that you are still
driven to these shifts, to put the cases, of false and forged presupposals? if
your cause were good it would stand of it self, you might go plainly to
work, and never reason upon such devised cases, as you know and believe shall
never be true, except you be a Millenarie indeed, (as you gave before a
shrewde suspicion of that heresy) to think Christ shall come again, and here
for a thousand years in all worldly might and glory, reign in the earth, and
then go dwell in heaven.

But perhaps you will say, what? will you let me to put what case I lift? when ye
sky falls, they say, we shall have Larkes.

True, M. Saunders, we can not let you, to put what case you list, be it never
so absurd and repugnant to the truth. But is this the rediest way to boult out
the truth, to put the case of an evident untruth, and to imagine that to come
that never shall be, to infer that usurpation of your Priests, that is, and
ought not to be? But see how sone your argument is ouerturned. For if your
case be not admitted, then is all your labor lost, and you have won nothing
for your Priests. But the Scripture is manifest, that this M. Saunder^ case
vnrtue. Act. 3. Math. 24.
shall never come to pass. And that the heavens contain Christ, til the day
of Judgment, he is neither here nor there, in his human nature, as Christ
himself has testified. Which as it dasheth this your case ye put: so it
confuteth an other chief error of yours, that affirm ye have the human
nature of Christ, closed up in a box, and that ye Christ's human nature
not in the Sacrament.
eat him up, or keep him up, till he wax mouldie, and then you burn him up.
Is this the best honor you can affoorde to Christ, being conversant here in
earth in his human nature? If it be true that you say he is present, how
chance ye serve him thus? is it because he appears not in his likeness, but
looks rather like a wafer? if it were Christ indeed: howsoever he looked,
can you find in your hearts thus to order him? But you will say: that is an
other matter, answer to this presupposal. We speak now of Christ appearing
in his own likeness. How say you, if he were conversant in earth as he was,
should he not over Christian Kings have superiority, in temporal causes so
well as in ecclesiastical, that might promote his Church? I answer, if this
were admitted to be true, that Christ again were conversant If Christ were in
hi^ huma^n nature in the earth, what superiority should be given him.
on the earth, Christian Kings ought (no doubt) to give him all superiority,
and be under him in all ecclesiastical and temporal causes, that might
promote his Church, acknowledging all the power they have to proceed from
him. But that Christ, if he were again on the earth, would reign over Kings,
and in his human nature rule Kings in their secular causes, or that he would
think this a way to promote the Church, or that he would depose Princes, and
make their subjects revolt from their obedience, or that he would cease their
kingdoms into his hands, and make Kings to kiss his feet, to lead his
Horse, to hold his sturrops, or that he would wear three Crowns, and
Princely roabes of gold frette with perle and stone, or that he would keep
such a princely port and pomp, as passed all other Princes: which things
your Pope, pretending to be his Uicar in the absence of his human nature,
does: this would be hard for you to prove M. Saunders, although your case were
granted, that Christ personally in his human nature were conversant in
earth again. For if he would have had any of these things, he might have had
them when he was here on earth, as your self confessed in the Chapter going
before saying: This in this kind I will speak, as the chiefest argument,
that Christ while he was here in earth, and fulfilled all the law and all
righteousness: notwithstanding he would govern eccl. matters only, as a
Priest, and by no means as an earthly King. For he openly refused to administer
an earthly kingdom, and therefore fled, when he saw the people go about to do
this thing, that they might make him a king, and he denied that he was
appointed a deuider between the brethren.

Are not these your own words M. Sand? I know you What kingdom Christ
vvoulde take upon him and he were here in earth.
wrest them to an other purpose, which there is answered unto. But how serve
they not here against your self* trow you Christ is now become of an other
mind, than he was when he was here on earth? if he be still of the same mind,
then would he not take upon him, if he were here again on earth, the estate of
an earthly King, nor govern in secular causes. But trow you, your Pope
pretending to be his Uicar, would suffer this, and seese the temporalties he
possesses, the kingdoms he has gotten, the honor that is given him, or any
thing else, that in eccl. and secular causes (under pretense of the Churches
promotion, he usurps over all kings Christian? no, he would rather handle
Christ worsse (if he How the pope would order him.
could lay hands upon him) then ever did the Jews, he would not only crucify
Christ again, but burn him clean to ashes for an here^ike, rather then he
would lose this honor, or any jot thereof. But and if Christ were here
again, conversant on earth in his human nature, would he suffer the Popes
intolerable pride and errors? would he allow him to abuse his name, as
though he were his deputy and Uicar general? I trow not. Not that I think
he sees it not, or suffers it not, or has not, by his provident justice,
ordained, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
that Satan should set up such an Antichrist, to delude strongly the Children
of unbelief, and to exercise under the Cross of Christ his little elected
flock. But that, if Christ should so come as he here supposes, surely I
would think the cause of his coming to be, even to destroy ( spiritu oris
eius 2 Thessalonians. 2
with the breath of his mouth) this man of sin, and not to maintain him in his
pomp, much less himself to take the like upon him. Not that Christ is not
a king over the house of Jacob, not that his kingdom is not eternal, as the
Angel said to Marie, not that he should not subdue al earthly kingdoms to his
spiritual kingdom: but that his kingdom is spiritual and not earthly, and the
subduing of earthly kingdoms, is with a sword that conquereth the soul of
man, that is, the word of God, and with a force from above, subduing the will
of man, that is, the spirit and grace of God: and not such a subduing of their
kingdoms, that it dissolueth their polycies and estates, or deposes their
kings, and makes the people take Arms, and exercises* in secular causes, an
earthly Kings authority. M. Saunders pretends this is to promote the Church
of Christ, but such promotion confoundes devotion, and has The Churches
promotion.
poisoned the Church of God, as they say a voice was heard, what time
Constantine (although falsely) is supposed to have endowed the Church with such
royal honor: Hodie venenum intrauit in eccles^n, This day entered poison into
the Church. But Christ has flatly forbidden it, and told his Disciples when
they asked such promotion, that they knew not what Math 20.
they asked. But afterward, they knew and found the saying of Christ to be
true, that their promotion lay in their affliction, and not in their kingly
honor.

And thus we see the falsehood of the mayor forged upon this fained
presupposall, which is not to be granted, and yet if it were granted it
would fall out, to the utter ruin of the Pope and all his Prelates. Such ill
luck has M. Sand still to light on such examples, as he co^ceineth to make for
him, but being a little better examined, make most of al against him.

Now to the minor: that Christ has given to his Ministers in What power the
ministers have.
the visible ministry, all the power necessary to salvation, that he should
have himself in his human nature. Where find you this M. Sand? I think it
will be over hard a matter for you to prove, that all the power necessary to
salvation that he should have himself in his human nature, in the visible
ministry: he has given it al to his ministers. Al power Math. 28.
(says Christ) is given to me in heaven and in earth: this is spoken in
respect of his human nature: but trow you he gave this prerogative to his
Apostles? you allege John. 20. John. 20.
As my father has sent me, so send I you. But trow you, this is to be
stretched to the visible ministry of al things belonging to his human
nature? His mediation belongs to ye ministry of his humanity, so well as to
his Divinity: has he given the^ the office of his mediatio^? The
propiciatorie sacrifice of his own body belonged to the visible ministry of
his human nature: gave he this power to the Disciples, that their bodies also
in suffering death, should be propiciatoris sacrifices? The ordeining of
Sacraments was in the visible ministry, and belonging not only to Christ's
Divinity, but also to his humanity, gave he this power to his Disciples to
make Sacraments? Christ therefore gave not his Ministers all the power, in
the visible ministry, necessary to salvation, that belonged to him in his
human nature, but reserved many things peculiar to himself. Although all
the power they have, he gave it the^, yet all the power he has* he gave them
not. He gave them power in preaching the word, in binding and losing, in
administering the Sacraments. Difference of power.
And yet is there a great difference between that power that is proper of ones
own, and that which is legantine and represents but an others: between
that, that is simple and absolute, and that that is bounded and conditional:
between that that is principal, and that that is but ministerial. All which
distinctions are your own Scholemens, and therefore these powers are nothing
like, and yet are they so far unlike from such princely power of earthly
honor, as you imagine, that they are rather clean against it, both in Christ,
and in his ministers too.

And this your own gloss out of your own Pope Gregory might have taught you:
Sicut misit me pa^er. Idest, ad passiones. etc Glossa in Lyra super Ioh.
As my father sent me, that is to say, to troubles and afflictions, so send I
you to suffer persecution, not to reign like Kings, and rule kingdoms. And
therefore since this sentence of Christ is true, that he sent them as he was
sent, and he was not sent in his human nature to depose kings, nor to
dispose of their kingdoms, nor to govern them: therefore his Disciples were
not sent thereto. But the Pope says he is sent thereto, and takes it upon him:
therefore he is neither minister of Christ, nor successor of his Disciples: but
his Disciple that has offered him worldly kingdoms, if he would fall down and
worship him, as he has done, and so has gotten his kingdoms.

As for the sentence of Epiphani^, writing against the Nazarei, although as he
has culled it out, it seems to give the Priests the power of Kings: yet
this is neither the meaning nor the words of Epiphanius. Epiphanius whole
sentence is this:

Our Lord Jesus Christ is therefore a Priest for ever, according Epiphanius
in Haeres. 29.
to the order of Melchizedech, and also a King, according to the order from
above, that he might translate the Priesthood together with the law. He
is of the seed of David, because he came of Marie, sitting in the throne for
ever, and of his kingdom thereis no end. For now it behooved him to
translate the order, both of the Priesthood, and of the kingdom. For his
kingdom is not of the world, as he said in the Gospel to Pontius Pilate,
my kingdom is not of this world. For since Christ by hid speeches
fulfilleth all things* the matters declared of him, came to a certain full
measure. For he which always reigns, came not to receive the increase of a
kingdom but he gave a kingdom, to those that he has appointed under him,
that it should not be said, he proceeded from small things to greater. For his
throne abides, and thereis no end of his kingdom. And he sits upon the
throne of David. So that he has translated the kingdom of David together
with the Priesthood, and given it to his servants, that is to the Bishops of
the Church. Whereby it appears plain, Epiphanius means not, that Christ has
given them an earthly kingdom, which he took not upon himself, and he flat
debarreth from them, nor he ever gave to his Disciples, nor they ever
exercised. But he means of a spiritual kingdom, which he himself keeps
ever, and yet he ever communicates to all his faithful, but in especial to
the Ministers of the Church, that set forth the mysteries of this heavenly, and
not of an earthly kingdom. This sentence therefore of Epiphanius makes
nothing for Bishops to be depesers of Kings, or disposers and rulers of earthly
kingdoms, which is the present question.

Wherefore (saith^ Saunders) sith there is a double Sand. 81. 82.
power in the Church, the one spiritual, of which ^orte, is Math. 20.
that of the ministers of Christ, to whom is commanded that they should teach
and baptize all nations, but the other is mixed, that is to say, by the
beginning thereof secular, howebeit to be now referred to a spiritual end:
although in the original, in the use, and in a certain middle end, they
differ, (as is before declared) yet do they both concur in one body of the
Church, and are carried to one end of eternal salvation, for the which
things, they are to be counted one certain under power ordained. For as in
Christ, there is neither Jew nor Gal. 5.
Greek, neither bond nor free, neither male nor female, but they are al one in
Christ. So in the kingdom of god, the powers are not as it were altogether
distinguished either of the father over the son, or of the husband over the
wife, or of the master over the servant, or of the Prince over his subject, or
of the Pastor over his sheep, but al these powers are one in the Church of
God. And among all men I take this to be agreed Hebr. 10.
upon, that all these powers shall besvvallovved up of that infinite glory,
that in the life to come, shall be poured on the sons of adoption, in so much
that there shall be no secular thing in the kingdom of God. And since the
Church of Christ is a certain lively Image of the life to come, although there
remain (by reason of the mixte condition of this life) certain differences of
these powers: yet notvvithstanding. they are so among themselves disposed and
placed in their orders, that even as every one of them draws near, unto the
life to come, so it ought more and moreto govern all the residue. But it is
manifest, that every kingly or civil power, is also among them, that are not
the members of Christ. Neither any whit less appears it, that the power of
the Pastors and teachers is placed and appointed in the only Church of God, for
the edifying thereof in Jesus Christ. Whereupon it is Ephesians. 4.
euicted, that the spiritual power of the pastors of the church, draws
nearer to the state of the life to come, than any other power, or family, or
earthly common wealth. For Pastors are placed in the Church to this purpose,
that they should Hebr. 13. Math. 28. 1. Cor. 4. 1. Cor. 5. 2. Cor. 2 and. 7
Math. 16.
watch for our souls, teach, baptize, dispense the mysteries of Christ,
give open sinners unto Satan, and in the person of Christ to forgive them
that are sorry for their sins, according to the Lord. To conclude, that they
by their keys should bring so well earthly kings, as other me^ into the
kingdom of heaven. Sith therefore as Christ the Lord of all, worthily
governs so well the spiritual as the earthly power: and since the spiritual
power flows not from Christ, but as he is redeemer of mankind, and that
power is properly ordained and provided for the getting of eternal life:
neither by any means can it be said or thought of a wise man, that Christ
vvoulde have the earthly power above the spiritual in his Church, which is
all led by the spirit, and ought to be Romans 8.
lifted above all earthly things. Truly it is necessary that in the Church
of Christ which is one, the only spiritual power should rule, and that
the power of the father, the husband, the Lord, yea, and of the King
himself should be altogether under the power of the Pastors appointed of
Christ, when the matters of the life to come are handled.

Except Master Saunders of vain glory, did either delight to much to hear
himself, or of subtletie, went about to tire and wrappe his Readers: he would
never use so many words to so little purpose. Much of this is nothing but that
he has spoken before, and is here in vain repeated, much of it is clean
besides the matter. The sum is this, that all estates (as touching spiritual
matters) are altogyther The difference and union of both powers temporal and
spiritual.
under the spiritual Pastors. The effect of all this long drift, stands on
these two reasons: the one of the difference of ye two powers, to prove the
spiritual to be the better: the other of the union of both powers, to prove
the Priests alone to rule them both. What he has told us heretofore of the
difference, concerning the original, the use, and the end of both, we have
heard already, and it is needelesse to Supra. page 791.
repeat. And likewise, that all civil and kingly power, is as well out of the
Church of God, as in the Church of God, and the spiritual power only in the
Church, is already answered unto. Supra. page
And in all these actions, that he reckons up, the King is likewise granted
the inferior. Howbeit here is nothing that the King is inferior, in things
belonging to his kingdom. But what is all this to ye present purpose, that the
Priest may depole the King? he reasons of the ^mon of these powers, and that
they are all one in Christ, and that Christ has both in him, and rules both,
so well the secular as the spiritual* and this is likewise answered last unto.
Put that here upon the power How the power of all estates are under the
pastors power, and how not. How they are all under the kings power and how
not.
of all estates, is altogether under the pastors power: that is not hitherto
proved. And yet we deny not, but that the power of all these estates, Father,
Husband, Lord and King, is under the pastors power, but not altogether under
it. And so we say that all these powers, yea the pastors and all, are under the
Kings power, but not altogether under it. All estates are under the pastors
power, because he teaches all estates of men, how to live in their vocations.
All estates are under ye Kings power, because he ouerseeth, in all estates, the
maintenance of the same. So that (as Master Saunders rightly says) there is no
difference and there is a difference, and there is a mixture of these powers.
There is no difference, How ^ere is no difference in these powers.
in respect that all are partakers of the unity in Christ: in regard whereof,
neither Priest nor Prince are better, the one than the other, or the people
worse than both, since all are one in Christ. There is a difference, in respect
of the order How there is a difference in these powers.
and government of the Church, which is so distinguished in difference of
degrees and callings, that as the wife may not take upon her the husbands
office: nor the son the fathers, nor the servant the masters: so neither the
past or may take upon him the office of the King: nor the King the office of
the pastor. And there is a mixture, in respect that the pastor directs, The
mixture of these powers.
by teaching of all estates, and spares not the Prince: and that the Prince
directs by governing of all estates, and spares not the pastor. But this
mixte power of entermedling, confounds not the one power with the other:
neither may the Prince usurp the authority due to the pastor, nor the pastor
usurp the authority due to the Prince. As the one therefore is not confounded
and yet meddled with the other: so the one has both inferiorship and
superiority over the other, and yet is neither altogether inferior, or
altogether superior to the other, as here M. Saunders on ye union and mixture,
difference and no difference of these two powers, concludes, to exalt the
pastor to such an absolute superiority over the Princes, yt at their liking
and misliking, they mighto depose the^. But now M. Sand. to confirm this, that
ye pastor is altogether, in spiritual matters, above the Prince, proceeds
saying:

For as the fleshely man perceives not the things that are of Sand. page 82.
the spirit of God: so neither the fleshly power, governs those things that
are of the spirit of God. For although Kings govern 1. Cor. 2.
the members of Christ, yet notwithstanding they govern them not, in respect
that they are the ine^bers of Christ, but in that they are yet occupied in
secular business. For the members of Christ may want a King, as in times past,
almost for three thousand years, eue^ from the beginning of the world, until
the kingdom of Saul, they wanted an earthly King. But yet the members of
Christ never wanted some pastor, because Romans 10.
faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. But those that preached
the word of Christ, they were the pastors of the flock.

The argument is this, That which has no perceuerance of things that are of
the spirit of God, ought to have no superiority in things that are of the
spirit of God.

But the Princes power has no perceuerance, of things that are of the spirit
of God:

How prove you this M. Saunders?

The fleshly power has no perceuerance.

But the Princes power is but a fleshly power.

Prove this better, M. Saunders.

Such as the man is, such is the power:

But the Prince is but a fleshly man:

Prove this t^, M. Saunders.

He which has only respect to secular business, is but a fleshly man. But kings
have only respect to secular business:

Prove me this also, M. Saunders.

Although Kings govern the members of Christ, yet they govern them not in
respect that they are members of Christ, Ergo, they govern them only in
secular business.

Prove this too, M. Saunders.

If Kings govern the^, as members of Christ, then would they never have wanted
the government of kings: but almost for 3000. years, they wa^ted the
kings'gouernme^t until Saul came: Ergo, kings govern the^ not, in that they
are members of Christ.

Is all your drift come to this (M. Saunders) to run from Civil governors from
the beginning and as ancient as spiritual pastors.
the matter, to ye name of kings? what if neither the name nor estate of kings
were before ye time of Saul? was not the people of God always governed even
from the beginning with a civil or politic Magistrate? call him King or Prince,
or Patriark, or Duke, or Judge, or what you will, do you inueygh here only
against Kings? is it the name of King that you bear such spite unto, to call
it, but a fleshly power? as though M. Sand. malice against the name of kings.
Satan hadeuen fleshed you against kings. For what more gross or bestiall
name, can you give the government of the Turks and infidels, than here you
term the power and persons of Christian kings? but al these arguments are
false M. Saund. the Church of Christ never wanted magistrates: ye magistrates
were not only themselves (if they were good) the members of Christ (although
they had a fleshly part, the old man in the^, as even the pastors have also)
but they had a special charge and regard to their subjects, eue^ in yt they
were members of Christ. Not, that they took upon them the office of spiritual
pastors, to preach gods word unto the^, and administer the sacraments, except
some of them were such persons, as might not only, ouersee it done of others,
but might or ought themselves to do it: as all the Patriarchs ordinarilye,
till Aarons time, and some of the Priests and Prophets extraordinarily, and
very seldom afterward chosen thereunto: but this was the duty of all the
Magistrates, which all the good Princes, did principally look unto, howsoever
other did neglecte or abuse the same. This therefore (Master Saunders) is a
foul sclaunder, to speak so lewdly on Christian Princes, and also a
contradiction to your former saying, that their estate Supra. 799.
was spiritual. Yea how does this agree with your words next following.

Wherefore (say you) since Kings and pastors, do now come Sand. page 82.
together into one body of the Church, and the powers of the^ before
distinguished, ought now to serve one Christ, to wit, either of them in
their place and order: but most certain it is, that the spiritual power,
which is instituted for the church is knit more nerer with Christ, than the
power of earthlye Kings, which is appointed to defend men in earthly peace,
not only within, but also without the Church of Christ: I see not, but that
he has lost his common sense in judging gods matters, if any man contend
that the spiritual power of the Church is not above the earthly power of Kings*

What soever you see, or see not (M. Saunders) I see you How M. Sand. esteems
of al other men, that deny that which he affirms.
have a great conceit of your self: that thus in your conclusion almost of
every argument, you make all men fools, and doltes, and mad, and out of
their wits and to want reason and common sense and to be no better than beasts?
if they deny that that you affirm. Whether it come of the contempt of
others, or of the pride of your self, that makes you to use these speeches so
often, let other wiser Judge, for we are fools and mad men in your opinion.
But if you be not M. Sand. contradictions.
blind in your own conceit, do you not see what contraries still you utter
to make the Princes power ^oth fleshely and spiritual: to stretch to further
ends than bodily peace, and yet to stretch no further? but these are your old
contradictions. You tell us of a superiority, and a superiority we have
granted. Neither have we so lost our common sense, but that we see your false
packing, in charging us to contend, that the spiritual power of the Church,
is not above the earthly power of Princes. For, neither do we deny the
superiority Christion prin ces power is not only an earthly power.
of the spiritual power of the Church: neither do we grant the power of
Christian Princes, to be only an earthly power. But what is this for the
priest to depose the Prince? God be thanked, we have not so lost our common
sense, but that we see you straggle from the question. But let us see if you
come any nearer to it.

For if neither part be over the other, how in one body Sand. page 82.
of the Church, do both powers abide, being not united: or how are they
united, if they yet abide so distinguished, that one can not govern the other?
or who ever saw in one body of a living creature, two members utterly
distinguished, placed in one place and honor? who has seen (except in a
monstrous body) the foot made equal to the arm, the thighe to the neck,
the leg to the fide? But and if the kingly and spiritual power are not
altogether equal members, distinguished only in number, as two hands, two
feet, and two eyes (for those that differ in original, in use, and in end,
can never be equal) or else they be also things utterly severed, because they
be united and filled together in one body of the Church: we must needs
confess that they differ in the placing of them, and yet they are continued in
the compass of one body.

Here is Sim Subtle, M. Saunders, of all that ever I see. A man had need have
more than common sense, that shall understand this gear, although he study
for it, you covet to speak so darkely. We go plainly to work, we grant that
the ecclesiastical power, and the polytical power are two distinct powers. We
grant, that they are joined together in one body of the Church of Christ. We
grant also, that the one has in some respects, a superiority, and in other
respects an inferioritie to the other. We do not confound them being thus
joined, and yet distinguished) Not we but the Papists confound both powers.
the one in the same or like place with the other. It is your selves that
would thus confound them, giving both the powers unto one person, and
confound one member with another, and make a monstrous body. We attribute not
both powers to the Prince, as you do to your Pope. We affirm that the Prince
differs from the Bishop, and the Bishop from the Prince. We affirm that
both are members of the mystical body of the Church of Christ, and both rule
the other members, and that as members too. We affirm the Bishops power, in
respect of his ministry, in exhorting and rebuking, is above the Princes: and
the Princes in respect of his government, in maynteyning and punishing, is
above the Bishops. So that here is not one, or the like place and honor given
to both: but both have such places as are fit for either. And thus as the
head is superior in one respect, concerning judgment, invention, and memory:
and the heart is superior in another respect, concerning life and will: so the
Bishop may be granted a superior member in the body of the Church, in one
respect, and the Prince superior in another. What monstrous body is here, or
what confusion or rather not in your own dark speeches, instling and
confounding these things together, that your Pope might have both powers in
him, but still what is this to the purpose, that Bishops may depose Kings?

Whether of these therefore (say you) shall obtain the chiefer Sand. page 82.
parts in the body of the Church? shall not the spiritual power, which is
given of God himself by Jesus Christ, to that 2. Cor. 3. 1. Reg. 8.
end that it might minister justice, spirit and life unto us? as for the
kingly power came in deed from God, but not only and properly by Christ, as
he is the Savior: but also by the sense of the mind conspiring, and the will
of the people, whether it were faithful or unfaithful: neither could of it self
at any time pertain unto heaven, or minister life unto her subjects. If
therefore the chief parts in the body of the Church belong to the spiritual
power* truly that ought of right to govern and rule the kingly and all
earthly power, that is found in the same body of the Church.

Yet again, M. San. I think above twenty times we have granted you the due
superiority of the true spiritual power. The due and true spiritual Power.
I put to these words due, and true, because, neither is your spiritual power,
the true spiritual power but rather an earthly and carnal power, and that
spiritualnesse that it has, is rather from the spiritual power of darkness,
than of the spirit of truth, and was never of God, nor by Christ, nor
administreth justice, spirit, nor life, but iniquity, sensuality, The
Popish spiritual power.
and death: nor pertayneth to heaven, but leads to hell, I mean the
spiritual power of the Popish spirituality. The spiritual power of the
Ministers of Christ, I grant does all these things you speak of, and
therefore it has a superiority, but such as is due unto it, in the
ministration of these aforesaid things, and not to encroche upon such
superiority as belongs to Christian Princes. But, to stayne the Princes
power, you call it earthly, and so How the princes power is earthly, how
heavenly. Supra. 791.
it is in some respect, but it is heavenly in other respects also, because it
came from God, and it represents the divine power of God. It came from God
(you say) but not by Christ, but by the peoples consent. How true this is,
is partly answers before, and S. Paul says, Omnis potestas The Princes power
came from Christ. Proverb. 8. Christ a savior as well in that he is a king, as
in that he is a Priest.
est a Deo, all power is of God. Is not Christ God? how then came it not from
Christ? And is not this spoken of the wisdom of God, which is Christ, Per me
reges regnant, Kings rule by me? You make exception, not by Christ, as savior.
Is not Christ as well a savior, in yt he is king, as he is a savior, in yt he is
Priest. Not that (say you) the Princes power, of it self pertaynes to heaven,
or ministers life. What it does of it self, we force not, M. Sand. we speak
of Christian kings, representing Christ the savior. Not that the Kings power
saves, no more does the Priests power, but only the power of Christ, yt is
both King and Priest: but that by either of these, Christ works means
toward our salvation. How both the Princes and the Bishops pouer pertayne to
heaven, and minister life.
and so both pertayne to heaven, and minister life also: the Bishops power, in
setting forth Gods word and Sacraments: the Princes power in ouerseeing that
both the Bishops and clergy set them forth duly, and that the people
duetifully recoyue them. But still what is this to the purpose, for the Bishop
to depose Princes, shall we never come to our matter again? this is a long
vagarie. But go on M. Sand. even whether you list to wander.

For as in the same body of man all the members ought to Sand. page 82.
obey the commandment of reason only of the mind, because in the same body
is nothing higher than the mind: so also in the Church, which is like a man's
body, sith the spiritual Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.
power governs as the mind and reason: all other power that is found in the
Church besides, ought of necessity to be subject to the spiritual power:
Ought I say to be subject, not every where, nor altogether, but only in those
things that pertain to the salvation of souls, and to the proper jurisdiction
of the Church.

And have you spyed this now* M. Sanders, that the spiritual power in the
church, is like to the rule of reason in our body, but only in these things?
How then pertayneth it to depose kings, to dispose, translate, and occupy
kingdoms, to cause subjects rebel, which is the proper question here in
hand. Do these things, pertain to salvation, are these things the proper
jurisdiction of the Church* then surely it is a proper Church, and it has a
proper jurisdiction, The Popish Churches jurisdictions.
or we shall make a proper salvation of ^oules, and you have made a proper
piece of work, so properly to prove your argument of the Princes deposition,
for the which I s^ill ^rie for some proof, but you have belike forgotten it.
For shame M. Saund. come once again to your matter: but go to, now at the
length, you will draw nearer to it.

For if the earthly power do injury to the spouse of Christ, Sand. page 82.
and. 83.
or do not defend it from the injury of other, when it may, or in any thing
faynte from justice and truth: those that govern the church of God, ought to
admonish the civil Magistrate, that he should decline from evil and do good.
But and if the civil Magistrate will not so amend himself, they must make
haste to other remedies, for it can not be in a well ordered city, but that for
every evil that may fall out, there is a remedy prepared.

Now (M. Sand.) this gear begins to cotton. For remembering M. Sand
presupposall of the Princes doing injury to the Church, or suffering it.
at length your idle vagarie, you draw nearer to your matters, for the Princes
deposing. And here you presuppose three things: either that the Church has
injury offered her by ye Prince: either that the Prince, where he may, defendes
her not from others injuries: either that he himself faynteth from justice and
truth. Here, say you, what remedy? The Pastors admonition to Princes doing
evil.
Those that govern the Church of God, ought to admonish the civil
Magistrate, that he should decline from evil, and do good For the admonition,
it is well and truly said, M. Sand. and would to God the Pastors would thus
do in these your presupposed cases* But here is no deposition of the
Magistrate. Howbeit craftily even here you have as good as deposed him
already. For you make your The Prince, and not the Priests only, governs the
church of God.
selves ^ose only that govern the Church of God: and call the Prince* but the
civil Magistrate, as though he governed not also the Church of God and had
nothing to do therewith, but only with civil affairs, and that the Priests
have all the governance of Gods Church. But as this is false, neither have
you, nor can you prove this, but still reason, a petitione principij, taking
that for an undoubted true principle, that is chiefly denied, that you are the
only governors of the Church of God. So now, that which you M. Saund.
presupposall returned on the Priests doing injury to the Prince, or suffering
it.
presuppose in the Prince, let us presuppose the like in you. If you that call
your selves the Church* have at any time done (...) to the Prince: and trow
you, ye never did it? Did your Pope never injury to the Emperor? did your
bishops never injury to kings? did your spirituality never injury to the
laytie? I think (for shame) you will not deny it. If you do, you shall have
witnesses inow, of your own side against you. Again, did your Pope never
suffer injury to be done to Princes, and might have helped it, and did not?
deny it and you can for shame. Moreover, did your Pope and his Clergy never
saint from justice and truth? you dare not seek to cover it, it is so open and
confessed. What remedy now to amend these things? the governors of the Church
(say you) must admonish the^ to decline from evil, and do good. Who The
Popish Priests will only admonish them selves.
are these governors of the Church that ye speak of? our selves, say you. Why
then you must admonish your selves. Would to God you had that grace, M. San.
that you would enter into judgment with your selves, and admonish your
selves. But now running headlong in your faults, and will not hear them told
of any other, but think you do well, and he that shall tell you the contrary,
you will tell him he is an heretic, and if he come in your claws, you will
burn him, although he were some of your own company (for so you have served
diverse that have rebuked your faults and errors) yea, you are so sotted on your
selves, that you maintein you can not err: O how roughly will you admonish your
selves, How roughly the Popish Priests will admonish them selves.
and how soon shall all the world look for your amendment? Is not this a
plain mockery with ye world world? is it not more than time for Christian
princes, that are in deed ye governors of the Church, to admonish you? I
deny not, but you may, yea and ought to admonish the Prince also, if he be
such an offender as you imagine. But that you ought to Difference between
admonishing, governing and deposing.
be the only admonishers of them, and not your selves of them to be
admonished* you see the inconvenience. And yet there is a difference between
admonishing and governing, and a greater difference between admonishing and
deposing. But by little and little you draw to wards it. The Priests over
hasty remedy to amend the Prince*


But what and if the Prince (say you) will not amend him self? And what (say
I) if the Priests will not amend the^ selves? we must make have (say you) to
other remedies Yea, but not such haste (M. S^) that you break your s^nnes: and
much less such have, that you break the ordinance of God. For in such haste
is more waste than speed, and the end of it never wants ^o. We grant you,
there are remedies in the Church of God for such inconveniences: but no such
remedies, as for the subject to attempt to depose his Sovereign, and stir
the people to rebellion.

But if any (say you) being admonished, amend not him Sand. page 83. Math. 18.
self, we are bidden to denounce him to the Church. Who if if he will not
hear the Church, is to be accounted as an Ethnike or a publicane.

Are you bidden, M. Sanders, if he be your Prince, to renounce your civil and
polytike obedience that you ought him, yea although he were in deed an
Ethnike? if you find this, you come somewhat nearer to ye purpose: else you do
not only wrest this, place, which is not spoken of Princes, but also straggle
clean from the matter in question.

But now (say you) if any King not hearing the Church, be Sand. page 8^.
permitted to hold and administer his kingdom over Christians: who sees not,
all the people, over whom that King rules, to come into most certain danger
of losing the faith? for that saying is no less true than ancient.

After the example of the king, the whole world is framed.

So while only Jeroboam (as I said before) worshipped two Calves, the one in
Bethel, the other in Dan, and appointed 3. Reg. 1^.
Priests, not of the sons of Leui, but of the basest of the people: This
thing became an offense to ten Tribes, and for the greatest part of Israel
the faith peryshed.

The danger and offense is great (we grant) of Princes Remedy against
offenses and dangers.
thus offending. But for subjects to depose their Princes, for these dangers or
offenses: the danger and offense were not remedied but augme^ted. For what
Prince were not then in danger if you would lay these offenses to his charge,
were he never so giltlesse of them? if he never so little offended you, ye
might^ say, he did you injury, or he suffered other to do it, he helped you
not, he fought not in your quarrel, against The inconveniences of the Popish
remedies.
those Princes, on whom you would have set him. If he swarued at any time
from justice, or but spoke a word awrie, yea if he but saynted from those
things you would have him do, and would not acknowledge yt he so did, who you
reproved him for it, when you told it one to another (for you call your selves
the Church) then in all post haste the prince must be counted as an Ethnike,
or a publicane, and be deposed from his kingdom, and the people must rebel.
In what The danger of the Popish doctrine.
danger by this doctrine, both the Prince and the people stand, and your selves
also ye teach this dangerous doctrine, is apparent. The example of Jeroboam is
a greater case, but as great as it was, neither ye priests nor ye prophets
attempted to depose Ieroboa^, nor the people rebelled against him, no nor the
tribe of Judah, nor Roboa^ were permitted to war against him, for all this great
loss and danger that the people received by him.

Sith therefore (say you) the wisdom of God has not Sand. page 83.
left the Church of God (which is a city excellently founded, and defenced
without a medicine, which it may give to such a disease: neither is there any
other medicine can help, than that which takes away so evil a king from
among the Psalm. 86. Math. 16.
people, and gives the kingdom to a better man: we must believe, that such
power is granted at the least to the chief Pastor of the Church, in these
words: feed my sheep: 1. Cor. 5. John. 21. Math. 16.
and whatsoever thou bindest in earth, shall be bound also in heaven. So that
the chief Pastor can not only excommunicate a wicked king, but also set his
subjects free from al obedience of him.

The wisdom of God (as you say M. Sanders) has not The Church of God not
left destitute of medicines for such diseases.
left the Church of God without medicines for such diseases. Gods word is
even a storehouse of plasters, as well Co^solidatiues, as Corrosi^es, for the
Ministers of Christ's to apply them to any infected members. But these medicines
that are taken out of the word of God, you despise and reiecte as too base
simples, and vaunt of your own compoundes. There is a medicine in gods word
called: In patientia Luc. 2^.
vestra possidebitis animas vestras, y^ shall possess your souls in patience,
when a wicked Prince ^oth vex them. There is another called In fide fundati
and stabiles, being founded in Collos. 1. Psalm. 12^. Psalm. 56.
faith and stable. Another called: Ad te leuaui oculos meos, I have lifted up
mine eyes to thee. etc. Another, In Domino confido, non timebo quid mihi faciat
hom^. I put my confidence in the Lord, I will not fear what man can do unto
me. Another called, beati qui persecutionem patiuntur propter iustitiam,
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness. And a number of
Math. 5.
such excellent medicine^ there are. And in deed there is such a medicine too,
as you s^y, vt auferatur de medio populi, that he should be taken from among
the people. But there is but one Physician, that knows the right confection
of ye strong purgation, and that is God himself. Ministers of diverse sorts
he has by whom he gives this medicine, but I never read that any godly Bishop
or Priest or faithful subject, did ever minister it to his Sovereign.

The text that you cite hereto, is not as you cite it, auferat M. Saund.
corruption of the text against Princes.
regem adeo malu^ de medio populi, that may take away so evil a king from among
the people: but auferte malum ex vobis ipsis take away the evil from among
you: not the Prince from among the people. For that were to take away one evil
with another. And how should this evil be taken awa^? Ne commisceami^i
fomicarijs. etc. be you not mingled together, or keep no familiarity with
fornicators. He says not, deprive him of his life or living, but be not
defiled with his wickedness. And Excommunication.
ye greatest censure that s. Paul speaks of, is excommunication, pertaining
properly not to the goods and bodies, but to the souls of men. Neither
speaks he there at all of Princes but of private men and equals in the Church
of Christ, who^ ^e calls brethren. For the Kings and Princes at that time,
were (...) Christened. And he speaks of such, as they might law^y s^un their
company, such as Lyra calls Ribaldes, or verlets, drunkards, whorehunters,
Idolaters: but not such as Who should be avoided and how by Saint Paul's
meaning. 1. Cor. 5.
in the Civil polycie they must needs obey, nor those that were out of the
Church of Christ.

I have written to you (says he) by an epistle, that you should not
intermingle your selves with fornicators: not utterly from fornicators of this
world, or covetous persons, or ravenous, or worshippers of Images, else should
ye go out of this world. But now I have written to you that ye intermingle not
your selves. If any which is called a brother be a whoremaister, or covetous
person, or a worshipper of Images, or a sclaunderer, or a drunkerd, or a
rauener, with such an one we should not eat meat. For what have I to do, to
judge them that are without? do not you judge of them that are within? as for
those that are without, God judges. Take away the evil from among you. Now
says M. Saunders, that S. Paul speaks of taking away so evil a King from
among the people, and this he sets down in distinct letters, as though S.
Paul had meant the Priests should depose an evil King from governing the
people. Where he speaks not to the Priests but to the people, and would have
them shun the company of such false brethren as were among them.

But M. Saunders will say, does not this stretch to a king, so well as to any
other, if he be a brother in ye faith of Christ? I grant it does, in that he
is a brother. And if he be infected with such vices, he also is so far forth
to be shunned. But How a vicious king is to be shunned and judged.
not to be shunned in that he is a Prince and governor of the people: much
less the people to forsake their obedience to his authority, because they
must forsake their obedience to his vices. He may be so shunned privately, as
the public government be not shunned, he may be judged of the faithful, in
their court of conscience, concerning his crime, but he may not be judged in
their Court of Consistory, concerning his worldly power: he may be taken
heed of, but not taken away: he may be even excommunicated also by the
ministers, but not by them deposed: because, howsoever he deserves it, yet
have they no authority that stretches so far. That remedy belongs not to
them, but unto God.

But now sir, what and if the Prince be not only no such The testimony of S.
Paul returned on the Popish Priests.
malefactor, but goes about to resorme these malefactors, where as other
private men, can but shun their company, and the ministers of Christ can but
excommunicate them, which though it be never so great a censure, yet they
esteem it not: and that the Prince will punish such malefactors in their
goods and bodies, yea and take them away from among the people by death,
banishmente, prisonment or otherwise, as his office requires he should do, to
whom the Romans 13.
sword is given against the malefactor? what now if it fall out, that the
Popish Priests be the greatest malefactors in these notorious crimes? what if
they be not only private whore masters, but also public maynteiners of banks
and stews for whores, and dispisers and restrainers of honorable matrimony?
what if the Popish Priests be so covetous and ravenous, that they have gotten
almost the wealth of all Christian kingdoms into their fingrings, and are
never satisfied with devising naughty means, to pick men's money out of their
purses? what if the Popish Priests be worshippers of Images, and causers of
them to be worshipped? what if many of them be common drunkardes, and all of
them drunken with spiritual drunkenness, which is a great deal worse? what
if the Popish Priests be sclaunderers of those that be in authority, and
would take the Kings sword and Scepter out of his hand, and pull his
Diadem off his head, and pluck his roabe from his back, and turn him quite
out of his throne and Kingdom and bid him go shake his ears, and stir all
his subjects to rebellion? what if all these, and an infinite sort of other
horrible crimes, were found in the Popish priests themselves? ought not this
rule of Saint Paul to take place on them, and all Christians to abhor and
shun them, and all Princes to depose and punish them. Now, whether the
Popish Priests be culpable in these crimes or no: I think the cry of Sodom
and Gomorre did not more astende up to heaven, than the cry of the Popish
Gene. 18.
Priests abomination resoundeth in all the earth. And thus this sentence that
Master Saunders thought to wrest against Princes, if it be well examined,
falls more out against the Priests themselves.

As for the other two sentences John. 21. and Math. 16. are no less wrested
hereunto. We must believe (says he) that this power, to take away the Prince,
and give his Kingdom to a better* is granted at the least to the chief pastor
of the Church, in these words, feed my sheep, and whatsoever thou bindest in
earth shall be bound in heaven also. In so much that the chief pastor may
not only excommunicate a wicked King, but also set free his subjects from all
obedience of him.

And find you this in these two sentences Master Saunders? Peter not the
chief pastor of the Church.
we must believe it, say you, that this power is given at the least to the
chief pastor, in these words. How shall we believe it, Master Saunders,
since these words neither say, nor import any such matter, that Peter (to whom
they were spoken) is the chief pastor of the Church, neither at the least, nor
at the most: least of all, that in these words these things How M. Sand. ex o
^deth these words feed my sheep.
are contained. Christ says to Peter, feed my sheep* you expound these
words, that he gave him power, to take away Kings from their kingdoms, and to
set the people at liberty from their sworn obedience. This is a proper
feeding (M. Saunders to give them pappe with an hatchet, as they say, to spoil
Kings and s^t their kingdoms in the vprores of rebellion* Christ (...) not his
sheep on the fashion nor we read that ever Peter (...) them so, but with the
word of How Peter fed the sheep of Christ. 1. Peter. 2.
God, and with exhortation of obedience unto Princes. Peter fead the sheep of
Christ on this wise: Be ye subject to every human creature, for the Lords
sake, whether to the King as excelling, or to his rulers, as those that are
sent of him, to the punishment of malefactors, and to the praise of them that
do well, for so is the will of God. For doing well, you stop the mouths of
foolish and ignorant men. As free, and yet not having liberty for a cloak of
malice, but as servants of God. Honor all men, love brotherhood, fear God,
honor the King. Let servants be subject to the Lord with fear, not only if
they be good and gentle, but if they be froward. etc. And so he enters into an
exhortation of patience, under wicked governors. This is the feeding that Peter
fead the sheep of Christ withal: neither did h^uer depose any Magistrate, or
set at liberty any subjects, or usurp any kingly dominion, but dissuadeth the
clergy from it.

As for the other sentence of authorizing Peter to bind How M. Sand. applies
binding and losing of Princes.
and lose, is so far from giving him authority, to bind Princes in bondage
and captivity, making the^ to lose their kingdoms, and losing their subjects
from their bondage of subjection, setting them at liberty to rebel and chose
another: that if Master Saunders were not too too shameless he would never
thus apply it. And yet he says we must believe it* that in this sentence also,
Peter has this power given him, which neither Christ, nor Peter used at any
time, but both of them flat deny it. But why should we believe this M.
Saunders?

For (say you) if whatsoever Peter or Peter's successor loses Sand. page 83.
in earth, is also losed in heaven: then verily, when he loses orderly the
faithful subjects, from the obedience of a wicked King in earth: the subjects
are in heaven losed, from the obedience of that King. Besides, if whatsoever
Peter's successor binds in earth, be bound also in heaven: then when soever
the successor of Peter, rightly and well commands any King to go from his
Magistracy, which (being thus affected) he unjustly holds: or commands
him, by whatsoever means he can, to hinder another King, that hinders the
faithful people from eternal life, that he should not perish in doing
wickedly: that King is bound also in heaven, that is to say before God and
his Angels, to obey the decree of the chief Bishop, except he will have his
own sins before God, to be retained and not remitted.

Here is your Sampsons post, M. Sau^ders, that you, and your Pope build upon,
for his supremacy that he has the keys of heaven and hell under his belte,
but how grossly and shamefully this spiritual power of bynding and losing,
consisting in preaching the word of God, and pertaining only to the soul of
the faithful beleuer, or the unfaithful refuser, is applied to the body and
goods of men, to be taken from them: is wrested to commanding of Kings to get
the^ packing from their kingdoms: to bydding of subjects take arms against
their Princes: to bidding of one King, by whatsoever means he can, by defying
fighting, and making war, by sheeding Christian blood, by violating peace, by
breaking leagues, by wasting one another countries, to molest and persecute
one another: and that all Princes and nations are bound before God and his
Angels, to obey his bidding, yea, although he were such a chief B. or the
successor of Peter, as he craketh, A shameful abusing of Christ's saying.
and is not: is so horrible and shameful a wresting of Christ's saying, so
evident a contradiction to all other sayings in the scripture, so open a gappe
to the dissolution of all estates, and to bring all tumult and confusion into
the world: yea, this binding and losing were such a binding up of all
godliness, and the very losing of the devil himself: that it is marvel
that ever any Papist professing learning, would be so gross (in this age of
greater learning) thus to expound it. Which exposition was never heard of by
any godly father, till Pope Gregory. 7. set it a broach, and Pope Boniface. 8.
following him, set all Christendom by the ears about it. And now that all
the world sees the folly and wickedness of it, M. Saunders so unpudently
would renew it.

But he has a shifting restrainte in this exposition, to M. Saunders shift.
salve the matter. When the Pope (says he) duly and orderly loses the people
from their obedience, and when he well and rightly bids the king give over
his authority, the^ either of them are bound to obey his bidding.

True, Master Saunders when he does these things duly and orderly well and
rightly: the^ it shall be granted you. But how can he do that, well and
rightly, duly and orderly: that is most evil, and against all duty, right and
order? can a thief steal well and rightly? can such extreme wickedness that
passes all private theft, and is the open breach of all due order, be duly
and orderly done? But belike M. Sau^ders thinks, if the Pope do it in his
consistory, if he have on his Cope, and do it in his Pontificalibus, if the
belles be roong and the candels put out: then it is well and rightly, duly and
orderly done. Such toyishe orders uses the Pope to bleare the simple, as
though, when it is done with book, bell and candle, it is done well and
rightly, duly and orderly: but before God and his Angels in heaven, and before
all wise and godly learned me^ in earth, as these orders are mere ridiculous:
so these doyngs are most abominable. But now let us hear his reason for this
doing.

For if whatsoever power any king has, he ought to convert Sand. page 8^.
and apply that wholly to the honor of Christ: then he that otherwise does,
shall in the day of doom, render an account of sin, when even that sword it
self (which in times paste he has either drawn out against Christ, or else
he would not draw for Christ) shall accuse him of disobedience. If therefore we
shall follow reason aright, as the Minister of Christ ought not to consecrate
him for Prince, whom he sees not to be a Christian or a Catholic: so neither
ought he, to suffer him to bear government any long while over Christians,
who^ by any lawful means he ca^ remove. For the Lord has subdued to his
minister Jeremy, Jeremy. 1.
as well the kingly persons as their kingdoms, saying: Behold I have put my
words in thy mouth, behold I have this day set thee over nations, and over
kingdoms, to root up, to destroy, to leese, to scatter, to build and plant.
Which words fall out most aptly on the person of Christ. But no Catholic
doubts, but from him, they are daily fulfilled in his Church by his
ministers.

That the Prince ought to convert and apply all his power The Princes charge
for misusing his sword.
to the honor of Christ, we grant. And if he abuse his sword in drawing it
against Christ, or not defending the says of Christ thereby, we grant
likewise, at the day of doom the Prince shall answer for it. And therefore
Princes had need to be wise and learned, to look the better unto it. Which if
Psalm. 2.
they did, they must needs draw it out against your Pope and you in
principal. But if their sword (that God gave unto them, and they have
missused) shall accuse them: what shall the rust of the gold and riches do,
that the Pope has ill gotten and worse spent? what shall his triple crown and
usurped title do, what shall the Cross keys do, that he pretends, he has
from Peter, and the sword from Paul, embrued with so much blood of the
Saints of God? shall not these things much more accuse the Pope, at that
great day of reckoning?

But how holds this conclusion here upon? If the Prince If the Prince abuse
his sword the spiritual minister may not take it from him.
abuse his sword, shall the Pope wring it from him? surely then the Princes
sword, that the Pope has thus extorted, and he was forbidden to meddle
withal, shall accuse him also. But Master Saunders says, he may take it from
him, so that he take it by lawful means: as though a man may do another
wrong, by lawful means: as though he may usurp by lawful means that, that
by no means he ought to do: as though there can be any means lawful to do
that, that is not lawful to be done.

But that it is lawful, he cites the saying of God to Jeremy, The Papists
wresting the sentence of god to Jeremy.
cap. 1. This sentence is also cited in the Extrauagant of Pope Boniface, and
applied, as here Master Saunders does, that the Ministers of God may order
kingdoms, as the words seem to specify, according to the letter. But where
did Jeremy rule any nations and kingdoms, root up houses, destroy Cities,
pull down buildings, build and plant new in their places? I think, M.
Saunders, you can not show that ever Jeremy did this, neither can you in
such sense apply it to Christ, on whose person, you say, aptly it falls
out, sith Christ in his person, literally, did not these things neither. And
then can it not serve your turns, to govern Nations and kingdoms, to root
up houses, to destroy kings and depopulate their Countries, Towns, and
Cities, and to translate at your pleasures the whole estate of Christendom.
Jeremy did never thus, nor Christ did ever thus, nor his Ministers did ever
thus, and therefore you doing thus, can not bolster your doings from them. And
if you will do this as Jeremy did, and as Christ has taught, and as his
Ministers did, good leave have you. But how did they it? God says to Jeremy,
Behold I have put my words How Jeremy pulled down and set up kings and
kingdoms. Lyra in Ierem. 1.
in thy mouth: whereupon says Lyra: Because Jeremy not only prophesied
against the King of Judah, but also against many other kingdoms, as shall
appear. Therefore it follows: Behold I have set thee. etc. that thou
should root up, that is, thou should declare in rooting up, and
translating from thence the Inhabiters, etc. And should build and plant,
that is, thou should declare the Jews to be reedified and planted in their
own Country. Which These things were done long after Ieremies time.
was fulfilled in the time of Cyrus, that gave license to the people, to
return into their own Country, and reedifie the Temple: And in the time of
Artaxerxes, who gave license to Nehemias to reedifie the Temple of Jerusalem.
So that this rooting up was not done by Jeremy, nor this buylding again was
done in his time: but was long after done by God, and by such Ministers as God
appointed thereunto, which were no Priests, but Princes. Howbeit sith it was
Gods ordinance, he says, Jeremy should do it, because Jeremy should
foretell it. And therefore the learned Jeremy is said to do them, because he
fortolde them.
Uatablus expoundes these words on this wise: I put my word in thy mouth,
that is, I appoint thee to be a Prophet: behold, that is, mark those things
that I shall tell thee, that thou shall threaten my enemies, whom I have
planted, placed, confirmed, and builded in their nations, that I will pull them
out by captiuities, except they repent: and contrariwise, I will build again
and plant them, whom before I destroyed and pulled up* if they shall
acknowledge their sins. The doer of them was only God, and such instruments
as he used, which were no Priests not Prophets. Ierem. 45. Ierem. 42.
And for confirmation hereof, that this which he ascribes to Jeremy, was
Gods doing, and Jeremy but the foreteller of it: he refers us, first, to
the. 45. chapter, where God says to Jeremy concerning Baruch: Thou shalt say
thus unto him, Thus says the Lord: Behold, those things that I have
edified, I will pull down, and the things that I have planted, I will root up,
yea all this land. And in the. 42. chapter: If you abide and inhabit in this
land, I will build you, and will not pull you down, I will plant you, and will
not pull you up, because it repe^teth me of the evil that I have brought upon
you. Thus we see that Jeremy was not the doer of any of these things, he
never deposed kings nor translated kingdoms in all his life, but only
declared to them Gods judgments to come upon them and destroy them, if they
repented not, Gods merciful promises to comfort them if they repented. Now
on this fashion (if he will follow How the Pope should set up and pull down
kings and kingdoms, if he will follow Jeremy.
Ieremies fashion) should the Pope and his Prelates pull down, and set up
kings and kingdoms, not by deposing them from their estates, not by seazing
kingdoms into their hands, not by translating the gouernementes thereof, not
by making subjects rebel against their Sovereigns, not by setting Princes by
the ears together, not by putting all to fire, sword and famine: but by
declaring to them the wrath and plagues of God, but by exhorting them to
repentance, but by recomforting them with Gods most merciful promises, but
by preaching, and teaching them the word of God: and thus only to pull down,
and set up Kings and kingdoms. And further than this, the doing of Jeremy
stretched not, nor the Ministers of Christ may do.

Now if you apply this sentence spiritually to Christ, The sentence spoken to
Jeremy, applied to Christ.
and from him to his Ministers, we admit also your application. But where did
Christ thus order worldely kingdoms? Now can you then from Christ, father
these your dooinges? Your Gloss joined with Lyra, Glossa in Lyra in Ierem. 1.
has these words: Multi bunc locum. etc Many expound this place on the
person of Christ, for Jeremy is interpreted, the high one of the Lord, who
destroyed the kingdoms of the Devil, which he showed unto him on the top
of the Mountain: he destroyed the adversary powers, blotting out the
handewriting of error in his Cross. Of whom next to the hystoricall truth,
it is said in a figure: Wherefore did the Nations frette, and the people
imagine vain things, the Kings of the earth stood up, and the Princes came
together in one. In the place of all these being destroyed, lost and pulled
down into hell, the Church of God is builded up and planted.

Thus says your own Gloss, in applying this sentence from Jeremy to
Christ, concerning Christ's pulling down and setting up of kingdoms. And on
this wise How the Ministers of Christ ought to pull down and let up kingdoms.
ought the Ministers of Christ, to pull down and set up kingdoms, that is,
with the sword of Gods word, to beat down* the power of Satan, the kingdom
of error, the buylding on the sands, the works of sin, to root up vices,
and to beat down (as S. Paul terms them) all strong holds resisting the
truth of God, and to set up the kingdom of Christ, to edify his Church, to
build upon the rock, to plant virtues, and by doctrine and ensample enstruct
the faithful people. And so does your own Gloss interpret it: Vt euellas
mala, and destruas regna Diaboli: That thou should pull up evils, and
destroy the Lyra.
Kingdoms of the Devil. etc. and should edify the Church. Whereupon
says the Gloss: To four heavy things, two joyful things succeed, for
neither can good things be builded, except the evil things be destroyed,
neither can the best things be planted, except the worste things be rooted
up. For every plant that my heavenly father has not planted, shall be pulled
up by the roots, and that buylding which is not builded on the rock, but
upon the sands, is dug up and destroyed with the word of God. But that
which the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, that is, all
sacrilegious and perverse doctrine, he shall destroy it for ever, and those
things that lift up them selves against the kingdom of God, and trust in
their wisdom. Which before God is foolishness, he shall scatter and put
them down, that for these the humble things might be edified. And in place
of the former things that are destroyed and pulled up, those things may be
builded and planted, that are convenient to the ecclesiastical truth, of whom
it is said, you are the buylding of God, you are the tilth of God.

Here, M. Sand. even by your own gloss, is described, what this building and
pulling down is, that belongs to the ministers of Christ, so far unlike
your Popish buylding, that it shows the overthrow and rooting up of your
plants and buylding, and how your kingdom shall utterly be destroyed. In the
overthrowing of which munitions and buylding the truth of God, the ministers
of Christ must so set themselves against all worldly kingdoms, that fearing
not their might and tyranny against the truth, they overcome them. As God
said to Jeremy: Girde up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all
those Ierem 1.
things that I command thee. Fear not their faces, for I will make thee not
to fear their faces. For I have made thee this day, a strong city, and an
iron pillar, and a brazen wall over all the land, to the Kings of Judah, and to
the Princes thereof, and to the Priests, and to the people thereof, and they
shall not prevail, for I am with thee, says the Lord, and will deliver thee.
If the kings of Judah (says the Gloss) which Glossa in Lyra.
is interpreted, confession, and the Princes, and Priests, and people of it,
to wit, the Bishops, the Priests and Deacons, and the vile and unnoble
vulgar people will arise against an holy man: let him have a strong faith, and
fear not, let him trust in God, and he shall conquer them.

Here is the conquest of these kingdoms, whereby the What manner of conquest
of kingdoms this is.
true Ministers of God shall overcome all Kings and Princes, all Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, and all the people that resist them. But this is as
far from deposing kings from their estates, from ruling, possessing, and
translating earthly kingdoms: as you that seek after all these things, are
far from Ieremies, from Christ's, and from his Ministers conquests.

But (says M. Saunders) the Protestants, who can not Sand. page 83.
suffer, that the flesh give place unto the spirit, or the temporal kingdom
to the spiritual (for every where they favor too much the flesh and the
world) before all things John. 18.
they allege against us the saying of Christ, my kingdom is not of this
world, we must see therefore, what Christ in those words would have
understood, For the Protestants wrest them hitherto, as though the Ministers
Math. 13.
of the Church of Christ (which is the kingdom of God) may have at any time no
power over Christian Princes, or over their earthly kingdoms, and causes
subject to them, because the kingdom of Christ himself, is not of this
world. But in this thing they are too foully deceived: For it is another thing*
not to be of this world: and far another thing that the Christian kingdom
that is in this world, should not be subject to Christ, and to the Ministers
of Christ. When Christ denies his kingdom to be of this world, either by
the name of this world is understood sin, and the tyranny of sin, and the
mass of the reprobate (as the Lord otherwhere faith: you are not of the
world, if you were of the John. 15.
world, the world would love his own, but I have chosen you out of the
world) or else by the name of the world is understood, all this visible
creature, whereof the faithful also are part so long as they live here. If
therefore by the world we understand darkness and sin, and the reprobates
of this world: certain it is, the kingdom of Christ is by no means of this
world, because all the kingdom of Christ is light, and darkness is not in
his kingdom, who lightneth every man coming into this world. But if by the
world, John. 1.
we mean the visible creatures, and among them comprehe^d the Church of God:
verily ^e denies not that those creatures are subject unto him, or that these
temporal kingdoms that believe in him, are comprehended under his eternal
kingdom. But he denies that his kingdom is from hence, that is to say takes
his original of this world as other kingdoms are wont to do For the kingdom
of Christ s^rang not from the law of nations, as other kingdoms do, but from
the divine and natural yea and from the supernatural law. Whereupon
Augustine marked, that Christ said not, my In ca. 18. Ioh.
kingdom is not here, but it is not from hence, for in the world it is, but
of the ^orlde it is not, but of heaven.

Here M. Sand. having as he thinks, confirmed his opinion, M. Sand. answer
to this objection, My kingdom is not of this world. John. 18.
will now assay to confute our objection against it. And to this purpose, he
chooses out the saying of Christ is Pilate, My kingdom is not of this world.
This he says, we allege before all things. I omit his sclanders, that we can
not suffer* that the flesh should give place to the spirit, that the spiritual
Kingdom should rule the temporal, and that we favor to much the flesh and
the world. All which are but mere sclanders, and do fitter serve to re^urne
upon the Papists. But let us come to his answer of this objection, which I
grant is one of our objections unto them, although not (as he says) the
chief objection, but such an one, as master Sanders with all his shifts, is
not able directly to answer The Popes kingdom worldly.
to it. First, what a worldly kingdom the Pope seeks and possesses, is
apparent: in so much that few worldly Kingdoms in worldly might and glory
are comparable unto it. Although (God be praised) it decays daily
notwithstanding al his practices to repair and vndershore the ruins thereof.
Against this his worldly kingdom we object, that sith he pretendes to be the
Uicar of Christ, and Christ statly denies his kingdom to be such a worldly
kingdom: if the Pope he his Minister, he can not claim nor enjoy such a
worldly kingdom. What fetch now can M. Sand. M. Sand (...) by distinction of
this wordr the world.
find^, or any in all the world to elude this plain argument? we must (says
he) distinguish of this word, the world* which sometime signifies s^ne,
darkness, and the reprobate. In this sense Christ's Kingdom is not of the
world. Sometimes the world signifies all visible creatures: and in this
sense, it is in the world, though it be not of the world, that is, it has
not his original of the world, but from God. But this hinders not, but that
being in the world, worldly kingdoms may be subject to it. And so we sor not
marking these distinctions are f^ly deceived.

Whether we be deceived, or you, M. Sanders, or whether we or you would deceive
others, all the world easily may perceive. We admit your distinction, of
being in the (...), but not of the world. Neither disallowe we your
significations of the world, although subtly you conceal those
significations thereof, that it ought to have been further distinguished
into. For the world signifies often times, the glory, might, riches, power,
and pleasures of worldly things, especially when this word Kingdom is joined
to it. And this is the very natural sense The natural sense of world ly
kingdom.
of a worldly kingdom, that is to say, a state in or of the world, excelli^
in these worldly things. Now this, which is the very natural sense, you
^yde, and run about the (...), with this and that signification, to carry
the readers (...) aw^* from the proper signification of it. We deny not that
the kingdom of Christ is in this world, neither deny we that Christian
kings ought to submit them selves unto it. But we deny that this kingdom
stretches to the worldly government and possession of kingdoms or Realms, to
the deposing of Kings, and translating the states of Polycies, which is the
proper question now in hand. And to show that this sentence of Christ,
without all shifting or shuffling, is simply and plainly thus to be
understood: I will desire none other (besides S. Augustine whom you cite, and
the ancient Fathers) than even the Papists own judgments and interpretations
on this sentence, My kingdom is not of this world, which the Gloss
expounds thus: Quasi decepti estis. etc. As though he should say, ye are
deceived, for I hinder Glossa in Lyra.
not your government in the world. And so says Lyra: Non quaerit, etc. He
seeks not the temporal government of Lyra. in. Ioh. 18.
this world. etc. My kingdom is not from hence, that is to say, so far as
appertains to get these temporal things. But against this seems that
which is said in the Psalm. 46. God is the King of all the earth: but he is
very God, as he is very man, therefore his kingdom is of this world. We must
say, that according to the verity of his divinity, all things are subject
unto Christ, notwithstanding so far as appertains to his humanity, he
came not in his first coming to govern temporally, but rather to serve and
suffer. And so it appears, that he sufficiently excludes that, that was
laid to his charge, of usurping the kingdom of Iewry, because there was no
question of him, but in that that he was man, and for the present state that he
was in, which appertayned to his first coming.

Ferus expounding this saying, My kingdom is not of Ferus in John. 18.
this world. Quasi diceret. etc* As though (says he) he should say, I grant
(O Pilate) and acknowledge my self to be a King, this is even that that I have
done, this is that crime Christ's kingdom expels no temporal Princes from
their Dominions.
that is laid unto me. Howbeit understand this thing aright, I am in deed a
king, but so, that I neither usurp not diminish the power of thy Keysar, nor
expel any of the Kings or Princes from their power or dominions. And that thou
may understand the matter it self, I am not a worldly king, but an
heavenly, in whose hands are the hearts of all Kings, although it seem not so
to thee. My kingdom, that is, my principality The significations of the
kingdom of Christ.
or administration: or, my kingdom, that is my laws and rightes: or, my
kingdom, that is, my ministers and subjects: is not of this world, that is,
not of man but of God. I (says he) am of him made King over his holy mount. To
conclude, it is not of this world, that is, it is not temporal but eternal,
for the world and the lust thereof does pass away. Besides this, it is not of
this world, because it is not corporal, but spiritual, and is administered
after another sort, than is a worldly kingdom. For this is administered with a
material sword, but The difference of these kingdoms.
my kingdom has no need of this sword, for the sword thereof is the word of
God. The kingdom of the world has Cities, Towers, Towns, Villages, Armies,
Armor: my kingdom requires only the hearts of men. The world rules the goods
and the bodies, but I rule the hearts and the consciences. The world rules
with a carnal power, but it yields to the spiritual: but I rule spiritually
against sin, death and hell. Thou see how beautifully Christ describes his
kingdom. After the same manner almost does Zacharias speak of the kingdom of
Christ: Behold thy King comes unto thee meek and poor. etc. Howbeit we
must mark that he says not my kingdom is not in this world. For Christ also
is the Lord of the world, for all things were made by him, all power is given
to him in heaven and earth, now if the kingdom of Christ be not of this world,
then it follows, that there is yet another world. And therefore although thou
see not the promises of Christ fulfilled in this world, yet despair not, for
there is another world, in the which is fulfilled, whatsoever here is not
fulfilled. Again, because the kingdom of Christ is not of this world, we are
bidden to pray, let thy kingdom come. In this first word therefore Christ
delivers Pilate from all fear, and moreover by this example proves
himself, to wit, that he is clear from desiring the Imperial or kingly
power. If (says he) my kingdom were of this world* I would not lead unarmed
Disciples about with me, but armed, yea, I would have counselors, soldiers,
armies, etc. who in this my necessity, should with swerd^ defend me as their
Lord, yea offering themselves to death for me. Or if I coueted a worldly
Kingdom, either the Angels should defend me from the violence of the Jews: or
rather I would have need, neither of Angels, nor of men, for my right hand
should be able to help me. etc. Of these things therefore Christ concludes,
but now my kingdom is not from hence. Out of which argument persuade thy
self most certainly, that my kingdom is not of this world. Whatsoever thou
or thy Emperor has, it shall for me remain whole unto you, I desire none of
your things, I regard not the glory and riches of the world, that you
esteem for the greatest goods. These things truly were spoken to Pilate, but
they pertain to us. For, if the kingdom of Christ be not from hence, what
do thou Christian, seek for riches and honors of this world, if the kingdom
of Christ be not of this world? Christians therefore ought to have tribulation
in this world while in Christ they have the peace of conscience, marvel not
therefore from whence so many troubles happen to the godly in the world. And
with this word the godly man ought to comfort himself in adversity, and say,
my kingdom is not from hence. Besides this, if The error of the Papists.
the kingdom of Christ be not from hence, then err they that set the
kingdom of Christ in outward things and elements of the world* etc.

Thus does your own friar Ferus expound this sentence, that the kingdom of
Christ is not in such power and royalty as worldly kingdoms are, nor
diminishes, deposes, nor takes away from kings their kingdoms. And thus
does Ludolphus gather out of Chrysostom, and other ancient fathers. Ludolphus
de vita Christi part. 2. cap. 61
Nihil denique monstrauit tale. etc. To conclude, he never showed any such
thing. He neither had soldiers nor Princes, nor horses, nor burden of mules*
nor any such thing about him. But he led this life humble and poor, carrying
about with him. 12. base men. According to his divinity all things were
subject to Christ, howbeit as touching his humanity, in his first coming he
came not to rule temporally, and to reign, but rather to serve and suffer.
Whereupon he denies not that he is a King, but rather grants it. Because
according to the truth, he was the King of King^, but yet to take away
occasion of escaping. he tempereth his answer saying, that he seeks not the
temporal dominion of this world, because his Kingdom is not of this world,
so far as touches the seeking and having these temporal things, and therefore
his kingdom was neither against the Jews nor the Romans, nor hindered their
authority, because they only regarded an earthly Kingdom, that is, of this
world. As though he said to them, ye are deceived, I hinder not your Empire
in this world, least vainly ye should fear and rage, but come ye to the The
Pope and his Prelates kingdom confuted by the Papists them selves.
heavenly kingdom by believing, that is not of this world, to the which by
preaching I inuit you. Christ said, my Kingdom is not of this world, but
yet notwithstanding many Prelates, which are his vicars, seem in their doing to
say the contrary, in pompes making themselves equal to Princes, or rather
exceeding them.

Thus says again your Monk Ludolphus, and withal hitteth your Pope for his
more than worldly kingdom. For whereto else tends all this drift, but that
the Pope ruling all Christian Kingdoms (pretending a spiritual Kingdom of
Christ) might get a carnal kingdom to himself? As for Saint Augustine who
(you say) marked, that Christ August. in cap. 18. Joan.
said not* my Kingdom is not here, but it is not from hence: if you Master
Stapleton also had marked this in Saint Augustines exposition on this sentence:
Audite Iudei. etc. Hear O ye Jew, and Gentiles, hear O thou Circumcised,
hear O thou uncircumcised, hear O ye earthly kingdoms, I hinder not your
rule in this world: you might have marked with all, that although his kingdom
be here in this world: yet is it not only not of the world* but also not a
worldly kingdom nor hinders their government, which it should do, if it might
depose and alter them. Thus we see S. Augustines S. Augustine thought not that
the kingdom of Christ hinders vvorldly kingdoms.
mind was not, that the kingdom of Christ dispossesseth Kings or any estates
of men of their possessions and temporal goods, whereto M. Saunders applies
him: and also that by S. Augustines, and by his own Friars Judgments, this
sentence is aptly objected of us, against that kingdom that the Pope claims
and usurps, in the name of the Kingdom of Christ. Neither can all M.
Saunders elusions shift off the force of our objection. Neither does this
avail, that he says, by the world is meant darkness, sin and the reprobate.
True it is, the world many times signifies all these things. But what helps
this, when even the Popish kingdom (as an evident token of reprobation) not
only commits, but maintains most abominable sins, and the darkness of
ignorance is their chiefest cover. Howbeit the pride and tyranny of the Popes
earthly kingdom, was so apparent: that even themselves cry out upon it. But
now to M. Saunders.

And although Christ be borne of the Virgin beyond the Sand. page ^4.
course of nature, yet notwithstanding he is both very man, and was verily
borne, and by nature, he ought to be the King and Prince of all, who in things
of that kind, is the first, and only: I like their sentence very well, who
teach that Christ, in that he is man, is the true King and Monarch of all
mankind, although his kingdom be not such an one, that he ever mingled
himself in earthly things, except whereas they might be profitable to a
spiritual end.

As you like very well of these men's sentence, so you have Christ a king as he
is God and man.
heard the judgment of your own side to the contrary, that Christ, as he is
man, by his first coming, took no Monarchy nor Kingdom upon him, but a
spiritual kingdom belonging to his divinity. Although I do not mislike
their sentence neither, that refer also the kingdom of Christ unto his
humanity, so that they refer not (as you do) an human kingdom to it. He
is very man we grant, although you, in the doctrine of transubstantiation to
confound the The Papists confound the verity of his manhood.
verity of his manhood, he was also verily borne, and is the only chief of
all that are borne, and he was borne of the stem of vvorldly Kings also, and he
was truly called even by his parentage the King of the Jews, but because his
kingdom consisted not in that, he was not borne to be such a King. And this
appears even in these words following unto Pilate, after he had denied his
kingdom to be of this world: when Pilate replied, Art thou then a King? he
answered, Joan. 18.
thou say that I am a King. Ne tamen. etc. which notvvithstanding (says
Ferus) least Pilate should be more offended Ferus in ^o. 1^
with the name of a King: Christ proceeds to declare his kingdom more
plainly, as though he should say: Pilate, understand thou this for troth,
and cast out of thy mind all suspicion, of a vvorldly kingdom, or of
tyranny. This is the case, I will not at al deny my spiritual kingdom, The
manner of Christ's kingdom.
whether it be before thee, or before Caesar. Only know thou this thing,
that it is not my purpose to invade any man with Arms, or after the manner of
other Kings, to reign pompously: but to erecte and establishe in earth, the
Divine truth. To this purpose was I born* and to this purpose came I into the
world, that I might bear witness to the truth. Therefore I say came I,
therefore was I borne, not to fight with the svvorde, but that I might teach and
declare the truth, and the Gospel, which is the power of God to salvation,
to all that believe. And as I declare the Gospel, so I rule by the How Christ
rules.
Gospel in the hearts of the believers, over sin, death, and the Devil and
for sin will I give righteousness, for death life, for the Cross, joy,
for hell I will give heaven, these are The feoftme^ts of Christ's kingdom.
feofments of my kingdom. Of these things none can be pertaker, except he
hear my voice, and believe in his heart. I enrich not mine with riches, with
cities and other feofme^ts, but by my words I communicate unto them joy,
life, peace, and to conclude, heaven it self. The Gospel therefore is the
Scepter of my kingdom. But what are these things against the Emperor of Rome?

Thus again we see that Christ is not such a King, nor his kingdom such, as
you dream of. Which in the end, your self, contrary to your self
confess, that his kingdom is not such an one, that he ever mingled himself
in earthly things. Then (Master Saunders) those things belonged not to his
Kingly office, nor to his kingdom. For in such things every King ought not
only to mingle, but chiefly to occupy himself. But strait you have an
exception at hand: that he mingled not himself in earthly things, except
whereas they might be profitable to a spiritual end, and this your self
before confessed, was the final end of all the civil Supra. 797.
power, and that all faithful Kings, ought to direct all those things in
their kingdoms, unto spiritual ends, because they themselves are spiritual.
And so what lets, but that Christ should have reigned as a worldly King,
and governed an earthly kingdom? But say you:

This kingdom of Christ therefore both came from heaven, Sand. 84. Math. 28.
Romans 14. Psalm. 8.
and tends unto heaven. For both al power is given unto* him, as he was
man, and died and rose again, that he should rule over the living and the
dead, and that he should be set over the works of the hands of God, and
that all things should be cast under his feet, sheep and Oxen, and moreover,
the beasts of the field: And also Saint Cyrill says, that even the In Joan.
li. 4. ca. 12.
wicked in the last day shall arise to their punishment for Christ, who
rose first, and contained, as man, al men in him self. Since therefore earthly
Kings administer those things that pertain to sheep and Oxen and beasts of the
field: although they remain E^hnikes and Infidels, yet are they truly under
Christ the King, as the most worthy man* that has received the principality
over all things of this world, not from the earth, but from heaven, and for
the same, shall give an account to him, of their common weal evil ordered,
because they referred not their kingdoms to a spiritual end, that is, to the
glory of one God. But Christ so far as appertineth to his human ^atu^re,
being less than Angels, seems to me to have Psalm. ^.
received that kingdom (that Adam first should have administered among all
creatures, to the glory of one God, if he had not fallen from grace) and to
have renewed it in himself, and to have directed it to a spiritual end, that
when all things should be subject to the Son of man, then should the Son
1. Cor. 15.
also be subject unto him, that has subdued all things to him, that God
might be all in all. Since therefore Christ by his human nature is the King of
all, he truly directs al things to a spiritual end, that is, to the glory
of God, for God deserue^h glory, yea, even in those that are damned, both for
his Romans 9.
power and for his justice.

The effect hereof is this, that God has given to the humain nature of
Christ, as to the principal of al his creatures, al power and judgment, to
direct them to a spiritual end, that is The government of Christ
to his glory. But what is this to the purpose that Christ's kingdom is after
the fashion of a vvorldly kingdom? he governs all creatures, we grant, with
his power and providence, yea, the sheep, Oxen, and cattail that he speaks
on. But does the kingdom of Christ consiste in these things? Numquid Deo
cura de bobus? has God (says Saint 1. Cor. ^.
Paul) care of Oxen, in ye consideration of his heavenly kingdom? He tells
us, how all Kings shall answer (for the ^busing of their kingdoms) unto
Christ at the day of dome, because they refer them not to a spiritual end:
But he tells not how much more the Pope shall answer for ^surping
kingdoms, and abusing the spiritual kingdom of Christ to vvorldly ends.
But shall this judgment of Christ, be in a vvorldly co^sistorie? He tells
us, how he thinks that Christ received that kingdom that Adam should Adams
kingdom.
have had, had he not fallen. But thinks he that Christ should have ruled in
an earthly Paradise, or yt Christ came to restore us to no better kingdom,
than Adam was in before he sinned? He tells us, Al things shall be made
subject to Christ, and Christ to God, and God shall be all in all.

But thinks he this kingdom shall be in this world and militant Church,
while the euimies strive and are not yet al subdued? he tells us the glory
and justice of Christ shines in the condemnation of them that are damned. But
does he think, this is a vvorldly glory, and human justice? it is true,
that the glory and justice of Christ shall shine over the^. And so shall it in
the righteouse condemnation of the Popish Church, that seeks such a vvorldly
kingdom, and calls it the spiritual kingdom of Christ to cloak their
pride withal. But what can Master Saunders conclude hereon, for Bishops to
possess kingdoms, to rule Kings, to set up, or to depose them?

Neither say I these things (says he) to shevve hereupon Sand. 84.
that power is over the universal world given to the Bishops of the Chnrch,
as though they in all things are the Ministers and Vicars of Christ, in that
he is man: for they have not received the whole power of Christ to
administer it, but that part that properly belongs to believers. For it was
said unto the first Pastor, feed not all men, but my sheep, and to thee I
give the keys, not of all the world, but of the kingdom of heaven. Sith
therefore Christ has received a certain Io^. 21. Math. 16.
celestial kingdom, which kingdom uses also earthly things unto the glory
of God, and since out of the things of the world, he has chosen a certain
society of men, which in a certain especial sort, vvorshippeth God in faith
and love: in this only second kind of things, Christ has ordained Pastors
to be his Vicars.

You say, that ye say not these things, to shevve that hereupon, power is
given to Bishops over all the universal world. But what soever you say, your
Pope says contrary, applying this saying of Christ to himself and his
successors: all Math. 28.
power is given to me in heaven and in earth. You say, that Bishops have only
that power, that properly belongs to the believers, because Christ said
unto the first Pastor, feed, not all men, but my sheep. That Peter was the
first Pastor, is another question Master Saunders. But that the Peter not t^
first Pastor.
the Apostles had not in charge to go and preach to those that were not
believers, yea, to all men, so far as they could, besides the feeding of them
that were believers, and so were become already the sheep of the fold of
Christ, is a manifest untruth. For the Apostles had this general charge, go
Marci. 16.
ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. So that
they fed (besides the faithful) the Infidels dispersed through out the whole
world, for those Christ also calls his, because they should be his sheep,
and alias oues Joan. 10.
babeo. etc. I have also other sheep that are not of this fold, those must I
bring also. etc. But whereto run you to this so evident falsehood? forsooth to
prove that the Bishops have full power over all the believers, in a their earthly
possessions, and so might have power to depose Kings, and to occupy their king
doms and sease upon al men's goods that are Christians, because they are their
Pastors. And to this purpose is it that you say, Christ has received a
certain celestial kingdom, which uses also all earthly things unto the
glory of God. Which Christ uses not a vvorldly kingdom by the
Administration of the spiritual misters.
saying in this sense may well be granted, the kingdom of Christ uses all
earthly things that it uses, to the glory of God: but this would be proved
that the Kingdom of Christ uses, by the administration of the spiritual
ministers thereof, a vvorldly or earthly kingdom, which use is so far from the
glory of God, that it is contrary to his celestial kingdom. Which
consists (as you say) in feeding the sheep of Christ, in the keys of Gods
word, and in that especial sort of worshipping God in faith and love: and
not in deposing kings, or governing of earthly kingdoms, wherein they can not
be (as you term them) Vicars or deputies of Christ since Christ the King,
neither took himself such use of power upon him, and flatly forbad the same
unto his Ministers.

Therefore the whole kingdom of Christ came from Sand. 84.
heaven, that is, from the dignity which is given unto his human nature,
for the union of the Divine nature. Neither by any means the kingdom of him,
drue his original from the law of nations or the civil. For he refused to
be created Io^n. 6. Luke. 1^.
King, or to divide the inheritance between the brethren, saying: who has
made me a Judge or deuider over you? As though he should say: neither the
common weal, neither the Emperor has made me a Judge, and yet
notwithstanding, these brethren thought of such a Judge. But in that part that
Christ was appointed of God to be Judge, by his incarnation, concerning that,
he said unto those brethren: bevvare of all covetousness. For he savv that
they drove not their inheritance to a spiritual end, that they might bear
the heavenly judgment of Christ.

This is a shameful wresting of the Scripture, and inuerting M. Sand. shifting
off the examples of Christ's fleeing from being a vvorldly King, and refusing
to be a ^vorldly Judge
of the manifest doings of our Savior. Here are two other plain examples of
Christ, against Master Saunders, the one of his refusal to be a vvorldly King,
the other to be a'vvorldly Judge. The former he shifteth off in this sort^,
Christ would not receive an earthly kingdom into his hands not because he would
none of it, but because he would not take it of their gift, least it should
seem to come of them. For his kingdom is of heaven, and notin the original,
from the law of nations, or of the civil. As though our disputation The cause
of Christ's refusal was not on ly in the original, least it should seem to
come of the^
were so much of the original, as of the use and having of it: as though
Christ respected nothing but the original, or as though, if he would have
had such a kingdom, he could not have had it if they had not given it him: or
as though, even the first original of earthly kingdoms, came not from God
also. But to confute you with your own mouths, I will cite once again Friar
Ferus against you, that alleges not only this cause of the original, but
many other causes directly to this purpose. Christ fled (says he) because he
Ferus in. 10. 6. The causes why Christ fled from a vvorldly king dome.
received not a kingdom of men, but gave a kingdom unto men. He fled, because
his kingdom is not of this world, it is not carnal, it consists not in
external riches, power, pomp. etc. Yea, he rather came, that he might teach
to contemn these things. But his kingdom is a kingdom of truth, justice,
peace, and eternal life. For although he govern in all the world, yet he
governs not after the manner of the world, nor he affects such a
kingdom. He s^edde therefore, not because he vvoulde not reign over the
faithful, but because he deferreth the express tokens of reigning for the
time to come. He sledde, because he came to minister, not that it should be
ministered unto him. He fled, for he came not to kill Kings, but to preach
to Kings the knowledge of reigning justly, not to press the kingdoms of the
world with tributes and taxes, but that which Kings so well as the people
vvanted, to give them gifts of life eternal, out of the treasure of the
kingdom of heaven, going about to vanquishe in war, a far other manner of
ennimie, than Tiberius Caesar, and to take an other manner of beast than Rome,
which at that time. was Lady of the Jews. Besides this he fled, that
he vvoulde not give to the people an occasion of sedition against Caesar,
Christ would not give any occasion of sedition.
and so vvithall an occasion of sin and perdition. For he that moves
sedition against the power (as here in your writing you M. Sand* do, and
your Pope does in his Bulls against Christian Princes) sins and justly
perishes for it. Which Christ himself has spoken: he that takes the
svvorde, shall perish with the svvorde. To conclude, he fled, least he
should give the adversaries occasion of sclaundering him. For if they, yea,
eue^ without this, perfecuted him as a seditious person, how much more would
they have persecuted him, if he had accepted the kingdom offered of the
people. Thus even til this day flees he from those, that only seek carnal
things in him, because no part of his spiritual gifts looks on the^, and he
despises them that are occupied about vile bags* to wit, being given to their
belly and filthiness. He only gives himself to them that seek spiritual
things in him, and that can say our conversation is in heaven. Not without
cause therefore Christ here fled being sought for unto a kingdom, who being
sought for unto death, offered himself freely. For first by this, he
condemned our pride, or coueteousnesse, or ambition, or deintinesse. Secondly,
he taught to contemn the glory of the world, than the which nothing is
more vain, and not to fear the adversity of the world, than the which
nothing is more short. Thirdly, he taught herein, that those things are but
small, that in the world seem to be mostegreat. They thought they had offered
Christ a great thing, but he despised it as a little thing. We are far of an
other judgment. Whom he means by this, we: look a little The Popish
Prelates of an other judgment than Christ.
before concerning the^ that offered the kingdom to Christ. This fact (says
he) declares what the flesh seeks in Christ, even his own Cosins, that is
to say, fleshly and human things. Christ is set forth before us, that in him
we should seek the forgiveness of sins, righteousness, eternal life. But
the carnal man seeks nothing in him but license, carnal liberty, and the
filling of the paunche. For he that is of the earth, speaks and thinks of
earthly things, yea, such is the nature of the flesh, that it abuses all
the gifts of God, and seeks far other things in them, than God would. So
the fleshely man in the creatures that are given to our use, and to this that
God might be known and feared, seeks no other thing than pleasure. And when
by the^ he ought to be carried unto the creator, he sticks in the^, and
worshippeth the^, So, in the law which was given of God, for the knowledge of
sin, the carnal Jews sought righteoushesse (even as the The Papists
compared to the carnal Jews.
Papists do) and so now also, all those carnal men, that in the power of
the sword, seek not that that God will, but only ambition, pride, etc. yea,
and that in these things that appertain to the spiritual government, those
carnal Pastors seek only honor, riches, idleness, delights: when as Christ
ordained them to be teachers, guides, Apostles. etc. For no other Carnal pastors
cause, than for the edifying of his body. Thus says Friar Ferus against his
own fleshely spirituality seeking in Christ's spiritual kingdom a worldly
kingdom, which for these causes abouesaide, and not only for the original,
(that Master Saunders here only mentions) he refused to be made a King.

The like shift Master Saunders uses to the other place Luc. 12. of Christ's
refusal to be a judge, between the brethren M. Saunders shift to Christ's
refusal to be a judge Luc. 12.
for the division of their inheritance, saying who made me a judge, or deuider,
over you? as though he should say, neither the common weal has made me a
judge, neither the Emperor has made me a judge. As though Christ refused to
be their judge, not for that he would not be such a judge, ^ut for that he was
not made such a judge by human authority. For of such a judge (says he)
these brethren thought, whether What the man thought of Christ that would have
him a judge.
they thought him to be such a judge or no, i^ not apparent, Master Saunders,
and if we may go by conjectures and probabilities, it rather seems the
contrary. For neicher could they see any such tokens in him, to have bin
authorized from those that were ^hen the Magistrates, and his words going before
do argue they could not conveniently so think of him, both rattling up the
Phariseis that had the human authority: and bidding his Disciples not to
mistrust what to answer when they should come before the powers and
Magistrates, which these brethren hearing, might easily conceive yt Christ
himself was no such earthly Magistrate. But to the causes wherefore Christ
refused it, and that as before) even of the Papists Hofmeister. in Luc^. 12.
mouths themselves. Hofmeister one of your sloutest champions, has these
words: Truly those things that have bin spoken and heard from the beginning of
this Gospel, do enough declare the kingdom of Christ not to be of this world,
neither that he would reign temporally in the world, since he takes not
soldiers that ca^ oppugn others, but fisherme^ readier to suffer tha^ to
strike. And so in this place, with most manifest words Christ declares, that
he came not for this purpose, Why Christ took not on him the (...) of a
Magistrate
to take upon him the office of a Magistrate, but rather that he might reign
in our hearts, so that it might be our hap to come to the eternal goods,
whatsoever happened of our tem porall goods. Therefore when he was interrupted of
a certain Jew, that he would help him in recovering his inheritance: he
answered, Man, who has made me a ludge or deuider over you? As though he
should say, has not this world judges, that may decide so base
controversies? it is not appointed unto me, that this or that man should wax
rich by inheritance, but that all men should come to the inheritance of life
immortal. But in these words Christ would betoken many things, to wit, that
he which has an Apostolical office, ought not to be wrapped with profane and
silthie affairs. For so the Apostle says otherwhere, No man going to warfare
under God entangleth himself with worldly business. And the Apostles say all
at once, it is not meet fo^r us to leave the word of God, and attend on the
tables. Christ also by this reproving would declare, that his doctrine takes
not away the Magistrates offices, but rather confirms the^. Whereupon he
says also else where render to Caesar, that that is Cesars. And when his
Disciples striued for prehemine^ce, he said* the kings of the nations govern
them, and so forth. Whereby he declared, that neither he himself, nor his,
ought (as they call the^) to be secular judges: neither Christ abolished not
the Magistrates office, though he himself refused it.
did he by this refusing, abolishe the order of the Magistrate, but much more
(as we have said) confirmed it. Thus far your own Doctor Hofmeister against
you, that the intent of Christ refusing to be a judge herein, was chiefly
against such usurpation of worldly Magistracy, as the Pope and his Prelates do
exercise.

But (say you) Christ in that he was appointed of God to be judge by his
incarnation, concerning that part, he said unto them, that they should beware
of covetousness, for he saw that they drove not as yet their inheritance to a
spiritual end, that they might bear the judgment of Christ.

As who should say, if they had been Christians he would then have been a
temporal judge over them, that is to say, if they had done their duty, he
would then have broken his. No M. Saund* that was not the cause why Christ
refused to judge y^ matter, but because he counted it no part of his office,
neither was he appointed of God thereto, but it belongs to the Civil
Magistrate. As for such judgment, as vydding the brethren to beware of
covetousness, was in deed appointed of God to Christ, and of him to al his
Ministers, to judge of vices, and in such sort, as by preaching to them their
^ties, to All judgment of all temporal matters not vtte^ly debarred from the
spiritual Ministers* What kind of judging is debarred.
judge of all estates, and of all things also. Neither is all ^on of Civil
controuersi^s, or judging temporal matters ^ply debarred from the spiritual
Minister, nor the use of temporal things. But that the kingdom of Christ
confis^es in these things, or that the ministers of Christ be in such Ci^ill
judgments above Kings, or may judge* Kings, and give their inheritance from
them, or if they have any authority too in Civil matters, that it is properly
by their office, or belonging properly to Christ's kingdom and that they have
it not from the Prince* is clean confuted by this example. Neither can all
these shifts defeat it, much less that that follows in M. Saunders, saying.

Declaring therefore to what end all things that are in the Sand. page 84.
world ought to be re^rred: seek (says he) the kingdom of God, and al these
things shall be cast unto you. Where he denies not that even worlldy things
pertain to the kingdom of Luc^. 12.
God: but he would not have those sought, for themselves, but only for the
kingdom of God. But the kingdom that believes in Christ, it has left in that
part, to be of the world, in which part Christ denied his kingdom to be of
this world. Whatsoever (says S. Augustine) is from henceforth regenerate in
Christ, is made a kingdom, not now of the world. Though all things all to be
referred to gods kingdom yet the kingdom c^nsists not in all things. 1. Co^.
10. Romans ^4.


That all things ought to be referred to the kingdom of God, we grant, but
yt the kingdom of God consiste^ in all things we deny. Meat and drink ought
to be referred to the kingdom of God, whether ye eat or drink (says S. Paul)
o^ whatsoever ye do* do it all to the praise and glory of God, but the kingdom
of God is not meat and drink. Yo^ say, worldly things pertain to the
Kingdom of God. Which although it is much better said, than that the kingdom
should appertain to worldly things, as the Papists here would drine it, to
the state of a worldly kingdom: yet is it but an improper saying, that worldly
things belong to the kingdom of God. In deed the faithful (which are the
kingdom of God) How worldly things belong to the kingdom of God.
have them, and they belong unto them, and they are necessary and convenient
for them, as meat, drink, cloth, house, fire, water, propriety and
possession of temporal and worldly goods, to each faithful man in his degree,
and also to the ministers of the Church of Christ, and that to have these
worldly How the spiritual ministers of Christ may have a b^ance of worldly
things. In what respect they belong to the^ and to all the faithful and in what
respect they belong not unto them. How the Popish^ ^relates would have worldly
things.
things belonging to them (according as their gifts and travails require)
with dubble honor, yet do they not belong unto them, nor to any of the
faithful, as he is a member of this kingdom but as he is a man and subject to
infirmities, and these gifts of God are made for his use, so well the
ministers as any others. But yet there is a difference in the having of these
worldly things, and the being a Prince in the having of the^: for such Princely
having of them, is expressly forbidden unto the spiritual minister of Christ,
and permitted only unto the Civil Magistrate. The Pope and his Prelates will
not only have them, but they will be kings, and excel kings, in the having of
them, and will have them in the name of the Church, and of the kingdom of
Christ, and not as from the Prince, to whose authority properly, although not
to whose propriety, they belong: for the minister may have the propriety of
those worldly things so well as another, and perhaps better than many another,
and more abundance of them too, with which he may do more goodsundry The
Papists have no measure in having, and the cormorants no measure in pulling
away.
ways, than diverse other in Gods Church. But there is a difference between
stark ^aring* and stark blind. Ther^ are some cormorants that hunt for the
spoi^e, and would have the ministers earthly things clean taken from them, as
though they were only spiritual. The Papists on the other side, were not
only cont^t to have them, but they would (besides their to much excess of
them) be exempted with privileges from the Princes authority in the having of
them, and the Pope did claim not only a kingdom of them, but that al kings
held their kingdoms of him. And this is the thing that we deny the Papists.
For Christ has plain debarred it, and denied his kingdom to be a worldly
kingdom.

Yea but (says M. Sanders) in that part that a kingdom In what part and
respect the believer in Christ has left off to be of the world.
believes in Christ, it has left off to be of this world*

We grant you, M. Sanders, in respect of the belief in Christ and the soul
that believes: but yet has it not left off to be of this world, in respect
of the body, in respect of the civil government, in respect of having and
using orderly Gods creatures, in respect of maynteining our lives, our goods,
our families and our countries: all which earthly things, the kingdom of God,
that is, the faythfull^, may enjoy, and have far better use of them than any
other, referring them to spiritual ends, howbeit, every man in his degree
such earthly things as are competent to his estate, and are not debarred from
his use, as the having of an earthly kingdom, is from the spiritual Minister.

As for the sentence of S. Augustine, is not to this purpose, S. Aug. wrested
by master Sanders.
but wrested thereto, for he speaks not there of a kingdom, as we here do,
that is to say, of a civil power governing a Realm, or of a Realm and
Polycie governed by How faithful kingdoms lea^e off and how not to be of the
world.
a King, as though because it received the faith o^ Christ, it were not of the
world, that is, it were not governed after a worldly manner. In which sense
(as we have showed) Christ denied his kingdom to be of the world. For
although it be become a faithful kingdom* yet maynteyneth it still the former
state, which is no^ diss^lued by the kingdom of Christ, but rather bettered
and confirmed. Of whi^he estate S. Augustine there speaks not. His words are
these: Aug* in tractatu, ^n loa. 11^.


Therefore they were of the world, when they were not of his kingdom, but
pertayned to the prince of the world, That therefore is of the world,
whatsoever is in deed created of the true God, but is borne of the corrupted
and damned stock of Adam. But that which is regenerate in Christ, is made a
kingdom now not of the world, for so God has pulled us out of the power of
darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of the son of his brightness.

By which sentence it appears, he speaks not of the world, in the sense
of the might and glory thereof, but in the sense of the power of sin and
Satan: neither of a kingdom, in the sense of a Polycie governed by a king,
but in the sense of the spiritual gifts of Christ. In which How every
faithful is a king in a mystical sense, but not in a literal sense.
sense, every faithful man, woman, and child, is not only a member of his
kingdom, but is a king. Howbeit he is not a king, in that sense that Christ
denied his kingdom to be of the world, that is, to be a Magistrate, and
governor of Gods people: which estate is only granted vn^ Princes, and as
flatly ^ebarred from any ecclesiastical person, as from any other private man.

Si^he therefore we say not, that other kingdoms ought Sand. page 84.
to be under the Ministers of the Church of Christ, than those that already
believe in Christ, or at any time have believed: truly this is most foolishly
objected to us, that Bishops have no power over Christian kings and their
kingdoms, because it is written, the kingdom of Christ (which is committed to
his Ministers, for the part whereby he works here) is not of this world.
For we seek it not of those kingdoms that are of this world, but of those,
which although they be in this world, yet by faith in Christ they have left
to be of this world.

M. Sand* still wrestes of purpose this word, the world, M. Sand. still
vvrestes this word, the vvorld^.
to sin, and to the state of the unfaithful. As though Christ only meant, My
kingdom is not a kingdom of sin, and such as are the kingdoms of those
Princes, over whom the Prince of darkness raygnes. Whereas the words of
Christ are plain, that his kingdom is not such a kingdom, as rules in
worldly glory, whether it were of the The simple and literal meaning of
Christ in ^aying* His kingdom is not of this world.
faithful kings, or the unfaithful. For the Jews that would have made him a
king, did not doubt of this, that he would become a tyrant, or an unfaithful
Prince, they hoped he would be a better Prince unto them* than he was that then
oppressed them: they trusted he would govern them, as David, Solomon, and
other godly princes had done: they reckoned that their Messiah should rule in
all worldly glory, as a most mighty king. But this opinion The opinion o^
the Jews that offered him the kingdom.
Christ denies, in his fleeing from their offer. And so he said to Pilate,
If my kingdom were of this world, my ministers would fight for me, that is,
I could, not by tyranny, but by worldly and lawful power and force maynteine
my kingdom. Neither did his Disciples when they desired His Disciples opinion
in cra ^ng pre^erment in his kingdom. Math. 20.
such pre-eminence in his kingdom, think his kingdom was a kingdom of
sin, or a rule of unfaithfulness: but thought of a very worldly government,
shining in all might and glory, which they took to be good and lawful, and
him to be most worthy of it. And this is that that Christ reproves in them,
affirming that neither he nor they should reign in such sort as worldly
Princes do, whether they were faithful or unfaithful Princes. Not that Christ
governs not the faithful Princes. For they obediently submit How Christ
rules Christian Princes.
their earthly kingdoms to his spiritual kingdom, yea and to the ministers
of his kingdom too, in things belonging to the ministry of his spiritual
kingdom. But that the Ministers of the spiritual kingdom of Christ, have
such How M. Sand. would have al Christendom and a great part of
Heathenesse subject to the Pope.
power over any Christian Prince that believes in Christ, that they may take
his estate from him, that they the^ selves may rule in his estate, that they
may make him hold his estate of them, that they ought not to be subject to
his estate: this is the thing that M. San. laboreth in, and would bring all
kings and their kingdoms unto, that either have the faith of Christ already,
or at any time have had it, as Jerusalem, Syria, Greece, Asia, Egypt, Africa,
and diverse other countries, so well under the Turk and Saracens, as all
Christian kingdoms in the world, to be subject to the Popes authority, to
receive or forsake their kingdoms at his pleasure. But this and such other
worldly glory of rul^g kingdoms is flatly debarred by Christ's saying: My
kingdom is not of this world: neither all the John. 18.
wisdom of the world can co^nteruayle this sentence, how foolishly soever we
seem to M. Sanders to object it. But this is his old song, all are rooles and
doltes with him, that obiecte any thing against the Popes worldly wise
Dominion. But this foolishness we need not be ashamed of, that is the decree
of Christ, who is the fathers wisdom.

If therefore we see such a kingdom, as is dedicated to Sand. page 84.
Christ, thus governed, that the King by abuse of the sword which he
carries, carry away the Christian Citizens into most grievous sins, yea
into schisms and heresy, if he say Christ is but a creature, if every where
he permit divorces, if he affirm vsuries to be lawful, shall it be a wicked
deed, first after one or two admonitions, to remove this King from Tit. 3.
the fellowship of the faithful: and then if he yet amend not him self, by
the help of other Princes, to expel him utterly from the government of his
kingdom?

If a Christian King were such an other wicked King, Whether it were a
wicked deed for Bishops to depose a wicked king.
as here you imagine: you ask if it were a wicked deed thus to order him? I
answer you, it were a wicked deed. For and he were ten times more wicked,
that excuses not the Bishops treason, to incite other to expel him. None of
the ancient godly Bishops did ever attempt that tre^heris against such wicked
Princes, were they Arians, Tyrants, Though the subject be not bound to obey
the vices, yet he is bound to obey the state.
or whatsoever they were, til the later Popes did set abroche this traiterous
practice. For, a Bishop being but a subject, although he is not bound to
obey the Princes vices, yea he is bound both to disobey the vices, and to
reprove the Prince for them, and to terrify him with the threats of Gods
wrath, although it cost him his life for his labor: yet is he not bound to
rebel, or cause other to rebel, or to practice conspiracies with other
against his Prince, whereby effusion of Christian blood ensues. Yea he is
bound to the contrary, to obey his civil government, and not he to abuse his
estate also, because the Prince abuses his estate, but to use all lawful
means he can to reform him, committing the rest to God, who placed him, and
whom he represents in his calling, though he swerve from him in his ruling.
As for the Bishops have no such calling to depose Though Bishops can not
depose Princes yet Princes can depose Bishops.
him, nor any such ruling as worldly Princes, good or ill do exercise. And
therefore if they take this usurpation upon them, though they ought not to
depose Princes, yet ought Princes to depose them, especially being infected
with those vices, that M. San. su^niseth are in these Princes. Have not Popes
made schisms, when two or three, or four at once striued for the Papacy?
have not Popes maynteined, Christ is a creature* as Liberius that was an Arian?
and a sinful creature, yea alyer, as Leo the tenthe objected to Bembus,
Quidmibi narras de Christo fabulas? What The vices that he surmiseth on
Princes, are apparante in the Pope and his Prelates.
tellest thou me the fables of Christ? Has not the Pope not only permitted
divorces for many other causes than God permits, but also by force and
against the consent of both the parties severed those that God has joined,
and joined those that God has forbidden to be joined? Does not the Pope
maynteine the greatest vsuries that be, to wit, the Jews to pill and poll the
Christians, and al for his own lucre, besides his most filthy and unlawful
gain by fornication? Does not the Pope by the abuse of the sword and keys
that he says he carries, carry away the Christian citizens into most
grievous sins, yea, and say he may carry away with him at the world to the
devil, and no man must be so hardy as to say, sir, why do you thus? Shall it
now be a wicked deed, to remove the Pope from the fellowship of the faithful,
after one or two admonitions, and then if he amend not him self, that all
Christian Princes help to expel him utterly from the usurpation of this his
worldly kingdom. But M. Sa. not seeing these vices in his holy father, and
surmising the worst in Princes, supposes we will answer his objection thus:

But one will say, no power is given unto the Church of punishing Sand. page 85.
or of removing the kings from their office, and therefore if the kings will not
of their own accord be amended, they are altogether to be born withal, neither
ca^ any other thing be lawfully attempted against them. This truly do many
preach.

Who they be that preach this, I know not, I think it but your slander. Ill
will never said well. And yet whosoeso What the prea cher may do against a
vvic ked Prince. No bodily punishment of the King belongs to the Bishop.
preaches this, preaches far better than you do, whose sermon is all of
treason and rebellion. As for us we preach this, that the preacher or
spiritual pastor may in such extremities, use a spiritual punishment, of
denouncing the sentence of Gods wrath against him. But to punish him with
bodily punishment, or with expelling him from his kingdom, is no more
belonging to the Bishop, than to put him to death. The state of some kingdoms
are such, I grant that the Princes regiment is but conditional, and he so well
What may be done in removing an evil Prince in some estates.
bound to the electors of him, and other peers or estates in his Signiorie,
as they to him, and either parties sworn in his Coronation, not only to
observe those conditions, but to persecute or remove the violater of them. In
such cases, what those Electors, Peers, and Estates may do, and how they
may, or may not do it, is an other matter. But yt eue^ in these estates, the
Bishops ca^ do it, and do it in that they are Bishops: this we deny (M. Sand)
and as yet you have not proved it.

But I doubt not, but that every necessary and profitable Sand. page 85.
power is given to the Pastor over his sheep, whether they be lambs, or
lambs dammes, or rams, and that to this purpose, Ezech. 34.
that he should strengthen that, that is weak: that he should heal that,
that is sick: that he should bind up that, that is broken: that he should
bring again that, that is cast away: that he should seek that, that is
lost, so that he rule not with austeritie and power.

You doubt not (M. Sand.) but I doubt of this, that every Whether every
necessary and profitable power be given to the Pastor over his sheep.
necessary and profitable power is given to the Pastor over his sheep. The
eccl. power is both necessary and profitable. But the Prince is a pastor, and
the people are his sheep. And yet by your own confession, the ecclesiastical
power is not given to the Prince. Had you marked this, you might have doubted,
that every necessary and profitable power, is given to the pastor over his
sheep. Again, the power of the sword, and putting to death malefactors, is a
necessary and profitable power. But the Bishop is a pastor, and the people are
his sheep. And yet by your own confession, the power of the sword, and
putting to death, is not given to the Bishop. Had you seen this also, you
might have doubted, that every necessary and profitable power, is given to the
Pastor over his sheep. This lack of doubting, made you to^ rash of deeming,
and to pronounce your sentence over general. And as you see in these two cases
a flat exception, that you will gladly revoke: so we must drive you to
grant the other powers also pertaining to a King, which notwithstanding they
are necessary and profitable, are yet not given unto a Bishop, although he be
a Pastor. I pray you remember, Vos autem non sic, if it will not make you sick
to remember it. Luke. 22.


The duties of good pastors that you cite out of Ezech. 34. The popish Pastors
far from the duties described in. Ezech. 34.
God (we grant) has given them power thereto. But the Popish pastors are as
far from all these points, and much farther, than the Iewishe pastors were,
of whom the Lord co^playneth, saying: VVo be to the pastors of Israel, that
feed themselves: are not ^he sheep fed of the shepherds? ye did eat the milk,
and were clad with the wol* that that was fat, ye killed: but my flock ye fed
not* that that was weak, ye stre^gthned not: that that was sick, ye healed not:
that that was broken, ye bound not up: that that was cast away, ye brought not
in, that that was lost ye sought not, but ye ruled them with bitterness, and
with power. how this directly touches the Pope, and his Prelates, even the
popish enterlined Gloss does testify. Hoc proprie. etc. Glossa in Lyra in
Ezech. 34.
This properly is spoken of the pride of Bishops, which shame with their works
the dignity of their name, for humility, taking pride: who think they have
gotten heaven, and not a burden. Whose loytring idleness, whose vain
glorious pride, whose bitter tyranny, and more than kingly power was so
intolerable, that it was marvel that ever you durst for shame recite this
place. But you thought it served to your purpose, that you might under the name
of sheep punish and drive out Princes at your pleasures. But this place
gives not Pastors power to weaken them that be strong, to make them sick that
be hole, to break that that is bound up, to cast out that that is brought in,
to leese that that was sought for, to kill and devour both the fat and the
lean, both the Prince and the people, to rule with bi^ternesse and with power:
al which by your popes practice is don, and by your exposition is defended. For
is not that to rule with bitterness, if ye expel your To expel Prin ces from
their kingdoms, is to rule with bitterness.
Princes from their kingdoms? can ye be any bitterer to them? what earthly
power can ye claim higher, than to seize upon and rule their kingdoms, or to
have the^ rule them after your rules, whom you will appoint, to ^olde them in
chief from you. This place of Ezechiell gives you not such power, but
condemns in Pastors the usurpation of it. But what will not impudency wrest
to serve his turn.

Moreover, to the mind and to reason, power is given over Sand. page 85.
all the members of the body, insomuche that it bids that rotten member to
be ^ut from the body, of the which it may be feared, least it should infect the
other members. But the In Orat. de moderat. in disputat seruanda. The
similitude of cutting of a rotten ^eber.
pastors in the Church are as the mind is in the body of man, as S. Gregory
Nissene has noted.

I answer* First, this is but a similitude, and therefore con^inceth nothing,
how often soever you allege it. We grant that the Pastors are, as it were,
the mind of the Church, in the reasoning and discussing the faith of Christ,
How the pastors are as it were the mind or reason in the head. How the
Prince again is as the mind o^ reason in the head.
the word of God, the sacraments and mysteries of Christ's Church. But again,
in the maintenance and setting forth, in the oversight and public direction,
in the punishment and correction of the trespasses, the Prince is the mind,
the reason, and the head also, and a pastor in gods Church too. And therefore
this belongs not only to the Bishops. But be it the Prince be not the mind
and reason, whose place is in the head. Were the King but as the heart, or as
the will whose place is in the heart, yet as the mind does but either devise
by invention, or discern by judgment, or remember by memory, and not assent
or dissent, like or mislike, choose or refuse, for that belongs to the will:
so the spiritual pastor may devise wholesome remedies, or remember the Prince
The Prince compared to the will in the har^e.
of them, or discern in controversies between this and that, which we deny
not. But the refusal or receiving, the liking or misliking, the bidding or
forbidding, that lies in the faculty of the Prince. Not that the Prince has
faculty to will every thing, no more than the head may devise every thing, for
both ought to will and devise only good things* but that the authority to put
them in execution, and willing the members to do them, as it proceeds
principally next to God, from y^ will: so the setting forth of godly Religion,
taught by the persuasio^ of the pastor as the reason in the head, proceeds
principally next to God from the Prince, as the will in the heart. But now as
M. Saunders has for stalled the head for the Priest, so if he will not relent
the heart to the Prince: yet I If the Prince were but com pared to the lungs,
lights or liver, yet must ^e not be cut off because he is infected.
trust he will be thus good unto him, to compare him at the least to some
principal member in the body, as to ye lights, the lunges, the liver. etc. If
now the lights, the lunges, or the liver, be infected, by whose infection
diverse others parts of the body would become also infected, will the head
therefore, will the mind or reason bid cut them off, and hur^e the^ out of the
body, least they infect the other members? were it not an unreasonable reason
that would reason thus, to have those rotten members cut off from the body, of
which remaining it may be feared least they should infect the other members,
when the cutting them away straight kills all the members, both head and
heart and all? and thus you see M. Saunders if we shall reason by similitudes,
how they make more for us, than for you. But similitudes may delight or
lighten a matter, they are not of force to urge it. But M. Saunders will press
it with stronger arguments.

Besides this S. Paul by name does teach, that power is given Sand. page 85.
to the Church over the goods and over the bodily things of the faithful. For
he persuadeth the Corinthians, that if they 1. Cor. 6.
will needs go to law, they should go to law before Christians, and not before
Ethnikes. And because it might be said, there were no public Magistrates or
judges ordained among the Christians: he warns the faithful that they should
appoint judges among themselves: and if perhaps there were not wisemen in that
kind (which notwithstanding was not likely) yet at the least they should rather
appoint contemptible persons, tha^ to go to law before the infidels.

This place is alleged before and there is answered. The drift of it here,
consistes on this argument.

The Church has power over the goods and bodyly things of the faithful:

But the Pastors are the Church:

Ergo, the pastors have power over the goods and bodily things of the
faithful.

To the Mayor I answer, the Church has power, but a How the Church has
power over the goods and bodily things of the faithful.
limited power. Such power as confounds not or takes away the goods or
bodily things of any of the faithful, which are members of the Church. Such
power as is competent to every member of the Church, to possess, to use, and
dispose his own goods and bodily things, according to his private or public
calling.

To the Minor, I deny it: the pastors are not the Church, The pastors are not
the Church, but members of the Church.
but members of the Church, and have power only over such goods and bodily
things as belong to the^. And yet in that power that they have of the
propriety of their own goods, they may so little spoil the Prince of his
goods or bodily things, that they hold them from the Prince, and have by him
the The pastors have the power and propriety of bodily goods from the power of
the Prince. 1. Cor. 6.
peaceable possession of them. For all that power under God is from the Prince,
to the^ and to al other. Neither the Bishops nor any in the Church, nor all the
Church together, has power to take the Princes goods or his bodyly things from
him.

But M. Sau^ders to enforce his argument, cites the sayof S. Paul. 1. Cor. 6.
In that he would have Christians, go to law (if they will needs go to law)
before Christians, and not before Ethnikes.

Why, M. Saunders are Christian Princes and faithful M. Sand. makes priests
only Christians, and Christian Princes Ethnikes.
Magistrates no better with you than Ethnikes? and are you Priests only
Christians? for else how can you apply this to the present purpose? that
Priests should have power over the goods of the faithful: that the faithful
should run for decision of their controversies to the Priests, not to the
Princes? that the Bishops may judge of the Princes goods aod kingdom, and give
it away to another: trow you this was the meaning of S, Paul? But you excuse
the matter with this, S. Paul meant not that the Corinthiaus should go to law
before the pastors for te^porall matters.
that they had then no Christian Magistrates. As though therefore he had bidden
such law matters to be determined by their pastors. No M. Saund. this was
neither the words nor the meaning of him. For he knew, the pastors had another
power and enough to do therein, although they busied not themselves in the law
matters that fell out among the Christians. Not that s. Paul thought they might
have no power of any bodily things, nor propriety of temporal goods, or that
he thought they might in no case be peacemakers in such brabling matters: but
that Saint Paul would have the pleadyng and decision of such things to be
rather belonging ordinaryly, to some faithful and honest manne, chosen among
them selves, than to run to heathen Judges. Which words among themselves, do
as it were declare, that he meant such as was of their own calling, and not
their ^astor* Which is more evident in that he says, is there no wise man
among you? what, not one, that can judge between brother and brother? so that
he speaks in general, and not only of the pastor. And where he says, chose
a contemptible person. Except ye will make the pastor contemptible* it argues,
he meant not this judge should be the pastor. So that this place, as it makes
nothing for the power of the Priests over the goods and bodily things of the
faithful, so it makes much here in against them. For if S. Paul in such
matters of goods and bodily things, rather than they should not have a
Christian judge, would have them chose among themselves even a contemptible
person: how much more now when the Church has faithful judges and Christian
Princes, it ought in such controversies, to run to them for Justice, rather
than to the Priests and Bishops, that are of another calling.

Moreover, least any should say, that the Church of Christ Sand. page 85.
has nothing to do with the business of this world: he says expressly, do
ye not know that the saints shall judge of this world? and if the world shall
be judged by you, are ye unworthy 1. Cor. 6.
to judge of small things? know ye not that we shall judge the Angels, how much
more worldly things. Behold the Apostle reasons from the spiritual power to
the temporal, on this wise: To whom that which is more, is lawful, to him is
lawful that which is less: But we Christians shall judge of the world, and we
shall judge the renegate Angels and the Devils themselves, the which comes by
the spiritual power* whereby we be made the sons of God, and the coinheritors
Romans 8.
of Christ: much more therefore may we exercise secular judgments. VVherby it
appears that secular things are both inferior ^o spiritual, and are not
estranged from the spiritual power, but may light under it, chiefly then,
when the matter is in hand of punishing or judging those men, that are the
members of the Church of Christ.

(...) say not (Master Saunders) that the Church of How the ministers have
and have not to do with worldly business.
Christ has nothing to do with the business of this world, this is but your
sclaunder. We say that the spiritual Ministers of the Church of Christ, have
not so to do with such vvorldly business, that they may turquise all the
world, and alter the states of vvorldly kingdoms, and occupy them selves
about vvorldly affairs, in such vvorldly dominion as you pretend they may.
Whereto you abuse shamefully Saint Paul's sayings. He speaks there of
vvorldly matters, S. Paul wrested by Master Sand*
and you apply it to all judgments, yea, to the judging of a kingdom* But
you replle, he says the Saints shall judge the world and the Angels, which
are greater things than kingdoms, how much more then kingdoms, that are
lesser things.

Trow you) Master Saunders (he speaks there, of such How the saints shall
judge the world.
judging the world, that they should judge like chief Iusti^ of realms and
kingdoms, whether this or that Prince shall enjoy them, or shall be
dispossessed of them? No (M. Saunders) she speaks of no such thing. The
world shall be judged in them, as Chrysostom well notes: Iudicabunt
Chrysostom. in. 1. Cor. 6.
non ipsi iudices. etc. They shall judge* not they themselves sitting in
judgment, and exacting an account. God forbid, but they shall condemn the
world, the which signifying he says, and if in you. etc. He says not of
you, but in you As who should say, the just condemnation of these that are the
worldlings, shall shine in the salvation of you that are the Saints. This
therefore proves (...) such worldly judgment as you pretend

Secondly you abuse S. Paul, as though in speaking of S. Paul speaking of
Saints means not only spiritual Pastors.
the Saints, he spoke only of the spiritual Pastors, whereas he speaks in
general of the whole congregation. Are Saints and Christians only Priests
with you? this is both manifest wresting of S. Paul, and shameless arrogancy
in your selves.

But you say the Church has it, by the spiritual power vvherby we be made
the sons of God, and coinheritors of Christ. We grant you Master Saunders.
But does this spiritual power belong only to Priests? you say it appears
hereby, we may exercise secular judgments, whom mean you by this we,
(Master Saunders) your selves that are the Priests? But S. Paul speaks of
Christian people, and not of the Pastors only, yea, least of al of the Pastors.
Whereupon says Haimo out of Gregory, on these words, choose him that is
contemptible. Secundum Gregorium. etc. According Haimo in. 1. Cor. 6.
to Gregory, by contemptible persons we may understand secular men, having
the knowledge of human laws, and in their personages being honorable, who
in comparison of them that understand the divine laws, and pierce the
mysteries of the holy Trinity, are contemptible and simple, although they be
faithful* And according to this sense we must read it affirmatively,
because such are to be appointed, which of the Canons are called, the Sons
of the Church. I sprake it to your shame, because although I command it not,
you ought to have done it. And therefore he commands such to be ordained,
because they that ought to serve on the altar, and meditate Divine Sermons,
and give the word of preaching to the people, ought to estraunge themselves
from secular business and judgments. Likewise says your Cardinal Hugo. The
gloss calls them Hugo in. 1. Cor. 6.
contemptible, that are not apt to great offices in the Church, as to preach
and teach. And this is an argument that my lord The Pope reproved.
the Pope ought not to appoint Masters of Divinity, to be Judges of temporal
things. To your shame (says the gloss) that those should examine earthly
causes, that have gotten the wisdom of outvvarde things. But those that are
enryched with spiritual gifts, ought not to be entangled with earthly
business, that while they be not driven to inferior goods, they may be able
to attend on the higher goods. Hovvebeit this must greatly be cared for, that
they that shine in spiritual goods, forsake not utterly the business of their
vveake brethren. Thus your Papists themselves are of a contrary judgment to
you, M. Saunders, (besides all your Popes, and Councels Canons) that the
spiritual Pastors should not be these Judges in secular things, that here
Saint Paul speaks on. To wrest therefore these words spoken of any faithful
Christian, only to your Priests: to wring this sentence from the state of the
Church, then being without any faithful Magistrate, to the time now, when
they have many, and those not chose^ of themselves, but ordained of the higher
Magistrate: to wrythe it from the judgments and taking up of their petit
quarrels, to the deposing or setting up of Kings, or altering kingdoms: is
clean beyond the meaning of S. Paul, and an evident violence and injury to
Gods word. Now upon this sentence thus wrested, you proceed to your argument,
saying:

For their goods are so much subject to the ecclesiastical Sand. 85.
power, that it is lavvfull for the Church, of private men, to ordeine
Magistrates, that should judge of secular causes, and De regulis iuris.
not only of ecclesiastical. But no man can pass more right to an other,
than he has himself. Therefore the Church which has power to make them
Judges, that were private Hebr. 5.
men before: has much more it self over those secular causes, received
power, by the Ministers of God, that as Aaron, 2. Cor. 5.
are called to the public mynisterie of Jesus Christ. For whatsoever is of
Christ, given in common to the Christian common weal, is given by them that
exercise the Legacy for Christ, and are Stevvards of his mysteries.

Your argument is this. Whatsoever is given in common of Christ to his Church,
he gives it by the Pastors.

But power to make Magistrates and Judges, is given in common of Christ to his
Church: Ergo, it is given by his Pastors.

But no man can pass more right to an other, than he has himself. The
Pastors pass this right, and power of being Magistrates and Judges in secular
matters to another:

Ergo, the Pastors have right and power of being Magistrates, and judge
themselves in secular matters.

Al these parts and co^clusions of these reasons I utterly deny (Master
Saunders.) First the (...) is fall (...) ^nsample, Christ gives not al his
gifts by his Pastor.
Christ gives temporal peace, in common to his Church: he give* plenty of
fruits, and seasonable weather, in common to his Church: he gives health and
strength of body, in common to his Church he gives good Magistrates, Kings and
Princes, in common to his Church: he gives good laws, natural, civil, and
municipall, in common to his Church: all these are powers given of Christ in
common to the Christian common weal, so well as to any other common weal
not Christian: but they are not given by the ministry of the spiritual
Pastors. The mayor therefore is not true.

Secondly, the minor is also false: that Christ gives power The Church has
not always power to make their Magistrates.
to his Church, to make Magistrates and Judges over secular matters. To some
Churches indeed he has given this power, and does give it, where they orderly
do choose their own Magistrate. But this can not be spoken of the Church
indefinitely. For the Church in most places thereof, has not the choice of
Princes, but God (either by ordinary succession, or by extraordinary means)
places them over the Church, and those Princes place the Judges.

Thirdly, by the Church is not me^t, either the ecclesiastical power, or the
Pastors that have that power. For the power is but Gods gift for the Churches
use and benefit, and the Pastors are but parts and members of the Church.
Fourthly, this is false also, that they can not pass a right, to another that
they themselves have not. For even in the dispensation The Pastors pass a
right to the Prince and have not the right in the^ selves.
of their mysteries, we may receive faith and grace by their ministry, and
yet they be graceless, and have no faith themselves. And in the solemnization
of Matrimony, although the Pastor have no right to the bryde, yet he
transferreth the having of her, from her friends, to the brydegrome: and so may
they be Ministers in the intronizing a Prince, passing a power from God to him,
which yet themselves have not, except you will make them Kings. And thus all
your rules are false, and hold not, besides that they be all wrested and
clean from the sense of the sentence cited, and therefore no good argument can
be framed on them that that can rightly conclude the present purpose. But now
Master Saunders will apply this better, and here in the margin he sets
down in great letters. Nota, Note, to stir up the Readers attention to note
his application. Sand. 8^.


But now (says he) if that nevve Judges must be made of the Church, rather
than we should go to law in secular causes before the Infidels, are not
nevve Kings also rather to be made of the Church, than that we should be
compelled to plead our causes, before heretical and scismatical Kings?

Now you begin handsomely to frame your argument to your purpose, for all
this while you did but dally. But if the Reader note this matter, as you
require him to do, as he shall find no consequence in your argument, so shall
he find The Corinthians might not choose new public Magistrates, because
they might choose new private arbiters.
rank treason in your conclusion. If the argument were good, then because the
Church in Saint Paul's time might choose among themselves arbiters, to judge
and take up their petite matters: therefore they might have chosen new Kings
also to govern them. But this could they not have done without treason and
rebellion, therefore this argument is false. Is there no difference (Master
Saunders) between the choosing of an vmpier, or an arbiter chosen between two
parties of their own voluntary, to judge and descide their private
controversy, and the choosing of a supreme and public Magistrate to govern
their whole estate? Who sees not that this they might in no wise do. The
other they might do well inoughe. And so may any of us do also, to avoid the
charges and troubles of the law, although we have Christian Princes and
faithful Judges too, neither troubling those estates, nor our selves, and save
our money in our purses, and better nourishe charity in not going to law, but
taking up the matter at home among our neighbors quietly. May we therefore
subtracte our selves, from the Judgment Seat of the public Magistrate, when
we are called or enforced by law thereto? and why might we not, if we might
choose a new King, when we mislyked the old? No, Master Saunders, this is
further from Saint Paul's meaning than was the other. Saint Paul gives not the
Corinths leave nor power, to erecte up among them selves a public Magistrate,
to flee unto in their contentions, and utterly to forsake the judgment seats
of the heathen Judges and Princes that did govern them. Saint Paul speaks of
their own voluntary taking up of matters, by some indifferent man among them,
to be chosen as Judge in this or that brawle between them, and would not have
them of their own self will, in matters that might be well taken up among
themselves, to run to Law before heathen Magistrates. Wherein although he
disalow the disorderly contention of the one, yet he disaloweth not withal the
orderly authority of the other, which he confesses to be S. Paul allow eth
the authority of heathen Magistrates in his time.
given of God, and he exhorts all subjects to obey, and that for conscience
sake, even the government of the heathen Princes, notwithstanding they were
Christians that were subjects. Whereas if he had meant otherwise, he had not
only contraryed himself, but confirmed the sclaunder of the heathen people,
that the Christians were Rebels to their estates. And he might have been
accused of sedition, as styrring the people to make nevve Magistrates, which
for them being subjects, was above their power to do. And although this crime
was laid to Saint Paul's charge, of sowing sedition: yet could they never
justly prove it on him, his doings and writings testified the contrary, with
what care he labored to keep the Christians in obedience. Who otherwise might
here upon have had great occasion of choosing nevve Princes, pretending they
were Christians, and made free by Christ, and therefore ought not have
suffered themselves to live in the heathen Princes bondage. Which freedom of
Christian liberty, least they should have thus abused, to carnal
licenciousnesse, and disturbed the order and quietness of their estate: Saint
Paul so often and so earnestly exhorts them unto obedience. Neither they did
so ever understand this present exhortation, to have the liberty or power to
forsake the heathen Magistrates obedience and judgments, and to erecte a new
Magistrate and Judge to rule among them. For this had been the ready pathe to
all Rebellion. And to prove that this is the readiest way to Rebellion, see
how Master Sau^ders gathers hereon, that nevve Kings are to be made of the
Church, rather than we Master Saunders (...) S. Paul to al rebellion.
should be compelled to plead our causes before heretical and scismaticall
Kings. So that if the Priest shall say, the King is an heretic or a
scismatike: not only the people must so account him, but they must account him
no longer to be their King, they must not be compelled to appear in his
Courts and Consistories, they must plead no cause at all before him or his
Justices, but must forthwith choose a new King to be their governor. How far
this is differing from Saint Paul's doctrine, from this sentence, from
subjects obedience, and how near to set all the world in an uproar: I dout
not but if this Nota, that M. Sand. sets it out withal be well noted, it will not
only breed in the Readers minds, a note of suspicion, of privy conspiracies
and traiterous packing, but openly show a manifest proclamation of plain
rebellion. Now to prove that ye subjects should thus rebel, he shows ye
dangers yt should ensue, if they should remain in their obedience. For
certain it is, that there is more danger of heretical Sand. page 85.
Kings, tha^ is of unfaithful Judges. For unfaithful Judges do not judge, but
of matters of this world and that according to the law either of nature, which
is always right or civil, which is seldom vvrong. Moreover, what if I
suffered vvrong at the tribunal of a Pagane Judge? the loss is small, to
suffer the spoil of temporal goods, which good men bear with joy. But
heretical Kings compel their subjects, casting away the catholic faith, to
embrace their heresy, the which can not be done without the detriment of
eternal salvation. It is altogether lavvfull to the Church of Christ, to
remove from his government an heretical, a scismatical, a symoniacal King, and
to conclude, to remove him, that will not amend himself, and to place
another among the Christians in his rome.

This argument is drawn from the danger of suffering the king, and is already
answered diverse times. The lawiers Better suffer a mischief than an
inconvenience.
would briefly say to this, better suffer a mischief, than an inconvenience,
but were this an inconvenience too, we may not take away one inconvenience with
an other greater inconvenience: for there are convenient remedies of patience
and constancy, against these inconveniences, and not rebellion, although the
inconvenience were much greater than M. Sa^d. makes it. And yet to aggrauate
ye same, he makes comparison One inconvenience not to be helped with an other
inconvenience.
of a King and a Judge, as though the Judge represented not the King. He
compares the danger of the loss by the one, and by the other: as though the
heathen Judges and Princes dealt not also in cases of Religion. Who (although
they were deceived herein) yet they conuented people before them for Religion,
to drive them from the worship of God, to the worship of their Idols, and
labored by all persuasions and means they could, to bring them to their
Religion. And very many they brought to their Idolatry, which was The heathen
judges del^ not only in tempo rall matters.
more tha^ the loss of temporal goods: eue^ the detriment of eternal
salvation. Neither did they use their judgments always according to the law
of nature or the civil: neither does the one judge alvvayes right, considering
the great corruption of nature, chiefly in the heathen: neither did the other
sildome wrong, but often wrong among them: neither meddled the civil Law of
the Pagans, only with matters of temporal goods, and of this world, but
also with matters of the world to come, and therefore there was further
danger of the judgments of those heathen Princes and unfaithful Judges,
than here Master Saunders would seem to acknowledge there was, mitigating
all that he can, the danger ensuing from them: to aggrauate the greater
dangers from naughty Christian Princes. But he need not run to these
untruths, to aggrauate his comparison. For we deny not, but that if the
Prince were such a wicked Prince as he speaks of, it were in deed very
dangerous to the faithful subjects under him, and so much the more
dangerous that he pretends to the faithful, to be a faithful Prince, and
is not. But what a dangerous doctrine The danger of M. Saund. doctrine
is this, that the people should therefore rebel, and revolt unto another.
Might the Christian people in ye primitue Church for all the danger of
eternal life that they and all the faithful were in, when the heathen Princes
would have them worship Idols, which is as ill as heresy: and when the
heretical and scismaticall Emperors being Arians, Monothelites. etc. in the
ancient time, compelled their subjects, casting away the Catholic faith, to
embrace their heresies, might they remove the^ from their government, and place
another in his room over the Christians? and that yt should straight be
heresy, which the B* of Rome should say were heresy, and he should be a
scismatike that should not consent to him? Yea, and he must be deposed for
symonie too* and by symonie forsooth we must understand, that if the Prince do
appoint and inuest a Bishop, then straight he is a simoniake, and must out of
hand be depesed. What a greater danger is here, not only to Christian
Princes, but to all the Church of Christ, whose sauegarde is here pretended?
But if we reason of dangers, the greatest danger The greatest danger of all
is of the Pope and his prelates.
of all is of the Pope himself and his prelates, and the more danger, that
Princes and people be thus beguiled by them, and yet the king may not meddle
with them, although his duty never so much require, and he has good warrant
in the scripture (...) remove them, and so have not they of him, were they
never (...) good, and were he a great deal worse than M. Saunders makes him.
But Master Saunders will now prove that the Bishops have warrant out of the
scripture for them, and once again he alleges the example of King Saul and
Samuel.

For if the kingdom of Saul stood not, even for this that he Sand. page 85.
observed not the precept of Samuel, in waiting for him seven days before he
sacrificed. Yea if the Lord cast off Saul that he 1. Reg. 10. and. 1^.
should not be the king, because he fulfilled not also another precept of the
Lord declared by the Ministry of Samuel in killing 1. Reg. 15.
Agag: if for this disobedience of Saul, while he yet reigned, Samuel was
bidden to anoint David, to be the King of the Jews: and Samuel did it privily
in Bethleem: Neither after the holy Ghost sent down from heaven, the
spiritual power of 1. Reg. 16.
the Church can now be less, than in times past was in the Synagog: we must
now also confess, that that King, which shall despise to hear the Lord
speaking by the mouth of the highest Bishop, may so be deprived of the right
of his kingdom, that another may in the mean season be of the same Bishop
anointed for King, and that from that day forward, he truly shall be the King
whom the Bishop orderly anointed, or other wise did consecrate, and not he
that being armed with a band of soldiers, occupies the seat. For of such
the Prophet says: Osee. 8.
they have reigned, and not by me, the which thing is so true, that lo^athas
the son of Saul acknowledged that the Kingdom 1. Reg. 23.
should fall unto David, after the death of his Father. And all that were in
need sled unto David, and he became their Prince, and there were with him as it
were four hundredth 1. Reg. 22.
men, and when Achimelech the Priest asked Counsel of the Lord for David, and
Saul having intelligence thereof, commanded his servant to fall upon the
Priests of the Lord: no man durst execute so cruel a commandment, besides
only Doeg the Idumean.

The effect of this reason is threefolde. First, that the Pope may depose a
King and set up another. Secondly, that the King so deposed by the Pope, is no
longer lawful King nor to be obeyed, but the subjects ought to go to the
other whom^ the Pope sets up. Thirdly that although the Pope may depofe a
King: yet no King may depofe or touch the Pope or his Priests. For the first
point, are all aged these arguments:

The spiritual power is as great now in the Church, since the holy Ghost was
sent from heaven, as it was before in the Synagog.

But Kings were then deposed, and other set up, by the spiritual power:

Ergo, Kings may now likewise be deposed by the spiritual power, and other set
up.

But the spiritual power belongs to the highest Bishop:

The Bishop of Rome is the highest Bishop.

Ergo, the Bishop of Rome may depose Kings and set up other.

The later argument, which we utterly deny, and here he proves not, but
takes for confessed, that there is in earth a highest Bishop over all other,
and that the Pope is he: is belonging to another controversy.

To the former argument, we grant the Mayor. The spiritual power is as great
now, after the holy Ghost was sen^e from heaven, as it was before in the
Synagog. But we deny the Minor. That the deposing of Kings and sitting up of
other in their steed was not done then in the Synagog by the spiritual power,
that is, by the spiritual authority of the spiritual pastor.

For proof hereof, M. Saunders infers an instance of Saul and Samuel.

Saul lost his Kingdom because he observed not the precepte of Samuel. And
therefore Samuel ordained another King.

I answer. First this fact was not a matter ordinarily Deposing of Kings was
never belonging to the spiritual power.
belonging to the spiritual power of Samuel, but an especialtie of gods
singular appointing. It was not a thing belonging to the Bishops office, to
depose Kings and set other in their places, it was but a particular act done
by gods especial commandment, so that it could not, nor was ever drawn into
any ordinary rule of their spiritual power then: and much less is any thing
belonging to the Bishops spiritual power now, which is an ordinary power,
and consists in setting forth the word of God, in administering the sacraments
of God, and in bynding or losing the conscience of the obstinate or repentant
sinner. Which things since none of them pertain to the deposing of a Prince or
any other man, from his temporal possessions and worldly estate: it is
apparent that this extraordinary doing of Samuel, was neither the^ nor now
ordinarily pertaining to the spiritual power of pastors.

Secondly it is false that Saul lost his kingdom for not observing the
precepte of Samuel. For although Samuel pronounced Samuel was but the minister
of declari^g gods precept.
it, yet it was the Lords precept, as like wise the other precepts, of which M.
Saunders confesses: that he fulfilled not the precept of the Lord, declared
by the ministry of Samuel. So that Samuel was but the Minister of declaring
it.

But say you, then must not the King despise to hear the Lord speaking by the
mouth of the highest Bishop. We grant you M. Sanders the King must not despise
to hear the Lord speaking by the mouth of any Bishop. As for any highest B.
besides Jesus Christ, we deny. And the King ought to despise No highest B. of
the Church besides Christ.
to here him which claims that highest room. For it is an evident argument
that the Lord speaks not by such a blasphemous month, as exalts it self
into Christ's Bishopprike. As for Samuel took not upon him to be the highest
Priest or Bishop, nor was any B. or Priest at al, nor spoke any thing at all,
that he had not the especial and express commandment of God thereto. Let your
Pope and his Bishops show the express commandment of God, either especial
or ordinary, that they be bidden to depose Kings and set up other, or else you
wrest this example, and do no less abuse God, than you would abuse Princes by
it.

Thirdly, this is false also, that Samuel either deposed Samuel deposed not
Saul.
Saul, or ^et up David. Concerning Saul, he declared to him, how his
kingdom should not continue, but he deposed him not. The words of Samuel are
these: Thou haste 1. Reg. 13.
do^ foolishly, that thou haste not observed the commandments of the Lord
thy God, that he commanded thee. If thou had not done this thing, the
Lord had even now established thy kingdom over Israel for ever. But thy
kingdom shall arise no further. The Lord has sought him a man according to
his heart, and has commanded him, that he should be captain over his
people, because thou haste not kept the things the Lord commanded thee.
First, here Samuel refers all to the Lords commandment. And as Caietanus
a Papist notes thereon, This commandment Caietanus in 1. Reg. 13. The Lords
commandment by Samuel to Saul, was especial, and served but for that turn.
^yra in. 1. Reg. 13.
of the Lord, violated by Saul, was not a commandment of the law, but a
particular commandment declared to Saul by Samuel. An especial
commandment (says he) for that turn. Secondly, he refers the punishment,
not to his removing of him, but to the doing of God. Thirdly, he does not
(neither in his own name, nor in Gods) depose him at all from his estate, but
tells him how his kingdom shall not continue. Vltrate (says he) It shall
continue no further after thee. Because his son Isboseth raygned not over all
Israel, neither yet over that peaceably, and that for a small time. And this
purpose of God (as Lyra nateth) although it were then declared, by reason of
the present demerite of Saul: yet was it the Lords everlasting purpose. The
purpose of God (says he) is certain and infallible. Lyra in. ^. Reg. 13.
It was before ordained of God, that the kingdom should be given to the tribe
of Judah, as appears Gene. 49. The Scepter shall not be taken from Judah. But
the Pope can not show the like purpose of God, that such or such a Prince
should now be deposed or placed: therefore he does but wrest this example.

As for the placing of David: Although (says Lyra) this was yet to come, he
speaks notwithstanding, as though it Samuels doing to Saul and David, was
but a declaration of Gods purpose to come.
were paste, for the certeintie of the divine providence. So that yet no act
was ^ast against Saul, or unto David, but only a declaration of Gods purpose
to come. Here was therefore no deposing of the one, nor placing of the other.
As for Samuels other sentence. 1. Reg. 15. is more destnite, when he says:
For that thou have cast off the word 1. Reg. 15.
of the Lord, the Lord has cast off thee, that thou should not be king.
And yet he says not here, I depose thee* or the Lord deposes thee, from
thine estate, and from henceforth thou shalt neither be king, nor be reputed
and taken of the Church of God for king any longer. Samuel says not thus,
nor meant thus, nor Saul understood him thus, but desired Samuel to return
with him, and worship the Lord. And Samuel (repeating his words) said: I will
not return with thee, because thou have cast of the commandment of the Lord,
the Lord has cast off thee. And Samuel turned to go away, but he caught
hold of the skirte of his cloak, and it rent. And Samuel said to him, the
Lord has rent the kingdom of Israel this day from thee, and has given it
to thy neighbor, a better than thou. And yet in all these so effectual words,
Samuel says not here, In Dei nomine, Amen, etc* In the name of God Amen. I
do here presenly depose thee, and so forth, as the Pope uses to do. No, all
this was but a declaration of the time to come, as Lyra says: Dicunt autem
Hebraei, etc. Some Hebrnes say, that Samuel then Lyra in. 1. Reg. 15. The token
to Saul who should succeed him. 1. Reg. 14. Glosla in Lyra.
gave a sign unto Saul, that he should reign for him, that should cut
off the hemme of his garment. Which David did, as is contained. 1. Reg. 24.
Whereupon Saul seeing the hemme of his garment in David's hand: said, now I
know for certain that thou shalt raygne.

And so the Gloss titeth Saint Augustine Iste cui dixit. etc. This man to
whom the Lord said, the Lord despises thee, that thou should not be
King of Israel, and the Lord has rent this day the kingdom out of thy
hand: Soul raygned forty year after this sent^ce of Samuel.
ruled forty years, to wite, even as long as David reigned. And yet this thing
he heard the first time of his reign. Therefore we understand* it to be
spoken to this end, that none of the stock of him should reign. He rent it
(says the Gloss) although he reigned forty years afterward. The cutting
off of Saules kingdom was mente by his posterity, not by himself.
But as then he des^rued that the kingdom should be rent from him, and given
to a better* etc.

Thus these sayings and doings of Samuel, were not the real deposing of
Saul from his Royal throne. For both he took him self still as King, and
desired Samuel to honor him before the Elders of his people, and before
Israel. But now (says he) honor me. Sinon, etc. Although Lyra in. 1. Reg. 15.
(says (...)) not for my persons sake, yet do this thing for the honor of my
royal dignity. And so Samuel assented to him. willing (says Lyra) to give
it unto Saul, so long as he was of God suffered in the kingdom.

Now as for David, Samuel in deed anointed him, David's privy anointing
betokens it was no public act.
and that (as you say) privily. Which argues against you, that it was no
public act of making him king, but as it were a preparatiue unto it, and a
privy forewarning of Gods purpose to come. Secondly it was a thing of Gods
especial appoynting, or else Samuel would not, nor could have ever done it.
Thirdly (says ^yra) Aduertendum est, etc* We must mark, that David was
anointed to be king, not to this purpose, that he should streighte possess
the kingdom. But when the acceptable will of God should come. But God did
suffer Saul in the possession of Saul was never deposed so long as he lived.
the kingdom, even until his death. And thus we see upon this act of the
Lord by Samuel, as well to Saul, as to David* here was yet no such
deposing of the one, nor setting up the other, as Master Sanders claymeth
here, reasoning from the example of Samuels doing to Saul and David: for the
Pope to (...) Christian Princes offending, and to set up others in the ^places.

The second thing yt he gathers heerevpon, is this: that M. Sand. reasons
that he is to be obeyed whom the Pope settes up, and he to be forsaken that the
Pope deposes.
the king by the Pope being deposed, is now no longer true and lawful king*
but a plain usurper, and a wrongful occupier of the kings sea^e, being armed
with a band of soldiers. but the other that is anointed, or otherwise
consecrated by the Bishop in his place: shall truly from this day forward be
the king, and the people ought to go to him, and not obey the other. And for
this, he alleges three reasons. First, the saying of God by the Prophet Osee.
Secondly, the acknowledging of Ionathas Saules son. Thirdly, the gathering of
diverse persons unto David.

First, for the words of the Prophet which are these: They have raygned, and
not by me. They were Princes, I Osee. 8. How wicked kings are of God, and not
of God.
know them not. I answer. First these wor^ are Gods complaynt against the
wickedness of those kings of Israel* that directed not their government by
Gods law: not that they were not kings, but that they were wicked kings. Not
that they were by no means ordained of God, for (...) potestas est a Deo, all
power is of God, and God says in Romans 13. Pronetb. 8. loa^ 19*
general, per m^ reges regnant, Kings rule by me, so well heathen as faithful
kings* Pilates power was from above: These kings of Israel, Jeroboam, Achab,
Iehu. etc. were of Gods ordeyning. Yea Iehu, whose house here God complained
upon, and said, he and his offspring reigned not by him* were yet
notwithstanding made kings, and raygned by him. In respect of their ambition
and private affections, their reign was not of him. In respect of Gods
ordinance, of his justice, of his providence, it was not only permitted, but
also especially appointed of him. As both the* text is (...), and your own
gloss confesses for Hieroboam the elder, that it was done by Gods will,
although it were done also by the peoples sin, that regarded not the will of
God; but ^llowed their own selfewil. And so in some respect, it was not the
work of God, and yet in other respects, it ^as the work of God. And so here
(...) himself, and says: I know them not. Not that The Prophets after they
had declared Gods wrath to wicked kings, did still obey their civil government.
he was ignorant of them, but he acknowledged not their doings. Secondly,
neither the prophet Osee, nor any other prophet, took upon them to depose any
of those wicked kings, but to declare the wrath and vengeance of God to come
upon them. After which declarations, they did not subtract from them their
civil obedience, and count them from that day forward no longer to be their
kings, or exhorted the Church of God to forsake their polytike government: but
having declared their message from God, they let them alone, till either God
him self did strike the^, or stirred up by some especial and extraordinary
means, some foreign or domestical persecu^ of them. Thirdly, this makes
nothing to prove yt those kings, (...) the Pope takes upon him to pronounce
they be no Kings, are no longer Kings: except he will make him self God, yea
and above God too. For although God say, They ^gne not by me* yet he calls
them kings. But the Pope calls them v^urpers, that raygne not by him.

Secondly he alleges the acknowledging of Ionathas Ionathas acknowledged not
David to be king, but that he should be king. 1. Reg. 23.
Saules son, and the peoples gathering unto David For Io nathas, it is true,
that he acknowledged the kingdom should be deuolued unto David after his
fathers death* And so he says: Tu regnabis super Israel, Thou shall reign
over Israel, and I shall be next to thee, and this my father knows. But this
infers not, that he took David then presently to be king, and his father
from that day forward no longer to be king, neither revolted he from the
obedience of his father, to David's obedience, neither could his father lay this
treason to his charge, that he forsook his due subjection, although most
bitterly (...) rated him, and said: Thou son of the wicked 1* Reg. 20.
rebellious woman, do not I know that thou haste chosen the son of Isai to
thy confusion, and to the confusion and shame of thy mother? For as long as the
son of Isai lives upon the earth, thou shall not be established nor thy
kingdom. Whereon (says Caietane) the cause is made manifest, because Caietan^
in 1. Reg. 20.
he was an impediment to the succession of the kingdom, and verily Saul had a
true judgment, as the event of the matter proved. And thus the acknowledging
of Ionathas proved not David's kingdom to be in esse (as they say) but in
futuro, not that he was King, but that he should be King. Nor the confederacy
between David and Ionathas, was any conspiracy to depose Saul, or to set up
David, but a confirming of the love between them and their houses, when God
should make him king.

Now for the peoples gathering unto David about the Why the people flocked
unto David.
number of, 400. this was not to assemble a rebellious multitude, to invade
king Saul, and to depose him from the crown to set up him self. For neither
they came for any such purpose, but for their succor, being in debt and
trouble, or otherwise vexed: neither did David send for them, nor incite any to
take his part, not proclaimed him self to be king, or published the Lords
anointing of him, or ever used that multitude that came unto him for any such
purposes. And yet the question is moved both by Caietanus and Lyranus
heerevpon. The question (says Caietanus) atiseth, whether it Caietanus que
stion whether David did well to receive this people to the prejudice of their
creditors.
were lawful for David to receive these debtors, in the prejudice of the
creditors that had lent them? The solution is, that if these men had house,
field, or vineyard they are understood to have left their goods unto them.
But if they were utterly unable to pay their debts: they were excused for their
vnhabilitie, until their better ability. For, that David excellently
instructed all them that came unto him, while he ^aried in that cave, the
Psalm restifieth: I will praise the Lord at all time. Containing (according
to the letter) a doctrine given there of David unto the soldiers. Therefore
David received not these men in prejudice of their creditors. And thus as he
did not receive them to the prejudice of any private man, so he received them
not to the prejudice of the king and public state. Whereon Lyra month the
other question, Lyra his question whether he did well to become their captain,
and received them to the prejudice of the publi^e state.
saying: In that he became their captain, it seems he sinned, in receiving
such as Abimelech received: the needy and vagabounds, assembling the^ unto
him as is contained, Iud. 9. We must say, that he gathered them not, to slay
the innocent, as did Abimelech to slay his brethren, neither to spoil the
faithful. For we read not that he spoiled the people of Israel. But rather
kept their goods, as is contained afterward. 1. Keg. 25. of Naball. But he
gathered them, to persecute the Infidels, as is contained afterward in many
cases. And to keep his own body from the ambushementes of Saul. The which he
might do in such a necessity, chiefly when he was now anointed king. By
reason whereof, in such a case, he might prolong the payment of the debtes,
and in many the forfeyture is released in the case aforesaid.

Thus see it was not for that ye people took David actually to be king, but
for their own refuge, that they fled to him. But whatsoever their intent was
good or ill, David assembled them not to hinder or hurt any private or public
person. And although he received them, and used them for his defense, which
he might do, being in the state he was: yet would he never suffer them to
enter meddle in the quarrel of his right to the kingdom, nor yet he him self
would ever take it upon him, and impugn king Saul, no not when he had him in
his danger, until the Lord by other means took Saul away, and gave the
kingdom in real possession unto David. Before which time David never called
him self king, nor the time of his raygne is reckoned, but Saul David never
took him self nor was taken of any other to b^ ^ng till S^ule was d^d.
counted and called, and his reign reckoned, as king, till his death, and
never shortened, disturbed, nor once gain said by David for all these folks
assemblies.

For example. When God sent king Saul (as it were of purpose) even into David's
hands, and the soldiers moved David to kill him: he would neither him self
hurt 1. Reg. 24.
him, nor suffer any other to do it, nor yet take him prisoner, and so depose
him, or cause him to resign. But only cut off privily a flap of his garment,
for a testimony how he spared him, and yet his heart throbbed, that he had
done so much against him. His conscience reproved him (says Lyra) in that
Lyra.
he had done irreverently to Saul, who was to be honored so long as he was of
God suffered in the kingdom. A certain remorce of conscience (says Caietane)
is described in David, Caietane.
in that he had cutoff the skirte of Saules cloak. For it is the property of
good minds, even there to fear a fault, David's remorce of conscience even for
cutting but a flap of Saules garment
where fault is not found. The reason of his remorce was, because the cutting
of the cloak was in his proper kind injurious. Howbeit it was without fault,
both because it was given unto him, by Gods authority, to do with Saul that
which seemed good in David's own eyes: and also good reason moved, that David
might show a sign of his benevolence toward How this cutting was and was
no^ injurious to Saul.
Saul, by a most evident testimony conuicting Saul: that yet at the least,
Saul might leave off from so wicked persecution. But a better testimony he
could not show, than the skirte of his garment there cut off: the action
therefore naturally injurious, was not done in the form of an injury, but of a
necessary sign, to witness the truth of David's right mind to Saul* And
this good mind David him self expresses: The Lord keep me from doing this
thing unto my Lord, 1. Reg. 24.
the Lords anointed, to lay mine hand on him, for he is the Lords anointed.
And here Caietanus gives this note: He touches two reasons. The one, in that
he says: to my Lord: The other, To the Lords anointed. But because that was
the chiefest reason, for that Saul was anointed of the most high God, that
only he names twyse. Whereby we see, he accempted Saul still as his lawful
king, and himself David's reverence and humility to Saul.
to be his dutiful and obedient subject. And so he acknowledged him self to
Saul, when he cried after him, saying: O my Lord the king* and when Saul
looked behind him, David enelined his face to the earth and bowed himself. And
David said to Saul: wherefore give thou ear to men's words that say,
behold David seeks evil against thee. Behold this day thine eyes have
seen, that the Lord has delivered thee this day into my hand in the cave,
and some badde me kill thee. But I had compassion on thee, and said, I will not
lay my hand on my Master. For he is the Lords anointed. Moreover (my father)
behold, I say, the lap of thy garment in my hand. For when I cut off the
lap of thy garment, I killed thee not. Understand and see that there is no
evil nor wickedness in me, neither have I sinned against thee. According to
the Hebrew (says Caietane) neither is rebellion in me. etc. He excludes all
David purges himself of all rebellion and sin against Saul.
sin, by repeating his work backwarde. For last of all, he excludes sin
against Saul: and before, rebellion against the King: and first of all, evil
universally. And upon these words, The Lord be judge between thee and me: And
the Lord avenge me of thee, and let not my hand be on thee. This he said (says
Lyra) in the zeal of Justice, and not of reuengement. For no body ought to
take vengeance on his own injury, by himself, except it lie upon him by his
office, and even then it were better that he did it by another. All these words
(says Caietane) David wishes no reuengement to Saul.
are not of him that wishes, but foretells and expects. For they are, in
the Hebrew text, of the future tence and the indicative mode. He shall judge,
and he shall avenge. So far is David from wishing any evil unto the king. And
he so humbles himself unto him: that he calls himself, in comparion of
the King, a dead dog and a fly: Since I am (says Lyra) of no moment (or
nothing worth) in regard of thee: Thus far was David from ever attempting to
depose King Saul, after Samuel had anointed him. And that not only where Saul
confesses David should reign, not that he did reign.
Ionathas, but even where Saul himself acknowledged, that David should be
King after him, saying: and now I know of a certainty, that thou shall reign
and the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thy hand. But yet he says
not, that he then presently reigned, neither does he resign unto him, but make
a covenant and take an oath of David, that Saul resigned not to David.
when he should reign, he should not destroy his seed after him, nor take
away his name from his fathers house, and this, David swore unto him. Wherein he
acknowledges though a state to come, yet no state in present.

The like occasion falling out again. 1. Reg. 26. David behaved 1. Reg. 16.
himself to Saul in semblable wise. For when he might have killed him, and
Abisai would have killed him ^he not only would not do it, nor suffer it to
be done. But he says to Abisai, destroy him not. For who can lay his hands
on the Lords anointed and be giltlesse. David (says Lyra) would give this to
the person of him, so long as he was suffered of God in the Kingdom. Always
(says Caietane) David had fixed in his heart, and in his mouth the honor of
the most high God, in so much that he thought none innocent, that stretched
his hand upon the anointed of God. As the Lord lives (says he) either the
Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or he shall descend into
battle and perish. The Lord keep me from laying my hand upon the Lords
anointed. By this (says Lira) David intended, that by no means, he would be
the efficient David would ^e no efficient cause of Saules death.
cause of his death, except perhaps in defending himself, so that he could
not otherwise escape. And when David called to Abner, he challenged him to be
worthy of death, for keeping the Kings person no better, and when Saul knowing
his voice said, is this thy voice my son David? and David said, it is my
voice, my Lord O King. And he said, wherefore does my Lord thus persecute his
servant? for what have I done, or what evil is in my hand? Now therefore I
beseech thee, let my Lord the King hear the words of his servant. etc.
thus humbles he himself in his purgation, and says, the King of Israel is
come out to seek a fly, as one would hunte a Partridge in the mountains. So
lowly abasing himself in comparison of Saul, whom he calls the King of
Israel. Neither dissembled he but spoke Bona fide, even as he thought in his
heart. So far was David from not acknowledging Saul to be still his sovereign
Lord and lawful King, so far from gathering any unlawful assemblyes
against him, so far from any privy conspiracy or open rebellion, so far
from so much as thinking to depose him: that when he had him in his danger, he
would not only not hurt him, nor suffer other to doeit, but gave him so great
honor, as any subject can give his Prince. How then is not the story of
Saul and David wrested, for a Christian subject that has no such authority,
as David had, to depose, or take arms against his Christian Prince, or to go
from the obedience of him, as no longer lawful King, after the Bishop shall
say, he has deposed him, and to obey any other, that the Bishop shall appoint
for King?

The third thing that Master Saunders infers, is this, that although the
Pope and his Bishops may do thus to Princes: yet Princes were very tyrants, if
they should do ought to them. And hereto he alleges, that when the high
Priest Achimelech, asked counsel of the Lord for David, and Saul having
intelligence thereof, commanded his servants to fall upon the Priests of the
Lord: no man durst execute so cruel a commandment, besides only Doeg the
Idumean.

For Achimelechs asking counsel of the Lord for David, Wh^ 1. Reg. 21. Whether
Achimelech asked counsel of the Lord for David, or no, when David fled unto
him. Lyra.
David fled unto him: first, the case (Master Saunders) is not so clear, but
that (as Lyra confesses) a question is made thereon: for there appears no
such thing in the. 21. Chapter. Although Doeg so accused him, and Achimelech
stands not to the denial thereof, but upon his innocence. Lyra says,
Dicunt aliqui. etc. Some say that he lied, as tale bearers are wont to say
more than is in deed, but the contrary seems rather to be true. So that
this is not so clear a case, as you make it. But what is all this storye to
the purpose, or not rather against you? especially that that follows, of
Achimelech the high priest inferior to Saul.
Saules puttyng the Priests to death. Wherein although he did a wicked and
tyrannous act, yet it argues that he had authority over the Priests.
First, in that he cyted them to come before him. Secondly, in that they obeyed
his citation and came before the King. Thirdly, in that the high Priest calls
the King his Lord, saying: here I am my Lord. Fourthly, when the King laid
treason to his charge, he replyeth not, that he could be no traitor to the
King, being his superior: but as inferior, pleads he was no traitor. Fifthly,
he acknowledges both David to be Saules servant, and himself also, saying:
be it far from me, let not the King ^. Reg. 22.
impute any thing unto his servant, nor to all the house of my father, for thy
servant knew nothing of all this, less or more. Whereby it appears that the
high Priest and all his family, were under the Kings obedience, and so still
continued, after that Samuel had declared, how that the Lord had rent his
kingdom from him.

As for that the Prince abused his authority, to the cruel murdering of
innocents: we grant it was so detestable, that his soldiers did well, in
refusing to execute his wicked commandment. We defend no such authority in
Princes, nor such obedience in subjects, as murdereth innocents The Popish and
not the protestant Princes imitate Saules cruelty, or rather excede it.
without all law and Justice, and that after such a cruel sort, as did the
doggishe Doeg, being not content to murder the innocent ministers of God: but
besides, to put to the edge of these word, all the men and women in their
City, yea the Children and sucking babes also. You can find no protestant
Prince (M. Saunders) that ever did the like deed. But Popish Princes have not
only done the like, but far surmounted, both Saul and Doeg, and all other
cruel Princes, in such unnatural Tragedies. So fit all Master Saunders
ensamples serve his purpose, that every one makes clean against him.

But now (says he) least any man should think, at the least Sand. page 86.
the power of those Kings that sprang from David, to be greater than the
spiritual power of the Synagog: let him besides this consider, that Ahias the
Silonite, while Solomon was yet alive, foretold that Jeroboam should govern
the ten tribes. 3. Reg. 11.
Whereupon is understood, that either the whole kingdom, or some part thereof,
may be taken away from a wicked King, by Eph^. ^
the spiritual power of the Church. For what power was in times past, in the
Priests and Prophets: the same is now in the pastors and teachers, whose duty
it is so to consulte for the souls health, that they suffer not, by the
disobedience and tyranny of a wicked King, the people of an infinite
multitude, to be compelled and drawn to scisme and heresy.

The argument is still as before, from the spiritual power in Priests and
Prophets then in the Synagog, to the spiritual power of popish pastors and
teachers in the Church now. To this besides the former answer, I answer
again: first, the popish pastors and teachers, being false pastors and false
teachers, except it be from such Priests and Prophets as were of Baal,
Balaam, Bell. etc. can frame no good conclusion. Secondly, admit they were
(which they pretend) true pastors and teachers: yet the argument is not true,
from any particular and especial charge, given unto some one or two of them, by
gods express commandment, to foretell this or that thing to come: to
conclude thereupon an ordinary spiritual power, in all the priests and
prophets then, and ye like to succeed in the pastors and teachers now.
Thirdly, neither any such thing is described or meant by S. Paul^ Ep^e. 4. in
the office of pastors and teachers now: neither this example of the old
testament. 2, Reg. 11. infers any such thing done by the priests or prophets
then. The example of (...), he alleged before, but he thinks here to frame
it better to his purpose. His argument is thus.

The prophet Ahias while King Solomon lived, foretold Jeroboam The example of
the prophet Ahias foretelling Jeroboam that he should reign.
that he should reign over ten Tribes.

Ergo, either the whole kingdom or a part thereof, may be taken from a wicked
King by the spiritull power, that is, by the pastors and teachers of the
Church.

I deny the argument (M. Sand.) from foretelling the taking away thereof, to
the taking away thereof in deed. The foretelling belonged to that Prophet, to
who^ God not only revealed it, but commanded to foretell it. The taking away
thereof either in part or in whole, belo^ged only to God, working by his secret
or open Justice, and to those (as instruments of his wrath) whom he ordained to
do it: that is, by Jeroboam and such as rebelled with him. And, howbeit The
specialtie of this fact not to be drawn to example.
this fact, when* it was done, was such a specialtie, as can not be drawn to
an example, no more than can the attempt of Abraham to kill his son: yet was
not this fact done in Salomons days. Who all his life long reigned King of
the whole kingdom notwithstanding all this Prophecy. In deed Jeroboam which
was a wicked man, lift up his hand and rebelled against Solomon, not tarying
the Lords opportunity as David did, but following his own ambition, he abused
the prophets message. Who although he told him that God would give him ten
tribes, yet he told him that How Ieroboa^ was a traitor how he was not.
Solomon should reign all his life time. But I will take the kingdom (says
God by the Prophet unto Jeroboam) out of his sons hand, and will give
ten Tribes to thee. etc. so that this serves not Master Saunders purpose,
to dispossess the present estate of the Prince living. Neither says the
Prophet, he will do it: neither byddeth he Jeroboam to rebel, either against
Solomon or his son, but he says, God him self would do it. To the which
sentence and work of God, Jeroboam ought to have obeyed. Which in so much as
he did not, he disobeyed God, and was a traitor to his Prince, and deserved
death. Although God by his secret justice, so punished Salomons seed, that
he confirmed the Kingdom in Ieroboams hands, and made him a lawful King. But
in all these things here was nothing done by the Prophet, but the foretelling
of Gods purpose. Which notwithstanding, was enjoined him, by The Prophet did
but foretell this fact, and that by especial commandment.
Gods especial commandment. For otherwise, had he presumed thus of his own
head, by reason of the authority of his Prophetical office, whatsoever
Salomen had deserved, he had for his part been but a ^rayterous Prophet, and
so are all those Popish Pastors and teachers, that teach subjects to rebel
against their Sovereigns, on pretense of these examples. True Pastors and
teachers by this An admonition for Christian Princes not to join in marriage
and leagues with infidel Princes. 3. Reg. 11. 3. Reg. 16. 3. Reg. 21. 2.
Paral. 20.
particular example, may learn thus much in general, to teach Princes to
fear God and dread his Justice, to beware of Idolatry and of joining
themselu^s in marriage, or in other leag^es of friendship, with the enimyes of
gods truth. As Solomon ^ell to Idolatry by marying of Infidels. Achab for
joining in friendship with Benadab, was punished: and marying the wicked
Iesabell did even ^ell him self to wickedness. Yea the good King Iosaphat,
for joining in league with the wicked King Ochozias Achabs son, was reproved
sharply and his ships perished. These examples and such other, ought good
pastors and reachers to teach their Princes, and to set the wrath of God
before them, how he will root up their houses, and destroy their kingdoms,
if they fear not him. Thus ought good teachers by these examples to do, but
not they themselves to depose their Princes, or to set up other, and stir
the people to rebellion. But Master Saunders has yet more examples.

To the same purpose pertayneth that Elias anointed Asael Sand. 86.
King over Syria, and Iehu King over Israel, and Elizeus to be Prophet for
himself, on that condition, that if any escaped the 3. Reg. 1^.
hands of Asahel, him should Iehu kill: But if any escaped the hands of Iehu,
him should Elizeus kill.

If this ensample pertayne to the same purpose, that do the other of Samuels
anointing David, and of Ahias foretellyng Jeroboam that he should raygne: then
pertayneth it not to your purpose, (Master Saunders) for Bishops to depose
Christian Princes, and to make their subjects rebel against them. For the
other (as we have already plainly seen) are but manifestly and shamefully
wrested thereunto. But now let us see, if The examples of Elias anointing
Asahel, Iehu* and Elizeus.
this example of Elias will serve your turn any better.

The argument is driven to both these purposes, the one, for the anointing of a
new king: the other, for punishing of the former king. For ye anointing of a
new king, is alleged, that Elias anointed Asael King over Syria, and Iehu King
over Israel, and Elizeus to be the prophet for himself.

First I answer, as before, these are again the express and particular
co^ma^deme^ts, of the Lord unto Elias, giving him a particular charge, that he
should anoyut all these three. To stretch therefore the Lords particular charge
to him, unto a general rule, without any express commandment of y Lord
thereunto, is a dangerous and presumptuous abusing of Gods commandment. For
without this especial charge of God, Elias had no ordinary authority, by
virtue of his prophetical office, to have done any thing herein, as the popish
Bishops, without any particular commandment of God, take upon them to do, by
virtue of their Bishoply office.

Secondly I answer, that this anointing of these Kings, was not ye real
inuesting of them, in their royal estate, neither yet done by Elias him self,
as even your own gloss notes thereon. Vnges Asahel. etc. Thou shall anoint
Azahel: no Glossa in Lyrano in. 3. Reg. 19.
otherwise but that he foretold him, that he should be king in time to come.
He anointed Elizeus no otherwise, than by casting his cloak on him. The two
Kings, neither he by him self, neithor Elizeus his disciple anointed them, but
one of the Prophets was sent to anoint Iehu. And this Prophet in deed 4. Reg.
9.
powered oil on Iehu his head, and said, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I
have anointed thee King, over the people of the Lord of Israel. etc. Which fact
and saying, as the Popish Bishops can not imitate, having no such commission:
so the other anointing of Asael, was but a forewarning, like as 4. Reg. 8.
the former fact of Ahias was to Jeroboam, and therefore serves not this
purpose, least of all the anointing of Elizeus, who was no King but a Prophet,
and therefore is alleged clean out of place, to infer the present purpose
of anointing Kings.

But M. Sanders has a further fetch in naming Elizeus. For thereby, as in
Elias he thinks to prove the setting up of kings: so in Elizeus he would
infer their pulling down. For (says he) Elias anointed Asael, Iehu, and
Elizeus, on that condition, that if one escaped the hands of Asael, him
should Iehu kill: but if any escape the hands of Iehu, him should Elizeus
kill.

You falsefie the Scripture (M. Sanders) the words are not, that they should
be anointed on that condition, that they should do these things: but the Lord
statly foretells, that they shall do these things. Et erit quicunque fugerit.
etc. And 3. Reg. 19.
it shall be, that whosoever escapes from the sword of Asael, him shall Iehu
kill: and he that escapes the sword of Iehu, him shall Elizeus kill.
Whereupon says Lyra, that Asaell Lyra in. 3. Reg. 19.
and Iehu killed many Idolaters of Israel, is enough expressed after in the
fourth book. But that Elizeus killed any, is not read, but of two and forty
whom he cursed, whereupon the Bears did tear them. But says Caietane,
notwithstanding Caietanus in 3. Reg. 19.
nothing lets, but that these things were fulfilled, even as the letter
foundeth, although the execution be not written. So that if this slaughter of
Elizeus be meant spiritually, then it serves not for bodily punishment, which
is now the question. If it be meant bodily, as was the slaughter Exodus 32.
made by the Levites, when they slew above. 20000. for Idolatry, and as
Phinees stabbing with his dagger Number. 25.
Zambri and Cozbi for their whoredom: then either of these, being particular
charges, and especial commandments, can not be stretched to the like
example of bodily slaughter, to be committed by the Clergy now. Neither the
popish Priests (although they be the cheifest authors of it) will pr^tende
that they will meddle therein, but say with the Priests that put Christ to
death, It is not lawful John. 18.
for us to kill any man. And to this purpose of a figurative killing, M. Sand
drives this example.

By which figure (says he) what else is signified, than that Sand. 86.
many powers are set up, and erected in the Church of God, that that which is
not done by one of them, may be done by another. Of which powers, the last
and chiefest is that which belongs to the Prophets, that is, toward them
that are the Pastors and teachers of the Church of God. For as the sword of
Elizeus is reckoned in the last place, as which no man can escape, although
he escape the sword of Asaell, or of Iehu: so the censure of the spiritual
power can by no means be avoided, although any escape the sword of the
secular power. For the spiritual power uses not the bodily or visible sword,
which by certain means may be let, but uses the sword of the spirit, that
passes through all places, and pierces even to the soul of him whom it
reaches.

First, M. Sanders, you do more than you can well justify, How the Prophets
did kill these Idolaters.
to wring this fact, to this figurative signification of this spiritual
sword. For if Elizeus did strike, or cause to be stricken the remna^t of those
Idolaters with a bodily sword, as did Asael and Iehu, having for warrant Gods
especial commandment thereunto: then is your figure dashed. But whether he
did this or no, you see the judgment of Cardinal Caietane, and we see the
examples of the Levites, of Phinees, and the killing of Agag by Samuel. And 3.
Reg. 18.
the like of Elias, in killing the Priests of Baal. even in the Chapter going
before. He brought them to the brook ^ison, and killed them there. Elias
(says Lyra) killed them by the people, that to this purpose assisted him, or
perhaps he killed some of them, with his own hand, by the zeal of Gods
justice, and so Samuel is read to have killed Ameleck. But understanding the
killing thus, because these especialties are not to be drawn by any ordinary
example in the spiritual pastors: let us now admit the figure of the spiritual
sword that M. San. drives this killing unto. Do you know what this spiritual
sword is (M. Sand) that you speak on. Think you it is to command others to
fight against kings, and to murder their subjects? If it be true (which you
affirm) that none can escape it, and that it pierces the soul: they It
belongs not to Pastors to punish with the bodily sword.
might escape this sword by many means, as you say. So that it is not the
exercise of such a sword, nor the bidding of such a sword to be exercised. And
how chance then your popes do exercise it, and you contend here for it, and
allege all these examples, and yet pretend (clean contrary hereunto) the
only spiritual sword? Whereas in very deed, ye ought to use none other, even
as your own Gloss says hereon* Nocentes iustitia. etc. The divine justice
causes some offenders to be punished with the edge of the sword, by kings:
other it stri keth through with the tongue, by Prophets and Priests. To punish
therefore with the bodily sword, belongs only to Princes and their officers,
and not to the Pope and his Prelates. Wherefore your Pope both lies and usurps
in clayming both swords: and your self confute him, that say, you have the
only spiritual sword: and also contrary your self, sith the deposition of
Princes from their royal estate, belongs to the secular, not to the
spiritual sword. Which belongs to the spirit, and is only of the soul, and
is such as none can escape. M. Sand. confutes him self.
And therefore your own self confute your self, applying ye power of the
spiritual pastors, to the deposing of princes from their kingdoms. For they
may well inoughe escape your popes tyranny, as they do (God be praised for it)
better tha^ heretofore some Princes have done. And as for his curses, which
also he calls his spiritual sword, being not only nothing like the spiritual
sword that God has appointed, but clean contrary thereunto: Princes shall
escape them well enough: yea, God himself does belsse them, as fast as ye pope
does curse them. But master Sanders, to prove that they can never escape this
sword, says Elizeus sword is reckoned in the last place, and the last he
calls here the chiefest. But how agrees this, with that he said before,
of the first place? There, he would prove the Priests authoriti^ chiefest,
because he is reckoned in the first place. And here he would prove the Priests
sword chiefest, because it is reckoned in the last place. And if it were
reckoned in the middle place then would be have proved it also the chiefest,
because that In medio consistit virtus, Virtue consists in the middle place.
And thus be the Priest, or any thing belonging to the Priest, reckoned in the
first place, in the middle place, or in the last place, that is still an
argument with M. Sanders, of the best and chiefest place. But now to prove yet
better the force of this sword, M. Sand. proceeds, saying:

Moreover to this spiritual sword, the other material sword Sand. page 86.
obeieth, which also takes punishment of him, that sets him self against
the spiritual sword. For Elias by the sword of the spirit, that is, by his
prayers, commanded the fire to descend from heaven, and consume those
captains of fifty, that despising the spiritual power of the Prophet, said
unto him in the name of the earthly power: thou man of God, the king
commands thee to descend. And again: thus says 4. Reg. 1.
the king, make haste and come down. For these Captains of fifty trusted so
well in their earthly power, that is, so well in the number of soldiers that
were under them, as in the authority of the King, for whom they were sent on
message, and in respect of this power, they despised that spiritual power, that
Elias was endued withal, And therefore with mocking saluted him, the man of
God. But when at the word of Elias the fire came down from heaven, and
devoured those 4. Reg. 1.
two Captains, and their twice fifty men that were with them: the third
Captain of fifty being sent of Ochozias the king, acknowledged the sword of
Elias, and therefore commanded not him (as the other had done) but besoughte
him, and said: O man of God, despise not my life, and the lives of thy
servants that are with me. But what is it, that the Prophet regarded not to
obey the kings commandment, but that he him self in that cause was greater
than the king, and that he taught, even by the things them selves, the
spiritual power of the Church to be greater than the earthly? For neither yet,
being most humbly desired of the third Captain of fifty, he came down to
the king, before the Angel of the Lord bad him not fear, but go down. For
he sat in the top of a mountain (that is) in the chiefest place of the
Church. Which place the earthly king ^ughte rather to have honored for Christ,
whose person Elias did bear, tha^ by authority to command, that the man of
God, leaving his chair, should come as a subject to the king. For we read
also that Ambrose complained, that he being a Bishop, stood Ambro. lib. 5
Epist. 27.
among them of the Consistory. And said unto the Emperor: if thou had
acknowledged me, thou would not see me in this place. Not that I deny the
Prophets and Pastors of the Romans 13.
Church to be subjects to the king, so far as their goods and bodies: but I
contend, that their power is not only equal, but higher than the kings own
jurisdiction is, so often as the souls salvation is in hand. For neither must
we be ignorant of that, that Elias therefore would not obey Ochozias the king,
but rather killed his captains and his soldiers, because the king being
sick asked counsel, not of the Lords Prophet, but of Beelzebub the God of
Accaron. If therefore 4. Reg. 1*
any king fall obstinately into heresy or schism, the Bishop and Prophet shall
not only not obey him, but also punish him, not only denying unto him the
spiritual goods* but also in taking away his corporal goods, after a due sort
and order. But it was unworthy for the person of Elias, for to kill with his
own hands, a hundred and two soldiers of the kings: and therefore with his
only word he spoke, and fire came down from heaven, that devoured those two
Captains of fifty with their soldiers.

Master Sanders having now referred this sword of Elizeus, The superiority of
the spiritual sword, is not the present question.
to the figure of the spiritual sword: will prove both that it is above the
kings s^cular power, and also destroys them that resist it. But first his
proves for the superiority of th^se swords, is neither belonging to this
present purpose, nor we contend about it, but willingly grant the stroke of
the word of God, to be the greater stroke, and Elias in that case to be
greater than the king also, and the spiritual power to be greater than the
earthly power, and that the spiritual power may spiritually punish the
resisters of it. But that the ordinary spiritual power of the Priests or
Prophets, may depose the ordinary secular power of Kings and Princes: that the
pastors spiritual sword, may strike the secular sword out of the Magistrates
hand, to whom it is of God committed: that the spiritual power may of his own
nature punish Princes with bodily punishment, and take their state and
kingdoms from them, and cause their subjects to rebel against them: This we
utterly deny, and this is the very question. Now heerto is alleahed The
present question is, whether the spiritual power of pastors may depose he
secular power of Princes. 4 Reg. 1. King Ochozias represents not the
Protestant, but the popish Princes.
the fact of Elias, sitting in the mount, who prayed to God that fire might
consume the wicked kings messangers that derided the Prophets, and would by
force have setched him to the king.

To this I answer, first, for this king, he resembles no protestant Prince,
but rather the popish Princes, who not only being sick as Ochozias was, but
also in health, (as though there were no God in Israel) seek not to the
only living Lord, to Christ the only savior and mediator, but to Idols, as
Ochozias did to Eeelzebub: and would murder the Prophets of God, that reprove
them for it, as Elias did.

Secondly, for Elias, he sat not on the top of the mountain, to signify the
chiefest place of the church, which chiefest Elias took not upon him the
chiefest place in Gods Church.
place he took not upon him. And do not your self ascribe the chiefest place
of the Church to the high Priest or Bishop? Or was the Prophet the^ above the
chief Priest, or intruded he into the high Priests place? or were both in the
chiefest place, and so your Pope claymes the chiefest place of the church from
both of them? True it is, that in his time Elias was the chiefest instrument
that God used in the r^formation of the Church, yet neither took he upon him
the chiefest place of the Church, nor exalted him self above the king, nor
deposed him, or his father, or any other prince, how wicked soever they were,
nor incited other to rebel against them. And this you should prove that Elias
did, or else ye stray from your question.

Thirdly, for this fact of Elias, I answer as before. It is no ensample for
us to follow the like. Neither did Elias Elias his fact not to be drawn to
any example to follow.
use it ordinarily in his defense, but upon especial occasion God by his
justice defended thus his Prophet, and revenged the contumely, wherewith they
scorned not only him, but God, in destroying those wicked deriders after such
a terrible and miraculous sort. Not for that they were the kings ministers,
but for that they assented to the kings cruelty: and besides (being
Idolaters) they scorned the power of God in him, in calling him in derision,
The man of God. For Lyra in.. 4 Reg. 1.
so says Lyra: Cognouit autem. etc. Elias knew by revelation, that in mockage
he called him the man of God, and was consenting to the king in the sin of
Idolatry, and in the punishment of Elias, and likewise they that were with him,
and that hereupon by the sentence of God they were to be punished: for the
which cause he pronounced the divine sentence. So that the striker here was
God, Elias only pronounced the sentence of Gods justice. Neither did he any
thing herein, but by the especial motion of God. He would not come down (as
master Saunders therein says true) no not at the most humble entreatie of
the third Captain, till the Angel of GOD badde him not fear, but go down.
Whereupon says Caietane: Vide, actiones Eliae. Caieta^us in 4. Reg. 1.
etc. See, the actions of Elias are governed by the Angels direction in every
point, that is to say, so well his outward as his inward motions.

Whereby we may see that he did not this fact by any ordinary jurisdiction of
his Prophetical office, but by the especial direction of God, which can not,
nor ought to be drawn into example, for other to do or wish the like.

Fourthly, this example to follow Elias herein, is of all The imitation of the
fact of Elias expressly forbidden to the Disciples of Christ. Luke. 9.
other flatly forbidden to the Disciples of Christ. For when ye Samaritanes
would not receive Christ into their City, James and Io^n said, Lord, wil^e
thou that we command that fire come down from heaven, and consume them, even
as Elias did? But Jesus turned about, and rebuked them, and said: ye know not
of what spirit you are. For the son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them. Now this example of the severe justice of God, thus
desired of them, and they reproved by Christ for desiring the like, M. Sanders
resumeth for his Bishops authority. Whereby it appears, he knows not of
what spirit Christian Bishops Popish Bishops of a contrary sp^rite to Christ.
ought to be, and that Popish Bishops are of another spirit than Christ is
of. For Christ came not to kill Princes, to fire their towns, to burn their
people, and depose Kings from their kingdoms: to which drifte all this is
spoken.

Lastly, I deny this drift and consequence of the example.

Elias prayed that fire might consume them from heaven.

Ergo, Christian Bishops ought to take away the corporal goods of Heretical
and Schismatical Princes.

If the conclusion had been thus: Ergo, they might pray that God would take
their corporal goods away: it had been a more likely and a more tolerable
conclusion. Howbeit this also is forbidden, to pray to have their corporal
goods taken away. It were their duty rather to pray, ye they might better use
them, and that God would either convert them, or otherwise at his good
pleasure, stop their tyranny. They ought not to pray for the taking away of
any man's goods, much less their Sovereigns goods, to who^ your self
confess, that they them selves are subject, ^o far as their goods and
bodies. And then be they not over the goods and bodies of their Princes,
being their subjects, least of all ought they, either by themselves or by any
other, to take their M. Sand. proves his Bishops to be traitors.
Princes goods and bodies from them: For that is not a subjects but a traitors
and a rebels part.

But says M. Saunders they may take his bodily goods from their King so they
do it, debito modo and ordine, after a due manner and order.

He told us thus before, but it is clean beyond all good ma^er, and against al
due order, to take away any man's goods, chiefly the Princes, yea and that
the Bishops or priests to do it.

The example of S. Ambrose, complaining that ye Emperor The example of S
Ambrose.
mis^sed him, is clean against M. Saund that alleges it for him. For S.
Ambrose took not the Emperors goods away, nor deposed him, nor caused other to
rebel against him: but for all the Emperors missusage of him, he continued
still in his obedience to the Emperor. Howbeit he told the Emperor of his duty,
and so should al godly Bishops do, and not attempt to depose their Princes,
nor to stir up other to depose them.

Let us now put the case (says M. Sau^ders) that some man Sand. page 8^. and.
87.
which was a Prince was present with Elias, who having received the power of
the sword, would have offered himself to use it for Elias. Or else let us put
the case, that it is said of Elias unto him: because these soldiers contemn
me, and in me God, whose prophet I am: rushe thou on them and kill them. Had
now that Prince sinned, if at the word of Elias, he had killed the Kings
subjects? either else could not an earthly sword have performed the same
thing, that the ministry of fire did yield Of like things it makes no matter
what is done.
from heaven? Truly with wise men it makes no matter, what is done of those
things, that are of the same weight and moment. If fire be the more noble
element than earth, yea, or those metals that are dug out of the earth: I
see not but that he, who called fire down from heaven, which should satisfy
his commandment, much more could have spoken to a Magistrate bearing the
sword, that he should pull out and draw that sword for him against any King.

Whatsoever you see not (Master Saunders) you make all the world to see that
you be of a viperous generation and adders brood, that cannot creep forward
by lying straight, but wynding and crooking in and out, hither and thither. M.
Sand ^alles to putting of cases again, contrary to the Scripture.
See how you s^ill seek shifts whereby to proceed, when by the direct
Scripture your cause will not go forward. You fall to putting of cases once
again. Put case the scripture had said thus: Put case Elias had done this:
Put case another had done that. What a warbling is this? If you will allege
the Scripture, take the Scripture directly as it lies. Put no more cases to the
Scripture, than the Scripture puttes. Are you wyser than God, or not as Gen 3.
false as the old Serpent, that in tempting Eve, altered the words of God?
But this argues, that the Scripture it self fitteth not your turn, except you
may turn and alter it as you will.

You pretend it is no matter with wise men what is done of those things, that
are of the same weight and moment. As whether these men were killed by the fire
or by the sword, Difference of punishments.
since they were killed. But are these punishments all one (Master Saunders)
to have been stricken with the sword of a man, and to be consumed with fire
from God? in deed as you say, here is death in both, which is the same thing:
but are their kinds of death, and punishments, of the same weight and moment?
When the four Kings slew the Sodomites, Genesis 14. Genesis 19. 1. Reg 22. Leuit.
10.
and when God reigned down ^ire and brimstone from heaven to s^ay the
Sodomites: when Saul (as Master Saunders said before) killed the Priests, and
when God killed the Priests with fire from heaven: is here nothing in these
deaths, but the difference of the more noble element? Surely it seems
Master Saunders you have been so long in Rome, that you are become Inglese
Italia nato, so worldly wise, that you have no fear of Gods vengeance, that
thus measure it by man's punishment. There is a great difference (Master
Saunders) in the weight and moment of these punishments, not only to show
the heavier wrath of God, but also to show, that although Elias desired This
punishment of fire, was an especial pu^shme^t proceeding from God, not from
Elias.
it, on such specialties as is aforesaid: yet the punishment was only from
God, not from Elias, he had not the fire at his commandment, but God sento
the fire upon them, which makes another greater difference of the case,
besides other sundry differences, that clean do alter it. For it is not likely
that Elias would ever have set another Prince, upon his own Princes
subjects, or stir any rebellion against his Prince, how sharply soever he
rebuked him for his sins. He neither spared King Achab, nor Queen Iesabell,
nor their son Qchozias, but boldly reproved them. But as for deposing them or
moving other Princes to depose them, or to kill either them or their people: he
never did it, nor ever showed any taken of lyking such doing, and therefore
we ought not to presuppose any 3. Reg. 18. Lyra super Luc. 9.
such thing of him. These things he did, he killed the Pries^s of Baal, either
by his bydding them to be killed, or as Lyra says, propriamanu, he killed some
of them with his own hand. And here he besoughte God take this vengeance on
these wicked soldiers, and this he did by the ^stincte of God. The other, that
you put the case for, we find no such deed, nor have any such warrant, and
without such warrant from God, they should savor of treason to the Prince, and
so make a great alteration of the case, to serve your purpose, and wreste the
Scripture, and therefore are not to be admitted.

But although (says M. Sand.) Princes of this world see not Sand. 87.
the power of this spiritual sword, notwithstanding if at the prayer of
Elizeus, God vouchsafe to open their eyes* they shall see more armies with the B.
tha^ with any Emperor. For behold 4. Reg. 6.
the mountain full of horses and of fiery charets round about Elizeus. But
when the King of Israel seeing the greatness of the fa^ine, swear that the
head of Elizeus should not stand upon him that day: Elizeus that knew this
oath of the King to be unlawful, foreseyng in the spirit, the messenger to be
at hand, that should execute the Kings commandment: Ibidem.
he said unto the elders that were with him, know ye not how this murderers
son has sent to take away mine head: take he^de therefore, when the
messenger comes, shut the door, and set him not enter. Yea Sanctes Pagninus
so expoundes these later words, oppress him in the door. By which words,
not only the shutting out of the Kings messenger is signified, but also a
certain violence done unto him. All which I have brought to this end, that I
might show that the pastors of the Church, have power not only over the
souls of the faithful, but also over their bodies and goods, so often as the
souls health may be promoted thereby. For we know also, that two bears
coming out of the 4. Reg. 2.
wood, did ^eare in pieces ^ortie and two of those Children that mocked
Elizeus. Whereby also is declared, that all the creatures of God arise, to
revenge their injuries, whom God has adorned with spiritual power. And
truly when good Kings wanted, that would revenge the contumely 4. Reg. 1.
done to the pastors of the Church, the element of fire and the wild beasts
took that care on them.

We had before, the example of Elias, and then of Elizeus, The example of
Elizeus.
and then again of Elias, and now again of Elizeus. Of whom three things are
here alleged. The first, that Elizeus had greater power to defend him, than
the King of Syria to oppugn him. The second, when the King of Israel sent
to kill him, he caused the messenger violentlye to be kept out of the door.
The third, when the children of Bethel mocked him, he cursed them, and
straight wild bears destroyed them.

To the first I answer, it is impertinent to ye purpose of Elizeus defense of
^rie charets against the army of the king of Siria.
deposing Princes, or seazing on their te^porall goods and kingdoms, or
causing their subjects to reuolte from their obedience. Elizeus did none of
these things, neither can this defense of Elizeus without racking, be drawn
hereto.

But M. Sand. ^aith, he brings it to this end, to shevve that the Pastors of
the Church have power, not only over the souls of the faithful, but also
over their goods and bodies.

If you bring it to this end, M. Sand. then as you bring it about the bushe,
and not directly to the question in hand: so here youfoully over shoot your
self. For this Prince was not a faithful, but an Infidel Prince, and the
enemy of the Prince of Israel. And therefore inuading with open hostility
the Princes dominion of Israel: it was lawful for any Israelite, to do the
worste he could to destroy the Syrians army. Howbeit, Elizeus gathered no
power, nor uses any worldly violence against this foraine Princes army, as
the Pope does against foraine Princes, to come upon them with horses and
charets, and with a mighty army, like to this infidel Prince of Syria, to
besiege Christian Princes and the true Israelites, and to destroy the Prophets
of Jesus Christ, that give Christian Princes warning of the Popish practices.
So that if a figure may be drawn from this history, to our times: the Pope
more resembles Benedab, than Elizeus. As for Elizeus, gathered no worldly
power, but with steadfast confidence commended himself to God, and God
protecte^ him with Millions of Angels. He had power indeed to defends him, and
more Armies than has any Emperor, as M. Saunders ^aith. But this power was
spiritual, and not such as the Pope exercises over Princes. Would the Pope
seek (...) other power than Elizeus did: then might you M. Sanders put up your
pipes, this controversy were at an end, for deposing Princes. No, M.
Saunders, The Pope like to Benadab.
all Princessee, yea, even those that are blinded with affection toward him,
do see, that he seeks and has such power, as Benadab had, and greater
worldly power also. For the maintenance whereof, you here do contend by
writing, as fast as he contends by fighting. But this was not the power of
Elizeus^ If you will see a platform of Elizeus power, The Protestants like
(...) Elizeus
look upon the poor Ministers of the gospel, environed round about with your
popish armies, horses, and charets, in so much that the poor simple man,
cries out as Elizeus servant did: Alas master how shall we do? the Popish
Benadab has besieged the poor Protestants with such mighty aru^es, that all
the world would have thought ere this, they should have been clean swallowed
up. But God be blessed, poor Elizeus has more armies* the poor preachers of
the Gospel have more Legions of Angels, and more spiritual fyrie char^ts and
horsemen to assist them, against all that assault them, than that yet they could
ever prevail, but are (as was the host of Benadab, stricken more and more with
blindness. For and they (...) not blinded, they must needs see this mighty
work of God, that all whose eyes God has opened, do behold, and glorify
God, and fear not any more the host of this Benadab, for they that be with
us are more, than they that be with them. But see how this Captain of Benadab
that is blind himself, wolo so blind us with him, yt he would make us believe,
that even Benadab himself were Elizeus. But does the Pope use his captives as
Elizeus did, who suffered The Popes cru (...) to his cap tiue^, unlike the
cu^sie of Elizeus.
not them to be killed nor spoiled, but comforted and refreshed them, and set
them again at liberty? No, M. Sand. we are not so blind, but we and all the
world does see, that as ye Pope fights with other man^ of armies, than did
Elizeus: so he uses to his captives no such mercy, but more tygerly cruelty,
than we should find at the Turks hands, than the Turks found at ye hands of
Tamerlanes the Scithian, tha^ is to be found among the Canibals, that roast men
on a spit being killed before, and not ^rye them at a stake alive: yea, than a
man shall find among the Savage Bears and Lions that would quickly devour
him. Such dispyte has the Pope showed even to his own Cardinals, where
Elizeus showed this goodness to his enemies. And when he had them in his free
choice to have killed them, he let them go free. Whereas the Pope to kill his
(...) being free, has violated all safecondui^, and broken all oaths, bends,
promises, faith and honesty. And is the Pope yet like Elizeus? But how holds
this argument? Elizeus had more power than the host of the Syrians: Ergo,
Bishops have power to depose Princes.

The second thing that M. Sand* notes in Elizeus, is the Elizeus caused the
kings messanger to be kept out of the (...) 4. Reg. 6.
excluding of King Iorams Messanger, that was scute to cut off his head. This
factdrawes somewhat nearer to the purpose in respect of the King, for he was
the King of Israel, to whom Elizeus was a subject: but this again is as far
from the purpose, in respect of the Kings cruelty and Idolatry, wherein
Ioram figureth Popish, and not Protestant Princes. But in respect st^l of the
present controversy, it is nothing to ye purpose at al for the kings deposing.
For how follows this?

He bad them keep the Kings servant out, that would have come to cut off his
head:

Ergo, he bad them depose the King from his royal estate.

And here M. Sanders urges the force of Elizeus words. Sanctes Pagninus (says
he) translateth thus these later words, oppress him in the door. In which
words is not only signified, a shutting out of the Kings Messanger, but also
a kind of violence done unto him.

You need not run to Pag^ M. Sanders, our translations confess as much:
premite eum in ostio, reprimite illum in ostio, press him in the door, or
rather repress him, than oppress him. For oppressing draws nearer to the
murdering of him, which was far from Elizeus meaning, and is nearer to the
Popish violence. But the plain meaning is, keep him out of the doors, as ye
co^m^n translation has it. Neither is it material, though he were shut out
before he came, or thronging in before y^ (...) were ^ul shut, he were
violently thrust out again. For this was not done of the^ to resist ye ^ings
authority, nor (...) to be done of him (...) show that he had such powero^ his
goods and body, yt he might take his goods or his life from him: but this that
was here done, was to preserve himself being the Prophet of God, from the
Kings unjust violence, and from the hasty fury of the cruel murderer, whom
the King sent to kill him, without all law, justice, or reason, only upon the
sudden passion of his outrage. As for the Prophet, he had especial warrant
by Gods especial reucaling, so to bid them, and therefore the Prophet bid
nothing amiss herein. Yea, he knew well enough, that although he resisted
the Kings messanger, yet he resisted not the King, but even therein obeyed the
King, and did that he Elizeus resisted not the King in keeping out his Mes^anger
would have had him to do. For the King immediately repenting him of his wicked
oath and hasty cruelty, came himself (as it seems by the text) in all have
after the Messanger, to stay his hand, and to let the Prophet of God alone,
acknowledging his offense, and that his punishment was even the hand of God.
Now Elizeus (by revelation) knowing of all this: what did he in bidding them
resist the Messanger, but even obey the Kings will? and therefore when he had
them keep him out, or offer him violence, if ye will needs so expound it: he
says withal, is not the sound of his masters feet behind him? and this was
the very cause why he bad them do so. Let him enter, cuius causa subditur.
etc. (says Lyra) Lyra in. 4. Reg. 6.
the cause whereof is annexed, for behold the sound of his Masters feet is
after him, for after the departure of the Messanger, Ioram repented, and
therefore he followed him to revoke the precept. And faith Caitane, That they
should boldly Cale^anus in. 4 Reg. 6.
resist the Kings messanger, he foretells the^, that the King follovved his
Messanger, repenting that he sent him. And therefore the King follovved the
Messanger, because he repented that he had commanded, that Elizeus head
should be cut off, for he came to himself again, and came personally to move
his complaint before Elizeus. Now all this that should have lightened the
master, M. Sand* concealeth, and cuts off this sentence of Elizeus in the
middle, taking no further thereof, than he thought he might wreste to seem to
serve his purpose, after such manner as the Devil cited scripture against
Christ. Whereas the whole sentence set down, and the storye considered, it
makes clean against him. Nevertheless had Elizeus, on the especial will and
revealing of God, done otherwise, it had made nothing for him.

The third example of Elizeus, makes least of all to the Elizeus cursed the
children that mocked him and the Bears devoured them. 4. Reg. 2.
purpose. Because Elizeus cursed the children that scorned him, and they by
Gods just vengeance, were destroyed by Bears: that therefore he ever attempted
to depose the King, or solicited his subjects to rebel against him. This
conclusion is to far fetched. And yet that which Elizeus there did, doing it
in the name of the Lord, and by revelation of the Lord, pronouncing the
sentence of Gods justice upon them (as Lyra says) can no more be leuelled to
an ordinary rule, than the fire that came down at the petition of Elias.
Neither does the Popish^ gloss, or Lyra gather thereon, that Bishops might
cause their Princes subjects to be destroyed that mock them: but they make
this a figure of Christ. Mystice exponendo. etc. In expounding this
mystically, Glossa cum (...) ^a in 4. Reg. ^.
Elizeus going up to Bethell, signifies Jesus Christ ascending to his Cross,
whom the jews mocked, according to the text of the Gospel. For the
vengeance whereof, two Bears came afterward into Jury, to wit, Titus and
Vespasian, and killed the people forty years after the passion of the Lord,
for revenge of the contu^elie done unto him. This figure your own commentaries
make hereon But I have not read, that any makes it serve for Bishops to depose
Princes, but for Princes to depose wicked Bishops, that crucify Christ in
his members, and deride the simplicity of the Gospel. Who rather than they
should remain unpunished, God will stir up heathen Princes to punish the^,
as he did these Bears, and flashe down fire from heaven to destroy al those
Priests, that offer strange fire to God: and will stir up all his creatures,
to revenge the injuries done to his Saints and Ministers, where good Princes
want, (as you say) that should revenge the same. But then freuible you, ye
cruel papists, yt have done so many outrages to Gods Ministers, and have shed
so much blood of his Saints, that ye shall never flee Gods heavy vengeance,
howsoever good kings do want. Though you abuse Kings to be executioners of
your cruelties, whose duty (by your own confession) were to punish such
injuries. Which if they would better look unto, and put in practice, they
should so little fear your deposings of them, that they would depose every one
of you.

And thus, as all your examples make nothing for you, so every one of them
makes so much against you, that it seeineth as these Syrians were so
blinded, that seeking to take Elizeus, they were led they wist not whither,
even into Samaria, and were themselves taken of their enemies: so you seeking
to take the Ministers of God, and to take ye Christian Princes power from him,
to bring all to your holy father Benadab, are so blinded in framing your
arguments, yt you blunder on such examples, as still make clean against you.

But now after the acceptable time is come, wherein are S^nd. 87.
many Christian Kings, of whom some always obey the Vicars of Christ: there
is now no need of miracles, or of the ministry of creatures vvanting
reason, sith there want not faithful Princes, which may perform and
execute this. For since Zachary the Prophet of God has foretold, that so
Zacha. 13.
great a fountain of grace should be opened to al, after the coming of Christ,
that eue^ ones father and mother should thrust him through, whom they should
understand to speak a lie: how much more at this day, shall there not want
those, that shall not suffer him to live, whom they shall perceive, that he
will not obey the high Priests commandment. For the power Deuteronomy 17.
of the Ministers of Christ is so much higher, than the power of the Priests
of the Leuitical kind, by how much difference, 2. Cor. 3.
Justice, Spirit, and life, that we minister, excel da^natio^, the letter, and
death, which things the leuitical priests by occasion ministered.

If there wanted Christian Kings and faithful Princes the^, and yet the
Prophets then deposed not the wicked Princes, nor set up new Princes, but
rather, committed the vengeance Where faithful princes wanted (...) Prophet
(...) m^nt to ^od.
to God, that punished Idolaters, by the ministry of creatures vvanting
reason, where there vvanted faithful Princes to do it: with what face can you
(M. Sanders) allege these examples, for the Pastors deposing of Kings? which
are so flat arguments against it, that where Christian Kings, and faithful
Princes want, to punish Idolaters and deriders of Gods Ministers, there
Christian Pastors should commit the vengeance to God, rather tha^ attempt to
depose those unfaithful Princes, which no faithful Prophet did.

But now (say you) are many Christian Princes, of vvho^ some always obey the
Vicar of Christ. For so ye call your Pope. The obedience to the (...) o^ nee
(...) to Christianity. by M Sand. ar gument.


Whether the Pop^ be Christ's, or Satan's Uicar, is an other question, M. Sano.
Whether any Christian Kings obey him, is somewhat nearer to the purpose,
although not directly to the question here in hand. But if this be true, that
there are many Christian Kings, of whom some always obey the Pope: then are
there also many Christian King, of whom some never obey the Pope. And if they
may be Christian Kings; that never obey the Pope, as were the Emperors of
Greece, the Christian Kings in Asia, Africa, and the Northeast parts of
Europe, that never obeyed him, and yet are Christian Kings: then is not the
obedience of the Pope necessary to christianity, else, not some, but al
Christian kings obey him, and he yt obeyed him not, were no Christian King.

But now (say you) there is no need of miracles.

Then (say I) there is no need of such examples. But if you No need of
miracles.
deny the need of miracles, why does your Church plead upon them, and abuse
the world so much by them? what? be you become a Bogomile M. Sant? nay then, I
wilturne you lose to M. Stapl. But why will you not stand on miracles now?

Now (say you) want not faithful Princes, which may perform and execute all
this.

Then (say I) faithful Princes have authority to destroy false Pastors, and
not false Pastors, no nor true Pastors, to destroy neither faithful, nor yet
unfaithful Princes.

You cite the Prophecy of Zachary, That so great a fountain Zacha. 13.
of grace should be open to all, after the coming of Christ, that even ones
father and mother should thrust him through, whom they should understand to
speak a lie.

Tru^, M. Saunders, such a prophecy there is in deed. But had your self not
been guilty in your conscience, to have been one of these liars that the
Prophet speaks of, you would not thus have snatched at the sentence, here
and there a piece, like the Egiptian Dog that M. Stapleton tells us of,
drinking in Nilus river, and dare not drink a full draught, for fear he be
caught by the lyppes. And so would you be caught by those lying lips of
yours, if you had so fully set down the prophecy, that the Reader might
have perceived who the lier is. The words are these: In that Zacha. 13. The
prophecy for punishing of false Prophets.
day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness. And in that day,
says the Lord of Hosts, I will cut off the names of the Idols out of the
land, and they shall no more be remembered. And I vvil cause the Prophets and
the unclean spirits to depart out of the land. And when any shall yet
prophecy, his father and his mother that begat him, shall say unto him, thou
shall not live, for thou speak lies in the name of the Lord. And his father
and his mother that begat him, shall thrust him through, when he prophecieth,
and in that day shall the Prophets be ashamed every one of his vision, when he
has prophesied. Neither shall they wear a rough garment to deceive, but he
shall say, I am no Prophet, I am a husbandman. For man taught me to be an
herdman, from my youth up. And one shall say unto him, what are these wounds
in thy hands? then shall he answer, thus was I vvounded in the house of my
friends.

By this sentence it appears, that by this lier, is not meant The punishment
of false Prophets belongs to the Prince.
a Prince, but a false Prophet. Whereby you can not infer the present
question, that Priests may punish Princes, but ye contrary, yt Princes may
punish priests, may well be inferred thereon. For by ye fathers and mothers
thrusting through, is not meant private punishment, each one to kill another, nor
yt ^his thrusting through belongs to the Priests, who take upon the^ to be
the Prophets themselves, and to whose calling killing belongs not, but it
appertains to Kings and Queens, to civil Princes and Magistrates, that are the
fathers and mothers. of gods people, and ^o whom of right (as having the sword
from The popish clergy be such false prophets as Zachary prophesied of.
God) the punishment of false Prophets appertains. But who be these false
prophets (M. Saunders) that the Prince shall punish? First, all they which
deny that fountain of grace, to be the only washing away of sin and
uncleanness. Whether your Pope, your Prelates, and you, seek not other The
fountain of grace.
things, besides this fountain of grace, for the washing away of sin and
uncleanness: all the world knows, and your own practice and confessions (as
is before proved to M. Stapleton) charge you therewith. Secondly, these false
prophets are those Idolatry.
that maintain Idolatry: which whether the popish Priests maintain or no,
as it is so apparent, that no fig lease can hyde it, so we have hard your
own testimonies openly confess it. Thirdly, the false prophets are they, that
teach lies in Teaching of lies.
the name of the Lord, which what is it else, but to teach other doctrines,
as necessary to salvation, than Christ and his Apostles taught, their own
traditions and constitutions in the stead of the word of God. How this also
touches the Popish pastors, besides the appearance thereof, we have hard
already their own witness. Fourthly, these false Prophets were such, that
for their blind, and gross ignorance Ignorance.
they were more fit to go to carte than to schole, to hold the plowe than
to hold the place of a pastor, such blind guides leadyng the blind, that a
Child scarce seven year old, can give more readily a better answer of the
Christian faith, than many a Popish Priest, yea than some Doctors in
divinity, of twenty years continnance could Hipocris^ of rough garm^
have done. Fifthly, these false Prophets were such hipocrits as with
counterfeit austeritie with sack and hearecloth, with linsywoo^ie, with long
and grave disguised and prescribed rough garments, have borne to the simples
eyes the counse^ance of holy fathers and only religious men.

These (M. Saunders) these are the liars, these are ye false prophets, that the
true Prophet Zatharie here describes, and foretells of their destruction:
How the fountain of grace should be opened that you had stopped: how the
death of Christ, and not such means as you had devised, should wash away all
sins and vncleanneste: how your Idolacrie should be pulled down, and the
very names of your Idols become odious: How your lies and forgeries should be
espied: how Princes should punish you eue^ to death: how you should be so
athamed The detection and punishment of popery prophesied by Zachary.
of your lies and trumperies, that you should cast of your cowles and hyde your
marks for shame, and say you were never Priests, Monks, nor Friars, but
husbandmen* All which how it has come to pass, all the world sees, and many
of your own side have confessed, and be ashamed, and cry God mercy, and have
forsaken their superstitious prelaties, and have chosen rather to live like
husbandmen, than to deceive the people and abuse gods name with lies any
longer. And if this prophecy have not wrought this effect in you, but that you
remain yet a shameless lying Prophet, and would obstinately ^naintaine these
things: it is a shrewd token you be given up to a reprobate sense, and are
blinded by gods righteous Justice, for refusing his mercy, and that godly
Princes should run you through, and execute the severity of gods justice
upon you.

Now all this that detected you to be these lying prophets, and that showed the
Princes authority and office to punish you, as you steightly pass it over,
so you wreste it clean to another purpose, as though they should be run
through that would not obey the Pope. For so you apply it, saying: How much
more shall there not want at this day, that will not suffer him to live, whom
they shall perceive will not obey the commandment of the highest Priest. And
as you put this in distinct letters, so you quote for it, Deuteronomy. 17. The
wresting of the com^o^ alleged place. Deuteronomy. 17.


This place is often alleged, and answered already unto in M. Stapleton, and
is so shamefully wrested here by you, that if there were no other argument,
even the wresting of this prophe^ie would argue you to be one of these lying
prophets, that should be run through for abusing the word of God. As
though that law took yet place among us, that was appointed for that time to
the Jews: or as though those matters between blood and blood, plea and plea,
plague and plague, in causes of controversy among the Jews, were matters of
Religion then, or are to be stretched to all matters of faith now: or as though
those matters were determined by the only high priest then, and not by the
judge and Civil Magistrate, asking counsel of the Priests, and giving judgment
by his own authority, make not rather for the obedience to the Civil
Magistrates, than to the obedience of the Priests: or as though Zachary
prophesying of the state after ye coming of Christ, did mean there should be
one chief B. besides Christ, whose commandment all Princes, all Bishops, al
people in Christendom should obey, or else they should be thrust through and
killed. In deed (M. Saunders) Zachary speaks a little before of a pastor
that should come which lively discribeth your Pope.

And the Lord (says Zachary) said unto me, take yet unto Zachary. 11.
Zacharies prophecy of the Pope.
thee, the instrument of a foolish shepherd. For lo I will raise up a
shepherd in the land, which shall not look for the thing that is lost, nor
seek the tender la^bes, nor heal that that is hurt, nor feed that that
stands. But he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their claws* in
pieces. O Idol shepherde, that leaves the flock, the sword shall be upon
his arm, and upon his right eye, his arm shall be clean dried up, and his
right eye shall be utterly darkened.

Who exercises this tirannie over all the people and the Princes too, eating
them to the bones yea bones and all, deposing them, destroying them, and
pilling their kingdoms with insatiable extorsions, but the Pope* the Popish
glosses ascribe it to Antichrist, but they describe the Popes practices. Lyra
in Za. 11.
A pastor in the land, (says Lyra*) that is, Antichrist to rule therein: that
shall not visit the forsaken, that is, he shall do no work of Godliness, but
shall be of greatest cruelty toward the just, and therefore he says: and shall
eat the flesh of the fa^e, that is, by spoiling of their goods: and tear
their claws, by afflicting and killing them. Again what Pastor may better be
called in Idol than this Antichrist the Pope? That is The Pope an Idol.
called an Idol (says Lyra) that is worshipped for God, and is not God. And so
shall it be of Antichrist, that shall sit in the Temple of God, as though he
were God. 2. These, 2. O Pastor and Idol (says the Gloss) thou art so wicked,
that thou shall Glossa cum Lyra.
not be called a worshipper of Idols, but shall be called an Idol, while thou will be worshipped of men. Who leauest the flock to be denoured of beasts,
that the Lord had always kept. This pastor shall therefore arise in Israel,
because the true pastor had said, I will not feed you. This pastor by another
name is called, the abhominatio^ of desolation, that shall sit in the temple of
God, as though he were God. Therefore the sword of the Lord shall be upon his
right arm, and upon his right eye, that the force of him and all the boasting
of his might, might be dried up and withered away, and the knowledge that under
a false name, he promised to himself, shall be obsenred with eternal darkness.
Here it is apparent, that Zachary meant your high B. the Pope, but he so little
threatens the^ that obey him not, that he curses him and all the^ that obey
him, and threatens the vengeance of God upon him, to pull down his tirannie,
and to blind him. But I think (M. Sand.) that your right eye was blinded also,
that saw not this, or else you blinked at it, and would not see it. For this
would have told you another manner of matter, than that be should be killed,
that obeyed not the Popes commanding and would, hau^ made you afraid, least
this killing should light both upon him and you.

But you go on and tell us, that the authority of the ministers Sand. page 87.
Deuteronomy. 17. 1. Cor. 3.
of Christ, is so much greater than the Priests of the Leuiticall kind,
how much justice, peace, and life, that we do minister, is better than
damnation, the letter, and death, that the Leuiticall Priests ministered by
occasion.

That the authority of Christ's ministers is greater, we grant, in such
things as belong to their ministry, that are Christ's ministers. But whether
it be greater in outward glory, is another matter. But be it great or less,
where you thrust your self in the number, and say, that we do minister, you
are but an intruder, M. Sand. For neither you, nor any popish Priests, are
any of Christ's ministers, The ministration of the popish ministry.
as is already proved, even by your own last allegation out of Zachary. And
if the ministration of justice, the spirit and life, be the trial: your
contentio^n is here for sedition and rebellion, contrary to justice: for a
worldly glory and earthly kingdom, contrary to the spirit: for deposing,
killing and thrusting through of all those that will not obey your Pope,
contrary to life. And so is your ministration worsse, than the ministration of
the Leuiticall Priests, who (you say) ministered these thing not of purpose,
but by occasion, but you seek of purpose all occasion, thut you can find, or
snatche at and wrest, to minister matter for the deposing of Princes, for the
rebellion of subjects, ^ the murder of all estates, only to maintain the
pride and tyranny of your Pope, above all Christian kings and kingdoms. Now
that none of all these examples and testimonies will fadge no better, we shall
have once again the example of Ozias.

And yet (says M. Sand. in the Leuiticall Priesthood such Sand. page 87.
height of the Ecclesiastical power is figured, that even then also we may
see, that kings were compelled of Priests, whereby they gave up their
Magistracy. For when Ozias was waxen 2. Para^ 26.
strong, his heart was lift up to his destruction, and he neglected the Lord
his God, and entering into the temple of the Lord, he would burn incense upon
the altar of Incense. The^ Azarias the Bishop, and other Priests that were
strong men, entering after him, resisted the king. And when he notwithstanding,
holding the Censor in* his hand, threatened the Priests: straightway a leprie
sprang in his forehead, which the Priests beholding, they quickly expelled
him. What followed therefore? Ozias dwelte in a house aparte, being full of
leprie* for the which he was cast out of the house of the Lord. Moreover
Ioatham his son governed the house of the king, and judged the people of the
Lord. Who sees not the bodily casting forth of the king out of the house
of the Lord, clearly to express that ecclesiastical power, whereby kings
taking upon them the offices of Priests, may be cast out of the kingdom of
heaven, by the excommunication of the highest Bishop. Moreover, if because the
king was made a Leper, the administration of the kings house, and the
government of all the people, was deuolued unto the kings son: how much
more the infection of heresy, which (as S. Augustine says) is signified by
the leprie, ought to bring Aug. Quest. lib. 2. q. 40.
to pass, that a Prince being driven to the state of a private life, may be
compelled to leave his house void unto his successor.

This story of king Ozias, as it is already cited by M. The example of king
Ozias, attempting to offer incence.
Stapleton, and was not before forgotten of M. Sanders, so here and in diverse
other places it is recited. Neither is there any one Popish writer on this
question of Supremacy, but he alleges this example. And as they thus often
allege it, so is it often by us answered, and in deed it is casie to be
answered, for it is not to the purpose, and but their malicious slander, to
burden the Protestant Princes with it, who take not upon them to do the
offices, belonging to the Bishops and Ministers of Gods word and Sacraments,
as here Ozias attempted to do. If you can name any such Prince, and such
things, name them hardly, M. Sand, but prove it withal, else you are but a
slaunderer of those that be in authority. But here M. Sand. applies this
example to this, that the highest Bishop may excommunicate such a Prince, and
cast him out of heaven.

Whether your Pope be the highest Bishop, or no, is still The pope readier to
cas^e Princes out of heaven, than to bring the into heaven.
another question. But this is out of question (M. Sand.) that he is always
more ready to cast a Prince o^t of heaven, tha^ to bring him into heaven, and
to cast him out of his kingdom too, than to let him enjoy it, especially if
he deal with him, although he do not as Ozias did, but do the duty of a godly
Christian king. But who denies this (M. Sand.) that In what case a Bishop may
excommunicate a ^icked Prince.
a godly Bishop may upon great and urgent occasion, if it shall be necessary
to edify Gods Church, and there be no other remedy, to flee to this last
censure of exco^municatio^ against a wicked king? although you can not infer
any such necessary conclusion upon the allegory of this example. But what is
this for the expelling him out of his kingdom* and for deposing him from his
estate? Can you prove that Azarias and his Priests did handle Ozias thus? For
this is the present question, but this you can not find they did, and therefore
this example serves not your purpose.

Well, say you, they used a bodily casting out of the king, out of the house of
the Lord. Trow you (M. Sand.) they The Priests withstoode the king, but not
with any bodily violence* 2. Pa^al. 26.
took him by the heels, and cast him out, or by the head and the shoulders*
and thrust him out? I trow not, that they laid any violent hands upon him.
They withstoode him, but it follows how, they said unto him, It pertayneth
not to thee to burn ince^se unto the Lord, but to the priests, the sons of
Aaron, that are consecrated to offer incense. Go forth of the Sa^ctuary, for
thou have tra^sgressed, and thou shall have no honor of the Lord God. This was
no resista^ce (M. San.) to blam him for his wickedness: and when he regarded
not their sayings, but was wroth with the^, and was eue^ ready to offer the
incense, God stroke him with ye leprie. So yt it appears they laid no violent
hands on him, but rebuked him, and yet in his fury he had done it, had not God
him self with his sodayn vengeance stopped him. If they had been so disposed
(being forty valiant men, besides the high Priest) they might have wroong the
Censor out of his hand, and might have pulled off the Priestly garments from
his back (for so Josephus tells how he came into the Temple) howbeit they
resisted him not in such violent ^rte.

But say you, when they espied God had once stricken him with the leprie, then
quickly they thrust him out.

But not with violence (M. Sanders) Non explicatur expulsio, Caietanus in 2
Pa^al. 26.
etc. (says your Cardinal of Caieta) thrusting him out is not expressed, but
the Priests, when they saw the Leprie, warned the leprous king to go forth.
Neither needed he then any great warning, Sed and ipse, etc. For the king
himself being terrified, made haste to get out, because he felt forth with
the stroke of the Lord, so that he was not only moved of the priests, but also
moved of him self, feeling the (...) of God, to go out of the Temple. What
great violence was here done of the Priests to the King, except their rebuking
or warning of him, either before his presumptuous attempt, or after? Did they
strike him? No, God stroke him, M. Sanders, and not the Priests, for all they
were so many tall fellows, and had might enough to have stricken him. If your
Pope therefore and his Prelates will take The Pope deals not with Princes as
Azarias did. 1. Tim. 3.
this Bishop and his Priests for their example, they must be (as S. Paul
says) no strikers, nor fighters, chiefly not not against their Princes: they
must be mighty, but not in blows, but potentes sermon, mighty in the word,
to reprove the wickedness of Princes, and so resist them, as S. Paul says,
he resisted Peter to his face, not that he buffeted or Gal. 2.
p^meld him with his fiste about the face, as Bishop Boner did his prisoners.
But he resisted him, in speech reprehending him, and with such resistance
these Priests resisted the king* and all Bishops may and ought to resist all
wicked princes: but this is far from deposing them, or sollicit^ng other
Princes to make war upon them, or moving their subjects to rebel against
them. But master Sanders brgeth further what followed.

The king being a ^eper, dwelt in a house apart, til the day of his death, and
his son governed the kings house, and judged the people of the land.

What is this (M. Sand) to the Priests deposing of him, This king was never
deposed for all this offense.
that he dwelt aparte? For, being a Leper, God in his law had so appointed
Leuit. 13. Neither did the contagion of his disease suffer the administration
of his office. Howbeit neither for his offense, nor for his punishment thereof,
was he deposed from his kingdom, and his son made king but ye son as his
fathers deputy* administered ye affairs of his fathers kingdom, and so, for all this Ozias continued king even til the day of his natural death, which
was a longer time (if your Gloss be true, after this fact, than he had been
king before this fact committed* For (says your own gloss) Volunt Hebraei.
etc. The Hebrews will have it, that this hap^ed in the 25. year of Ozias, whose
years remaining are. 27. And so he raygned as the text says. 52. years. But
whether this computation be true, or no, it plainly appears that he continued
king still, and was buried as a king and his son began not to raygne til his
father were dead. Which argues, that for all this heinous fact, which God so
maruellously and dreadfully revenged insomuche that Josephus Co^mestor, the
Gloss, Lyra, and diverse other say, that the terrible earthquake, mentioned in
Amos 1. and in Zachary. 14. was done at that present instant, when God stroke
the king for attempting this deed) not withstanding he retained still his
estate, though he could not, for his sickness (...) himself the office. So
little did God suffer the Priests, or any other to depose him, howsoever the
king deserved it, or rather a worsse punishment. Thus this example of Ozias,
that is so often alleged, and so much triu^phed upon, as it is meer^
slanderous so makes it nothing for the Papists, but clean co^fu^es them, and
playn^g argues, that how fervently soever the Ministers of Christ may
reprove and rebuke a wicked Prince for his offenses, yet be his offenses never
so great, the Bishop has no such authority that he may depose his Prince,
but must commit the punishment unto God. But now of this example of Ozias
leprie, we shall have another argument.

And as Lepers should be discerned of the Priests, whether Sand. page 87.
they be whole or infected: so the judging of heresy, pertayneth to the only
Priests of God. Therefore by the manifest testimony of divine scripture, it is
euicted that an heretic king both may be, and ought to be deposed, least he
infect all his subjects, with that kind of disease. For he can not seem to
have his common senses, that will think this to be yielded to the infection of
the mind, that he grants is to be denied to the infection of the body. Of
the corporal leprie it is Leuit* 13.
thus written: whosoever shall be infected with any leprie, and is severed at
the will of the Priest, all the time that he is a leper and unclean, he shall
dwell alone without the tents. All which things, sith they happened to the
Jews in a figure, but are written to us for our learning: the matter must thus
be taken, 1. Cor. 10.
that the cohabitation of them with the faithful, must be denied to be
permitted, that bring strange doctrine, straked as it were with spots of
leprie into the Church. Now if neither private men alone, but also kings were
bound by this law (as the holy scripture testifies of king Ozias) truly
kings also being spotted with heretical wickedness, are by the judgment of
the Priests, to be driven both from the use and administration of the kingly
power.

The former argument of example, is now drawn to another 2. Paral. 26. The
similitude of leprie compared to heresy. Aug. ^. Quest. 2. Q. 40.
of a similitude, the leprie being compared unto heresy. To this argument,
first, I answer, that although I deny not the proportion of the similitude,
being rightly applied, as S. Augustine uses it, comparing heresy to a
leprie, in respect of the filthe and contagion of it: notwithstanding, where
we have not the express use of the scripture for it, I deny that any argument
of a similitude made of man, is (...) sufficient force to euicte a controversy
in the school of A similitude of man is no manifest testimony of the word
of God.
God, And therefore this is a manifest untruth, that by the manifest
testimony of divine scripture it is euicted, that an heretic king may and
ought to be deposed. Name that manifest testimony, for as yet you have not,
and here you make but an argument of a similitude. But neither a similitude,
much less a collection of your self, to frame an argument from a similitude
thereon, is a manifest testimony of divine scripture. therefore this is a
manifest false assertion.

Secondly, I answer. This similitude (as you here apply This similitude is
applied of the Papists to other things
it) is of less force, in that you wrest the same similitude to other things,
as to auricular confession, and to assoyling from sins, and therefore it
serves not properly, but is wrested, to deposing of Princes.

Thirdly, I answer, if this similitude were admitted of The Priest did but
discern of the disease, and not dispossess men of their goods.
the Priests desce^ the leprie then, and the Priests discerning heresy now:
yet comes it not home enough to depose the Prince, and to exclude him from
his kingdom. For the Priest had no such authority given him ^uer a leper, to
dis^ him of his goods and inheritance. Only the Priest found out whether it
were a leprie, or no, and pronounced him a Leper, if he were found so to be.
Which done, the law took place of such a person, to be excluded from
company. The execution of which law was not done by the Priest, but by the
Magistrates and the people, as appears Number. 5: And the The excluding of the
Leper from company belongs not to the Priest. Number. 5.
Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Command the children of Israel, that they put
out of the Host every leper, and every one that has on issue, and whosoever is
defiled by the dead. etc. So that ye (...) of lepers, was not by ye authority
of ye priest, but by ye princes authority or co^ma^dem^t, and the peoples
execution, only ye priest discerned and declared, who was, and who was not a
(...). And therefore this law reaches not so far, as to the judgment of
deposition, much less to the taking away of any man (...) and ^heritance,
least of all of the Princes.

Fourthly, I answers to the words that you cite, for the The tex^ of scripture
(...) alleag^d.
Priests authority herein, out of Leuit 3. Whosoever shall (...) spotted with
a Leprie, and is severed at the will of the Priest, all the time that he is a
Leper and unclean, he shall dwell alone without the tents. This sentence (as
you have set it down in distinct letters) is not in all that Chapter, nor any
other that I find, so that, except you quote some other place, I doubt it
will prove a lie, and a shameful abusing of the holy scripture. If you think
it be holy, as ye call it, how dare you thus hacke and peruerte it? and where
find you these words, separatus est ad arbitrium Sacerdotis, He is separated
at the will of the Priest? as though it were at his wi^ or arbitrament whereas
he did but as the law commanded him, and was prescribed in every thing, what
he should do therein.

Fifthly, I answer, this law was pertaining to the Judicial This law was
Judicial, and so we are not bound to it, nor it is any figure to us.
law of the Israel^ts. But the Judicials in the old law touch not us, nor be
any figures of our Judicial laws, and therefore this is wrested hereunto*

Sixthly* I answer^, the application of S. Paul's sentence ^. Co^. (...). is no
less manifestly wrested* For S. Paul speaks nothing there of this matter,
but of other matters. ^ther ^: S. Paul wrested. Haymo in 1. Cor. 10.
but Haec autem omnia, Al these things* Haec autem omnia superius (...), says
Ha^o* All (...) things aforesaid. And therefore* (...) do ^ll to apply this
in general, I deny (...) but as ^ Romans 15.
^or ou^ (...) or instruction. But not for our descanting or construction* to
make (...) as (...) list upon them. For that (...) both (...) of the literal
sense, and you would ^*

^ ^.
thus ^* must ^ straked ^ If the ^ matter of Christ's parable, of the Cockle
growing together Math. 13.
with the wheat. I grant that we ought to avoid such cohabitation as may
conveniently be avoided. But such cohabitatio^, as cannot be avoided without ye
incurring of another greater sin, must not be denied. As the husband to deny
1. Cor. 7.
c^habitation with his wife, though he be faithful and she an I^fidell yet if
she will tarry and dwell with him, he can not put her away for ^ir infidelit^e:
Nor likewise can the faithful* woman forsake the man, though he be an
Infidel: neither can the child deny his natural obedience to his parents
and cohabitation with the^, though he be faithful and they be Infidels:
Neither can the faithful servant deny his civil obedience and cohabitation
with his Master, although his master be an Infidel, as were the most in S.
Paul's time, and yet he would have none deny cohabitation with their masters,
no though they were rough and cruel, besides their infidelity. And shall the
subject then deny his politic cohabitation* and ci^ill obedience to his liege
Sovereign and lawful Prince, for pretense of diversity in religion?

Eighthly* I answer, if you will needs apply this separation The moral or
mystical signification of separating the leper separareth not the ^king from
his kingdom.
of the Leper to a moral or mystical signification, yet serves it not to the
deposing of the person from his C^ill estate, or to his exel^sion from a common
weal, but to his exclusion of moral virtue, or to his expulsion ^ute of the
(...) of grace, from being a ^ber of the mystical com^ weal, which lets
not, but that he may remain (...).

N^thly. I answer, your conclusion that you make for The example of king Oz^s
confu^es M. Sand. figure.
king^, so well ^s o^h (...) men, fails ^n this example of king Oz^s. ^or
neither was he deposed by y^ Priest or by any other man, but (...) king* so
long as he ^, is ^ of king Ozias, ^.

^thly, I answe^e, that all this (...) ^ere admitted makes nothing against
protestant Princes but it makes much This figure makes against popish
priests, not against protestant Princes.
against popish priests. For if unto all yt bring into the Church, strange
doctrine, straked as it were with the spots of Lepry, cohabitation must be
denied. Then the Pope and all your popish Priests, being found to bring into
the Church, other doctrine than God has taught in his holy Scripture, are to
lie thrust out of Gods Church, if worse should not happen unto you, by the
figure (if you will go to figures) of Nadab and Abiu, that offered strange fire
before the Lord, and were consumed with fire from heaven, but beware you of a
fire in hell. And thus much to your figure of the Leprie for deposing Princes,
which if we deny, you say (as is your common saying) we have not our common
senses. But had you had your private senses, when you made this argument, you
would have been better advised, ere ever you had made it common, and had
Printed it, but you did but as other had done before, for the argument before
was common.

But what do I reason (says Master Saunders) Athalia Sand. page 87. 3. Reg.
11*
the Mother of Ochozias murdered all the Kyngly seed, except Ioas whom
Iosaba had hid in the house of the Lord. Moreover Athalia reigned over the
land seven years. But in the seventh year, Ioiada the Bishop taking to him
Centurions, Captains and soldiers, made a covenant with them, and swore them
in the house of the Lord, and showed unto them the kings son, and gave the^
in charge what they should do, and brought out the son of the King, and set
the Crown upon him, and the testimony, and made him King and anointed him.
But Athalia when she saw the King standing upon the Tribunal, according to
the manner: she cried out, treason, treason, But Ioiada the high Priest
commanded the Centurions and said: carry her out without the bounds of the
Temple. And whosoever follows hi^, let him be stricken with the sword. And
Athalia was killed in the Kings house. Ioiada therefore made a covenant
between the Lord and the King and between the people. And Ioas did that
which was right 3. Reg. 12.
before the Lord, all the days wherein Ioiada the Priest did teach him. Do
we not here plainly see the whole knowledge of the Kings cause, to have been
belonging toward one high Priest. He calls the soldiers, Judges the
Queen that had ruled seven years, to have raignedvniustly, and commanded her
both to be deposed and killed, and in her place did substitute Ioas to be King,
and subjected him under the Lord, and placed him above the people. All which
things sith they were well done, is it not now true, according to the
sentence of the divine Scripture, that the Bishop ought to know of the causes
of Kings and Emperors, whether they be just or unjust. For what so ever the
Bishop in this kind does, whether he define the King to be deposed or to be
placed: he is no other than the Angel of the Lord, out of Malach. 2.
whose lyppes, as well Kings as private men, ought to require the law of the
Lord. The high Priest is as it were a sequester, as between the Lord and the
King, so between the King and the People. So while one Judge in the Church is
ordained, both between Kings themselves, sturred up with mutual contentions,
and also between them and their People: infinite occasions of wars and
tumults are cut off,

Master Saunders here first asks, what he does reason? The example of
Ioiada the high priest that caused Athalia to be killed. and Ioas to be made
king.
If he can not tell, what he does reason, surely I know not. But this I know
that it was but a very weak reason, and therefore belyke he was weary of it,
and will return again to urge us with example. And here to knit up the old
Testament, he alleges the example of Ioiada the high Priest, for the kylling
of Athalia, and the substitutyng of Ioas to be King. But this example, which
bears yet a face to come far nerer to the purpose than any thing spoken
hitherto, notwythstandyng if it be well considered, is as far from the
purpose and as much wrested unto it, as the other. I omit that he still keeps
his old practice, M. Sand. confuse citing of the scripture.
in iumbling together diverse pieces of the scripture, and not to set down the
text as it lies, and yet he makes a distinction of letter, as though it were
all the text. Which and it were not his common v^age of the scripture, were the
better to be borne withal, and might be imputed to the ^ters negligence, as it
often falls out, but in so often handling thus of the scripture, it is not
tolerable.

But to the example. First, I answer, this pertayneth nothing No king is here
deposed but an usurper killed.
to the question in hand for the deposing of a King. Here is no King deposed.
Here is an usurper, that had no righ so the kingdom killed. And to your own
expositor Lyra says: vsurpauit sibi regnum Judah, and prius describitur
^uiusonodi vsurpatio. Lyra in 4. Reg. 11.
She usurped to her self the kingdom of Jury, and this kind of usurpation
is first described. And the text is plain that she had no right. The right
King was Ioas, when his brethren were sl^ine. Therefore here was no deposing of
her. Neither durst you say that Ioiada deposed her, but he commanded her both
to be deposed and killed. Although for commandment of deposing her, you find
no such thing, for she was not their lawful governor, this therefore serves
not to the purpose of deposing a lawful Prince, and that for heresy, which
was not laid to her charge, neither was she killed for that cause, but as a
traytresse to the Crown, as a murderer of her own blood, and as a mere
usurper of the kingdom that belonged nothing to her. And therefore Ioiada did
but as a good and faithful subject should do to his liege Lord, and to his
heirs after him, and not as one that by his Priestly office, had power over
the royal estate.

Secondly, I answer, that the doyngs of Ioiada herein, The doings of Ioiada
were upon such occasio^n that they can not be (...) example.
were upon such especial occasions and necessities, that it is evil drawn of
you to an ordinary example. For none of the Priests either did the like, or
could claim to do the like to their kings, as Ioiada had done, much less
to be drawn to an example for y ministers of Christ to follow. First, Io ada
was the uncle by affinity unto Ioas, for Ioiada the high Priests wife, was
sister unto King Dehozias, whose children Athalia being their Grandmother, did
murder, save that Ioas (being a newborn babe) was privily conveyed away, by
his Aunt Iosaba the high Priests wife, where he was closely norished in the
Temple, till he was six or seven years old. Good reason had Ioiada to keep
the young King The close nou rishment of so as by the high priest his uncle in
the Temple was extraordinary.
his Cousin, and more right thereto than any other, not by virtue of his
Priestly office, but being thus of God sent unto him, by his wines industry,
for the childs close and safer preserving in the Temple. And yet this
nourishing a child and his nourse in the Temple, could so little be drawn to
any ordinary example, that if necessity had not enforced it, it had not been
allowable. As even Lyra notes out of Rabbi Solomon. Quod puer and nutrix sua.
etc. That the Child and Lyra in 3. Reg. 11.
his Nourse were kept in the loft of the Temple of the Lord, where nobodie
durst approach, but the Priests and the Levites, that kept the holy vessels
there laid up, to the intent they might there the better be hidden. And
although it was otherwise unlawful for a woman and a child to be there,
yet in such a necessity it was lavvfull. As David and his men did eat the
Priestly bread, being driven in necessity, which notvvithstanding
otherwise, had been unlawful for him.

Thus can not this deed of Ioiada for the nourishment of The close doing of
Ioiada argues he had no ordinary authority.
Ioas; be drawn to any ordinary example. Neither durst Ioiada be known of
this deed, that no doubt had cost him his life, had it been but suspected.
Which argues he had no ordinary authority to put down the Princes, no, not
this very usurper, being also a murderer, and an Idolater. In all which cases,
if he had had any ordinary power and right thereto, be would no doubt have
openly professed, and avouched his doing, and not have kept it so long close,
and privily watched his opportunity.

But now, the child being thus by the high Priest and his wife preserved and
nourished, which child had the only to the crown, lay it not him upon, was
it not his duty, yea In what respect this doing belonged chiefly to the high
Priest.
and his obedience too, both that he ought before to his brother in law
deceassed, and to this his young nephewe extant, that the child should have his
right inheritance? and to whom belonged the procurement hereof, rather than to
him that had the child in custody, besides that he was his uncle? and since no
man of any countenance knew hereof but he, how should the child have gotten
his right but by him? But did he make the child King by his priestly
authority, as though the Priests had had the interest, to appoint and make
such Kings as they pleased? No, but it was the duty of the one to procure it,
and the right of the other to have it. And yet that he did not this of
himself, the text says plain: he took and brought Centurions and Soldiers
to him into the Temple. Here consequently (says Lyra) is discribed the
Institution Lyra in. 3. Reg. 11. That which Ioiada did, he did it not by his
own authority, but by consent of the prin ces and nobility
of the true heir, by the carfulness of loiada the high priest. seking to
this the assent of the Princes and nobles of the kingdom. So that he sought
their assent and help, or ever he would detect the Child unto them. And for
this present necessity, he brake the order also of the priests courses that
King David had appointed, for the sons of Aaron and Leui, to minister
weekly, and then to give place to other. These he stayed for the more number
and strength, to establish the young King in his right, and so by these
extraordinary means, he crowned him king, and caused the murderer and
usurper to be killed.

This fact therefore of Ioiada, can not be drawn to an ordinary Wherein
Ioiadaes fact may be drawn to an example.
example, except in these points, that every good subject, so much as in him
lies, should preserve the lawful Kings children and heirs, and not suffer
any other to whom the inheritance belongs not, to vsurp the crown, but the
right and lawful heir thereof to enjoy it, and to expel al intruders and
usurpers, chiefly such ty ants as seek their usurpation by execrable
murdering, especially such as against nature destroy their own blood, and al
such as by any other traiterous means aspire to the kingdom, and so far forth
as they conveniently can, to help to restore the lawful heir thereto, as to
whom only they owe their homage, and are sworn. This is al godly subjects, and
so all godly Bishops and priests duties in every Christian kingdom. Thus may
this doing of Ioiada be drawn to an ordinary example, which we deny not. But
what is this for Bishops to give kingdoms from the right heir, to him that
has no claim thereto, but by the Bishops gift, who gives a large thong of
another man's leather, as does the Pope give kingdoms from one to another,
having no more right to give them, than the other to take them. Which is not to
expel an usurper, but for one usurper to set up an other usurper, which is no
more like this example, than an apple is like an ^yster.

Thirdly, I answer^, for Ioiadaes knowledge of the kings In what respect ioiada
had knowledge of the Kings causes.
causes, he had them not in respect, he was the high Priest, but in respect he
was the uncle, the guardian, the norisher and protector of the (...) person,
being a child: and yet this is spoken by M. (...) without the book, that
after the coronation he had the knowledge of the kings causes Neither yet if he
had the knowledge of the^, the king being in such estate, and so much beholding
to his uncle, a general rule could be made there, or was made among ye Jews,
or can be made among Christians, yt either the bishops of any kingdom, much
less ye B. of Rome for all kingdoms, ought to know the causes of kings and
Emperors, whether they be just or unjust. This generality can not justly be
inferred on such a specialtie. For neither al kings estates (...) like to this
kings estate, nor all Bishops estates like to this Bishops estate, as by the
causes aforesaid appears.

Fourthly, I answer, that as here is inferred no ordinary The King might have
knowledge in the Bishops causes. 2. Paral. 23.
rule, for Bishops to have knowledge in kings and Emperors cau ses, from ye
contrary, here is inferred an ordinary rule for kings and Emperors to have
knowledge of B. causes. For eue^ at the kings (...) (although he were an infa^t,
and had no more skill of religion tha^ of government) ye text says: they put
the crowne^ upon him, and gave him the law in his hand. And so says Lyra,
the testimony, that is, the law wherein he was ordained, ought to study and
meditate, and keep it, and cause it to be kept. True it is, that the high
Priest did teach him, and the King did well, so long as he was taught of so
godly a father. And thereupon may well be inferred that Bishops may teach
Kings that which is right before the Lord. But this teaching of the King,
infers no public government of the King, which the Pope claims, and M.
Saunders pleads for. The authority of teaching the King, and the authority
of governing the King, are ^arre different authorities. That of teaching we
grant to Ioiada, and to al Godly Bishops: not to teach what they will, but
that which is right before the Lord. And to see that they do this, the Prince
has the law of God given into his hands, so well as the crown set on his
head, to show, that although the Bishops must^ teach true doctrine, and Godly
exhortation, yet must the King have knowledge to ouersee that it be taught* as
well and much more than any other matters of his kingdoms. What shall we say
then to the popish Bishops, which will not give the law of God into the
Princes hands, but wring it out of his hands, that he should not know it,
but blindly follow such false doctrine and naughty examples, as they would
teach him? are these Bishops like to the Bishop Ioiada? And if this king fell
to Idolatry, when he wanted this good teacher, how shall that King do that
never had such a teacher? and yet for all this teaching of Ioiada, that was as
it were a father to the King: the King notwithstanding, while he continued
good, both commanded all the Priests, and taught them, how they should deal
in their oblations, collections, reparations, and other things belonging to
the Temple. 4. Reg. 12
And Ioas said to the Priests, all the silver of things dedicated, that be
brought to the house of the Lord. etc. Let the How the king dealt with the
priests for their ^blations.
Priests take it unto them, every one of his acquaintance, and they shall
repair the broken places of the house, wheresoever any decay is found. And
in the 23. year of King Ioas the Priests had not amended that which was
decayed in the Temple. Then King Ioas called for Ioiada the Priest, and the
other Priests, and said unto them. Why repair ye not the ruins of the
Temple? Now therefore receive no more money of your acquaintance, except ye
deliver it to repair the ruins of the Temple.

Thus did the King not only know of the Priests causes, but called them
before him, yea, even his uncle Ioiada the high Priest also, and appointed an
order unto them how to bestow their offerings. And when they were negligent
therein, he rebuked the^, and revoked his former ordinance, except on their
amendment. Neither did the Priests, no nor his uncle Ioiada the high Priest
grudge or grumble hereat, nor said that the offerings were theirs, not his, to
dispose, nor told him they were his superiors: but as his inferiors, most
humbly obeyed his ordinances. Al which things fithe they were well done: is
not now true, according to the sense of the divine Scripture, that we may
make a better ordinary rule her^on, for Kings and Emperors to know of
Bishops causes, than for Bishops to know of Kings and Emperors causes? If you
replye this was but a money matter: I answer yet was this money, oblations and
offerings. But will you grant Princes thus much, to make ordinances how all
your money offerings shall be used, when ye shall gather them, and when not, of
whom ye shall take them, and how ye shall bestow them: ^ay, (...) will never
do this, for money is the chiefest thing ye shoot at, no penie, no pater
noster: all your e^cl. causes depend so on money offerings, Gloss^ in Lyra.
that as good ye gave the prince authority in all ecclesiastical matters, as
let him deal thus with your money offerings, Ioas government over the
priests stretched f^ther than to money matters.
as Ioas did with theirs. But does your own gloss expound this no further than
to money matters? Ioas (says your gloss) both in this name and in this
work signifies Christ, for it is interpreted the strength of the Lord. He
commands the teachers, that they should take all the money that is offered
into the Lords house of the passers by, to wit, whatsoever spiritual
knowledge or good work is brought into the Lords treasorie, that by the
offices of the preachers, it may be bestovved on the repayring of the
spiritual Temple, that whatsoever he shall find torn by error, or hurt by
Vices, they should repair least the multitude of hearers should perish by the
doctors negligence* Here this fact of the King is compared to the
representation of Christ, and to the oversight of all eccl. matters. So that
if Kings will account the study of the Law of God, as well to belong unto
them as their crown, if they will look unto, know, and examine the causes of
the Bishops and their revenues, and appoint them orders to repair the ruins of
the Lords temple, and see that the preachers lay out their talents, of
spiritual knowledge and good works toward the building: then should kings
truly represent Christ, and be indeed the strength of the Lord, because
they have ye Lords power and authority thereunto. And thus this example better
considered, makes more for the Kings authority over the Bishops, than for the
Bishops over the Kings authority.

Fifthly I answer, that although a Godly Bishop be a How the B. is a
sequester between God and the Prince.
sequester between God and the Prince, and between the Prince and the people,
in prayer, in the Sacraments, and in preaching: yet* is he not a sequester
between God and the Prince, or between the Prince and the people, in matters of
the kingdom, The B the Lords Angel or Messanger and the Prin^es the Lords
Christ or anointed.
least of all, he may sequester him from his kingdom. And though he be the
Angel of the Lord in his message, if he be a Godly bishop, for otherwise he is
the Angel of Satan: yet is the King the Lords anointed, or the Lords
Christ in authority: but the Lords Christ in authority, is above the lords
Angels in message: therefore the King is yet above the Bishops.

And although the King so well as the private man, ought to require the law
of the Lord, out of the priests lips, yet if the Priest inst^ade of the
Lords law, will give his own law, the king ought to rebuke or punish him.
For if the King ought to require it of the B. then as it is the Bishops duty
to yield it, so is it the Princes duty and of^ce to call upon him, and to see
to it, that the B. faithfully give it to him, and to all the private men in his
kingdom. Which again proves so little the Bishops authority over the King,
that it plainly proves the Kings authority over the B. in requiring of the^
to preach the law of God, which is their proper office and calling, and not to
govern Kings, and translate kingdoms.

Sixthly and lastly I answer, that if this were granted The event of (...) off
al w^rres and ^umults, if the Pope might de pose and set up all Princes.
to the Pope, which M. Sand. would so feign conclude, that one Judge in the
Church should be ordained between Kings themselves, and them and their
peoples, and that this one Judge should be the Pope: where he pretends, it
would cut off infinite occasions of wars and tumults: as this conclusion can
not be gathered on this example, so this effect of peace to ensue by this
means, is but an imagination in M. Sand. opinion, we should find another
manner of effect thereof, that would be the very welspring of infinite wars
and tumults. And least he should think that I speak partially against the
Pope, as he does for the Pope, I report me to the experience of it, and not to
vain imaginations, what tragedies has the Pope raised between the Greek and
German Emperors, chiefly to the Henry's the 4. and the ^* to Frederike the 2.
to Lewis the 4. to the tumults of King John in The hurly burlies that the Pope
ha^h made.
England, to ye Popes practices between Germany, France, and Spain, for the
kingdoms of Cicil and Naples, for the Duchy of Apulia and Millaine, to the
maintenance of the factions in Italy, between the Guelphes and Gebellines, the
white sect, and the black sect, the French and Imperials, the Uenetians and
the Genowaies, the Florentines and the Pisans, and all the states of Italy. Al
which and infinite more wars and tumults in Christendom, have been raised,
nourished and abetted, chiefly by this one Judge the Pope, and yet would M.
Sand. have him to be the only Judge and definer, whether any King should be
deposed, or be placed. Were not this the readiest way to set al Princes by the
ears? chiefly if he would change his mind upon displeasure, or his successor
should favor an other, or there were two or three Popes at once, the^ should
al Christendom be in a broyle by the ears together, and the Pope would clap
them on the back, and win by the spoil of all countries, and no country
should have their lawful and natural Prince, but either foraine or perjured
usurpers, nor any Prince have his royal authority, but be the Popes Tenants
at will. If the world were come to this pass as it appears the Papists
would have it, were not this a goodly quiet world trow you? But then it were a
golden world for the Priests, when all men else should find it a bloody
world, and every man were ^eadie to cut an others throat, and all things run
to havoc.

But were it admitted that none of these mischieues should The popes wi^ k^d
peace if it were admitted
ensue, but that al occasions of war and tumults would be cut off: yet since
this calling to rule all Christian Kings and kingdoms, is unlawful for any
Bishop (besides Christ) to have: what were this peace but as the wicked say,
Pax, pax, vbi non est pax, peace, peace, where God says there is no peace?
what were this peace, but the worlds peace, yea, the Devils peace? where the
strong man held all things in his house in peace, where Antichriste ruled in
quiet prosper^tie, till Christ a stronger than he, would come and break his
peace. Rather than tumults should be cut off, with such a shameful peace,
and peace bought with such a wicked condition: it were far better for Princes
to strive to the death for the truth against such peace, and to cut off such
an arbiters head, who to maintain his pride for worldly peace, would make open
war with Christ. And thus we see the effect would be naught, and yet as
naughty as this peace would be, we should not have it peaceably neither, if
the Pope might set in his foot, and take upon him to depose kings, and
translate kingdoms. But this example of Ioiada gives him no such authority.

M. Saund. having now gathered together all the proves M. Sand arguments out of
the new Testament. Mar. 5. John. 2. 1. Cor. 5* 1. Tim 1.
and examples that he could wrest with any color to his purpose, leaves the
ol^e Testament, and falls to the like proves and wrestings of the new
Testament: How Christ for the salvation of one man, let the devils drown two
thousand hogs: How Christ drove the buyers and sellers out of the Temple.
How S. Paul gave the incest^ous fornicator at Corinth, and Hymene^ and
Alexander, to Satan: How Peter reproved Ananias and his wife for lying to the
Act. 5.
holy Ghost, and they fell down dead. But how al these things are wrested, is
app^ant. For in all this, here is no king deposed, and therefore they serve not
to this question. But how every one of them serves to confute the Papists,
because the volume is risen too large already, in these answers, and chiefly
in the answer to Master Stapleton, I am constra^ned here to break off and
stay. As for that which follows of the Fathers and of the Histories, and how
those also are wrested as ^oulie as these: I purpose to reserve (God willing)
to another volume. In the mean time, let us conjecture the residue by these
arguments, and the rest of al ye Papists by these two M. Stapleton and M.
Saunders, who are now their principal writers. Whereby as we may easily
weighe the peise of their stuff, so we may^ evidently see the dri^te of their
malice, Thirsting blood, breathing treasons, practicing conspiracies, procuring
seditions, and blowing out as it were a trumpet to open rebellion, against the
Queens Maiesti^, their Natural Sovereign and our most Gracious Governor,
against all the states of the Realm, and to make have of the whole
congregation of Christ, and all to maintain the pride, the tyranny, the
errors and superstitions of the Pope. But with what weak and selender reasons,
how impudently wrested, how shamefully applied, how unfitly concluded: All the
world may see, and themselves be ashamed, if they be not past shame: All the
children of God may clearly behold, and not be afraid but the fullier
confirmed in the truth thereby: All Christian Princes may the better perceive,
and the more abhor the Popish practices, and with all their power repress
them, as the utter ruin^ of their sstates, and considering their high calling,
may zealously look to the duty of their authority, and as their Titles put
them in mind, be in deed most Christian Princes, and earnest defenders of the
faith and Church of Christ: And all true subjects may stick the faster in
all duetifull obedience to their natural Princes, detesting the foraigne
usurpation of the Pope, and all the traitorous seducings of these his
chaplains: That Antichrist may have the overthrow, the Prince may have the
regiment, the truth may^ have the victory, the reader may have the benefit,
and God above all things may have for ever the glory, through Jesus Christ's our
only Lord and Savior. So be it.

FINIS.
Psalm. 2. Wherefore, be ye now advised O ye Kings, be ye learned ye that are
Judges of the earth: serve ye God with fear, and rejoice unto him with
reverence, kiss the son least he be angry and so ye perish from the right
way, if his vvath be kindled yea but a little, blessed are all they that put
their trust in him.
Faults escaped in the prince.
Faults. Corrections. good ministers good ministers. 232. (...). 24. the summ^
the (...). 316. (...). 23. the reas^ the (...). 377. (...). 8. secund^
secund^m. 386. lin. 12. tamen (...) tamen* 391. lin. 14. also ^ll (...). 403.
lin. 21. renouned (...). 408. lin. 16* that is that it is* 408. lin. 34. in the
in (...). 410. in the (...). trea^ise (...). 432. lin. 24. peccatum peccati.
469. lin. 10. together thither. 512. lin. 10. godly (...). 541. lin. 32. let
hi^ to let him. 577. lin. 12. dealing deal. 581. lin. 20. whom against whom.
593. lin. 14* yuo you. 599. lin. 2. et despetto de di^ in dispetto di dio. 599.
lin. 9. yemay he may. 605. lin. 19. causes: is causes: as. 617. lin. 5. as who
though B. as though the B. 625. lin. 31. though follow though it follow. 632.
lin. 28. giving giu^. 636. lin. 9. reddit reddite. 641. lin. 10. not not only.
636. in the margin. but yet ^r els^. 649. lin. 1. so long so far. 652. lin.
22. Emperors the Emperors. 674. lin. 11. about about it. 705. l^n. 12. as are.
717. lin. 2. that that that yet. 721. lin. 8. is simply ^s simply. 731. lin.
19. grautned granted. 732. lin. 19. or if the or if in the. 767. lin. 30.
prioris prioribus* 788. lin. 22. which was (...) which was not. 824. lin. 5.
you you^. 83^. lin. 16. ^ereth (...). 955. lin. 10. not only (...). (...).
lin. 12. the breast their breast. (...). lin. 34. can do more c^ do no more.
865. lin. 22. qualle equally. 866. (...). 15. thereof the, of. 881. lin. 21.
authority of (...) authority and. 897. lin. ^4. is a Catho^ (...) a (...).
^08. lin. 26. inconuen^t incompetent. 915. lin. 14. ye the yet he. 925. lin.
16. that (...) that it is. 928. lin. 25. and in deed and then in deed. 959.
lin. 20. or covetousness our covetousness. 1024. lin. 2. or ambition our
ambition. ibidem. lin. 2. or dainte^es our dainteynes. ibidem. lin. ^. sprake
speak. 1042. lin. 17. that that that. 1045. lin. 2. the that. 1056. lin. 1.
there thereon. 1107. lin. 22. from so from. ibidem. lin. 32.

Many other faults are escaped in the printing by reason the author was not
alvvayes present: but they are such as thou may (gentle reader) thy self
correct them.




