A MOST COMFORTABLE EXPOSITION OF The last and most difficult part of the
prophecy of Daniel from the 26. verse of the 11. chap, to the end of the 12.
chapter.

Wherein the restoring of the Jews and their calling to the faith of Christ,
after the utter overthrow of their three last enemies, is set forth in livelie
colors, By the labor and study of that bright and worthy man of God,
THOMAS BRIGHTMAN Englishman and once fellow of Queens College in Cambridge.

Rom: 11.25.26. J would not brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this
secret, that partly obstinacy is come to Israel, until the fulness of the
gentiles be come in: and so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, The
Deliverer shall come out of Sion, and shall turn away the ungodlines from
Jacob. Anno 1635.

To the friendly READER
ALthough the revealing of the Revelation and the song of songs do yield
clear and notable arguments, sufficiently to make known the happy and longed
for vocation of the Jews, yet the due regard of such a divine mystery does
require that we bring forth and lay to every little spark, taken from the
altar of God, which may yield more clear and evide^t proof of that truth
which mortal men do not yet sufficiently conceive and see into. Behold
therefore how this truth is confirmed not of one or two, but of three such
witnesses, as are beyond all exception. Daniel is added to John and Solomon,
Dan. 12.1.2. With. 10. 14.
who among the visions of God almighty, do plainly testify that this
deliverance of his nation to be performed in the last times was also revealed,
what special account the good and great God made of all these, do those
singular commendations testify, which the Scriptures have honored them
withal. John he is the disciple who^ Jesus loved, Solomon was the king beloved
of his God, Ioh. 13.23.
whom his name was called Iedediah; Nehe. 13.26. Dan. 10.11.19.
2. Sam. 12.25, Daniel also is a man of desires, because in his time he was
most accepted and beloved of God. It must not therefore seem strange, if God
made known his secrets unto them after a special manner, Psalm. 25.14. Eccl.
4.12.
for the secret of the Lord is present to them that fear him. United forces do
allwais best prevail, and the more helps they associate and join together,
the stronger they are, A three fold coard is not easily broken.

Although therefore thou do sometime doubtinglie read over the Revelation of
John, and the song of Solomon for the newnes and strangenes of the matter, yet
when by Daniels coming in, such an admirable consent of Scripture, gives such
clear light to confirm the matter in hand, fear not to embrace the truth
with thankfullnes unto God: for here all these, not by mutual conspiration,
but by divine inspiration, do proclaim one and the same thing.

How much also Daniels testimony is to be accounted of in this matter, thou
shall far better perceive by his own words well understood, the^ by mine, as
the e^suing exposition plainly shows.

That truly is of great weight that Daniels prophecy is deputed and appointed
for the Jews, to whom notwithstanding he brings no comfort, if that
resurrection spoken of 12.2. be understood of the last and general
resurrection, properly so called, which without all doubt both in matter and
time does fall-in together with their deliveraunce in verse. 1. Behold then
after the Jews three last enemies be utterly overthrown; that is to say, The
Roman empire, which is called the King chapter 11.36. and is described by his
properties verse 37.38.39. and the Saracens, whom he notes and names, The
King of the South verse. 40. and lastly, the Turkish empire styled with the
title of the King of the North verse. 40. etc. Behold I say, a plain and
clear pourtraiture of the Jews vocation, not only undertaken and begun
44.45. but consummate and perfect chapter 12.1.2.3. where it shall be made
manifest ( I think) without obscurity. That the resurrection there, is the
full restoring of the Jewish nation out of the dust of destruction and their
calling to the faith in Christ, whereby those that are dead in sin are truly
raised up again according to that of the Apostle, If the casting away of them
be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them be, but life
from the dead. Romans 11.15. Romans 11.15.


And that the minds of good men may the less be disquieted in the
expectation of so great a felicity and happiness. Lo the very times of this
deliveraunce opened to thee, as well of it begun when tidings out of the East
shall trouble the Turk verse. 7. and 11. as when fulfilled, when the Turkish
name and empire both shall be utterly abolished, The greatness of the Kingdoms
under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most
high, verse. 12. True it is indeed that almost all these things are otherwise
carried and applied by interpreters very well deserving of the Church: but Truth
is ever well accepted and enterteined of the ingenuous, to which none can
prescribe a rule, or overrule, not space of times, of patronage (or authority)
of persons, Lib. 1. de Virgin. Velan. c. 1. August. de lib. arbitr. 3.
as Tertullian speaks well. Yea, if a scandal be taken (or arise) because of
the truth, it is more, profitable to permit the scandal, the^ that the truth
should be left. He does sparingly refute other men's opinions, but mildly after
his manner always, where they prejudice and hinder the truth.

The controversy is chiefly concerning Antiochus, whom he endeavors to prove
by a multitude of weighty reasons, That he must of necessity be excluded out
of every particle of this prophecy which he has here vndertake^ to handle.
Assuredly he brings admirable light to the right understanding of the whole
prophecy of Daniel. Weighing then all things in an equal balance, lay apart
all prejudice against the truth discovered, and pray earnestly with me. That
the Deliverer may come out of Sion, who may utterly overthrow his enemies, the
Beast with Gog and Magog, and that he may thoroughly turn away ungodliness from
Jacob. Farewell.

The text of the 11. Chapter of Daniel from verse. 36. to the end. 36 ANd the
King shall do according to his will, and he shall exalt himself, and magnify
himself above every god, and shall speak marveilous things against the God of
gods, and shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished: for that that is
determined, shall be done.

37. Neither shall he regard the god of his fathers, nor the desire of women,
nor regard any god: for he shall magnify himself above all.

38. But in his estate shall he honor the God of forces: and a God whom his
fathers knew not, shall he honor with gold, and silver, and with precious
stones, and pleasant things.

39. Thus shall he do in the most strong holds with a strange god, whom he
shall acknowledge, and increase with glory: and he shall cause them to rule
ever many, and shall divide the land for gain.

40. And at the time of the end shall the King of the South push at him, and
the King of the North shall come against him like a whirlewinde, with charets
and with horsemen, and with many ships, and he shall enter into the countries,
and shall overflow and pass over.

41. He shall enter also into the glorious land, and many countries shall be
overthrown: but these shall escape out of his hand, even Edom and Moab, and
the chief of the children of Ammon.

42. He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries, and the land of
Egypt shall not escape.

43. But he shall have power over the treasures of gold and silver and over all
the precious things of Egypt: and the Libyans, and the Ethiopians shall be at
his steps.

44. But tidings out of the East, and out of the North shall trouble him:
therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make
away many.

45. And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas in the
glorious holy mountain, yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help
him.

Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy
sight O Lord my rock and my Redeemer.
THE ANALYSIS or Resolution.
DAniel records things done in the first six chapters afterward in the rest
of the book, visions and revelations showed to him: wherein is disclosed, what
the people of the Jews are to expect from that time to the very last end. Of
the Revelations he first propounds the universal type of things to come in
Chap: 7. in those following he uses a larger declaration of the first, both as
it did agree with the next times in regard either of the enemies chap. 8. or of
the Messiah in cha. 9. As also it did agree to all times by a continued order
and succession from his own time to the full deliveraunce of his nation. Of
this last and plentiful Prophecy the preparation is set down in the tenth
chapt. then afterward the thing it self in the two followinge chapters 11. and
12. From the beginning of the 11. chap. unto this place the matters of the
Persians and Grecians are so manifestly, particularly, and expressly
foreshewed, that in very deed, it may seem rather a History then a prophecy.
That which remains does partly show the other oppressors of the people of
the Jews, in this Chap. partly that wished end of all their troubles in the
following.

There are three oppressors set down, The first a certain King described,
without any addition of his dominion how far it stretched, but summarily
both of an unlimited power toward strangers, most proud and prosperous till
the appointed time verse. 36. and also toward his own, a contemner of his
Countries and fathers religion, without natural affections, and exalting
himself above all, verse. 37. After perticularly as he should be famous for some
special acts, partly in the matter concerning Religion verse. 38. and beginning
of the next, and partly in politic affairs, in the later part of verse. 39.
The second is the King of the South verse. 40. The third is the King of the
North, who is happy in his preparation verse. 40. in his proceeding verse. 41.
and largenes of his dominion ver. 42.43. but is unhappye in the fear of
doleful tidinges, in his wicked purpose and resolution of mind, v. 44. and
last of all in his going forth and end verse. 45.

THE SCHOLIA or Exposition.
Verse. 36. And the King shall do what him list, or according to his will.
We have often times made mention of Daniel in the Revelation and the
Canticles, whose testimony what force it has to those things for which we
alleged, it, cannot be sufficiently understood, except we repeat it from the
beginning and take upon us the full handling of a very obscure place of
scripture, and much controverted amongst learned men: which truly I do the
more willingly undertake, because being helped by the light of former
expositions, we hope we shall be able to bring something by Gods assistaunce to
clear the truth and bring it to light. Neither do I doubt but it will be very
acceptable to the godly and learned to see Daniels, consent with the rest, and
the lovelie face of the truth to be brought upon the stage in open view, with
whose beauty the most heavenly minded are especially ravished, yea and which
even the vulgar sort of men, though unskillful beholders and judges of beawtie
are also astonished thereat. Every vision has difficulty in it, but he must
have leisure at will, that undertakes the whole work: but these last visions
being well understood, on which does rest the exposition of the former, those
also that go before may be easily conceived.

We begin the exposition from the 36. verse, because there are not many
things in the former verses need to stay or hinder the Reader: but those
which follow are much doubted of, whether they belong to Antiochus Epiphanes,
or to some other King. Well and rightly in my judgment does Calvin avouch, That
it can by no means be referred to Antiochus. Those things that follow do
not any wise agree: for how should he do what he list, by exalting himself
above all that is God, whom the ships of Chittim limited and prescribed verse.
30. Neither did the Kings of Egypt, being young, attempt any thing against
Antiochus: Neither was there any King of the North, by whom he sustained any
wrong to speak of. Or if we shall make Antiochus himself the King of the North,
as some interpreters do: Neither does the King of the South provoke him as it
follows verse. 40. Neither did he return into Egypt after he was commanded
to depart by the Romans as verse. 30. before.

The history records that he went twice into Egypt as, 2. Maca. 5.1. About
the same time Antiochus undertook his second voyage into Egypt, wherein he does
admirably agree with Daniel; but of a third expedition not agry, or the least
mention in any Author that I could find. The Authors of the books of the
Macabees would have made some mention thereof if there had been any. Neither
would Josephus have let it pass, who after the retturne of Antiochus out of
Egypt by reason of the Romans threatening denounced, does mention nothing at
all that was again attempted against that Country before his death among the
Persians. Livie also, who shows him to be restrained by Popilius the legate
lib. 45. of his Epitomies abridgement, declares him in the next book to be
dead without doing any other memorable exploite. Justice also, after he had
declared the tarntesse and rigor of Popilius, tells us that Antiochus died
assbone as he was returned into his Kingdom: was it possible such a notable
expedition could be taken in hand, wherein so many nations were overthrown and
great alterations came to pass, as it follows verse. 40.41. In recording
whereof all these Authors would not be faithful and diligent, which yet
notwitstanding should escape the trust and diligence of all these Authors.

But thou will say, Though the History be silente, yet divine Oracle without
all exception, makes the matter plain and manifest, for so Daniel speaks
before, verse. 29. At the time appointed he shall again invade the South, but
it shall not be as the first expedition, or as the last, but by the leave of
learned men, no such thing is here intended, if we do rightly expound or
translate the word, which runs thus, But the set time shall return and he
shall com into the South, and it shall not be as the former, so also the later,
for there is nothing more frequent then for the later doubled Caph, to answer
the former, and to be the reddition or answer thereunto: in which sense the
particle Ita, so, does answer the word. Sicut or ut, as: And it shall be as
the priest, so the people, etc. Isa. 24.2. And it shall as the righteous so the
wicked. Genesis 18.25. you shall hear, as the small, so the great. Deuteronomy. 1.17. and
very many of the like sort; wherefore the translation of Tremelius is to be
corrected, But it shall not be as the first expedition or as ^he later: for the
Copulative particle rendered disiunctively, and the note of the similitude being
taken propositively and not responsively or redditively as it ought, does
plainly show of three voyages, against the truth (if I be not deceived) of all
histories, and against the mind and meaning of the prophet himself. For is
it any way likely, that Antiochus for fear of the people of Rome had carried
away his whole army out of Egypt, the Romans after that should either leave
off the care of that Kingdom, or that he should dare again to enterprise
war against the good liking of the Senate? Moreover That little help spoken of
verse 34. proceeded far beyond the tyranny of Antiochus whom Judas Macabeus
and his other brethren did overlive. To what end therefore should the Prophet,
when he had far passed those broils, come sailing back again that way he
had formerly overpassed with a certain inextricable confounding of things?
Finally shall we think or imagine, that the Jews calamities did so continue in
Antiochus alone, as that it should be altogether needles to speak a word of
their consequent troubles afterward? Neither do these words any better agree
to his sons, who never did atteine unto the greatness of their Father. The
Kingdom of Syria did more and more decaie, until at length not long after it
was utterly wasted. This King therefore is not Antiochus, but some other far
surmounting him, one of those four chief ones spoken of before chapter 7.17. and
therefore the prefixed article has his emphasis or express force of
signification, distinguishing him from Antiochus, of whom he spoke in the
words next and immediately going before, who was but small and mean in
comparison of these four chief, and this King is the last of these four: for
the Lion, the Kingdom of the Assyrians, was abolished and gone before this
v^sion was showed to Daniel, as before chapter 10.1. Of the bear and leopard, the
Persians and the Grecians, there has been enough spoken in the former part of
this chap. The terrible beast then only remains, that variable wild beast
and of many fashions, which is this King. For it is necessary that the
exposition (of which kind this last prophecy is) should bring no new matter,
as far as it concerns the general heads, nor any whi^t depart from the
general type. By which it is also manifest that the fourth beast chapter 7. is not
the Kingdom of the Seleucidans and Lagidans, as some learned men have thought,
seeing this King, that very beast, neither is Antiochus nor any part of the
Grecian Monarchy, which had no successor after Antiochus greater then he.
But of this matter more hereafter. So as by those necessary arguments thus
laid down, we are led by the hand to the Romans, who took the lamp from
the Grecians, and whom the Jews afterward found and felt the must cruel
revengers of their wickedness. For it is the intent of the spirit in a breife
Synopsis or abridgement to our view, to deliver what the estate of the Jews
should be, not only to the first coming of Christ, which yet notwithstanding
Antiochus never atteined to, but also to all ages succeding, till at lenght
they shall be gathered into one fould, and be made together with us Citizens of
the same Kingdom.

Other prophecies have made this manifest unto us and the singular agreement of
this prophecy will marveilously confirm the same. The Angel does note or
signify, the Roman Monarchy by the name of one king, as if it were of some
singular person after his manner; and then he adds certain properties, by
which as in a glass we may behold his lively face. First of all therefore,
where shall we find a greater power to do what he list then in this empire?
especially from such time as Antiochus the great by their means was deprived
of all command beyond the mountain Taurus, and was commanded to contain
himself within the narrow bonndes of Syria. For a little before having van
quished Hanibal and triumphed over Perseus the Macedonian, and having slain
the Cymbrians or Danes, and all fear laid aside far and wide round about,
what should restreine such an extreme licentiousnes of all things, and such an
unbridled appetite both of covetinge any thing, and of obteininge any thing
he coveted according to his will. The bridle of fear was cast upon all other
Kings: only the Romans, whose power exceeded, did bite the bridle, and would
not be curbed by those whom they had overcome in battle. Ptolomie felt of
their tyrannical power, whose Island Cyprus, although he were a king and
their fellow and confederate, was proscribed and ransackt, not for any offense
and injury, but only for their desire to enjoye so great a wealth, wherewith
the Island was reported to abound. And whereas no fit nor feigned color
could be pretended, then Cato that great patron of Justice, as he was called,
was made a public robber of the wealth so ungodly coveted, that so, as I
think, the gross dishonestie of the fact might in some sort be hid and
concealed by the authority of the man. The Egiptian could not brook the
wrong, but at the report of the matter poisoned himself, Florus lib. 3. chapter 9.

The war against Creete if we will take knowledge of the truth, we also made,
says the same Florus, only through a desire to vanquish that noble Island.
But this licentiousnes was nothing to the outragiousnes of the Emperors. It
would be over tedious to enter in the particulars, neither is it needful in a
matter so well known to all. Assuredly that which Daniel once spoke of
Nebucadnezar, agrees very fitly to this King, and for the Majesty that God
gave him, all nations, people, and languages trembled, and feared before him;
he put to death whom he would, he smote whom he would, whom he would he set
up, whom he would he put down Dan. 5.19. These are the large bounds of an
unlimited desire proper to supreme authority. Let us not seek for them either
in Antiochus, or in any other servile prince, but only in the highest empire.
This is therefore his first mark, His unlimited power out of all control.
His pride follows, he shall exalt himself and magnify himself above all
that is called God. Interpreters do use to carry these words to the impiety
of this King, which indeed is noted in the next words And he shall speak
marveilous things, and words against the God of Gods. Those former words
therefore do belong to men: for pride is here set out by a twofold subject
about the which it is exercised, partly men whom it contemns and despises as
their underlings; partly God himself, of whom it does both think and speak
unreverently. We know that men placed in higher degrees of dignity, are in
many places in the Scripture called Gods, especially such as have any
government and command of things: this King should make no accounte of all
these in comparison of himself, as it is evident in the people of Rome. For how
should not he lift up himself above all, whom almost through the whole
world, he held as his vassals and coppy-holders: who could obtain a Kingdom
but by the help of his authority? or who could keep one but with his
goodwill? The Ptolemies Kings do fly to him as to the bestower of Kingedomes,
that Antiochus at his command might he made to lay down his victorious
weapons, and depart out of Egypt which he had subdued, and so to let go his
sweet morsel out of his mouth again: And without delay comes Popilins
flying into Egypt, and showed by his doings how little a legate of Rome did
esteem of any king, he scornfully refuses the hand and embracements, he
bids leave-off his complements and friendly salutations and making a circle,
strictly enioynes him a speedy answer before he went out of that space.
Neither durst the great King mutter a word against it, but remembering he had to
do with his Lord and Master, quietly suffered he the prey to be taken from
him, and giving warning for the readiness of al his carriage he departed out of
Egypt. This Epimanes did more wisely then Perseus the Macedonian, who wageing
battle with the Roman, learned at the length to his great damage by
following the triumphing chariot of Aemilius, what a dangerous matter it was to
contend or fight with a superior, or one more then his match. Foolishly also
did Gentius King of Illiricum, who would not submitt to this tyrannical prince
before he was sent prisoner to Rome together with his wife and children and
kinsfolks by Ammius the Praetor. O Roman thou wast indeed above every God, all
Kings did submitt their necks and yield under thy yoke Prusias therefore the
King of Bythinia, though not according to princely dignity, yet very
co^modiously, to make show of the Roman eminencye, commanded his son
Nicomedes as an orphan or ward to the Senate, and acknowledged himself a free
man of the people of Rome.

But we are to observe notwithstanding that this King should exalt and magnify
himself by wresting principality by force and arms, and not by voluntary
subjection to him. Prusias indeed willingly seemed to profess himself their
servant, but his profession was but a base flattery, which fear extorted, but
he did not ingenuously nor willingly desire it. What should I make mention of
Eumenes King of Pergamus, of Ariarathes King of Cappadocia, of Mithidathes King
of Pontus, of Diatarus King of Salatia, who all of them and all others in all
places submitted themselves to this King, either of their own accord or of
compulsion. We see therefore that this agrees to the Roman alone to whose will
and pleasure all other did reform. Antiochus neither durst nor was able to
arrogate any such matter. But if we interpret these Gods to be the
celestial and divine powers, then is there less likelihood in it, that he
should prefer himself before the heavenly, which knew so well he had a
master on earth. But these Gods here spoken of are not heavenly but earthly
ones: That even as Antichrist, who was afterward to succeed in this very seat,
should exalt himself above all that is called God or is worshipped, 2. These.
2.4. by assuming to himself a dominion over all the kings of the earth: so
this king here should go before him in the same steps, to make to his heir
the more easy path and passage to the top of his axecrable pride to be
abhorred of all men: such is his arrogant haughtiness over men, but he will
not be contained within these bounds: he will use reproachful words against
the God of Gods, says the text, But so did the Assyrian king also of old,
Has any of the Gods of the nations delivered his Land out of the hands of the
King of Ashur. 2. King. 18.33. And it is said of Antiochus also, that he slew
many men and spoke very proudly. 1. Maca. 1, 25. This therefore seems to be a
common note of great soveraigntie, which usually breaks out into great
blasphemy against God himself: yet there is reason in this place, wherefore it
should be proper and peculiar to the Roman, for the Assytian has no part at
all in this vision, neither can it be referred to Antiochus, whose horrible
mischiefs are formerly recorded, that he should pollute the holy place or
sanctuary, and should take away the daily sacr^fice, and set up the
abominable desolation verse 31. He had now already passed and proceeded beyond
those words, why should he now be reprooved for inco^siderate end uncivil
language after such heinous mischeifes? we do not use to accuse a man whom we
have prooved to have thrust his neighbor through wit a sword and after to lay
to his charge that he pricked him with a pin or a needle also. This therefore is
not Antiochus his blasphemy but the Romans, who though they came behind him
in wicked deeds against the God of Gods, yet they refrained not themselves
from wicked words. Although it be not necessary that these words should be
of the mouth, when as the fool has said in his heart there is no God: and it
is certain although they used no words, and brake not out into terms, yet
the Romans after they grew into acquaintance with the nation of the Jews,
did in their private thoughts attribute more to their Jupiter of the capitol,
then to the great creator of the world. But yet words are not wantinge, which
are as witnesses of notorious blasphemy. Cicero, with the applause and
approbation of his nation, does not vouchsafe the true and sincere religion of
God any other name then a barbarous superstition; neither so contented, his
ungracious tongue goes forward in determining those sacred things of divine
institution to be both unworthie of the nobleness and splendour of the Roman
Empire, the gravitie and greatness of their name, the institutions of their
ancestors, and also to be odious and hateful to the immortal Gods, because
the nation whose they were, was vanquished, remooved, presecuted: for so he
plays and makes a flourish and ostentation of his eloquence against the God
of heaven in his oration for Flaccus.

That was but a light matter that Augustus commended his nephew Caius for
contemning the religion of the Jews. Tiberius did persecute them with so
great hatred, that he compelled all their worshippers or Lovers to burn all
their holy garments with all their furniture; who also appointed and
distributed the Jews youth by a kind of oath, into the provinces of a corrupt
air, and he banished the rest of that nation and their followers under a
penalty of perpetual slaverie and servitude, if they were not obedient, as
Suetonius in his Tiberius witnesses ca: 36. yet notwithstanding he would
afterward have had Christ registered among the Gods, if the authority of the
Senate had not hindered it, whosoever ancient decree it was, that no God should be
consecrated by the Emperor, unless it were approved by the Senate. O the
notorious blasphemy of this King, with whom the divinity is weighed and
esteemed according to man's arbitrament and judgment, except God do please men,
he shall not be God: man must now be propitious and favorable to God as
Tertullian speaks in his Apologeticus.

Very great prosperity goes with their intolerable pride, which has been in
no kingdom greater then here. With what prosperous enterprises from the first
foundations has every thing been begun, continued and perfected? One war
has always drawn on another, and new occasions did incontinently follow each
other, so commodious, fit and seasonable, as that the Roman armies might seem
not so much to have sought principality as to be called thereunto.

Upon just cause did Servius Tullius one of the first Kings seem to have
familiar compaine with Fortune, which prosperity was no whit lessened in
succeeding ages and generations. those especially after the subduing of Syria:
whence it came that Rome had so many eminent, renowned and stately temples of
fortune, but none of wisdom, temperance, patience, fortitude and magnanimity:
doubtless the Roman people did more increase by fortune, Cesars motto was,
Veni, vidi, vici.
then by prowess. Surely that title or motto of their words, which Ceasar in
his pompous pageant, bare before him in his triumph of Pontus, I came, I saw, I
overcame, might have been common to the whole empire.

Plutarch his little book of the fortune of the Romans, may afoard an ample and
large discourse of this their felicity to him that desires more. But least
any weak mind should be too much discouraged with these their prosperous
affairs, there is added a comfort of an appointed and set time. Till he has
accomplished his wrath, says he, what wrath? not his own, which cannot be
satisfied, but Gods, who was angry for the sins of the people, who ordeineth
the tyrants for judgment, and establishes the spoylers for correction Hab.
1.12. The reason which follows is doubtful, for it may be rendered: because
severity is to be exercised: and so it belongs unto the Jews, as if it were
determined with God to correct and punish the refractarie, by giving to this
King, the people of Rome a great sovereigntie, as the Apostle interprets a
like place in Isaie, for that which the Prophet says, The consumption decreed
shall flow with righteousness, for the Lord God of hoasts shall make the
consumption and decision in the midst of the Land. chapter 10.22. Paul renders it,
For he will make his account and gather it into a short sum with righteousness:
for the Lord will make a short word and count in the earth Romans 8.29. by which
testimony he prooveth that the Jews are to be rejected and but a few of that
nation to be saved, which severitie be afterward calls (...) Romans 11.22 by a
word answering to the hebrewe (...) decision. The Grecians turn this place of
Isaie. It is brought to an end and perfection with have, in the very same with
Paul, His short work, for the thing determined does come to his end with a
kind of hastening.

The other interpretation concerns the Romans themselves because the
determination is made, that is to say, the bounds are set and fixed, beyond
which, the madness of the wicked King shall not pass, whom the bridle of
divine providence shall moderate even in the least and smallest mattrers; for
that does decision or determination signify, which does not consider the
matter in sum and general, but severally by every member distributed into
his parts: a matter of singular comfort against distrust, as though God did not
by his providence reach over particular matters: both meanings are very good,
but which is the more apt and fit in this place let the reader judge.

37. Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers. Now he informs us what
manner of one this King^ should be toward his own, whereunto he propounds a
threefold propriety, The contempt of his fathers Gods, No regard to the desire
of women, and the magnifying of himself above all* what is therefore that
conte^pte of the Gods? Interpreters do refer it to the disregard of all
Religion, which yet notwithstanding the Romans we know, have too
superstitiously observed, as is evide^t to be seen by many examples and in
Valerius Maximus lib. 1.1. Neither shall we find their posterity any whit to
relinquish the institutions of their Ancestors in this matter. Their Children
after the Grecian Monarchy went on in the same Course of superstition, wherein
their ancient fathers had gone before them: These things therefore do rather
belong to Civil policy, which this new King should innovate and bring in,
altogether differinge from that which his ancestors had observed. For the
civil Magistrate is called God, as we showed before, and therefore his not
regardinge the Gods of his fathers is nothing else, but his light esteem of the
Magistrates, which his fathers used in times past: and not long after the
Romans had subdued Judea, the government of this people became a Monarchy,
which was before an Aristocratie or at least mixed of the people and the nobles.
Their first government of old in former ages was by Kings, but they were at
length expelled, and the name grew so odions as that Tarquinius the Consul
could no longer be tolerated, because be affected the name of a King. And from
thence forward the same hatred* was derived to all their posterity as many
examples do make manifest, and that decree of the Senate, wherein there was
order taken that no Kings should enter into the City.

But it was fatal and ominous at that time to be so basie about excluding of
Kings, when by and by after a king was to rise up amongst themselves. In the
time of Cicero the soothsayer or interpreter of the Sibills, earnestly
contended in the Senate, that he whom they accounted as a King should be also
called a King, if they would live in safety.

But this was taken in very ill part, in so much that the Orator advises them
to deal first with their great ones, that they would bring forth any thing
out of the Sibils prophecies rather then a King, whom neither Gods nor men
would suffer any longer at Rome. But thy prognostication failed thee, O thou
witty Orator. Thou saw with thine eyes a little after a King at Rome which
thou did prophecy should never come to pass. This contempt therefore of
their fathers Gods is a new ordination of Emperous violating the law of their
fathers, and bringing those Magistrates into subjection, who were wont in their
old Fathers time to have the chief command. This change of government was a
remarkable note for all men easily to distinguish between this King and
others. And so does Daniel admirably consent with John's revelation, what time
as John did write these things, he tells us five Kings were fallen and the
sixth did then flourish. Daniel in these words does as it were foretell the
funeral of the fifth King, Rev. 17.10.
and the birth or nativitie of the sixth, which should aspire to the top and
highest command, by the contempt of the ancient Gods, the old Magistrates to
whom their fathers yielded all obedience. As concerning the desire of women,
there is no less difficulty about the right meaning. The interpreters take
it passively for that desire which men bear toward women, whereby it comes
to pass that some refer it to lust, others to humanity and couresie, but
the like construction is active elsewhere, as the desire of all nations, that is
to say, which all nations do desire, Hag. 2.8. So the desire of women, is that
which women do desire, which were very unequal and unfitte to refer unto
lust. What is it then that women do most of all desire and affect? To have
their children most honorable. Bathsheba seems heerupon to request an oath
of David, that her Son, if she had one by him, should succeed him in the
Kingdom, which happily she wrested from him before she did yield unto his
lust. Assuredly, The desire of women brought the mother of Zebedeus children to
show her outrageous ambition in asking the chief seats in Christ's kingdom
for her two sons. Wherefore this king should have no regard to this desire,
because he would be nothing careful for his natural succession, otherwise
then in all other kingdoms. For if we cast our eves upon any other
government; what do the fathers more earnestly, being kings, affect, then to
leave their children, a quiet, stable and steadfast kingdom? But this care
nothing troubles this king Octavius therefore succeeds I. Ceasar, Tiberius
his son in law Octavius; Caligula Tyberius and so afterward: yea for the
most part in degrees much further of, the successor no way allied unto him
that went before especially, when as the highest empire was at the pleasure or
at the bestowing of fierce and Cruel soldiers, not of the Senate gathered
together of lawful assemblies. Sometimes indeed in succeeding ages one or two
sons now and the^ have enjoyed their fathers kingdom by inheritance, but
that was rather by the choice and affection of soldiers, the^ by the advice of
their fathers, who perceyving how greatly force and violence had prevayled did
not mind the care of succession, which they saw to be in other men's power. Such
therefore should the government be, as should more respect the honoring of all
estates with great authority, then the desire of women to enrich or ennoble
their Sons with any singular pre-eminence above the rest, and it were indeed
a marveilous matter if the wisdom of God had not forewarned us of it long
before, that the emperors having the chief command of all matters, there
should be so few found in so great a number to have their lawful issue to
succeed them.

This is therefore the second, clear, famous, and dom^sticall note, whereby this
empire should be known. The third is his magnifiing himself above all; where
there comes again a new contempt of the Gods, nor Regard any God says he.
To what purpose is this? was not this impiety sufficiently reprooved before in
the former verse? He will magnify himself above all Gods, and now also in the
beginning of this, and he shall not regard the God of his fathers. This
repetition is not in vain, but a new degree of the like pride. The contempt of
the Gods in the former verse was of all foreign Magistrates among all nations
whatsoever. The contempt of the Gods in the beginning of this verse, was of
their own domestical but ancient and instituted of old. The contempt of the
Gods in this place is of the present Consuls, Pretours and Tribunes, and the
rest now in being, whose names as yet remained, but all the power and
authority was invested in this chief Magistrate alone. Tacitus in the first
entrance of his history showing how Augustus by little and little drew the
right of all offices to himself alone: First he set upon the Consulship like an
enemy by force as Suetonius declares in Augustus cap. 27. the rest were
offered him at his pleasure: he was perpetual Tribune or protector of the
Commons, and had perpetual government also of laws and manners.

Therefore the other Magistrates were but titular only, and a vain show and
semblaunce of authority, appointed only to ease the Prince of trouble in
their Kingdoms, and not to exercise any absolute authority. No marvel
therefore if he exalt himself above all these, whom he used as his vassals and
base flatterers. All Kings in their territories have chief command, neither
do they respect any other inferior God or Magistrate, whom themselves
created of their own subjects, but on the contrary side are honored of all
men. But this especially should be remarkable in this empire, because the
beginning of innovations are most of all observed, we find therefore this third
note most conspicuous and manifest in this King, which is not at all observed
in others by reason of long custom.

38. But in his place shall he honor the God of forces. Hitherto have been
more common notes, now he sets upon more special ones, and more proper to
certain places, and first of all how he should behave himself toward the
true God. For the better understanding whereof the words are first to be
discussed, which are diversely rendered by interpreters.

The learned Tremelius and Iunius do translate them absolutely: And as
concerning the God of great strength he shall honor him in his place, I say,
He shall honor the God which his fathers knew not etc. but this constructio^
does require a nominative case, this God of forces, etc. as Ps. 11.4. and
18.31. Apoca. 2.26. and 3.12.21. as we have there observed upon the place. In
such like constructions the preposition is wanting indeed, but the want thereof
is so frequent in this kind, that I think it is no where fully expressed.
Moreover this translation does give the whole honor to the God whom his
fathers knew not, whereas yet the Angel expressly leaves some honor to the God
of forces: for those words. (He shall honor the God) in the former part of
the verse, must have the like signification with the same words in the second
part thereof. Furthermore except the words (He shall honor) were to be joined
with those in the beginning of the verse the God of forces, the accent athnach
in (...) shall honor should be altogether in vain, and the compulation of the
next word, yea and also the whole word (God) next repeated.

The second word (Mauzim, of forces) has no less difficulty. The
signification is agreed upon, but the purpose of it is diverse ways applied.
Some do retain the hebrew word it self, and think it added to signify an
Idol, and that in very deed not unprobably: for he that a little before was
called a contemner of the Gods, how shall he presently in the next words be
accounted a worshipper of the true God? But if I be not deceived, the historye
will remove this block, and refute the interpretation. Tremelius does expound
it of the true God, whose judgment I approove of, for so is the word taken
before in v. 31. and by and by again in v. 39. especially being joined with
mibisaijm (...), which word is also spoken of the holy place in verse. 24.
Thirdly (...) gnalcanno, upon his place, or in his place, to wit, of this
King, as learned Calvin does expound it: as if this King would acknowledge no
other God but such as should be fastened to his place, should come after the
word jecabed, he shall honor: which being otherwise, it cannot, as I think, be
referred to any thing else, but to that which went before, namely, to the true
God in whose place this honor was to be done.

The double sense therefore of the words evinceth that the true God of great
strength is to be honored in his own place by this King; which to be done,
the history also bears witness. For Pompey havinge surprised Jerusalem and
entered the temple, when as within it the table and candlestick, and the cups
were all of gold, and great abundaunce of sweet incense, and beside about two
thousand talents of sacred moneys in the treasury, yet made conscience of
touching any thing at all, but heerin also was like himself and did nothing
unworthy of his other virtues. Josephus in lib. 14. of Antiquities and cha. 8.
He did not indeed forsake his old idolatries, neither did he acknowledge the
true God by repentance, but yet he carried him self more temperately and
moderately then the wicked Antiochus had formerly done. In respect of whose
outragiousnes, was not this admirable abstinence, great piety and reverence
toward God? But over and besides the next day following he commanded the
keepers of the temple to purge it, to have the sacrifices appointed by the law
restored again, and gave the preisthood to whom it was due.

There is added to this humanity, which is honorable to the true God, the
decrees of Caesar and of the ensuing Emperors for liberty granted to the
Jews to live after their own laws, as Josephus has it in his 14. book of
Antiquities in his sixteenth and seventeenth chapters.

The true God is greatly honored, when liberty is granted to his people to
worship him according to his own appointment. And although the Roman
Presidents did make their residence at Jerusalem yet notwithstanding they
diminished nothing of that grant. Justly therefore may this King be said to
honor the God of forces in this place, whose deputies for the present did
preserve the liberty of the holy people to live after their own law. This
is then a special note whereby this King is distinguished from all others. Many
have brought Jerusalem, into their subjection at sundry times, but none of
them all have governed the City by Presidents, and in the mean time granted
the Jews to enjoy their own religion and worship.

But althoug this honor be of some certain place, it is yet but generally
propounded the distinct and several kinds thereof are declared in that which
follows: And the God, says he, Whom his fathers knew not, shall he honor with
gold etc. what God is this? A forged one indeed, as some have thought, who
refer these things to Antiochus Epiphanes, who set up Jupiter Olympius in
the temple. But we have showed already that these things can no ways agree to
Antiochus. And how could Jupiter Olympius be unknown to his ancestors, whom
these fathers especially, worshipped? The Gentiles knew well enough the whole
rout of Gods, but the only true Jehovah, when both they and their fathers were
ignorant of this God; whom alone it concerned them to know after the Romans
had to do with the Jews, they got something of him by hearing. Whence it is
that we read of some holy centurious in the Gospel, who in the time of their
governements in Iu^ea, have learned and atteyned the saving knowledge of God.

This is therefore the same true God which was formerly called the God of
forces, who could scarce be better perceived then by that gross and palpable
ignorance wherein the nations of old did formerly wallowe.

How then did this King confer to the honor of this God, gold, silver and
precious stones? Doubtless by a noble and costly repayring of the temple; for in
the reign of Augustus the temple of Jerusalem was repaired, and restored,
toward the which building what a huge mass of Gold, silver and precious
stones, and other very costly things was laid out? A thousand cariages were
imployd in carrying of stones, ten thousand of the most skillful artificers, and
moreover a thousand priests who should see to the framing of the inmost
porches, from whence all the profane and unclean were debarred, neither was
the building finished in less time then eight years. Hence therefore may a
man more easily guess then give in a just account of such an infinite charges:
especially if he call to mind the goodly golden vyneyards, and the other
ornaments of such an admirable work both mannels and materials so costly:
Josephus Antiquities book. 15. 14. c. 14. Now then did God perform that which
of old, he had foretold by his Prophet Haggai 2.8. Hag. 2.8.
The silver is mine and the gold is mine, says the Lord of hosts. Some of the
Jews that returned after the captivity, which had seen the former house are
said to weep with a loud voice when the foundation was laid. Ezra. 3.12. But
Haggai bids them be of good courage, for the glory of the second house shall
be greater then the first and the desire of all nations shall come unto it, yea
whatsoever the second house in the building begun was wanting of in splendor
and magnificent structure, God promises to supply, whose is all the gold and
silver which accordingly he plentifully pours out for the furnishing and
ornaments of the house. And now at this time they did religiosly and earnestly
endeavor to bewtifie the Temple, to prepare it for our Lords coming, who was
shortly to come unto his own house.

For soon after the temple was finished our Lord Jesus Christ was borne, who
was greater then Salomons temple, for whom the house was worthily prepared,
being so sumptuosly bewtified and adorned, as in token of that most glorious
temple, which himself was soon after to finish and make perfect, which was
also showed in some sort to be chiefly amongst the gentiles, seeing they were
now the chief authors of the typical ones restoringe, for this seems to be
no slight presage of the spiritual buildinge into the which they were shortly
after to be brought and chosen, by that high and absolute workman.

Thus shall he do in the most strong holds with a strange God. verse. 39
He does further proceed to make this king better known by other of his
doings: for these words are an answer to a secret objection whereby those
things formerly of the temples building, may seem little to agree with and to
the Romans: for we know that Herod bestowed all that cost of his own. The
Angel therefore meets with it, as if he should say, I would not have you to
think me to avouch, that the Romans did or would undertake any thing with
their own hands, cost or means, but whatsoever he did in the holds of the
strong God, be did it all at the charge and travel of a strange God, that is to
say, of a certain inferior magistrate, which held his place rather by force
and tyranny then by any lawful authority, whence he shall worthily be
judged a stranger, or strange God. And who can be ignorant that Herod was such
a one, an Edomite by birth and a stranger, who had no right at all of lawful
authority over the Jews? Wherefore the Romans should do all by his means,
which they conferred on the houldes of the strong God: that is to say, which
they bestowed upon the restoring of the Temple: for these are the holds of the
God of forces, whence he privily sends succor to his own people, and
yields help unto them in adversity, as the frequent and fervent prayers of
the saints do manifest, whereby they labor all they can, that God would heart
and help out of his temple Ps. 18.7. to which purpose also is that of the
Prophet Amos 1.2. The Lord roareth out of Sion and utters his voice from
Jerusalem. And it is manifest whatsoever was done in the building of the
Temple, it was done by the authority of the Roman Emperor, but yet by the
cost and travel of Herod, a strange God; that does Herod himself acknowledge in
an oration to the people concerning that matter.

Amongst other opportunities and means of finishing so great a work, which was
a terror to many men's minds, he rekoneth the friendship of the Romans by the
benefit whereof he specially trusts he shall be able and fitting to bring all
the perfection which he had purposed and propounded to himself. Now says he,
seeing by Gods providence I obtain a Kingdom and have leisure, ready money and
great revenues coming in and that which is most of all, the friendship of the
Romans, the Lords of the world. I will do my endeavor etc. Iosep. Antiq. li.
15.14. See how he attributes the greatest part of his means to the friendship
of the Romans, whereof he made more accounte then of his leisure or ready
money at will, which yet he more evidently declares, when as after the work
finished, he did dedicate a golden eagle of great weight upon the great door of
the temple, the arms of that King, by whose favor and authority, that
strange God had showed himself so bountiful upon the holds of the Almighty
God. And hitherto of his works toward God. Now in special what manner of one
he should be toward men, Whom, says he* he shall aknowledge, he shall increase
with glory, for all authority was in the hands of the Romans from the first
touch at that province. He by his legate Scaurus did prefer Aristobulus the
younger brother both to the preiesthood and the Kingdom. He also by Pompey
restored H^rcanus again, he made Antipater the Edomite the governor of all
Judea, and appointed his sons Phasaelus and Herod to reign, who but he
confirmed Herod's will and testament, and declared not Archilaus his son for
king, but granting him a moytie of Herod's jurisdiction, made him a ruler of
the people?

That which of late belonged to one now by the appointment of this King, who
might do whatsoever him listed, was divided among four, Philip and Antipas
and Salome do enjoy equal portions with Archilaus. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 17. c.
13. so he divided the land for money and the history makes it manifest, that
this King made more account of talents then of reason and honesty, justice and
equity, whosoever brought the greatest weight of gold did speed best in his
suite. But that buying and selling is of all other the most memorable, when
after the overthrow of Jerusalem Vespasia^ and Titus emperors had famously
triumphed, Caesar writes from Rome to Liberius Maximus, appointed governor, to
make sale of all the land of the Jews: Iosep: of the Jews war. lib. 7. c.
26. Hiher without doubt had the angel respect, giving us this for an infallible
mark of this king, that no place may be left any more to doubt of his person.

And at the time of the end shall the King of the south push at him. verse. 40.
Hitherto have we spoken of the first of the three oppressors as we did
distinguish them in the Analysis or Resolution. The second and third do
follow, the prophecy is but short in the second, very large in the third,
because it did more concern the Saints to be very well fortified against his
tyranny, as we shall see in the exposition. Our learned Broughton does
separate those words from the former with a prefixed title, for the argument
in a differing character to this purpose. The third expedition of Antiochus
into Egypt against Ptolomeus Philometor. But we showed in the 36. verse before,
that there was no such third expedition, which is grounded upon a wrong
interpretation of the 29 verse of this chapter, neither is it confirmed by the
consent of any history: also these words are flat against it: for the King
of the South shall provoke this King and fall upon him with his spightfull
horns: but the King of Eygpt attempted nothing at all against Antiochus from
the time of his departure out of his country at the commandment of the Roman
legate. The Ptolomies thought themselves happy men to be delivered from such a
grievous enemy by the royal authority of the Romans, so far they were
from provoking him to battle. Besides, this conflict should be at the end of
the King: but Antiochus toward his end had all his war against the Eymaitans
or Persians in the east, not against Ptoleemie in the south. In the hundred
forty and third year of the Kingdom of the Greeks he left Egypt being
thereto compelled by the authority of the Senate, at which time in his return
he grievously tormented the Jews, but two years after he raged most cruelly,
sending Apollonius, to root out utterly the Jewish religion, if it were
possible. At the beginning of the hundred forty and seventh year, when he
thought to break into Judea, it sodeinly came into his mind to commit this
task to Lysias, and himself to go first into Persia, from whence he never
returned alive again into Syria.

Shall we thrust up together so maine victories, and those of so many
nations, which the angel attributes to the King of the north, into such narrow
streights of three years and a few months more at the most, and in the mean
time not think them worthy of one words celebration or praise, by the
historiographers? Antiochus surely after the Romans had restrained him from
making war where he listed, and that he must of necessity lay down his
weapons, seems to give himself over to that monstrous riot, which Atheneus
describes in the words of Polybius. He had money enough for that wondrous
pomp, after he had robbed the temple of Jerusalem of a thousand eight hundred
talents, in his return out of Egypt, wherwithall in the pride and haughtiness
of his heart he imagined, he could make the land navigable and the sea passable
on foot. 2. Macab. 5.21. And what else now should such a man do, borne to no
thriftines, but to wallow himself in the mire and puddle of his own filthy
pleasures, who had an injunction for cessation of arms? And so Polib. in
Athen. Dipnoseph. li. 5. All these things, says he, were brought to pass,
partly by those things which he had scraped together out of Egypt, after he
had deceived the young king Philomether with a feigned league, and partly by
the help of his friends, but he had pilled also very many temples. But to
make short, All the noble acts which are herafter rehearsed of the king of the
north, do call us back to some other beside Antioch: We are not to think that
the Jews calamities had an end in this one ma^s tyra^nie, or that they needed
no other caution against the ensuinge evils. The Angel swears in the
revelatio^ that that should be finished which God had promised by his prophets
in times past when the seventh Angel sounds c. 10.7. and this so^nd is the
last period of time which shall put an end to all prophecies. Rev. 10.7.
But among the Prophets there is not any one, to whom God has imparted at
any time more plentiful revelations, either of longer continaunce, or of more
exact knowledge of all particular matters, then unto Daniel: neither is it
likely that there should be no remainder of comfort in the prophecies for the
people of God, whom we know he has determined at the length to join to his
Church, when he has gathered the remnants together. These things do I speak
to this end, because I see other learned men to restreine those things which
follow within the bounds of Christ's incarnation, howsoever they confess
ingenuously and confime by arguments, that they can no ways agree to
Antiochus. But I trow it shall evidenly appear to any man embracing the truth
without contention, that it is the purpose of the spirit in this place to
comprise in a short abridgement the whole estate of the people of the Jews in
a continual orderly succession even to the second coming of Christ. Let us
come therefore to the words, The time of the end whereof mention is made in the
first place, shows many middle matters to be overpassed, and that a passage
is made to the last things; yet not to the last and utter ruin of this King,
the Roman Emperor, but to his sliding glory, and end of his unbridled
power, whereby of late he did whatsoever he pleased. Neither did any remarkable
accident fall out besides those things already spoken of, after the defacing
of the City and scattering of the nation by Adrian, which handled the
remainders of this people in like manner as Vespasian, had their fathers not
many years before. Justly therefore does he pass with so swift a course from
those times to the weakened and decayed empire. A little before the end therefore
of the flourishing Roman empire, (the King of the south) that is the Saracens
shall encounter him, which with their Captain Mahomet did first make an
invasion into the Roman Dominion out of Arabia and the southerlie places near
adjoyninge.

The beginning of this hostile and violent assault was about the year six
hundred and thirty, which in short time fell out so happily unto them, that
within less then thirty years they got from the Roman empire Jerusalem, all
Syria, Africa and the greater Asia. The Spirit does fitly liken this nation to
a beast that strikes with his horns jithbag, (...)
says he, He shall push at him, he shall so wantonly and proudly insult,
neither with ill success nor with less force then the wild beasts use to
do, whose strength is all in their horns. Great was the insolency of the
Agarens, who hearing that Constance the Emperor had prepared a navy against
them, staid not till he should pursue and invade them, but presently came
flyeing upon him into Phenice in Lycia, and overcame him in a great battle by
sea: Zonar. Constans. Afterward for seven years together they vexed his son
Constantinus Pogonatus, and in their great pride bent all their forces against
the royal City, which they most eagerly assaulted as many years almost as
the Grecians did Troy of old, as scorning the lesser towns and judging the
mistrisse alone worthy, to the which they might intend their journey with
earnest desire. But thou will say then, If the Spirit would fall down into
these times, why does he pass over the Goths, Vandals, Scythians and the other
northern, rude and barbarous people, by whose invasions this Roman King was
weakened and wearied before these Saracens fell upon him.

Because it was his purpose to touch those oppressors only, which should be
troublesome to the people of the Jews, which suffered no great loss by this
wasting of Europe, most of them remaining in Africa and Asia. In which places
being free from the Roman yoke, they served a new slaverie by submitting
themselves to the basest Agarens. So the holy land in times past, the Jews
country, fell under their dominion at length. The Spirit therefore makes
mention especially of these by whom the Jews were to suffer most hardship.
Neither does he in this place detect the Jews by such words as he did before
when he had to do with Antiochus: for the legal worship being abrogate by the
death of Christ, for which the Jews to this day so eagerly strive, it cannot
be that they should suffer any thing for godliness sake, for which cause the
Spirit should speak of Religion oppressed, as it fell out under Antiochus,
wherefore he vouchsafes the Jews no mention at all, only he rehearses these
enemies whom they should find hurtful and grievous. Such is therefore the King
of the south. The King of the north is described at large by his preparation
after the manner of a whirlewynd, and by his warlike instruments of all sorts
then by his happy progress in this verse.

But who is this King of the north? Not Antiochus, as we have before declared
sufficiently, though the same title of the King of the north be given to the
Kings of Syria. The other notes will not suffer it as the ensuing exposition
will manifest. Neither is it the Roman defending himself against the Agarens:
for that (At the time of the end) did belong to the declining of the Roman
Empire, but the King of the north does grow into great authority from this
beginning, as the words following do show: which reason also enforreth that
this bickering must of necessity be referred to some other time then that
which went before the coming of our Lord Christ: for the Roman Kings did as
yet flourish and grow more and more, neither at that time had atteined to his
height and maturitie. But this war fell out about the end of the flourishing
of the Empire. It is not then to be doubted but that the King of the north is
the Empire of the Turckes. We know that the inward parts of the north did cast
out this base rabble into the world through the straights of the Caspian sea,
which at length loosing his reins for liberty, mightily assailed our
continent on every side, and does in these days violently assault us as it
were a whirlewinde. But who it is against whom the angel says, He shall come
against: the King of the south or the Roman, it may be doubted of: As a whirle
wind, says he, shall he fall upon him.

He vanquished indeed the Empire of the Saracens in Asia, but the weight and
force of his tyranny did lie especially against the Roman whom the angel
makeththe common butt to both Kings, both of the north and south, to pearce
him through with their darts and weapons, as the history shows evidently.
Havinge therefore found out the adversaries, let us see in the several parts
how the description will agree. He shall invade, says he, a whirlwinde and
tempest suddeinly, speedily and mightily shaking and wastinge all things,
whose force can scarsely be any way avoided but by flight, which indeed
agrees to none more fitly and truly then to the turkish tyranny from the
year one thousand three hundred, when he began utterly to overthrow Cities,
Kingdoms, armies, layeng along and spoylinge all that come in his way.

The outragiousnes of the Turks did as much exceed that of the Saracens, as a
violent tempest rushing from above, exceeds the fiercenes of a beast pushnig
with his horn. The violence of this beast may be avoided by flight or
resistaunce, and our men have repressed at length the insolency of the
Saracens, though with their great trouble and loss: but it is not in man's
power to oppose the terriblenes and force of the whirlewindes, from which it is
hard in any corners or coverts to make an escape. Whence it came to pass that
our wars have not so much put off the fury of the Turks as provoked it:
neither is any better to be expected until his tyranny be come to his
appointed time. His warlike instruments are chariots, horsemen and ships: the
hooked iron chariots were in frequent use with the Ancients, as it is manifest
both by sacred and profane history: The Romans first saw them in the war
of Antiochus, and after that against Mithridates: They stroke great terror at
the first, but afterward they were derided and scorned as Vegetius shows,
book. 3.

Wherefore the Romans never used these chariots, and while they bore the swaie
and vanquished, others also cast them off as unprofitable on every side: Here
therefore he does rather allude, to the ancient Custom, then strictly
determine that the King of the North would use such a kind of arms: unless
peradventure these chariots be wagons and other cariages appointed for the
armies remoovals whereof the Turks use abundaunce, though they have great
plenty of camels. They may also be referred to those great gunnes which are
drawn upon wheels, which do resemble a kind of chariots, spitting fire. The
Turks abound in horsemen, they bring more of them into the wars then almost
all the Christian princes joined together.

They have also very great navies well furnished at their pleasures: for they
were not contented with the bounds of Asia, but providing shipping they sailed
into Europe with a desire to subdue and conquer our world also. He wants
then no kind of preparation, wherwithall the Angel said he should be furnished.
The success is summarily signified in the last words: And he shall enter into
the Countries and shall overflow and pass over, that is, They shall go up on
the bredthe of the earth, as John speaks Rev. 20.9.

The first words thereof do show the largenes of his tyranny, for it shall
not be contained within the bounds of one Country, but he shall spread
himself into many regions, The next words show his easy victories, which
shall be as soon and as easily gotten, as a low ground is soon covered with an
overflowinge of waters. The third shows the safety of his victories whereby
he may freely go hither and thither in his conquered Kingdoms, and in regard
of his strong holds which he shall possess he may go, and come, pass and
repasse, without any fear of hostile invasion or home rebellion, unless the
word gnabar, pass over, does signify some declining or lessening of his
power, as if the Angel would affoarde some hope that his tyranny should not be
perpetual. But this comfort is added to verse. 44. whereupon it seems the
less probable, to be here intended, so as the former sense is the likeliest.
wherefore when such happy success is signified in these words, and how the
event has been answerable, we perceive and feel by woeful experience, rather
then need to be expressed by any man's speech: since the time that the
floudgates taken up, this whirling raging gulf was sent into the world,
overflowing and violently bearing all away with his multitudes.

And he shall enter into the glorious land and many countries shall be
overthrow. Verse. 41.
The largenes of his dominions is set out at large, and withal certain
bounds are set, at least on some part, which by no means he shall overpasse.
The first country made mention of is the land of the Roe or of delight and
ornament, that is Judea it self, as Ezechiel shows, calling it the land of
the Roe or of glory, which God swear to give to the Israelites after their
deliverie out of Egypt, and which he gave them to possess after forty years
wandering in the wilderness. Ezec. 20.6.15. Erets hatsebi. Terra capreolae.


But it may happily be doubted, what should be the reason of this appellation,
whether it be so called from his inhabitaunts put to flight and driven into
banishment, as, the Roe-bucks leavinge their wounted haunts do run hither
and thither when the hounds and hunters do pursue them in the mountains. So
Esaias speaks of Babylon describing her exiled Citizens carried away, for it
shall be says he, As the chased Roe and as the sheep that no man takes up
cha. 13.14. And Judea, whether we respect the first Canaanites, whom the land
spued out for their horrible wickedness, or the new dwellers the Israelites
first carried away by the Assyrians and after driven out of their country by the
Romans, and scattered through the whole earth, may worthily be called a chased
Roe. But Ezechi: in the place aforesaid seems to bring another notation of
this name: for he describing Canaan from the abounding of milk and honey, as if
it had borrowed, his name of this fruitfulnes, says. It is the Roe o^ glory
of all lands, as if all lands did hunt and seek eagerly after this land as
after the Roe, because of the felicity thereof, as if this were the glory and
delicious delighte of all lands, for so is tsebi often used. I think the
Spirit did use this word of set purpose, thereby to comprehend both, their
expulsion and happiness, lest her citisens should despair and be quite out of
heart, but in the midst of her sorrowful exile they should think themselves to
be Gods tsebi, darlings and delight. To this same purpose is that word
Armageddon, used in the Apocali as we have showed in that place. Seeing then
that this is the land whereof the Angel in this place says, the King of the
North shall come into it; and he speaks of his coming as of a new thing:
for to what purpose should be declare it as a wondrous and strange thing which
was usual and accustomed? This King therefore of the Noth is not Antiochus, for
whom it was no news to come into Judea.

He had twice before grievously afflicted it, verse. 28.30. His third coming
might have been terrible but not new, if he had come, which we have prooved
formerly to be far from the truth. By the same reason is the Roman excluded
whom we have seen before bearinge rule in the land, and making sale thereof
verse. 39. or dividing it for gain, but it most fitly and truly agrees to the
Turk, who at his first onset was wholly taken up in subduinge of Europe and
Asia, on that side which is joined to the borders of the Persian Empire and
came not in Judea the glorious land before Zelimus, about the year one
thousand: five hundred and fourteen going into Egypt, took his journey this way
and so by the way, won Jerusalem by assault.

At the same time fell many countries, Comogena of Syria, Antiochia, Damascus,
also Tripolis, Berillus, Sidon and also Palestina, with all the region by the
sea coast even unto Egypt, which all now first came under the Turkish tyranny.
Yet it so came to pass by divine providence that he meddled not with Edom, Moab
or Ammon, for that is the chief of the children of Ammon; as if he should say,
he was so far from subduing these countries that he had no power over their
uttermost coasts. We know these regions do border upon Judea, Edom to the
South, Moab and Ammon toward the East, and by one common name are at this day
called Arabia, the third part whereof the Turk vexed, not being content to open
himself a way into Egypt, through Syria, Judea, Palestina. From the time of
that expedition, Persia and Europe especially, did hold him tacke, so as his
wars proceeded that way no further.

Here therefore rests the Turk on that part of the world, by which fixed
bounds and journey, as it were drawn and laid out, the Spirit leads us as
it were foot by foot, to find out this Cruel beast. But these lands were
not free from Antiochus, who had the tuition of them, as it is manifest by
Hircanus the son of Josephus, who attempting many things against the
Arabians, and fearing least being brought under the power of Antiochus he
should pay for his evil deeds, laid violent hands upon himself, Antiochus
enjoyed all his possessions. Joseph. Antiquit. lib. 12.5.

Afterward the Romans with their Captain Scaurus pierced in even to the rock
of Arabia, much more did they bring under their subjection those countries
bordering upon Judea, Joseph. Antiq lib. 14.9. And again Augustus Caesar sent
Aelius Gallus into Arabia to Attempt those nations and countries. Strabo lib.
16. in Arabia, but under Trajanus Arabie was made a province, as Sextus Ruff.
Histor. Antiquit. lib. 5. de Consulibus. It could not be therefore said that
these nations should escape out of the hands either of Antiochus or of the
Romans, but only of the Turk himself, who as a Channel has these wastes to
restreine his raging billows with these Shoares.

Verse. 42. verse. 42.
And he shall stetch forth his hand upon the countries and the land of Egypt
shall not escape. The Angel yet goes forward to declare the greatness of this
tyranny in certain particular provinces amongst which he specially and by
name expresses Egypt first of all and some other regions of the Continent, as
well because the Jews did there especially live in exile, to whom this comfort
was chiefly intended, as also because the conquest of these countries should,
as it seems, be the last.

To stretch the hand then is to offer violence, to make war and to vanquish
and to bring into subjection against their wills, this rage and tempest was to
spread it self into diverse countries, and the Christian world has at this day
woeful experience of the truth of this divine oracle.

Egypt was one among the rest which should be vanquished and subdued to this
empire; which that same Zelimus, of whom we spoke in the former verse, brought
under his subjection in the years 1515. He had indeed intended and prepared his
voyage against the Persian; But when Campson Gaurius the Sultan of Egypt had
taken Aladinus his nephew on the brothers side, and had sent a proud answer
to Zelimus, who desired peace while he was occupied in his Persian wars, the
Turk on the sudden turned all his forces against him. So having slain
himself and scattered his army, in the province of Comagena, he gave not over
till he had pierced into Gaurius his Kingdom, of Egypt, through Syria and
Judea, and although it did valiauntly defend it self, he did utterly
overthrowe it and tread it under foot. Antiochus indeed attempted war
against Egypt; but he was constrained to depart without doing of any thing,
for all his attempts were restrained by one comminatorie warring of the Romans,
so as he was feign to relinquish that which he had gotten, as Josephus Antiq.
lib. 12. 6.

How shall we then apply these things to Antiochus, who was far short of the
success of this King of the North. The Roman did enjoy this Kingdom, yet not
by stretching his hand upon Egypt as the Turk who overcame it by force and
arms, but by right of league and confederacy as all historians report. Now to
find out the true events, we must not only regard what was done, but after
what manner and sort also, wherein the prophecy is as certain, as in fore
shewinge the things themselves, which are to be done.

Verse. 43. Verse. 43.
And he shall have power over the treasures of gold and silver and over all the
precious things of Egypt. These words do more fully show how Egypt should
not escape, that is to say, it should be subject to his will in such sort as he
may freely prey upon it, make havoc and spoil of it, which we find this
Zelimus did, when he had taken Tomumbeius Mamatucus, who had made himself King
after Gaurius his death, he tried him with a tedious and sharp examination
about his treasures before he would put him to death.

What hidden treasures will not he find out and carry away, which constreineth
the King himself by torments to bewray all? how cruelly did he rage against
the common people, who had no regard of Majesty and honor? Of very good right
did the Spirit make mention of the hidden treasure, for the smellinge and
finding out whereof such a deal of cruelty was used.

And when there was no more gold, least any thing should be wantinge which
might further his desires, he carried away more then five hundred families out
of all Egypt, specially out of the City Memphis of the most wealthy and noble
rank, besides a great multitude of women and children of the Mamatukes, whom
he commanded to be slain every one. A kind of men indeed worthy to dye an
evil death. No such thing was ever done by Antiochus. And allthough the
Romans had power over the treasures of Egypt, which they with greedines and
cruelty extorted in all places by all the means they could, yet this power
was not of the fadinge but of the flourishinge estate of the empire, whose time
is now handled, as we have seen, in the beginning of the 40. verse. Whatsoever
things therefore are here mentioned, as some ways agreeing to the Romans, we
shall find much differing in time, so as the diligent and attentive reader
cannot deceived.

As concerning the Lybians and Ethiopians, who says he, shall be at his
steps: thereby is signified that these nations also shall serve the King of the
North, whose stepps and goings they shall observe, and should join themselves
as companions in his expeditions. Lybia is a common name of the whole continent
of the third part of the world which is now called Africa: and it is a special
name of a certain part of the country, which again is distinguished into two
other Lybiaes, so as in the whole it is three fold. It has not his name of
Lybia the wife of Epaphus, or any such like as the Grecians would have it, but
of Lehabim by contraction Lubim, as the native words are usually corrupted
among foreign nations, for the country is so called for the flame and
scorching heat of the sun wherewith it is always schortched and burnt. And
those Lehabim took their original of Mitzraim Genesis 10.33. Some refer Lubim
to the root Lebab, and the form of the nowne does admit this notation as the
more fit, neither is the signification disagreeing; seeing that the Lybi^^^ go
before all other nations in craft and subtle policy.

But Daniel seems to use the word corrupted, rather by the custom of nations
then contracted after an usual and accustomed manner.

The Ethiopians here or Cushim whose father was that son of Cham Genesis 10.6.
And although the Cushits did inhabit far and wide, in Asia and Africa, yet
they seem by a common and general name, to be specially pointed at which
inhabit from the South of Egypt to the seaward. The Angel therefore says that
these nations shall follow the turkish ensigns, or at least the Turk with his
steps shall come unto them, that is to say, with his Emissaries, Bassawes,
Begoes and Agoes and other messengers, which he uses as steps to overrunne
far distant places, and to bring them under his subjection. And we know also
that a great part of Africa, beside Egypt: is now possessed of the Turk at this
day. Arcademus Barbarossa the turkishe ambassador did deprive Maleasses the
King of Tunnis of his Kingdom, whom the Emperor Charles the first restored
again in the year 1535. who six years after had occasion again to sail to
Argiers in Africa to keep the Turk busied in far distant places to bridle and
restreine the insolency of his late victory in Europe with some losses in
Africa, if it might be. But Caesar now arrived not with the like happy
success as he did before, for the third day there arose such a tempest and
violent fall of rain, that he lost many of his ships, gunnes and all other
provision, yea he wanted many thousand of his soldiers, whereby he was
constrained to depart without doing any thing, and to leave that whole
province to the Turks. Yet not these alone are in his steps, but Ezechiel
setting down the army of Gog, whom in the Revelation we have manifestly
proved to be the Turk, does conioyne together the Ethiopians and them of Phut
the furthest western Lybians of the country Tingetana chapter 38.5. Now if these
things be applied to Antiochus we shall see a wonderful difference. He had no
command over Egypt alone, much lesseover the Lybians and Ethiopians whom he
never came near unto either by himself or by his messengers in any warlike
expedition.

The Romans were of old the Lords of all this country, but in their prime
flourish of their Kingdom, not at the time of the end, whither the Angel has
already brought us as we said before.

veas. 44.
But tidings out of the East and out of the North shall trouble him. Hitherto of
the prosperous affairs of the King of the North, now follow the adverse, and
first by tidings. All the former passages have shown us things past already:
for since Antiochus, the Romans, Saracens and Turks have played their par^es,
who with grievous calamities have wasted and at his time do wast the Jews,
partly while they retained the religion given them from God, and partly whilst
to this day they do wickedly observe their ceremonies abrogated long ago. But
those things which follow from hence unto the end, do show us also of things
to come, as it will easily appear by the particular exposition. We have often
times incountred that opinion which attributes all these things to Antiochus,
to that intent truly that it might appear in every particular, how much it
wandreth from the truth, we are yet to proceed in the same, that we suffer not
our selves to be deceived by it, when we shall see the difference and
disagreement thereof on every side. I do not therefore find what tidings from
the East should trouble him, except happily that rich temple of Diana in
Elanois did trouble the man: yet that message was more to provoke his lust in
coveting: then to strike any fear into him. And what need was there to go
thither with such a cruel mind, utterly to destroy all, where gold and not
blood was sought after. 1. Mac. 6.2.
Neither was there any forcible attempt to any private man's goods, but only
to sacred wealth, wherewith the Jews often times, being more Iealously affected
to their sacred and holy things, then those of Elanoies were, redeemed both
their lives and liberty. And grannt him to be Antiochus Epiphanes, was he so
mad or beside himself that being affrighted with eastern and northern
tidings, 1. Mac. 3^ 37.38.
himself should go into the east and send Lysias into the South, and set no
guard at all toward the North?

Our learned Broughton saw that these tidings were no way likely to trouble
the man, and therefore he takes in the Parthian war which Florus reports
to be between Pharates and Antiochus the King of Syria, in the Abridgement of
Livius 59. but the learned man was decived in the name, and refers that to
Epiphanes, which was proper to Sedetes many years after, Live. li. 46. shows
Epiphanes to be dead, but that which he mentions of Antioch. l. 59. belongs
to Sedetes, as it is manifest out of Justin also, who shows Antiochus to have
departed, who had to do with Popilius the Roman legate in Egypt, at the end
of the 34. book: but the Parthian war was of another Antiochus much younger,
the brother of Demetrius that was living and taken by the Parthians, of which
war he entreats in his 38. book. That is therefore a vain Parthian war,
at no hand to be referred to those tydinges. Calvin does expound these things
of Crassus, who being overcome at Carras in a great battle not far from
Babylon, the Roman whom he makes this King of the North, was terrified with
the report of this slaughter.

It could not indeed otherwise be, but very grievous to the Roman to hear of
the death of so great a Captain and of so great and well furnished an army,
but where are the tidings from the North? Caesar in the mean time did subdue
the french men, neither were there any other northern tumults. Where was this
Cruel expedition to destroy and utterly to make away many? The Romans did not
much strive in the revenge of that overthrowe, only Antonie added more unto
it, by the overthrow also of his own forces. For whereas the Parthians brought
the eagles of Augustus, which they had taken away at the death of Crassus, they
did it voluntarily and not by constraint as Florus shows in his 4th book and
12. cha. Furthermore where did the Roman plant his Tabernakle? at the glorious
holy mountain, that is to say, in Judea the holy land, thereby to repulse
the fear of these tidings; or how came he to his end in the same land, who
flourished so long after and when he began to fall, he had his overthrow any
where save therabouts? There are many such like arguments which will not
suffer it to be referred to any Roman. Wherefore these words belong to the
Turk, whom we have hitherto seem to be meant of the King of the North, and
the tidings out of the East and the North, which shall so trouble him, shall be
the report of the Jews converted to the Christian faith: We know this nation
is dispersed almost through the whole world, but yet they most abound in the
countries East and North in respect of Judea; For they be bordering upon their
native Country, and the Remains of their brethren, which were of old carried
away by the Assyrians, and inhabited these very places, might thither invite
and allure others as often as they were to remove out of their own country.

Out of both these regions the Jews at length shall show themselves, who shall
give attentive ear unto Christ. This did the Revel: 16.12. teach us before,
where after the overthrowe of Rome, Euphrates shall be dried up, that the Way
of the Kings of the East may be prepared.

There have we showed that this is to be understood of the vocation of the
Jews and that it belongs to the very same time with these tidings out of the
East, the most deadly and last war prepared in both places do make manifest.
There the dragon mustering all his forces, does go to a place called
Armageddon to cut off and destroy utterly, but he does bring destruction upon
himself, for that next vial does power out the last destruction upon all Gods
enemies. Here the King of the North shall go forth with great fury in the
glorious holy mountain to destroy and utterly cut off many, but he shall
come to his end, and none shall help him. Then immediately shall the resurrection
follow, as we see in the beginning of the next chapter. But the Apocalypse
makes only mention of the East, because the first greatest and chiefest
company shall come from thence, yet in the new Jerusalem, next to the first
gates on the East, which are open to these first eastern Jews, are those on
the north, because the brethren of those parts shall make up the next company
of those that came on flocking into the new city c. 21.13. Re. 21.13*
In which respect Ezech. does first describe the north gates of the holy city
restored; showing by this mixed and co^fused order (his prophecy giving the
first to the north and the Apocal. to the East) that it skilleth not much
whether of the twain we set first, the desire of both out of both countries
will be so close joined and almost unseparable. Ezech. 48.1.16.30.
chapter 48. 1.16. and 30. This consent therefore of Daniel, does very much confirm
our exposition of the Revelation and the Ca^ticles, but the matter will as yet
appear more evide^tly, when we shall have gone over the rest of Daniel. These
are the tidings out of the East and the North, which at length shall be noysed
far and near after Rome shall be defaced: she alive and survivinge, no good
news can be expected; Christ does defer that joyful and happy time to her
fall and ruin, least that loathsome harlott, should be partaker of such a
pleasant report. And how can it otherwise be, but this news must be very
troublesome to the Turk, who knows well what a deal of mischief may
thereupon fall upon him? he has enough to do to defend himself against us
Cbristians of the west alone; what a terror will it be to see himself, in
the midst of his enemies to be beset before and behind, at one time, and not
only to hazard the loss of his empire, but of the name of the Turks also?
for then shall that sayeing of the Prophet be fulfilled, I have bent Judah as a
bow for me, I have filled Ephraims hand, and have raised up thy sonn^s O
Sion, against thy sons O Greece, and made thee as the sword of a mighty
man. Zach. 9.13.

Now then will he gnash the teeth, fret and chafe, storm and grow mad, he
will appoint choice officers and muster and take up a huge army, he will set
forth to war with a full purpose to wast and destroy all things, for as
much as now he will see the time at hand, either to quit himself speedily, or
to perish for ever. And the Roman Antichrist will afoard him an opportunity
to turn himself wholly to that war, who will withhold us in these west parts
with as troublesome a war as the revelation teaches, chap. 19.19. For he
shall reviue and remain, a while after his forlorn and lost Rome, as we have
observed upon the Apocal. 16.13. etc.

Verse. 45. Verse. 45.
And he shall plant the tabernacle of the wrath of his judgment between the
seas in the mountain of holy delight. We have heard of the tydinges and of
his wicked purpose, sorrowful presages of his destruction at hand. Now the
destruction it self is set down, a sweet comfort to all the godly and of all
their tedious troubles, but all this will be finished in war: both the place
and issue hereof are set down in this verse As concerning the place, before he
describes it by his proper marks; he shows in a word what manner of provision
he should make in this place, he says, He shall plant the tabernacles of the
wrath of his judgment, for so I render and translate (...) Ahole Aphadno: the
Greeks do retain, the Hebrew word entire (...), and he shall plant his
tabernacle Aphadno; but Symmachus re^dreth it (...), stable, And he shall
spread the tabernacles of his stable, that is to say a stable wherein his horse
shall stand. The vulgar latin version does imitate the Gre^kes, And he shall
plant his tabernacle Aphadno. The rest which I have seen do thus with one
consent, and he shall plant the tabernacle of his palace.

The strangenes of the word which is no where else used in the Scriptures, and
the conveniencie of the matter made me thoroughly to observe the notation thereof,
which seems to be compounded of three words, Aph and Din, and the affixe of
the third person the wrath of his judgment? as if he would say, He shall plant
the tabernacles of wrath, whereby he shall procure upon himself judgment and
everlasting destruction; a most significa^t word used of purpose, as it
seems, most divinely to comprehend in a brief sum admirable consolation. He
shall indeed attempt destruction unto others, but the mischief shall fall upon
his own head: he shall find and feel that in himself which he intended for
others.

Reverend Broughton says, it is a Babilonian word of frequent use in the
Babilonian Talmud: but it may be the Jews did often insert the word, found in
Daniel in their writings in that signification which themselves most fancied,
though it were not in common use with the vulgar Babilonians. The fit
composition of these Hebrew words does make this opinion more then probable.
Now for the place of the war, he says, Between the seas: but where abouts
is that? or rather where is it not? seeing the whole land is an Island? he
therefore restreines this largenes in the next words: In the mountain of holy
delight, in the mountain Tsebi, of the Roe or del^ght, that is to say in the
land of Judea, as we have seen before in verse. 41. Hence let us take knowledge
which seas these be the river Euphrates and the Syriach arm of the
Mediterranean sea, as in the 72. Psalm verse. 8.

And he shall have dominion from sea to sea, from the river unto the ends of
the earth: for first the Jews shall be here gathered together who now live as
exiles and out of their own country. All the Prophets speak of this return
which they shall advaunce and take in hand, not for religions sake, as if God
could not elsewhere be worshipped, or as if it were of necessity to bring in
the legal worship again, but not to strive any longer as strangers and
inmates with foreign nations and that the admirable goodness of God might
openly appear unto all men, now again pitying his people whom he had
estranged from himself with so long a divorce: Hitherto also will the Turk
come in have to oppress this newly returned people. He will compass the camp
of the saints says Apocal. 20.9. and the beloved City, But Ezechiel Eze. 38.8.
most plainly saying. After many days thou shall be visited in the later
years, thou shall come into the land which is brought back from the sword and
is gathered out of many people, against the mountains of Israel, which have
been alwais wast, when he shall be brought forth out of the nations, they shall
all dwell safely; and there is much more cha. 38.8,

The tidings therefore out of the East shall call the enemy into the holy
land: not to Chinais whither Antio. went, nor to Babylon whither the Romans
went, to be revenged upon the Parthians, so as if there were no other mark of
the King of the north besides the very place of the war, his person could not
be concealed from an attentive reader.

The issue of the war will be most lamentable, for he shall come to his end
and none shall help him: because it shall be brought to pass not so much by
man's power and forces as by Gods own mighty arm, gloriously showing it self
from heaven, as it is Apoca. 20.9. But fire shall come down from God out of
heaven to devour them. And I will plead against him, says Ezech. 38.22. with
pestilence and with blood, and it will rain upon them and upon his bands, and
upon the many people that are with him an overflowinge rain and great
hailestones, fire and brimstone. What help and aid can come against these
darts and arrows? O Turk, thou shall therefore perish, not only the Prince
himself, but also the principality it self; thy name shall be utterly raced
out and thou shall be tormented everlastingly, both for thy horrible impiety
against God and also for thy barbarous wickedness and cruelty against men.

Thou art left as another Pharao soon to be overthrown with violent storms
of the fiery lake, that both the great name of our God may be made more
famous, as also to afoord to all the Saints the argument of a new song of
thanksgivinge. Such is therefore the King of the North, who when he shall perish
in the holy land, he can neither be Antiochus nor the Roman, who came to
their ends in other places.

The text of the whole 12. CHAP.
1 And at that time shall Michael stand up: the great Prince which stands for
the children of thy people, and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never
was since there was a nation, even to that same time: and at that time thy
people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book.

2 And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.

3 And they that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and
they that turn many to rightousnesse, as the stars for ever and ever.

4 But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time
of the end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.

5 Then I Daniel looked, and behold, there stood other two, the one on this
side of the bank of the river, and the other on that side of the bank of the
river.

6. And one said to the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the
river: How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?

7. And I heard the man clothed in linen which was upon the waters of the
river, when he held up his right hand, and his left hand unto heaven, and swear
by him that lives for ever, that it shall be for a time, times, and an half:
and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people,
all these things shall be finished.

8. And I heard, but I understood not: then said I, O my Lord, what shall be
the end of these things?

9. And he said, Go thy ways Daniel; for the words are closed up and sealed,
till the time of the end.

10. Many shall be purified and made white and tried: but the wicked shall do
wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand: but the wise shall
understand.

11. And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the
abhominatio^ that makes dosolate, set up, there shall be a thousand two
hundred and ninety days.

12. Blessed is he that waits and comes to the thousand three hundredth and
five and thirty days.

13. But go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shall rest, and stand in
the lot at at the end of the days.


THE ANALYSIS or Resolution.
HItherto of oppressors, now their deliveraunce is handled, which in the
general and in this kind, is both out of great affliction v. 1. and
afterward to an unchangeable condition and estate verse. 2.3. but in his
quality, it is both sealed, verse. 4. and has a double opposition of time, the
first proper to the Angel, whose preparation shows the number of Angels, and
the place, verse. 5. But the conference does consist of a question ver. 6. and
an answer, consisting partly in gesture, and partly in words, verse. 7. The
second opposition of the time is such, as a man at length should understand
also, the occasion whereof was also the ignorance and the question of Daniel
verse. 8. The answer of the Angel is partly negative and refusinge, v. 9.
partly consolatorie, as well universally, which belongs to all Saints, (whom he
shows this darkness and obscurity shall nothing hurt ver. 10.) and withal
yields help an^ assistaunce to understand the double time expressly
determined first verse. 11. the second verse. 12. as also particularly, which
belongs to and concerns Daniel himself, verse. 13.

THE SCHOLIA or Exposition.
Verse. 1. Verse. 1.
And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince.
THis last Catastrophe and turning, does prosecute three things in order: who
shall deliver, from whence, and whom.

Some would have Michael here the defender, to be Christ and it is very
certain that he is the great Prince; yea by far the greatest of all, the
Prince of his elect people, who has delivered his church always and will
deliver it herafter, yet the name of Michael here seems to be some certain
Angel whose ministry the great Prince will use in this battle. In the later
end of the tenth chap. before, he is spoken of as a certain helper, with whose
aid that glorious Angel assisted, seems notwithstanding to complain of his
being alone, There is none that holds with me, says he, in these things
but Michael your Prince.

But more plainly there in verse. 13. And lo Michael one of the chief or first
princes. for Christ is not one of the chief princes, as if he were of a
certain order of Angels, and had a Companion of power, but all the Angels, as
servitours do Minister unto him. But thou will say (...) Acad Hasharim, is not
one of the princes, but first of the princes, verily (...) is of order
sometimes, when it is joined with nownes of time, as in one of the months,
that is to say, in the first day of the month. Levit. 23.24. And so with this
our Prophet, in one year of Darius, that is in the first, Dan. 9.1. From
whence in one of the Sabaoths for the first day of the week. But the same
word joined with others is, for the most part of number not of order, as behold
the man is become like one of us: Genesis 3.22. He does not mean as the first of
us: of which sort are many other places. That may be added also, that the
Archangel Michael in Jude 9. Does put off the Divil to the Lords judgment as if
himself had not power and authority to restrain him, which yet
notwithstanding Christ does exercise. Mar. 1.25. as in many places elsewhere
in the Gospel.

Neither is it likely that the Apostle, if he had meant Christ, would not have
called him by his proper name, especially when he does bring his argument from
the greater, whose force is much lesse^ed, if that which is greatest of all, be
not called by his own, but by a far inferior title. Yet do I not so
dispute of this, as if I meant willingly to contend with any man about that
matter, but only to find out truth, whereof very great care is to be taken as
much as may be, even in the smallest matters. Neither is it of necessity that
things must be done by the ministry of an Angel from heaven, in such sort as
no part thereof should be acted by man, but Christ may raise and stir up some
excellent man in whose person he may present a visible Michael, as in that
battle of Michael and the Divil in Apocal. 12. we have seen: But what kind
of ministry soever it shall be; in what manner this Prince shall come prepared
and furnished to the battaille, it is at large declared in Apocal. 19.11.
Secondly whence he shall deliver, is from such a troublesome time, as was not
the like from the beginning of the nation unto that very time. The Turk is
always intolerable even in peace, rest, and vacation, how outrageous will he
be, when he shall be afraid of his own overthrowe? He has striven elsewhere
about some Countries, or at the uttermost about the Empire, but now he must
fight for his life, where he must either overcome, or else not only undergo
the yoke of subjection, but be utterly destroyed and die with extreme torments.
He has often times in vain carried, almost infinite forces into the field: how
will he be furnished now, when he shall perceive all now shall be hazarded at
once for ever?

Out of these streights of time, any one may easily conjecture what horrible
turmoiles, the Cruel beast shall make, but also on the new and Christian
peoples part there wilbee no less grievous a trial, when they shall see this
horrible and fearful tempest, immediately to follow the faith which they so
lately had professed? For they may imagine God to be angry because they have
forsaken their fathers religion and have embraced christian, which their
ancesters did so hate, therefore the Spirit does foretell the grievous troubles
of those times, least any man by the sharpenes thereof should fall from the
truth. God does usually turn tbe rage and fury of the adversaries unto his
own praise and glory, if other escapes be stopped up, he ope^eth a passadge
through the sea, brings out of the lions den, and preserves safe in the
fiery furnace, neither does he still the raging waves until we see our
selves almost lost: Wherefore as of old in Egpt, so salvation will now suddenly
shine forth, but then especially when all things seem desperate, and past
recoverie.

But how is this affliction most grievous? of all former only which some one
greater should after succeed? not so, but of all without exception, for it shall
outstrippe all the former and it self shall be last, which an everlasting
deliverie shall presently follow, for hereunto is joined the resurrection, after
which no calamity is to be expected of the Saints. How therefore should it
either agree to either Antiochus or Roman, who, whatsoever mischeife they did,
it was but a flea-biting to this misery of a thousand six hundred years,
wherein as yet the Jews do lie buried.

But this fit or sharp assault is not come as yet, seeing the deliveraunce is
not yet happened, which shall fall out in the midsts thereof. Who shall be
delivered, they are first noted by their nature, then by grace: by nature, Thy
people, By grace, Every one that shall be found written in the book. That shows
the nation of the Jews, which were Daniels people, coming of Jacob the same
common root and stock. So in the beginning of the verse also standing for the
children of thy people: whereby he teaches that this deliverance is not
presently but to be expected in their posterity, namely their Children, but
how many ages after, shall appear afterward.

This prophecye therefore is proper to the Jews, but thence it will not follow
also as proper to the time of Antiochus, seeing the Jews may be afflicted as
Gods people, howsoever they suffer not for Mosaical ceremonies, as it will fall
out when they come to the faith. I would that worthy Broughton had considered
this, he would not have so drawn all with a wrye neck unto Antiochus.

But there shall be also a choice and difference in this people: Their
deliveraunce shall not be so confused to bring all to eternal life, but those
only which together with this outward safety from these great dangers, shall
be by saving faith adopted for sons, whose name* God in his everlasting
decree has written in the book of life, for, it is not in him that wills or
runs, but in God that shows mercy: neither is it in our power to receive
faith or believe, but is only theirs who have the earnest penny of election.
It is very likely therefore that some of the Jews will hold so obstinately their
legal rites and institutions, that neither with the famous deliverance of
their nation, nor with that exceeding glory wherewith the truth shall then
flourish, will they suffer themselves to be separated from their superstition.

And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake. verse. 2.
Such has been the trublous estate whence they shall be delivered; The
condition into the which they shall shift and pass, is waking out of the dust
of the earth, which is afterward laid down by a distribution of saints and
reprobates in this verse; and again of saints alone in the next verse. As
concerning the wakinge, all our expositours that I could see, do refer it to
the last resurrection of the bodies. Some Jews contrariwise do apply it to
the restoringe of the Church, which they s^ie shall be in this world. We must
freely and diligently search on which side the truth is, all prejudice laid
aside. It makes against ours, that all these things, namely the end of the
former chapter and first verse of this, are so linked together in a continual
course and order among themselves, for that is meant by the band of time in the
beginning of the chapter, At that time shall Michael the Prince stand up, as if
he should say. At what time the king of the North shall pitche his tents in
the land of tsebi Judea it self, the^ shall that great trouble oppress them,
then shall happen this admirable deliveraunce, then shall this resurrection be
accomplished: therefore howsoever in other places passage may be made from the
birth of Christ to his second appearinge, yet in this place it cannot, where
such a band does come-in between.

And unless we do allow of this connection, what a huge heap would there be
in the prophecy, what a gulf to let escape and skip a thousand six himdred
years and more, I know not how many, especially which has gone so leisurely
and orderly to this very place and was chiefly ordained for the Jews, to whom
he affoardeth no comfort at all, if he pass and fly presently from Christ
first exhibited unto the latter end of all things. This one thing may seem
sufficient to refute the exposition not only of this verse, but also of all
which ours do bring upon the ten last verses of the former chapter, which they
will not have reach beyond the first coming of Christ, when as yet the Angel
has gone step by step through all ages from thence as we have made it plain
I hope.

Seeing therefore all these things are necessarily coupled and joined together
among themselves, if that voyage of the King of the North into the land of
tshebi, be either the expedition of Antiochus or the Romans into that
country, then this resurrection which immediately follows, is either not
proper, or if it be proper, then that exposition of Antiochus and the Roman is
not true and natural. But you will say, Let us hazard the loss of that
exposition rather then suffer this of the resurrection to be taken so from us.
Let it be a continual orderly prophecy, let it be shutt up at lenght with the
last resurrection; but the Angel will not have it so, who speaks so exactly
as if he did it of purpose to meet with this strange exposition.

Many of them, says he, that sleep in the dust shall awake; the resurrection
(so properly called) is common to all, as many as from the first Adam do
sleep in the dust, but when this is only of some, it is manifest^o be some
other then that which is properly so called. But some will say, Some are put
for all. Once happily or twice in Romans 5.15.9. But we must not start from the
natural signification but where there is necessity of the figurative here
nothing inforceth to leave the proper: but contrariwise there is a necessity
to retain it: for seeing this resurrection is the same with the deliverance in
the former verse, made indeed out of the book of life, after the manner of the
resurrection, and being of one only people of the Jews, as was observed
before, they are said well, Many to be awakened, when the men of one nation
and not of all mankind do arise: therefore our Broughton does not well translate
it, for the many of them that sleep in the earth of the dust shall awaken, for
the many is as much as the multitude or the universal of them that sleep;
all together from the mind and purpose of the prophecy.

So dangerous a thing it is to put-in any thing of our own in doubfull
places, which are rather to be left pure and entire, then to be prejudiced by
any additions. It makes somewhat also, that the reward of the best here, is
much inferior to that which all shall have there at the last, in the
resurrection all the righteous shall shine as the sun in the Kingdom of their
father Matthew. 13.43. but in this they whose reward is greatest, shall not exceed
the brightness of the stars.

But they, says he, that turn many to righteosnes shall be as the stars
for ever and ever. Its a manifest difference between that and the heavenly
Crown. Besides, which justify, says he, intimating a place for doctrine in
this resurrection, whereby godly minds being endued with the knowledge of
Christ do enjoy true righteousness and holiness, when as in that last
resurrection, prophecy shall cease, and all this policy wherewith the Church
is now governed upon earth, 1. Cor. 13.8. and last of all the Angel both
knows and teaches others the day of this resurrection, as we will show in
the last verses of this chapter: for the end of these wonders whereof they
inquire afterward, verse 6. and 8. does include this resurrection, the last
term of the former prophecy and a thing worthy of admiration: but the day of
the last resurrection is hid from the angels themselves, yea from Christ
himself as the son of man, much more from Daniel or any other of the
Prophets Marc. 13.32. These things therefore make against the proper expounding
of the words. Calvin objecteth one thing against the figurative, which is the
restoring of the church neiter will that stand, says he; which is said, some
shall rise to life, others to shame and contempt, if this did only agree to
the church of God, surely none should rise to shame and contempt. But it may
be answered. That the church is a field mingled at least with tares among the
good corn, a net not altegether without bad fish, a house not without some
vessels to dishonor: wherefore it is needful to prefer some particular
restoring of the church, before that general exposition of the general
resurrection. Neither is the certeintie of the bodies resurrection any whit at
all weakened thereby. This doctrine is confirmed by other scriptures above all
exceptions: and this very place whose proper sense and meaning we have cleared
does make somewhat also for confirming thereof. The Spirit of God would not so
often and diligently use this allegorical resembla^ce, if it did not thereby
declare the thing should most assuredly come to pass in his time. Otherwise it
were an easy matter to avoid, all the promises confirmed by this type, as no
whit more certain then the resurrection whereof there is little or no hope at
all,

But the holy Prophets do leave no startings back, whilst they bring the
matter grounded upon manifest promises, and rested upon by assured faith to
confirm the same. Faith therefore loses nothing, although it does ingenuously
acknowledge what is due to every place. What is this resurrection then? the
full restoring of the Jewish nation and their vocation to the faith in Christ,
for so is our Conversion to God often called, in the Scriptures; the time shall
come, says Christ, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear it shall live. Io. 5.25. Awake thou that sleep,
says the Ap. Ephesians. 5.14. and arise from the dead and Christ shall give thee
light. But the Jews specially shall rise by believing and rising out of their
troubles, of whose restoring the world has little hope. The mighty hand of God
will raise up these dead carcasses, else it were incredible that this dust
should live again: wherefore the Apost. speaks of the Jews, what shall the
receiving be but life from the dead To. 11.15. as purposely bringing light
unto this and such like places. This resurrection then is the same whereof the
Apo. speaks c. 20.12.13, for this follows the utter overthrow of Gog and
Magog, that is presently added to the destruction of the Turks, as we have
expounded: and both Gog and the Turk do make the same enemy, as we have
showed in the Revelation at large. This is that resurrection whereof Eze: c. 37.
with this only difference, that Ezech: describes the first conversio^ of the
Jews by life restored to dead bones and Daniel expresses their first
co^version by the tidings out of the East, and therefore the battle of Gog and
Magog does follow the resurrection with him. But in this and also in the
Apocalipse, it does go before it. This is that revocation of the Shulamite
whereof in Canticl. 6.12.13. Return O Shulamite, return, that we may look
upon thee: Or rather that wish that follows (for the renovation does rather
belong unto the tidings of the East in our Daniel) O that one would give thee
as a brother unto me sucking the breasts of my mother, finding thee without I
would kiss thee, yet I should not be despised. So as an admirable consent of
Scripture does shine forth every where to confirm a matter altogether unknown
to the world, and we have expected nothing less then that almost these many
generations. Such is the resurrection then, the distribution of them that rise
does follow, of some to eternal life and of others to shame and everlasting
contempt. For as conversion to Christ is specially called resurrection, yet
notwithstandig the general deliveraunce from enemies, which was common to the
whole nation, does in some sort resemble it, when they shall lift up their heads
and stand upon their feet, who lately were trodden under foot of all, and were
almost brought to dust with the weight of their long and tedious afflictions.

Out of whom, those whose hearts the Spirit shall endue with love and faith,
shall surely awake and come out of the graves having now obtained the dignity
of the children of God: Who shall enjoy eternal life, not only because they
shall have the fruition thereof in heaven, but also because there shall be a
perpetual felicity in earth, not to be steined with former troubles of the
former ages any more, but it shall continue pure and spotless until their
departure into heaven, for now will God wype all tears from their eyes, and
there shall be no more death, nor sorrow nor crying nor pain, for the former
things are passed away Apocal. 21.4.

But the rest who being partakers of the deliveraunce shall yet persist in the
wicked blindness of their hearts, they shall rise in deed, but to eternal
destruction; seeing after this time there is now promise of mercy to them, and
of calling them to the faith, whereby alone we apprehend and lay hold of
salvation: for all the Jews will not give consent to the same truth, but some
of them will presevere and persist in their old hardness of heart, howsoever
God shall give a clear testimony to his son by subduing all their
adversaries. There is no place therefore left in the new Jerusalem for the
fearful and unbeleevers and the abominable and murderers and whoremongers and
sorcerers and idolaters and all liars, which is specially spoken of the
obdurate and hardened Jews, allthough the men of the same rank in all other
nations also shall be in the like estate and condition Rev. 21.8.

Verse. 3. Verse. 3*
And they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament. The other
distribution of them that rise, is of saints only, whereof some be people some
be the teachers: both are illustrated by a similitude, they of the firmament,
these of the stars. For I do agree with learned Calvin, who takes
Hamashchilim intransitively, as also a little after in the tenth verse, where
with out doubt knowledge is not tied unto teachers, which thence appears,
because Hamashchilim, the wise, are there opposed. Lerishagnim to the wicked,
for only the saints, and all of them are truly wise, but the wicked,
allthough they excel in policy, craft and subtlety, in all trades and
customs of living, yet notwithstanding are empty and void of all sound and
true wisdom, and are in very deed said to be fools, as Solomon does often
call them.

But now all the people and whole company of the faithful shall be pure and
clean, shininge with beauty of entire holiness, like unto the firmament it
self, whither no cloud aspireth, nor any earthly pollution ascends to
cast any aspersion or blott thereupon. The firmament is often covered all over
with thick clouds, and taken out of our sight, but here it is spoken of, not
as it often seems to us, but as it is in its own nature.

But they that justify others by teachinge, admonishing, exhortinge,
reproovinge and comfortinge, which are parts and duties of the Teachers, and
they which enjoy public office in the Church shall be the solidest and
clearest part of their sphere and compass, and shall become shining stars
wherewith this firmament shall be bewtified and adormed, themselves in the mean
time enjoying the chieffest glory. So in the first christian Church the
ministers were stars, which one like the son of man walking between the
candlesticks, d d bear in his right hand, Apo. 1.20.

These teachers of the Jews shall enjoy like glory, which are precious stones
in the Apoc. 21.19. whereof is built the wall of the new Jerusalem.

It is to be observed here that the Doctors and Teachers are described by that
present duty not formerly past: for matsedikim does signify them that do
justify, and not that have justified or turned to righteousness; by which
argument we have showed before, that the last resurrection is not here
intended in this place, where there wilbee no use of present teachers, but the
former past labors only shall be rewarded. Farthermore we may observe, that
here is a less reward both of people and teachers then that which God has
laid up for all his own against the last day, who shall be like as the sun.

If therefore the Angel do here now speak of the greatest glory of the
saints, why should he signify it by the resemblance of the firmamente?
besides what singular thing have the teachers, if they atteine to no more then
that which is common to the teachers here in this life? These are all stars
as the place even now spoken of did teach us: but now they are also called
angels whose likeness and similitude seems to be the highest top of our
felicity and happiness. Indeed they are called angels but by reason of their
ministry only, and not of their present glory. The Spirit therefore would
show us by the rewards themselves, that this is some other resurrection then
that which shall be of all men at the last.

Verse. 4. Verse. 4.
And thou Daniel shut up the words and seal the book. Hitherto is the first
part of the chapter, now he comes to the rest, where first is a sealing
consisting of a precept, and the putting in of a tacit and close objection.

The precept is of shutting the words and sealing the book even to the time of
the end. But how should this be? Should Daniel keep it to himself alone?
wherefore then did he commit it to writing? The Angel would have him write it
in the same words, and after the same manner which he had received it, to add
nothing of his own by way of exposition to clear the matter. Daniel knew well
how obscure and dark these things would be to the readers, and he himself
understood the whole matter very well, as he witnessed in the beginning of the
vision, and he understood the thing, and had understanding of the vision chapter
10.1. therefore the learned and eloquent man could have cleared the obscurities
with such words if he might freely have done it, as none of the simplest sort
need to have been any where gravelled thereat. But the Angel does not give this
liberty but commands to wrap it up in the same obscurity wherewith he saw
it covered at the first deliverie thereof from himself. This do I take to be
the true and proper meaning of this shutting and sealing: for Daniel had heard
these things of the Angel, neither had he any other way to shutt the^ up but
by writing obscurely and not in open and plain terms. But wherefore does he
bid shut up the words and seal the book? Are the book and these words the
same and all one? It often comes to pass that some short and little writing
is called a book, as the book of the generation of Jesus Christ Mat. 1.1. and
such like. But happily here in this place the words are this very prophecye,
from the beginning of the tenth chapter, and the book all his visions in
general which he is commanded to hide in a profound style, hard to be known
and to put them together in a book; after God had last spoken to him in this
kind of visions, but the former visions were already written before, so as it
is better to refer, words and book, to the same thing; yet so, as the
things should be kept close and not be hid for ever, but only to the time of
the end: of what end? Of a perfect end, or soon after to be perfected: nigh at
hand, as it seems and a little before the end, when things lately buried in
obscure darkness shall be brought forth into open light. Daniel might have
objected, that so the elect should be deprived of the fruit of a most holy
and divine revelation. The angel meets with it, as if he should say, Let not
that trouble thee, for many shall come to and fro, and knowledge shall be
increased, that is to say, although these things be hard and difficult, yet
some will take great pains in searching out the truth, and by wise discourse
gather one thing of another, will level very near, yea and hit the mark it
self, and will much increase knowledge; which thing indeed we have seen come
to pass both in the Jews and in our own men, who by diligent search have
found out many remnants of this gold scattering here and there, and thereby
have brought much profit both to themselves and to the Church.

But for what cause would God have these things shutt up for a time?

First that the wicked by seeing should not see, and by hearing should not
hear, wherefore Christ spoke in parables to the unbelieving Jews, and John was
commanded to seal up those things which the thunders uttered. Apoc. 10.4.

Secondly, That security should not grow upon the Saints by the expectation
of a long time, to whom the opinion of an end always approaching should be
profitable, whereby they may have their Lamps always in a readiness.

Thirdly, that there might be a testimony of Gods truth in those ancient
times, when the wicked at length shall know that those things were foretold
many ages before, which themselves do find most true after it is too late.

4. Lastly, because this obscurity shall not take away all understanding of
the Saints, but shall whet only their diligence in searching, to whom the
Angel promises a further profiting and proceeding, seeing by their godly
labor and diligence, God does make over to the godly all his mysteries and
secrets in Christ.

And J Daniel looked and behold two standing. Verse. 5.
So is the seating, now follows the first designing of the time; the
preparation whereof does propound unto as two other Angels, and the place where
they stood. The number seems to be added for the confirmation of the whole
matter. In men's Courts God has appointed every matter should be established by
the mouth of two or three witnesses, Deuteronomy. 19, 15. After the same manner the
more are sent, that the matter might be more confirmed, and humane infirmity
regarded and provided for. Now might the Prophet try his right by Law with the
Angel if he had deceived, or the thing foretold him should not com to pass.
The place where they stood was at the bank of the river, one at one side of the
bank, and the other on the other side, and the river was Hiddikel, as we learn
by the 10. chap. verse 4. the third river of Paradise, Genesis 2.14.

It is not certainly known whether the Prophet were bodily present by this
river, or the sight thereof were afoarded him after a prophetical manner. If it
be this, there is some great matter in it, why this alone should be offered to
his very view above all the rest, but if he were bodily present, which I
rather think, Daniels company flying away for fear, chap. 10.7. neither can
it be without cause, that he makes mention rather of the river then of the
region and country: And we shall see assuredly that of the four visions, which
were showed to Daniel, three of them were at the waters. And not without good
cause, when as visions do foreshew the affairs of nations and people to be
done in ages to come, and waters do both lively resemble the troublesome
tempests of worldly businesses, with the variable and inconstant condition of
people, and also thereunto are frequently used in scripture, as in Ezech.
26.19. When I shall make thee a desolate city, by bringing up the deep upon
thee, and great waters shall cover thee. But waters do d^ffer according to the
diversity of the things thereby signified. In the first vision the four Winds
of heaven strove upon the great sea, and four great beasts came up from the
sea, chap. 7.2.3. because as the Sea is the collection and gathering together
of waters, so there was entreated of the matters of all people, which should
all be disturbed with these four Kingdoms. The second vision was at Vlai, no
sea, but only a river unknown, not famous, not set out with any note at all
of any excellency, so in that vision the Empire of the whole world was not
entreated off, but some particular nations, the Medes, Persians, and Grecians,
in which the prophecy stops his narration, as it were in some creek of a
great sea, and a river, drawn and derived out of the deep, chap. 8.2. The last
vision was at Hiddikel, a particular River also, but such a one as flowed out
of Paradise, eve^ as the matters therein handled, do specially respect a
particular people, but holy and elect, whose spring and original does come out
of Paradise, the infinite grace of a merciful God, which runs thence along
through the stock of the holy Patriarchs in all ages, as it were thorough a
channel.

The former visions were also showed for the Churches sake only, but they
declared flourishing nations. First, the four great Monarchs, afterward the
Medes, Persians, and Grecians: This alone shows the full deliverance of the
holy people, and therefore they were given at the sea and unknown waters, like
to people of no account with God: but this was given at the holy River, that
he might more lively set before our eyes the condition of that ancient and
holy people, by the election of grace. Such a River therefore is it. Now, the
Angels do not stand both on one side, but are severally placed, and keep both
the banks, because God defends this people on every side by his Angels, to
whom he has given in charge, not only to be careful of some of their
matters, and careless of the rest, but to perfect all things which do concern
the safety of his elect. This is a great comfort in time of so long a divorce,
when they understand that their God cares for the^, and that there remains a
seed of election amongst them, though the blind world sees it not, as being
far hidden from men's eyes.

Ver. 6. Ver. 6.
And he said unto the man clothed in linen. The conference of the Angels
follows, and first a question before, which we have both the persons
propounding it and to whom. The propounder of it was one of the Angels, which
stood at the banks. Both do not enquire by words, although the desire of
knowledge of it was common to them both. It was sufficient for the one to
receive the answer, neither was it material which of them demanded it;
Therefore whilst one speaks, the other expects in silence, modestly
observing order, the author whereof the holy spirits have always before their
eyes.

The Angel whom he enquireth of, was clothed in Linen, to wit, garments, for
Badim are Priestly garments, made of fine Linen, peculiar only to the Priest,
whence happily they have their name for (...) Bad, is a sole and singular thing
that does agree but to one, and therefore the Priests are noted by these
garments, as Doeg is said to have slain fowrescore and five persons wearing a
Linen Ephod, 1. Sam. 22.18. David went before the Ark in such an Ephod, 1.
Chro. 15, 27. but it was extraordinary, and he that was a perpetual type of
Christ our King might for a time join or use a Priestly habit, moved thereto no
doubt by divine inspiration. But as these garmens did belong only to the
Priests, so were they proper only to the holy place, for when he was to go
from the altar, although in his sacred function they were to be putt of, and
others putt on, Lev. 6.11. yet the Levites seem to have us^d them in carrying
the Arc from the house of Obed Edom to the city of David, 1. Chron. 15.27.
yet it may be these garments were not the Baddim of the Priests, nor that Ephod
of David, but some special ornament, for joye and solemnity of the time, which
David wore in common with the Levites, whose duty it was to carry the Ark, as
if he had longed and leaped for joy to be counted in the number of the sacred
and holy ministers.

The other word Buts, there used does seem to signify this difference, so as
Bad in the end of the verse may by a common name show the like garment both of
the Kings and of the Levites, neither the one nor the other using that which
belonged only to the Priests and the holy place.

For to add one thing more because we have entered upon this matter of
garments; these were so proper and peculiar to the holy place that they were
to be used if the priests were there conversant, though upon other occasion
then for religion; whereunto tends that of Josephus, That when Herod reedified
the temple and could not himself for religions sake enter into the inward
parts, he procured the framing thereof by the priests, a thousand of them at his
cost were clothed with priestlie robes, and were not unskillful, some in
masonrie, some in carpentrie lib. Antiq. 15. 14.

These garments do therefore seem to prove him to be Christ, who is the only
priest worthy to be consulted with in all doubtful matters, whose lips
preserve knowledge, and at whose mouth the law is to be inquired. He is alwais
in the temple, in the midst of his own, and therefore is alwais clothed with
holy garments: which yet will more appear, if we consider him standing upon
the waters of the river.

The other two angels each of them kept his bank, looking to their tasks
enjoined, but the care of all lay upon this, and therefore as the Spirit moved
upon the first waters, susteining them in that confusion by his mighty power
Genesis 1.2. so Christ watches over the affairs of his Church, which would
quickly come to utter ruin if they were not supported by his power.

But it is to be observed, if this be Christ, Michael is not, for he does
plainly distinguish between himself and Michael in the end of the tenth
chapter, and there is none that holds with me, faith he, in these things
but Michael your prince.

Such are therefore the persons conferring: the Question it self, How long
shall it be to the end of these wonders? that is to say, when shall the e^d of
these wonders be? The Angels do desire to behold and pry into the secret
mystery of redemption, unto which earnest study they might privately give
themselves, and enquire these things apart, if their example were nothing
pertinent to kindle and inflame our industry.

Who therefore can without great blame be negligent in inquiring after these
thinger, whereof he sees the angels so greedy, though excelling in
multiplicitie of knowledge of things. Neither is this their ignorance
feigned: for to what end should the answerer so earnestly swear in a matter of
no doubt, for their sakes especially did he speak so earnestly by
asseveration, knowing that Daniel could not understand his answer. And we
know that the Angls, though they be of an excellent understanding of all
things created, yet are ignorant of many things till they be further
informed. For they are not only ignorant of the last day, but also of that
manifould wisdom of God in the mystery of the Gospel, which it now made
known by the Church unto principalities and powers in heavenly places Ephesians.
3.10. They desire to have these things showed unto them, whereby they might the
more magnify the great and high creator for his infinite wisdom.

Verse. 7. Verse. 7.
And J heard the man clothed in linen. The answer is confirmed by an oath,
the form whereof is expressed by gesture and words. The gesture is the lifting
up of both hands to heaven; That is to say, toward heaven. It was an ancient
custom in swearinge to lift up the right hand to heaven, as if they would call
him to be present for a wittnes, whose glory and majesty does shine
especially in the heavens: but he here clothed in linen, by lifting up both
his hands does seriously show some excellent matter, and does more pearce and
affecte the mind with a sense of the highest Majesty.

As often as the name of God is to be used, the mind is to be raised up to as
great a reverence as may possibly be, and how much more of us miserable men
very dust and earth, when as the mighty and holy Angels do so prepare and
dispose themselves at the very mention of him. Oh you most filthy beasts which
do in mockery pollute his holy name in your common talk. The solemn words
are by him that lives for ever. In all invocation, when the mind is not
capable of the divine exceeding greatness, an attention is specially to be
fastened on that part, as I may say, which is most powerful to kindle and
stir up our present faith. Whereas now therefore the times are spoken of, he
most fitly brings in God living for ever, who can best of all bear witness of
the appointed periods of all things, whose alone is eternity it self.

But now let us come to the matter it self; which sets down the time two
ways, both by a certain distributio^, and by a full dispersion of the holy
people. The distribution is more general and indefinite, which may as well
agree to any age, for what age is there wherein we may not find a time, times
and a half? But the other member, and when he shall have accomplished to
scatter the power of the holy people, All these things shall be accomplished;
does revoke that generality unto certain bounds, neither does it permit a
wandering into all ages, but makes it proper to one certain: as if he should
say, All these things shall have an end, not at every time, times and half a
time, but at one certain time, when he shall make an end of scattering the
holy people: which plain and perspicuous sentence makes me think that those
things can no ways agree to Antiochus.

For although we grant the time of his afflicting the Church to fall fitly
into this distribution, whereof notwithstanding we shall see by and by: Had this
people also an end of their calamities with Antiochus? Did that blessed
resurrection and happy, happen to the Jews at his death? What scattering from
the first beginning of the nation, is comparable to this, whereof they have had
now such miserable experience these many ages since their crucifiing of
Christ? It was not more grievous to be afflicted in their own country, then
to be scattered through the whole world: to want their country, goods,
estates and liberties, and to hold their lives at other men's pleasures
whersover they live: besides the distribution fitteth not.

The most learned Tremellius does so render it. After an appointed time,
appointed times, and part of time. The words are thus properly: At, or for an
appointed time, appointed times and a half. For I think ^hesi is no where
used but for an half or equal part of another. But before where the same
matter is handled, it is Vphelag guiddan, and the division of time. c. 7.25. I
confess it, but because the word phelag was doubtful, this prophecy being
more plain, as the latter always uses to be, does by name express: what
part he meant and speaks of before, sure half. Can we then after this
fashion devide the time wherein Antiochus afflicted the Jews? Our writers do
refer these things unto that time wherein the daily sacrifice was taken away
by Antiochus, and the abominable sacrifices of the wicked gentiles were
substitute and put in liew thereof. But his time is far from the accounte: For
this abomination lasted but three years and ten days at the most: The.15.
day of the month Chisleu in the 145. year this impietio began 1. Mac. 1.57.
and in the year 148. the 25 day of the same month, the abomination was put
away and the ^emple cleansed, 1. Mac. 4.52. therefore if one year be a time, 2
years, times, ten days are distant from the half 172. days.

But Josephus does expressly confirm the assiduitie and continuance of the
daily worshipp to have been inhibited for three years and six months, In bello
Iudaico lib. 1.11. But the Macabean contrary, That day the heathen had defiled
it, in the same day was it made new again, 1 Ma. 4.54. where are then the six
months of Josephus, if it were restored, the same day that it was defiled?
Thereunto agrees the second book of Macab. 10.5. That day the temple was
polluted by strangers, on the very same day it was cleansed again. Yea
Josephus himself a more faithful wittnes elsewhere contradicted himself.

And they offered whole burn offerings, says he, upon the new altar and that
fell out upon the same day wherein their holy things had been profaned three
years before Antiq. lib. 12. 11. See how exquisitely he speaks, showing it
also to be the same day of the year not of the week.

Therefore the true time of this abomination was precisely three years only,
we made mention lately of ten dais more, but by them was signified the
beginning of that wicked enterprise revealed; What then came into Josephus
mind to make an addition of six months more? Surely, as it seems, from the
misunderstanding of this ptophecie, which he thought to be referred to
Antiochus, he would have fitted the time against all truth of history.

But you will say, though these things do not fitly agree to that three
years, yet they agree well enough to the term of two thousand three hundred
days, which time of raging was appointed before to Antiochus by the Angel cha.
8.14. for if we allow for a time 657 days, for times 1314. for half a time
328. the sum will be made up wanting but one day. Truly this conjecture co^eth
nearer to the truth then the former, and shows what a near conjunction there
is between these two enemies, who have the like time of the raging allowed
unto, yet it wandreth much from the meaning of this prophecy: for this
distribution is the very same with that of c. 7.25. and belongs unto it. But
that little horn of the 7. c. which is the same with this time, is not the same
with the little horn of the 8 chap. which is certainly Antiochus Epiphanes, and
therefore we shall not do well to consound the times and to give that to one
which is proper to another. Not to speak of the vision of the 7. c. which was
at the sea, but that of the ^ight at the river of Vlai, and those in the
seventh were written in the common tongue of the heathenish Kingdom, that the
common prophecy might come abroad unto all.

These in the 8. in the proper and mother tongue of the holy people; by both
which the prophet would insinuate that first prophecy to be more general,
This more particular, and those which follow thence to the end of the book.

To let these things pass, I say: It is most certain, that the little horn
of the eight chapter is of the third great Monarchy, whereof c. 7.17. for it is of
the goat, which is called a leopard, chap. 7.6. with his 4 wings and 4 Heads,
therefore he makes one Kingdom with the goat and leopard. For the horns
must not be pulled off from the heads, and another manner of Kingdom appointed
of those and of th^se, wherefore all these do belong unto the third Empire and
Monarchy, which is of the Macedonians. But the little horn of the 7. chap. is
of the fourth great Monarchy, except we will labor to make them but three
only, which the Angel says are four c. 7.17. contrary to the ancient
histories, which do acknowledge no such diversity in the horns from the
beast it self, whose the horns are, nor observe any such thing in Antiochus:
wherefore a new Kingdom should begin from him. He reckons the years of his
Kingdom from Alexander, 1. Mac. 1.11. and so constantly through that whole
narration. Surely if a new government was to begin from thence, the Spirit had
directed his pen to bring the accounte, from his first beginning after the
manner of other Kingdoms. Furthermore the little horn of the eigth chapt. does
come out of one of the four horns of the goat, but the little horn of the 7.
cha. came up among the other ten horns.

Besides this horn reigns till the horns be cast down, and the ancient of
dais did sit chapter 7.9. that is to say, till all the Kingdoms of the world be
overthrown, and all principality come to Christ, as it will soon com^ to
pass after this blasphemous horn be cut off.

But presently after Antiochus had not the Kingdom, at least that most ample
one of full glory, whom all nations should serve, as it is there in verse 14.
It were tedious to gather all those things which show a difference. These few
may be sufficient to the understanding and lovers of the truth.

Seeing therefore these things cannot agree unto Antiochus, we must seek out
some other Kingdom, which we shall find to be no other then the Turkish,
whither the prophecy has brought us allreadye, as we have showed. This is
that little horn among the ten, coming out of the fourth great Kingdom, to
wit the Roman, most famous in the Apocalypse with the ten horns. chap. 12.3.
etc. with whose iron teeth and nails of brass, all the rest were devoured and
broken in pieces. The time of this little horn was limited before cha. 7.25.
and is here repeated again as the but and bound of that matter which the
Angels demanded. For the man clothed in linen answers. Then shall be the end
of these wonders, when the blaspemous Kingdom of the Turks shall come to an
end, then God should make an end of scattering the holy people and of pouring
out his wrath any further upon them.

But what should be the time of this tyranny, is more plainly understood by
the revelation, where is given him an hour and day and a month and a year
chapter 9.15. which sum comes to 395 years, every day being taken for a
year, as we have there showed. By which entire number granted we may now
understand the reason of the division, for a time is one hundred years, times
200. years, half a time 50. which whole space if we number from the beginning
of the Turkish power anno 1300. it will end at lenght at the year 1650. but 45.
remain still. You will say, The reason is because the Apocal. sets down
the last time of the Turkish name, but the Angel here does set down the
beginning of his ruin and alteration, which destruction we shall presently see
to be set down in his express numbers at v. 11. and 12. following: as we have
formerly heard.

First the tidings out of the East shall trouble him, then some years after his
utter ruin shall follow in the land of Tsebi 11. 44. 45. But the d^stribution
us^d in this place reaches to the tidings and no farther.

Therefore so is the end of the wonders, when all these things shall be
fullfilled, that is to say when the resurrection shall be, the glory of the
saints shall shine, the glory of the teachers shall be chieffest, and all
other things brought to perfection whereby Christ's Kingdom shall have the
pre-eminence over all; Which things if any man judge to be meant of the
internal kingdom already obtained, he destroieth the prophecy, which is
specially conversant in foretelling things which shall be accomplished, being
proper to certain places and times, and not alike common to all alike: whereof
what observation or pr^diction or admiration can there be, as is of these
things which in the former verse are called wonders?

It is to be observed, that the same distribution here in this place used in
Apoc. 12.14. are not of the same continuance, for that of the Apoca: is of 42
months, this of Daniel is only of 13. and certain days.

Verse. 8. Verse. 8.
And I heard, but understood not. Hitherto the conference of the Angels and the
instruction belonging unto them. Now he comes to Daniel. The occasion is his
ignorance and a question the holy man heard, but he understood not. A young
beginner is not capable of that which the Scholars of the upperforme do
easily and quickly conceive.

A notable proof of difference betwixt the heavenly and earthly School. An
obscure declarat^on suffices them, which our dulnes no more perceives then
the blind man does the sun beams, although it be of the most acute and
wittiest: for who is more acute then Daniel? But how is Daniel now ignorant of
that which he understood before? Had he forgotten it? It was the same division
of the same Kingdom in cha. 7. and a certain angel being asked of the whole
matter, made known unto him the interpretation of the words, chapter 7.16. There
the continuance of the tyranny only was signified by that distribution, which
was sufficient to understand that vision.

But now another thing is demanded when the end should be. Now continuance of
a certain part of any thing, unless we know where the count is to begin, does
leave the mind in doubt floting or wavering with a confused notion only.

This is therefore that which he desired to know, with the expectation whereof
he might comfort the tediousnes of his present grief. But happily he is not
without all blame in that he so curiously enquireth into the times.

Indeed Christ gave his Disciples a check for asking such things: It is not for
you, says he, to know the times and seasons which the Father has putt in his
own power, Acts 1.7. and how was it that Daniel thought not thus? Surely, if
it concerned me to know these things, the angel would have spoken plainly,
and have fitted his speech to my capacity, but it seems he would have me rest
in the certain expectation of things to com to pass one day, whereupon he did
use such a solemn oath, and would have me to search no further when they shall
be accomplished.

Surely, the angel by not granting his request does seem secretly to reprove
it: yet not so, but some should at length understand those things, else he
would not have added such express bounds of the matter: and that saying of
Christ, is not simply and absolutely to be understood, but in part, and in some
sense. For Paul does define certain times, and all things are most accurately
delivered to John in the revelation. Therefore he would not have his Apostles
too careful of the times, which did so little concern their callings, but
above all things to be diligent in preaching of the Gospel, wherein consists
the very life of salvation.

Verse. 9.
And he said: Go thy way Daniel for thy words are closed up. The Angel
answers, and first by refusing to impart that which he demanded. Go thy way,
says he, and be contented with those many secrets, which have been already
revealed unto thee: there is a certain measure of knowledge for every one,
beyond which we may not pass. Every man ought to contain himself within his
bounds, whatsoever notable and remarkable thing is to fall out u^till the
M^ssiah be manifested in the flesh. Thou have undoubted knowledge abundantly,
clearly and exactly: that which from that time shall after come to pass,
although thou see the continual course thereof unto the later end marked out,
yet the very moments of time thou must not know, for these words are closed and
sealed up till the time of the end. Thou must not only seal unto others the
things delivered before in obscure terms, as thou conceivest of me, but also
the reason of the times, for things to be done after the coming of Christ is
shutt up from thy self: the understanding of them is not to be found out,
before the appointed time is come, and the end draw near, wherein all things
shall be perfected and fulfilled.

This is the sum of the Angels answer, and we see how men in vain in all
ages have troubled themselves in the calculation and account of these things.
These dark questions have framed the Laberinth with intricate windings.

How unapt are we of our selves, to foresee things to com, when we fail so
fowly here and there, though the light of most certain truth be held out unto
us* we are not therefore to stick in men's great names: This knowledge and
search is not from humane capacity, but from divine revelation, if not
extraordinary, yet the mind must be enlightened from above, and specially at
that time when as the consummation and end shall be at hand and before the
doors.

Verse. 10.
Many shall be purified, and made white and tried.. A general consalation.
Daniel might have feared least, that the saints being destitute of so clear a
light, might dash upon so many grievous offenses, and at length fall into many
gulfes of destruction. The Angel meets with it, and bids him not to be
anxious and pensive in that respect. They should sustain no loss at all by
the obscurity of those things: for both the holiness of profession shall be
manifest and certain, and the wise shall get understanding.

Both these members are expressly laid down, and illustrated also by a
putting to of the contraryes. The ungodliness of the wicked, which shall do
wickedly, is opposed to the constancy of profession, and ignorance of the
ungodly, to the understanding of the wise. As for constancy, it is more
profitable to the godly to live always in expectation of their Lords coming
approaching, then to understand the delay thereof for a long season, considering
the great infirmityes of us all, yea the wise virgins also sleep whilst the
Bridegroom tarryeth, And when the servant beginns to think with himself, that
his Lord will delay his coming, he will fall a smiting his fellow servants and
maidens, and will eat and drink and be drunken. Therefore this obscurity does
bring this commodity with it, to drive away security, and to make the mind
always vigilant and attentive, for it yields a certain present hope; which
will not suffer them to be filthy or vile, but does spur them on to go
courageously forward without intermission.

Hence it comes to pass, that no dangers do terrify the Saints, but they
get and gain singular profitt by them, according to the manner and greatness
of every trial; for they are distinguished into a threefold degree, for they
are either certain light ones or more grievous, or very great.

The first sort shall make the Saints pure and clean, as we do purify
things, which have not gotten much filth, either by a slight wyping or rubbing
or spunging of them: Or if a garment have drunk in deeper any filth or spott,
that it cannot be cleansed without greater pains, the trial shall be nothing
else but a certain whiting, indeed a more troublesome and sharp trial,
according to the quality of the filth more deeply soakt in, which yet
notwithstanding shall not exceed the bounds of purifying.

But if it be needful to break vessels, which are unclean, and very filthy,
and to cast them into the fire, they shall be cast into the furnace, for no
other end but to be melted, and to be made afresh new and holy vessels. Surely,
a very great comfort to the godly, whether they be purified or wyped lightly
over with lighter afflictions, or be whited with some sharper trials, as under
the fullers feet, or last of all with the greatest they be melted in the
furnace of the hottest fire.

But it must be observed, although certain words be here repeated, which were
used formerly, cha. 11.35. yet it will not therefore follow to be the same
persecution. These are common effects of every affliction, there are also the
Pastors by name expressed, but this no less concerns the common people.

But the wicked shall do wickedly. This is the opposite member of the first
part, as obscurity shall drive away security from the good, so it shall
increase it in the wicked: For when they shall see no fear before their eyes,
they will think there is no danger at all: therefore they will loose the reins
to their lusts, give themselves to pleasure, and take their ease, after a
mocking fashion demanding, where is the promise of his coming? For since the
Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of
the creation, 2. Peter 3.4. But let no man be moved with their example, seeing
the Spirit has foretold the same so long before.

The second member is of understanding, whereof all the wicked shall be void,
for they observe no events, and those which they see with their eyes, they
attribute to nothing less then to divine providence; the God of this world
does so blind their eyes, and deprive them of all light of understanding, that
they see not their own destruction before they have plunged themselves
therinto, without all hope of escape.

But the elect do otherwise, which amidst the great darkness of worldly things
do always see some twilight, by guidance whereof they may walk in safety:
for they do always draw from the divine oracles, that which may serve for
their comfort and instruction, howsoever to the world they be inextricable, or
such as cannot be dissolved.

This therefore does the Angel affirm, that some sparks do always shine in
the wise in the midst of this darkness, as much as may suffice for their
several times and ages: to such wise men, I say, which do wholly depend upon
the will of God, which do not suffer the works of God, to pass away by them
without profitt, which call to remembrance the things past compare and lay
together things present, use great diligence in searching of the Scriptures. To
these wise which have, shall more be given, knowledge shall be increased, faith
shall be confirmed; neither shall obscurity hinder them any thing from
obteyning that which is needful or profitable. It is to be observed that the
word Mashchilim, when it is opposed to the wicked, is not taken for the
teachers alone, but for any of the common sort of believers.

And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away. Verse. 11.
Hitherto was comfort from the freedom of danger, now there is help of
understanding afoarded, though not unto Daniel himself, who had answer before
to be gone, and that the thing was closed up, and sealed, yet so as
notwithstanding he should declare and leave it to posterity; whereby before the
end of days, they being better informed by the event of things, might have
sure witness of the admirable truth and wisdom of God.

Let us dive into this deep and bottomless pit, supported by divine
assistance, if happily he will grant us to bring forth to light that which had
hitherto layne hid in the bottom of deep darkness.

There is the more hope of a happy endeavor and attempt herein, by reason of
the end now approaching, whereunto the understanding of these things is
promised.

Verily, I do unwillingly encounter with other men's learned judgments, and I
would refrain the very naming of them, but that, as I am persuaded, necessity
does otherwise enforce.

But I hope that good and reasonable men and lovers of the truth will not take
it amiss to have those things removed out of the way, which do hinder the
right understanding of things, when as themselves also have taken all
praysworthy labors, to find out the truth, and have freely taken away all
whatsoever they knew did hinder the same.

There is a twofold time here laid down, certain and limited, but neither of
them do at all belong to Antiochus: For in that, the first whereof in this
verse of 1290. days is referred to that time, wherein Antiochus Eupator, the
Son of Epiphanes did by his Letters pattents or chatter permit and confirm
to the Jews the worship restored by Judas Macabeus from the time of the
desolation made by his Fathet Antiochus; The calculation or account does not
agree: For the true time of the desolation, as we have showed before in ver. 7.
was just thre^ whole years to a nayl, or ten days more at the uttermost.

To the decree, made by Antiochus the Son, the fiftenth day of the month
Xan^icus, 2. Maca. 11.33. (which month answers to Nisan of the Hebrews, as
Josephus in his Antiqui: lib 3. cap. 10.) there are added other 108. days
more: for so many fall out betw^ene the 25. of Chis^en, and the fiftenth of
Xanticus. The sum of all these is only a 121^. days, which want of the
number set down by the Angel 77. days.

But if any will believe Josephus his fable, whereof we have spoken in the
seventh verse, who does add of his own six months, to the time of the
desolation: which whole space of three years and six mon^ths does affoard
1272. days, yet notwithstanding eighte^ne days are wanting to this sum. But
if we join 108. days to these th^ee years and and six month, the space to
the decree of Antiochus the Son, then there will be 90. days over and too
many: so will this space and time no way agree with it self; not to repeat
other matters, whereby we have before evinced sufficiently, that the Angel
has nothing to do with Antiochus from the 36 verse of the former chapter.

Calvin of happy memory did well see, that this could not be understood of the
profaning of the Temple, which was done by Antiochus, therefore does apply it
unto the Romans, but will have the number of the days to be taken
allegorically, as if the Angel had said to this effect, although the time of
affliction may seem very long, even to 1290. days, yet we must not despair,
nor be out of heart of such a great number, but always to call to mind,
although affliction remain a time and times, yet there will follow afterward
but half a time. But for that the Angel would have used some usual and
ordinary number, it falls out often times, that 7. or 10: or a hundred, or a
thousand, or some such round and common number is putt for an indefinite: but
no man will use unaccustomed particulars in common speech, except he intended
some just and certain sum.

Besides that, what mystery has such sentence in it? What needs that to be
sealed or shutt from Daniel, or any other, which is the common doctrine of all
times? It is well known to all the Saints, that the very longest afflictions
shall come to an end at length: neither could Daniel be ignorant thereof, if
the former distribution had meant any such thing: wherefore we must not rest in
any common doctrine, but we must find out some thing proper and peculiar to
times and places, without which it is no prophecy.

There are many other interpretations, but not of any moment and authority, as
to hinder the truth at all, and therefore I will let them pass.

Now then to discover and declare the matter, according to the measure of grace
given unto us, in these words the Angel teaches two things; First, the very
decree and set time, from whence we are to beginn to number and account;
afterward the continuance thereof. That is set out by a double note or mark;
One is of taking away of daily sacrifice, the other is of setting up of the
abominable desolation.

There is mention made in Daniel diverse times of taking away of the dally
sacrifice chapter 8.11. and 9.17. and 11.31. Now it is out of all controversy,
that all these places do belong unto two times only, and to two men by whom
it should be taken away; Antiochus and Christ: whether of these does the Angel
speak of? we have showed before both by the number of the days, and by other
arguments also, that it cannot be referred to Antiochus.

Christ therefore is to be understood, who by his death has abolished the
ceremonial law of sacrificing: which is also made plain by the manner of
speaking, where Antiochus is spoken of, there is allwais added some
signification of wickedness, of putting down the truth, of suppressing and
contempt of holiness or of some such like, for because he by violatinge the
daily sacrifice did abolish and take away the law: but when Christ is spoken
of, it is only said absolutely, He shall make the sacrifice to cease or take it
away as in this place, because he did abolish it, not by violatinge and
breaking it, but by fullfilling it. Must we then begin to number from his
death? not so, but the other part of the set time is to be added, And to set
up the abominable desolation.

It is hard and hidden indeed what time these words do mean: yet we must
labor to fish and find it out by comparing it with other places.

It would be tedious to repeat all other men's judgments. I will content my
self with the bringing forth mine own, which I leave and commend to the
godly and learned, as also all things else of mine to be weighed and
examined. (...) Shiekats does signify Abomination and execration or cursing,
but it is attributed to diverse things according to the differing respect and
state of the time: which Homonymie, that is, when diverse things are signified
by one and the same word, has peradventure deceived some.

Before Christ yt was a very abominable and accursed thing to take away the
legal ceremonies which God himself did institute and deliver to the fathers
to be religiously observed, whence Antiochus is said to set up the desolating
abomination chapter 11.31. After Christ, who brought an end to the legal worship by
fullfilling the truth of all shadows in himself.

It was no less odious and hateful to obtrude and thrust upon God an old
worship antiquated and abolished. Whereunto Esaie seems to have reference,
speaking in the name of the Lord, He that kills a bullock is as if he had
slain a man, he that sacrifices a sheep as if he cut off a dogs neck, he
that offers an oblation as if he offered swines blood, he that burns
incense, as if he blessed an idol, yea they have chosen their own ways and
their soul delights in their abominations cha. 66.3.4. God in deed does
worthily detest heathenish superstition, but for men brought up in
understanding of divine things to hate and persecute the truth, and to
dissemble and faigne holiness and piety with an adulterate and cou^terfeite
wors^ip, as the Jewish nation does since they rejected Christ, is a most
loathsome abominatio^ before God. May not that also be the meaning of that
before in chapter 9.27. Where after the sacrifice abrogated by Christ, there
follows desolation upon the winge of abominations? Let us see briefly, if you
please, as also to bring some light and evidence happily to a place very
difficult and intricate: The words are thus; And he shall confirm the covenant
with many for one week, and in the midst of the week he shall cause the
sacrifice and oblation to cease, and upon the wing of abominations that makes
desolate, and until the consummation and that determined, he shall pour upon
the desolat. chap. 9.27.

Having showed in the beginning of the former verse the Jews horrible
wickedness, in putting the Messiah to death; he declares afterward, what
punishments, those that are guilty of so great wickedn^s, should undergo.

These says he are two, The first is the destruction of the city and
sanctuary, which he describes in the rest of the verse, and he does free
them from a doubt in the beginning of the next verse. For it might be demanded
what should become of Gods worship, the sacred and holy places being
demolished and cast down. The Angel does prevent it and shows both that
Christ himself whilst he lived, should make a new covenant, and confirm it
unto many, and also by his death should at length put an end unto all legal
ceremonies, that there should he no need after that, either of the city
Jerusalem or of the temple to worship God.

The second punishment is of the People which he distinguishes by a double
condition: First of the Nation in some sort as yet standing, and entire, then
secondly broken altogether and trodden under foot. The two words (...) and
(...). Meshomim and shomem, desolating and desolated, or making and made
desolate, do signify this difference to us: for that is active of some force,
yet to their own destruction, but this is passive and of no strength, borne
only to suffer violence of strangers.

But thou willt say, There is no word or mention of any punishment appointed
for either. True indeed, for the Aogel thought it better to leave it to be
thought of, then to express it. For when he had recorded before, the death of
the Messiah, What punishment could have been spoken of, worthy of such a sin
and villainy? Wherefore as unable to set out the greatness thereof, he rather
signifies grievousnes and heinousnes of it by an ecclypsis or defect of
speech, then by an open and plain term.

But as concerning the affairs of the nation yet standing for a time as
entire, the fearful revenging hand of God set upon the winge of abominations
that makes desolate. Which, then, and what manner of wing is this? wing is a
military word signifiing some troop, or band of soldiers, such as was the
wing of the Jewish rebels, when they took up arms against the Romans: for the
Angel does point at this very time, when he says not simply that God will
reveng and punish the abomination of the Jews, then being common to all that
time, since they had rejected Christ, and obstinately retained their abolished
ceremonies: but on the winge, he says* when rebellion shall be added to
abomination, and the people shall be mustered and ranked into wings, bands and
troops: as Josephus de bello Iudaico lib. 45. reports it was done, when the
zealous (for so the conspiratours called themselves,) whose captains were
Eleazar and John, having gathered together a company of desperate men, did
betake themselves into the Temple which they made the tower and refuge both of
the Civil intestine, as also of the foreign wars.

These troops of thieves and robbers, allthough all the people conspiring
together, were of the same rank, was certainly this wing of abominations,
wholly compact of most desperate, cruel and wicked men, of whom the very
Edomites were ashamed, who being called for their aid, after they saw the
barbarousnes of their fellows and companions, did forsake them presently, and
conveyed themselves home again.

This was the winge making desolate with its audacious impudency and
wickedness, and brought ruin, upon their own heads, and upon their whole
country and laws. Many things make for this exposition.

First because destruction came upon this wing after Christ was cut off, for
that is (...), g^alcanaph, as it did fall out and happen to the Jews properly,
not to the Romans. Then again those things which Christ adds for
explication sake Matthew. 24.15. This wing should stand in the holy place even
as these robbers in the temple, which they possessed immediately after they had
begun their conspiracy, and held it to their last universal slaughter.

For allthough the whole land of Judea was the holy place in respect of other
countries, yet Christ spoke to his disciples, who by that kind of speech did
understand the Temple as they were accustomed commonly. Which yet is more
plain and evident by Mark. 13.14. Who faith this abomination should be set
where it ought not, which cannot agree to the Romans. For Christ had now
already approved of their rule over the Jews, and had commanded the^ to give
to Caesar those things that were Caesar's. Then was it lawful for them to
enforce those mutinous conspiratours to their duties, what should hinder them
from besieging the city upon just occasion? when as they made not war
against them willingly, but drawn thereto against their wills and injuriosly
provoked.

Last of all Christ propounds this wing of abominations standing in the holy
place as a sign to fly out of Judea, which any might do in convenient time,
whilst these rebels possessed the Temple a year or two before the Roman army
came thither, and there was then very good cause to fly, when they could
expect no harder measure from a conquering enemy, then the citisens suffered of
their domestical murderers, but after the city was besieged it was too late
to think of an escape by flight. But Luke chapter 21.20. makes mention of an army
besieging Jerusalem, I confess it, but yet notwithstanding there is no less
difference between this army and that winge, then between the Romans and the
Jews, things which differ in the whole subjects.

Therefore there is not a word of abomination, where there is any mention of
this army. The one might be well a fit token of the other, some part of the
time of both existing together, wh ch vicinitie and neernesse happily
occasioned the expositours to confound the things themselves, but they are
altogether diverse in the nation, country and people, to wit, the army of the
Romans, and the abominable winge of the Jews.

The exhortation which follows after to flight, we have seen out of Matthew
from what fontaine it properly flows. All things therefore duly weighed, it
seems to me more probable and fit to expound it of the Jews then of foreign
legions.

The other part of punishment is upon the nation trodden underfoot, such as it
should be from that war, never able to raise up it self again, He shall
pour, (says he,) upon the desolate, even to the consummation and that
determined, which words do show that it shall be overwhelmed with continual
miseries, and be brought almost unto nothing, as we know it was, yet it should
have this comfort, that there is a time determined and limited to these
calamities for so means the word (...) Nechoretsah.

Hence therefore we see a twofold desolation of the place of the people of
Jerusalem, and of the whole nation. The two former did fall into the same time.
The third indeed from that original does yet endure through many generations.

But the desolation of abomination is a differing thing from all these, a full
abolishinge of the ceremonial worship as well in respect of use as right,
which the appointed days will not have begun at the destruction of
Jerusalem: Thefore we must seek yet further. Nevertheles seeing it is now
manifest what is abomination: the other word Shomem remains to be examined,
which expositours do render diversely, Calvin making astonished, Tremelius making
desolate.

But for the most part it does always signify passively in this active form,
when it not^th action, it is mostly used in piel: which difference Daniel does
diligently observe: for speaking of Antiochus, which made desolation by setting
up abomination, he notes him by abomination that makes desolate, Meshomem:
chapter 11.31. And again the same form of the word shows the authors of the
calamity, to come upon them upon the wing of abominations, Meshomim, making
desolate, as in the place lately expounded chapter 9.27. but where he speaks of
the people suffering desolation, he uses the word Shomim, as there he shall
power upon the desolate. In which place both words are used Meshomem, and
Shomem as the figure Antanaclasis, does make the difference more apparent.

Once I find it to signify actively as before in chapter 8.13. but out of the
more frequent use of the word, we render it passively to set up abomination,
made desolate.

This is the sum and effect of the whole sentence, and from the time, of the
daily sacrifice taken away by the death of Christ; And of setting up
abomination made desolate, that is to say, of abolishing utterly that impious
manner of sacrificinge; for God had determined that the abrogated use of the
ceremonial worship should at lenght be utterly rooted out, so as the least
trace thereof should not remain. Wherefore when as the set time does consist of
two parts, the abrogation of lawful worship, and the rooting out of adulterous.

For the first it is agreed upon amongst all, into what time it fell out,
neither can the second be obscure and hidden, if we diligently peruse the
history. We know from Christ raised up from the dead, unto the times of
Vespasian, this abomination did stand in the holy place: holy, both by the
first inst^tution, and also by the estimation of the common people without any
interpretation.

But he having surprised Jerusalem, did burn the Temple and deface that place,
where alone it was lawful to sacrifice. Who would not now have thought the
abomination to be made desolate, but soon after it showed it self again a
little, until Adrian wasted the Jews with a new slaughter, and took from them
all hope of recovering the holy rubbish decayed; For which cause they had
raised a sharp war.

Did then the hatred lie buried from this time? after a few years it made new
broiles again: for wicked Julian having gotten the government, was the author
and furtherer of the restoring the abomination, not only givinge them liberty
to repair and build the Temple, but also by commanding the charges to be
supplied out of the publik revenewes of the common wealth. Socr. lib. 3. 20.

Neither went they negligently about the business when they had this liberty:
The Jews did diligently follow their opportunity.

All things were in a readiness toward the buildinge: but God did sodeinly
befoole and make void all their labor and impious endeavors. An exceeding great
earthquake did shake and utterly overthrowe the old foundations which were yet
remayninge; or as Theodoret reports, themselves cast it down with their own
hands, thinking to build it new from the lowest foundations lib. 3. 20.

Then fire falling down from heaven, did burn up all their working tools and
instruments, so as will they nill they, they were constreined to desist, and
leave off their enterprise, and to go home every one into those contries,
whence they had runn together out of every place on all sides.

Cyrill of Jerusalem makes mention of this prophecy of Daniel, when the Jews
did first set upon the work, which Christ has also laid down in the
Gospels, and spoke it unto many in private, that now was the time com that a
stone should not be left upon a stone in the temple, but that saying of our
Savior should be fulfilled. Neither was his prediction vain: The earthquake
the very next night confirmed the very truth thereof.

Now, that I may conclude with the words of Socrates: So therefore was the
Temple utterly overthrown in stead of the new building, which was prepared. But
now that we have seen many and diverse overthrowes, which of them shall we make
the beginning of the account? Assuredly the last: for a thing is not said to be
utterly wast and desolate before it be so cast down, as it rises up no more.
As long as it does a little after revive again; It has a being after a sort
though very troublesome. When after Julian therefore nothing mo^e was
attempted, let us acknowledge from that time the abomination utterly made
desolate.

Now then, we have the set time of the beginning certain, the last open
overthrow of all the legal worship, which came to pass in the days of
Julian, about the year 360. For O^uphtius does cast the first of Constantine
into the year 304. whereunto if we add 31 years of his reign, and then 24 of
his Son Constantius, and last of all one, and certain months of Julian, we
shall find the Apostata to have reigned precisely at the said time. Let this
be spoken of the Epache or just time of beginning of the account; the space of
time follows, which can not be concluded in the number of so many natural
days.

No such thing, as is here foretold, did fall out about that time. And the
prophet uses, when natural days are understood to add, and put to their
terms, whereby to know them, as unto evening morning 2300. days, chapter 8.14.
which bounds being here wanting, we are not to think of any other days then
before of the weeks, whereof every one did signify a week of years: after
which account every day most be taken for a year. Neither so also but also the
Julian years, of which sort were those seventy of weeks; whereof if we put
1290 years to the times of Julian the Apostata, the fore-appointed time will
end, and be out at the year 1650. exactly when a time, times, and half a time
shall be ended as before, verse. 7. Then shall Euphrates be dried up, that the
way of the Kings of the East may be prepared, Apoc. 16.12. Then the tidings
out of the East shall trouble the King of the North, as before chap. 11.44.
Then the Bride, which has been banished from the marriage bed so many ages and
generations shall at length, hear, return, Return O Shulamite, as we have
showed upon Canti. 6.13. Then finally shall that voice ring out Hallelujah, for
the marriage of the Lamb and his wife, Apoca. 19.4.7. for these things do
belong to the same time, and these are the things which shall presently follow
the destruction of Rome, whose last destiny or ruin is now at hand, as we
have made plain and evident in the Revelation.

Verse. 12. Verse. 12.
Blessed is he that waits and comes. So is the first bound and limit, which
being known, the second cannot be hard nor hidden, for this of 1335. days does
add and put to the former 45 years, and does end at the year 1695. The former
number did end at the first reeling and declining power of the Turks, this
second at the defacing and utter abolishing of the same: That was perfectly
finished together with time, times, and half. This shall end together with that
space of an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, Apoc. 9.15. The
tidings before did trouble him from the East, but now his universal slaughter
shall be in the Land of Tzebi, or Judea, and before th s last limit is that
ample and large promise prefixed: Blessed are they that wait, and do come unto
it. And then indeed shall all the Saints be blessed, who shall have a glorious
resurrection, and be raised out of the dust of destruction, and every one of
them shining like the firmament and stars: for this is the time and limit of
that resurrection, of which before, verse. 2.3. and Apoc. 26.12, what shall be
wanting to the chiefest felicity on earth, when the Saints shall see new
Jerusalem coming down from Heaven, themselves inrold citizens thereof, dogs
excluded, and whatsoever is unclean, hunger and thy st to be far of, all
enemies rooted out, and all tears taken away for ever?

When I say, there shall be all these things, and infinitely many other, which
the prophets do prosecute with admirable pleasantness of words. Can it be
doubted any longer, but then shall be indeed that golden age, and highest top
of holy felicity, and happiness, which mortal men may expect, yea or think
of in this earthly and base habitation.

And this word alone does false up our minds rather to hope for those things,
which the Prophets have so solemnly spoken of this ma^ter, then to interpret
and expound them, as already past and fulfilled long ago. For if we look back
to the death of Antiochus Epiphanes, we have showed already, that the space and
number of days is altogether unlike and far distant.

The decree or Edict of Antiochus his Son, wherein he granted the Jews
their own Religion freely, do not reach to the just account, as we have
showed in verse 11.

Now, if we shall cast the death of Antiochus the Father unto the 45. day from
that decree, the same difference of necessity will yet remain: but yet say I,
to grant the account and calculation to be very just, what felicity did follow
the death of Antiochus, that the Church might so greatly rejoice therein?
except peradventure we shall think the holy people to be in very great
prosperity, while they were oppressed with wars under Eupator, 1. Maca.
6.28.29. or that they could triumph greatly when Demetrius was devising a sharp
and bitter persecution against them by Bachides, Alcimus, and Nicanor, 1.
Macab. 7.9.26. especially in his second expedition, when there came so great
trouble and affliction in Israel upon the Jews, as like was not since the time
that no prophet was seen amongst them. 1. Macab. 1.9.27.

There is no need to record the ambition of the Priests, the tyranny of the
Romans, the inhumanity and incivility of Herod and the Governors, and that
which is far greatest of all, the abdication and rejection of the whole
nation, for so many generations to this day, all which do of necessity carry
it, that this full and constant felicity of the godly, which the Angel speaks
of in this place, can not be of those times.

How much more ca^telously does the holy Spirit speak, which calle^h all that
joy, but a small and little help, as before in ch 11.34.

Henr. Wolphius lib. de temp.
A certain Godly and Learned Man does think these years are to be numbered,
and to be counted from the overthrow of Jerusalem by Titus and Vespasian, they
ate of Christ 71. from which beginning the first account falls into the year
1361. at which time the School of Prague was found^d by Ch^rles King of
Bohemia, and did begin to resist and openly to gainsay the errors and tyranny
of Antichrist: The second ends in the year 1406* when a more clear light of
the Gospel brako forth, so as the Angel here does pronounce him blessed that
shall overlive these first seeds of the Gospel brought into light again.

But we have declared already, that Titus indeed did destroy the City and the
Temple, and made a lamentable Havook of the people, so as for a time they were
constreined to leave off their Mosaicall worship; yet notwithstanding he
brought not the last giving over of sacrificing, which only the Angel makes
the set time of the beginning.

Besides the knowledge of the Gospel is a blessed thing for all times and ages:
but the Angel does speak of a certain special felicity and blessedness,
which shall come unto the godly, besides that inward joy of the Spirit:
Otherwise the noting and m^rking out of certain days were in vain, neither
were the promised joy of so great worth and moment, if the Saints did enjoy it
always alike.

I do not brethren bring forth their judgments, and refute them any way for
to d^epe at them, for I reverence their Godly Labors, and do honor their
great learning and knowledge in Christ Jesus: But that no opinions should be
any hinderance and prejudicial to the truth, which I am sure they would have as
well as I. As if the truth lay hidden in the bowels of a hard flint, and cannot
be gotten out but by much dashing and many blows; yet notwithstanding I am
sollic^tous and very scrupulous herein, least by smiting the stone, and seeking
the sparkle, I should at any time let fall any virulent or venomous stro^ke
upon any man's good name or credit: and I hope my Godly brethren will likewise
take in good part this ^ude and disordered work, whatsoever it is, looking
rather to that, which is well and profitablie spoken to embrace it with
thankful minds, then contemning that which is good for any other defect or
unskilfulnesse.

Verse. 13. Verse. 13.
But go thou thy way till the end be. Hitherto was the common comfort; that
which is proper to Daniel, is in this last verse; The meaning whereof is this,
as if he should say: But then Daniel, go thy way, and rest content, that all
these things shall come to pass toward or before the end, and although they
seem to be long delayed, yet the tediousness thereof shall not be grievous
unto thee: for thou in the mean time shall yield to nature, and go the way of
all flesh, and being freed from the miseries of this life, shall quietly rest,
and be partaker of that happiness, which those do enjoy which dye in the
Lord, and at length also shall thy body also be raised up out of the grave, in
that Lot and condition which God shall give unto thee, that thou may be
partaker of unspeakable joy, with all the rest of the Saints, and so reign
with Christ for ever.

This meditation ought to putt away all trouble from the prophet, and to beget
in us that moderation and steadfastnesse of mind, that although we be
transported with an eager desire of this approaching felicity: yet
notwithstanding if it be the Lords will so to have it, we may willingly depart,
and lay down our earthly Tabernacles.

It is a most pleasant thing indeed to see and behold Christ reigning upon
Earth, but there is no cause at all why the holy souls should envy this
pleasure and happiness to their Brethren left here below.

Let us therefore rest with quiet minds in the midst of the tempests and
dangers of this World, expecting now shortly, either in life or in death, that
which is with all votes, and fervent prayers much to be desired.

Come Lord Jesus.
The Translatour to his Christian friends in Kent, Suffolk, and elsewhere,
wishes all health and h^ppines here and hereafter.
I Have been often requested to translate Mr. Brightman upon Daniel and the
Canticles into english, as he is already upon the revelation. I have at length
yielded to do one, being both short and pithie, leaving the other to such as
have more store of gifts and leisure, for reasons best known to my self,
which I must crave also to keep unto my self: although I confess I would be
glad that all our english Churches should enjoy the benefit of the godly and
learned labors of such a worthy English man (nay what if I should say, an
english prophet, as some learned beyond the seas have styled him) for as or
blessed Savior says, (and it was his own lot and portion) a prophet is not
without honor but in his own country, and among his own kindred. Marc. 6.4.

I have seen indeed both Jesuits and Lutherans abroad, and also protestants at
home, both in pulpits and in private, barking and carping against this
excellent and worthy man, but I spare and pity them, not any of them able to
do or speak as he has done and spoken, and many of them not worthy to carry
his books after him. It is far more easy ^o ca^p at a worthy writer then
to compile a book like his, let them either mend his, which will be a hard talk
for them, speak better, or hold their peace.

He was indeed one of a thousand, great and gracious many wais both in life
and in learning, dum ea docuit quae fecit? and ea fecit quae docuit, and verba
vertebat in opera. He taught that he did practice, and did practice that he
taught, and so turned words into works. He was a great Artist and a great
linguist. He had good skill in all arts and tongues needful for a complete
devine, even in song also, (vocal music being the best) till his more
weighty studies called him from the mayde^s, to divinity their mistress,
wherein he excelled and shined above many of his fellows, all that then lived
with him in Queens College in Cambridge, whereof he was a fellow, do very
well know. He shined every way, and was a Brightman indeed answerable to his
name, (...), vir splendidus, a bright man, in his life shining to all that
conversed with him, and in his deep learning and knowledge shining to all that
heard his learned catechizinge, common places, and lectures in the college, or
his sermons in the country in Bedfordshire.

Aquila non capit muscas. Eagle like he soareth aloft catching no flies but
great and high matters; he does not with the lamb wade in the shallow^s,
obvious and plain places, but with the Elephant he swimmeth and helps other to
swim safely over the deepest and darkest places of the whole canonical
scriptures, as John's revelations, Salomons song, and Daniels obscurest vision
in 11.12.

Some may think he did altum sapere and bear to high above his reach and
capacity, and therefore he the Austr. Lutheran applies the speech of Festus
to Paul Act. 24. to him untruely, but those that did well know him, and the
great measure of meeknes and humility that God had graced him withal, would
not think that he did (...), as the Apost^e says very elegantlie in that
eloquent exhortation Romans 12.3. Jmum humilitatis, summum divinitatis, The depth
of humility is the height of divinity: the lower in or selves, the higher
with God, as himself speaks Esai, 57.15. though he be high and lofty and
dwells in the high and holy place, yet he will dwell also with the contrite
and humble spirit, and unto such will he be a guide and teach them his ways and
counsels. Ps. 25.9.14.

And therefore I do not doubt, but God revealed much unto him and let him see a
great deal more into these mystical and dark passages, then many other of
his dear servants, that so he might reveal and open them to others: for as he
freely received so he freely gave.

But whither will my love carry me? I refrain: his own works shall praise him
abundauntly; which because being in latin, the greatest part of our countrymen
do not understand. I have made his short exposition of Daniel to speak english
unto them, that none may be deprived of the benefit of his godly labors.

It is pity such a bright shining candle should be put under the bed or
bushel, but to be set so as all may see and enjoy the light thereof. Math. 5.15.
He has so cleared that point of the Jews vocation, which the Apostle casts
a (...) Romans 11.33. in these latter times after the overthrowe of their last
and greatest enemy the Turks, as I have not seen in any writer the like. He
goes beyond the streine and against the stream of the most interpreters, who
go about for the most part to restreine all in Daniel to the first coming of
Christ and do refer all to Antiochus, or to the Romans: which cannot be,
for neither of them come to their ends in Judea, or the glorious holy
mountain, as the Turk shall do. Dan. 11.45.

Daniel having in the former part of this chapter 11. laid down their other
enemies the Persians verse. 2. the Grecians, chiefly Alexander. verse. 3. and his
4 captains succeeding verse 4. which came especially to two principal heads:
the Lagidans in Egypt, whom he calls the Kings of the South, as standing
South from Judea verse. 5. and the Seleucidans in Syria, whom he calls the
Kings of the North, verse. 6. etc. to the 36.

Then and there he comes to the three last enemies of the Jews, the Romans,
which had clipped the wings of Antiochus in the 30. verse, till at the end
their own eagles wings were also clipped by the Saracens and Turks in verse.
40. the one like a dossing beast do push sore at him, the other coming
against him like a whirlewinde that cannot be resisted, overfloweth, bears and
beats down all before it, enters into Iudaea, the glorious land, which had
been then a long time the cockpit of the world in the midst of their enemies,
Babilonians, Persians, Grecians, Lagidans, Seleucidans, Romans, Saracens and
now at this day the Turks, the last, though not the least of their
adversaries, which shall be troubled with the tydinges of the eastern and
northern Jews conversion, which shall make him to march out furiously against
them like another Iehu 2 king. 9.20. though not with like success, but he shall
com to his end there, in the holy land and glorious mountain, and note shall
help him, for who can help and hold him up whom God will hinder and cast down?

Then followethe joyful return and resurrection of the Jews: who lay as dead
for almost seventeen hundred years in chap. 12. which if it be not meant of
them, there is little comfort for them in the whole prophecy, which was the
Prophets maine intention and principal drift and scope, Oculus adscopum, our
eye must be always at the mark and scope, if we mean to hit the white and
right meaning, and so the Apostle Paul does call their calling and receaving
unto grace, life from the dead, Romans 11.15. whereunto most sweetly agrees the
prophet Ezekiel from the 37. chapter. to the end of his prophecye in the last
12. chapters, first setting down their conversion in the first 14. verses of
the 37. where the dead and dry bones scattered come together again and live.

2ly the vnyting and joining together again the ten tribes with the two, from
the 15. verse. to the end.

Thirdly, the destruction of Gog, and all their enemies in the 38. and 39.
chapters.

Fourthly, and lastly, we have a heavenly new prophecy concerning the glorious
and Christian Church of the Jews, whereof Christ himself was the builder, in
the 9 last chapters, beginning with a very solemn charge, for a reverend
attention, and a sweet carriage, and demeanor of all parts, inward and
outward, as of heart, eyes, and ears. 40.4. And also concluding with the new
and lasting name thereof, not Jerusalem, as of old now antiquated, but Jehovah
Shammah, the Lord is and will be there for ever, as being the truth of the
former type, represented by the temple, Psalm 132.14. This is my rest for ever,
here will I dwell, for I have desired it.

Thus have I briefly in a word epitomized and abridged this learned exposition
for thee: He shall now speak unto thee in thine own mothers tongue and native
language. He will bring that to thine ears, which happily thou did never
hear of before: Make much of such faithful expositours, and pray to God to
increase the number of such learned interpreters, as may help thee to see and
understand such mystical visions and revelations of God, and that he would in
his due time bring down those two main enemies of his gospel and his people,
the Roman Antichrist in his old Rome, and the eastern Gog and Magog in his
new Rome or Constantinople, who would soon fall of his own Mahumetane
ponderous weight, if he were not supported by Romish idolatry: And let not us
protestants by our scandalous lives and conversations be any hinderaunce to
the calling and coming on of our far distant brethren the Jews, but help
forward, what we may their effectual vocation, by frequent and fervent prayer
for them, and daily crucifying of sin, which crucified the Lord of glory both
theirs and ours, and so together with joint consent set forth the purity of
Gods worship: and celebrate his praises unto the full and final end and
consummation of all things.

FINIS.

