THE WEEPING LADY: OR, LONDON LIKE NINIVIE IN SACKCLOTH. Describing the Map
of her own misery, in this time of Her heavy Visitation; with her hearty
Prayers, Admonition, and Pious Meditations, as the occasions of them offer
themselves in Her PASSION.

Written by T. B.

Lord, have mercy on us. Weep, Fast, and Pray.



Printed at London by B. A. and T. F. for MATTHEW RHODES, and are to be sold by
Nath: Brown, in the Long Walk, near Christ Church. 1625.

THE EPISTLE TO the READER.
COurteous Reader, Briefly thus: If looking in my Book, you see Men imprisoned
in their own Houses, and abroad none; if here you see a multitude of Crosses,
and abroad none; if here their equal number of Bills, with LORD HAVE MERCY
UPON US, and abroad none; and shall say, Thus they have been, but are not. I
answer, That they Have, is enough, why they are not, I know not; that they yet
might be, we all know, in the loss of Husbands, Wives, Children, Servants,
Kindred, our Neighbors, and common Acquaintance. A wound smarts no less
covered, then discovered: For some decrease in the number, let us praise God,
and pray to God, for the continuance of this mercy begun, till this sad
Visitation be ended.

My intent in erecting this poor Monument of Misery, was, to make this Ladies
Tears out-liue Her Tears: That, when (by the infinite Mercies of God they
shall be wiped off, and all Her Sores made whole; we may* in the view of this,
and other (more worthy) Remembrances of Her, re-view them; in them, those
infinite Mercies; and in both, be made mindful of them, end eternally
thankful for them: Which God grant.

Thine; THO: BREVVER.

Lord, have mercy on us. Weep, Fast, and Pray.



TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, GENErous, and euer-worthy Lover of Goodness, and
Pious Endeauours, WALTER LEIGH, Esquire, SWORD BEARER to the Honorable
LORD-MAIORS of this Famous City of LONDON.
Right Worthy Sir:
A Sad Sharer of the common miseries of these sad times, prompted by his own
Sorrows, has, (though too weak a Pencil-Man for such a Piece) undertaken to
draw that Sorrow to the Life, that has drawn many thousands to Death; my
Title speaks my meaning; The Wounds of this WEEPING LADY.

To have drawn Her in her Health, the Idea or Conceptions of the most pure and
pregnant Wits might have been deficient, such was Her Beauty, Her Splendour,
such were her change of Colors, Glorious within, and without in Embroydered
Garments. But now, (such is her Change She has no Change, wearing only one
Suit, and that the sad habit of Mourning.

In thus presenting Her, I present you with nothing but groans, Sighs, tears,
shreaks, folding of arms, bearing of breasts, wringing of hands, pale looks,
dejected eyes, bleeding hearts, and most heavy and bitter condolements. How
unpleasing this might be to many, I am not ignorant; but imboldned by that of
the Preacher, The Heart of the Wise is in the House of Mourning, etc. my hopes
are fair of her favorable and gracious receiving.

To whom better to present this Lady of so many Honorable Lords, then to your
worthy Self, I know not; your Worship having been to many, and now to This,
Her Last, (equal in fame with any from Her First) a prime and much respected
Officer, beating the Sword that most impartially guards Her, and wounds Her
Enemies. She is now on the mending hand, and our hope (in Him, that what he
will do can do) is strong for the daily decrease of her sorrows; the speedy
return to Her solace, and fullness of Beauty and luster. For which among many
Thousands of Her afflicted Sons and Daughters, incessantly praying; I rest,

Ever Bound to your VVorshi^^ pleasure: T. B.

THE WEEPING LADY: OR LONDON LIKE NINIVIE in SACKCLOTH.
IERIM. 9.21. Death is come up into our windows, and entered into our Houses.


LIke tender Plants, beat, with too great a shower,
Or like a Tree that is blasted; or a Flower
Plucked from the Root; Decembers gloomy shade,
The Sun eclipsed; Youth to disease betrayed:
Or like to any thing, that Chance, or Time
Or Heavens just Anger, scourges in the Prime,
Disroabing it of Ornament, of Grace,
And seating what is opponent in their place
Sits now the Mistress, Lady of her kind;
That Queen, whose Beauty did attract the mind
Of All, to see it; to admire, to love,
And (in their Functions serve it) to approve
Her worth, and their own duties: o like these,
Or sadder Figures, of Her sad disease
Lies London now; beat, blasted, withered, shook,
Of strangers pitied, of Her own forsook.
But, to divide Her sorrows, and to bring,
The wounds, sighs, tears, and each particular sting
Of Her afflicted Bosom, to your Eye,
Lives not in my Intention. Nor if I
Had such a Will, had I the power to speak
My Grief; for Hers (too strong) makes me too weak.
Her self do that, for what is in Sorrows breast,
The Bearer of it, can decipher best:
I only draw the Curtain, and thus show,
This Queen of Cities, now, the Queen of woe.
London, the Anatomizer, of Her own miseries, as out of a broken slumber thus
speaks.
HOw saine would Sorrow sleep? But as my Head
Would touch the Pillow, of that downy Bed
The mournful sound of sighings, of deep groves,
Vision of Tears, and universal mones
That do present themselves before me, keep
That Comfort from me, and command me weep.
Her Bells, continually Towling.
O Hear the Instruments, my soul did love,
My Bells, that summon to the Spouse, the Dove,
The Oracle of Heaven, Now sadly sound
Nothing but frightfull summons to the ground:
Nothing but calls to Death; nothing but Knells;
All notes of Grief, for All are passing Bells.
Nay more to add, to my Affrights, affright
Death, will have all Times, minutes; and by Night Towling night and day.

Command this doleful Towling, as by Day:
We know who sends him, and we must obey.
What change there is in all things under Fate? Digression.

How sadly now they found? And but of late,
When their shrill voices, did proclaim the Gain
Of Englands Heart, out of the Hate of Spain,
What Dulcet sounds they had? -- And while they played
To th'mounting flame of Bonfires, that were made The King his return from
Spain

Ioying His safe Arriving? Since that Time
What music made they, when the pride and prime
Of all her Sex (MARIA) in our Land The Queens arrival.

Made Her most wished Arrival; Hand in Hand
Joining two royal Sisters, to Advance
The Glories of them both: Great Britain, France.
But I too far, in this Digression go,
My joy (almost) made me forget my woe:
The woes of my disease; -- The Sore, that treads
My Beauty under foot; -- The Sore that spreads
Over all my Happiness; -- The Sore that makes
Me, to be loathed and left; -- The sore that takes
My Sons and Daughters from me; And the Sore
That makes this mournful music sound, all over
My spacious Circuit, round about my Walls;
The neglect of our duties remembered.
For round about them, are the dreadful Calls
Of Death, in their sad language. -- Had we heard
Their Calls unto the Temple, and prepared
Zeal, and Divine affection, that the word
Sown in our souls, might (as it ought) afford
A fruitful Harvest of good works, no doubt,
We had not heard these clangors fly about
Her Counsel to fly to him, from him we cannot.
Thus to affright, to wound us. -- But it is Just
Those sounds, we would not hear, these sounds we must;
Till Heaven be pleased to still'em. -- That He may
Lets fly to meet him; Weep, and Fast, and Pray.
The Graves still greedily gaping.
O See, (like wounds dug in my tender side)
My multitude of Graves, that gaping wide
Are hourly fed, with Carcasses of Men;
Those hardly swallowed, they will be fed again,
Gorged with my Sons and Daughters: as if He
All things made for man, man for God.
All things were made for, were but made, to be
A prey to worms: -- As if the end of Birth,
Were (...) to cry, to labor, and in Earth
Have his eternal period: -- As if Breath
Were a Childs bubble, and the sport of Death:
For so He triumphs now; so now He kills, Deaths Triumph.

So empties Houses; so the Grave he fills,
Those Tenements of his. -- Where many lie,
(Too many manyes) not like things that dye
Assured in their Redeemer, that they shall
Rise to a Being, whence they never can fall;
But -- I ha'done; -- Passion, thy power is strong
The rest in weeping; tears are sorrows Tongue.
Sleep, sleep in peace my Children, in your dust
We see what it is, to brittle life to trust, A great help to live, is, to
remember we must die.

And Her still failing Adjuncts: For thus fades
The Pomp of flesh: And -- entered those dark shades
From Court, or from the Village, All are one,
Degrees in Life there are, in Death there is none.
Her Houses, their Masters Prison.
O See my Sons and Daughters, that survive
Their Household massacr'e, (half dead) alive,
In their own Houses buried; or as bad,
Enjayl'd, imprisoned; -- In that passion clad,
That to behold them, makes Affection wring
My Heart to Blood, mine Eyes into a spring;
(Maternall loves Companions) -- See the Wife The Wife.

Sadly bemone, the loss of half Her life,
In The loss of her poor Husband. -- See her sit,
(While sighs, do sighs, and tears, do tears beget)
Ready to follow him, from this sad vale
To His eternal Mansion. -- See the pale
And ghastly seat of death, upon the face
The Husband. Parents. Children.
Of Husbands for their Wives: -- Behold the Race
Of grief in Parents, for the sad depart
Of Sons and Daughters; Sons and Daughters smart,
To see the stroke, this strange Disease does give
Upon those Lives by which they Be, and Live.
See them debard all meetings of delight,
See them debard society, and sight
Of Kindred, and Familiars; -- See them there
Bard the best pleasure, that does Passion cheer,
Their Recreatiue walks, losing their share
Of what all taste, the sweet and wholesome Air,
A poor man's only physic. -- See them loose
The benefits of those poor Trades they use:
The sum of their misery
To sum up all their miseries in one,
See them in the Dongeon, of laments and moan.
Yet thus it must be, by the Laws, and Love
Of me, their City, and of that Above,
For it is by Heaven commanded. -- -- Thou great God
Yes Prayer.
That more delightst in Mercy, then thy Rod.
(Joining them both together) -- be to these
In their need plenty, in their Languor ease.
And in the midst of this infectious flame,
Let thy good Angel come, and be the same
To them, and me their Mother, that He was
To those in the midst of burning Flames did pass
Untouched, or vnoffended. -- In thy Hand,
Is Life and Death; All power in thy Command.
Her Multitude of Crosses.
O See me full of Crosses; see, and weep
To see the Cross thus like a Gangrene creep
From part to part upon me. -- Nor is it strange
We wear these Crosses; they are Heavens exchange
Of Crosses with his. -- We Crosses had before.
The Rich-mans Cross upon the hungry Poor, Our Cross dealing one with
another.

In griping and engrossing: which to quit,
Need has again (with a dexterious Wit)
Crossed them in Cheats and Theeuing. -- Woe is me
The many Crosses of a Term to see;
Strange Crosses in strange Cases: -- Then a slight;
The Cross of Measure, and the Cross of Weight;
The Cross of honest-seeming, to deceive;
The Cross of Swearing, to make men believe
What Truth is rackt to look on. -- And for these Our sins the cause of our
fichnesse.

Crosses of Sin, the Crosses of Disease
Stick like a brand vpon's; upon us fall
The First, on many; but the Last, on All.
But to the Cross again, which does present
In all, (but in my Sorrows) all Content.
Saint George his Cross, Englands, the Badge of Joy,
These Crosses the Badge of Death.
Is here the Badge of Him that does destroy,
No Champion ever like Him: -- For His power,
In thousand Places, Thousands in one Hour
Her incitement to Prayer and ^oly duties.
Turns to the Pit before Him. -- Against this loss
O lets petition Heaven; and that this Cross,
This Viol full of Anger may be staid;
Which, till it be (by the Almighty laid)
We patiently must bear it; It Is decreed:
For He for Us upon a Cross did bleed,
Has told us plainly we His Cross must bear,
The necesty of them
Or nere ascend His Dwelling. -- Where no care,
No Chance, no Change, Time or Defection dwells;
But All so full of Glory, it excels
The Compass of Man's thought. -- Toth' Cross we then
Add -- Lord have Mercy upon us All. -- AMEN.
Her Terms.
O See my Terms cut off, in them the Law,
(That eeuen Line, Justice her selle does draw,
Guiding to pious dealing) Like a Mute;
Nor hinder wrong, nor help a rightful Suite,
While my Infection spreads. Woes, woe succeed,
Of all Demurres, heeres a Demurre indeed.
Her Parament.
See how the City has disturbd the Court,
How my Disease has troubled the Import
And weighty Businesses of that High Seat,
Where Royal Charles and his grave Synod treat
The grounds of all our safety. -- And at last
Dissolved that Royal meeting here, and placed
LONDON, Westminst.
Mine, and my Sisters Dignity and Grace
Upon a Handmaid to us. -- Ore which Place, Oxenford. Her Petition.

Thou God of Mercy all thy Mercies spread,
And there, and here, and every where strike dead
This All-deuouring Monster. Let thy love,
Make this an Act, in thy great Court above.
O See how my Disease, has seemed to check Her Pageants.

The love, and duty, is prepared to deck
My streets with stately Pageants. Things should wear What they should be.

Much Cost, much Art, and in their structures bear
The fullness of Invention: where the Eye,
May feast it self, on the varity
Of specious Forms, and Figures, and the Ear,
The soul, of all those rich Inventions hear
Delivered, in Choice language. -- I presume What they shall be.

That thus they shall be, when they shall assume
Their costly Robes preparing. -- But (alas)
They yet stand bare and naked; and men pass What they are.

By them, as by my self: for that Disease
That dyms my luster, has denied it these,
And all those Beauties my large Bounds embrace.
Repair sweet Mercy, what sad frowns deface. Her brief Petitions

O see how thick, these shafts of vengeance fly,
How thick they fall, how thick Men fall and dye, Of this Massacre in general

Which way so e're we turn us! If your eyes
Can see for Tears, see how this Tyrant plyes
The cruel part He Is acting. How He sweepes
Whole Familyes before him, and then keeps Whole Families taken away.

(In dismal emptiness) Possession there,
Where life again would enter, but that Fear
Does for a time deter him. For this Foe,
(Invisible, Invincible) a Blow
Gives above all resist. -- O see my Streets
To many, Deathbeds; for this Monster meets
Men boldly there and strikes 'em: -- here Men tread,
To sight, in safety; there of the sudden dead.
See, see, O see, how thick from all my parts
Gallants in Coaches, and their Goods in Carts
Fly my poor wounded Body: -- where before
The Flight of Citizens Her Sons, ^ith her ^ender Hearts an^uish for it.
(That their rich splendour might in mine be more)
They would embrace me, hug me. -- But the Flight
Of these move little; That would kill me quite,
Is, that my Sons, (They that upon my Breast
Have had repose, (a long and tender rest)
And from it sucked the Substance made them grow
Great in the Worlds Opinion) In my woe,
Want and distress forsake me. These, that He
That was a Bondman, and by me made Free;
That took his Oath to love me, and submit
His best Endeavors to me, to beget,
Guard and maintain mine Honors. -- But no more.
Thus Swallows Winter fly; the Rich, the Poor.
Upon Relation of the many Miseries, that many of those that fly the City, do
fall into in the Country.
Her Tears, Sighs, and Passion augmented.
O My full Tide of Anguish! Yet mine Eye
Drops not so fast, so much to see them fly;
As, in that Flight, to see them headlong run
To greater dangers, then they fly to shun:
In multitudes we find it; and still thus 1. Her gree^ for them that mind not
Hers.

Deplore their Sorrows, though they mind not us.
Here Bills and Halberts meet 'em; -- where, (as one
Had dared the Law in some great mischief done) 2. Met and stayed like Fel^ons.

They must be staid, examined, and there show
What place they came from, to what place they go;
Th'occasions of their travail; and before
Some Constable, can hardly tell three score,
Must show their Passes. And from place to place, 3. Show their Passes like
Rogues

(Passing through Villages) through this disgrace
Pass till they end their Journey. And what then?
What comfort find they (poor distressed Men)
When (through these scorns and loathings) they have got
The place to which they travail? Are they not
With great suspicion, much amaze and fear,
(As if each part about them seemed to bearo
Their en^tainme^t.
Plagues and infections in them) entertained
At Halberds point, at distance? and constrained
(In their least pity) to a private Room?
Though nere so sound they are; and in the Doom
Of that Imprisonment, some part of the load
Of what they shun at home, they meet abroad.
Mark (...) mise^^.
But this is but disgrace: See some poor souls
Under necessities more harsh controules
Made strangers to acquaintance; nay, the Son
A stranger to his Father; Brothers shun
The Partners of their Blood; and Mothers (...),
Those they have hugged and dandled, (as they me.)
O let me weep, (weep blood) and through that glass
Hardly welcome
Look yet a little further; where (alas)
We may behold some of my Sons that here
Had soft and easy lodging, lodging there
Hard ^odging.
In Stables, Barnes, Outhouses; nay be glad
To sleep in Houils; think no room too bad
That had a covering over it: some be feign
To lodge, where neither against the Wind, the rain,
Nor the Suns fury, they could shelter have;
Heaven only covering them, and they their Grave.
Then, as a sad Companion to their woe,
(For miseries do seldom single go)
^. Their miseries in their sickness.
Behold them in these Lodgings, faint and weak,
Their Purses many may some comfort speak,
But purchase none or little; and that too,
But dealt among them, as a man should do
Such duties to a Lion, to a Bear,
Or some such savage Creature, in great fear,
Fling some poor pittance to them, and then fly: 9. The tendance.

Here Is all their tendance, let them live or dye.
See some over taken with so faint a breath, 10. Many there, as with us, dye in
the common way, (...) and Ditche

Ere half their Iourneyes done they Inn with Death,
In The common way they tread on; as they go
Fall to the ground and dye: great numbers so
In Rodes, in Ditches, in the open Field,
The debt of Breath, thus to their Maker yield;
And where they dye, are buried. Some again
(So bold we are to sin to add more sin)
On Sledges, Barrowes, Dung-carts, any thing
(The wisdom of those places please to bring)
Are borne to places more remote; and some
(Like Dogs) are haled with Cart-ropes to a Tomb
Fit, but for Dogs and Caryon: into which,
As they are found, they are tumbled; Poor, and Rich:
Their rich Apparel, their rich Pockets; All:
Nay, Gold it self they bury; that must fall
To'th' place it came from: so that by this Rod, The s(...) God, a D^uell.

That seems a Devil now, seemed once. God.
Oh, I could weep my self into a Stone,
Or my, as senseless Image, in the moon
Of my poor Sons and Daughters; that with me Her Apostrophe in Groves and
sighing.

Had had far better usage: But, in vain
I weep for them: Now to my self again.
So, (as preparing to a Bridal Bed)
In what a Path of Herbs and Flowers men tread,
Which way so ere they wander: For, each Street
Seems now a Garden; All as green, as sweet.
But Oh, my sad my sick, my bleeding Heart!
These are no Nuptial strewings; here no part
Of such a Ioye's appearing: For (O, see!)
These Paths are for the Dead, and such as be
The half, dead train attends them. Every where
Nothing but Graves, but Coffins, but the Beer,
And bearing breathless Bodies to the Ground;
Delight's an Exile now, pale Mourning Cround.
See how my Streets are emptied, how my Trade,
(Io which there is another Sickness made)
Lies as 'twere dead and Buried. See, (O, see)
The Shops of those are Dead and those that Flee,
So every where shut up, a man may say;
What Is all this Time; but Grim DEATHS HOLIDAY?
Yet see my emptiness too (...) moan,
For not a Friend, a Friend without a grove,
Sighs and sad Language meet. -- See Death destroy
All our expected pleasure, all our joy,
Till Heaven shall stop his Progress. Unawares
Our Feasting's turned to FASTING; Play, to PRAYERS.
Most fit it should be, and most fit, we praise
That Holy KING, that made these Holy DAYS.
That has commanded, what his God commands, His Proclamation is Falling an
Prayer Niniu. buckler.

That Second God to us, that understands
That the best Buckler, to defend the stroke,
Heaven lays on Sinners, which their sins provoke;
I^ ^eeping Niniuies. That Prayers and Tears,
When Hezekiah, was beset with fears, Hezekiahs Prayer.

Procured an Angel, in his cause to fight,
Whose unresisted power, in one night,
A hundred, fourscore, and five thousand men
Laid dead before him; He who knows again,
When God had purposed this good King to death,
By Prayer, He changed that purpose, and got breath His life prolonged by Prayer

For fifteen Summers longer. He that knows
How; when the fiery Serpents, wounded those
Murmured at Moses, when good Moses prayed,
Those Serpents lost their stings, that Plague was stayed.
So Lord stay this, this Serpent, whose sharp sting
Has pierced to many; and let Mercy spring,
In thy good pleasure to us. -- From the Deep (...)

(...) anguish Lord we call, we pray, we weep,
and do as they did: By this Serpent struck,
We on a second; on our Savior look,
Expecting cure. -- To which be pleased to Bow,
And what their prayers did then, let ours do now.
With this Exhortation to her Sons, in the brief Enumeration, or Repetition
of some things formerly spoken by way of Allusion, She Concludes.
Hear then my Bells, call to the Church, and Death;
Reuiew my Graves: There the full point of Breath;
Know thy proud flesh, a Prison to thy Soul;
The Cross a Badge, did Death and Hell controuse.
(...) thou the Law of Heavens eternal Love,
The Acts and Statutes of that Court Above;
Love thou the sights, the blessed Angels see;
Serve thou the God, with whom All pleasures be;
Obey his Royal Substitute, thy King;
Let love among you, have an endless Spring:
Level your words, and Actions to the will
Of Him, has power to pardon, or to spill,
And I shall soon be well; and you in Me,
And I in you, All our best wishes see.
The Authors comfortable Conclusion and thankful Remembrance of Gods great
mercies, in the happy surcease of this dangerous Contagion, and preservation of
those, who are yet living.
THus much for this Cloud of misery, now to that gloriou^ Sun of Gods
mercy, which most graciously rising upon us, has begun to dissolve, dissipate,
and dispell it, in the decrease of those that dye of this heavily bewailed
Contagion: Upon which looking, let us say with David, What shall I return to
the Lord, etc. Withal, make this promise, and zealously strive to perform it;
That that God, that in his Anger, remembers Mercy; That desires not the death
of a Sinner, but rather, than he return and live, may continue this mercy to
us; and speedily (if it be his blessed will and pleasure) say as he said, to
that destroying Angel, in the time of his Kingly Prophet, It is sufficient;
hold now thy hand. That so, we here at home, and those abroad, that (as if
they could slye from God) slew from us, may again meet; he decently merry;
Live lovingly, assist one another willingly, and finally that All together, to
him that of nothing, has made us; that lost, has Redeemed us; that erring,
reduced us; that Ignorant, has taught us; that sinning has gently chastised
us; that dispayring has comforted us; that falling has raised us; that
standing has held us; that going has lead us, that Coming has received us;
And, that from this and many other dangers has delivered us. We may show our
selves evermore thankful: still pray, still praise him, that so this span of
Life ended, we may, (falling in death) rise again to that Life that shall
never end.

Four things ever to be Remembered.
Think on thy Sin,
That thou may grieve:
On DEATH,
That thou thy sin may leave:
The Last great Judge,
That thou may fear:
On MERCY,
that thou not despair.
FINIS.

