THE WILL OF WIT, Wits Will, or Wills Wit, choose you whether.

Containing five discourses, the effects whereof follow.

Read and judge.

Compiled by Nicholas Breton. Gentleman.

Non ha, Che non sa.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1597.

To Gentlemen, Scholars, and Students, whatsoever.
GEntlemen, or others, who employ your time in the studies of such Arts, as are
the Ornaments of Gentility, to your courtesies I comme^d the unlearned
discourse of my little wit, which as I will not entreat you to commend,
deserving the contrary: so I hope you will not disdain, though it deserve
discommendation, but so by your pardons, excuse my small discretion by great
desire, that here^ with less haste, I may take as great care as pains, to
publish a piece of work, somewhat more worth the perusing. Till when, wishing
you all the favor of God, with good fortune of the world, I rest in honor of
learning to you and all Students.

A loving friend N. B. Gent.

The Epistle to the gentle Reader.
A New Book says one, true, it came forth but the other day, good stuff says
an other. Read, then judge. I confesseit may seem to a number, a bold
attempt, to set out a form of wit, considering the witty discourses, of such
fine wits as have deserved such co^me^dation, as may drive this mean piece of
work of mine into utter disgrace, were it not that perfect courtesy does
bear with imperfect knowledge, regarding more the good mind in the writer,
then the matter written, and therefore the best will give good words,
whatsoever they think, to encourage a forward will to do better, when indeed
it were a fantastical head that could do worse. Well when Wit is a
wool-gathering, and Will wandering, the world without guide, what a case that
manne is in, that is in such a taking I refer you to mad folks, of whom
you may see examples sufficient, and so I being in a certain melancholye
mood, past all Gods forbod, took my Pen and Ink and paper, and somewhat I
would go do, whatsoever it were, to put out one conceit, and bring in an
other, at last, and at first, of a sudden, unawares, and at adventures, by
Gods good help, and good fortune, the little wit that I had, meeting with good
Will, I knew not how, fell to work, (at first) I know not what, but having
written a while, I made somewhat of it, which though little to any great
purpose, yet, if it please the readers, I am contented, and if any man think
it well done, then Wit shall think Will a good boy, and Will shall think he
took Wit in a good vain, and Will and Wit shall have the more heart
hereafter, to fall to further work, but if I have bin more wilful then
wise, to trouble your wi^tes, with a witless piece of work, pardon me for
this once, ye shall see I will please you better hereafter, in the mean time
desiring your courtesies to commend what you think worthy, and not to disdain
without desert, I rest, wishing your content in what you wish well, as I pray
you wish me as I do you.

Your friend Nicholas. Breton Gentleman.

Ad Lectorem, de Authore.
What thing is Will, without good Wit?
Or what is Wit, without good Will?
The one the other does so fit:
As each alone can be but ill.
But when they once be well agreede:
Their work is likely well to speed.
For proof behold good Bretons will,
By help of Wit, what it has writ:
A work not of the ^eanest skill,
Nor such as shows a simple Wit.
But such a Wit, and such a Will:
As has done well and hates ill.
I need not to commend the man,
Whom none can justly discommend:
But do the best, the best that can,
Yet some will spite, and so I end.
What I have said, I say so still,
I must commend, this Wit and Will.
C. A

FINIS.
Ad lectorem, de Authore.
What shall I say of Gold, more then it is Gold:
Or call the Diamond, more then precious:
Or praise the man, with praises manifold,
When of himself him self is virtuous,
Wit is but Wit, yet such his Wit and Will,
As proou^e il good, or makes good to be ill.
Why? what his Wit? proceed and ask his Will,
Why? what his Will? read on, and learn of Wit:
Both good I guess, yet each a several ill,
This may seem strange, to those that hear of it.
Nay, near a whit, for virtue many ways,
Is made a vice, yet Virtue has her praise.
Wherefore, O Breton, worthy is thy work,
Of commendations worthy to the worth:
Since captious Wits, in every corner lurk,
A bold attempt it is to set them forth.
A form of Wit, and that in such a sort,
As none offends, for all is said in sport.
And such a spo^t, as serves for other kinds,
Both young and old, for learning, arms, and love:
For Ladies humors mirth with moan he finds,
With some extremes, their patient minds to prove.
Well Breton, write in hand, thou have the thing,
As when it comes, love, wealth; and fame will bring.
VV. S.

A pretty and witty Discourse, betwixt Wit and Will.
LOng have I travailed, much ground have I gone, many ways have I trod,
mickle money have I spent, more labor have I lost, in seeking an old friend of
mine: whose company so courteous, his counsel commodious his presence so
pleasant, and his absence so graeuous, that when I think of him, and miss
him, I find such a miss of him, as all things are out of frame with me. And
out of frame, can come to no good fashion. Oh what shall I do? It is long
since I lost him: long have I sought him. And too long (I fear) it will be ere
I find him? But wot you who it is? Oh my wit, I am from my Wit, and have been
long. Alas the day. I have bin almost mad, with marching through the world,
without my good guide, my freende, and Companion, my Brother, yea, my self.
Alas, where is he? When shall I see him? How shall I seek him, and whither
shall I walk? I was too soon weary of him, and am now weary of my self
without him. Well, I will go where I may, I may hap to find him: but hap is
unhappy. Therefore hap good, or hap ill, I will walk on still: if I find
him, happy man. If I do not, what than? Content my self even as I can,
Patience where is no remedy.

Wit. Long have I looked, far have I sought, often have I wished, and sore have I
longed for my merry mate, my quick sprite, my dearling, and my dearest bird:
Whose courtesy so contentiue, whose help so necessary, whose necessity so
great, whose presence so pleased me, and absence so angers me: that when I
would have him, and see, I am without him: I am not in order, and being out of
order, can take no good course. Alas what shall be^ide me? I have lost my
love, or my love has lost me. Would God we might meet again, and be merry
together: which I cannot be without him. Oh what have I lost? my Will, Whither
is he gone? when will he return? who has led him away? or will bring him
back again? what company is he fal^ into? or how does he lead his life?
Well, time yet may turn him. Till when I wish for him, heping to meet him,
but hope is uncertain: yet hope well, and have well. Thus alone I cannot
dwell, if I find him so it is: if not, then ^wis, I must be content with this.
Patience is a virtue. But whom do I behold so near? It is my Will, with
heavy cheer: well, I am sorry for this gea^e. Yet will I to him out of hand,
and know, how so the case does stand. What? Will?


Will. Who? Wit?


Wit. Whither away?


Will. Where I may.


Wit. Whereto?


Will. Oh to do.


Wit. What?


Will. Teach thou me that.


Wit. Why, sighe not boy?


Will. Oh all my joy.


Wit. Where is it Will?


Will. Among the ill.


Wit. What? Is it lost?


Will. That greeues me most.


Wit. And not to be recovered?


Will. Oh my heart is almost dead.


Wit. What? Will? Hold up head. I will be thy friend to death.


Will. The^ give me leave to fetch my breath. And welcome, twice and thrice
well met: where my hearts joy is set. Many a walk have I fet, but no comfort
could I get, till now by thee mine only friend, with whom I mean my life to
end. If thou will give me leave good wit.


Wit. Yes good sweet will, and glad of it.


will. Then hark good wit unto my tale: not of amidde my bliss in bale, nor
any such like stuff so stale. I study not to talk in verse, but I will unto
thee rehearse, a plain discourse, in homely prosse, wherein I will at large
disclose: How I have lived, with whom, and where: how I was tossed, here and
there. How I did chance to travail hither, and so we will be merry together.


Wit. Contented. Uerse is good sometime, but sometime press, and sometime
ryme. But be it either prosse or verse, what so thou will, good will rehearse:
I mean to hear it to the end. And quit thee quickly as a friend. But since
thou likest prosse so well, begin in prosse thy tale to t^l.


Wills Tale.
OH good wit, (if thou do remember,) I lost thee in travail to the Well of
Wisdom. Since when, I have wandered through a wilderness of woe, (which in
the Map of that Country (I find) is called the Desert of Desire. Wherein I
saw so many ways, as new in this, and then in that. ^t last I came to the
hill of hand Hap, which led me down into a Uale of Uanitie. There did I
live in the Lake of Miseries, with the lost people, that having followed
Fancy, found Penitence, the reward of running heads. But Lord, what a life it
is? I loathe to think on it. Believe me sweet wit, there is such falling out
with Fancy, who shifts all upon Folly. Such exclamation upon Folly, who
bringes them to Fortune: such cursing and banning of Fortune, for her froward
dealing: in gentle helping them up upon the wheel, and then sudden
dinging them down (almost to their destruction,) that if there be a Hell in
this world, there is the place. God keep all good minds from such a ^thy
corner.


Wit. Amen. But tell me ^w can thou thence?


will. I will tell you anon: ^ut first I will tell you more. There is of all
States, Princes cry out of cares: Lords, of lack of living: Ladies, o^ false
Love: Soldiers of want of pay: Lawyers, of quiet: Poor men, of Law:
Merchauntes, of shipwreck: Mariners, of scule weather: Usurers, of Sermons,
and Divines of Usurie: Players, of Preachers, and Preachers of Pl^yers: Dicers,
of loosing, and losers o^ Dicing: Cryples, of fighting, and fighters of hurtes:
the Rich, of sickness: the Poor, of want: the Sick, of pain: the
healthful, of ill hap: the unhappy, of the time that ever they were borne.
Oh, it is a pittious cry: I would not be there again, to hear it as I have
done, for the gain of Europe.


Wit. Believe me, I cannot blame thee: but tell me, how camst thou thence?


Will. Oh brother, I will tell you how: you know, sometime trauailers must
needs have rest, which they must come by, as they may: Now I having walked,
(as I told you) through this unpleasant place: weary at last, I laid me down
in the ditch of Distress, where, finding many dead skulles, and other boanes,
I there thought to begin a sleep, or sleep my last: now lying there, in
such sort as I tell you, me thought in my sleep I sighed, in which sorrow, a
good motion of mind, set my heart to prayer: which tended to this effect, that
it would please, the mighty and merciful Majesty, of the most highest, to
send me some mean, to lead me out of this misery: being as it were from my
Wit, and altogether comfortless. Now suddenly there appeared unto me, an old
aged man, who took me by the hand, with these words: Arise thou sluggish
wanton, walk no longer out of thy way: turn thee back from this straye
pathe, experience does teach thee: what is Will without Wit? Prayer has
procured thee pardon, the high and only God has given thee Grace, by Grace
go seek, that is worth the finding: look where Wit is too him, and make
much of him: With joy of that word, I awaked, and with shame of my Folly in
leaving thee, I hung the head: with sorrow whereof, I was almost of life
deprived: but now by thy sweet welcome, wholly revived: now awake (I should
say) I saw none but thee: and now while I live, I will follow thee.


Wit. Why, was it here you slept, or have you come far since you waked?


Will. No, no, here did I sleep, here is the place of pain so unpleasant:
but now I see thee, I have received comfort, for that I know thou can lead
me to Wisdom, who will soon show me the way to Paradise.


wit. Why then will, well have thou slept, better have thou dreamed, but best
have thou waked, to hit on me so happily, who intend to bring thee to that
good beginning, that shall lead thee to endless bliss. But to quit thy tale,
I will tell thee a little of my travail, and so we will away together.


Wits Tale.
WIll: thou know when I left thee, in the lane of learning, I went on
straight to the school of Virtue, and with her Testimonial, to the Well of
Wisdom, which stands within the Palace of Patience: where I found the
Fountain kept with four Ladies, whose names were Wisdom, Temperance,
Fortitude, and Justice: now when I came thither with suffient warning from
Virtue: yet (for order sake) they thus used me: wisdom, which stood with a
Snake in her hand, (over whose head was written) I see the holes that subtle
Serpents make, thus used her wary speech unto me: Sir (quoth she) how,
presume you into this place? from whence came you, and how and whither will
you? Lady, (quoth I) from Fancies Forte I came, and am now travailing to the
Forte of Fame: I came now directly from the School of Virtue: brought thither
by Learning, had by reason, servant to instruction: and here behold Patience,
who has lead me, who is further to plead for me: Welcome (quoth she) but art
thou not weary? no (quoth I) nor would be, if the walk had been longer, to
have my will.


Will. Why did thou think me there abouts? oh Lord I was far wide.


Wit. Peace Will a while: when I denide weariness: Yea (quoth Fortitude) an
other of the (...) (over whose head was written, I yield to good, but
overthrow the ill.) I will see if you be weary or not, I must try a fall with
you. ^t first I made no account of her, but when I begun, I sound her of
great force. Yet in the end, she was content to give me over and let me come
n^re the W^ll. Now upon the Well brinkes stood Justice, over whose head was
written: My hand hittes right, Death is my stroke, my balance will not lie.
Then was my words written down by Memory, and weyed with Truth: which being
even in judgment, she ^ad me welcome: and so was content, to let me lay my
lips to the sweet lie quor of Sapience. Oh it is a delicate Water.

Now as I stood, I heard a Trumpette sound, which done, I heard a voice
which said: What Trompe can sound the true report of Fame? Now desirous to see
y^ place, whence I heard this sound, I craved the Ladies pasport to the said
place: who gave me no other pasport, then the commandment of Patience:
warning me in any wise, to take hold of Time, when I met him: and turn him to
my use: with these two, I should come to the sort before me. I right glad of my
good hap, took leave, and forth I went: anon I met Master Time, with his
Sith in his hand: singing Save Virtue, all things I cut down, that stand
within my way. But as he came working, I watched him near, and as he struck
aside, I suddeinly stepped to him, took him by the no^le, and turnde him to my
work. What would thou (quoth he?) I must not stand idle: no (quoth I) thou
shall walk, and lead me to the Fort of Fame. Come then (quoth he) go away,
softly (quoth Patience) content (quoth I) and so together we go to this stately
Court: where being first entertained by Courtly, we were brought to Favor, and
so led up to Fame. Now being on knee before her highness, she first gave me
her hand to kiss: and willed the Lords to bid me welcome: see here (quoth
she) the perfection of affection, what a travail he has undertaken only for
our favor, which he shall be sure off. The Nobles used me honorably, the
Gentlemen courteously, the Servants reverently, and Fa^our freendly. Now as I
stood, I heard such sweet Music, such heavenly songs, it made my heart leap
to hear them: The Prince did sing in praise of Peace, the Lords of Plenty,
the Ladies of true Love, the Lawiers of Quiet, the servant of Law, the
Merchauntes of Sailing, and Sailors of fair weather, the Rich of Health, the
Poor of Charity, the Healthful of good hap, and the happy of Gods
blessing: there was no Usurers, Dicers, Players, nor fighters heard off. Oh,
there was a place of pleasure: if in the world there be a Paradize, that was
it: Oh that thou had been with me.


Will. So would I, but tell me, he we came you again?


Wit. I will tell thee: When I had been within, and without, and heard such
sweet Hermony, of such singular Music: at last, I came down into the base
Court, (...) by Favor, to a lodging, which was called the counting house:
there sat Memory, to take the names o^ such as had (...) entertained, and
meant to s^ke favor, at the hands of happy Fame. But as I was going through
the Court, I met one of the Maids of Honor attend^unt upon the Princess,
whose name ( Favor told me) was Be^lezza, accompanied with Gentilezza, an
other o^ the (...). Now as I was walking, I feared s^ earnestly an them, that
(not looking to my (...)) I stumbled (...), and with the fall I awaked, now
awake, I thought of my good Will: and see how soon it was my hap to meet
with (...)* but no sooner then I wished for thee, nor then I am heartily glad
of thee.


will. Gramer^y wit. But yet I beshrowe thee?


wit. Why so?


will. For loosing me.


Wit. Thou might have (...).


will. You might have held me.


wit. When?


will. When I was near you.


Wit. Where was that?


Will. Where you lost me: But tell me one thing, where was it you slept, and
awaked so so^ainely? What? was it here abouts?


Wit. Yea, here Will, here, here is the Forte of Fame, as thou shall find,
when thou have been with me a while: there is no house, but has a sink: no
h^ld so fair but has a foul d^tch: no place so pleasant, but has a corner
of anoyance: he that runs retchlesly, falls headlong: and he that is in a
hole, he knows not how, must come out he knows not when. Care is to be had in
all things, at all times, and in all places: well, thou have known some
sorrow: learn to leave selfe-iudgement: follow friend, go with me.


Will. Why? I would never have lost the, but.


wit. But that thou were weary of me.


will. Why? I was not weary but.


Wit. No, but that you were a wanton.


VVil. Why? I was not a wanton but.


wit. No, but that you were wilful.


Will. Why? I was not wilful but.


wit. No, but that you thought better of your self then any else.


wit. Why? but I did not think so, but.


wit. Nay, you may say you would not have thought so, but.


Will. But what? or why?


wit. But because you did not see your self.


will. Yes indeed, but I did: I did see my self and you too.


wit. Indeed, but you did not: for if you had seen me, you would not so have
lost me.


Wit. Yes, but I did see you, but when I had looked on you a while, I looked
on my self so long, till you were out of sight, and then I looked after you
and could not see you.


wit. Well, but then you saw me not, and so you lost me: but since you now
have sound me, follow me near, stay but a Buts length behind me, least I
suddenly step a flights shot before you, and then a furlong further, you
never overtake me.


will. But soft, runs wit so fast, will is weary.


wit. Go too, throw off your clogge of care, trust to me, so you do as I bid
you, all shall be well.


will. Yes, but.


wit. But? What?


will. But a ltttle of your help.


wit. Yes, but.


will. But? What?


wit. But that you must of your self labor.


will. So I will but.


wit. But not too much: well, contented, I will work. Will thou help?


will. Yea willingly.


wit. How long?


will. Till death.


wit. Why, will thou dye?


will. Not with working: yet will I work sore.


wit. Whereto?


will. to win my wish.


Wit. What that?


will. You can tell.


wit. But tell me.


will. What?


wit. Is it Favor?


will. That is one part of it.


wit. Wealth?


will. An other part.


Wit. Honor?


will. The greatest next.


wit. Content.


VVil. All in all.


wit. Where?


will. In heart.


wit. How?


will. By hap.


wit. How that?


will. By Hope?


wit. Oh, Hope is vain.


will. Oh, do not discomfort me.


wit. Doubt the worst.


will. Wherefore?


Wit. Because I bid thee.


will. Why do you bid me?


Wit. For this reason: the best will help it self.


will. What is the worst?


wit. Envy.


will. What will he do.


wit. Mischief.


will. To whom?


wit. To good minds.


will. How shall I do then?


wit. Let Patience use Prayer, God will preserve his servants.


Will. That I shall: Then it is not impossible?


wit. What?


will. To get Content?


wit. It is hard.


Will. What then?


wit. Do our best.


will. Content.


Wit. But hark will: shall I tell thee a little more of the Fort of Fame: What
I saw, and heard before I came away, over the gate at the entry, I saw
written, pretty Posies, some in Latin, some in Italian, some French, and some
English. In Latin I remember these: Quid tam difficile quod non solertia
vincit? By that was written, Labor vertus: And by that, vertute Fama: And over
that, Fama immortalis: And that was written, in many places about the house. In
Italian was written, Giouentu vecchezza: by that, vecchezza Morte, et Morte
Tempo, et tempo Fama: but over all, sopra tutti, triumpha Idd^o. In French, Le
sol Fortune, il prudent Fame* Fame est divine, duinitie, est pretieuse, Dieu
est nostre guarde. In English was written. Patience is a virtue. Virtue is
Famous. Fame is divine. Divinity is gracious. Grace is the gift of God: And
God is the only giver of grace. Which by Patience seeks the virtue y^ is
Famous to the divine pleasure of the giver of all good gifts: Blessed be his
name, this shall he find, that enters Fort of Fame.


Will. Oh sweet speeches.


wit. Then will I tell thee further, as I walked up and down with Favor, I
heard Courtesy and Content, (a couple of Courtiers) discoursing of thee and
me. Of the Uertues of wit, and the vanities of will.

Wit, they said, was desirous of knowledge, but Will could take no pain: wit
would have Patience, but will would be wood with anger: wit would work, when
will would stand idle: wit would be walking, when will would be slothful:
wit would call for wills help, when will cared not for wits counsel: wit
would be wise, and will would be wanton: wit would be Uertuous, and will vain:
wit would be Famous, and vvil foolish: wit would be sober, and vvil frantic:
wit would be careful, and will careless: wit studying, and will playing:
vit at good exercise, and will idle, and worse occupied: wit mourning for will,
will making no moan for wit: Wit in his dumps, and will in delights: wit would
do well, and have will do no worse, if he would follow him. But will would
loose wit, and wit must work without will and against will: and yet this is
strange, they were sworn Brethren, one could not be without the other. Yet
wit could make better shift alone: wit could find will, when he had lost
himself, and will (yet) would please wit well, when he would be a good boy:
Which he would never be, till he were beaten, and y^ with the smart of his own
rod: then he would come home to wit, follow wit as his best friend, and never
leave him to the last hour.

Now when I heard this discourse, I remembered thee, and being able to tarry
no longer, the hearing of such matter, against him whom I love, I entreated
Favor to bring me forth into the Court, toward the Countinghouse: whither
walking, I stumbled by the way, and fell as I told you: wherewith I awooke.
Now good will since I have found thee, and now thou see the miseries of the
world: come, follow me, let me bring thee to a better course: Let not me
mourn for thee, nor other thus talk of thee: I will make much of thee, if
thou will love me: I will make thee give them cause to say: see what a
change? will is come home wit is content to be ruled by wit: he works with
wit, he walks with wit: he mournes and is merry with wit: he is travailing to
virtue with wit, he will find Fame by wit: why he, will? he is as welcome as
wit, as worthy as wit, now he has learned of wit, how to direct his course:
believe me will, I love thee.


Will. Gramercie good wit, and I thee: But tell me one thing, me thinks all
this was but a Dream, for in the end you did awake with the fall.


Wit. True vvil, I was in a Dream, and so were thou:


will. Oh then you did hear men talk so much of me in in your sleep: Awake, I
warrant you: you shall u^uer hear so much amiss of me.


Wit. I hope so too: now I have met with thee, I will show thee a way,
whereby thou shall deserve no such difcredit.


Will. Gramercie. But shall I now tell thee, a little that I had forgotten,
that I saw and heard in the Lake of Misery?


Wit. Contented good will, and gramercie too.


Will. Then wit thou shall understand, I heard these speeches past among
Penitent people: when wit is wayward, Will is no body: woeful wit, blames wanton
will: wanton Wit, chides worthy vvil: unhappy wit, hasty will: fa^tastical Wit,
forward vvil. Over that, wit thinks scorn of vvil, but yet he cannot be
without him: Wit has lost vvil, but yet he is glad to seek him: Wit mournes
for Will, but Wit sees it not: Will travails for the Stone, that Wit must whet
himself upon: VVil is painful, but wit unthankful: vvil is courteous, but
wit cursed: Will soon content, wit too curious: will would be ruled, but wit
had no reason: will would have been Famous, had wit been Uertuous: will had
been good, had not wit been bad: will had not lost wit, had wit looked unto
him: Will would do well, if wit would do better: will would learn, if wit
would teach him: But will must work without wit, and against wit: and yet it
was wonderful that sworn Brethren should so disagree, yet one so necessary
for the other in all actions, as nothing could hitte well, when they were a
sunder. Will could meet wit in a Maze, and comfort him with his company: will
could bring wit into a good order, when he was quite out of course. Wit would
be glad of will: but when? when he found the want of his Freende, which he would
never do, till he were weary of working alone: and then he would embrace will,
make much of will, and never leave will for any worlds good. Now when I heard so
much of my good Wit, I could not tarry any longer in the company, but from them
I go, and by my self sat down, where I slept, and wakte, as I told you.


Wit. Gramarcie good will: Why then I perceive, we were both a sleep, we lost
one an other in travail, and travailed in sleep, to seek one another: which
walking we have found: happy be this day of our meeting, and twice happy hour
of this our freendly greeting: He runs far, that never turns: he turns
well, that stays in time: and he stays well, that stands fast: he stands
fast, that never falls: he falls low, that never rises: he rises well,
that stands alone when he is up. Good Will, well met, let us now be
merry, shake hands, swear company, and never part.


Wit. Content, here is my hand, my heart is thme. But ere we go any further,
let us be a little merry.


Will. What shall we do?


wit. Let us sing.


wit. Content. But what?


wit. What you will: begin and I will answer you.


A song between Wit and Will.
Wit. What art thou will?


W. A babe of natures brood,


Wit. who was thy sire?


W. sweet lust, as Lovers say:


Wit. Thy mother who?


VV. wild lusty wanton blood,


Wit. when were thou borne?


W. In merry month of May.


Wit. And where brought up?


VV. In school of little skill:


Wit. what learndst thou there?


VV. Love is my lesson still.


Wit. Where readst thou that?


w. In lines of sweet delight,


Wit. The Author who?


w. Desire did draw the Book:


Wit. who teaches?


w. Time.


wi. what order?


w. Lovers right,


Wit. what that?


w. To catch Content, by hook or crook.


Wit. where keeps he school?


w. In wilderness of woe:


Wit. why lives he there?


w. The fates appoint it so.


Wit. Why did they so?


w. It was their secret will,


Wit. what was their will?


w. to work fond Lovers woe:


Wit. what was their woe?


w. By spite their sport to spill,


Wit. what was their sport?


w. Dame nature best does know.


Wit. How grows their spite?


w. By want of wish: wit, what that


Will. Wit knows right well, Will may not tell thee what.


Wit. Then Will adiewe.


w. Yet stand me in some steed,


Wit. wherewith sweet will?


w. Alas, by thine advise:


Wit. whereto good will?


w. To win my wish with speed,


Wit. I know not how.


w. Oh Lord that Will were wise.


Wit. would thou be wise.


w. Full fain. wit. the^ come from schole
Take this of wit: Love learnes to play the fool.



VVIl. Content, I will come from school, I will give over A^tem Amandi, and I
will with thee, to some more worthy study, which may be as well to my
commodity, comfort, as content.


Wit. Well said will, now I like thee well: and therefore, now I will do my
best, to work thy delight. But for that now I have a piece of work in hand,
which none must be privy too, till it be finished. We will hear leave off
talk, and fall to our work together, so shall I the sooner and the better
dispatch it.


Will. Content. You shall have my help, in it, or any other thing, wherein I
may stand you in steed: And since you are so glad of my company, we will live
and die together.


Wit. Gramercie good VVil: and mean time let us pray God to prosper our
work: let us have care how we work: what, when, and where we work, that
we may ^de it commodious, not contrary to Gods will, contentiue to the best,
offensive to few or none, let the matter be Uertuous, so shall he prove
famous.


Will. Good


Wit. I thank thee for thy good counsel, God give us his grace to do so. I
am glad to see thee so well bent: now I must needs love thee: thou were never
wont to be so well minded.


Wit. Better late then never: it is good to be honest, though a man had
forsworn it: there is no time too late, to thrine.


Will. True: And I promise thee now, I hope I shall do well by the comfortable
counsel, of so good a friend: God be thanked, the old vain is gone. Stet pro
ratione voluntas, Sum Iuuenis fruar hoc mu^do, S^nex cola^ pietatem, Omnia
vincit amor. Faint heart never won fair Lady: Let us be merry while we are
here: When we are gone, all the world goes with us: Let the^ take care that
come after: A man is a man, if he have but a hose on his head, Oh che bella
donna? favor della Signora, oh dolce amore, La Sennora et spada, se^za estos
nada, Perle Amor de dieu: Beau damoiselle: oh brave huom: Che gallante cheual?
Il faut auoire come? That makes no matter: then sweetes had no sower: but now.


Wit. Oh will, do thou remember all this: I pray thee forget al, and think no
more of such things. I am sorry, that ever they were in my heart, but now thou
shall see we will do well enough: we will take another way, to both our
comforts. We will to Care, and entreat him, to lend us his help, for without
him in deed we shall make an ill-favored end, of what we begin untowardly. I
promise thee, I heard the pretiest song betwixt him and Misery, that I heard a
good while: if thou will set it down in writing, I will recite it unto thee.


VVil. Contented, right willingly, and thank thee too.


Wit. Then lo, thus It was.


The Song between Misery and Care.
M. WHat art thou care?


C. A secret skill unseen.


M. who was thy syr^?


C. sound wisdom.


M. Mother who?


C. Devise.


M. And who thy Nurse?


C. Delight I ween.


M. when were thou borne?


C. In harvest.


M. what to do?


C. To work.


M. with whom?


C. with wit and honest will:


M. what work?


C. In grain, to gleane the good from il.


M. What good?


C. The best.


M. And how?


C. by wary eye,


M. whose eye is that?


C. the eye of perfect sight:


M. Who bears that eye?


C. The head that has me nie.


M. whose head is that?


C. Each one that loves delight.


M. But what delight?


C. That longest does endure,


M. Oh Care.


C. I come, thy comfort to procure.


M. Whence do thou come?


C. I come from lofty Sky,


M. when camst thou thence?


C. Even now.


M. who sent thee so?


C. The Gods.


M. whereto?


C. To comfort Misery:


M. But how?


C. By wit to work his ease of woe.


M. What woe?


C. The worst.


M. what that?


C. The grief of mind,


M. Oh.


C. Fear not, Care will quickly comfort find.




Believe me, I like it well: But is Care so comfortable* Yea, indeed is it.
Care is both a Corsie and a comfort, all is in the use of it. Care is such a
thing, as has great a do in all things: why Care is a King in his kind. Did
you never hear my discourse of Care in Uerse?

VVil. No that I remember: if it be not long I pray you rehearse it. And for my
better remembrance, henceforth I will write it.


wit. Then give ear, thus it was.


The song of Care.
COme all the world, submit your selves to Care,
And him acknowledge for your cheifest King:
With whom no King, or Keisar may compare,
who bears so great a sway in every thing.
At home, abroad, in Peace, and eke in war:
Care chiefly stands, to either make or mar.
The Court he keeps, is in a wise conceit,
His house a head, where reason rules the wit:
His seat the heart that hates all deceit,
His bed, the brain, that feels no frantic fit.
His diet is, the Cates of sweet content:
Thus is his life, in heavenly pleasure spent.
His kingdom is, the whole world round about,
Sorrow his sword, to such as dare rebel:
His counsel, wisedame, that decides each doubt,
His skill, foresight, of things to come, to tell.
His chief delight, is studies of devise,
To keep his Subiests out of miseries.
Oh courteous King, oh high and mighty Care,
What shall I write, in honor of thy name?
But to the world, by due desert declare:
Thy royal state, and thy immortal Fame,
Then so I end, as I at first begun,
Care is the King of Kings, when all is done.
FINIS.


Will. Surely, I never heard so much of Care, before: but reason has showed
me, all is true that you have spoken of him. And therefore let us humbly crave
his help in this our work, which we are to take in hand, I dare warrant his
favor. Wit, Say theu so Will? then let us go: Time trudgeth away, we have
talked long: Mountains never meet, but friends often: good hap comes often
unlooked for, but never unwelcome. I thought not to have found thee here, but
we see Fortune does much, but Fates more to bring friends together: and
friendship does much, where faith is fixed: And faith is a Jewel, and Iewelles
are precious, and precious is for Princes.

Oh God, trust me will, we must be wary to work so with advise of Care, that as
we are friends one to another, so we may prove in all actions to show our
cheifest Jewel, our faithful heart to God and her Majesty: To whom might we
once be so happy, as to present a piece of work worthy the receipt: oh how
glad should then eur hearts be, which with faithful duty would adventure
death for her most excellent favor: which til by desert we find, and always
let us love and honor our singular good Lord, that has vouchsafed us his
undeserved favor: and let us heartily pray for the preservation of her most
excellent Majesty, with long and prosperous reign over us: as for the
advancement of his Honors estate: who by his Uertues deserves, and by deserts
has found Favor of her Highness, love of her Peers, honor of us, and a
number our betters. And so let us away into my Closset of Conceit, where from
company we will think upon such matters, as here we^ will not talk on.


Will. Content. We wll go together, study thou, and I will make my pen, ready
at thine, or his Honors commandment. And thus, til we have dispatched our
work in hand: let us take our leave, humbly of our good Lord, and
courteously of all our friends: Wishing them to employ their studies, to the
pleasure of God, content of the best sort, profit of themselves, and good
example to others: and so Bacciando le mani del Signore, let us bid them all
Adio. From our heart, this, 20. of August. 1597.


I^genii voluntas.
The Authors Dream, of strange effects, as follows.
NOT many days since, it was my hap to travail, not far hence, into a
Country, called the Island of Inuen^on: where I met with many of mine
acquaintance, as well friends as foes, New my foes began to flatter me, and
my friends as fast to frown on me: My friends were wit and Reason, Wisdom
and Care, Wealth and Content: My foes were Will and Rage, Folly and Rechlesnes,
Woe, and Discontent: now there were other, betwixt friends and foes, that
stood looking at me, with a strange countenance: as who should say, will thou, or will thou not? these were Fancy, Love, Frenzy, and Patience. Now
there were two Ladies, that sat in such a state, that I had much a do, to
look up to them, these were Virtue and Fame: Now below there were two
Sprites, which I was vily afraid off, the one was pide of all colors, and the
other as black as a Coal: the colored was Vanity, and the other Infamy.
Now as I looked about me, ^ remember my first words were these, God bless me
from Sprites. And then looking vpwardes, I wished to God, I could clime up to
the two Ladies.

But soft a while, there is more in it then so, more steps in a Ladder then
one, and more sticks then one to the making of the steps. Soft fire makes
sweet Maulte, Non cui^is att^ngit adire Cori^thum: The Court is not for common
persons, let Beggars stand at Gates: I am but a poor trauailer, I must acqaint
my self with mean men before I seem to look so high: let me go speak with
my friends: But what mean my foes ^hus to use me with courtesy? What? would
they be friends with me? But let me see who is he that so frowns on me?
while I am looking on my foes. Oh it is my friend Wit: let me go to him, and
learn the cause of his choler. Why art thou angry good Wit? Will is at thy
command, if thou think well of thy friend: leave those frowning looks,
that will soon bring me out of love with thee. What (quoth Reason) remember
who is thy friend: ha^ thou forgotten what I have told thee? what is will
without wit? yea, (quoth I) and what is Wit without Reason? Oh (quoth
VVisdome) cold words, Wisdom shows wit cannon want Reason: yea, but (quoth
I) where is wisdom: Oh (quoth Care) come to me and I will telth^* tush (quoth
I) what is Care without wealth? Oh yes (quoth Wealth) Content is sufficient
riches. Yea marry (quoth I) but where is that? Tush (quoth Fan^e) come away
and go with me: Come, thou have been from me a great while: Wit i^ become a
sworn brother to Reason and they two are servants to wisdom. Wisdom, h^e
is consulted with Care, to hu^t after wealth, and wealth forsooth must win
Content. Oh it were a trim life to take in hand to follow these fellows. Come
go, soft (quoth I) I have been fantastical enough already: Then (quoth
Fancy) look wh^re Love is: tush (quoth I) my heart is done.

What? will thou go with me (quoth Frenzy?) no (quoth I) I would I were
further from thee. Then (quoth Patience) I trust you and I shall be friends,
yet, no (quoth I) for I am sure thou never came to me for any good. With that
Fancy turned her face, Love looked another way, Frenzy fomed at the mouth like
a Bore, ^ Patience looked like a poor Companion. Now came my foes near me,
Will he comes swearing, that Wit was so waywar^, that no body could abide him.
Rage he swore, Reason was so wonderful, as he knew not what to make of him.
Folly he badde fie upon Wisdom* why, no badie could talk with him for Care.
And Retchlesnesse, swear* Care was too covetous for his Conscience to meddle
withal. Woe cried out upon Wealth, saying: it was the trash that he was weary
of, and had brought him to that pass, by penitence of too much estimation of
it. Discontent, he told me that Content was but a flincher, he would never
abide with any man long, and he would be my companion during life, if I would.

Now was I in such a maze, with muzing what to do, that I was, and I was not: I
could not tell where, nor what I was, yet with much a do, I made them all
this answer. Will, thou know I have tried thee ^ wanton, therefore no more
words, if thou will follow me do, otherwise farewell. Rage, thou art not
ignorant, of thy unruly rudeness, therefore run after me if thou will, for
else I will gladly rest without thee. Folly, thou did so much follow
Fancy, that thou had almost undone me: I am afraid of thee, therefore come
behind me if thou will, for follow thee I will not, except thou step before
me ^awares, and that unwillingly. Retchlesnesse, do thou remember what thou
have lost me? go look a Companion, lie aloof, for I like thee not. Woe, do
thou not know, how often thou have made me weep, then go water other me^nes
cheeks mine eyes are wet enough already. And Discontent, thou have done me
^uch despite, that I can never delight in thee: therefore depart, for I will
never bid thee welcome.

My friends that frowned on me, now hearing these answers to these
customers, came a little near me.

First (quoth wit.) how now? shall friends be foes? Will thou no more of my
company? Yes (quoth I) if I wist to what purpose. Why (quoth he) I will bring
thee to Reason: What to do (quoth I? nay, (quoth wit) ask him that: Well
(quoth I) Content: So when Reason had espied us, he began somewhat merrily to
look upon me: What (quoth he) have thou lost will and found Wit? now I see
we shall be friends again. Yea, but (quoth I) what will thou do now for me?
Why (quoth he) I will bring thee to wisdom: To what end (quoth I) he shall
soon sh^we thee (quoth he) such sufficient good, as thou shall be glad off.

Wisdom with grave conntenaunce, thus saluted me? Old freende, have thou
left Will with Rage? and followed wi^ with Reason? welcome. Come let us go to
Care: For what cause (quoth I?) of him thou shall quickly know (quoth he) to
thy Comfort. Now being come to Care: Oh old acquaintance (quoth he) What is
wit, Rage, Folly, and Rechlesnes, gone together? and art thou come with wit,
Reason, and wisdom, twice welcome. Come let us walk to Wealth: Wherefore
(quoth I?) Thou shall know that anon (quoth he) when tho^ comst to him: When
wealth saw me ( Benedicitie, quoth he) is wilful Rage, left with Foolish
Rechlesnesse, and woe, worn out? Welcome freende, look who is here? Who
(quoth I) and with that I spyed Content: Who thus saluted me: My good freende,
now better welcome then ever. I like it well, that thou will rather seek to
recover thine old friends, then to run after new. Keep still with Care,
and wisdom will so persuade thy wit with Reason, that thou shall find me
always at an inch with thee. Marry, as wit is ruled by Reason, Reason by
wisdom, Wisdom kept by Care, and Care has only Content at commandment: so
must thou, now thou have found us out, use us in our kind, which if thou art
desirous to learn, thou must entreat with wit, by Reason, to demand of
wisdom: of whom thou shall know more then I can tell thee, and so welcome, I
have no more to say unto thee. I glad of this their freendly greeting, went
first to Wit: My good Wit (quoth I) thou know how long I have longed for
Content: how long I have sought him, and could never find him: and now having
found him, I am to crave thy counsel how to use him.

Alas (quoth will) I am heartily glad of thy good mind: rome, we will to
Reason, for without him, I am nobody. Reason presently persuaded with me, that
it was his duty, to demand Counsel of wisdom. Now when we came to
wisdom, he said he would talk a little with Care, and give me answer.

Which attending a while, at last, thus it was, my friend (quoth he) Con^ent
is to be used as he is taken: if by the eye, let the head lodge him a while:
before he come to the heart. When he is in the head, let Wit way what he
is, let Reason run him over, and let me with Care have the considering of
him: If we like well of him* let him sit nearer thy heart: But if either
wit or Reason think him not worthy the bringing to me, Or I, when I have
considered of him, think him not worthy the keeping: as by the eye you sound
him, so by the eye loose him. But how soever you find him, love him
moderately: Least with too much you be weary* or too little you cannot know
him. If you find him by Conceit, wit will soon knew what he is.

Then Reason having talked with him, I shall soon with Care so consider of him,
as thou shall not tarry long for knowledge how to use him: If by Wit, and
Reason both thou have him, it will be but little work to bring him to me.
When I and Care have considered of him, thou shall not doubt how to use him: If
by me thou can by him, Care will tell thee, thou can never make too much
o^ him: And as we now and then give him lean to be abroad in the world a
while, so must thou give him leave to be l^king a while, thou shall by our
help find him again well enough. Good Sir (quoth I) your will be done. Then
(quoth he) I will tell thee what, there are three Companions, that he does
often keep company with all. Whose names are these: Fancy, Love, and
Patience. Now sometime we see him among them, and let him alone, to see what
they will do with him: Now sometime when they have had him a while, they
would lead him away to Folly: Rechlesnesse, and those fellows, which when we
see, then we fetch him home, and let them alone with Discontent. Whom when
they are weary off, then they leave him, and come to crave his company again:
Which for a time we grant them.

But what d^st thou look up at so? Oh Sir, it is at the two heavenly Ladies,
how might a man come to know them, and to do them service? I will tell thee,
one is Virtue, and the other Fame. Now the way to them is this, thou must go
along by Fancy, slip along by Love, skippe away by Frenzy, and shake
Patience by the (...): behold, Content is with Fancy before thee, take Wit
and Reason with thee. I with Care, will not be far from thee, and by our
help shall the Ladies entertain thee. Now, haste may hinder thee, and sloth
may set thee behind hand: Look where the Sprites be, take heed least they
catch hold of thee, and then all we leave thee: and then be sure the Ladies
will ever disdain thee: now ^llowe my counsel, and God speed thee. Thus
with humble thanks unto vvisdome, I took wit, and ^eason, and set forth
toward Fancy: Sir (quoth she) whither walks you? Friend (quoth wit,) tell
her whither wit and Reason shall carry me with Content from Francie. Lord at
this answer how she scoulde: Can thou not pass by me (quoth she) but
thou must rob me of my Content? Well, thou must ask Love leave yet, ere he
go, and if he will let him go, take him to thee, and away sheeflung to Folly:
Now as I came by Love: friend (quoth she) whither new? let us have a little
talk with you. Say (quoth wit) your Tale will be too long, I cannot tarry:
I am going whither Careful wisdom, wild wit and Reason, to lead me,
with Content from Love. Oh how he frowned, what (quoth he) will thou not
leave me my Content? Well, Patience has a part in him. See what she will say
to thee, since ^ cannot keep him: so away he ran so Rage, and so I lost
him. Now must I come by Frenzy, who looked on me so terribly, that without
giving ears to his speeches, I fetched a leap, almost from wit and Reason
too, but thanked be God: when I came to Patience. I found them both again.
How now (quoth she) whither will you? Tell her (quoth wit) whither,
wisdom with Care, has commanded wit with Reason to take Content from
Patience, and so to accompany me, till I return again. Alas (quoth Patience)
Ultra posse non est esse. I can not hold him, thou must have him: and so
heauili^ she went to woeful Discontent, with whom she abode, till our
return again. Now was I ^ most danger: we must pass along by the Spirits,
whom as I came by with Content in hand, they snatched and caught at us. When
wit and Reason, by careful wisdoms warning, kept us aloof from their
fingers: Then when they saw they could not catch us, Lord what means they
made to allure us. Vanity, had a Million of toys, which so pleased mine eye,
that Wit and Reason had much a do, to hold me from her: she would show me
such gallant inchaunted Glasses, and in them such sweet Ladies, such heavenly
Faces, and such singular bodies, with such excellent Graces, that if I had had
Fancy with me, she had been fast for starting: if Love, he had been
linckt: if Frenzy, he had been in his kind: if Patience, she would have
forgot her self. I may tell you, that Wit and Reason, had never so much in
their lives to do, to keep Content and me from them: But Careful Wisdom,
may do much.

Now when Beauty could do nothing, then did she fill out dilicate Wines,
into Artificicall Glasses, and set dainty Iunkettes, to move me to that
vain delight. But my stomach was full, what could I wish more then Content?
When this would do no good with me, then brought she forth, a sight of
gallant Horses, their heads full of Feathers: (...), Content could go on
foot, then thought she, now or never: Oh, she had a Citterne, on which ^hee
pla^de me a fine piece of Italian Music, and sung, Che Compra^ M^tonne.
Tushe, I was not then fasting, and therefore I cared not for her flesh.

Then did she open a pretty Chest, out of which she dr^we out ^che Iewelles,
rare Pearls, precieus Stones: and after them, Silks of all colors, fine
Ribbons, Cutworke Ruff^s, Stringes, Laces, Purses, (...), Pinnes, Gloves, and a
thousand things, with what do you l^cke Sir? Noneof these (quoth Wit) Reason
would be g^ne.

Now suddenly began the black Sprite to sound his Trumpet: but Lord what an
unpleasant noise it made? Now it was time, for I began to be afraid, which
Wit and Reason seeing, comforted me with Content, of hope to see she end of my
happy journey.

Now when I was past them, I asked of wit, what they were? Why, (quoth he) we
shall hear by and by. Knowledge, here before, keeps the key of Virtues gates,
he will tell us.

Now when we came to him, he told me, the one was a Pyper, and the other a
Pedier* Now Knowledge. not ignorant of my travail, nor my guides: brought us
all before the two Ladies, Virtue and F^me. Before whom we fell on knee: and
first to Virtue beseeching favor: she demanded of Knowledge, what and whence
we were? who reported no other then truth: and she considering the friends
that sent us, her chief Councillors, and Wit and Reason their chief
Servant, badde Content be of good cheer, he should receive Courtesy: so
in short, she did vouchsafe us her favor: Now was I become servant to Virtue.

But (quoth she) for mine elder Sister Fame, favor you may have promise of,
but not entertainment, until you have fulfilled certain of my commandments.

Which are these, hear them: let Wit note them: Reason remember, and Wisdom
take care, to see thee execute them. The first is, when you pass by Vanity,
tell her you are sworn to Virtue. And ere you go, swear to shun Vanity,
and ^schew her Ui^s: Look in her Glasses, but love not her painted faces: Come
not on the back of her pampered P^lfrayes, and give a puff at her foolish
Feathers: Delight not in her Glasses: Drink not of her Wine, nor feed of her
Dainties: stop thine ears from her fidling Music, and close thine eyes
from her Trumperies: Shake thy head at the shameful sound of Infaime, and so
pass that (...).

Pass alo^g by Patience with pleasure, fly by Frenzy with fear look away
from Love, with loyalty to Virtue, frown on Fancy, with Fidelity to Fame:
Make much of wit, and love Reason, honor wisdom, by careful wisdom seek
wealth sufficient: let wealth not make the Covetous, le^st that thou loose
Content: This is the sum of my Will, which as wisdom writes me word, he
sees with Care performed: ^t your return, I promise you preferment to Fame,
and thus fare you well.

Thus back again went I, through all the perilous passages, y^ I had gone
through before. Now first I must pass by the two Spirits, which as I came by,
the pie^ Spirit, first began thus to play the Trull with me, she held me
out a Glass, wherein she did lively show me such intising toys, as would
have made a man that had any life in him, to have looked toward them.

First, she showed me a trowpe of fair Ladies, every one her Lover, colling
and kissing, chinning and embracing, and looking Badies in one another eyes:
Anon they were set down, every Lady with her Lover hard by her, with his
head in her lay, and his hand in her purse. By them a sight of sweet Souls,
sitting by a Candle, catching of Fleas.

There were other sights of more effect then all these, to set a young man's
heart on fire: but let them all go, when I wished my self a Lover: what? quoth
Reason) Love has no Reason, would thou love me? when I wished my self a
Flea: Why (quoth wit) will thou be a Beast? want Reason, and be subject to
every slutt^s fingers? then, I had done. When I wished my self somewhat else,
not to be named: I must rule you (quoth Reason) else I see you would quickly
ru^e to ruin.

Now when Vanity saw she could do nothing with me this way, she began to
to use Uillanie with me, come slave (quoth she) do thou think scorn to
look toward her, whom Princes do so dearly account of? thou art my ^laue,
and dare thou deny me service? Yea (quoth I) I dare and do deny thee, I
am sworn servant to Virtue Therefore a point for thee, and thy Uillanie^:
Do thou challenge me for a servant, that do scorn thy ^lauerie, prate to
Patches: when thou find a fool for thy diet, feed him with a dish of
Diddledomes, for I have done with thee: if ever I served thee, I am sorry for
it: and since my wages was but lost, I mean to live no longer by it. As will
brought me to thee, so has wit by Reason brought me from you both.

At these words her Cake was dowe, she hung the head, her Trumpetter sounded,
Toutest Moote: thus I past the first perrill. Now must I come by Patience, who
sat with Discontent, whom I only smiled on, as I went by, to see her
simplicity: Promise (quoth she) let me have my Content: Tell her (quoth wit)
Reason says, enemies are too near: send away Discontent, and as wisdom
allows of it, you shall hear more of him: Till then, perforce Patience be
still, and so Adieu: She answered nothing, but putting finger in the eye, let
me pass.

Then came I by Frenzy, whose mad countenance so amazed me, as that now it
was no boo^e, to bid me leap lightly, till I were beyond him: For wit told
me before, that Frenzy was an enemy to Reason. Then escaping his clutches, I
must come by Love: new began I to look away, as it were over the shoulder,
toward my Mystresse, who had commanded me to take heed of looking toward
Love. Yet did I hear him utter these speeches: is Wit and Reason not
sufficient to deal with Love? Why? Art thou afraid to look? Why Cupid will
not strike thee blind: Tush (quoth Wit) tell him, Reason says, Love is too
lo^tie for Reason to rule: and Wit too weak when Reason must yield. I would
be loath to venture mine eye sight. At this answer, Love with Rage kept such a
reakes, that I thought they would have gone mad together. Well, thus leaving
them not far from Frenzy, I must pass by Fancy: whom I frowned on so,
that she had little mind to flatter me, and therefore bluntly she asked
me: what? friend are you angry with me? and wherefore? For that (quoth I)
thou art a block in my way to Fame: I would (quoth she) Fancy were no body.
Yes (quoth Wit) tell her, Reason does admit her one with Love, but not with
Wisdom, and so bid her farewell. Thus thanked be God, I had well euergone
t^is company, and with Wit and Reason, I brought my Content to Wisdom. To
whom, when I had delivered my message from Virtue: Well (quoth he) now shall
thou once pass back again, through this company, and then thou shall have
entertainment of thy desired Lady. My self will so accompany thee, that
though great will be thy danger, yet little shall be thy harm, and easy
thy passage.

Now thou have passed hitherto, with Wit and Reason, I will this give thee to
understand, that I have a friend and a servant, both of one name: My friend
is Reason, and so do I call my servant: my friend is Reason, given me by
divine Grace, who helps me to see how high the power of God is, above the
greatest Potentate upon the earth: How much natural Reason is subiest to
divine Judgment, by the duty that Nature does owe unto her Creator.

Now as thou go by Fancy, perhaps she will get help by natural Reason,
to bring her to thy bow: But I will be by thee, to keep thee from her bent.
So will Love use Reason, to bring thee to his Lure, but let me alone to keep
thee from his lewdness: Frenzy there is no talking with, let us fly him
speedily. Patience will persuade thee with Reason, but I will plead with her
so for thee, that thou shall pass her well enough:

Now if Vanity get Reason, we shall do ill enough with her: yet will I
find her Uaine so, as that if I let her blood, I will strike her heart so
dead, as that she shall have no stomach, to strive longer with us: nor
Infamy for sorrow, have power to sound his Trumpet.

And therefore now rejoice, that though thou have long run astray, yet that
now at last, thou has^ hit on a happy way: well time trudgeth away, thou
would fain begone, and I would as feign prefer my servants, therefore let
us be going.

Now, anon we came to Fancy, who had gotten wit and Reason: and as soon as
she had espied me, Freende (quoth she) welcome, better late then never. N^we
I trust we shall not part so soon as we have done. Yes, (quoth I) for any
thing that I can see: what shall I do with thee? What? (quoth she) will thou
not yield to Reason? Yes (quoth I) so Wisdom will me. Why, (quoth Reason) am
not I servant to VVisdome? Yes, (quoth I) so is Wisdom thy Master. And
(quoth he) has not my Master sent me hither to tell thee, that there is no
man but must yield to his Fancy? Tell him (quoth VVisdome) where Grace does
govern, Fancy must obey. Yea, but (quoth Reason) Nature follows Fancy.
Yea, but tell him quoth Wisdom) diuin^ Grace bridles Nature. Yea, but (quoth
Reason) Nature will have her course. Tell him, (quoth Wisdom) with leave of
divine power, else not. Why the (quoth Reason) shall Fanice be nothing? Yes
(quoth I) with natural Reason, but not with divine Judgment? Why then, quoth
Reason, what do I with her? Tell him (quoth VVisdome) help her to C^sin
Fools, and so fare well.

Now, Love we must pass by, who thus saluted me: Why, Now I trust, we shall
be (...) d^s: for all our falling out. No^ a whit, quoth I, I have done with
Love, gramercie, I will no more of thy company. What? (quoth Love) will thou
not be ruled by Reason? Yes (quoth I) so he be not ruled by Nature. Why
(quoth he) will thou not allow Reason to yield to Nature? yes (quoth I)
Natural Reason: and (quoth he) will thou take Reason for no body? yes (quoth
I) when I am without wisdom: and when you are with him, what do you think
him? aline to lead a fool to Love, and a i^st for wisdom to laugh at. Then
(quoth he) I see thou art out of lyking with Love, or out of Love with me.
With both (quoth I) but with thee never so much, as when thou would bring
me in liking with Love: therefore leave thy illusions, for I like neither
them, thee, nor thy Love, farewell. Now was he skipt from Frenzy, and got to
Patience, with whom (when we had escaped) Frenzy, we found sitting together.
Now (quoth Patience) at last I trust (though long first) we shall be friends.
Come let us live together: Soft (quoth I) no haste but good. I remember an
Italian Proverb: Pac^nccia ^ cosa (...). Patience is the pattern of a
Pesaunt. Peace (quoth Reason) you will not b^ against me, will you? yes (quoth
I) if I like you not? Why (quoth he) does not Reason affirm Patience a
remedy in all perplexities? a remedy (quoth I?) no: she is a rest betwixt
Rage and Reason, in a Discontented mind: Why (quoth he) is she not a Virtue?
Not (quoth I) as thou can consider her.

Why (quoth he) does she not set the Discontented mind at quiet? No (quoth I)
but she makes the mind that would ease the body, with outward ^age, kill he
heart with inward freatting. No (quoth he) Patience is a Content. Yea, (quoth
I) with a Discontent. What? (quoth he) will you admit her no body? yea (quoth
wisdom) with natural Reason, but with Wisdom a forced Content, in effect,
an unwelcome rest to a woeful mind, a Virtue amiss conceived, yet better so
taken, then refused for Rage: but when bad is the best, let both alone. Thus
Wisdom deemes her a Virtue, that waits on Uillaines, and such a Virtue, as
the virtuous mind does not love to trouble it self with all. Adieu* I have no
more to say to thee, nor will I have to do with thee. Well, now was our first
passage past over: Now must we pass by Vanity: there was a piece of work.
Now forsooth began Vanity to reach out her hand: Friend (quoth she)
welcome, I thought I had lest thee: Soft (quoth I) hand off, triumph not
before the victory. Why? (quoth she) shall not Reason stay thee: No (quoth
Wisdom) tell her, not when I see him so near Vanity. Why (quoth Reason) is
not the beauty of Ladies, the bravery of Apparel, the sweet sound of
Music, the pleasant taste of Win^s, and delicate Dainties, the gallaunt
show of stamping Steedes, with ^launting Feathers, rich Jewels, and such like,
sufficient to persuade thee to keep us company: Then art thou obsti^ate I
think: No (quoth I) I see a sentence over your heads, sufficient to set me
far enough from you. What is it (quoth Reason?) Oh (quoth I) Vanitas vanitum,
and omnia vanitas. Now (quoth he) I have no more to say: I see my Master is
too near thee: Vanity, farewell, I must away with my Master. So away went we
by Infamy, who was ready to weep for sorrow, to see that now his Lady had
gotten near a servant, nor he near a companion to make him so merry, as to
sound his Trumpette.

Now passing alone, toward the Gates of Virtue, we came to Knowledge, who
presently as he had espied Wisdom* vaylde his Bonnet, fell at his feet, and
having done his duty, rose of his knee, and led us through the base Court,
and so to the Hall: where first we met with Courtesy, who conducted us to
the garre Chamber: there was Learning with his Arts, which led us to
Experience, who brought us to Time: who^ as we caught hold of, they brought us
to Virtue. Who first welcomming Wisdom, and showing good Countenance to Wit,
and Reason, gave me a ^endly nodde, and so staying a while* talking with
Wisdom: She came at last to me, with this sweet and favorable speech.
Ser^aunt, (quoth she) I see thy duty discharged, my commandment kept, and
my will observed: for thy continuance, Wisdom has given hie words, and I am
content to take it Now promise is to be performed, thou shall have
entertainment of my elder Sister, who I know at mine, and Wisdoms requests,
will not refuse thee. So onwardes we go, toward this goodli^ Lady, whom
when I came before, and fell on knee, she bad me welcome, with these words:
Youth (quoth she the good report that Wisdom has made of thee, the good
mind that my si^er (...), has to thee, do make me desirous to do thee good:
I wish thee well with all my heart, and upon Wisdoms word I could be
content to entertain thee. But there comes no man to me, without he have done
some notable Act worthy Memory: I^ thou have done any such thing, let us
understand it, thou shall be presently admitted: if not being servant to my
sister Virtue, thou may soon attempt it, and (...) begu^ quickly finish
it: till then, content thy self with her entertainment, and think thou have
attai^ed no little honor. So turning from me, she went to her sister, to whom
she used these words: come let us talk a little with Wisdom, touching the
traua^le of this fellow. Content (quoth she) so away they go together, to the
Garden of Delight, a place of such pleasure, as passes my (...) to set out.
New as they were going thither, I hoping to hear some good news of
entertainment: at the conuning back again of Wisdom, I heard the sudden
sound of such a Trumpet, as with the loud ^oyse thereof I started, and so
awaked. O^ good Dream, oh sweet sleep, oh blessed ^sion, to gave so good
instruction, to keep me from destruction, from which God deliver me, my well
willers, my friends and foes, and all one another, that will thereto say. Am^n.

Now I have been entertained, at the hands of Virtue, sworn her servant
though in sleep,) I must n^we (according to the commandment o^ Fame) attempt
some such enterprise, either by Learning or Ualiancie: as may (by Uertues
knowledge) purchase me entertainment of Fame. Now for a young man it is hard,
for new^ a days, the gallauntest Youths be^me so amor^us, as that in long
time, they have much to too, and a great grace of God, if ever they grow
virtuous. Well, yet have I (better late then never) being warned in sleep,
taken ca^e now awake, to d^uise, which way to work, ^ what to take in hand,
to deseru^ my Ladies favor: and this I will promise you, there is mettalles in
the fire, which though they came from many Countries, yet are they here so
mingled, and abide so well together, as that if it shall please God, to let me
finishe it: I hope to bring to such perfection, as shall be worthy to be put
in memory. Till when, beseeching God to grant me his heavenly, and
favorable aid, and all good minds to pray for the same: I pray for them, and
all other, that it will please God to grant us all his grace, that we may not
attempt any thing, but ^rtuous, that to his glory may make us Famous on earth,
and in heaven acceptable to his omnipotent mercy. So be it.

N. Breton.

FINIS.
The Scholar and the Soldier.

A Disputation pithily passed between them, the one defending Learning, the
other Martial Discipline.



Written by the said Author., N. B. Gentleman.

To the Courteous and gentle Reader.
GEntle Reader, read no further then you like, if you find any thing to your
Content: think well of me for my pains. If there be nothing that likes you,
my luck is naught: in nothing there can be no great thing, yet something may
be found, though nothing to any great purpose. Well, there are diverse
Nothings, which you shall read further off, if you will take pains to turn
over the leaf, and peruse the rest that follows. Now, though I will wish you
look for no marvelous, or worthy thing, yet shall you find something, though
in effect (as it were) nothing, yet in conceit a pretty thing to pass away the
time withal. Well, if you stand content with this Nothing, it may be ere long,
I will send you something, more to your liking: till when, I wish you nothing
but well. And so I bid you fare well, from my Chamber at the black Friars.

N. B.

A discourse of a Scholar and a Soldier. etc.
The Scholar alone, talking to himself. IN a Country unknown, travailed
certain persons unnamed, of which, two only unacquainted, met together
unlooked for, the one a Scholar, the other a S^uldiour: which ere they met had
passed many a weary walk. Among which, one day about three or four of the
clock in the after noone: The Scholar almost tired with extreme travail,
sat him down on a ^ancke side, under a shady tree, where, with a hungry
stomach (having not dined, nor supp^d well many a day before) he fell to
sucking of certain roots, which he had gathered in the fields as he went: and
finding no better fare, to fill his belly withal, he thought good to feed his
fancy with some contentiue conceit or other: But finding no occasion, to make
himself mercy, all comfortless and solitary, to himself, he used this
speech.

Oh, what a weary life it is to tr^uaile? Knowledge (I see) is hardly come by*
and hardness is unpleasant to the heart: when the heart is ill, all the body
is the worse: she body not well, how can the mind be at quiet? And the mind
disturbed, what case is man in? Ah moulde of mishappe, framed to so many
miseries: Oh cursed Fortune, that bring out of frame, a thing so blessedly
framed. Oh ^onde will, to crie*out upon fortune: Oh, wilful ^it, that do not
see thy Folly: Oh, vain Folly that so have fed my Fancy: Oh, foolish Fancy,
that so have followed Folly: and oh fool I so much to follow Fancy.

But why do I make this moan? I see nothing to dislike me: alas, so see I
nothing to like me. Why? am I discontent with nothing? no but that I see
nothing to my Content. Why? does it dislike me, that nothing contents me? no,
but that nothing does neither please, nor displease me. Why? in nothing is
nothing, then what so distrubes me? that what must be nothing* for some thing
it cannot be, yet some thing it is. And what is it trow I? it is Aliquid ni^il,
that some nothing know I. What? do I know nothing? No? yes, I know this thing,
that nothing is something: And what is that something? why, noght else but
nothing. Then since it is (...) nothing that breeds my disliking, let me see
what something is, in this same nothing, which nothing seems something, and
yet is but nothing? it is my Conceit. Conceit? What is that? a secret gift unto
the mind. What? secrets are hidden? what is hidden, is not known, but that it is
hidden. What is that it, bidden? Something unknown: then till it be known,
what is it? Nothing in knowledge, yet something unknown, then something it is,
nothing, as was before shown: in truth little something, but proves to be
nothing: and yet that same nothing, no little sore something to breed man's
disliking? Beauty, Riches, Honor, Virtue, Friendsh^p, Love Time, etc.

Beauty, what is it? a deception of sight, a secret gift of Nature given to
the body above Captivity, saving that if may be conceived to be nothing: yet
is it some thing in show, though in substance nothing, yet thus much to
disliking, that it breeds a lyking, whereby grows a greater disliking, yet
both as much as nothing. For Beauty is but a secret allurement of the eye, to
liking of the person where it is placed. Now that lyking growto Love, of the
person Beautiful: which but for Beauty (some time) were more worthy hate,
then, in this it falls out to be an illusion, a deceit of Conceit by
allurement of the cie. But whereof grows this? but of the fault of Conceit:
which I showed before, is (though some thing) nothing. Then of nothing grows
nothing, but nothing: If then this deceyt grow of the fault of Conceit, which
is some thing, the fault can be no something, and then cannot Beauty be any
thing, but a shadow: which in substance is nothing, though in conceit some
thing: but in knowledge nothing. But let me* leave this vain nothing, and
think of some thing else: which well considered, may come to as little, or as
much nothing.

Riches, that must needs be some thing: and yet let me see, is there no (...)*
Nothings then one? Oh yes, how many are there? and what are they? Oh, there are
seven Nothings, one in respect nothing: An other Nothing, in a manner: An other
Nothing, to trust too: An other Nothing, durable: The sixth, a n^w Nothing,
called nothing at all. Now let me see, which of these Nothings, is Riches: in
effect it is something and that thing y^ we ^th great things: it purchases
love, friendship, and contrarily hate, and Envy: it buyeth Honor, and sells
honesty: it makes things of nothing wonderful, and wonders things of
nothing. It is a comfort to the mind, and a corrupter of the Conscience: it
releeueth the poor, and pleases the wealthy; it is a help to obtain
Uertues, so it is an occasion of vices: it is a worker of wars: it makes
Peace: it is the occasion of much treason: it makes truth come to light: it
makes the traua^ler: it keeps some at home: it makes the fine workmen: it
breeds idleness: it makes the brave Court: it beggars the country. What should
^ stay any longer upon it? it is such a thing* as has such a sway in many
things, as almost there is no worldly thing to be counted a greater: and can
this then be nothing? yea: and how? Why, it is nothing in this, it is nothing
durable it is a (...) of Fortune, who gives nothing but mutable: for a Rich man
to day, tomorrow is poor: It is subject to many casualties: and in that it is
so uncertain a thing, it is nothing certain, not certainly nothing, but
nothing durable, then in this it is nothing, though otherwise something: but
enough of this Nothing, and now to some other, which seems something, but in
^ne, fall^s out nothing.

Honor: That is a thing greatly sought, little sound, and much made account
of, nor for the Virtue of the substance it carries with it: but for the
Majesty of the matter, which in substance is nothing, it purchases to the
person Honorable reverence of his Inferiors, familiarity with the Nobility,
and favor of the Sovereignty. Now there are diverse Honors, one Honor is
gotten by Riches, which is a thing nothing durable: of nothing grows nothing,
then Riches decayed, dies the Honor, then that Honor is nothing, in that it
is as Riches nothing durable.

An other Honor is got by valiancie, and that is in War, whereby the
Captain wins the Arms, that after during life, he, to his honor, and
after him his po^eritie, to his and their honor, do honorably bear: yet for
all this, well considered, it is nothing, for that it is not certain: for that
in Wars to day is got, that to morrow is lost: to day he gets an En^gne, that
to morrow loses his own Arms, body and all: if he come home well with his
victory, yet Virtutis comes Inuidia: He that did clime by Virtue, may be
overthrown by villainie: hes may be accused and attainted, that never did
amiss: Perjury may make forgerie, to seem no knauerie: many times might
overcomes right, and then executed upon condemnation, his house is come to
destruction: then this Honor, I see like wise is the nothing, that is the
nothing durable.

But leaving this, there is now another Honor, got by Learning, which gains
the knowledge of many things, and the use of the same. The best things it
shows, and descries the woorst: it teaches to know God, and how to serve,
love, and honor him: it teaches to know the Devil, and how to bless us
from him. By Learning comes Wisdom, by Learning ill used, commes folly: by
Learning comes Fame: by learning comes favor, of the highest: by learning
comes all goodness: by Learning comes that honor, that longest does endure:
for after death, Fame of Learning ^s an honor to to the person dead: and yet
that Honor nothing durable, for Fame in deed is but a fained thing by Fancy,
and nothing sayned can be true, which proves Fame to be no true thing: then in
truth it must be nothing. If then Fame be the chief Honor of the learned,
which well considered, is neither any thing in substance, nor yet durable:
then this Honor (though many ways something,) yet in some it is nothing.

Wherefore, leaving Honor, let me see what thing is Virtue: Oh, a heavenly
thing, it is that which makes the Soldier by valor Honorable, and by the
help of Learning Famons: It is the enemy to vice, it is that which aduanceth
the poor, and makes the Rich honored: It is an Honor, that the most
honorable do most honor: it is in sum, the wonder of the world, the
stay of Wisdom, and the high way to Heaven: and can this so worthy a thing
be thought nothing? Oh yea, and how? Alas Money is such a thing, as without
that thing, there is nothing accounted in a manner any thing. Virtue is a
Jewel they say, but it is of small price, who will give any money for it? Nay,
more, who will not for money become vicious of Uertuous? Alas, too te^e: Then,
by this I see, that Virtue in respect of Riches, is nothing, which Riches in
respect of Virtue, ought rather to be counted nothing: but being as it is, (in
respect of Riches) nothing. I see it is the nothing, that is (...) nothing in
respect: and does not this nothing (...) sufficient disliking in that, in
respect of a thing of nothing, it should be thought nothing. Yes (...), but
when nothing will help it, let me see some other thing which found out in
kind, in (...) comes to be nothing.

Friendship, what is that thing* To be short, it is such a thing, as I have
found so much deceit in the thing: as I care to say no more of the thing, then
that it is nothing to trust too, then for me it shall stand for nothing. Some
will say, it is, that keeps Princes in peace, and Countries in quiet: of peace
comes plenty, of plenty Pleasure: Pleasure maintains health, and health
makes a merry heart, and all this comes of hearty friendship. Yea but where is
that? Nescio. I can not t^l, for the world is full of falsehood: that thereis
almost, Nulla f^des, l^ft in Terris: and where there is no faith, Freendship is
nothing to trust too, and so let it rest that nothing, and to some other thing
as much as nothing.

Love, what is that? oh it is a marvelous thing. Some say it is a God, called
Cupid, but that is but a fond thing that Fancy faines: and no fained thing
can be thought any thing but nothing. Some other say it is a strange thing
devised by Desire, found out by Fancy, followed with affection, obtained with
friendly liking, and kept with faithful Care: but what thing is all this
thing? I never could see, hear, or read any thing, that found it more then
nothing. Some say, it is no God, it is rather a Devil that sets minds on
madding, and then it is a mad thing, God bless^ us from such a thing, that is
worse then nothing. Some say, it is a common thing, and yet it is such a
thing, as is past man's conceiving, and all men's des^rying, at least without
faining, and fained things nothing, how can this be any thing (but in a
manner) nothing: then leaving this nothing in a manner, let me go to some
other thing, which yet will prove nothing.

Time, what may that be? a strange thing that rules all things, and yet it
self nothing. Some fame it to be a thing like a man, with a balde head, saving
a lock before on the forehead, with a pair of Wings on his shoulders, like an
Angel, and with a Sith in his hand like a Mower, fetching his stroke, as
though he had always some work before him: But this is but a fained thing,
which they set out balde behind, and with a lock of hair before, for this
reason. That Time, when it is once past, it is not to be caught, it is to be
used as it comes, and narrowly to be watched, that it slipper of away unawares,
least when it is past, repentance finds it too late to wish for. His Wings
b^token speed, that he makes where he goes, according to the old Proverb,
Time tarrieth no man. His Sith shows his labor, that he never stands idle:
for Time will be ever set about some thing, and if Wit want discretion to
set him to some good work, Will is not without seem toy or another to turn
him to. Happy is he that can use him well when he has him, and twice happy
he that does always war^ly watch him, to turn him to good use.

But who is he that ever saw him indeed, as he is set out in show? Nemo.
None that ever I could hear of. Then being but a fained thing (as many other
are) let it pass as these things for a thing of nothing: which being known to
be nothing but a fained thing, let it rest in substance nothing, (though in
conceit, a secret thing) which may prove in a manner (well considered)
nothing. But now there is a new Nothing (as yet) unspoken of, which if a wise
man heard me keep such a prating to my self about nothing, he would hang it
on my sleeue for a reward, for him that deserves no better thing. Well, the
chief nothing of all, which is the nothing at all, that is the nothing that I
see here to delight me, which made me use all this speech of nothing.

But whom do I see yonder before me? What is it a man? Why? then there is
some company so comfort me in this calamity: then that is some thing, yet to
drive me out of this nothing. Well, I will rise to him, to see what he is?
and whither he travails, whence he came, and what he intends to do? It seems
a stout fellow, by his stern look: it seems by his Warlike countenance,
he should be a Soldier. A Soldier? what should he do here abouts?
without a Captain, far from any town, and alone without company? Is he not
some outlawe, that lives here in the Wilderness? who takes the spoil of such
poor Trauailers as my self: and hereby it may be, he has more company at
hand, either in their caves, or in the Wooddes hereby, God knows. Well, I
hope the best, that he may yet be some man that travails this way in Gods
peace, meaning neither me nor any else harm.

Therefore, toward him I will, and therwithall up he rose, and to him he went:
but what Country man mayhe be? I will see. And so when he came somewhat near
unto him, he used his speech.


The scholar, to the Soldier. Ben trouate Signore, bien trouue Mounsieur,
buene ^aliado, es la Vuestra merced. Salve Domine. Countreyman well met.


The Soldier. Well met good freende. Che sete voi? Inglese? Don venes vous?
amigo. Dic mihi quaeso.


The Scholar. Oh Sir, for that I see you understand the English tongue, and
my travails in these Countries, has not been long: leaving other languages,
you shall understand, that first for my Country, I was borne in I sola Beata.
I come from I know not whence, and am going I know not whither, by profession,
I am a scholar: New what are you?


The Soldier. Friend* I profess Arms, and to answer thee otherwise, I was
borne in Terra Fortunata, I come from a Combatte, and am going to a Challenge.
But what a fantashcall fellow art thou? to tell me thou comst thou know not
from whence, and art going thou know not whither: what? have thou studied
thy self stark mad? thou speak so (...)?


The Scholar. No Sir, but indeed I am somewhat wild headed with want of
company, and almost half mad for lack of meat, so that blame me not if I
speak wisely: for indeed^ when a man has been long fasting, the brains will
be out of temper, and when the head is ill, all the body is the worse, and the
wits not at best: and yet Scholars are hardly brought up, therefore they
should away with hardness the better: their allowance in Colleges is but
small, therefore little meat should content them.


The Soldier. Scholars brought up hardly? No, it is the Soldier that has
the body to bea^e hardness: he is se^loned as the Carp^ter sa^es by his
boords) for all weathe^, he can go further with a crust, and cup of cold
Water, then the Scholar with his pound of beef, and his pot of beer: the
Scholar must have his diet at due times, or else his stomach will wamble, and
he must be sick like a Woman with child: and oh, it must be well dressed, or
else it goes against his stomach, and if he fare ill once a week, he lives
hardly. Alas for him, the Soldier must have his meat when he can get it, and
take pains himself to dress it, and eat it perhaps at midnight, digest it
as he may, give God thanks for it, and think himself happy if he so may have
it. Therefore in respect of the Soldiers life, for his fare, the Scholar is
at far better state then the Soldier: but then for honor, the life of the
Soldier.


The Scholar. And why so?


The Soldier. For that the Scholar sits always crouding at home in his
Chamber, eating up the wealth of his Country, with his nose over the fire, or
lapped up in a furred Gown, to defend him from the cold of the winter: and in
Summer plucking up the Flowers that should beautify the ground, and so goes
he plodding up and down, with his eyes bended downewardes, as though he were
seeking Pearls among Pybles, or else staring into the Element, as though he
watched when the man in the Moon would come out among the stars: And when
they come in again, then they fall to reading of one book or other, sometime
they read the famous acts of gallant Soldiers, such as Caesar, Alexander,
Hanniball, Hector, Achilles, (and many other that I leave to recount) whose
victorious deeds they take pleasure to peruse, but the base minded fellows,
are never the more ready, or willing to stir their own foot out of he
Country, to see an inch of service.


The Scholar. Oh good sir, speak not so in discommendation of a Scholar: for
why, if he sit at home (as you say) he is not idle, when he is reading on his
book, and when he leeketh downwardes, it is because (his hrains being busted
about study) he would not lift up his eyes, least the beholding of some vain
thing or other (which the world is full of) should carry away his wits with
a wanton delight, from his desire otherwise determined. If he lift them up
into the Heavens, it is either for hearty repentance he makes unto God for his
offenses: or else for his grace, to study no higher causes, then may be
granted with his favor.

Now, though he stare, as you term, upon the Moon and Stars, to mark
their courses, and by them to discern and note further causes: it argues not
therefore, that he watches a man in the Moon: For indeed I have studied
somewhat my self, and I have contemplated the Sky, the Sun, the Moon, and
Stars, and this I will say, I have diverse times seen a man or two in the
Sun, but in the Moon never any: therefore he was ^oo simple to be a
Scholar, whatsoever he was, that would stare upon the Moon, to look for a
man in it.

Now for your noble Captains, whose triumphant deeds you speak of, that
Scholars take delight to read, but not to follow: You are deceived, for there
be Scholars that bear as high minds, and as valiant hearts, as any men,
and to tell truth, a good Captain was first a Scholar, who pursuing the
valiant deeds of other men, has been by them set on to attempt the like
enterprises:

Besides, sometime you will grant me (I think) that counsel and words does
much in wars: Is not policy one of the chiefest points in wars?
Experience does well, but with Art it does better? What said Cicero? Plus
ego togatus, quam armati december. He did more in his Gown, then ten in their
coat Armours. Ceda^ armatoga concedant laurea lingu^. Let the Gunne give place
to the Gown, and give the brave tongue, the Bay tree. Was not Cicero, ^ratorum
prestantissimus? an excelent Scholar? Cataline was a brave Soldier: but yet
Cicero and his side, gave the overthrow. Again, how should the Fame of your
gallaunt Soldiers remain^ in Memory, had there not been Scholars willing,
(for the good will they bare them,) to set them out with such a grace of
glory, that all men should be glad to read and hear them, yea, and a number
to follow them. But every man must not, nor can be a Soldier: for some
must be at home, for diverse causes of importance, appertinent unto the Common
wealth, which in their kinds are as worthy honor as the Soldier.


The Soldier. Not so. I grant that it is necessary for some to sit by the
fire side while the other fetch Wood and Cole. But they are slothful, while
the other take pains, and whether is more worthy honor, labor, or
idleness? Again, when the Souldio^s of Rome had playde the men, in the
overthrow of Cataline: Was it not a fault in Cicero, to show such arrogancy
in his speeches, to take upon him more effect, then ten men in Armor? either
he meant it merr^ly, by some odd ten persons, that never came out of the Town
to the battle, because yet he said somewhat unto the Soldiers, to
encourage them: and they that were away, neither said nor did anything. And so
he meant it to the discommendation of their Cowardice, in keeping far enough
from the fight: Or else he meant, he pr^ted more himself, then any ten
Soldiers in the Camp. But happy it was for him that the day went of his
side, though the victory came not by his eloquence: I grant he did great
good with his persuasions, for in deed good words will move much: especially,
in good causes as that was: besides God is good, and he does commonly give the
good victory: and if he suffer them to be overthrown, it is for a further
good he means them.

Now therefore, if he had given the chief glory to God, and the rest to the
valiant Captains and Soldiers: in my judgment, he had done well: but to
come out with Plus ego, me thinks he played the fool, Ipse. Again, whereas
you speak of the great favor of Scholars, that they do unto Soldiers, in
setting forth their famous deeds, I must give them commendation for their
pains, but for Honor, confess who deserves more Honor, the man that does
the deed, or he that wrytes of it, when it is done.

I grant Learning an ornament, and a necessary appertinent unto a Soldier.
Otherwise in deed, it is hard for him to be a good Captain, for by
Learning, he knows upon what cause it is good to begin war: and war
offered, upon what cause it grows, and if it be without cause, how good then
is the defense. Else if a Soldier will upon a fagarie, or mad humor in the
head, go show his great business and little wit, he knows not, nor cares
not, upon whom, where, or for what cause: I will say his foolishness makes
him unworthy of the name of a Soldier: his deeds worthy to be put in
oblivion, and himself unworthy honor. Therefore I confess, a good
Captain, had need to ^ee somewhat a Scholar, ere he take (...) hand: (...)
yet in his Scholership, not so worthy honor, as when he has showed him self
a Soldier: Marry this I allow of the unlearned, the Scholar is to be
honored, and the Soldier to be beloved. But yet I say still, the Soldier
is to be honored, both of the Scho:ler, and the unlearned: of the Scholar for
his Wisdom, with valor: and of the other for his ^outnesse, with virtue. Now
what say you for the Scholar.


The Scholar. This I say: the ground, I think was before the Grass, the
tree before the fruit, the Plain song before the Deskant, and so forth. The
ground I must confess, is worthy love, for bringing forth Grass: so is
Grass to be loved for the Cattailes sake that it feeds, which we (...) by.
Now if the ground brought out nothing but Moss, then were it little to be
loved: again, the Grass cut, and not well handled, would do little good, and
were worthy as little love. The Tree were ill, would bear no Fruit: and the
Fruit ill, would please no taste: the Plain song, were plain stuff, without
Deskant, and the Deskant were a mad piece of Music, without Plain song to
be the ground.

But as the ground for the Grass, so the Grass for his ^weete juice: the Tree
for the Fruit, and the Fruit for the sweet taste: the Plain song for sweet
Deskant, and the Deskant for skill, are loved. So is the Scholar for ^is
Learning, and the soldier for ^ertue, to be honored a like: and if any more
then other, the scholar, for that he finds by Learning, what is Honor, how
it is to be gotten, how maintained, and what to be esteemed. He sees whether
his body be to his mind, and if it be, then if both be fit to abide the
life of a soldier, then does he prove a Famous fellow, if God send him
good fortune. If not, why then he takes in hand, Law, Phi^cke, or Divinity,
the most excellent study, whereby to win no less honor during life, then Fame
after death. By learning comes knowledge, by learned knowledge, comes a man of
mean countenance to give counsel unto Princes: By learning is seen what
sin is, how it is hated of God, and wh^t hurt it does to man: by learning is
Virtue found, and how it is beloved of God, and honored of the best minds,
and so ought to be of all men: by learning comes the knowledge of the nature of
many things, and the use of the same: by learning can the Physician cure the
soldier being sicks or hurt: by learning does the man of Peace know the
law of Arms. In sum, I know no man excellent in any thing without learning,
which is the ground of all excellency. If then learning be excellent, the
tune that is spent in that is most excellently well bestowed, which time may be
well called the Scholars time, and the scholar for so well bestowing that
time, most worthy to be honored. Now what say you for the Soldier?


The Soldier. Marry this I say, the better the grass, the more is the
ground esteemed: and till the ground bear grass, what was it to be esteemed?
but as barrain, and therefore a thing of little worth: but when it brings
forth good grass, then it is called a fat ground, good ground, and so
forth. Marry if this ground lie in a cold corner, it will be long ere the
grass spring, and being come up, it commonly proves sower, and does not so
soon nor so well fatten the Cattle, as other that lies somewhat near the
sun. Again, if the ground lie very high, and near the sun, then is the
Grass so parched with the heat, that there is little sweetness left ^n it
for the Cattle. Then must it be kept with watering, to cool the heat, and to
refresh the root of the grass withal. Again, the cold ground must be often
dunged, thereby to give it more heat, and with that warmth, to comfort the
root of the grass, that it may the better come up.

Now I do not deny, but these grounds may be both indu^erent good in their
kinds, after they have been well used as I say. But the ground is to be
considered of, according to his nature: and if the ground be of nature to
bear grass, and such common herbs as will feed Cattle, it is not to be
despised. But if it be of nature to bring forth flowers, herbs, roots, and
fruits, for man himself to feed on, is it not to be made account off, far
above the other? Yes surely. And this mind am I of, that at the first
Creation, when God had made the Earth, he gave it a secret nature to bring
forth Fruits, but many sundry grounds, sundry kinds of Natures, which
according to the same are to be esteemed. God when he had made the ground, he
said, let us garnish it with Grass, Flowers, Herbs Trees, and Fruits, and so
forth.

Now he thought it not worthy the looking on till it had brought forth the
Fruits, Flowers, and Herbs, which his heavenly Majesty had given it a secret
Nature to bring forth, to beautify it self with all. Which Flowers and
fruits, some he saw here, some there, and according to the Fruits, he
esteemed the plotte of ground whereon they grew: therefore say ^, the ground
is to be thought off according to the goodness of the fruits, which naturally
and not by help, it brings forth. The Tree was before the Fruit, but till
such time, as it brought forth fruit, what was it but a stock? not worthy
the proyning.

Now there are diverse Trees, which according to the nature of the Soil wherein
they grew, bring ^h fruits, Nutmegges, Cloves, Cinnamon, Ginger, Mace, Pepper,
Orenges, Limons, Pound Citrons, Pomegranets, Grapes, and Sugar in Canes
Melones, Abricockes, Artichockes, Prunes, Raysons: And for Roots, ^ringos,
Potatoes, and a number of other too long to recite. The cold Countries yield
watrishe fruit, as Plums, Pears, Apples, Cherries, and such like. The
temperate Soil, bringes forth fruit, neither too watrishe, nor yet too dry,
but betwixt both. Now, the Trees are to be thought off, according to their
fruits: is not the Cinnamon tree to be esteemed above the Apple tree? is not
the Damson Tree, to be made accoumpt off, above the Blackthorne tree? Is not
the Pippin tree, to be esteemed above the Crabbe tree? The Abr^ocke, above the
common Plum? and the Cherrie above the Hauthorne berrie? Yes out of doubt,
according to the sweetness of the taste, is the fruit to beloved,. In the
Garden of Paradize, there were diverse fruit Trees, and fruits, but one thief
that was to be honored above all other: for feeding whereof, man was driven
out of the ground, and forced with toil, to* get his living abroad in the
world, with Gods high displeasure. Therefore some Trees are above other to be
honored: Plain Song is good Music, but not so good as when the Deskant is
made to go with it.

Now there are diverse grounds, which according to the Deskants are to be
esteemed: What sweeter hermony, then among the Birds of the field? what Byrd
so ^uch honored as the Nightingale? and why? but for her sweet change (...):
When she first begins to record it is a pretty bird. But when she sing^s out
in the midst of May, about midnight the weather fair, and (...) a fine bushe:
Oh ^s a heavenly noise, to h^are the sweet wretch.

So the Scholar, (...) be (...) his Learning, for his sight in diverse Arts.
But now men are borne under diverse Planets: as some under Jupiter, those are
imperious fellows, those are good to be Princes: some under Saturn, they are
froward of Nature, and good to make Lawiers: some under Venus, and they are
good to make Solicitors of Love: some under Mercury, and they are good to be
Secretaries, for they are (commonly) ingenious: some under Sol, those are hot
fellows, those are good to make Mariners, they may best abide the cold of
the Water: some under Luna, and they are weak of Nature, and subject to much
sickness, those are good to make Physicians, to help themselves, and other
that has need of them: some under Mars, and they are the men that prove the
gallant Soldiers.

Now if the Scholar be borne under that Planet of Prowess, and in his time
of study be addicted to follow that which he sees worthy Honor, which both
reason persuades his mind, and Nature leads his body too: is not he worthy to
be honored above the Scholar that is weak of Nature? and unfit for any
exercise of great honor? Yes surely. My self have studied a little, in diverse
Arts: but ever I was most bent to this Art of war, when I scarce kn^w what a
Gun meant, me thought it did me good to hear it shoot off, and see the fire:
it did me good to look on a swoorde blade, ere I knew whither it should have
a hut or not.

What shall I say, I loved a Drum and a Fy^e, better then all the fi^ling
Music in the world: and growing to some years, I would practice now and
then a little of Warlike exercises, till in the end, the delight therein,
drew me quite from my Book: So that when I had learned first to serve God,
and how to serve him, to do no man wrong, and take as little as I might. I
left my school fellows, and forth I got to seek adventures. Now Law I have
enough, for my self (as I said) I will do no wrong, and take little. And
among Soldiers, Stafforde law, Martial law, killing or hanging is soon
learned. For Physic I have ^uough, I know a little Turpentime, will heal a
great cut, a Cobwebbe, and Salt, or Bole Armonick, will ^int a bleeding. If I
be ill at ease, I fast it out: I do as Hogs do, never eat meat, till they
see whither they shall live or die: Tush, sickness comes by ill diet, then
learn by one surfeit, to use the better order twice for it: but Soldiers use,
is to keep no diet, but to abide all hardness, therefore they commonly are
not sick, but upon the bullet, which if it light in the breast, they lie not
long on it: so that they have no need but of the heavenly Physician, to crave
his heavenly Mercy, to purge their souls from sin, that it may appear pure
and acceptable before him, at the day of Judgment. And new minding not to say
much more in this matter: What say you for the Scholar


The Scholar. Sir, I must needs say, you have said well for the Soldier,
but yet I must say, that note the lives of them both, and you shall see the
Scholars life most worthy honor: and why? the Scholar finds (as you say)
by discretion, whither his body be to his mind, and both apt for Arms: if
not, yet he is ready and able to instruct those that are able, in those chief
points that do most appertain unto that Art. Whereby the willing mind having
but little knowledge) may speedily purchase great perfection by small experience.

Further, the Scholars Book will not let him be idle, but to fall to some
honorable study or other:

As if he study (...), I f^tche my au^thoritie out of Scripture: Does ^t
Christ b^d us honor the Physician? If he study Law, what thing (...) ^ore
honorable, then that which (...) Countries in good order? the Prince in peace,
and the s^ectes in awe? the well doo^rs in centinuance, and the offenders in
fear? And is not Law then, an honorable study,? If he study Diuin^ty, who in
the world more worthy honor, then he that pronounces the word of God? to
the comfort of the pe^tent, and the perdicion of the obstinate? In that study
is seen, who is the good Soldier? What is the good quarrel? against whom
it is good to ^ight, and who gives the overthrow. The true Christian is the
good Soldier, which with only Faith, fightes against the foul ^nde Satan,
and all his filthy and h^sh cr^we, whom Christ has overthrown, and trodden
under his feet, this is the good fight: to God be given the glory of the
overthrow.

And is there any time more happily spent, then in this war? is there any man
so worthy honor as he that sp^ndes his time so happily? no sure, this is the
good Soldier, and this Soldier is the Scholar: Again, the Scholars life
is c^le, modest, content with little, desiring no man's hurt, and wishing all
men well, loathe to have his hands imbrued with blood, and sorry to see the
cruelty of the bloody Soldier. The Scholar studies how to set out the
Soldier, how to keep the subject at home in order, the Country in quiet,
and himself in health: the Scholar seeks by Law, to redress the poor man's
wrong: the Scholar studies to know all good, and ^hewe all ill. If the
Soldier do so too: then is he as worthy honor, as the Scholar, but no
more. But in truth, I have not heard many such like Soldiers as your self
seem to be: for you were an old Scholar I p^rceiue, before you were a young
Soldier, if your practice in Arms has been as great, as your study in
Arts, I must th^ke you a rare Soldier, yea, a Captain worthy to lead a
great army: but if you will confess a truth, I think you w^l not any longer
(...) your opinion, i^ that the Soldier should deserve honor above the
Scholar.


The Soldier. Yes surely, though I must confess, I see in you the mind of a
Soldier, and the perfect points of a good Scholar, and for your learning
woorth^e honor* yet will I (though unworthy of any commendation, having never
done any famous exployts) give the chief honor to the Soldier. For though
the Scholar do fl^de by reading* what is the good fight, who is the good
Soldier, who is the eneime to be overthrown, and who gettes the victory?
Yet if he know this, and will not put it in action, it is then but for others
instruction, and not for his own souls health. Again, he that has read
little, by grace may have sufficient knowledge, that the Devil is naught, and
faith is the only de^nce for him: God is the only victor, and his ^e the
glory.

But further, he that is borne under Mars (as I said be fore) and has any
thing studied the scriptures: he will in the honor of God go travail the
world, seek out such obstinate rebels to Christ, as take them unto
Antichrist, leave God, and serve the Devil: such when he finds, he will
destroy them, that they may not live to infect other. What better death? then
in such a quarrel? What life so worthy honor, as such a death? What action
so famous, as such an enterprise. Oh good Soldier, that so honors his God:
sweet Christ, that upon the Cross lost his heart blood for his sake, that he
will in his quarrel, to do him due service, adventure, and willingly loose his
heart blood, and his life in this world for his sake: knowing assuredly that he
shall find it again, with ten tunes more blessed toy in the world to come.
The Soldier seeks adventures here and there, stays wild Beasts, and
would destroy the simple trau^ler: the Soldier challenges and slays the
villain that flaundereth the virtuous: the Soldier is courteous to all men,
he is modest with Modesty, to show the height of his mind: the Soldier is
content with any thing, and sometime with nothing: the Soldier does helps
the oppressed in a rightful cause, and does hurt no man but his enemies: the
Soldier ^nbrues neither his hands nor his blade, in the blood of any, but
those that would do the like in his breast: the soldier has a Martial law,
for such careless persons as will ^ot obey the Law of Arms, appointed to
maintain good laws, and to cut off the offenders of the same. In sunt, the
soldier is the servant of God only, the scholar waytes too much of our Lady
to do God good service I say not all scholars are so, but I wish that the
soldiers were so, but as God is above our Lady, so his soldier above her
scholar to be honored. How say you scholar, will you allow me this? or not?


The Scholar. ^yr, I cannot bu^ allow you this, that the worthy souldi^ur is
to be honored above the wanton scholar, but I must say the wise and careful
scholar is more worthy honor then the wild and careless soldier: But I
will a little speak of the scholar, and so I will either have it, give it, or
gree upon it. You must consider sir, we are by nature all the children of
sin, but by adoption the Children of God.

Now for the Planettes, in deed the Child that is borne under Mars, is most
^tte for battle, and under Mercury, for study. But he, say I, that is borne
under Jupiter* whose Parents were borne, the one under Mars, the other
Mercury, he shall have the operation of Jupiter, wholly* and partly each of the
other in him,, and such a follow say I, will prove the man of Honor in deed,
of all other.

As for example, was not Marcus Aurelius, a gallaunt and worthi^ Soldier? did
he not be^ow great time in his study? who wrote his works but himself? I
will not stand upon examples: was not David a brave soldier? A man worthy
of great honor? did he not bestow great time in his Psalms? Had he not as
great a delight in his Book, as in Battle? Well, was he not in love with
Berseba? and was he not so^ie for it? Well, though he served our Lady a
little, he loue^ God best, and God loved him for all his offense: and why? for
that he left his folly, was sorry for his sin, and was ashamed of himself:
he craved mercy in heart, and was therefore received into favor*

Wherefore good sir condemn not scholars for serving Ladies, which in deed is
your meaning: for Bersebae* beauty, bewitched the wits of King David, and
made him quite forget his Wisdom. Now there are sewe King David's left for
their wisdom: but for beauty, many Bersabaes. If then the world be as full
of fair Ladies, as ever it was, and not men of so rare wisdom? Blame not
scholars for their service, nor make soldiers saints for their minds to
Godward?

But as David was both a good soldier, and no worse scholar: and Marcus
Aurelius, as good a scholar as a soldier, and were therefore more honored
then the unlearned Captains: so I pray you grant, that the vali^nt scholar* in
honor, is to be preferred before the unlearned soldier: And that the
Scholar is so fit a Companion for the Soldier, as they can not well be one
without the other, and being together, do deserve the greatest honor of all
men living. There is such a love and union betwirt them, and the one is so
necessary unto the other, that some men think, the one and the other is as it
were Alter ^ple: so that they do deserve like honor, and not one to be higher
then the other. Now sir, what say you? Will you think so well of the Scholar,
or not*


The Soldier. Baleeue me Scholar, since thou cemest so near me, welcome:
This I must say to thee, I see thou have a good mind to a Soldier: and
therefore since thou art entered into tra^ile, and I have been in some
skirmishes, let us both forget we are at home: and being here, let us
determine to season our selves for all weathers, let our faithful prayer be
our defense against the Devil, and all his temptations: my sword ^ee our
defense against bodily enemies, and thy wise counsel my comfort, to arine my
self with patience. Let us fear neither fire nor water, care for no weather,
fair nor foul: stick not for night, nor day: take what we find thankefully,
part it friendly, and spend it merrily: live together lovingly, and die
virtuously: so shall we be spoken of on earth and amously, and live in Heaven
eternally: which that God may grant willingly, let us fall down presently,
and pray heartily, that we may rise roundly, walk wisely, and speed luckely.
What say thou Scholar?


The Scholar. Oh sir, right gladly: and since you have so courteously
vouchsaied me your company, I here swear my self, your own at
commandment always, and as much as may be* I rejoice to have found you, I
hepe to live with you, and never to leave you, so dearly I love you, that I
will die with you, ere I will forsake you: and as you do love me, so put your
trust in me, and this be sure of me, that you shall command me, till lives
end believe me. Now that we may together, to the heavenly place thither, the
only place whither, the Scholar, espieth, the good Soldier hieth: with
humble he arts l^tte us pray, that we may walk the way, that at the latter
day, we may have cause to say, Truth will not lead a stray. To which good and
blessed place* God grant us all his grace, that when we have run this race,
that we may walk apace, that within little space, we may all face to face,
behold our blessed Lord, whose name with one accord, let us with laud
record. And so let the soldier, make much of the Scholar, and trust to the
Scholar, that he loves the Soldier, and let us be sure of this, when we
do pray, i^is, Gods hand does never miss, to work for our avail.


THus did the Soldier, put the Scholar out of his Nothing: and together they
are gone about something: But for that I know not what, till I see them again,
I will here bid them farewell, and with my self wish you well: Promising
that if I do meet them, you shall hears what became of them.

Till when, and ever, God so bless us here, that we with joyful ch^re, may
all at once appear, before his heavenly throne, to which his grace alone,
guide us right every one, both Men, Women and Children: I would he were hanged,
that will not say.

Amen. Marti Mercurius. N. B.

FINIS.
(...) The Praise of virtuous Ladies.

An Inuectiue against the discourteous discourses, of certain Mailcious
persons, written against Women, whom Nature, Wit, and Wisdom (well
considered) would us rather honor, then disgrace. For proof whereof, eade
what follows.

Written by the said Author. N. Breton, Gentleman.

Hic and haec homo. Considera quid mulier?

To the Courteous, and gentle Reader.
GEntlemen and others to whose view shall come this wonderful piece of work
of the praise of women (considering how little cause of commendation, is found
in a number of them.) I beseech you, before you begin to read: resolve with
your selves, to take in good part, what you think I have written against my
conscience. And though I have perhaps, as great cause to write the contrary,
in respect of the little good that I have found in some: Yet the hope of good,
that I have to find by favor of some one, (none such) has made me in the
behalf of women generally, (for her sake) say as much as I wish all to
approve, and I would as gladly affirm. In the mean time, I hope I have
offered none injury, in doing them a courtesy: I crave pardon of none, for
saying my mind, and good though^s of them, of whom I deserve it. Meaning, to
deserve as well as I may of all the world, and desiring too, as little ill to
any as may be. Thus wishing you, to wish Women no better, then you see them
worthy. I pray you wish me no worse then your selves, as I wish all you.
From my Chamber in the Black Friars: this present and always.

Your friend. N. Breton. Gentleman.

The Author, to the virtuous Ladies and Gentlewomen.
LAdies and Gentlewomen, or other well disposed what soever: I have (in your
commendations) said as much as I hope you will deserve: and more then I think
has been said for you this great while. Now if yet think that I have said,
is said for flattery, you should show me little favor. For to flatter all, I
should but have a floute of a number: and to speak well of all, I hope will
make none mine enemy. I crave no f^rther friendship then I deserve, nor
greater thanks, then may requite good will, which wishes well to ye all, that
are well minded: and if you think I have said truly, in that I have written,
thank your selves for giving so good occasion: if contrary* do your endeuonr
to make good what I have said, and will be glad to see: and so rest, ready to
do^ you agreater service. From my chamber, in the Black Friars.

N. B. Gent.

FINIS.
The praise of virtuous Ladies, and Gentlewomen.
WHen I peruse and consider of y^ strange discourses of diverse fantesticall
fellows, that have no grace, but in disgracing of women, in Inuectiues against
them, in most despitefull description of their dissimulations, in such shameful
setting out of their sex. Whereby for a few mad headed wenches, they seek to
bring all, yea, most modest Matrons, and almost all Women in contempt: surely,
me thinks, I can term them by no name fitter for their folly, then mad
men, that fame would be Authors of somewhat, and knowing not what to take in
hand, run headlong into such absurdities, as redounde to their v^ter
dishonor. For let a man not quite forget himself, and but a litt'^ look into
himself, he shall see so great a part of a Woman in him self: as that,
except he w^ll run from him self, he cannet but with as great honor
account of them as of himself, Let me go to the beginning, was not the first
Woman made out of man? and was she then any thing else, but a piece o^
himself, Now when some would (...) against her, for her d^t: did she it of
her self? no, it was by the Serpent. And further, if a man should consider
narrowly of it: was she any other then himself, that deceived himself? F^
the^ more, if it were but for the pains they take, in bringing us into the
world, besides the pleasure that we have in the world: we ought rather to
cover any crime, or cause that might breed their discredit, th^n of our selves
unworthily to seek th^r defame.

Some men may think, that some one Woman has hired me, to flatter all, or
else, by flattering of all, I should hop^ of favor of some one. Some will say,
perhaps he has a Woman to his mother: some other, a Woman to his Mistress:
some other, he is sworn to the Candlestick: other, it is pity he was not
made a woman: and some, oh he is a good Woman's man.

Now, all these I answer in their kinds: as all Women are not of one nature,
so neither are all Natures of one disposition: as one loves to be flattered, so
other love to be flatly dealt withal. Therefore if I should seek to flatter
all, I should but floute my self: and commonly, the hyre of flattery is but
hate, which is so cold a comfort to any man's Conscience, as he were well
worthy of a frumpe for his folly, that would be hired, to such a service.
Further, they are fools that love to be flattered, and Women have ever
naturally had so much wit, as to find a falsehood in a fair tale. But if
fair words be truly spoken, and by authority confirmed: they cannot but be
as friendly taken, as fully allowed. Wherefore, my words in their behalf,
shall show testimony of my true meaning, else let me abide the slander, of such
hypocrisy as is hateful to an honest mind.

That I have a Woman to my Mother, I grant, and am heartily glad off: for
surely, he that is not borne of a Woman, wants a piece of a Man, and he that
despises his Mother, in that she is a Woman: is to be disdained him self, in
that he is no Man. are we not commanded by God, to honor Father and Mother:
Is it not written in the holy Scriptures, Thou shall honor thy Father, b^ thy
Mothers pains shall thou never forget: Then remember the commandment, and
do thy Mother due reverence: disdain her not, for fear of Gods displeasure:
discredit her not, for GOD and man's disliking: defame her not, for fear of thy
Souls destruction.

Now some will say, that I have a Woman to my Mistress, I not deny it, for
Saints are none upon the earth, and Devils I would be loath to do^ service
too. A Woman of honor, may well be Mistress to a Man of worship: in reason
consider, and grant me this: what Soldier so valiant? what courtiour so fint?
and what scholar fo profound: but will use his arms, his allegaunce, and his
art to win the favor of his Mistress.

I have heard some talk their pleasure in a heat, that the fairest Lady in
the world, should not make them steupe to their Lure. But when (without an
Hostler) they walked themselves a cold: oh then ere long recant al, it was not
I, and cry Pecca^, for a favorable look, of an indifferent face,

Now some will say, that I am sworn to the candlestick, such I wish their noses
in the socket. And this I say further, my faith was not yet so much had in
question, to be called to the Candlestick: but if he that say so, have been
brought to the like book oath, I wish he had eaten the stringes for his
labor.

Some will say, it is pity he was not made a Woman: I wonder why? my beauty
is not such, to allure a wanton eye, nor mine eye ^o wanton, to allure a wicked
mind, my qualities are not only fit for a Chamber, nor in my chamber always
in bed. Then what see these fellows in me? if they say so, they know not why,
I answer them, I care not h^w.

Now some will say, oh, he is a good Woman's man: believe me, I think it
bette^ to be thought, a good Woman's man, then an ill man's Woman. But as no man
can be counted a man^ Woman, but figurat^e: so then a good Woman's man, I think
a man cannot be termed more fitly: but if any man speak it in scorn, I
answer him in scoff: if he speak it in despite of Women, let them (...) him:
if (...) displeasure with me, as he is angry without a cause, he shall be
pleased without amends.

And to conclude, I am of this mind, that as now the worl^ goes: he is very
pre^se, or little wise, that would not rather choose the favor of one woman,
then the frien^ship of any man. Now having made answer to these objections, I
will go onwards with my opinion, touching the worthiness of Women.

Let me see what man was ever so good, so just, so pitiful, so ^becall, so
learned, so Famous, for rare excellencies: But there may be found a Woman,
every ways his match? fetch authority out of Scripture* Was not the
blessed ^irgin Ma^ie a Woman? how good did God th^nke her, that he would
vouchsafe to conioyne in her most holy womb, his divine Grace, with her
human Nature? Me thinks there is no man of any good mind at all, but would
think well of all Women ^or her sake: and such as are not good, to wi^he them
grace to amend, rather then so to difgrace them, as makes them never have heart
to fall to good again. Admit (...) was ill, so was Adam too. Cruel was the
Woman that killed her Child, so was Caine, in killing his own brother Abell.
But leaving discommendations: now to commend for particular causes. For
belief, who before the Woman of Canaan? For repentance, Marie M^gdalen? And
for causes touching salvation, what greater points then Faith with pemtenc^e?
For worldly caus^s touching Fame. What greater virtue, then Learning? the
ground of all knowledge, how better known then by appara^, and where? but
where there is none such, I list not to trouble you, with recounting the names
of worthy Ladies, let this suffice, if there never were any so worthy
^emmendation, as men before this instant age: yet now is to be found a Woman
worthy a more worthy name (if more worthy might be) who for repentant
Faith, with rare Uertues, may be as well honored of all godly minds, as with
wonderful love, woorshipped of all good minds. Was there ever man learned?
so is she? and by his learning Uertuous? no less is She? and by his Uertues
Fa^ous? She as much as he. Now though there be none such as She, yet as
she is of all most excellent, so are there some other for commendation, more
then indifferent. But for that I will not give too much to any, nor can give
her sufficient* I say this for all Women, that men are mad that seeks their
dishonor. The Proverb says, That it is an evil Bird, will file the own
nest. Then let man consider the Hen that hatcheth him, and he would be
loath, to have the Cock have all the meat from her.

Some disprayse Uirgins, because they be obstinate? for my self, I think it a
sign of ill nature in a Woman, to be hard hearted. But if it come with care
of Credit, or content, I will allow it, say Lovers what they list, for that
fittes one man's ^ye, is far from ^tting another man's fancy: He may like, and
she may loath, she may love, and he not like. All are not of one mould, one
mind, one nature, one complexion, nor one condition: Love has no reason in
his choice, then such as have found such hard dealing in fair Damsels: let
them consider of these clauses, and let them alone. Luck is a great matter in
love, and so let it rest.

Some will dispraise women for wantonness, surely, I am persuaded, if the
world were examined, we should ^nde a Jack an Ap^s, as wanton as ^ Monkie: We
should ^nde a young man as wanton, in looking B^bies, in a Ladies eyes, as her
with flirting him on the Lips with her l^tle Finger: him as wanton in wearing
a Toy, as her in wishing the like: him as wanton in his devices, as she in
desires: and he in desires, as much as she in delights: he as wanton in c^st,
as she in colors: he as wanton in gift, as she in receite.

What shall I say? he as wanton as she every way, and she one way wiser then
he: if she be brag of her Beauty, he is as proud of his proper
personage: if she stretch out a fine hand, he strouteth out a straight
Leg: if she have her hand on the Pette in her Cheek, he is twyrking of his
Mustachios: if she play the wanton with a little Dog, he will be so wanton
as to wish himself a Whelpe. To be short, if she be vain in one thing, he
will be as little virtuous in an other.

Some will say, Women are covetous, are not men as handfast? besides
liberality, of courtesy, breeds loss of credit. Let not men be niggards,
if they will have Women frank hearted, Some will say, Women are ill
Mystresses, they give slender wages in deed: I have heard some called ^naus,
twenty times a day, yet has not had half that he deserved. Some saucy
servant will look for a favor, before he deserves a fair look. And some
servants thinks their Mystresse is covetous, though they give them never so
much, if they give not themselves also. But such as (...) have all, shall loose
all.

Therefore, let men weigh liberality in kind, and they shall find Women free
hearted, in extending favor (not fully deserved) and themselves covetous, in
being never contented. Some will say, Women are foolish: he never heard that
the wisdom of a Woman, should b^ no more then to go out of the rain, when
she is in it, and know her husbands bed from another man's.

But now a days men be so fantastical (I dare not say foolish) that if a
Woman be not so wise as to make a man a fool, she is no wise Woman: No
forsooth, but he is a very wise man to match with such a Woman. Women have
Wit naturally: wisdom must be had by Grace, Grace was given to our Lady:
then who wiser then a woman? Weigh worldly wisdom by wit and experience, and
let me see who, with all the experiments he can devise, can make a Woman a
fool in any thing, but himself in the same as v^wise.

Some will say Women are unconstant, but I say not all: for Penelope, and
Cleopatra, Luc^etia with diverse more too long to rehearse, shall stand for
examples of such constancy, as no man ever more constant. And for ^olly in
Fancy: who wiser then Solomon, who more wanton in Love?

Some will say Women are deceitful, but they that say so, be such as d^ceiue
themselves in Women: so think them trusty. For as well of men as Women, it is
said: Fere nulla fides est in terris. Let not men cosen themselves with a
wilful conceit: believe no more then reason leads them to. And they shall
find Women but like themselves, deu^sing all means they may, and employing
the best wit they have to work their wills. And for deceit, what greater
treason was ever found in any woman, then in Iuda^ when he betrayed Christ.

But leaving this, some will say, a Woman is a necessary evil. That she^ is
necessary I grant, but evil I deny, except i^ be meant only in respect of
man, that desires not any thing that is good, and so, his desire makes her ill
in estimation of mind, for that she is the ontent of an ill conceit: but
(indeed, well considered) he should find, that the ill were in his conceit
only, and not in the Woman, who is no other substance then another himself.
And if I must grant, as I cannot choose, that there is none good but God: so
indeed I must yield, that Woman is ill, and man no better, for if that Woman
be ill, how can man be good, unto whom ill is so necessary? But whether may
man be thought worse then ill, that will use that ill, worse then it should
^e? Therefore, let man first mende his mind, before he so discommend a
substance of his own natural kind.

Some will say, Women are pitiful, how is that known? by looks and
speeches: men are more: which is showen, as well in words of mouth, as writing.

Some will say, a Woman is a woe to man, who put in that to, did it of his own
authority, and therefore it is not to be allowed.

For consider right of the word, and the to is as well left out, as the word
falsely written, for indeed it ought to be written Woman, not Woman, for that
she does woo Man with her Uertues, who wedde^ her with vanity. For man being
of wit sufficient to consider of the Uertues of a Woman, is (as it were)
ravished with the delight of those dainties, which do (after a sort) draw the
senses of man to serve them.

Now a Woman having not so deep a capacity to conceive or judge of the
conditions of man, is only wedded to his will: which thing how vain it is, is
seen when it is bent to little virtue.

Some have a delight to term Women by nickenames, as in the door she is an
Image. But how wise is the man, that has his wits so cosened? to take one
thing for another? They be Lunaticke, or in Love, that worship such Idols.
And this I will say further, if she be an Image, she is liker nothing then a
man: in she house, she is a number of things: in the kitchen she is a
cormorant: I^ she dress meat, is she not worthy to eat? I have seen a
man eat the meat that a woman has dressed: and men liker Cranes, then Women
Cormoraunts. In the milk house she is a Catte: why? if she milk a Cow, is
she not worthy to taste it for her labor? In the Cheese she is a Mouse:
why? she set the Curdes together, should she not taste the meat. In the
bakehouse she is a Be, for her busy stirring about. Yet her sting is but her
tongue, that hurts no body, except she be troubled: then allow the Be her
Hiue, and let her rest. In the Buttrie she is a Sprite, but she does no
hurt, but fray a Mouse from the bread, and a thief from the Cubborde. In the
Seller she is a Sow, and yet I have seen one Dutch man drink more then five
English women. In the Hall she is a Hare, but being tame, take heed how you
hunt her. In the Parler she is a P^rat, she learnes but what is taught her,
and an Almonde will please her. In the Chamber she is a Bird, and who sings
sweeter then the Nightingale? In the bed she is a Flea, if she laid on the
Blankets, she is more worthy to lie in the Sheets.

But well, if it were not for making women to be worse then they would be, I
would tell them how they might tear me men in sundry places, both within and
without the house. But let this suffice, I mean but only to commend Women,
and not offend men. And if I have unwittingly offended any, I willingly ask
pardon of all, with promise of amends, if my power serve me.

For qualities worthy commendation, see who is to be preferred, the Man or the
Woman? without the house for husbandri^: if he mow, she can ^edde: if he
^edde, she can turn: if he cock, she can rake: if he load, she can lay
abroad: if he sow, she can reap: i^ he can shocke, she can bind
Sheafes: if he can thresh, she can Fan: if he grind, she can boult: if
he lay Leaven, she can heat the Oven: If he know how to buy a Cow, she
can milk her: if he break a Horse, she can ride to the Market on him: if he
buy a Sow, she can serve her: if he bring home the milk, she can set it
together: if he make a Pan, she can fleet the milk: if he make a
Chearne, she can make Butter: if he make a Press, she can make Cheese: If he
dress the Garden, she can weed it: if he sow good Herbs, she can gather
Sallets: if he set sweet Flowers, she can make a fine Nosegaye: if he
gather good Herbs, she can make good Pottage: if he be a good Cook, she
is a good Dairie Woman: if he be a good Baker, she is a good Brewer: if he
be good in the Pantrie, she is as good in the Pastrie: if he be at his
Pen, she is at her Needle: if he be a good Tailor, she is a good
Se^pster: and if he be a good Brusher, she is a good Launder. And which is
more worthy love, a clean Shyrte, or a fine Coat?

Now in higher causes: if he be Ualiaunt, she is Uertuous: if he can leap
well, she can dance well: if he can play well, she can sing well: if he
can commend, she can thankfully consider: and if he can take it well, she
can think it well bestowed: if he can write, she can read: if he can
swear truly, she can believe faithfully: if he can deserve, she can give
due if he can like honorably, she can love heartily. In fine, if he have
any good quality, she has another.

It were but a folly, to fill my Book with examples, of this Woman for
constancy, and that for fidelity, an other for Huswiferie, and the other
Woman, for worthy wit. Let this suffice in braefe, there is in sickness no
greater comfort, in health no better companion, to a wise man, then a witty
woman.

Now for wise women, I think his should show him self a very unwise man
that would wish for such a one. I remember a pretty speech, once uttered by a
very wise man: when a man (as it seemed) not very wise, came to him for his
counsel, what he might do, to come by a certain Jewel, that was stolen
from him out of his Chamber: and (having told his loss) before he would hear
of his advise. Sir (quoth he^ were I not best to go to a wise woman. Yes marry
(quoth he) if you knew where any such were. Meaning that they were so hard to
hit on, that it were but folly to secke them. Now what pity it is to see
some men so unwise, to think such wisdom in any Woman: after he had lost his
Jewel if he would e have looked into himself, and found his own folly,
before he had seught such wisdom in a woman: he should have seen that it
were more wisdom for a man, to keep that he has warely, then unwisely to
run to a woman, to seek for wit how to find it again.

But I will stand no more upon this point, let it suffice that it is wisdom
for a man to take heed, that a Woman be not wiser then himself: and how wise
so ever he be, to count them no fools. For in deed, as the common Proverb
is, The wit of a Woman is a great matter: and true, when a man with all his
wisdom, is sometime to learn wit of her.

In mine opinion, I heard a very wise speech of a very witty Woman, touching
the wisdom (if any) that ought to be in a Woman. In a Maid, to take care in
choice of a Husband: in a married woman, to love none but her husband: in a
widow, to provide for her children: in an old woman, to have care of her end.

Now for men, if a Batcheler take heed what wife he takes, and having taken a
wife, to love no other woman: a Widdower, to look for his children, before a
new wife, and an old man his grave: is it amiss? no I warrant ye. Now men
must be wise, in caring for Women, and themselves to, and Women no wyser, then
in caring for such men as care for them. But if a man be so unwise to trouble
a Woman's wit to care for him? how wise is he? and what a wit has shoe.
Confess you that have guilty consciences, and learn to be wise: and think
this sufficient commendation for a Woman, if she be a Uirgin for chastity,
with Uirginitie virtuous, of condition courteous, and true of love: such a
Woman ought to be, and if such they be not, pray for them as I dee, and such
as are, honor them as worthy: and for their sakes, all other whatsoever they
be, judge the best till you see the contrary: and where you know it, shake
your head and say nothing: but it is pity, God has done his part in her,
God amend her: put the fault in pride, and not in her. And you shall fee such a
change, that it was not she, no forsooth (as little children say) it was the
Bulbegger.

They say now, the world is toward the last year, and men toward their
last wits: then let Women be toward their first Wisdom. And if they show
but little Wisdom: yet let that have such commendation, that they may be
encouraged, to continue and increase the same. For surely (well considered) a
man can not do honor to a more worthy person, then a Woman. Is it not an
abuse in a man to disprayse his friend? What greater friend to a man, then a
Woman? who can discommend that he loves? except he dissemble sore? hypocrisy
is as ill as heresy. What can a man love more then a Woman? what, such love as
betwixt them? Marry some will say, they must love dearly, or hate deadly. God
forbid, that any man should be out of charity: I would think it a hard
matter to hate a woman. Yet since it is possible to do little better: I think
it wisdom to conceal it, for there is nothing gotten by revealing it.

Well, not to seem tedious, let me draw toward an end: think well of as
many as you may, love whom you have cause, hate none, whatsoever you think,
say nothing in their dishonor, least you grow in their utter dislyking: and
then your room as good as your company. When you seek for fauonr, take a
flowte with you: I marvel you can away so long with a Woman's company, ^c.

But well, to anoyde the frumpes, flowtes, skowles, disdainefull speeches,
quippes, tauntes, and angry couutenaunces, that Women will soon bestow, where
they see cause, do this: if you cannot love, yet do not loath: if you will
not honor, yet do not hate: if your conscience let you not, commend them, yet
let your courtesy not let you do the contrary. Remember your Mother, forget
not your friend* offend not your Mistress, and make much of your self: If you
like my counsel, follow it: if not disdain it not: if you love a Woman,
remember me: if you care for none, we will none of us trouble you: if we do
it, it is against our wills. But who is he that loves not a Woman? and
wherefore then will any look awrie upon me? I know not, and shall I say I
care not? Well, let it go, since it is not, I do all for the best, and I
trust the best will take it so: as for the rest, there lies neither life nor
death upon a look, and therefore hoping the best, I will not doubt the
contrary. And if men be as well contented with me for this praise of Women, as
I am determined to content them, with the like of them hereafter: if will be
not froward, and Wit fail me not, I trust the Ace of Diamonds will go to the
stock, and cuerie man will be pleased. In the mean time about some better
work, then I mean to make boast of: I must attend my Harvest, ere I fall to
Hawking.

Thus if I said any thing amiss, God forgive me: if I have said well, God
be thanked, take it among you: if I have said truly, it is not to be blamed,
if otherwise, I have but spoken mine opinion, which I hope to see fully
approved. And so sorry, if I have said that the wise will mistike, and glad if
I have written, that the good will take well. I conclude of a sudden, with
this short sentence, Hic and haec homo, Considera quid mulier, Like of them as
you list, love whom you can: when you seek for favor. God send you good
fortune. And so fare you well.

N. G. Gent.

FINIS.
A Dialogue between Anger and Patience.
Anger. FIe on the world, the flesh, and the Devil.


Patience. What is the matter?


Anger. The world is naught.


Pati. It may amend.


Anger. When it is too late.


Patience. Better late then never.


Anger. As good never a whit, as never the better.


Patience. A crust is better then no bread at all.


Anger. A crust is hard of disgestion.


Patience. Not for a hungry stomach.


Anger. Oh, it will ask vile chewing.


Patience. Take time enough.


Anger. My belly will think my throat cut, that I ^eede no faster.


Patience. A little suffices Nature.


Anger. When she has enough.


Patience. Then she needs no more.


Anger. Yea, but where is that enough.


Patience. In Gods Grace.


Anger. Why, I have the grace of GOD, but I want the wealth of the world, to
grace my self withal.


Patience. Alas, the bravery of the world is but beggerie before God. And the
rich man to heaven, goes as a Cammell through a needles eye.


Anger. Yea, but begging is a vile life in the mean time.


Patience. Then work.


Anger. That goes against the Wool.


Patience. Pains brings profit.


Anger. I have often lost my labor.


Patience. Take heed th^n how you work.


Anger. Had I wist was a fool.


Patience, Then learn to be wise.


Anger. But how.


Patience. Not with hasse.


Anger. How much leisure?


Patience. A little and a little.


Anger. Words are good, but that they bring no substance.


Patience. A cold wind is good in a hot Summer.


Anger. Yea, but the wind of words is but a blast.


Patience. I perceive one cooling card will not s^rue a hot gam^ster.


Anger Oh what a slave was I?


Patience. Wherefore?


Anger. Play, play.


Patience. Play no more.


Anger. Oh, Primero.


Patience. Rest from rests.


Anger. And what shall I do?


Patience. Be quiet.


Anger. I cannot.


Patience. What troubles you?


Anger. All things, Men Women, and Children: Men be (...), Women worse, and
Children costly.


Patience. Condemn not all for a few, and take heed whom you trust. Men are
wise, Women witty, and Children must be cared for.


Anger. Why do thou cross me.


Patience To (...) thee to right.


Anger. Why? whether was I going?


Patience. From thy self.


Anger. Why, am I mad.


Patience. No, but in a melancho^y.


Anger. That is but an humor.


Patience. (...) y^u whereof it comes?


Anger. No, I pray you tell me.


Patience. Of Choler.


Anger. How should I get help ^it,


Patience. It must be purged by Patience*


Anger. That is forced Physic.


Patience. Yet will it work well.


Anger. When shall I take it?


Patience. Evening and morning, and every day.


Anger. For how long?


Patience. during life.


Anger. What? will thou bind me to a diet?


Patience. That shall do the good, refuse not.


Anger. What shall I pay for i^?


Patience. (...).


Anger. Who shall have it.


Patience. Self will.


Anger. Will that please him?


Patience. He may not refuse it*


Anger. When must I pay it.


Patience. When you take your Physic.


Anger. What good will it do me?


Patience. Great: It will clear you of Choler, it will make you find a new
world: teach you how to know your friends, and to beware of your foes: the
way to a quiet life, a happy end, and Heaven hereafter.


Anger. Oh, good Physic.


Patience. None such.


Anger. When is it good taking it.


Patience. In the fall or spring, or at any other time.


Anger. How shall I take it?


Patience. Fasting in the morning, and ^ate what you can get after: Sleep
not before your eyes be together, and keep you as warm as your clothes will
give you leave: walk up and down about your business, and suppe not late,
except you have not eaten any thing all d^y before. Keep this order, and my
life for yours, this heat of yours will quite away, keep it for an excellent
piece of Physic: You may make it with a little cost, and no great labor.


Anger. Sir, for your good will I thank you, but for your Medicine I guess it
of mean effect: yet for that I am troubled with a Melancholy, I mean to try
your cunning. In the mean time I will fetch a sigh for my sins, and bid
you fare well. I am but young, and ^m going to age: he has promised me to
learn me some good Lessons.


Patience. And with him shall you find me, and so till we meet, farewell,

Thus is Youth gone to Age, of whose meeting (...) shall hear more ere long:
In the mean time I crave you, Patience, to bear with that has passed, and if
hereafter you hear of any better stuff: think of it as it deserves, and of
me as you have cause, in mind to give you as good cause as I can, to think
the best of me.

Mean time, hoping I have given no man cause to say ill by (...), I wish all
^he world to think the best of every man, and so of me among the rest. Who
wish none ill, but all as well as I desire them to wish me: And so fare you
well.


Patientia Penitentia. N. B. Gent.

FINIS.
NOw Gentlemen, when I had finished up my book, and bade you farewell, came to
my remembrance, an old piece of Physic, good for such persons as are sick
like my self, which for that I guess it as profitable as it may seem
pleasant: I am to desire you to read a little more what follows. It was my
hap* (not many months since) to be very sick, when, so weak as I could not
well walk abroad: I took my pen, and wrote unto my friends, of such matters
as stood me upon not to let slip, Among which, my health being not the least
thing that I took care of: I wrote unto a friend of mine, whom I counted a
good Physician, to minister me some such Physic, as he thought good for the
disease. Now the man well acquainted with the cause, and minding rather to
comfort me with some merry counsel, then weaken me with too many Medicines:
wrote me word, to observe such a diet, as I think is very requisite for all
men, that shall ^all into like Fever, to take care to keep: and when they have
found as much ease, as I have done in it, then I shall have as much thanks as
he had: but least I seem ^edious ere I begin, thus it was.

A Physicians Letter.
COmmendations considered, so^e for your heaviness, yet glad of your good
remembrance, (notwithstanding, your great weakness:) This is to let you
understand, that now you are determined to take my counsel, and trouble your
self with no more Physic. Upon Thursday fortnight (God willing) I mean to
see you: till when, for that I see no danger of death in you, I have here
written you word, what order you shall take, and when I come, we will talk
further. First considering that the cause grows of conceyte, which has bredde
such a hearts grief in you, as will hardly be cured without Gods great
goodness: and yet by his grace, is not past help. This you shall do, think
not of that you have lost, for the loss will gain you naught, but grief: and
cast not to get any thing ill, least the gain breed as great an after sorrow
as the loss? and to recover your health, and estate by such good means as it
way continue, this you shall do* Observe this order.

In the morning when you rise, serve God, and he will see to you: wash your
hands with running water, it is good for the heat of the Liver: make your
breakfast of a warm broth, which you shall make of Herbs in this sort. Take
a handful of Time, and put as much Rewe into it: stamp with these two, a
root or two of Repentan^, and strain them into a fair Dish, with the juice
Parseline, let it stand on the fire till it be luke warm, then taste it with
your fingers end, and if you like it not, throw it out at the Window: upon
my word, it will never hurt you. For your meat, you may now and then, if
your stomach stand to flesh, eat of a little warm Mutton, but take heed
it be not laced, for that is ill for a sick body: For change now and then,
eat of a Rabbet, it is as restoritiue, old Cunnies are to dry, and too hard
of digestion. You may now and then eat of a Lark, it is good and light
meat, but Buntings are to bitter. A Partridge is not a miss, but eat not of
a plu^ Plouer. A Chicke now and then of a month old, but March Birds are to
strong meat. A Woodcocke manis sick folks may be bold withal* but a Goose
of all other, is a vile Bird, a perilous meat, for a sick person. And of all
meats, Foul or other flesh, whatsoever, take heed of Uenison, as Does
flesh, and Hares flesh, and such like, they are stirring meats, and will
distemper the body very much.

For ^she, of all, beware of swallowing a Gudgine whole, or a Leaping Whyting,
a Gods heat, is not very good, and a salt ^ele is unwholesome: if I lie,
ask the Ship Boy. Drink not too much Wine, leasts it inflame the blood, and
bring the Purse into a consumption.

Comfort your self with hope of better hap, then you have had, considering
you cannot well have worse. Follow hard the good work you have in hand,
and finishe it as well as you have begun, it will make you amends for a
great deal of misspent time, it will purchase you credit, payment for your
pains, good thoughts of your betters, thanks of your friends, and content to
your self.

Thus loath to trouble you, with any more matter at this time, I pray you
follow my counsel, and when I come, tell me what ease you find: In the
mean time, as the Fiddler says, I pray you be merry, as you may (I mean)
though not as you would, and so God keep you, send you your health, both of
us his grace, and all friends a merry meeting. In haste from my Chamber, in
Smithfielde.

Your better freende, then Physician. R. S.
Il sano non ha bisognadel medico.
A farewell.
WHen I had received this Letter from this my freendly Physician, I took more
comfort in the mnth of this order set down, then care for the observance of
the same. But as new and then a sick man's spirits shall be somewhat more
revived upon a sudden merry jest, then a sullen medicine, so was I more
pleased with this merry ceunsail^, the^ I think I should have been with this
Physic: but as in health (...) better company, than a pleasant friend: so, in
sickness, no better comfort, then a merry companion.

I must nee^es say, both do well: for, as Physic does minister Medicines, to
purge such ill humors, as do in^ the blood, infect the Liver, and so bring the
body in^ diseases: so does the pleasant speech of an honest freende, purge
the mind of such melancholicke conceits, as bring the brain into such hurly
burly, as that all the body is the worse for it. For make the body never so
clean from all causes of infection, yet let the mind be di^nbed, within a
little time you shall see the body brought into such sickness, as is hardly to
be cured. But let a man be never so sick, if he have the company of such
a companion, as he may find content with all: his sickness, will by little
and little so soon away, as all the art in the world is not able to do
without it. What shall I further say? There is no sickness, no sore, as that
grows of sorrow, no better mean to cure it, then the company of a contentiue
freende: and whereas company cannot be had: merry counsel must serve the
turn. I speak by experience in sorrow no man sicker, with Physic no man
wealter: desiring mirth, no man more enjoying no man less, by Gods good help,
in the midst of this misery, found a freende unlooked for, that seeing me in
such extrem^tie, of a sudden, ^ell into a great laughing, not for ^oye to see
my sorrow, but for a wonder to see me in su^ a woeful case? Now knowing my
fr^ndes nature, scarce able to force a smile, I laughed a little for company.

Now to make me merry, the best Medicine for a sudden m^ting, he begins to
tell me what hap he had to ^isit sick Folks: For that not an hour before he
had been with a very freende of mine, and his too, whom he had left half
frantic, of a fantastical Fe^er. Fors^the, he was s^ far in Lou^, as
nothing would serve his (...), but Death.

No grace with him, but shaking the he^de with a terrible sigh or two: and not
a word, but (...), and oh, and now and the^ rise off his bed in a rage,
knitting his browe^, with Cancro, and then he spoke Italian, and by and by
make obeysaunce to the window, d^wne on his knee^, l^ up his hands, kiss his
hand, let fall a tear or two, with madame: and with that word ^eare open his
buttons, throw^ off his hat, fling away his Pantofles, break all the strings
of his Lute, knock the belly against the bed post, and run to his Sword,
when then it was time to catch^ hold^ of him, and so with friendly
persuasions, to bring him to better quiet. And in the end o^ his tale, but
thou art not so: when God knows, he fo^de me in far tamer taking. Yet to
be short, with this pleasant Tale, h^ tri^ed out the time, til my fit was
over: when we fell to such freendly communication, as merrily passed away that
day, and after many mo, til in the end with Gods help, I recovered, to whom
be given the glori^ of all health: wh^ in deed in health, is the only good
friend, and in sickness, the only Physician, that comfort, and cures the
most sick, that trusts in his heavenly help.

Thus have you heard, what good a merry f^eend ^oth (...) of sickness: which
(as you shall have occasion) send ^r to your comfort, always accou^ting and
h^uring God as the cheifest P^isition. To whom for our health, and oth^ his
benifites otherwise bestowed v^on us, be given all glory and ^aise, world
without end. Amen.

Me^ico del Anima Iddi^, Delcorpo buon Compagn^* N. B. Gent.

FINIS.
A Table of the Discourses.
THe first: The Will of Wit. Fol. 1 The second: The Authors Dream. Fol. 10 The
third: The Scholar and the Soldier. Fol. 21 The fourth: The Miseries of M^
Fol. 55 The fifth: The Praise of Women Fol. The farewell: A mean piece of
Physic.
What faults are escaped in the Printing, find by discrecion, and excuse the
Author, by other work that let him from attendance to the Press.

Non ha che non sa N. B. Gent.


