A CONSOLATION FOR OUR GRAMMAR SCHOOLS: OR, A faithful and most comfortable
encouragement, for laying of a sure foundation of all good Learning in our
Schools, and for prosperous building thereupon.

More specially for all those of the inferior sort, and all ruder countries
and places; namely, for Ireland, Wales, Virginia, with the Summer Islands, and
for their more speedy attaining of our English tongue by the same labor, that
all may speak one and the same Language.

And withal, for the helping of all such as are d^sirous speedily to recover
that which they had formerlie got in the Grammar Schools; and to proceed
aright therein, for the perpetual benefit of these our Nations, and of the
Churches of Christ.

LONDON, Printed by RICHARD FIELD for THOMAS MAN* dwelling in Pater noster Row,
at the Sign of the Talbot. 1622.

To the Right Honorable his Majesty's Lord Deputy of Ireland, and to the right
Honorable the Lord President and Lord Lieutenant of WALES, and the
Principality thereof, the Governors of the Isles of GERNSEY and IERNSEY; and
to the right Honorable and right Worshipful, the Treasurer, Council and
Company for VIRGINIA, and of the Summer Islands; and to all other Governors
within his Majesty's dominions, to whom the charge and care of Schools;
namely, those of the inferior sort, are assigned: with all true favorers of
good Learning, who unfeignedly wish the perpetual flourishing of the Church of
God, and of their native Country, I. B. wishes all happiness in Christ
eternally.
AFter many thoughts to whom I should more particularly dedicate this my hoped
Consolation, (right Honorable able and right Worshipful,) the Lord in his
wisdom and mercy (I trust) directed me unto your selves, as those whom it
does in a peculiar manner concern. That like as he has appointed you to these
places, so ye may ever have before your eyes, the special ends for which he
has assigned them to your trust, and for which you must be answerable to his
heavenly Majesty. The first and chief whereof (as I conceive) is this, That
his pure religion, honor, and true worship, may be set up, and advanced in
them; the next, that the wealth and saving of all his poor people in those
places, both of their souls and bodies, may be by you procured, so far as in
your power shall lie. And these things to be effected principally, by a
learned, holy, and faithful Ministry, protected and assisted by a godly
Magistracy, and by propagating and spreading all good learning and knowledge
amongst them. To this purpose God having ordained schools of learning to be a
principal means to reduce a barbarous people to civility, and thereby to
prepare them the better to receive the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ; as also
for the breeding and nourishing of such a holy Ministry, with a wife and
godly Magistracy, and people to be perpetually preserved; your care as I
take it, in the next place (that I may speak with all reverence and submission)
ought to be for provision of meet schools and Seminaries for them, according
to the natures and conditions of the places, and as God shall raise up means
thereto. And for those which are already so provided and established, that the
best orders may be known and received, for the speediest advancement of the
best learning in them, and for accomplishing all the good thereby desired; and
withal for supply of what private helps Gods goodness shall vouchsafe, for
breeding, and nourishing, and also preserving all true piety and grace amongst
them.

The benefit therefore and comfort of such small mites, as his heavenly
bounty has vouchsafed me, which may be helpefull hereunto, I do most
thankefully and cheerfully, as from his goodness, tender unto you to this
end; And more specially to you, right Honor able and right Worshipful the
Governor, Council and Company for Virginia, and of the Summer Islands; that
planting in a right order, beginning with the Lord, and the careful planting
and watering of his sacred Religion, you may find a more happy growth, and
increase, and evermore sound and lasting joy to your own souls. First, the
mite of my Schoole-labours traveled in, now many years for all inferior and
ruder places, whereunto what blessing his heavenly bounty has given, I leave
to the judgment of all true hearted wel-willers unto good learning. Secondly, I
desire to commend unto you, for them, and that upon undoubted experience, the
help, and benefit of another poor labor, which he of his goodness has
likewise granted unto me, namely of a little Treatise called, The true Watch,
and Rule of Life: which having received the witness of sundry godly learned,
(of whom I have for many years entreated the examining; and censuring of it,
after the public authorizing thereof) to be that way of godliness, wherein we
all who truly profess Christ's Gospel do agree, and that narrow path, in
which all that walk conscionablie, and carefully, shall certainly find
eternal Life: I dare be the more bold in ^^tie to make tender of, for the
furtherance of their perpetual comfort and felicity. And unto the same
adjoined the Rule of true Prayer, the second part of the same True Watch;
wherein I have followed, (so near as I have been able) the perfect pattern
of our blessed Savior: which two so conjoined, may be for directing privately
every soul (which has grace to use them, and to put them so in practice) as
their Sea-card and Compass, to keep them in the right course to their
intended Point; that they may not be carried over far, nor fall too short of
their desired haven; Yea to perform that for them, which neither Card nor
Compass can; to wit, that they may not only be k^pt from splitting; or
dashing upon the Rocks or Sands, but that they may sail securely amongst the
most dangerous rocks and perilous tempests. That arriving happily, they may
likewise ever after be kep^ safe, in the midst of all savage and cruel enemies.

And finally, what straits or miseries soever they shall come into, either by
Sea or land; that but only crying unto the Lord, they may be graciously heard;
and mercifully delivered in due time, according to that which shall be most for
the glory of his Majesty and their own salvation, with the good of his
people.

Though the dedication and patronage of my Schoole-labours belong unto our most
hopeful and illustrious Prince, and so in like manner of my Watch unto most
Honorable personages (to whom I am ever bound) yet I know that the tender of
the assured benefit thereof, after so long trial in the right use and practice
of them, even unto your Honors and Worships, for these poor souls, and for
your more happy execution of your charge, will be most pleasing unto them, as
who desire the wealth of all. Yea (give me leave to speak jointly and
freely, yet in all humble duty unto you all before mentioned, both right
Honorable and right Worshipful) even ye are they to whom the charge of these
poor Countries and places are committed in special manner, and the providing
for them. If therefore you should not use all holy means for the honor of
our God, with the saving and preserving of all those souls, and their
posterity, and gaining the very savage amongst them unto Jesus Christ,
whether Irish or Indian, but only respect your own ends and proiects, you
could never stand before his heavenly Majesty, to answer his Highness for
it; especially, if he most graciously offering you helps thereto, you
should not embrace them accordingly, and to your utmost ability see them put
in execution. You cannot be ignorant of the woeful estate of all sorts, so long
as they remain in ignorance and blindness, without the saving knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and much more of all such, as have been nourished long
in fearful superstition and Idolatry: and above all other, those who have
been bred in a manifest, and most palpable, and even a visible adoring of
Satan; nor, how the Holy Ghost has told us plainly, 2. These. 1. 8, 9
That our Lord Jesus will come, in flaming fire to render vengeance to all who
know not God, and which obey not his heavenly Gospel. Who must then be
punished with everlasting perdition, when he shall come to be glorified in his
Saints, and to be made marvelous in all them that believe. Oh set before your
faces the miserable condition of the damned, and so the danger of all living in
blindness, whilst they so remain. If we believe the word of the Lord, and
look steadfastly with the eyes of Faith, upon the wretched estate and woeful
torment of that rich Glutton in Hell (by whom our Savior fore-warneth all
sorts for ever) it will surely cause us to look unto our selves. Luke 16. 24. ^
Or if we set before our eyes the Lake prepared for all the ungodly, (...)
and where the blood of those souls must be required, if they perish for lack
of warning or instruction. And finally, if we consider aright, That the
righteous can scarcely be saved, 1 Pet. 4. 18
as the Holy Ghost witnesses most plainly, and we may see it by d^ilie
experience, (when as m^nie a good soul, which has been careful to walk with
God, yet in distress of conscience, and a little left to Satan's buffe^tings,
for their humbling, endure such misery, and is so hardly rescued from him and
from utter destruction) it will surely awake us all to look more carefully to
all committed to our charges. Ye are those whom our blessed God has
appointed; under our dread and gracious Sovereign to be as foster-fathers unto
them, and therefore it concerns you neerelie, to think seriously hereof; for
if that way of godliness, which we profess according to the word of the Lord
and our good Laws (which I have long endeavored to set plainly before, our
faces, in that little Tr^atise, the use and benefit whereof I desire to commend
unto you for them) be that narrow way of life, as we are assured from the
mouth of the Lord it is; then their contrary courses must needs be the way of
death and hell. Though therefore, we should have no commiseration of the poor
souls themselves, yet remember the things that may concern your own blessed
estate and posterity, and your joyful appearing before the high Tribunal of
our Lord and Savior, and then there will be no more need to move you therein,
nor any other whom the charge of souls concerns, who shall consider hereof
aright, to do your utmost endeavor for their salvation. There will be no more
need to call on you to see the gospel of Christ planted among them, or to
provide them of faithful Ministers, and to procure by all possible means all
other helps, or that, that which has been most charitablie given, and
formerlie collected to these ends, may be rightly employed, and whatsoever
else the Lord shall hereafter afford for their benefit, chiefly to bring them
into and keep them in this narrow path. Woeful is the case of all those,
amongst whom Satan reigns, and who worship him instead of Christ, as all such
do, who know him not, and much more those poor Indians, among whom he (as is
reported) is visibly adored and sacrificed unto, as their God. Marvel not if
honest and understanding Christians be so hardly drawn over to these places,
as namely into Virginia, or so much as to persuade their friends to such a
voyage, when as there are in the same so manifold perils, and especially of
falling away from God to Satan, and that themselves, or their posterity should
become utterly savage, as they are. This holy care being first had, for their
souls and eternal happiness; and withal, that there be no wrong offered to
the poor savage there, nor scand all given to them, there may be a greater
hope of a happy Plantation, and that he will in mercy afford a plentiful
supply of all good things, and raise up many to be benefactors and furtherers,
and give a prosperous success to all your holy endeavors, with assurance of
his favor present, and for evermore. But if thorough the wickedness or
offensive carriage of Ministers or people, minding nothing but for their own
advantage, these poor souls shall take occasion to conceive evil of the
Lord, and his religion, all this hope is utterly overthrown, in the very haven.

Here upon in my desire of their conversion and salvation, with the saving and
preservation of our own countrie-men there already, and which hereafter shall
go to them, and of all other in these ruder countries and places, I have been
bold to tender these my poor travels, upon much hope and confidence: That
first even this course of instruction, to be presented unto you, being embraced
and rightly put in practice, a most speedy and sure foundation, may be laid for
all future good learning, in their schools, without any difference at all from
our courses received here at home; and whereby both Masters and Scholars, may
proceed speedily, and cheerfully, and with certain assurance of a blessing;
and that so from us may be sent continu^ll supplies of teachers to proceed in
the same order. The trial whereof I dare (through Gods goodness) tender to
any by your selu^s appointed to m^ke full demonstration of it to them, like as
I have formerly done to the most learned and fit that I could choose to this
purpose, as appears in the Examiners ce^sure, in the closing up of this
little Treatise. And withal, to help that we may have by the same, not only
the purity of our own language preserved amongst all our own people th^re,
but also that it may be readily learned in the Schools, together with the
Latin, and other tongues, and so more propagated to the rudest Welsh and Irish,
yea to the very heathen and savage, brought up amongst them, the more easily
thereby to reduce them all (as was said) to a loving ciuility, with loyal and
faithful obedience to our Sovereign, and good Laws, and to prepare a way to
pull them from the power and service of Satan, that they may jointly submit
themselves to Jesus Christ.

And for the Watch, being agreeable to the word of the Lord, as I trust every
one that tries aright shall find it, I dare boldly a vow, that every soul that
shall truly put in practice, first that Rule and Way of life to walk in it,
shall find more true comfort by it, then by all the commodities in Virginia,
yea more true joy, with all heavenly riches and felicity, then all the golden
mines of the Indians can possibly promise unto them. Secondly, for that Rule of
Prayer in the same, that every one who shall learn to exercise it, as the Lord
Jesus has taught him, shall obtain whatsoever good thing his soul shall
desire: and finally, that so watching and praying, he shall be kept safe, even
in the midst of Devils and ten thousand other perils, and have the Lord to be
unto him, as he was to Abraham, God all-sufficient, whither soever he calls
him, to be seen of him in the Mount, and the inheritance of Abraham, to him
and his, so walking, for an ever lasting possession.

Thus have I presumed to tender unto you (right Honorable and right
Worshipful) whatsoever the Lord has vouchsafed me, whereof I have had hope,
that it might help you in your governments and charges, for the good of those
poor people committed to you, and specially which might further the happy
success of that so much desired Plantation, for the conversion of the heathen,
and training them up in good learning, and the fear of the Lord, and that so
from the children, it may please God more easily to derive the same unto their
fathers, from the younger to the ancients; and so in time, by some of
themselves so trained up, to propagate it to all their posterity: which (if
after further trial made by you) it shall be as courteously accepted, as it is
heartily and cheerfully offered, according to that which I have received from
the Lord, I shall not only have more cause to bless his heavenly Majesty,
but also be encouraged still to prosecute these poor travels, and to study the
further good of them all during life, especially for drawing the poor natives
in Virginia, and all other of the rest of the rude and barbarous from Satan to
God, and so rest,

Yours in all humble observance and hearty prayer to God for you, JOHN BRINSLEY.

A CONSOLATION FOR OUR GRAMMAR SCHOOLS.
THE uncomfortable and fruitless toils, Occasion of this work.
which the Lord has left unto men, to humble them thereby, have ever caused
many to be^d their wits and beat their brains, to find out more plain and
profitable ways, both to rel^eue themselves, and to make their burdens more
light. Amongst others, my self having first had long experience of the
manifold evils which grow from the ignorance of a right order of teaching, and
afterward some gracious taste of the sweetness that is to be found in the
better courses truly known and practiced, I have betaken me almost wholly, for
many years, unto this weighty work, and that not without much comfort,
through the goodness of our blessed God. And thence the more earnestly have I
pursued this same, for that I have been fully persuaded upon happy experience
(I trust) that I could never employ my thoughts and travels more acceptably in
any earthly thing, or whereby a greater benefit might redound both to Church
and Commonwealth, and in some sort to every soul, then in searching out, and
setting forth to the view of all, the shortest, surest, and most easy entrance
to all good learning, and how with certain hope of good success all may
proceed therein.

Who knows not the grievous complaints, which (to the disgrace of learning)
are made almost in every place, The usual complaints against nonproficiencie
in schools.
for the injuries done to countries, towns, parents and children; because in
so many schools, the children, which are the chief hope of parents and
posterity, are either spoiled altogether, or else do profit so very little?
Where good is done, how hardly it is effected commonly.
And for the most part, wherein any good is done, that it is ordinarily
effected by the endless vexation of the painful Masters, the extreme labor
and ^errour of the poor scholars, with enduring far overmuch and long
severity. Now whence proceeds all this, but because so few of those who
undertake this function, A chief cause hereof, want of knowledge of a right
course of teaching.
are acquainted with any good method, or right order of instruction, fit for a
Grammar school? This therefore has been in my heart, to show my love and
duty to all sorts, in seeking for my part to deliver the poor, painful and
honest minded Schoolemaister from this reproach and grief, The authors desire
to help all this.
and to help withal to supply this so great a want. And in stead hereof my
earnest desire has been to procure a perpetual benefit to all estates and
degrees, And to procure a perpetual benefit to all posterity.
even to every man for his children and posterity; by endeavoring to make the
path to all good learning more even and pleasing in the first entrance, then
former ages have known; and thereby also in the continual proceeding
afterward, so far as the Lord shall vouchsafe me his merciful assistance in
this great attempt. That children being so entered in a plain manner, may
strive toward the goal with undoubted certainty of obtaining their desire,
with pleasant delight and cheerfulness throughout all their time.

Concerning the singular benefits and blessings which come by good learning, Of
the rare benefits of learning no good man ever doubted
like as to every particular soul, and so to whole nations, no man truly wise
did ever yet make doubt. No not any one who has known aright what learning
meant; or who unfeignedly loved his country, the souls of Gods people, or the
Gospel of Christ. For what makes a nation to be a glorious nation, but that
the people are a wise and an understanding people? What is it whereby we come
so near unto the Highest, or to that blessed estate from which by our first
parents we are so fallen, and to which we must be renewed and restored, if ever
we shall inherit again the tree of life, as by true understanding and
knowledge, especially if the same be sanctified unto us? Yea, what is it else
whereby we excel the beasts, but by this divine reason, with which the more
we are enlightened by the spirit of the Lord, through the means of learning,
the more we differ, the more we do excel? Or who is he that can give God that
glory for which he was created, and redeemed from hell, or can in any measure
honor him as he ought to do, to his own salvation, but only he who is endued
with right knowledge and understanding? Contrarily, whence is that inhumanitie,
as amongst many of the Irish, the Virgineans, and all other barbarous nations,
but from their extreme ignorance of our holy God, and of all true and good
learning?

If any man should dislike of learning, The licenciousnesse of some learned or
abusers of learning, ought not to cause us to think the worse thereof.
or think that there is overmuch of it, for the strange licentiousness and
outrageous courses of sundry learned ones, or for that so many do abuse their
learning, even to their own perdition, without unfeigned repentance; why does
not the same man dislike also of the light, yea of riches, honors, and
pleasures, all which are abused commonly by the self same men, as they have
occasion, as much as learning is? Good learning is indeed the heavenly light,
the truest honor, the best riches, the sweetest pleasure. Learning is all, and
all in all, if we believe that wise Solomon, or any of the grave Sages who
have ever lived since the beginning of the world. Neither is the learning of
these men the cause of their licentiousness, but this is it in truth; either
that being left unto themselves, to humble them thereby, they have put out that
light of learning which checked and controlled them, and have chosen, in their
courses, to live in darkness rather then in the light; or for that God has
therefore in his heavy displeausre and most just judgment (as we are to fear
of many of them) given them up to such palpable blindness in the midst of the
shining light of this last age, because they loved darkness rather then the
light, Job. 3. 19. 2. These. 2. 10.
or at least for that they received not the love of the truth, that they might
be saved.

But wholly to convince all sorts, Learning is the glory of man, in the very
natural man's account
that learning is the true light, and that principal part of man's glory; let
any natural man ask of his own heart, whether if he would have his child
brought up to make a worthy man, he would not have him trained up in the most
excellent learning, notwithstanding all the abuses of it, and whatsoever can be
devised against it. And why should any one who knows but the law of nature,
much more the divine law of our holy God, (that whatsoever we would that men
should do to us even so we should do to them) once grudge or disdain that unto
others, which of all other things he most desires for himself and his? Why
should he not as well repine against them for the use of light, seeing the Lord
in his rich bounty, in like manner grants the light of true learning to be
communicated to every one, chiefly for his soul, as he shall be capable, as
well as he has the light of the day for the body; and also has charged all
most strictly, to seek after it above all other things. According to that of
Solomon: Wisdom is the principal thing, Prou. 4. 7.
therefore get wisdom, and with all thy getting get understanding. Exalt her,
and she shall promote thee, she shall bring thee to honor when thou do
embrace her. Wisdom is that one thing without which a man is not in truth a
man, nor can ever honor his Creator as he ought.

Yet to pass over this point, as not so needful (I hope) amongst us,
especially the true professors of Christ's glorious Gospel; whereof never any
one was a sound favorer, who was not likewise an earnest furtherer of the best
learning: and contrarily, they only who have sought the ruin of the Church,
as Julian, have sought (cunningly at least, and under other fair pretenses)
the shutting up of the school doors, and the bringing of all good learning
into open contempt or base esteem. And the rather do I repress my self
herein, for that this point has been so worthily handled and cleared by some
of high place now sundry years ago, and all obiectours put to silence.

To ret^rne therefore toward our proposed mark, The first and principal
means of good learning, the schools of learning.
and to consider of the means whereby the Lord bestows this heavenly gift of
all true knowledge and good learning; is not the first and principal the right
education of children in the Grammar schools, which God has ordained to be
his nurseries of all learning and virtue? In very many of which schools
abroad the contrary rudeness is notwithstanding very much to be pitied and
laid to heart of all; like as it has been long, and is at this day too
generally complained of, and that to be feared not without just cause. In what
schools the best learning and nurture are to be found.
Of which sort are all those wherein the scholars are so brought up, as that
they are made more unfit for any calling, or so much as to take pains in any
profitable employment. But these true nurseries are only such, wherein learned
Masters and Vshers, being encouraged with meet maintenance and due rewards,
do follow the best and most approved courses, A wonderful difference between
those schools wherein the best orders are observed, and the rest.
laboring constantly to put the same in ure. For in these a wonderful
difference will appear, when they are compared with those other, in which the
right means and orders are little known, and less regarded to be put in
practice.

And first to begin with the matter of learning, 1. The matter of learning
easy in such schools.
which ordinarily and in it self, through our natural blindness and dullness
is so hard and unpleasant; it is made in these schools most easy, and
replenished with all sweet delight.

Secondly for the manner of proceeding, 2. The manner of proceeding in a
singular order without confusion.
it is in these schools so direct and orderly, to the very highest top of all
perfection in the same, that the things taught before do ever give light to
those that follow after; and the later do so hang upon the former, as that they
have a continual dependence, and also the scholars have a continual help and
use of all those things which they have learned before. There is moreover in
them a very comely array, as in a well governed army, each knowing his own
rank and office, The painful schoolmaster may there expect a rich blessing.
without the least disorder or confusion. Whereupon the painful Schoolemaister
may, through Gods blessing, as certainly expect much comfortable fruit of his
labors, as any other man in all the world. That even as the best husbandry
brings forth usually the greatest increase, the shortest and safest cut in
navigations, does fetch in soonest the double gain; so the shortest and fairest
way of teaching, shall bring in speedily double learning without any loss or
danger. So as it must needs be great folly to go further about with more
trouble and peril, where a shorter and more sure line is plainly directed and
pointed out upon infallible experience.

But for the fruits hereof they will be found such, The fruit hereof able to
encourage each Master to take the uttermost pains to follow the best manner.
as are able to allure and encourage every one, to take the uttermost pains
to seek out and to practice the best means which ever God shall afford. For in
the meaner schools will soon appear such a change, from raw and rude
behavior, unto all commendable qualities, as if they had been cast in a new
mould. Hence will ensue a marvelous change in schools.
So that very children will begin to understand, write, speak, oppose and
answer, and in all things so to demean themselves, as to gain the hearts of
all who shall rightly make trial, and compare them with most others. The
bringing learning into esteem, and to make it to be desired, and honored of al*
Whence it must needs follow, that whereas learning is now commonly so basely
reputed of, and so few in the countries abroad regard to set their children to
it; yet if the best courses were in use, every one would desire to have his
brought up in some learning and nurture, The stirring up many benefactors to
learning.
and all of the better sort and quality should be provoked to become
benefactors to schools, to augment their maintenance and encouragements for
the nourishing and increasing of the same. Things accompanying a right course
in proceeding.


These things likewise will certainly accompany such a right order of
proceeding; both a marvelous freedom of the Masters from their weariness
and discontent, Delivery of the masters from much vexation and overmuch
severity. Of scholars from terror.
and from that ouer-great severity which they are enforced to exercise, or
else to do little good; and withal a joyful delivering of the poor children
from that continual fear, whereby in many schools, the greatest part have
been wont to be exceedingly dulled and to be made most unwilling to their
books. That all things in schools may be done with delight and comfort.
That now contrarily Masters may teach with much delight and comfort, and
scholars learn with an ingenuous emulation, like as they recreate themselves
in their ordinary sports. And for the time spent in getting learning, More
substantial learning in such at 7. years* then in others atten.
assuredly more true, sound, and substantial learning will be found to be
gotten in such places in seven years, then is in others commonly in seven and
half seven. For this is a thing notorious, State of most schools and scholars
of 15. years of age.
that in the greatest part of our common schools abroad, (some few of
principal note excepted) the scholars at fifteen or sixteen years of age,
have not commonly so much as any sense of the meaning and true use of
learning, for understanding, resolving, writing, or speaking, but only to
construe and to parse a little, to steal an exercise, and to write such Latin
as any of judgment will disdain to read. Unfit for the Universities.
That in respect of being fit to be sent to the Universities with credit, that
they may proceed with delight and understanding, when they come there, they are
commonly so senseless, as that they are much meeter to be sent home again. And
if they be admitted into the Universities, it is not without the grief of all
who respect the credit thereof. Evils in their entrance and continuance in the
Universities.
So as that they enter commonly with foul disgrace, and continue with much
contempt, to spend their friends money and their own precious time, which
might have been far better employed. That they become there a great deal
more ready to any kind of exercise then unto the study of good learning,
the ignorance whereof proves such a reproach unto them. Hence also after
sundry years so euilly spent, many of them return home again, almost as
rude as they went thither, or are sent abroad to be unprofitable burdens, both
of the Church and Commonwealth perpetually. Or if such do light into the hands
of painful and conscionable Tutors, Tutors must play the schoolmasters if
ever they shall do good.
and fall to their studies, yet their Tutors must then act for them the
School-maisters part, which must needs be very harsh and unpleasing, yea rare
to be found amongst them. So that in stead of their Academicall readings, they
must be enforced to supply that which was wanting in the Grammar school. Such
scholars must use extraordinary pains.
Such scholars must likewise use extraordinary pains and industry, and be
of most happy capacities, if ever they shall come to that pitch and height of
good learning, which being trained up rightly from the beginning, they might
very easily and in shorter time have attained unto.

Hereof the complaints of the worthiest and most careful Tutors in the
Universities give too sufficient testimony. And doing best, shall yet ever
feel the want of the Grammar school.
And though such scholars prove never so well, yet shall they feel the want of
the Grammar school all their life long. But to leave the University a little,
and to return to our schools again for the gracing of the^. Whereas now in
sundry of them, yea some which are of good maintenance, there are to be found
some few like unprofitable drones, not by the unaptness of nature, but for
lack of better guidance and education; then contrarily should we have all such
schools generally, as the little bee-hiues, If the best orders were had the
schools should be as the bee-hiues
every one in his own cell, and each knowing his own task, and all
gathering jointly to fill the hiues with the most excellent life honey. So that
taste wheresoever you pleased, you might ever find most sweet contentment; if
thus the best courses were alike made known to all, and care had that they
might be constantly put in practice every where. Yea then it would come to
pass, that whereas now there is little or nothing in very many of them,
wherein the eye or ear can take delight, but rather those who come to make
trial have enough at the first, and ever take just cause of grief, that there
should be such lamentable spoiling of so many toward youths, so wretchlesse
misspending of their golden age, with such inualuable and irrecouerable loss
and injury to all, As the goodly gardens and sweet singing birds.
yet in short time we should see the same as the goodly gardens, and as amongst
the little singing birds, in the flourishing Spring; where we still look and
hearken after more sweet variety of pleasant flowers, And generally excel
themselves.
and of melodious tunes. Then should we find by joyful experience, that each
mean school would ^ot only excel it self, but be equal to many of
chiefer note. And as much as the goodliest garden does excel the place over
grown with briars and nettles, the little bee-hiues the nests of drones, so
much should these each way surpass those same which now they are. That we
should as much rejoice in these, as ever we grieved for the other.
That as we have been grieved formerly for the one, we should be rapt with
admiration of the other, and think all our pains and cost far too little to
be bestowed upon them. Masters should be much more encouraged to go on with
cheerfulness, in seeing Gods blessing upon their labors, and by hearing the
due commendations given to their scholars, then by any other rewards
whatsoever. The children should ever likewise have their emulation increased,
Masters and scholars should proceed with all alacrity.
which of them all should most excel. And to conclude this point, hence it
should come to pass, that although all could not be expected to excel in
learning, Though all should not excel, yet all should be fitted to some good
emploiment, for the benefit of the whole.
(for then should we be left destitute of husbandmen to till the ground, and
much more of meet supplies to furnish all other callings; neither is it
possible, by all the means or pains in the world, to make such to be
scholars, to whom God in their natural co^stitution seems to have denied it;
chiefly where parents or teachers themselves are too indulgent or remiss: so
that their children are disobedient, much absent from school, come and go at
their pleasures, neglect their exercises or the like, or have been spoiled by
ill entrance at the first,) yet these things would follow through a right and
careful government. That a good part would be found in every form to credit
the school: some to store the Universities, others to adorn all other places
and conditions of life; that thereby might be had men expert in each kind as
necessity should require, for the common benefit and good of all. All these
ve^ied in some few schools.
All these things we may see verified in some few and rare schools, by
comparing of which with most others, and so by considering what a difference
there is (only through the better courses practiced constantly in them,) we
may fully judge of the truth of all that has been said, and most necessarily
be enforced to subscribe thereto.

Upon the due consideration hereof, This endeavor to di^charge a debt to all, by
making all sorts partakers of the blessings, which he has vouchsafed.
and upon much and loug experience of diverse places, together with the
certain assurance of these and the like undoubted benefits, which must needs
ensue generally upon the best courses of learning and good education, first
diligently sought out amongst all, and then diuulged for the public good, to
be put in practice, I have presumed to endeavor to my poor ability, as the
Lord has vouchsafed me mercy, to make all sorts partakers of this blessing,
and thus to be paying my debts to all, in communicating the same unto them.

This travel therefore has been, Duty to all in high place for their
children and posterity.
and is my duty and service, first unto you all (ye worthies of the chiefest
rank) who are unfeigned favorers of good learning, and more especially to you
to whom the Lord has engaged me and mine; yea my hearty wish (with all
thankful acknowledgement) toward you, in your children, and posterity, in
whom you are to remain after your departing hence, and by whom you would have
your names and dignities still preserved even in the earth. That they may with
sporting, in a pleasant kind of recreation, attain unto that heavenly gift of
learning, and excel all others therein, according to their places and degrees.
And that hereby they may adorn your houses, increase their own honor in
every kind, to become principal lights, and pillars of their country, and
not to live to the overthrow, or the dishonor of your houses, and names, much
less to the evil example, or to the spoiling of the poor people amongst whom
they dwell, as those who leave their names for a curse behind them.

It has been and is my debt, Desire to all parents.
and true desire to all parents, to further their comfort in their beloved
children, that they may see before their eyes their childrens forwardness in
learning and virtue, which may be unto them some recompense, of all their love,
care, and cost. And also that being hereby encouraged to bring them up
virtuously, they may always have the testimony of a good conscience, to cause
them to rejoice, in that they have had this first care to provide them this
portion. Hereby they may depart hence with gladness, when they may leave those
in their places, in whom they may see just hope, that they shall live still in
the earth with worthy reputation.

And in more especial manner has it been my study for all such who in their
natural and tender affection, To all more tender hearted parents.
would have their children brought up in the most loving and gentle manner, as
it were in playing, and with ingenuous strife and emulation, without that
sharpness which they cannot endure, so much as once to hear of.

Yea to all likewise of the meaner sort, Wel-wishing to the poorer sort.
that even their children may the more easily attain unto learning, that so
some of them being advanced thereby, may become a stay to their parents, a
comfort to their kinsfolks, a credit to their country which brought them up.

And to come unto our Schools, To the schools themselves.
for whose comfort I have chiefly spent my strength, it is my love unto you
all, that you may be such fertile Seminaries, of the best instruction and
nurture, as to replenish all places and callings. Such as from which all
cruelty and terror may be driven far away; that you may be Ludi literarij,
truly so termed; when the Masters may teach with delight, and scholars learn
with delight: yea when the greatest delight and comfort may follow in the end,
in reaping, and enjoying the fruit of all your travels. When as the meaner
schools may be either equal, or at least come near to those of greater name,
and the chief may seem as little Colleges, every year sending forth their
new supplies, unto our renowned Universities, our Innes of Court, and to all
other places of principal note; not only to match our adversaries herein, but
also to surpass them in that, wherein they have sought to gain the chiefest
credit, and to give our Church the sorest blow.

It is the debt of my love, To the Universities.
and token likewise of my thankfulness to you, famous Universities, by
endeavoring that ye may be replenished with the choicest plants, when Tutors
may be wholly employed as Tutors ought to be, that so you likewise proceeding
in the best courses after, may ever flourish more and more, in all the liberal
and worthy Arts, adorned with the sweetest Rhetoricians, the sharpest
Logicians, most acute and wise Philosophers, skillful Physicians, holy and
great learned Divines; for beautifying and fully furnishing the sacred
Ministry, Love to all who have lost their learning to repair it, and recover
them selves.
to your eternal praise and commendation, and to the everlasting glory of
Christ.

My love to you who have misspent your time, and estate in unprofitable
courses, which will be bitter unto you in the end, and who know not how to
employ your selves or your talents. That hereby you may retire your selves in
time, and not only recover in a few months, that which you have formerly got
in schools, and now have lost, (as experience warrenteth you may in good sort)
but that you may moreover grow on forward in the konwledge of good learning, to
become at length some way profitable to the Church of God, and your country
which bred you. That at least you may betake your selves, if not to the more
fruitful reading of the sacred story with other learned works helping
thereunto, to your eternal salvation; yet to the diligent study of the famous
and ancient Grecian or Roman history, and their noble wars; to help the
better to preserve, and defend your native country; or for the succor of the
distressed parts of Gods true Church, and the poor members of Christ against
that Roman Antichrist, as you now see the Lord to need your help, and call
you forth thereto. That thus you may receive comfort to your own souls, of
the pardon of your former courses, and of the Lords favor, when you shall
walk with him in some profitable calling: which otherwise I can never see how
you can attain unto, but that you shall find the flashing of h^ll within you,
when your consciences shall be once thoroughly awakened, to consider seriously
how unprofitable you have been; and of that fearful doom denounced against
the unprofitable servant: Cast that unprofitable servant into utter darkness,
Matthew. 25.
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. This will surely be executed
upon you without your unfeigned repentance, and laying lively hold on the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Finally it has been, Desire to all functions.
and is mine unfeigned desire to all functions and places, and more particularly
to every ruder place, as to the ignorant country of Wales, and more
especially that poor Irish nation, To all ruder places, as to Wales, to the
Irish, Virgi^ia the Sommerlland^.
with our loving countrie-men of Virginia, or where ever else, if it might
please the Lord to cause the light to break forth upon them, which now fit in
such palpable darkness, and in the shadow of death, and wholly under the
slavery of Satan. To the end to make the way of knowledge more easy unto
them, not only to the attaining of the Latin tongue, but also that hereby
they may much more easily learn our English tongue, to help to reduce the
barbarous to more civility, and so to plant Gods true religion there, that
Jesus Christ may reign amongst them, Satan's kingdom fall, and they saved
eternally, if the Lord vouchsafe them that mercy.

To this purpose I cannot but often think of the speech of a worthy learned man
whom Cambridge in his time much reverenced, Master John Ireton of Legworth in
Leicestershire.
who having labored many years with little fruit, amongst a blind, and
superstitious people, was wont much to lament, that he was enforced to labor
in a barren soil where salt had been sown: whence he used to affirm that the
chief hope of Gods church for all such pleaces so nuzled up in rudeness and
superstition, was to come out of our Grammar schools. And indeed for bringing
men unto ciuility, the very heathens saw this to be the only way, according to
these verses of the Poet, which are familiar to every child.

Add quod ingenuas didicisse fideliter arts
Emollit mores, Ovid.
nec sinit esse feros.
Right learning of ingenuous Arts,
The savage frames to civil parts.
This was one chief cause that all the wisest among them did so much prefer,
and ever so advance learning, and learned men.

To shut up this point; Discharge of debt to all.
this (I trust) shall bring a blessing in due time to every one, when this way
of attaining to learning, shall become so plain and direct, as that each poor
man's child may with a little cost and labor get some understanding, to know how
to serve the high God, and his own necessary occasions: and that the children,
and posterity of those, may come to the knowledge of the truth, who themselves
have lived in most gross ignorance, and extreme blindness. By the means
hereof every one shall be the better enabled to pay that debt, That every one
may pay the debt of his birth.
which by his very birth he owes unto the Lord, and to his native country.

For we are none of us borne unto our selves, For that none of us are born to
our selves.
but as the heathen Orator could say, Our country does challenge a part (of
our life and service,) our parents a part, our friends a part, etc. So that all
the course of the life of every one of us should be bent, to the faithful
discharge of this our debt: so to leave to posterity a thankful remembrance of
our well deserving of them. If the heathens professed this, how much more
should we Christians often bethink our selves, how much we owe not only to our
country, and to the Church of God in general, but even to every particular
soul, and more specially to those whom he has linked us to by nearer bonds.
And to this end ought each of us to seek, as he offers opportunity, to be
always paying this debt of ours; which none are likely to discharge, so well
as they, who have been best instructed in their youth.

Hereupon there shall never be wanting many cheerful aduancers of all good
learning, Learning being in reputation, shall never want multitudes of
benefactors.
from which so many blessings do proceed, especially when learning shall come
into the right estimation. This also shall be the chiefest glory of all such
in the earth, to have been benefactours and furtherers unto the best learning
and true piety, and likewise a notable evidence of the eternal happiness
prepared for them.

To this purpose if that heathen Orator could likewise say further, The
chiefest glory in earth to be aduancers o^ learning and piety.
even by the light of nature: That to all who have preserved, helped, or any
way augmented the happiness of their country, there is a most certain place
ordained in the heavens, where they shall enjoy eternal happiness; how much
more boldly may we Christians avouch the same, upon certain grounds out of the
word of God: That there is indeed a place of everlasting happiness, and glory
prepared for all those, who in witness of their love and thankfulness to
Jesus Christ, and to their countries, shall employ their studies, and their
wealth, to the greatest advancement of all heavenly learning, and unto the
virtuous education of youth, the hope of the succeeding ages?

Finally, The glory of our nation shall be increased as learning increases.
from all these shall the glory of our nation be enlarged continually, when
men of true wisdom and godliness, do both rule and obey every where. A
state most certain to endure long. A Prince ten times happy, and renowned to
be the head of a people so excelling in all true wisdom and understanding.

Being thus undoubtedly persuaded of so many and rich blessings to ensue, A
part of our happiness to show our love in furthering so great a good.
upon the right finding out, and making known the best courses of teaching in
the Gra^mar school, without the least evil that I can surmise, I have
thought, that this shall be a special part of my comfort, and a mercy above
all other outward favors, which the Lord has ever vouchsafed me, if I may but
do the least service herein, or but show my desire to further so great a good.
Hereupon have I been encouraged (as I said) not only to travel thus far in
it, but also to tender this my poor service unto all, presuming upon the kind
acceptance of it amongst all sorts; which the Lord has hitherto vouchsafed, so
far forth as I know. Because my confidence has been, from my first entrance
into this travel, according to the desire of my heart, that these small
beginnings might soon receive such plentiful augmentations, as in time to
accomplish all the good which has been mentioned; and as the Lord having
verified amongst very many, will I trust every day more manifest unto all.
Why this work was the more hastened to the public view.
I also at the first edition of it, hastened it the more, because, as we are
borne for all, (as before was said) and receive all our talents for the
benefit of every one, to whom they may do good, and are thereby each so
deeply indebted unto them, so I have endeavored since to increase my former
experiments, and to make them undoubted, by full, and most certain trial (as
I trust and heartily pray:) that all sorts for whom they have been written, The
uncertainty of our lives ought to make us to do all the good we can whiles we
may.
may reap some benefit by them, so long as schools or learning shall remain.
And what is my life but a vapou^, so that I might have been taken away before
the work^ had ever come to light, like as some of my fellow labou^ers in this
kind have been, (of whom I received some of these directions, M. To^ey. M.
Coote. M. Richardson
and those not of the smallest moment) who had been able to have done far
greater service in this kind; We cannot appear before our ^od, if we have not
done our uttermost endeavor to pay our debts, and to employ our talents to
bring most advantage to our master.
most of whose worthy experiments in this behalf, were buried with them? Or
how could I have ever stood before the Lord, if (being so fully resolved and
assured of the good that might come by this labor, and for that likewise, by
the bond of the Communion of Saints, all to whom this benefit of it might
redound, had interest in it; the Lord also having offered me so fit
opportunity,) I should not have sought the discharge of this my debt to the
uttermost farthing? Might I not justly have feared, that he would have been
displeased for my negligence and loitering in so necessary a work? Why should
I not then still communicate from time to time, what he has further vouchsafed
me in my continual travel? Yea why should I not stir up all my loving
brethren, to the full perfecting of that, which has been by his goodness
brought thus far forward toward the same?

Why should we suffer the industry of the enemies to be a condemnation to us,
Considering well the industry of our enemy.
for omitting our opportunities of accomplishing any service, which may
concern the glory of our God, the welfare of this people, and the perpetual
benefit of this our dear nation: when they watch all occasions not only to
hinder whatsoever good they can amongst us, but to put out for ever the candle
of Israel. Witness for ever the powder furnace.
When as they will toil day and night with the peril of their lives, to
undermine, and blow up our royal King, and Prince, our Nobles, and worthies,
with all our glory at once; thereby to make an easier passage to their most
bloody and accursed massakers, to murder all who bear any love to Christ's
Gospel, yea to destroy utterly all the people of the Lord, even through the
whole world, if it were possible, as their furious rage does at this day
proclaim, though with the endless destruction of themselves both souls and
bodies, and even of their native country their mother which bred them.

Notwithstanding, This work has not been set upon rashly, but vndertake^ by
an holy and warrantable calling.
I have not rashly attempted to enter into this so great a work, but, I hope,
that I may truly say, that the Lord our loving God, who has helped me
hitherto, has called me unto it. And this has he done, partly enforcing me by
necessity, to seek out the easiest, speediest, and best means to manage this
my calling, and whereby I might do most good in my place, to be thereby in some
sort answerable to the same. Partly by giving me a confident assurance, even
from the beginning of this my travel, what a benefit might come to all sorts,
by the read^est courses once found out; and more also in this, that I have
seemed to my self, by his goodness, to have from time to time gained ever
somewhat by my search: and have withal observed how much some few schools
have excelled others, chiefly through the better courses which they have
followed. Partly by vouchsafing me strength, and cheerfulness to proceed thus
far, still adding unto me some new experiments. More specially by causing me
to have an earnest desire, and an hope by this means to answer the love of
certain worthy friends, in seeking that good to theirs, which I was not able
to perform unto themselves. But above all, has he called me hereunto, by the
encouragement which I have received from some principal benefactors to
schools, By special benefactors to schools such who had author^^y to command
^y service.
and good learning; who though they might by their authority and favors have
commanded all my service, yet knowing my endeavor herein, have both most
lovingly cheared me, and withal somewhat supported me to go through with this
so weighty a business: The ^ight Hon. E of H. M. Johnson Archdeacon of
Leicestershire.
for the good of their own schools and places, and of all others. Who have not
thought it enough to found or bestow the places, and to endow them with meet
maintenance, unless they shall also do what may be to leave in them the best
means of all good instruction and education. To whom not only my self, but
the Church of God (as I trust) shall ever be beholden. From his Sovereign
Majesty's desire for all his ^hooles.


But to pass over this point. That worthy desire of our royal Sovereign
(whom the Lord long preserve to his glory and the good of all his people)
namely to have all good learning to flourish in these his dominions, declared so
many ways, and specially in that his gracious incitement to all
Schoolemaisters (in the conclusion of his Majesty's letters, set before our
common Grammar (ought not only to provoke, but to bind us all, who have this
function and charge, to endeavor our selves to the uttermost, to search out
still the best means for the most fruitful training up of our Scholars, in
all good literature and virtuous conditions, where he so royally assures us,
that as we shall receive reward of Almighty God for the same, so of his
Majesty worthy commendations. And therefore whatsoe^er comfort we shall find
by our travels therein, to make the same fully known for the general good of
all, as God shall vouchsafe us fit occasions thereunto.

For the manner which I have used in all this proceeding; For the manner of
proceeding in this work, the Preface to our common Grammar does direct it.
the Preface to the Reader in the same our common Grammar has directed me;
where having affirmed that the variety of teaching is diverse, and always
will be, for that every Schoolemaister likes that which he knows, and sees
not the use of that which he knows not, and therefore judges that to be the
most sufficient way, which he sees to be the readiest mean to bring a learner
to have knowledge therein; it directs us thus: Wherefore it is not amiss
(says it) if one seeing by trial an easier and a readier way then the common
sort of Teachers do, would say that he has proved, and for the commodity
allowed it, that others not knnwing the same, might by experience prove the
like, and then by proof reasonably judge thereof: not hereby excluding the
better way when it is found, but in the mean season forbidding the worse. This
course have I followed in all directions which I have here observed, and set
them down accordingly. Whereas it may be objected and said, Though many have
written hereof, yet none have proceeded in this particular manner for the help
of he meanest.
that sundry have written very learned treatises, concerning the trayning up of
youth: I answer, that it is so indeed; yet (that I may speak in modesty as
the truth is) all the learned do well know, that they are such, as do only set
down the same in a general manner; or do write of some one piece or two alone,
or at most of some few parts of Grammar learning and matters appertaining
thereunto; and the principal of them unknown to the common sort of teachers:
or else they are beyond the capacity and reach of the meaner sort (for whom
this is chiefly intended;) or at least, they have specially fitted their
course, for the instruction of two or three alone, to be trained up in private
houses, as our renowned Master A^kam. But none whom I know, or have heard of,
have in this kind of search and trial, gone through the several parts of our
Grammarschoole learning, applying themselves for the weakest, and for the
common country Schools, thus leading them as by the hand, through all the
whole courses thereof, only according to our common Grammar and most approved
classical Authors.

Neither have I in this, This work has not been proceeded in by private
conceit.
followed mine own private conceit, but besides searching by reading, trial
and observation, I have first for many years inquired further (as I said) the
best courses, from the most experienced, who have proved them: even of such as
have sent most excellent scholars unto the Universities; as I have been assured
from some of the chief in the same. Secondly I have made trial to see a
demonstration of every thing. Thirdly I have had (so much as I could) the
judgment of all the learned, with whom I could confer or communicate.
Fourthly, so far as I have been able, I have procu^ed yearly trials to be made
by some of the best authority, learning, and judgment that I could obtain
this favor of, and have entreated them to censure all things frankely, and to
direct us wherein they found or thought us defective, to confirm and encourage
us wherein we proceeded in a right course.

Neither have I conferred with any loving friend hereof (so far as I
remember) who has not approved of the course, and wished all good success to
this my travel. Nor posted on, but hastened slowly.
So that I have not posted it forward, but hasted slowly; and used so far as
God has granted me opportuniy, all means of due preparation, and of mature
deliberation: thus enquiring of (as I said) and conferring with so many of the
best experienced, as either my calling, or greatness of the charges in travel
would permit. And moreover before I published any thing hereof in print, I sent
some draughts, unto sundry learned, for their help and direction, though not
to the hundredth man to whom I desired. For that I was neither able to get
copies enough written, nor to procure them written truly, much less to be at the
charge to send the^ abroad into all parts, to many, who I know would willingly
have laid to their hands, and added their experiments. Therefore herein also,
in steed of sending any more written copies abroad, I after a time, by the
counsel of some faithful and judicious welwillers to this work, thought it
best to follow that worthy President of most happy labors, Master Perkins;
who when he was in hand with his Problem, being advised to send some copies
first to his learned friends, answered that he could not get copies enough
written, and though he procured some written forth, and by good scholars, yet
they were so defective, as that he could not well send the^. And for that cause
he would print some few of them first, which might go forth to the view of the
world, and so he might hear the common censure of all, and receive the help
of his friends, and then reform accordingly. Thus did I adventure to send
forth the former draught of my Gra^mar School, with some other parts belonging
to the same to the public view of all, that I might the sooner hear and
receive the free censures and better directions of all loving friends, and
welwillers unto this work, so to be forthwith trying, reforming and supplying,
like as I have continued until this day.

In the whole work, The Author assumeth to himself only the wants and errors.
as I promised not any thing but my travel, which I have striuen to perform
with all the poor ability which the Lord has vouchsafed me, so I take nothing
to my self, but only the wants and errors. The rest is his who has given
this desire, and prolonged my life, granted me understanding, strength, and
opportunity to bring it thus far forward. What directions or experiences
herein, I have received from others, as yet, or lately living, I would have set
down with their names adjoined, like as I have done of some (which I know
might have brought much credit to the work, for the authority of sundry of
them; and thereby every one of them have had their due) but that they did not
think it meet, desiring to be concealed. What I have gathered out of the
writings of the chief learned who have revived learning in this last age, as
Sturmius, Melanchton, Erasmus, and others, either shortly set down, or plainly
poynted at in them; I have omitted likewise to mention particularly; not any
way to wrong or detract from them, but partly for that I did not note the
places at my reading of them; and moreover for that I thought that labor more
troublesome then profitable to the Reader.

Neither take I upon me any way to prescribe to the meanest, Prescribes not to
any.
knowing my self so far inferior to the greatest part, but do begin to think
more and more, of this weighty calling, as Paul did of the sacred Ministry,
and to break out into that his admiration, who is sufficient for these things?
who is meet to have the treasure both of Church and Commonwealth, with the
hopes of all posterity committed unto him, and much more to prescribe
perpetual rules in this behalf? Much less do I pre^ume to teach them of most
excellent gifts; but as a poor fellow labourer for the common good, and a
willing learner of all, I do humbly desire the judgment and help of all the
chief learned, both for their cause who wish this, and for the universal
benefit of the present age, and of all posterity. That I may see still both
what they approve in the courses set down, also what they disallow, and
likewise upon what grounds; what may be bettered, what is yet wanting, and what
is superfluous.

Thus is my hearts desire, to travel in it still, according as I have begun,
until the Lord shall accomplish the whole work, which although it should be
seven years more, yea many more before; yet the Lord prolonging my days, I
shall ever increase in rejoicing in my undoubted assurance of the rich
blessing, which God will give unto it, and think all my labor most happily
spent. But herein let not any man expect from me great matters, in a lofty kind
of verse or prose, or eminency in declamations, orations, or the like, this I
leave to our worthy renowned schools of Westminster, Eaton, Winchester, and
the rest both in London and elsewhere, and to our Schoolemaisters of chief
fame, whose breeding and employment in schools has bin accordingly; and who
have ancient scholars long exercised in these kinds. Concerning whom I am so
far off from envying any excellent learning in them, that I wish all others
partakers of the like in their kind. And for my self I content me with this
mercy from the Lord, and bless him for it, that I have traveled chiefly for
our meaner and ruder schools; and that he has vouchsafed me this favor, to
bring my work so far forward, as to help to direct hitherto, according to
the things mentioned in the Contents. Yet this I humbly desire of all such of
principal note, for education, gifts and experience, to further us with their
better directions in all these exercises and the rest; and now God having so
accomplished my desire for the first foundation, and let me see his blessing
upon the little ons, I will labor to follow them in what I am too short, as
fast as his goodness shall enable, until I shall likewise find by experience,
wherein that excellency and comfort of theirs does consist, and come as near
unto them as I can. Though therein, Cum in primis non liceat; in secundis
tertijsve consistere pulchrum erit.

For the length of the work in the Grammar school, Reasons for the length of
the work.
I have in many things contracted very much in this edition. And for those
things wherein I may seem over tedious, as namely in the first entrance of
children, in teaching Accidence and Grammar, also for construing, parsing, and
making Latin, I would have all consider how therein I have contended to direct
the careful Master, to incite both himself, and his little ones, as by play,
to make the least to love the School and learning; and for that those things
being well performed, all the difficulty is past. Yea in all such places I
would wish you ever still to remember this, that I wrote not for the great
learned, but chiefly for the simplest, and young beginners, both teachers and
learners, with whom I cannot be too plain; although I have and do still strive
to abridge whatsoever can be, so as I may be well conceived of all, for whom I
labor; and in the end of every chapter have usually repeated briefly the sum
thereof. And know withal, that I have thought it my duty to set down
whatsoever I have found to be profitable, that out of them all, the best may
be settled, being confirmed by the trials of many. In which respects some of
great learning, who perused the work formerly, have not seen how it could well
be any shorter, nor what might well be spared, especially being thus offered to
the public censure. Consider moreover what great volumes have been written of
some one of these points alone, whereas my endeavor has been to go through
them all, showing in every one, what I take to be principally necessary or
behooffull. And finally remember that which Martial wittily and truly
affirms: Non sunt longa quibus nihil est quod demere possis. Martial. Epig.

Things are not long, wherein there is not ought to spare.


Those for whom it has been labored in, who will not vouchsafe it the reading
because of the length, would much less have taken the pains, or have been at
the cost, to have traveled, searched, and tried to have found it out. Although
this I dare constantly auow, and keep within my bounds, that it had
counteruailed unto me both the labor of an hundredth times reading it over,
and as many times the charges, if I had known but the things from my first
entrance into teaching, which God has now thus made known to all; besides the
freeing both of my body and mind from much toil and grief. Notwithstanding
that I then both read all whom I could get in this argument of teaching, and
also had from the beginning for sundry years the advice and direction of Master
John Ireton of Kegworth, mentioned before.
one in whose house I lived, who was well known to be inferior to few in all
excellent learning, and even in this kind amongst other. Neither do I doubt,
but that whosoever he be that would do good in this function, especially of the
new beginners, and shall peruse the work with desire to make his benefit of
it, shall meet with some one thing alone or other in it, (which if he will
practice it aright) he will freely acknowledge to be worth all his labor, as I
have done sundry of them at the receiving and trial of them, and much more
shall he do the same for all the rest.

Yet for those who would not read over the whole treatise at large, The use of
it to the learned, who would not read the whole.
they may see the sum briefly in the margents, and so in the table in the end,
to read what they desire, to pass over the rest. But for them for whom I have
traveled, I had much rather to be ouerlong, to the end that I may omit nothing
which concerns their help, Better for the learners that the work should be
ouerlarge then too short.
and may be understood of all, then by being ouer-short, to omit many things,
or not to be understood of the greatest part: as it falls out in most
Compendiums. For as I once heard a great learned and holy man say publicly in
the University concerning Compendiums, D^. (...).
that they brought ordinarily but a compendiarie knowledge; so it will be found
certainly true, amongst all learners of them in matters of any difficulty,
unless they have the help of good readers, or of most familiar Commentaries
and expositions, to make them plain. Because commonly the learners do imagine
that they have gotten that learning by them which indeed they are ignorant of,
and so cease from searching further; although for those who understand them
fully, or have means to have them plainly opened, they are of most singular
use, for the easy remembering and practice of the things contained in them.

Moreover howsoever I should not be able to attain to each point aimed at
here, and wished, nor to any one of them in the absolute perfection, This
travel happily employed, if but to effect these things following.
yet I ever thought from the beginning that my travel should be most happily
employed, if I might effect but only these things following, or some of them,
as namely:

If I might but set others on work, 1. If but to set others on work hereby.
to search yet further, or to make trial of these experiments or better, for
the full assurance of all sorts, to find out at length, that which is desired.

Or secondly, 2. Or to gain more experiments, which men are so hardly drawn to
communicate.
if it were but to gain the experiments of some others who have most happily
traveled herein. And the rather, for that sundry of chief experience in this
kind, are so hardly drawn to impart that which they know; either for lack of
opportunities, or lest they should be thought to presume over much, or
suspecting the censures of others, or for some like by respects, whereby both
Church and Commonwealth are deprived of their due; to wit, of such singular
helps as might exceedingly tend to the benefit of them both.

Or thirdly, 3. Or to make known sundry most profitable books and helps.
if I might but make known amongst alsorts, sundry most profitable books and
helps which God has to this end provided, both for Masters and Scholars,
which have formerly been hid, and are utterly unknown to the greatest part.

Or fourthly, 4. To help all desirous to do good, and yet toil without fruit.
if I may but only help such of my brethren as toil without fruit or comfort,
wearying themselves in an earnest study to do good, and do mourn and sigh,
wishing better directions. And much more those, who never knew any good
proceedings, and live as burdens to the public hurt, for lack of direction in
this behalf. That so not any one, who makes conscience of his calling, and
will inquire, should be unprofitable.

Yea fifthly, If but to gain one year.
if I might but help the common sort, how to gain but one year only in the
getting of learning, Though there may be hope of almost double sound learning,
to that which has been in many rude places.
and lessening of charges, chiefly for the poorer. Albeit that my undoubted
hope is, that by these courses alone almost double sound and good learning may
be gained, in regard of that which has been and is in many country Schools,
for understanding, speediness, certainty and delight. That little children
being rightly trained up, may do more at nine or ten years old, then in many
places at fourteen or fifteen, as Master Askam says, concerning the Northern
parts in his time; when they went to the school little children, and came away
great lubbers; always learning, little profiting, learning without book every
thing, and understanding within book little or nothing, as he rightly
affirms. And for the further evidence hereof, that so much more good may be
done hereby, it is very apparent in this. That a great deal may be gained by
three or four of these helps alone, For that so much may be gained by three
or four of these helps alone.
which either are not known, or not practiced in the ordinary Schools.

As first, by winning a year or two in the beginning, by ^etting them to
school so soon as they are able to learn.

Secondly, by causing all things in Schools to be done with understanding. Of
the benefit whereof see Chap. 5. of the Grammar School.

Thirdly, by making the Scholars very perfect, first in their grounds, viz
Accidence, chiefly in Nounes and Verbes, after the manner which is showed there;
and after likewise in the Grammar it self, for the perfect use, understanding
and applying of the rules. This will gain much in time, and more in ease and
certainty then can be imagined.

Fourthly, by making them very perfect in their authors, as they proceed.

Fifthly, by the knowledge and practice of the rule of construing, and of
translations formed according unto the same, for all the lower sort.

Sixthly, by having in all things the most easy, sure, and excellent patterns
to follow; which, they being kept unto constantly, must needs come in time to
express very lively, or at least come near unto them. To omit the benefit of
increasing in our own tongue as in the Latin; and all things for going
certainly without staggering or doubting, and much more by their growing in
their writing, together with their other learning, and that by one and the same
labor.

Now if by these few so much may be gained, and much more by all the rest
together, being constantly practiced: then let every man judge what we might
certainly expect, if many more learned well-willers, would add still but each
his several experiment.

These same, amongst others, have been the several ends, whereat I have aimed,
and thought my labors should be happily employed, if I might in any sort
attain unto them. Wherein how far the Lord has vouchsafed to fulfill my
desire, I refer it to every one who has or shall duly make trial of that
which I have written.

That I do in this work so much account of Grammatical translations, Reason
of the high account of gra^matical translations.
which I so often mention in the Grammar school, as namely Chap. 8. where I show
the manner, use and benefit of them, I hope that this will be found true by
experience, that after children have been well trained up in their Accidence,
and a little entered and acquainted with them, following the courses directed for
the^, they will go over their whole Authors so translated, by the help of the^,
before they could have gone through one third part of them without. And also
that they will learn their authors far more perfectly for each good use, and
keep them much more surely, with less labor or trouble; besides that they
shall continually learn by them to make Latin truly and purely, and to get
matter and phrase, as well as to construe and parse. And furthermore because in
all the forms which shall use them, chiefly in the higher, they will be found
for the most part to be in stead of the Masters or Vshers labor, and ever
certain, teaching English as well as Latin, without any of the inconveniences
usually imagined; so that there be a wise direction and oversight, as in all
other things, that they be used aright.

Besides experience, the reasons are most evident, as I have showed in their
place; Chap. 8.
especially by making all their authors to be so easily and soon understood,
and then for the continual practice by them of the Grammar Analysis and
Genesis: and finally that by them may be such a daily use of translating both
into English and Latin: all which are so highly commended by the learned, for
the speedy getting of any tongue. And hereunto the two first leaves of Master
Askams Schoolmaster whom I principally esteem and propound, Master Askams
testimony of the practice of translating.
do give sufficient testimony. He in the very entrance of his book, sharply
reproouing the common order of making Latins practiced in Schools; and having
showed how by that (as it is commonly said) children are utterly marred, and
also having given most manifest reasons of the hurt which comes thereof, for
the fear that children are driven into: affirming moreover, that nothing has
more dulled the wits, or taken away the wills of children from learning, then
that: and lastly how they learn evil choice of words, wrong placing, and ill
framing of sentences, and that which they must unlearn again; he afterward
speaks thus, concerning this kind of translating, and the benifits of it.

There is a way (says he) touched in the first book of Cicero de Oratore,
This is well worthy the marking of all.
which wisely brought into Schools, truly taught, and constantly used, would
not only take away that butcherly fear of making Latins, but also with ease
and pleasure, and in short time, as I know by good experience, work a true
choice, and placing of words, a right ordering of sentences, an easy
understanding of the tongue, or readiness to speak, facility to write, a
true judgment both of his own and other men's doings; what tongue soever he does
use. Then he sets down the manner, how the child should be taught to
translate a piece of Tully, or a like Author thus plainly, and afterward out
of his translation to turn it into the Latin of the Author again; and then by
comparing with the Author to see how near he came, and where he missed; so to
amend it, still striving until he come to express his Author truly. By this
he says, the master may teach all those things which are most tedious and
difficult without any error, and the scholar may learn without any great
pain, the Master being led by so sure a guide, and the scholar brought into
so plain and easy a way. This is the sum of Master Askams speech.

Now these Grammatical translations of our lowest School Authors, do perform
the same things for all young scholars far more surely and speedily.

More surely, because the scholar translating into English of himself, unless
the Master use marvelous diligence, before in making him very perfect in the
true construing of it, and as much after in perusing and amending every thing
which is faulty, the child will miss in translating; and if he translate falsely
into English, or miss of the Grammatical order, he can not translate into the
same Latin again, upon sure grounds and reason, unless he go by rote, as we
say. Moreover that labor for so perusing the translations, of every one of
each form thorough a School, would be endless in the greater schools, and
much more when they have turned it into Latin, for comparing all with the
Author, and reducing each thing into the right order; whereas these being so
translated unto their hands, do first guide them certainly how to construe or
to translate, to read all things which they learn by them, into a true
translation, and consequently to turn them perfectly into the Latin of the
Author again.

These do it also more speedily, More speedily.
in as much as they may read over many lines turning them into English or
Latin before that they can write one. Although that kind of translating by pen
of themselves, both into English and Latin, has also her due place and
singular use, for some special benefits thereof, as writing true Orthographie,
and the like, as I shall show in the handling of it.

Furthermore, This very course in effect practiced by Master Askam.
this very course of translating pieces of Tully or the like good Author, into
plain natural English, by the Master himself, and giving them to the
Scholar to turn into Latin, to try how near he can come to the Author, and
then comparing it with the Author, he sets down in the beginning of his second
book, page 2.

By this means he saw that experience which might seem almost incredible,
Experience of the singular benefit of it in Master John Whitne^.
in that hopeful young Gentleman (whose death he so much bewaileth) Master
John VVhitney, in Sir Anthony Dennies house, where the Lady Elizabeth did lie,
when he came to serve her; that within less then the space of a year, he had
so profited in writing pure Latin, that (as he says) some in seven years in
the Grammar Schools, yea some in the Universities, could not do half so well.
So afterward he saw the like in his happiest Scholar that ever England had
bred, our late Queen, who made us all happy; who, as he says, did so far
surpass all of her years in excellency of Learning, This way of translating
the chief and sure means to attain speedily to any tongue. Master Askams
Schoolmaster. Lib. 2. p. 33.
and knowledge of diverse Tongues, that very few of the rarest wits in the
Universities could any way reach unto her. And this seems evidently to have
been the chief means; like as he proves at large, by the authority of many
great learned, this way of translating, to be either the only, or at least the
chief, ready, and sure means to attain speedily to any tongue.

And that I may add but one other testimony of a rare and known experience
in this kind. A late known and worthy experience in a young Nobleman of rare
hope.
At the Commencement of that right noble, and memorable Gentleman, Sir John
Harington, (who now rests and reigns with the Lord) having speech with Master
Touey, who had been a Schoolmaister, equal (as he was indged) to most of the
chief in that kind; but was then wholly employed for the attendance and
tuition of that young Nobleman (with whom he also lives now in heaven,) I
desired to know this of him: that whereas I had writ unto him formerly, to have
taken some pains, in setting down the shortest and best way of teaching,
according to his experience; and now there was a rare fame, that God had given
an extraordinary blessing to his endeavors with that young Nobleman, so that
he did of a sudden go far beyond most others of his time, (above all former
expectation:) that he would vouchsafe to impart unto me, in a word or two, what
were the principal means he had used thereto. He acknowledging thankfully,
that he had indeed seen much experience of Gods mercy therein, told me, that
this was the principal and sum of his course: That he had been enforced to
begin again, even from the very Accidence, causing him to get the perfect
understanding of the Rules, for the meaning and use, though he could not the
words in so short a time; and after that, he had caused him to practice
continual translating into Latin, after this manner. That he himself had
chosen easy places of Tully, and other familiar Authors, which the Gentleman
knew not, and caused him to turn them into Latin, and after brought him to
the Author, to compare that which he had written, to the same, just according
to this last manner mentioned out of Master Askam. After, rounding me in the
ear, he said; But shall I tell you, It was by Prayer, quoth he. Hereupon,
after my return, I set my self to put all these in practice, yet more
seriously then formerly I had done. But for this kind of translating, finding
the toil and impossibility of it, first to translate pieces fit for every
Form, and after to examine every ones exercise, how he had translated, and to
correct them; I wholly bent my self to try how this might be done, through the
several lower Forms, that they might have most practice of it.

Thus trying sundry ways, which were ouer-long to recite, and amongst others,
having seen in a chief School in London, good use of verbal translations;
amongst some other things, I began to think, that by the means of
translations of the first Authors which Scholars learn, this translating might
be practiced in each lower Form continually. But there were yet two maine
difficulties, which had formerly hindered me from any such use of them. First,
that our usual translations did direct the young Scholars uncertainly, and
sometimes amiss, being often rather to express the sense, then the words in
any right order of Grammar; and that the learners must go by memory, and as
it were by rote, more then by any certainty of Rule, unless they were of
better judgment. And secondly, that for this and other inconveniences,
translations were generally in disgrace in Schools. Therefore, this then I
thought necessary to be my first labor, to find out some certain rule to
follow, according to which to frame these translations, and which might be the
guide of all.

And herein I, To whom the finding out of the rule, and of translations thereby
is acknowledged.
under Jesus Christ, acknowledge my self be holden for the rule of construing
and translating, in the beginning of my School labors, now above 30. years
ago, first to Master Crusius: since to the reverend and ancient
Schoole-maister, Master Leech. Thirdly, after them to that painful, Master
Coote, of Hunsden in Essex, now with the Lord. And fourthly, to that learned
Go^leuius, and to some other of my acquaintance, who had likewise taken pains
in this rule, which they willingly imparted unto me.

And so from that time until this day, Labor to find out the rule* and to
frame the translations accordingly.
I have still been laboring to find out the rule more exactly, and to frame
the translations according to the same. Secondly, this has been my next
study, to seek out the right uses and benefits of these translations, And
also the right uses and benefits of them.
and so in all things to set them down, as they might be a certain direction,
whereby most easily and surely to reap the fruit of them. Lastly I have
traveled herein specially to have full trial and assurance in every thing,
And finally, to have ^ull assurance of every thing.
that as I had gathered these amongst other experiments, for the use of all
schools, so upon certain proof by my self, and other of better judgment, I
might at length commend them to all learners, and so help to bring in that
excellent use of them (which Master Askam advised) even into the Schools, in
which they had been so formerly distasted, as that it was thought a Paradox,
but to name the use of translations i^ them.

Now upon this rule, Upon what things all the chief benefits of these
translations depend.
and the expressing every thing in the translations, both in propriety, and
also according to the sense and meaning of the author, with variety of other
English phrases, and supplying what is wanting, to make up the construction,
with the other things observed therein, especially upon the rule, depend all
the chief benefits, for a certain Analysis and Genesis; both for construing,
parsing, making and tying Latin surely, and sundry of the rest, Chap. 8.
as is showed at large in the eight Chapter of the Grammar School.

By the right practice of these translations, so framed, as I am fully assured,
Certain benefits of these translations rightly used.
by long experience, through the Lords mercy and goodness, an increase will
be found in learning, far more then can be well conceived, before due trial
made, and that with much less trouble to the Master then otherwise: and with
far more delight, certainty, ease, and cheerful emulation to the scholar. I
have therefore thought it my duty, after my infallible experience of them,
rightly used, so as I have plainly set down the manner in this second edition
of my Grammar School, and after my so long and painful travel, to find out
the Rule most certainly, with the best, and most profitable uses thereof, to
commend them more confidently unto all our Schools, and to all desirous to
recover speedily the knowledge of their Latin tongue, or to increase therein.
In a certain affiance, that all who shall use them aright, shall see a rich
blessing, without inconvenience: yet lest in any thing I should be thought too
peremptory, I entreat the learned first to make proof, then to judge hereof
according as they find.

For any further apology therefore for my bold attempt, Further Apology
needless, except, 1. The Authors desire to do all this good.
in these endeavors, I trust that some few of the reasons lightly touched
before, may be defense sufficient. And first my unfeigned study to do all this
good to all sorts, without the least injury to any one, so far forth as I
shall know it, or without inuerting any approved course. And that howsoever I
have been the unfittest of many of my brethren, to enter upon so hard a task,
yet the weaker, the more meet have I been, to have a compassionate feeling of
the wants of others; and more like to apply my self to the capacity of the
meanest and most ignorant: whereas the great learned and acute do often times
think, that what they themselves understand, all others should presently
conceive, though the most of the simple comprehend little or nothing of it
fully, as they should.

Secondly, 2. The having all these experiments gathered to our hands.
for that in these my poor labors, every one may have the weary travels,
and comfortable experiments, of many learned thus gathered into one, and
brought thereby unto his hands without labor or charge, which otherwise might
have cost them many miles traveling, and some years trial, as well as my
self, and yet they might have failed of many things, which here they may
find, and more hereafter, as God shall vouchsafe more supplies unto it.

Thirdly, 3. Assurance of each man's affection, to have his child so brought up
as is here desired.
because there is no man, having the nature of a wise father, who would not
have his child to have some learning, howsoever he purpose to employ him
afterward, and who to that end would not have him so instructed, as whereby to
get the best learning, in the shortest time, and with the least severity, or
who will not give almost double, if he may be assured to have his child so
trained up.

Fourthly, 4. For the testimony of his co^^cience to be upright and faithful
(...) all his work.
for that I have him who searches and tries the hearts, and whose good hand
has been with me in goodness, in all this work, to bear witness unto my
conscience, that I have not either in this, or any other my travels, aimed at
vain praise or commendation (for that our holy God would turn into shame) or
at any other sinister end; but that I have striuen with all my heart, so far
as in my weakness I have been able, to aim at those very ends alone, which
our blessed Savior has taught me, in that divine pattern of heavenly prayer,
which has been in all my labors my principal direction. And namely, to
manifest my duty and thankfulness to my heavenly father, like as for all
other his mercies chiefly in heavenly things in Christ, and for innumerable
temporal favors, in his fatherly providence, protection and direction
vouchsafed unto me; 1. Anno 1588
so more especially for those three great deliverances (to be had in
everlasting remembrance) not only of our Church and nation, 2. The death of
Queen Elizabeth, and peaceable bringing in our Sovereign.
and of all other the Churches of Christ with them, but even of my self
particularly in every one of them. And this I have desired to do, by seeking
first to honor him, 3. Powder ^reason.
and secondly to advance and enlarge his kingdom, and to these ends searching
to know and accomplish all his holy will, tending thereunto, and so all the
other subordinate ends, as he has directed me. Thus have I endeavored to rely
upon that his gracious promise, that thus seeking first the kingdom of God,
and his righteousness, all these other things should be added unto me, (as an
ouer-measure) so far as should be good. And herein indeed I have felt no
breach of promise from his Majesty, but found him faithfully and true; yea,
exceeding bountiful, above all that I could conceive, in all things wherein
his goodness has enabled me so to seek him. Upon all these grounds I can
nothing doubt, but through the mercy of the Lord, this labor being intended
to these very ends, and proved to be answerable thereunto, without
inconveniences in the right use of it, as my assured confidence is; I cannot
but fully hope, that it will in due time be most welcome, and acceptable to
all, that ever shall make trial by themselves or others.

Lastly, 5. For willing sub^ission of al^ things to the public cen^ure.
for that I willingly submit it, with all my labors, to the loving censure of
all the learned, who truly love Christ's Gospel, being ready to be taught of
the meanest, who shall in any thing show me my error, or give me clearer
light. And though the defects should still be very many (as in so difficult a
work it is no great marvel;) yet since I am most desirous to be continually
reforming, every ingenuous well-willer unto good learning, will (I trust)
lovingly pardon them, and thankfully accept of that which God of his goodness
has granted. Thus I put forth each first Copy of translations or others, And
desire to be still learning of all.
as not set forth, but to go more generally to all my loving friends, and
well-vvishers to this work, to crave of them further help, as I said before.

To this end, I do still humbly request, every true favorer of good learning,
to lay to his hand, that so I may be continually learning, amending, and
perfecting, so long as the Lord shall lengthen my days.

If in any thing, The cause of the confi^nt rejoicing in it.
I have or shall seem to rejoice overmuch, yet consider first, that in my
general work, in my Grammar-Schoole, I have thought the form of a Dialogue
most fit; wherein more liberty is granted to incite and encourage others.
Secondly, that I have not, nor will speak any more, then either what I have
seen experience of, or whereof upon good grounds, I am fully assured, and
which I take my self bound to relate, only to the praise of our God, and the
good of others, to make all others partakers of the comforts, which to that end
he has vouchsafed unto me, following so near as I can, that direction
mentioned before, in the Preface before our common Grammar. Thirdly remember
that report of Master Askam, concerning Master John Whitney, far greater
then all mine are together: and then I doubt not (these things being rightly
weighed) but all who are wise hearted, will easily bear with me, in my
confident rejoicing, trusting moreover that God will verify all things, to
every one who shall duly make trial. And in this affiance, and testimony of
my conscience, before his sacred Majesty, I wholly rely my self.

Therefore, Exhortation and encouragement to the weaker teachers.
before I conclude, give me leave a little to turn my speech to you, (my dear
fellow laborers,) and namely to all you of the weaker sort, for whom I have
and do still chiefly travel, whose hearts are set as mine to do all the good
you can, in your several places, all your days. To you all I wish, that as we
have been sometimes companions, in fruitless toil, and vexation; so we may be
now in rejoicing at, and admiring the new fruits of our labors. What a grief
may this justly be unto us, Grief to all honest hearted masters, for
complaints and murmurings against the^.
when one shall come, and cry out of us, to our faces: My son has been
under you six or seven years, and yet is not able so much as to read English
well; much less to construe or understand a piece of Latin, or to write true
Latin, or to speak in Latin in any tolerable sort, Complaints of parents for
the^^ children not profiting.
which he might have been well able to have performed, if that you had taken
that course and those good pains with him which you might have done; for in
such a school others much younger then mine are able to do it. Another shall
complain; My son comes on never a whit in his writing. Besides that his hand
is such, Murmurings of Towns for charges ill bestowed and children spoiled.
that it can hardly be read; he also writes so false English, that he is
neither fit for trade, nor any employment wherein to use his pen. When all in a
town generally, shall murmr against us, in this or the like manner, that
their children do no good under us, but lose their time, and spend their
friends money, being brought up idly, made fit for nothing, and therefore what
should a school do amongst them? That it were much better to turn the
maintenance given to the school, to bear the charges of the town for other
duties and services, then so unprofitably to employ it.

Moreover how must this needs trouble us, Some to cry out against our
severity.
when many shall cry out of our severity: some shall wish, I would my child
had never known him. If he had not dealt so cruelly with my child, he had been
a scholar, whereas now he is undone. Or when our scholars coming to man's estate,
shall curse us, for that by our blows they were made dunses or deaf (though
this oftentimes unjustly) or to hate all learning. Scholars coming to man's
estate to bewail loss of their time.
Or shall generally bewail the loss of their time under us, complaining as
the usual manner is, My Master never taught me any understanding, or right
use of good learning, that though I was with sundry, yet I was never the
better. I got more sense, and saw more light for the use and excellency of
learning, and also felt more sweetness therein, in one half year in the end,
with one who directed me in a better order, then in all my time, with all
others. The rest deceived my parents, and were my undoing. Or when they shall
thus complain: Our Master had not any care of our government and manners.
That they were not taught any religiou.
He never taught us the fear of the Lord, nor made the least conscience to
plant any Religion or grace in us.

Finally, Terror for for lack of growth of Gods religion.
what a terror shall this be unto us, and what a wounding to our consciences,
when we shall but think, how the Lord and all good men, may most justly lay
this unto our charge, that the cause has been chiefly in us, that Gods
religion, has not thriuen any better in our Land, in so long a time; but that
Popery, ignorance, Atheism, and all irreligiousnesse, have far more grown
up in many places? If we had been as careful to season our youth, in the truth
of Christ, and to settle them in the grounds of his holy religion, truly
professed amongst us, to their salvation, as the Popish schoolemaisters are to
corrupt them with Idolatry, and superstition, unto perdition, the knowledge and
love of Gods true worship, and piety, had flourished amongst us, every where
long ago, all Popery and Atheism rooted out. And what answer can we think to
make to God, for his religion, and people, for so many who have been lost,
chiefly through our lack of care? How should these things touch every one of
us, even to the very hearts, and cause us to bethink our selves at length, of
this our weighty function, to the end to take away all this reproach, and to
begin to recover the credit of our worthy profession.

You know well, The charge committed to us.
that we are they to whose charge that rich treasure, both of Church and Common
wealth is committed in trust, (as was said) and the hope of a more happy age
hereafter yet to come. We are they who help either to make or mar all; for
that all the flower of our Nation, and those who become the leaders of all the
rest, are committed to our education, and instruction: that if we bring them up
aright, there is great hope, that they shall prove goodly lights, and marks to
all the rest of the Land, especially, to the towns and countries where they
are; and clean contrarily, most woeful ensamples (as are every where to be
seen) if they be spoiled through us, or for lack of our better care. So that
we must needs do the greatest good or the greatest evil. As we are before
them, so we may expect, that they shall prove for the most part after us. We
are therefore the men, upon whom the flourishing of this our Canaan, does very
much depend. We cannot then but know, that as our work and charge are so
weighty, and in course of education next unto the work and charge of the holy
Ministry, which we also are to help to furnish: so our account must be
according to that which our God has trusted us withal, and our reward
answerable; dreadful, if we have been negligent; glorious, if we have been
faithful.

We cannot be ignorant, how our enemies the Jesuits, not only in their
Semina^ies, but also in their lesser schools, do bend their wits, to go beyond
us in this very kind. Give me leave to put you in mind of that which was
written unto me, from an ancient acquaintance in the University, now sundry
years ago, and which I do gladly acknowledge, to the praise of God, that it
has from the first relation put more life unto me in this business. The sum
of it was this.

The Jesuits, The combinations of the Jesuits ought to provoke us. October,
28. 1608.
the Popish schoolemaisters beyond the seas, do combine themselves together,
and all, or at least many schools do read the same books at one time, and
the same places, and do change every quarter, and set upon the school doors,
the Authors, place, lectures, exercises, every quarter, newly printed, and for
this they have great suite made unto them by the Printers. This have I lately
learned of certain whom I used beyond the seas to this end. Thus far my
loving friend. Whether this report was true in each particular, I cannot
certainly affirm, yet for the general, we all who understand any thing, do
know that it is most certain.

Now who are these who thus combine? are they not the principal plotters of
the ruin of all the Churches of Christ, and of Commonwealths, as they are
cried out of, even in the Popish countries themselves; the arch enemies of
Christ and his Gospel, and the chief vpholders of the throne of the Beast, to
make him king of kings, and Lord of Lords. And what is their purpose in seeking
out the most excellent courses of getting most speedily all good learning as
they would pretend? Surely their purpose is nothing else, as all the world may
plainly see, but by that their learning to ou^-countenance the heavenly
learning, the sacred truth of that everlasting Gospel, and all the learned,
who profess Christ Jesus throughout the earth: to gain all the flower of the
Nobility, and Gentry, yea of all the youth in all places where they come, to
bewitch all with an opinion of their learning, the more easily when their time
serves to cut the throats of all, who truly and sincerely profess Christ's
Gospel, and to possess their places. Yea if it were in their power, or
possible, to destroy all the Churches of Christ, to extinguish utterly all true
learning, to bring in again all their old learning, as (they call it) their
palpable delusions, and abominable Idolatry. What our state was almost by them.
We all saw, how nea^e we were to be consumed by their furnace. We with our
royal King, our Prince, our Nobles, and Rulers, the Church of Christ, with the
glory thereof. Now our God having so miraculously plucked us out, and we all
being in a special manner (next unto our Gracious Sovereign, and his royal
Progeny, together with these our Nobles and Rulers, the holy ministry and
noted professors) designed in their hearts, as flesh for their caldron; let us
show our selves thankful, every one in our places and callings: and in token
of our thankfulness, Our miraculous preseruations, and their deadly malice,
ought to put new life into every one of us.
to our most merciful and blessed God (whose name is for this above all other
outward deliverances, to be extolled for evermore;) first for our lives, and
then for our Religion the life of our lives; let us all be provoked to bend our
studies, and even to spend and end our lives, for our Christ, and for our dread
Sovereign, under him. By whose hand ^e so (even miraculously) delivered us,
the second time, like as formerly he had in a most wonderful manner, at his
first coming to the Regal Crown, and his entering in amongst us; whereby all
their long hopes, and bloody designs against us were dashed in a moment, and
that heavenly light continued to us, and to our posterity (I trust till Christ
shall come) which they certainly accounted at both those times, to have put out
for ever.

Let us now contrariwise stir up our selves, more then ever heretofore, that
the light of all good knowledge may break forth, and be as the morning
brightness before the Sun rising, to prepare the way to that glorious
appearing, and kingdom, when we with all the children of the light shall shine
eternally in the heavens: and when all those who have sought devices to bring
in again darkness upon all, or but to hinder the glorious light of truth,
shall without their unfeigned repentance live perpetually in their place of
utter darkness. We have no cause to fea^e our bloud-thirstie adversaries, if
we will but stick unto our Christ.
Oh that these enemies could think of this, and be warned in time, to turn
their thoughts another way, even for the King of Kings, that they might have
boldness at his appearing. But to leave them, praying for them, that so many
of them as belong to Gods eternal election, may have their eyes open to see
their misery, and be converted and saved; and to return to our selves. There
is no cause at all for us, why we should fear or doubt of a glorious triumph
and crown hereby; if that we will but cheerfully join hearts and hands;
provoked by the combinations of these our bloud-thirtie adversaries, and all
stick close unto our Lord and Savior, our Captain and teacher. With them is
but an arm of flesh, the spirit of man, of Satan, and Antichrist: Our
confidence in our Captain.
but with us our Christ, commanding and assuring us. He who is King of Kings
and Lord of Lo^ds. With us is he who must reign, until he have utterly
overthrown, 2. These. 2. 4.
and abolished that man of sin, (though now exalting himself above all that
is called God, or worshipped) and all those his soldiers with him. He will be
with us, and guide us, he will direct and bless us. He can make the meanest of
his to do more service for the vphoding and furthering of his own kingdom,
The power of our Christ, with us, and certainety of victory of his side.
which must come with power and glory, and endure for ever; then all their
combinations shall do to the contrary. And much more when we shall lovingly and
faithfully, as of one heart and soul, unite all our forces, and labors in
one, to this so happy and blessed a work, wherein we are sure to prevail, if
we will but go on manfully, and stand fast to our Captain, and great
Commander. The victory is his, he has gotten it already; (...)
he rides on the white horse, conquering till he have accomplished all his
work.

If we of the weaker so it can for the present, (...)
but attain near unto those things mentioned in the Contents of the Grammar
School, viz. what may be done for sp^edy and certain attaining to learning in
schools, which are also hereunto adjoined; our labor shall be most pleasing to
our God, profitable to all, sweet and comfortable to our own hearts. Even we
shall help to restore learning again to her ancient reputation and honor,
and ^^ee our selves from all reproach, being able to live with credit in our
places. And that we may come unto them all, Assurance that we may come unto
them.
make ye no doubt. My self and many others, have seen so much experience, in
as weak means, as most of us have, as whereby to assure us, that by our
constant labor and diligence, but in the courses set down in the
Grammar-schoole, we shall through the help of our good God find them in such
sort, (...)

Let us therefore double our diligence, An (...) to double ^u^ diligence
and (...) we have made trial, in these, or in better, item God have or shall
vouchsa^e them unto us. You see how much through his merciful goodness I have
(...) herein (though the vnablest of very (...)) and how far the work is
proceeded in; to the end hereby to provoke and encourage you. You who have not
better, prove these, which God hereby offers unto you; or at least so many of
them, as you shall most like of, and as your leisure and opportunity well
serve; yet not ouerloading your selves or your children. That we may approve,
what is best, reform what is amiss, and draw every thing still more shortly,
ever receiving better, as his goodness shall afford them. And so in time by
our joint consent, we may confirm all the surest, both unto our selves, and to
all other whosoever shall succeed. You that have more excellent in any kind,
communicate them with us, as we have presumed herein, in duty to tender thus
much unto you.

But let none of us be discouraged though we do not find our desires at the
first; None to be discouraged, if he see not his desire at the first.
set to it cheerfully, and in due time our eyes shall behold it.

Thus also our brethren, who are of the most excellent gifts, I mean the
Masters of all the principal schools of our nation, and all other sound
hearted favorers of good learning, seeing our loving contention, shall be
enforced to join hearts, and hands, and to afford us likewise their uttermost
help and countenance; which, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our
appearing before him, as they tender his glory, the good of our Church and
their native country, I again humbly entreat at their hands: especially their
directions for the best performance of these chiefest and most necessary
excercises mentioned, and whatsoever else they find us too short in, for the
full adorning of the Grammar School. By this means, shall the work of God
prosper in our hands, going forward happily, that we shall undoubtedly find the
desires of our s^^les, and wherein the excellency of the speedy attaining to
all good learning does consist, to the endless glory of our most holy and
only wise God, the lasting honor of our Nation, and of the Church of Christ,
the safe preservation of our lives and religion, with the happiness of
posterity, even to match and go beyond our adversaries. Thus finally all true
learning shall be had in lasting honor, and all unfeigned favorers and
furtherers of the same, shall triumph eternally. Which that it may, let me
only adjoyne that worthy encouragement, wherewith Christophorus Hegendorphinus
incited one of his scholars, now many years ago. Christoph. Hegendorphinus L.
E. discipulo suo,


Tu vero in liter as and Graecas and Latinas, vt soles gnauiter incumbe. Nec te
deterreat, quod in hoc seculo, tam literae quam literati contemptui sint;
redibit, creed mihi, redibit suus honor, and literis and literatis: nam omnium
rerum vicissitudo est. (...), inquit Sophocles. But apply you your self
cheerfully unto Greek and Latin studies, as you are wont. Neither let this
terrify you, that in this age, as well learning as learned men are in such
contempt. There will return (believe me) there will return, their due honor,
both to learning and to learned men: for there is an intercourse of all things.
For unto them that shall live in the last age, pleasant things shall be made
bitter, and yet pleasant and beloved afterward again, as says Sophocles that
ancient Greek Poet.

Thus far Hegendorphinus, as foretelling (truly I trust) the glory of this
last succeeding age, whereto let all hearty friends of good learning ever say,
Amen.

CONTENTS IN GENERAL OF SVCH THINGS AS may (by Gods blessing) be easily
effected in our ordinary Grammar schools*
1. TO teach schol^rs how to be able to read well, and write true or
orthographie in a short time.

2. To make them ready, in all points of their Accidence and Grammar, to answer
any necessary question therein.

3. To (...) without book all the usual and necessary Rules, to (...) their
Grammar rules; to give the meaning, use, and order of the rules, to show the
examples, and to apply them: which being well performed, will make all other
learning easy and pleasant.

4. In the several (...) and Authors to construe truly, and in propriety of
wor^s and sense, and also in pure phrase; to parse of themselves, and to give a
right reason of every word, why it must be so and not otherwise; and to
deliver the English of the Lectures perfectly out of the Latin.

5. Out of an English Grammatical translation of their Authors, to make and to
construe any part of the Latin which they have learned, or do presently
learn; to prove that it must be so, and so to read the Latin out of the
English, first in the plain Grammatical order; after as the wo^ds are placed
in the Author, or in other good composition. Also to p^rse in Latin, looking
only upon the translation; and to all their Poets which they so learn: to do
all this without book, which is far the surest, viz. to repeat, construe,
and parse with their book under their arm.

6. To take their Lectures of themselves, except in the very lowest Forms,
and first entrers into construction; or to do it with very little help, in
some more difficult things.

7. To enter surely in making Latin, without danger of making false Latin, or
using any barbarous phrase.

8. To (...) true Latin, and pure Tullies phrase, and to prove it to be true
and pure.

9. To (...), imitating Tully and the best A^thors in that kind, (...) and
pithie, in pure Latin, and familiar.

10. To translate into English, according to propriety both of words and
sense* and out of the English to read the Latin again, to prove it, and give
a reason of every thing.

11. To take a piece of Tully, or of any other familiar easy Author,
Grammatically translated, and in propriety of words, and to turn or read the
same, out of the Translation into good Latin, and very near unto the words
of the Author; so as in most, you shall hardly discern, whether it be the
Authors Latin or the Scholars.

12. To correct their faults of themsel^es, when they are but noted out unto
them, or a question is asked of them.

13. To be able in each Form (at any time whenever they shall be apposed of
a sudden, in any part of their Authors, which they have lately learned) to
construe, parse, read into English, and in those Authors, whereof they have
translations; forth of the translation, to construe and to read into the
Latin of their Author. First into the natural order, then into the order of
the Author, or near unto it, and in their Poets to do all this without book,
as was said before, and so to give an account, at each quarters and, what they
have learned in that quarter; so from quarter to quarter to do the like.

14. In Virgil, Horace, and other the chief and most approved School Authors
in Poetry and Prose, to resolve any piece, for all these points of learning,
and to do it in good Latin: In
Construing, to give propriety of words and sense, and also to expound in good
phrase. Scanning the Verses, and giving a reason thereof. Showing the
difficulties of Grammar. Observing the Elegances of Rhetoric in Tropes and
Figures. Noting Phrases and Epithets, with other principal observations.


15. So to read over so much of the chief Latin Poets, as Virgil, Horace,
etc. and of other the best Authors, as shall be thought necessary, by that
time, that by reason of their years they be in any measure thought fit, for
their discretion, to go unto the University; and to be able to go thorough the
rest of themselves, by ordinary helps.

16. In Greek to take their Lectures of themselves, to construe perfectly, and
parse as in the Latin; to read the Greek back again, out of a translation,
Latin, or English; also to construe, parse, and to prove it out of the same.

17. In the Hebrew to be able to construe perfectly, and to resolve so far as
is necessary for the Grammar-schoole; and to read the Hebrew also out of the
translation; which practice of daily reading somewhat out of the translations
into the Originals, must needs make them, both very cunning in the Tongues, and
also perfect in the Texts of the Originals themselves, if it be observed
constantly; like as it is in the daily reading Latin out of the translation.

18. To answer most of the difficulties in all classical Schoole-Authors; as
in Terence, Virgil, Horace, Persius, Iuvenal.

19. To oppose scholar-like in Latin of any Grammar question necessary, in a
good form of words; both what may be objected against Lillies rules, and how
to defend them.

20. To write Theames full of good matter, in pure Latin and with judgment,
and how to invent matter of themselves.

21. To enter to make a verse with delight, without any bodging at all; and to
furnish with copy of Poetical phrase, out of the best Poets.

22. So to imitate and express Ovid or Virgil, as you shall hardly discern,
unless you know the places, whether the verses be the Authors or the Scholars:
and to write verses ex tempore of any ordinary theme.

23. To translate forth of English or Latin into Greek. Also to write theames
or verses in Greek.

24. To pronounce naturally and sweetly, without vain affectation; and to
begin to do it from the lowest fourmes.

25. To make right use of the matter of their Authors, besides the Latin, even
from the first beginners: as of Sententiae, and Confabulatiunculae Pueriles,
Cato, Aesops fables, Tullies ^pistles, Ouids Metamorphosis, and so on to the
highest. To help to furnish them with variety of the best moral matter, and
with understanding, wisdom, and precepts of virtue, as they grow; and withal,
to imprint the Latin so in their minds thereby, as hardly to be forgotten.

26. To answer concerning the matter contained in their Lectures, in the Latin
of their Authors, from the lowest fourmes and so upward.

27. To construe any ordinary Author ex tempore.

28. To come to that facility and ripeness, as not only to translate
leisurely and with some meditation, both into English and Latin, as before in
the sections 10. and 11. but more also, to read any easy Author forth of
Latin into English, and out of English to read it into Latin again, as
Corderius, Terence, Tullies Offices, etc. To do this in Authors and places
which they are not acquainted with, and almost as fast as they are able, to
read the Author alone.

29. To write fa^re, in Secretary, (...), Gre^ke, Hebrew; (...).

30. To ^aue all the principal (...) Latin, Greek and Hebrew, with the
etymologies both Latin and Greek: (...) worthy helps and means to be had in
the Universities.

31. To be acquainted with the grounds of Religion, and to have the sum, and
all the chief Histories of the Bible. To take all the substance of the
Sermons, if they be plainly and orderly delivered: and to set them down
afterward in a good Latin style, or to read them extempore into Latin out of
the English. To conceive and answer the several points of the Sermons, and how
to make a brief repetition of the whole Sermon without book.

32. To be set in the high way to attain to the purity and perfection of the
Latin tongue by their further labor and practice in the University: having
both the rules and grounds thereof, and also variety of the best phrase meet
and necessary for them.

33 To grow in our own English tongue, according to their ages, and growths in
other learning: to utter their (...) in the same, both in propriety, and
purity; and so to be fitted for divinity, law, or what other calling or faculty
soever they shall be after employed in.

34 Finally, thus to proceed together with the tongs; in the understanding and
knowledge of the learning, or matter contained in the same, to become alike
expert, in all good learning, meet for their years and studies; that so
proceeding still, after they are gone from the Grammar Schools, they may
become most exquisite in all kinds of good learning, to which they shall be
applied.

These things may be effected in good sort, through Gods blessing, in the
several fourmes, as the scholars proceed, by so many in each form as are
apt and industrious, only by the directions in the Grammar school constantly
observed. If the Masters being of any competent sufficiency will take meet
pains: and the Scholars being set to school, so soon as they shall be meet,
be kept to learning daily, without loitering, having books and other
necessary helps and encouragements: and by their par^nts care caused to do
their exercises at home, and be ever kept in meet awe, and submission to their
Masters. But out of these I will extract only those which I take most
necessary and profitable for schools (not to trouble with over many) and set
them down briefly in the Grammar School. That so all scholars of any
towardness and diligence, may be made good Grammarians and every way fit for
the University by fifteen years of age, or at least by that time that they
shall be meet by discretion and government, which is commonly sixteen or
seventeen. And all this to be done with delight and certainty, both to
Masters and Scholars; with strife and contention amongst the Scholars
themselves, without that usual terror and cruelty, which has been practiced
in many plaees, and without so much as severity amongst good natures.

How greatly all this must needs tend to the furtherance of the public good,
every one may judge; which it will d^ still, so much the more as the Lord
vouchsafes a further supply, to the several means and courses after set
down, by adjoining daily more helps and experiments, especially of the
learned. Of whom my hope is still, according to my earnest desire, that they
will lend their helping hands, to the full perfecting of so profitable a work.

For the undoubted certainty hereof, and of each particular, first read and
consider of the means aright, then try according to the directions in their
several places in the Grammar School, and so give sentence.

For mine own self, I trust (God assisting) to be ever able to make such
plain demonstration of every thing, as to give full satisfaction to any one
indifferently affected, that by labor and diligence all may be in good sort
accomplished, so far as shall be requisite. Or wherein I shall be found too
short, I am resolved (God willing) never to give over, during life, until I
shall therein likewise see the desire of my soul, unto his glory, and the
general good of all.

Helps for attaining to those things mentioned in the Contents.
THese helps God has provided for our Grammar-schooles, more then in former
times, or at least more then are commonly known and used in them: whereof
experience teaches, that there may be excellent furtherance in a right use of
them, for all the several parts of good learning in Schools, for obtaining
the same more speedily, easily, surely and profitably: and namely for thus
running through all our ordinary classicall-schoole authors, and attaining to
the best exercises and faculties in Schools, as any one shall have occasion to
use them.

First, for the more speedy and right reading of English, and so leading the
child as by the hand to the Grammar school, as a preparatiue thereto.

The English-schoolemaister, of that honest and painful Master Coote.

There is also a little Brief, of a sheet of paper named, A Plain Method for
speedy learning to read, by John Merest: of whose directions there might be
very good use, if his Rules and style were amended by some Scholar, and brought
to perfection.

Other directions and helps for teaching to read, see in the Grammar-schoole,
chap. 3. For further growth of young Scholars in our English tongue, to
express their minds in propriety and purity, for their proceeding therein,
as they proceed in Latin: and also for them who would teach strangers our
language, or learn it. See after.

Secondly, for better learning the Accidence and first grounds of Grammar
(whereas children are usually very long in getting their Accidence, and often,
when they have done it, are little the better for it, especially for the
understanding and right use of it) to the end that the learner may get it
sooner and more profitably: for a right understanding and use thereof, and for
answering any necessary question belonging to it, and for better keeping all in
memory, to be able thereby to proceed most speedily, pleasantly and certainly
in their construction, is provided the Book called

The posing of the Parts. as also

M. Leeches questions of Accidence and Grammar.

Other helps, especially for directing the Masters, see in the
Grammar-schoole, Chap. 6.

Thirdly, for more speedy construing the Latin Grammar, to save much labor
therein, and for keeping the same with ease, which is otherwise very hard to
the children, and over troublesome to the Master, Lillies rules construed.

Fourthly, for better conceiving, understanding, applying, and making use of
all our Grammar rules.

The Grammar of this last Impression having the sums of the Rules in the
margents more perfectly and fully then formerly, and in the Syntax, the words
noted wherein the force of each ensample lies. In the first Impression of them
many things were mistaken and corrupted in the printing.

Fifthly, 2. For the speedy and profitable learning all our first and lowest
school authors, Gram. translations.
For speedy and profitable learning of all our first and lowest Schoole-bookes
and Authors, (whereas children are commonly very long in learning some little
piece of them, as of Sententiae pueriles, Coufabulatiunculae, Cato, etc. and so
the rest; and when they have learned them through with much toil to themselves
and their Masters, they are commonly little the better for them, for any good
use, and do after presently forget them, for the most part;) to the end that
they may soon run through all of them, or so much as shall be thought good, and
that for construing, parsing, understanding, reading them forth of Latin into
English, or forth of English into Latin; for making the same Latin, and
proving it; and finally, for leading the learner by the hand with delight,
until he be able to go of himself by ordinary helps, Books grammatically
translated.
with much less trouble to the Master, are provided Grammatical translations
of them, as namely; first, of Sententiae pueriles: Confabulatiunculae pueriles:
Corderius dialogues chiefly for the ready help of speaking Latin of ordinary
matters in a very good and pure phrase.

Catoes moral Disticks, with the Sentences adjoined, and also Isocrates ad
Daemonicum, translated into latin by Rodolphus Agricola: part of Esops Fables:
the first book of Tullies Offices: part of Ouids Metamorphosis: Virgils
Eclog^es, with that excellent book De Aptbus, of the government and ordering
of Bees.

All these are made so plain, Plainness and readiness of these translations.
as that children, if they be any thing studious, and well trained up in the
first grounds of Grammar, by the former helps, may with a little direction,
ever prepare their lectures aforehand at home ouer-night: such pieces (I
mean) as they are to learn in lectures; and that, as was said, for every
good use, without need of other Commentaries in any of them, or so much help
of the Master as is usual. So that they will, by the help of them, fall to
their private studies of themselves. And for things to be learned without
book, namely their Authors in verse so translated, they will be able thereby
so to keep them, as by the means thereof, and their other helps, from quarter
to quarter, to say them without book, construe, and to give all the chief
difficulties of them, with a very little private labor, thus to keep them
better in memory, and have use of them continually.

Hereof I might give you instances of experiments, according to which you might
judge of them; but I pass them over, standing upon so evident grounds of
reason, as has been showed before, and as I shall more fully manifest (God
willing) in the Grammar-Schoole, chap. 8. where I shall set down the use of
them, with the benefit in a right practice.

If you desire a praxis of all or most of the chief rules of the Syntax or
construction shortly comprised, take Master Leeches Dialogues, For a practice
of the chief rules of construction, Master Leeches Dialogues
set down in the end of his Grammar-questions: which Dialogues are so
contrived of purpose for children to that end: and so likewise translated into
English, as they may be gone through for each good use so soon as any of the
former.

By that time that children have gone through these books so translated, and
have by this practice attained unto the knowledge and right use of their
Grammar rules, especially that golden rule of Construing: for construing,
parsing, etc. they will be able, easily, with much less toil of the Master,
to go through all other classicall-Schoole-Authors, by such helps and means
as God has further provided.

For speedy running over the rest of the lower school For the rest of the
lower Schoole-authors, other translations.
books, which are not so translated grammatically: first, the other
translations of them may be of very good use thus far forth. As namely,
first to give the learners some light for the right understanding and meaning
of the Authors (which understanding of the matter is a maine foundation for the
speedy attaining to any such learning, especially for getting the Languages, as
I have showed elsewhere) as also for resolving the Authors, and affoording some
good English phrase, with variety thereof to express their minds. And
withal, that by the right use of such translations, they may the more easily
learn the manner of our usual translating of Authors, or any other work,
respecting only the matter and intent of the Author, whereof our commonest use
is: and so for reading forth of Latin into our own tongue, to express the
sense only, not directly, verbatim, or grammatically, but observing perfect
sense, good phrase, and purity of our tongue, and so back again out of the
English into a good Latin style in like manner. For the right learning of
these Authors does not so much consist in the construing and parsing of them,
as in getting by them the matter, phrase and style of the Author, and to these
ends and purposes amongst others, as I take it, they have been translated, and
are many of them unknown to most.

The Translations are these.
1. For the rest of Tullies Offices, For the rest of Tullies Offices not
translated grammatically, M. Grimmalds translation.
which are not translated grammatically; as namely the two latter books,
Master Grimmald his translation, which yet would be much more profitable to
this end, to them who would make use of it, if the English were separated from
the Latin, set in a book by it self, as the Grammatical and other
translations usually are.

2. For Tullie De Amicitia, Senectute, etc. Thomas Newtous translation. For the
other parts adjoined to the Offices, Tho. Newtons translation.


3. For the rest of Ouids Metamorphosis, Arthur Goldings translation in very
good English meeter.

4. For Ovid de Tristibus, the translation hereof in English meeter. For the
rest of (...)


5. Ouids Epistles, the like.

6. For the rest of Virgils Georgickes, not translated grammatically, Master
Abraham Flemmings translation in English meeter, coming next to the
Grammatical translations.

7. For Virgils Aeneidos, Master Phaer Virg. a^neid Master Phaer.
in English meeter.

8. For Terence, For ^erence Master B^rnards translation.
if you think good, and especially to furnish with English phrase to answer
the Latin, and by reading out of the English into Latin, to help more
speedily to obtain the Latin phrase and style, Master Barnards translation.

Provided always, Caution to be used in this and other authors.
that this be with great caution, for avoiding all danger of corrupting their
manners by lasciviousness or otherwise; considering the pronenesse of our
nature, like to tinder or gunpowder, if never so little a spark fall into the
same. The like caution is to be had for other, as Horace, Iuvenal, Persius,
Martial, etc.

For higher Authors.
For the more profitable, For higher Authors, as Caesar's Commentaries, Sir
Clement Edmunds his translation. This author, with those which follow next, are
worthy works for Noble Gentlemen and all other, who would do service to the
Church of God; and their native Country, to bestow some of their travels and
idle hours in.
easy, and speedy reading over Caesar's Commentaries (concerning the Roman
war a^chiued chiefly by Caesar) to the end not only to give light: first,
for the true understanding of the Author, but also to express the same in the
best and fittest words in a pure English phrase; and likewise for notable
observations for war, gathered all along out of it, which is one principal
use of the book.

The translation of it by Sir Clement Edmunds, Clarke of the Council.

This book, as it is well known to be the purest style, and an excellent
history for matter of war and martial affairs, and therefore most necessary
for our days, for the better helping to preserve the Church of God and our
native country; so it is difficult for children, in regard of the subject,
viz. matter of war, which they are not acquainted with. Yet by the
Translation rightly used, it is made so plain and easy, that children of
twelve or thirteen years of age, rightly trained up, may be able to go
through it for all the uses mentioned in short space, and much more others of
riper judgment. So that it were great pity, in regard of the benefit that may
come by it to all sorts, that so worthy a work should lie hid as it were,
being unknown to the greatest part.

The like we may say for these following. For Lucans Pharsalia For Lucans
Pharsalia Sir Arthur Gorge.
of the like argument in verse, viz. of the war between Caesar and Pompey,
Sir Arthur Gorge in English meeter.

For Liuy his Roman history, D. Hollands translation. For Liuy D. Hollands
translation.


For that excellent part of the Roman history by Cornelius Tacitus his four
Books, For Cornelius Tacitus, Sir H. Sauill.
translated by that worthy favorer and rare promoter of all good learning, Sir
Henry Sauill.

For Florus Florus.
his Roman history, from the foundation of Rome to Tratanus, the translation of
it, dedicated to the Lord Marquess of Buckingham.

For Seneca, Seneca.
that admirable Moralist and sweet Latinist, the translation of it by Master
Lodge.

Commentaries.
Besides these Translations for the ordinary schoole-authors, Comments* on all
O^id. For the Metamorphosis Sabine.
there are also Commentaries for them who desire their help; as, for all Ovid,
not only that large Commentary of sundry together, but more particularly, For
Ouids Metamorphosis, Sabins Morals briefly.

Also Raphael Regius, a large Commentary.

For Virgil, On Virgil, Seruius Donate, etc.
besides the large Commentary of Seruius and Donate, with the Annotations of
sundry other, set out by Frabricius: see,

The Analysis of Ramus on the Eclogues and Georgicks for the Logic and
Rhetoric thereof. Ramus, on the Eclogues and Georgickes.


A very sweet paraphrase of Friskiline on the Eclogues and Georgickes.
Friskilines paraphrase.


Meins Annotations on Virgil. Meins.
So for the use of the Masters, and all of riper years and understanding:

Taubman on Virgil, a very profitable work.

Moreover, For the rest of the ancient Poets short and pithy commentaries.
for the speedy and more profitable reading of all the rest of the chief
ancient Poets, are provided short and pithy Commentaries, or Annotations,
containing the substance and whatsoever is of worth in all the ancient and
large Commentaries, and the same made so plain, as that very children, rightly
trained up, may be able, by them, to read their Lectures of themselves, or
with very little help: whereas formerly they were over crabbed and obscure for
the Masters in many places to understand; as namely,

Master Bonds Commentary on Horace and Persius. Master Bonds*


Master Farnabee on Master Farn.

Iuvenal, Persius, Lucan, Senecaes tragedies. Martial.
Also, For the Roman histories and antiquities Master Goodwin his Anthologia.
for the more clear and full understanding of these and of all the Roman
history and Antiquities; Romanae historiae Anthologia, viz. a short and very
plain Exposition in English, of the Roman Antiquities, by Master Goodwine of
Oxford, for the use of Abingdons School.

Theames.
For helps for Theames both for matter and manner, besides the understanding of
Aphthonius common Places, For Theams M. Vicars his (...) for invention and
manner.
and the chief heads of Invention by Ramus and others, see Master Vicars his
(...), or Manuductio, leading the scholar (as by the hand) to the use of
Rhetoric; especially for making Theames, Declamations, or Orations.

For matter, viz. for short, witty, and easy Sentences for the younger sort,
For matter, Bibliotheca scholastica.
Master Drax his Bibliotheca scholastica. Flores Senecae.

Epitome sentent. Stobaei.

For store of the best examples for Theams both Roman and foreign of most moral
matters, Exampls, Valerius Max.
in stead of new, they may use Valerius Maximus.

This is made plain for the better help of the teachers where need is, by two
ancient Commentaries together, the one of them by Oliuerus Arzignanensis, the
other by Badius Ascensius, expounding every thing clearly, and almost
grammatically, besides the Annotations of others.

For further help of Theames, Stobaei Anthologia.
both Latin and Greek, Stobaeus sentences, or his Anthologia of the largest: a
most excellent work, gathered and digested by him Common place-wise, in
Greek, out of all the famous Greek Authors, translated into Latin by Gesnere
that learned Physician, having the Latin set ouer-against the Greek, and may be
singular for acquainting the higher and better sort of scholars, with the best
moral matter of sundry kinds.

For phrases in general, Phrases for Theames.
Master Drax his Cilliepeia.

For Epithets, Ciceroniana Epitheta.

For some select Phrases to this purpose, Drax his Calliepeia, Master
Farnabees Phrases.
and the like, Master Farnabees phrases.

Epistles and Letters.
For patterns of short Epistles and pithy letters of all sorts of matter;
Patterns for Epistles, Laconicae Epistolae.
see the Laconicall Epistles, to wit, the shortest and pithiest gathered out of
Tullie, Manutius, Politian, Erasmus, and many others, comprised by Buchlerus in
a little volume of purpose to this end.

For examples, Examples for imitation of Epistles of all sorts, Flores and
Sententiae scribendinque formulae illustres.
serving and directing for imitation of sundry kinds of Epistles, both
Consolatory, Gratulatory, and also Hortatory, with all the rest of the kinds of
Examples: see Flores and Sententiae scribendique formulae illustres.

For pure phrases more peculiarly belonging to Epistles, see Manutius phrases.

Orations.
For Orations: Orations, Melchior Iunius.
The Orations of sundry, and those of diverse kinds of Moral matters, and upon
sundry occasions, gathered and set forth by Melchior Iunius.

Examining of Phrases in Prose.
For help in examining of phrases, Examining phrases in prose.
and so for observing propriety and purity therein.

1. Godscalcus his observations of the Latin tongue digested alphabetically.
Godscalcus.


2. Schorus phrases, Schorus.
showing also the manner how to observe phrases in the reading of Authors.

3. Erasmus his Epitome of Vallaes elegancies, Erasmus Epit. of Vallaes
elegancies, Popma.
of the last Edition.

4. Popma de Differentijs verborum.

For flourishing and amplifying in Prose, see Ciceroniana Epitheta, Antitheta
and Adiuncta.

Poetry.
Besides Textoris Epitheta, In Poetry. Text. Epith. Buchleri Thesaurus poeticus.
See Buchleri Thesaurus poeticus, a book of notable use for each scholar: for
helps of Epithets and Poetical phrases: and also for his direction of the
right manner of making a pure verse, with other things belonging thereto.

For quantities of Syllables, Smetius.
Smetius his Prosodia.

Dictionaries.
For both English and Latin, Dictionaries.
especially for finding out the fittest Latin words to the English, and most
natural; and according to propriety first, together with the Etymologies or
notations of the Latin words, Rider.
Riders dictionarie of the last.

For giving the Greek to the Latin, and for supply of sundry of the best
Latin phrases expounded, Thomas Thomasius.
and the use showed, Thomas Dictionarie of the last.

For a short comprising of most Latin Primitiues in Sentences (except those
which belong to the several Arts and Trades etc.) and so to furnish with most
words of all sorts, For a short comprising of the Latin Primitiues, Ianua
linguarum.
for reading of any ordinary author belonging to the grammar school, or
otherwise, Ianua linguarum, a book in twelve hundred sentences containing the
most of the ordinary words, to be even as a Dictionarie in the childrens heads,
translated into English, to the end it may be more easily and speedily gotten.

Analysis or resolving of Authors.
For a plain and easy resolution of the matter of Authors meet for young
scholars, For resolving authors, Gram. trans. of etc.
see the grammatical translation of the first book of Tullies Offices.

Also of the first book of Ouids Metamorphosis.

And withal, the like translation of the first and last Eclogue of Virgil, and
of his fourth book of the Georgickes De Apibus, some of these in the inmost
colums, others in the outmost.

For a more learned Analysis in Latin, both Logical and Rhetorical, see
Ramus Commentaries on the Eclogues and Georgickes, and also upon all the
Orations of Tully, on which he has commented. Also Piscators Analysis of
Tullies Offices.

For a short and methodicall Analysis of the several books of the Scripture,
and of each chapter therein, see Gemma Fabri.

Disputing scholar-like of Grammar Questions, and to prepare for more learned
Disputations in the Universities.
1. In English, Disputation of Grammar questions, in English; Posing of the
Parts.
by way of Questions and Answers to make children perfect in the Accidence and
Grammar; The Posing of the Parts.

2. In Latin, In Latin, M. Stockwoods disput.
for the better scholars in a more large and scholar-like dispute, Master
Stockwoods disputations of Grammar.

3. For the like dispute in Tullies Offices by Questions and Answers, Disputing
of moral questions, master Brasbridge questions of Tullies Off.
the better to understand the rare and almost divine matter, for direction of
manners, in that book, Master Brasbridge his Questions of Tullies Offices.

Proper words for several Arts and Sciences.
To be able to get and remember words appertaining to Arts, For words belonging
to History, Trades, etc. Stanbridg. vocabula.
Trades, Sciences, histories of diverse kinds, and the like, as any one desires
them; first Master Stanbridge his Vocabula in verse. These verses are some of
them amended already; the rest so purposed.

After him, where he ends, others may be adjoined, in the end of Hunters
Cosmographie, in verse likewise.

For words belonging to Astronomy and Cosmography: Hunters Cosmographie.
and also the ancient proper names of places, as Countries, Cities, and Rivers,
etc. Hunters Cosmographie in verse.

If the names of the places, How this might be more profitable.
rivers, etc. as they are termed at this day, were set directly over the heads
of each of the ancient names there, after the manner of Stanbridges Vocabula,
it might be of most excellent use, and soon gotten, or set on the opposite
page directly against them.

All other words of like nature, belonging to the several histories, or
whatsoever else, might be thus comprised in verse, after the manner of
Stanbridge or Hunter, or otherwise, they might be set down in a short
narration, in form of a Dialogue grammatically translated, after the manner of
Corderius Dialogues, wherein he sets out, to the like purpose, a very sumptuous
banquet in an historical narration, in the 22. Dialogue of his fourth book.

Such a book might easily be compiled by a judicious scholar, How such a work
might be easily compiled.
of a pregnant wit, having meet leisure, by the help of Hadrianus Iunius his
Nomenclator; and the special Dictionaries for several uses, and so any such
words be very readily gotten, by studying and reading them often forth of English
into Latin: as experience teaches in the like.

But all these would be gotten much sooner, How best learned.
if being thus verbally translated into English, the English were set by it
self, so to study it out of them, like as the Grammar translations are.

Greek.
Whereas there is nothing in any tongue for the perfect obtaining of it, For
speedy attaining to the Greek.
but Grammar, words, and practice of them in a right composing and setting them
together: I mean, first, the knowledge of the Grammar rules, belonging to that
tongue; words to express the mind, and practice of both in reading Authors,
and in writing; for most easy and speedy attaining to the Greek tongue, which
has been wont to be so difficult and tedious: God has provided these ready
helps.

1. For the Grammar, For the Grammar Master Camdens most profitable for us.
Master Camdens is of all other most easy and profitable (as I take it) like
as for Westminster, so for all our schools; for that it follows the order of
our Latin Grammar most directly, chiefly in the Syntax, wherein many of the
rules are the very same, or near unto them. The Anomalies in the Verbs being
set alphabetically, so as they may be found very readily; and the Dialects set
directly after the order of the Declensions and Coniugations, that by it alone
well studied, most difficulties may be easily understood and answered.

For all other difficulties, For other difficulties concerning Grammar,
Cleonards Gram with Ant^sign.
and wherein it seems to fail; see Cleonards Greek Grammar, with
Antesignanus, set forth by Sylburgius, wherein by the help of the large Index,
you may be resolved of most doubts.

Hereunto adioyne, The short abridgement in the eud of Scapula.
if need be to enquire further, the Anomalies, Dialects and other difficulties
set down alphabetically in the end of Scapulaes Dictionary.

Secondly, For speedy attaining the greek Primitiues.
for attaining very speedily to all the Greek Primitiues or Radices; which
being had, all the rest are easily and plainly learned, as derived from them,
God has provided,

1. The Clauis linguae Graecae, Clauis (...) Graecae.
by Lubine. In which little brief, all, or most of the Greek Radices are
included in some seven hundred little sentences, in imitation of Ianua
linguarum, with a double Index adjoined, viz. both Latin before the Greek,
and Greek before the Latin; whereby they may be soon gotten, and easily
kept, or recovered being forgotten.

2. For the more full understanding of the tongue, For a more full knowledge of
the^, Fundame^tum linguae Graecae, sieve Epitome Lexici and Etymologici graeci
proschola Br^mensi.
for propriety and right significations, Notations or Etymologies, Deriuations,
and the like, see Fundamentum linguae Graecae; a little Epytome gathered
briefly of purpose, according to the order of Scapula. For the larger
explication of the same, with phrases and use of words; see Scapula.

For practice in reading some usual Authors. Authors in verse, Theognis, etc.
with Sylburgius.
The fittest for young scholars (so fair as I can judge) after they have run
through their Clauis, if you will begin with Poetry, that they may learn to
make a verse in Greek, is

Theognis his sentences with the other Poets joined with him; as namely
Phocilides, Pythagoras, etc. with the Latin translation and annotations
thereof, set forth by Silburgius. Some whereof being learned without book
perfectly, is a special help that scholars may have quantities, phrase, and
apt moral matter for verse.

2. If you please to read Hesiode his Opera and Dies, Hesiode with Ceporine
and Melancth.
you may use Ceporine and Melancthons Commentaries set forth by Johannes
Frisius Tigurinus; and the new translation of it by Erasmus Schemidt professor
at Wittenberg.

Or if you desire to read Homer, For Homer.
which is most generally approved of all, as the most excellent Poet: besides
the Latin Translations, especially that which expounds it most nearly and
properly.

For the better understanding and expressing of it in English, Master Chapman
in English meeter.
Master Chapmans translation in English meeter; whom we may rightly call, the
English Homer.

To these you may add, Eustathius.
if you will, Eustathius, and the large Commentary of Spondanus. Spondanus.


For the best and fittest Authors in Prose to be read in Schools, For prose*
Isocrates translated by VVolphius. Schorus his translation with annotat.
as namely Isocrates ad Daemonicum, are the translations of Wolphius: and also
of Rodolphus Agricola: and like wise the translation of Antonius Scorus, with
his annotations adjoined to his book De ratione discendi* linguae Graecae.

2. For Zenophon, Zenophons Cyropaideia.
the translation of his 3. first books de Cyri vita and disciplina.

For more speedy reading the Greek Testament, For the Greek Testament, Pasors
dictionarie.
Pasors Dictionary gathered of purpose to that end. What is defective may be
supplied by the Fundamentum, Piscator and others.

VVriting in Greek.
For writing exercises in Greek, For writing in Greek, Clauis, Thomas^^s,
Garthius. Poselij Calligr. Elegantiae graecae.
or translating into Greek: besides, the Clauis linguae Graecae for words, and
also Thomas his Dictionarie, for phrase you may use Garthius his Lexicon: and
withal for prose Poselii Calligraphia: Elegantiae Graecae by Vollandus.

In verse for Epithets and Authorities, In verse for Epithets and authorities,
Dinnerus.
Dinnerus his Greek Epithets.

For moral matter in Greek, For moral matter out (...) best Greek Authors,
Stobaei Anthologia, Cornucopia.
with excellent sentences and discourses out of all the ancient and best Greek
Authors, for the use of Translations, Theames, Verses, Declamations or Orations.

Stobaei sententiae, called Anthologia; or Cornucopia of the largest.

Speaking Greek.
For speaking of ordinary matters in Greek, For speaking Greek, Poselius.
Poselius his Dialogues.

Hebrew.
For a most speedy attaining to the Hebrew.

1. For the Grammar, For Hebrew Grammar.
though every one may take for his own use what Grammar he has learned, or is
most familiarly acquainted with, and supply out of others what is wanting
therein; yet for him that is newly to begin, or desires most easily to teach
or direct others Martinius printed by R^phalengius at Berne.
I take (under better judgment) Martinius to be the best. My reasons are,

1. For that it is most methodicall, Reason of it.
proceeding according to the right order of Nature and rules of Art.

2. For that it has answering unto it, Master Vdals Hebrew Grammar in
English, being in effect a mere translation of Martinius, only leaving out
some things which he thought less necessary, and making most things in
Martinius very plain, in stead of a Commentary, as the translations do the
Authors.

3. For that the Martinius Grammar printed by Raphalengius and by Abrahamus
VVeerlinus at Berne, have a Praxis adjoined, for the parsing of three Psalms,
viz. the 1. 25. and 68, like as Master Vdals has in English: which Praxis is
so orderly for the right examining or analyzing of every word according to the
order of nature and art, and according as all things are set down in the
Grammar in order of the Chapters, that they lead the learner directly, as by
the hand, to the plain parsing and resolving of those three Psalms; and by
them, auy other part of the Hebrew Bible.

And lastly, for that Master Vdals Grammar, (which I commend as a short
Commentary to it) has also a brief Epitome of the Hebrew Lexicon adjoined,
for the more speedy finding out any word, and so attaining the tongue.

Or in stead of Martinius, Master Vdals Grammar.
Master Vdals Grammar it self, which I find to be far more easy for the
learner, and much sooner gotten, for the use of it, and also may be readily
delivered and uttered in Latin, at least by comparing with Martinius.

For the best Lexicon or Dictionarie, Lexicon Buxtorphius.
Buxtorphius his Epitome for continual use: and also his Thesaurus for more
exquisite knowledge: or,

For giving the Hebrew words to the Latin; Lexicon Latino-Hebraicum, in the
end of the Epitome of Pagnine by Raphalengius.

For help for construing, and so reading privately, and knowing the Radices.

The Interlineal Bible, by Arias Montanus.

For the Psalms, Tossanus.
Tossanus may afford some help.

English.
Concerning our own language, For our own tongue to grow in propriety and
purity.
whereas some great learned, have much and long complained, that in most
Schools there has been little care, to teach Scholars to express their minds
readily in propriety and purity of speech, so to help to adorn our own
tongue; whereof we have continual practice, to the end that they may grow
herein with the Latin and other learned tongues, God has provided these
helps.

1. The use of the grammatical translations (having to that end, 1.
Gra^matical translations for all the first beginners.
both propriety and also variety of words and phrase to express the mind)
may be a good entrance for the younger sort.

2. After them, 2 Other translations.
all the other translations, used only in such sort, as has been and shall be
further showed in the Grammar school; so to ascend to those who have written
most exquisitely in that kind of Translation.

3. Dictionaries, 3. Dictionaries.
where fit words are wanting, to make choice of those English words in them
which best agree to the matter in hand.

4. Adioyne to these, 4. Best authors in each kind for English.
for them who would grow to more exquisite perfection, the books of such as
have written the purest style in English in each faculty, which they purpose to
exercise themselves in.

For strangers, For strangers.
who understand the Latin tongue, at least in some sort, and would learn our
tongue themselves, or would teach it unto others publicly or privately,
besides the former helps for reading English.

1. The English Grammar, The English Grammar.
called Grammatica Anglicana, a little Epitome written according to the rules
of Art, by P. Gr. printed at Cambridge Anno 1594.

2. Logonomia Anglica, Logonomia Anglica.
by Master Gill Schoole-maister of Paul's.

3. Translations, first grammatical; which lead the Scholar directly to
learn our tongue; after other translations, Translations.
and so the best English Authors and Dictionaries as before.

Rhetoric.
For Rhetoric, For Tropes and Figures briefly in use, Master Fa^nabees
tropes and figures.
so far as shall be necessary for the Grammar-schoole.

1. For Tropes and Figures of Rhetoric, and so for other figures of Grammar,
Master Farnabees Tropes and figures, so shortly comprised in verse, as that
they may be most easily gotten in a very little time, and so likewise kept in
memory, to serve for every good use.

2. For a more full understanding of that little book, For a more methodicall
tractate* M. Butlers Rhetoric.
and of all other matters belonging to Rhetoric, as for a methodicall
handling, and short comprizing of the whole Art, by precepts, illustrations by
examples, and the like.

M. Butlers Rhetoric of Magd. college in Oxf. with a short commentary
adjoined, now the 4. time printed.

3. For the use of Rhetoric, 3. For the use of Rhetoric, Master (...),
Manuductio ad artem Rhetoricum.
viz. for the practice thereef in Theames, Declamatious, Orations, etc.

The (...), or Manuductio ad artem Rhetoricam, by Master Vicars of Queens
College in Oxford.

Religion.
Concerning Religion; Religion, for laying surely the grounds (...).
for laying surely the first grounds of our holy Religion in Schools,
according to our good laws; and for seasoning the first and tender years of
our children therewith: (wherein the Jesuits shall rise in judgment against
us, being far more vigilant and industrious to destroy, then we to save; to
overthrow the Gospel, then we to propagate and spread it.)

1. To the end that Scholars may speedily get and ever keep in fresh memory
with ease and delight, For know^edge of the history of the Bible, Bibliorum
summula.
the whole sum of the sacred story, viz. the holy Bible, (being the sole
foundation of our Religion,) and so the sum of every Chapter therein; whereby
they may become sound Christians, and in time (through the Lords blessing)
admirable Divines, God has provided a little Book called Bibliorum summula,
which comprizeth the arguments or sums of every Chapter of the whole Bible in
Disticks, viz. each Chapter in two verses, beginning alphabetically, that they
may be more happily committed to memory, and recalled more easily when they
are forgotten.

This book is most painefully and profitably composed in a familiar and easy
verse, by Master Shaw, according to the contents of the several Chapters. A
more brief abridgement Memoriale, Biblicu^.


Hereunto is adjoined in the end, for further help of memory, the same
contrived far more briefly, viz. in a very few verses: as namely Genesis
having fifty Disticks in the Summula, according to the fifty Chapters, is
comprised in ten verses, every verse whereof comprehends five Chapters, and
almost every word notes a several Chapter; thus notably devised by Math.
Martinius.

2. For the first principles or iudiments in Religion, For the p^inciples
besides those by law appointed, Master Perkins ^ixe Principles expounded.
to be taught in Catechizing; and for building soundly upon the sacred
Scriptures, according to the doctrine of our Church: besides our ordinary
Catechismes by Law established, for a further unfolding and demonstrating of
the principles out of the express texts of the Word, Master Perkins six
Principles expounded, with many other, and chiefly such brief ones, as by
their oftest printing do testify the greatest liking, and most general
approbation of the godly learned.

VVriting.
For fair writing in our own, For fair writing, Copy books for Secretary,
Roman, Greek, Hebrew.
and all the chief learned tongues.

Copy books, prepared of purpose for the Grammar-schooles, as in Secretary
for our English, so for the Latin, Greek and Hebrew, together with directions
for writing in the beginning of them, printed by Master Thomas Man; whereby
all Scholars, well entered and practiced from their beginning, every day a
little, may come to write commendably, and many of them very fair every of
these hands, without hindering their learning, as is proved by experience.

Memory.
For the help of Memory, For Memory.
besides all directions for brief sums of every matter, as are set down in
their places in the Grammar^schoole and others; and besides diverse good rules
and precepts for memory in a little book called The Castle of Memory,
Master Willies Mnemonica.
Chap. 6.

Master VVillies his book of Memory, called Mnemonica sieve Reminiscendi, are
gathered out of the best who have written thereof: out of which the most
profitable things may be selected and used by them who are judicious.

Other Books and helps, Books prepared for the Press.
some of them ready for the Press, others in good forwardness to be soon
prepared, if they shall be generally desired, and the desire signified to the
Stationers, as necessary or profitable for the ends for which they have been
traveled in, as namely;
1 FOr furnishing with fit matter for Theams in Prose or Verse, Help for
matter for Theames.
Latin and Greek, which so troubles young scholars, and discourageth them,
An Index gathered out of the fittest Schoole-authors and others, with
references to the places.
for that they know not where to find such fit matter for them, and must
needs be very difficult before a great deal of reading and practice; there is
an Index or book of References, gathered out of their Schoole-authors and
others, only pointing at the places where to find them.

2. For patterns for Theames, Tullies paradoxes translated grammatically for
patterns for Theames. The Laconicall Epistles translated.
Tullies Paradoxes translated grammatically, with a short Analysis in the
margent, whereby they may be learned more perfectly, and understood more fully
to that end.

3. For direction and patterns for writing pithy and short letters in English,
which is amongst us, both most commendable, and of principal and daily use.
The Laconicall Epistles, translated into a good English style, with the Grammar
order and propriety in the margents.

4. For the more speedy and profitable learning the Ianua linguarum for every
good use; 4. For the more speedy and (...) learning (...) it is prepared to be
(...), printed as to supply what is wanting or Grammar order, prop^^etie,
declining, quantities, and E^ymologies.
whereas now, the English, in many places keeps only the sense, but varieth
both from the verbal and Grammar order, and also from the propriety of the
words in the Latin, whereby the learners are often exceedingly puzzled and carried
amiss: there ^s provided a grammatical translation to be set in the margen^s
in the English, to carry the learner aright, both for propriety and Grammar.
And also in the Index or Table, are set down the declining of the Nownes and
Verbs, with the Genders of the Nownes, to serve in (...) of a Dictionarie for
all of them: and withal, both the doubtful quantities, and likewise the
Etymologies or notations of the words briefly, being examined by comparing the
best Authors in that kind, and conference with other learned.

So that the learner may soon run through it, to get both English by the
Latin, and Latin by the English, with certainty, and for the other uses
mentioned.

For furnishing with Terence^phrase, with the best matter, Terentianus
Christianus, translated grammatically.

For the Greek.
1. For getting speedily the Greek Radices or Primitiues, For speedy getting
the Greek Primitiues, Clauis linguae Graeca^, made much more plain.
the Clauis linguae Graece is made much more plain, easy and profitable;
first, by the Latin set in the margent, according to the Greek, answering
word for word in such places where it now differs, and the whole Latin
sentences to be placed in the page opposite to the Greek, to lead the learner
rightly by the hand to the knowledge of the Greek, whereas now many of the
Sentences in Latin do only express the sense, and so set the learner at a
stand, or carry him quite amiss.

2. By the principal Etymologies set in the margent of the Greek Sentences,
directed with letters to know them speedily.

3. By a grammatical construction of the same in English, answering the Greek
so near as may be, adjoined in the end of the Clauis, with propriety and
variety of the sense in the margents. By the h^lpe whereof (as experience will
soon show) all the Sentences may be gotten in a very little time, both for
Latin and Greek, by studying them out of the English, only helped by looking
upon the Greek and Latin, as need requires; to be able thereby to give the
Greek and Latin words to the English, and contrarily, so to serve for any
good use thereof: and ever easily by this means to keep all perfectly, without
any trouble or charge of memory, through the help of the perfect understanding
of it by this translation.

Also for the easier entrance of the young Scholar to run cheerfully and
speedily through the best Greek Authors in prose, For entrance in the speedy
the running thorough the best Greek Authors in prose, Grammatical translations
of Isocrates ad Daemonicum.
as well as in verse, is prepared Isocrates ad Daemonicum, translated both in
Latin grammatically; and also with another translation in a more pure Latin
style.

So likewise the first book of Zenophons Cyropaideia in like manner.

Which three books being well gone through, The first (...) Z^nophons
Cyropaideia.
scholars will easily and speedily run through all other Greek Authors, by the
ordinary helps of translations, and the like means which God has so
bountifully provided for this last Age, especially if they have said a good
foundation in the Grammar first.

Hebrew.
For laying speedily a sure foundation; For the speedy and sure attaining all
the Hebrew Radiees, are preparing a ^word and a (...) thereunto like (...) and
Greek.
first, for the right knowledge of all the Hebrew Primitiues in their first and
proper signification; secondly, by what Tropes their significations are changed
into other senses: and so thirdly, by what reasons or notations all their
deriuatiues and issue come thereof: and finally, for getting speedily all the
Hebrew Primitiues without book; and with the getting of them, to learn also
so much of the Hebrew Bible in most profitable matters and sentences, there
has been long thought of, and is now in preparing.

First, a brief Hebrew Lexicon, after the manner of the Fundamentum linguae
Graecae.

And secondly, another little book after the manner of Clauis linguae Graecae,
wherein all, or most of the Hebrew Primitiues are to be comprised, in certain
choice sentences of the sacred Scriptures, of sundry kinds of matt^r.

This may be called fi^ly Ianua linguae Hebraicae; the other, the Clauis unto
it.

As these two may be of notable use, to make speedily perfect Hebricians, and
likewise to help to prepare the way to the calling of the Jews thereby, so
they require the cunningest workmen for the more curious framing and finishing
of them: whom God has also provided, if some noble minded favorers of good
learning, and of the Church of Christ, will but a little lay to their helping
hands, for defraying the charges of their maintenance, till they shall be able
to go through the work, to bring them to perfection, for the full
accomplishment of all the good therein desired.

For all these books and helps more particularly, For all these helps more
particularly, and the right use of them: the Grammar school in this last
Edition.
and for the right use of every of them, and how to avoid all the abuses and
other in conueniences; and so for attaining all those parts or learning
mentioned in the Contents, see the Book called (...), or the Grammar-schoole
in this second Edition: where, in a familiar Dialogue between two
Schoole-maisters all these things are full discussed and set forth, and yet
the book in many things abridged, and made less then before.

For matter of charges to provide so many helps, Matter of charge, and all
objections there answe^^^*
the gaining of one years learning will plentifully recompense, if we use
only the necessary: and all the other benefits be a sufficient overplus.

For all other objections, I refer you likewise to the Grammar-schoole, where
(I hope) you shall see your self well satisfied in all. And what is still
wanting, I trust the same good hand of our God will, in his due time, f^^ly
supply.

FINIS.
The Examiners Censure: March. 16. 1620.
WHere as this Author, still desirous to communicate all the new comforts,
which God has vouchs^fed him in his long and painful travels, for the
general good, and specially for our Grammar-schooles; and fearing lest in any
matter he should deceive himself or others, has entreated us to make some
further trial of the things which he has written h^rein, for the better
confirmation of himself and of all others; we could not deny his so honest a
request. Therefore (...) Labors in this kind, by (...) of Worcester, at the
first (...) of his Gramm^r-schoole, as appears in the (...) Preface before it,
and by other (...) since; yet now that it is to come forth (...), much more
complete and perfect after so much long travel and experience) we have
her^upon made new and further trial accordingly. In which we have found so
much content in every form, from the lowest to the highest, for the time which
we then had, as persuaded us of the truth of whatsoever he has written
concerning the same; and gives us withal much assurance of a very great
blessing to be hoped for, both to Church and Commonwealth in all places for
which he has traveled, by these his happy Labors rightly put in practice:
which all well-willers to Religion and Learning are to wish to their Country,
and by all means to promote, for the good of the present and of all succeeding
ages.

JAMES VSSHER Doctor and Professor of Divinity in the University of Dublin.
DANIEL FEATLY Doctor of Divinity, and Chaplin in house to his Grace of
Canterbury.


