The works of a young wit, trust up with a Fardell of pretty fancies,
profitable to young Poets, prejudicial to no man, and pleasant to every man
to pass away idle time withal.

Whereunto is joined an odd kind of wooing, with a Banquet of Comsettes, to
make an end withal. Done by N. B. Gentleman.

The Letter (...), to the Reader.
I Have both heard and read often times, that Books and Cheeses may very well be
likened one to the other, in this point: for the diversity of men's judgments
given of them. For they are wares both, to be looked on for love, and bought
for money. The Cheese once out of the Press, shortly after comes to market to
be sold: where (perhaps) it is tasted of many, before it be bought. And books
once imprinted, are presently in shoppes, where many peruse them, ere they be
sold. Now* some that have tasted the Cheese, will say (perchance) it is too
dry: an other will say, it is too full of whaye* the third will say, the meat is
good, but it is ill handled: the fourth will (contrary) say, it looks better
then it is. Come another, he will say, Berlady it is pretty good meat. Some will
say, It is little worth: and some will say, It is stark naught, but that is an
evil toungd fellow. Some will say, It Is Cheese: that's a blunt whoreson. Some will
say, It Will serve: he is to be borne withal. Some will say, It Is good meat when
one is hungry: he is worthy to have a piece of it (if he can get it) when he
has nothing else to dynner. Some will like it very well, and give money for it:
he is most worthy to have it, and much good may it do him. And thus of Books,
and so of this my book among others. Some will say, It is too dry, it wants the
sap of Sapience, neither has it yenough of the Runnet of Reason. Some other
will say, It is too sul of the whay of wantonness, which in wise men's taste,
seems very sour. Some will say, The invention is pretty, but it is ill pend.
Some other will more commend the pennyng, then the matter. Some will say, It is
pretty Poetry. Some will say, It is mean stuff. And some (perhaps) will say, It
is bald ryme, not worth the reading: but that is a malicious Lob, for my life.
Some will say, It Is verse: he speaks his mind plainly. Some will say, It Will pass
for Poaetrie: let him pass for and cetera. Some will say, It is good enough to
read, when a man has nothing else to do: he may read it (if he can come by
it) in such idle time. Some (perhaps) will praise it more then it deserves, and
give coin for it, rather then go without it. Such are best worthy to have
it: and well may it like them, when they have bought it. Well, such as like it
not, I pray you bear a good tongue, and let it alone, and God be with you. I
wish you well, and perhaps I will against the next Term, provide you some other
new ware for your old gold. Till when, and ever, I wish you all, with my
self, the grace of God, and well to fare.

From my lodgyng this.xiiii. of May. Anno Domini. 1577. Your poor Countreyman,
N. B.

The works of a young wit.
Primordium.
The Farmer, he, that new breaks up a ground:
and does not know, what fruit, the soil will yield.
The cheapest seed, that (lightly) may be found,
be (commonly) bestows upon that field.
For trial, first, as (best for his behoue,)
by proof of that, how better grain will prove.
And as I think the cheapest kind of grain,
on new digd ground the Farmer can bestow,
Whereof to reap some profit for his pain,
are Otes, a grain which every man does know:
Which proouing ill, his loss can be but small,
if well, such gaynes, as he may live withal.
What said I? otes? Why, Otes there are I see,
of diverse kinds, as some are counted wild:
And they are light: and yet with them some be,
in steed of better many times beguyld.
And sure I think that wild light kind of grain,
my self have sown, within my barren brain.
But it is no matter, small has been my cost:
and this is first time that I sturd my brain,
Besides, I have, but little labor lost,
in idle time to take a little pain.
And though, I loose, both pain, and grain in deed:
my ground, I crow, will serve for better seed.
For as the Farmer, though his croppe be ill,
the seed yet lost will fatten well the ground.
And when he seeks for better grain to till,
and sowes good grain, then is the profit found.
For, all the first, that good was, for no grain,
will bear good fruit, but with a little pain.
So my rude brain, that at the first (God wot)
was good for naught, no kind of fruit would yield
New broken up, will now yet bear an Ote,
and as I hope, will prove a pretty field:
I like it tothe better, that I find,
the Otes so sown, do not come up in kind.
For surely, all the Otes I sowed, were wild,
and light God wot: and cheap, they cost me naught*
And now if that I be not much beguild,
they prove good Otes, and will be quickly bought:
Mary my croppe I reap is very small,
but what is lost, my ground is made withal.
And when I till, and sow a better grain,
mine Otes so lost, I shall not then repent:
My profit then, will so requite my pain,
as I shall think, my labor pretly spent:
And eke in time, I hope with taking pain,
to make it fit, to bear a right good grain.
These Otes (alas) are fond and foolish toys,
which, often times, do enter in the mind:
The thoughts of which, give cause of grief or joys,
which are so light, as turn with every wind.
And, such wild Otes, I mean wild thoughts God knows,
are all the grain that in my ground now grows.
But yet I see that all the Otes I sowde,
I mean the thoughts that enter in my mind,
Are not come up: not half of them is showde:
and some come up, are blown away with wind.
The rest that stand, are such as here you see,
which if you like, then take them as they be.
These thoughts in deed, were causes of such crimes,
as in my books here plain apparent be:
Which, as I sat half idle many times,
I wrote (God wot) at randon, as you see:
Which though they be but wild light Otes in deed,
will make my ground yet fit for better seed.
Now I have thought on thousand causes mo
then I have shown, as well of grief as joy:
Some are forgot, and those I cannot show:
and when I wrote upon too fond a toye,
And that withal my self mislykte the same,
straight to the fire, for fear of further blame.
But such as these which by desert in deed,
I here do term toys of an idle head^
Are all the croppe, that yet of al my seed
I reap this year, the rest I think be dead:
But they so lost, will better make my brain,
to yield good fruit, wh^^ so I till again.
For I protest as thus aduisde, at lest,
next time I till, to sow some better grain:
Until which time, I friendly you request,
to take in worth these first fruits of my brain:
Accounting thus my brain a new digd ground,
my rimes wild Otes, which every where abound.
And for my labor more then half quite lost,
Laugh not yet at me, for my folly such:
Nor have regard at all unto my cost,
my pains were most, although not very much:
Which pains so spent, these trifling toies to write:
I have imploide to purchase thy delight.
Which though but toys, yet if they like thee well,
yield friendly thanks: and so my friend farewell.
Finis.
The Author standing in a study whether to write or no, wrote as follows.

Shall I presume to press into the place,
where Poets stand, to try their cunnyng skyll?
Fie, no, (God wot) I must not show my face
among such men, they come from Pernasse hill.
Where each one finds a muze, to guide his pen:
and what should I do then among such men.
No, no, (God wot) it is yenough for me,
to stand without, and hearken at the door.
And through the key hole somewhat for to see,
of orders theirs, although I do no more:
To see, I mean, how all the Poets write,
and how their Muzes, help them to endite.
Except I do, like Bayarde hold by chance,
thrust in at door, and take no leave at all:
In seeking so, my self for to advance,
against my will, may hap to catch a fall:
In ventring so, perhaps yet I may see,
among them al, somewhat to profit me.
Perhaps I may, and likelyer of the two,
for such my pains, get nothing but a flout:
Lo, thus in doubt, I know not what to do,
to press in place, or still to keep me out:
To stand without, I can but little gain,
to be too bold, but laughed at, for my pain.
Laughed at quoth I, but tush, if that be all,
I must not fear, to press in Poets place:
For laughing loud, can breed a hurt but small,
it does, but show some ass, or lobcockes grace
In him that laughes, for Poets will no: use,
the simplest wight that is, for to abuse.
(...)
for fear of floutes, of some odd mocking mate:
The wisest men, this once, I do not doubt,
in each respect, such il demeanure hate:
They rather will regard, mine earnest will,
and let me in, then I should stand out still.
And Pallas, she would send from Pernasse hill,
some learned muze, to help me to endite:
In writing to, who so might guide my quill,
that I might somewhat like a Poet write:
The Poets too would help, rather then I,
should loose the love I have to Poetry.
Then, if (perhaps) I write with simple skill,
the wisest he ades, (I trust) will pardon me:
They will regard my good and earnest will,
and think in time, some better stuff to see:
Which by Gods help (ere long) in hope I stand,
some finer matter, for to take in hand.
The Author mynding to write somewhat, yet not resolved what: wrote in verse
certain demaundes with himself what to write, as follows.

A Proverb old there is, which wise men count for true,
that often of sluggish idleness, great evils do ensue.
Which Proverb old, and true, when I do call to mind:
to set my self about straight way, I somewhat seek to find.
For fear least sitting still, when I have naught to do,
some thriflltes thought mine idle mind would set it self vnts.
Sometime I sit and read, such books as lykes me best,
sometime a learned grave discourse, sometime a pleasant jest,
Sometime I take my pen, and then I fall to write,
to learn to frame a letter fair, sometime I do indite,
Some pretty odd conceit, to please my self withal,
sometime again I music use, although my skill be small.
Lo thus I read, I write, I do (...), and sing,
and all to eschew idleness, that is so vile a thing.
And now not long ago, not having much to do,
but thinking best what kind of work to set my self unto.
I took my pen and Ink, and thought in deed to write
some kind of pretty pleasant toy, my mind for to delight.
But scarce I had begun, but then I thought again,
in countries profit for to write, to take a little pain:
And thinking so, alas, unto my self, quoth I,
what can I write, that any man may profit gain thereby?
My years are very young, experience but small,
my learning less, and (God he knows) my wisdom least of al.
And being then so young, and inexpert also,
and wisdom want to judge in mind, which way the world will go,
What almost can I write, but I must gain thereby,
but labor lost, and many a flout, for writing so fondly?
To write of pleasant toys to purchase deep delyght,
why every Rimer writes such stuff, then what shall I endite?
Some Ditties of despite? No, yet I like that w^rse:
shall I then write some ruffing rhyme to swear, and banne, and curse?
Fie, that were woorst of all: shall I then write of kings:
of princely Peers, and Princes courts, and of such gallant things?
No, no, no words of them, what ever so they be:
Quod supra nos nihil ad nos, then let them be for me:
Shall I go lower then, and write of meaner sort?
well, if I do, I must take heed what tales I do report.
What, shall I tell their faults, and how they may amend?
why, they will bid me mend my self, ere I do reprehend:
What? shall I take in hand the truth in deed to teach?
the^ some will say, beware your Geese, the Fox begins to preach.
Shall I then write of wars? oh no, I am too young:
I never seru^ce saw in rield, then I must hold my tongue:
What? shall I write of ships, and sailing in the seas?
alas, my skill in saylors art is scarcely worth two peace.
What? shall I write of Quirkes and Quidities in law?
no, no, for then I by and by, should show my self a Daw.
What then? of fruits or plants, of flowers, herbs and trees,
of drawing kno^s, and setting slips, and such like toys as these?
Tush no, the Gardner says, my cunning is but small:
and therefore I must hold my peace, and meddle not withal.
To such as rulers be, their duties shall I tell?
why, they will bid me rule my self, and then I shall do well.
What? shall I somewhat write of thriftie husbandry?
then shall I shame my self (alas) for none so ill as I.
What? shall I set out rules for to be taught in school?
I am so young a scholar, I should prove my self a fool.
Shall I tell scholars then, what is their due to do?
lets see good orders, say young boys, you set your self unto.
What shall I write of sin? what shame does grow thereby:
why, some will bid me mend for shame, for no man worse then I
Of virtue shall I speak, how it does purchase Fame?
then some that see may sinful life, will bid me peace for shame.
Why then what may I write? if neither this nor that,
nor the other Theme will serve my turn, good faith I know not what
I may resolve upon, but what my Muse thinks best
to write upon, I ready am to write at her request.
For why, I plainly see, Dame Pallas sure has sent
some Muse to me, to help me now some matter to invent.
And as me thinks in mind, she greatly me does move,
to write some dolorous discourse, of lots of luckelesse love:
Which since she so desires, I am content to show,
what passion once a lover pend, oppressed with endless woe:
And if my Muse again do chance to change her mind,
then shall you see to her content, what matter I will find.
Now look what so I write, refer it to my Muse,
and blame not me, but let her fault my folly quite excuse.
And take in worth, I crave, as she my mind doath move,
this dole^id and most strange discourse, that first I write of love.
A pretty passion, pend in the behalf of a Gentleman, who trauailyng into Kent,
fell there in love: and ventring both lands, lymme, and life, to do his
Mistress service, in long time reapt nothing but loss for his labor, which
loss, by ill luck, in lamentable verse, he wrote to his beloved Lady, which,
how she took in worth, that restes.

When I sometime, reuolue within my mind,
the sorrows strange, that some men seems to show:
And therwithal consider eke in kind,
the causes first, whereof their griefs do grow:
And then compare, their pangues with mine again,
I find them al, but pleasures to my pain.
For why, each one can make a plain discourse,
how every sorrow does assail his mind:
Then judge (alas) how far my woes are worse,
when none alive, can set them out in kind.
And if I could, my pangues at large express,
yet am I sure, they are remediless.
Why am I sick? yea sure, I am not well,
where lies my grief? in body? or in mind?
In both, God w^t, which more I cannot tell,
and I am sure, Physician none to find,
That can devise, to cure my strange disease,
save God and you, who may when so you please.
God knows my grief: you only wrought the same,
I feel the pain, though how, I cannot show:
God knows my help: and you, O noble Dame,
the only mean, to minister do know.
Oh help me then, whiles I am yet alive:
least that for life, I can no longer strive.
How holds my grief? alas both hot, and cold:
^ot with desire, and cold again with fear:
Warm, when I do thy beauties beams behold,
and quake with cold, to be, and thou not there.
Lo thus I live, tormented as you see:
and will you not some pity take on me?
But what is it, a kind of fever then,
that holds me thus, in these extremities?
Yea sure, it is a plain Quotidien,
that keeps me still, in these perplexities:
That day and night, does so my mind molest,
as never lets my body be at rest.
Is then an ague such a strange disease?
why, many so are sick, and easily curde:
Yea, but the sickness of the mind, no ease
by Phisickes art, can ever have procurde.
Such is my grief, which makes me thus protest,
until I dye, I never look for rest.
The grief of mind? why there are diverse kinds,
of sundry sorrows, in the mind of man:
To each of which, the sick man daily fyndes,
a sundry kind of comfort now and than:
Yet for my self, I still protest my grief
is such almost, as cannot find relief.
What grief is that? That no man feels the like?
a secret sorrow that cannot be shown.
For hidden hurts, who can for comfort seek?
but he, to whom the cause of grief is known:
Yet fare I worse, who know my strange disease:
yet cannot show it, nor yet seek for ease.
What may it be? some secret pang of love?
or contrary? some hurt that grows by hate?
Alas of both, the daily pangs I prove,
and that so sore, as may be wondered at:
To bide them both, but how? that seems strange,
How? Why alas, I have them by exchange.
For why, my trade is still to live by loss,
I beater love, in hope to gain good will:
My bruised Bark, strange tempests daily toss,
and keep her in the seas of sadness still:
And when at last, she comes from forreyne soil,
then see the fruits of all her tedious toil.
First Merchaundise is Malice, without cause,
and packt within a bag of bitter bale:
Then next, is books of Lady Venus laws,
which yield small gain, their studies are so stale.
Then sugared speeches, mixed with sowrenes so,
as all my wares, do yield me naught, but woe.
And thus, my ship once set on sorrows shore,
for all my wares, I custom pay to care:
Which done, to save some charges, that grow more,
I bear them home, to save the Porters share:
For which I think, I merit mickle gain,
I bear, God wot, with such an extreme pain.
And when I come, unto my home at last,
my luckeles lodge, for so in deed it is,
And that of all my wares account I cast,
what loss by that, what gain again by this:
At last, alone in sorrows shop I sit,
and sell my wares, to my bewitched wit.
Who, when he ways what they are worth in deed,
and yet perhaps is oftentimes deceiud:
In taking Reisons, in good reasons steed,
which in good taste, may easily be perceyud:
He thinks at first, he cannot give too much,
for such fine fruit, for why there are none such.
But God he knows, when he a while has fed
on Reisons sweet, ere they be full digest:
He soon shall find such woorking in his head,
as that his heart shall have but little rest:
And if among his Reisons sweet, by chance
he eat a Fig, that brings him in a trance.
For often in Figs, are secret fetches wrought,
some Figs are fruits, that grow of foul disdain*
Some of despite, and all such Figs are naught,
yet such be mine, which come not out of Spain:
But grow hereby, but over Sea, in Rent,
and thither it was, for all my wares, I went.
From thence it was, that all my wares I had,
and there I caught the cause of all my grief:
There fell I sick, there was I almost mad,
and there it is, that I must seek relief:
But all in vain, for why I plainly see,
the heavenly fates, do wholly frown on me.
Yet restless quite, this rest I rest upon,
either to die, and so my sorrows end:
Or else, when all my woeful wares be gone,
God will at last, some better shipping send:
And you dear dame, who only know my grief,
will wail my woe, and lend me some relief.
You made the Reisons that do make me loose,
your liking first, at lest in outward show,
And you again, the Figs did make me choose,
and made me taste, to work my deadly woe:
And you alone have Sinamon, to bind
your friendly liking, to my loving mind.
You have in deed the Priumes of pity sweet,
to cool the heat, of my so hot desire:
My quaking heart, falls quiuering at your feet,
to crave the comfort, of your fancies fire:
Your lowering looks, do make me sorrow so,
and your sweet love, can only end my woe.
Then wey my case, and when you think upon
the sorrows small, that some men seek to show:
And see again, how I am woo begone,
and that the cause of all my grief, you know:
Uouchsafe dear dame, some sweet relief to give,
yet ere I dye, for long I cannot live.
And thus adue, God long prolong thy days,
and plant some pity in thy princely mind:
To lend him help, who lives a thousand ways,
perplexed with pain, and can no comfort find:
But by thy means, and therefore thus I end,
Lady farewell, God make thee once my friend.
Finis.
My Muse having heard this, told me that patience was the best Medicine for
such a sickness. And thereuppon wild me write upon Patience, as follows.

NO sickness such, as is the grief of mind,
no cunning more, then for to cure the same:
Rare is the help, yet this I plainly find,
for every sore, some salve does Physic frame:
And so I think in deepest of distress,
some mean there is, to lend the mind redress.
But what that is, no writer shows the name,
experience makes each man himself to know:
But for my part, sure patience is the same,
in greatest grief, whereby my ease does grow:
And so I judge, in greatest grief of mind,
that other men the like relief do find.
For proof whereof, the passing panges of love
who dare deny, the greatest grief that is,
Which from the mind, no mean can well remove,
but many ways, torments it sore I wis.
In this I say so great a mallady,
patience perforce is only remedy.
Where Patience comes, despair with foul anoie
is driune away, and hope supplies the place:
Hope comfort bringes, and comfort causes joy,
and one Joy bringes an other Joy apace.
Oh sweet relief, chief comfort of the mind:
God grant me thee, in all my griefs to find.
Finis.
My Muse likte so well of this Pamphlette, that she willed me to write again
upon it, at whose command I wrote as folowes.

IN greatest care, what is the comfort chief?
the thing obteinde, that most the mind desires*
But wanting that, what most will lend relief?
the remedy, that reason chief requires,
Is patience, to please the mourning mind,
whereby the heart some ease (though small) does find.
Who stands content, with such hap as does fall,
with hope of better, cheeres his heavy heart:
Who discontente with anger frets his gall,
is like to live, in panges of greater smarte.
Then as I said, so now I say again,
patience does ease the mind of mickle pain.
Patience procures the comfort of the heart,
drives out despair, and sets hope in place,
Eases the mind, oppreste with grievous smarte
asswageth much great pains in little space
What more? the best and only mean I find,
in greatest grief, for to relieve the mind.
Oh precious pearl, and very rare, God wot
and hard, to hard, in time of grief to find.
Wretched the wighte, (alas) that finds thee not,
but happy he that keeps thee in his mind.
Blessed the God, that first did thee ordain
to ease the heart, oppressed with greatest pain.
Finis.
By that time that I had finished this Pamphlet upon patience, with hanginge
down my hedde over my paper, mine eyes grue read, and ran on water,
whereupon my muse took occasion, to think, upon the hurt of the eye sight,
and presentely willed me to write upon the same, as follows.

THree things there are, that greatly hurt the sight,
which by the eye, do breed the hearts disease,
And being seen, as well by day as night,
unto the mind do breed but little ease.
Of which three, one, does partly breed delighte:
the other two, breed nothing but despighte.
The furste, and wurste, is this (alas) to see
a foe fare well, and dearest friend decay^.
The second sight, then which, what worse may be?
is sorrows smoke, that rises night and day
From fancies fire, which from the heart to hedde,
does so ascend, as makes the eyes look read.
Now to the third, what more can hurt the sight?
then to behold a fair and gallant dame:
Then fall in love, and labor day and night,
to gain her love, yet not obtain the same:
Then thus I end, what more can hurt the sight,
then these three things which here I do recite?
Finis.
Now my Muse began sodaynely enter into the cogitation of the state of man, and
thereupon wild me to write these few verses following.

OH wretched state of miserable man,
who, let him have what so he can desire*
Yea let him crave, what so devise he can,
and eke obtain the thing he does require:
Yet such (we see) is our ambitious mind,
as yet in deed, does never quiet find.
For to begin with this perplexity,
the Captive, he that lies in prison pent:
Oh, what a heaune, says he, is liberty,
let him get out, and all his riches spent,
Oh then, says he, coin makes the merry man,
let him have wealth, and then, what lackes he than?
If he be rich, perhaps he has the gout,
what follows then? what heaune is health says hee^
Let him have health, then honor out of doubt,
he seeks next: and let him noble be,
What seeks he then? to stand in Princes grace:
which had, what then? himself the regal, mace.
If he be Prince, what then? a quiet seat:
which if he get, what then? his subjects love:
That once obtaind, what then? some glory great?
and glory got, what then? by arms to prove
Tenlarge his Realm: which got, what then but this?
to wish the rule of all the world were his?
Which sure I think, that if some man might have,
yet would his mind not sit at quiet rest:
But he would wish and somewhat seek to crave,
which might (perhaps) in deed avail him least:
Therefore say I^oh wretched state of man,
whom God can scarce content with what he can.
But for my self, God grant me grace to crave,
that he may think most meet for me to have:
God save our Queen, and God her Realm defend,
confounmd her foes, and thus I make an end:
When that this vile and wretched world is past,
God send us all the joys of heaven at last. Amen.
Finis.
These verses being read, my Muse be thought her self of a proper Gentleman,
who having been sometime a brave fellow, and lived galla^tly in Court by
Fortunes frowns, froward dealing of friends, and flattery of friendly foes,
suddenly sonke, and was forced for want of that he wished, for to leave the
court, and end his life among the country: Crew, where dolefully he dyed: at
whose departure from Court, and passage to the Country, I gave him in Verse
too read in idle time this doleful Adio, which here I recite. The man is
dead, his name not expressed. Wherefore I hope no man will find fault with
the recital: if any do, the matter is not great, and therefore at all
adventures thus it was.

SInce secret spighte has sworn my woe,
and I am driune by desteny
Against my will, (God knows) to go
from place of gallante company:
And in the steed of sweet delighte,
to reap the fruits of foul despighte:
As it has been a custom long,
to bid farewell when men depart,
So will I singe this solemn song,
farewell, to some, with all my heart:
But those my friends: but to my foes,
I wish a Nettle in their nose.
I wish my friends, their hearts content,
my foes again, the contrary:
I wish my self, the time were spente,
that I must spend in misery.
I wish my deadly foe, no wurse,
then want of friends, and empty purse.
But now my wishes thus are done,
I must begin to bid farewell:
With friends, and foes, I have begone,
and therefore, now I can not tell
What first to choose, or ere I part,
to write a farewell from my heart.
First, place of worldely paradyse,
thou gallante court, to thee farewell:
For froward fortune me denies,
now longer near to thee to dwell,
I must go live I wot not where,
nor how to live when I come there.
And next, adue you gallante Dames,
the chief of noble youths delighte,
Untowarde fortune now so frames,
that I am banishte from your sight:
And in your steed, against my will,
I must go live with cuntry gill.
Now next, my gallante youths farewell,
my lads that often have cheerde my heart:
My grief of mind no to^^ng can tell,
to think that I must from you part.
I now must leave you all (alas)
And live with some, odd lobcocke Ass.
And now farewell, thou gallante Luite,
with instruments of Musickes sounds,
Recorder, Citren, Harp and Fluyte,
and heaunely deskants on sweet grounds:
I now must leave you al in deed,
and make some Music on a reed.
And now you stately stamping steedes
and gallante geldings fair adue:
My heavy heart for sorrow bleedes,
to think, that I must part with you:
And on a strawne paniel sit,
and ride some country carting tit^e.
And now farewell both spear and shield,
Caliuer, Pistol, Ha^gubus
See, see, what sighs my heart does yield,
to think that I must leave you thus,
And lay aside my Rapier blade,
and take in hand a ditching spade.
And now farewell all gallant games
Primero and Imperial,
Wherewith I used with courtely Dames
to pass away the time with all:
I now must learn some country plays
for ale and cakes on holy days.
And now farewell each deinty dishe,
with sundry sorts of sugared wine,
Farewell I say fine flesh and fish,
to please this deinty mouth of mine:
I now (alas) must leave all these,
and make good cheer with bread and cheese.
And now all orders due farewell,
my table laid when it was noone:
My heavy heart, it irkes to tell,
my deinty dinners all are done:
With leekes and onions, whigge and whaye,
I must content me as I may.
And farewell all gaie garments now,
with Jewels rich of rare devise:
Like Robin hood, I wot not how,
I must go raunge in woodmens wise,
Cladde in a Cote of green or gray,
and glad to get it if I may.
What shall I say? but bid adne
to every dramine of sweet delighte,
In place where pleasure never grew,
in dungeon deep, of foul despite:
I must (ay me) wretch, as I may,
go sing the song of well away.
Finis.
My Muse somewhat melancholy with the reading of this pitiful parting of this
poor Gentleman, standing a while in a great dumpe, suddaynly can call to mind
a doleful discourse of a very sorrowful shroue Sondayes Supper, which a
luckelesse lover not long ago was at. Who fytting at board with his maliciyous
Mistres, received of her such undeserved frowns, and discourteous speeches, as
being returned home to his lodging after supper, sitting in his chamber all
alone, and calling to mind the perils he had past for her sake, and the
coin he had spent in her service, repenting him self, as well of his labor
as cost, both lost, Wrote in rage a few Verses of his ill hap: which
waylfull words my Muse gave me thus to write.

OH wretched wight, what fates do frown on thee?
have destenies decreed thee such distress?
Shall thou none end of this thy sorrows see?
and caust thou tell no where to seek redress?
Then sit, and sigh, and sobbe, and though long furst,
at last, thy heart with bitter pain will burst.
Look luckeles wretch, behold the pleasant sport,
the lively looks that twixt sweet lovers pass:
In joyful wise how friends to friends resort,
to make good cheer, and thou poor wretch (alas)
May sit alone, and find no merry mate,
to comfort thee, in this thy wretched state.
Where other feed on fine and deinty fare,
and fill their ears, with Musickes heavenly sound,
And have their hearts, almost deuoide of care,
and feel no woe, to work their secret wound:
I selly wretch, a thousand torments find,
each day by day, for to molest my mind.
And for my cheer, first mess, is myserie,
^erude in the dishe of foul and deep despighte:
Then, sorrows Salliet, so unsavory:
as, (God he knows) in taste yields small delighte:
Repentance root, then have I last of all,
whose taste I find, as bitter is as gall.
Then fruits of folly, served in at last,
and for sweet com^its, sundry kinds of care,
Which, God he knows, do yield such bitter taste,
as wretched he, that feeds on such fare:
Yet, so feed I, which when that I have eat,
comes churlishe looks, for to digest my meat.
My Music now, is beating on my breast,
and sobbing sighs, which yield a heavy sound,
My heart with panges of pain is ouerpreste,
which daily grow, by woe his deadly wound:
For company, in steed of loving freinde,
I find a foe, a fury, and a fiende.
And for delights, in dumpes I pass my days,
I weep for woe, when other sing for Joy,
I stand perplexte, a thousand sundry ways,
and know no mean, to rid me of anoye,
But must (aye me) perforce still stand content,
to dwell in dole, until my days be spente.
Finis.
This done, my Muse began to think upon the estate of lovers, and told me
that he was much to blame, to rage in such sort for a frown or a foul
word, he must abide twenty worse Banquets (except fortune be his great
friend) ere he atteine to his desire. For quoth she: Dulcu^ non n^uit, qui
non gustauit amarum. and therewithal, upon the same words wild me write as
follows.

BU^ by the sweet, how should we know the sour,
but by a black, how should we know a white:
How should a man enjoy one joyful hour,
that has not known some sorrow by despite?
What shall I say? what pleasure can he know,
that has not pass some pang of deadly woe?
The hungry fed, know best what is good cheer,
and poor once rich, who better knows welthe?
Who knows good cheap, but he that has bought dear?
and sick^ once hole, can Judge how good is health.
Believe me now, none better knows content,
then he, that has some time in trouble spente.
But what of him that never knew content?
that tastes no sweet, but bitter, sharp, and sour:
And all his days has still in trouble spente,
and can not hope, to find one happy hour?
Whom none alive, (but one) that comfort can,
God make that one, to help him wretched man.
Finis.
This done, my Muse studiynge of the strange estate of luckeles lovers.
bethoughte her self of a disdainful dame, whom God had blessed with better
beauty then by her behavior many ways she seemed worthy of, and chiefly,
for her discourteous dealinge with a gentleman her faithful lover, who every
way had deserved her favor, and was by equality worthy of her in every
respect: who seeing her untoward dealing, wrote upon the same in his study
alone certain verses, which as they were given me by my Muse to write, were
these following.

What gift so good? but folly may abuse.
what state so high? but fortune sets full low:
What gemme so rare? but fansy may refuse,
what Joy so great? but Frenzy turns to woe,
What faith so firm? but Fury does mistruste.
what wighte so strong? but Love lays in the duste.
What force so strong? but woe may make full weak,
what fury great? but wit may moderate:
What Frenzy such? but werines may break,
what fansy firm? but welthe will alienate:
What fortunes power? but wisdom may with stand:
what folly that? but will does take in hand.
What wretched woe? but time turns to delighte,
what wit so fine? but treason may entrappe:
What weary limme? but treasure makes light,
what welthe so great? but wastes by evil hap:
What man so wise? but fancy sets to school,
by laws of love to learn to play the fool.
What gift so good? as beauty in a maid,
what more abuse? then proudely use the same:
What Ge^^me to love? which proudely is denaide,
what madness more? then is in such a Dame:
My faith so firm, what fury does mistruste,
with foul disdaime, to sting me in the duste?
But oh that God should so his gifts bestow,
where wit does want, to govern them arighte:
And (aie me wretch) that ever I should know,
their such abuse, to work my hearts despighte*
And woe to them, that so good gifts abuse,
that pride should cause good profers to refuse.
Finis.
This done my Muse began call to mind a pretty short solemn fansy, that the
same man wrote in the time of his love, touching his il hap, which presentely
she willed me to pen, in this manner.

FLy fansy fond, and trouble me no more,
for where thou likst, thou findst unlucky lot:
Die deep desire, and vex me not so sore,
for do thy best, and it avails not,
Leave lowering love, to breed me still such grief,
as by no means, can ever find relief.
Fie fansy fie, why didste thou fix mine eye,
on such a star as so has dimde my sight:
Again, desire why didste thou clime so hye?
where thou canste never reach unto the heighte.
And cruel love, why didste thou yield me so,
a slave to her, that daily works my woe?
But all in vain I cry, my fansy still
does like her best, who wurste does like of me,
And my desire does think, perforce he will
assault the forte, that scaled can not be:
And love does force me honor her in heart,
who laughes at me, to see me live in smarte.
Finis.
Now began my Muse sodeinly to leave me, and I somewhat weary with writing, walked
abroad, to take the air: but being not gone far from my lodging, I met with a
noble man, my right good Lord, who would (no nay) have me with him to his
lodging, where I had not been long, but he commanded me to write him some
Verses. I craved of his Lordship a Theme to write upon* none would he grant,
but wild me to write what I would. I not knowing what of a sudden might best
fit his fansy, and yet desirous to pen that might like his Lordshyppe, standing
a while in a study, at last at all adventures I wrote that which I did assure
my self might no way much mislyke him, which with the help of my Muse who
met me there of a sudden, and unseen or heard, would whisper me in the ear
with what invention she thought best: such as by good hap my Lord liked
better of, then it was worthy, which was as follows.

MY Lord commaundes, that I in have do write,
somewhat in Uerse, a charge too great for me,
Whose barreine brain can no such Uerse endite,
as worthy were my lovely Lord should see:
And therefore thus, in half despair I stand,
to write or no, or what to take in hand.
Yet write I must, I see no remedy,
My Lord Commaundes, and I must needs obey:
And therefore though I shame my self thereby,
Yet write I must, I see there is no nay:
And therefore thus, not knowing what to write,
this ragged rhyme, at randon I endite.
In hope my Lord will well except my will
at his command, that seeks to do my best:
And not regard my too too simple skill,
and were it not, on this my hope did rest:
I should be so discomforted to write,
that I should sure no Uerse at all endite.
Therefore my Lord, I first must pardon crave,
for rudenes such as in my rhyme you find:
I know my Lord, your Lordshippe cannot have
a Uerse of me, that may content your mind:
My years are young, experience but small,
my learning less, and wisdom least of all.
And therefore thus I shrink, and shame to write,
but yet, in hope your Lordshippes noble mind
Will pardon that which fondly I endite,
and well accept such Uerses as you find,
I thus have wrote, (God wot) with little skill,
at your command, this Aliquid Nihil.
Finis.
This toye (though little worth) yet likte my Lord so well, as presentely he
wild me to discourse upon Aliquid, and let^ Nihil alone, at whose command,
with the help of my Muse, I wrote in this wise.

SOmewhat does bear some savor, some men say,
and where naught is, the King does loose his right:
The poor that begges from door to door, al day,
is safe, if he a penny get by night:
The little child that learnes the Christ's cross row,
is better learnde, then he that naught does know.
A cruste is better then no bredde at all,
and water serves where is there drink:
Some wit does well, though wisdom be but small,
it is better swim a stroke or two, then sink:
Better one eye, one leg, and but one hand,
then be stark blind, and cannot stir, nor stand.
Yet, to a Prince, a pound of pennies seems
a thing of naught, no sum almost at all:
Again, in schools, the learned Doctor deemes
a good gramarian, but a scoller small:
Yet do the poor a penny somewhat find,
and ABC. doooth trouble a childs mind.
And though the Baker count a Lofe no bredde,
and Uintner count good Beer, no drink at all:
And in comparison of a deep hedde,
a right good wit have understanding small,
Yet poor chawe crusts, and sup worse Broth then Beer,
and wit must serve, where wisdom is not near.
And though the man that sees with both his eyes,
does think a man with one eye sees but ill:
And he that has his limbs all sound likewise,
may think the lame on ground must needs ly still,
Yet one eye sees, one leg may help to stand,
and he may stir, that has but o^e good hand.
But this I grant, a penny (sure) to be
but little coin, to make a merry heart:
And so I think the childrens. ABC.
but little knowledge, to a learned art:
And small in deed, the savor is I know,
that by these two, is likely for to grow.
And crustes (I think) do lend relief but hard,
and cold the comfort that does water yield:
And wisdom too, from wit may not be spard,
two strokes in swimming, saues a man but seelde:
One eye sees ill, one leg but lamely stands,
he numly sturres, that lackes one of his hands.
And thus I grant, and therefore now again,
I think these sums, as good as naught at all:
I crave and have my penny for my pain,
and yet (God wot) it lendes me comfort small:
I can each letter in my Christ's cross row,
and yet in deed, me thinks I nothing know.
I chaw on crust, yet ready am to starve,
I water drink, which makes me cold at heart:
My wit I see, from wisdom quite does swerve,
I strive to swim, but cannot learn that art:
Dim is my sight, I stifely stir my hands,
and on my limbs, my body numly stands.
But as I first begun, I end again,
somewhat does well, although the sum be small:
A little plaster, does aswage much pain,
he only blessed, that needs naught at all:
Who countes al sums on earth, a sum but small
to heavenly joys, which sum God send us all.
Finis.
This discourse ended, and perused, my Lord was somewhat earnest with me, ere I
should depart from him, to write in like manner some discourse upon Nihil, and
let Aliquid alone: which though it seemed unto me heard (at the first) yer
minding to do my Lord any service I could, I took in hand, with the help of
my Muse, to write these verses following.

What must I do? write nothing? no, not so,
of nothing, I must somewhat seek to write
Of nothing? Why? What can I write, I trow
nothing yeeldes nothing, whereon to endite:
But there are choice of nothings now I see,
of which I know not, which is given to me.
But let me see, what these new nothings be,
what matter too, they give to write upon:
One nothing is, as I remember me,
a new nothing, which many a day again,
Children were wont to hang upon their sleeves:
now let me see what this new nothing gives.
Ah, now I find it shows a pretty jest,
when children cry, be it or Gyrle or boy:
To still them straight, and make them be at rest,
new nothing is a pleasant pretty toy:
So, new nothing I see, when children cry,
is a fit member in the nursery.
No more of new nothings, but now again,
an old nothing there is, and what is that?
That men do use, and some unto their pain,
do learn to know the meaning of that what:
Twixt creditours it is as some men say,
a few fair words, where is no coin to pay.
Besides these nothings now, a third there is,
which some do nothing to the purpose call,
That nothing to the purpose now is this,
when wisemen fall in talk, among them all
If some odd fool do seem to prate and clatter,
and all his talk tend nothing to the matter.
Now a fourth nothing I do call to mind,
and that is, nothing in comparison:
The meaning of which nothing, this I find,
an entrance, nothing to that which is done:
A penny to a pound, will seem so small,
as in manner seems naught at all.
Another nothing now, is nothing thought,
as when a man that has a thing to do,
Does think it easy, as a thing of naught,
and yet, when that he sets himself thereto,
He finds his nothing such a some, in deed,
as more then he can well dispatch with speed.
One nothing more, that nothing is in deed,
where credit, coin, nor wit, nor wisdom is:
New nothing, old nothing, nothing to stand in steed,
nor nothing in comparisson, I wis.
These nothings now, my self, I think possess,
and I believe, few men that can have less.
Now nothing thought, is this my fond discourse,
of all these nothings clapped together so:
Then which I think, there can be nothing worse,
and may therefore for nothing justly go.
Yet who the like does set himself unto,
shall find a foolish piece of work to do.
And thus my Lord, I must confess in deed,
I show my naught or no capacity:
To give your Lordship such a toye to reed,
as does coutanei nothing but vanity.
Yet since to write of nothing I was wild,
your Lordshippes hest (I hope) I have fulfild.
If not so well, as does in deed content,
I pardon crave, my will did wish the best:
If I had known, what had your lordship meant
To have had done, I should have soon been pressed
To beat my brains, according to my skill,
for to have writ, according to your will.
But since my theme, was nothing else but this,
a ba^e nothing for to endite upon:
If I by chance have wrote somewhat amiss,
And have besides the rules of reason gone,
I stand in hope, your Lordshippes noble mind,
will pardon all, which nothing worth you find.
Finis.
This discourse finished, and delivered unto my Lord, after some talk had
with his Lordship, I took my leave of him, and returnde home to my lodging,
but by the way, I chanced to pass by three or four gardens: and loking over
a Pale into one of the said gardens, to take the sweet air of diverse flowers
and herbs that grue near unto the pale, Iespyed sitting on a Cammamell bancke
under two or three trees, to shade them from the parching heat of the sun,
three gallant ladies: of which one so far in beauty excelled the rest, as my
thought I could not content my self enough with the singular comfort of her
sweet countenance, but let this suffice, that I stood there gazing, til the
sweet soul, to my extreme sorrow, and hearts grief, departed the place, and
then with a heavy heart as I could I returnde to my lodging, where long I had
not been, but my Muse came to me, and seeing me sit in that solemn sort, wyld
me write somewhat of the cause of my dumpes. I not knowing what to write in
that perplexity of mind, wrote as my Muse bad me, in praise of the garden for
the Ladies sake whom I had seen there, and yet for letting her go so soon,
fell out a little with it, in verse, as follows.

IF one may praise a place for harboring a guest,
in whom the stay of his delight, and chiefest joy does rest:
And eke may curse the place that harboring her so,
unto his dolor deep, again to soon did lether go:
Then let me praise the place where lodged my delight,
And curse it to, that let her go, so soon out of my sight:
Short was the time (God wot) I did her sight enjoy:
by want of which, I fear long time to live in great anoye.
Four or five hours were all that I, and that but feeld,
this gallant Lady now and than by fits sometime beheeld,
But from the (...) first that I beheld her face,
God knows within my wretched heart, how beauty hers took place:
Mine eye grue bladshed straight, for Cupid hit the vain,
that goes down straight unto my heart, and there begun my pain:
Then began my stomach work, my brain distempred to,
thus grieved in eye, head, and heart, I knew not what to do.
But to content my self, with comfort now and than,
of her sweet looks, aright relief for such a woeful man:
Which came alas but seeld, yet ever when they came,
God knows, I cannot show the joys I reaped by the same.
But what: I go too far, I meant to praise a place,
for harboring a heavenly dame for beauty and good grace:
And I am telling of the fran^icke fittes of love,
and of the hurt I caught thereby, and pangs that I do prove:
But I will leave it now, and speak somewhat in praise,
of such a place, as does deserve due praise a thousand ways.
What place is chose as chief to breed the minds delyght,
that was the place wherein I first did gain this Ladies sight:
Some think for gallant show the Court can have no peer:
but I more gallant count the place, where first I saw my dear.
For gold and Jewels rich, some speak much of Cheapside,
but there a Jewel, that may make them all their Jewels hide:
Some love in Paul's Churchyard, to spend each day by day,
to see of learned virtues laws, what ancient writers say:
The virtues of my book I cannot well declare,
but I believe what so they be, it shows them all that are:
It prudence plain descries, it loves no wrong at all,
it Fortitude does much commend, but temperate withal:
I tell you of a book, but trust me it is a dame,
who what I say, in each respect does well approve the same,
By virtuous noble mind, by comely courtly grace:
blessed be the book, worthy the wight, and happy be the place.
Some counts the Painters shop, for pictures fair and bright,
and fine proportions, a place the mind for to delight.
Then come, and here behold no foolish painted piece,
but lively dame, that soon may stain Appelles work in Greece.
Some think where Music is, that place for to be best,
the doleful mind for to delight, and set the heart at rest:
For music sweet (alas) no melody I deem
so sweet, as my sweet mistress voice, that music I esteem.
Some think that Gardens sweet, with flowers, herbs, and trees,
with knots and borders, sets and slips, and such like toys as these,
To be the chiefest place, for to delight the mind,
and there do seek in saddest moods, some solace for to find.
Their Judgments like I well, for trust me, I think so,
that such a place will soonest rid the mournyng mind of woe.
And in such place, I mean, in Garden sweet I found
by sight, the chief of my delight, yet causer of my wound,
My mistress dear, I mean the comfort of my heart:
and yet again, by absence now, the causer of my smart.
By her again, I saw in Garden where she sat,
fair flowers, sweet herbs, brave trees, fine knots, and borders too, but
what,
Upon my mistress still, was fixd my steadfast eye,
no flower nor herb, knot, border, tree, could make me look awry:
Untyl at last, too soon (alas) she went away,
and then for sorrow how I sighd, for shame I may not say.
But should I shame my self? thus much I would protest,
her then departure from my sight, yet breeds my hearts unrest.
Ha gallant Garden, yet which once with sweets did hold
so brave a dame, whose worthy praise can never well be told:
It (...) gramercy yield, that with the pleasant smell
of thy sweet flowers could find the mean, to keep her there so well.
But had thou kept her still, where now I give thee praise,
I would in heart have honored thee, til death should end my days.
What, could no gallant ant tree, nor yet the pleasant air
of some sweet flower, make her desire again to thee repair?
Surely some stinking weed among thy herbs does grow,
that gives y^^ sent, that caused her for to mistike thee so.
Or from some fruitless tree some Catterpiller fell,
upon her lap to her mislike, somewhat she likd not well.
I know not what it was, but many things I doubt,
but what it was, what so it was I would it had been out.
If that it were a weed, God soon destroy the root,
if noisome sight of fruitless tree, God lay it under foot.
If Catterpiller fell, to work her hearts annoy,
I crave of God, through all the world such vile worms to destroy:
And chiefly in that place, that none may there remain,
if ever she to my delyght do chance to come agayue:
If neither these was cause, I know not what to say,
but curse thee in my heart, for that thou letst her go away.
But since that she is gone, to thee a flat farewell,
and I my self from pleasant sweetes in doleful de^ will dwell:
And thus till she return, quight void of all delight,
adue to thee, farewell to her, and foul fall fortunes spite.
Finis.
Now by that time this discourse was full finished, it grue somewhat late in
the night: whereupon I growing somewhat drousy, had rather desire to rest then
write any more: whereupon my Muse left me, and I laid me down to sleep, and
being a sleep, I suddenly fell into a most strange dream, which in the
morning, awake, I called to mind, and as I could, I put it into verse, in order
as follows.

A piece of a Preface before the dream.
Strange are the sights that some in sleep shall see,
and stranger much, then, have been seen by day.
For proof whereof you here shall hear of me:
as I of late half in a slumber lay,
A most strange dream I suddenly fell in:
which doleful dream, (mark well) did thus begin.
The dream follows.
IN lucklesse land (a woeful tale to tell)
where never grief of any pleasure grue, The lukles^e land.

Where dire disdain and foul despite do dwell:
and of such churles a currish kind of crew,
It was my hap (me thought) not long ago, The wilderness of woe.

to travail through the wilderness of woe.
And walking long about this wilderness,
at last unto a huge great Heth I came, In the wilderness of woe the Heth of
h^uines.

Which Heth was called the Heth of heaviness,
and sure me thought might right well bear that name:
For on the same I could see no such thing,
as any way, might any comfort bring.
The ground al bare, without or hedge or tree,
save here and there a Breere or Nettle bush:
No fruit nor flower, nor herb that I could see, The description of the He^^

nor Grass almost, but here and there a rush:
And Moss, and Bents, and full of ragged stone,
and dwelling houses near it nere a one.
Well, The first vision.
walking long upon this Heth alone,
at last I stayed, whereas I heard me thought,
The voice of one that made a piteous moan,
and this he said, too long I wretch have sought
For some relief, but now too late I see,
there is no hope of comfort left for me.
And therefore home I backwardes will return,
and draw my days in dole out as I can:
And stand content perforce to wayle and mourn,
in endless grief (aye me) poor wretched man,
And with that word, he fetched a sigh so deep,
as would have made the hardest heart to weep.
Now hearing thus this waylfull ^oyce, at last
I cast about his person to epsy,
And by and by, with look more half aghast,
al skin and bones, as one at point to die,
This woeful wight (me thought) in pitious plight,
plodding alone, appeared to my sight.
And toward me (me thought) he drew so near,
as I might plain each part of him descrye:
And viewing well his sad and mournful cheer,
with heavy look, lean face, and hollow eye:
With Lathlike legs, and carkas worn to bones,
I heard him fetch full many grievous groans.
And down he sat upon a ragged stone,
and sighd, and sobd, in such a piteous sort:
As (credit me) of but half his moan,
it were a world, in kind to make report.
But to be short, his bitter tears did show,
his heavy heart abode a world of woe.
Well, with this sight in mind I heavy grieve,
yet heavy so, I thought to go and see,
What he might ayle, and yet to tell you true,
his only sight had half appauled me:
Yet neerthelesse, with much adoo, at last
unto the place whereas he sat, I past.
And coming to the place whereas he sat,
I spoke to him, and took him by the hand:
My friend, quoth I, I pray thee tell me what
may cause thee thus in such sad plight to stand
Alas, quoth he again, with heavy cheer,
what do I ayle? foud wretch what do thou here
My seely self am driune by destiny,
in doleful dumpes to spend my weery days:
In places, void of pleasant company,
Oppressed with grief, a thousand sundry ways:
But how camst thou unto this luckelesse land,
And to this place where now I see thee stand.
I wayle thy case, but thou will wayle it more,
ere that thou do get out hence again:
Here is no salve to heal the smallest fore,
nor any help to ease the lyghtest pain:
But whosoever here does catch a grief,
let him be sure to die without relief.
Here is no comfort for the heavy heart,
nor spark of joy, to cheer the mourning mind:
Causes enough, to breed an endless smart.
but healing helps, but few or none to find.
Here nothing is, but sorrow, care, and grief,
and comfort none, nor hope to find relief.
Aie me (thought I) what kind of speech is this,
how might I do, to get me hence again?
With that quod he, come wretched wight Iwis,
thou little know^^e as yet (god wot) the pain
That thou art like, and that ere long to know,
For thou shall come into a world of woe.
At which his words more half amazde in mind,
I drouping stood, as one at point to dye:
And therewith all (me thought) I began to find,
more inward grief, then now I can descrie.
In which sad plight as I a while did stand,
he rose (me thought) and took me by the hand.
And led me on, along this peuishe plain,
until at last we came unto a hill.
And there forsoothe, me thought we stayde again,
wherewith quoth he, The (...).
awhile now stay here still,
And view the heaps of harms that day by day
do fall to men, to bring them to decay.
And there (me thought) he shewde me first a knight,
a gallant youth, and sprung of noble race,
That went to wars, (...)
and being foilde in fight,
was captive taken, unto his great disgrace,
And being had, down straight the hill was led,
bound hand and foot, and hanginge down his hedde.
Whyther he went, that shall you know anon,
For I in order mean each thing to show,
And therefore well, (...) seen ^ere.
when this same knighte was gone,
there came a sight of rouers on a row,
Late ta^e at sea, and there no remedy,
were brought perforce upon three trees to die.
They once dispatched, The third.
I saw a battle fought,
a town was sackte: and man and child was slain,
The weemen there the soldiers besought
to save their childrens lives, but all in vain:
They still were slain, and they that fled away,
ran down the hill (me thought) an other way.
Thus gazyng long, I cast mine eyes about
upon the hill, (me thought) an other way,
And there (me thought) I saw a lusty route
of gallante youths, cladde all in rich array,
And suddenly (me thought) a fray began,
and one against an other fiercely ran.
Anon (me thought) one had his eyes thruste out,
an other los^e a leg, and half a hand,
The third was shrowdely wounded round about, The (...) fights of (...).

another lost both legs, and could not stand,
Some slain outright, and they that could, away
ran down the hill, and so began end the fray.
These youths thus gonne, (me thought) I saw hard by, The first

a table stand, and thereon cards, and dise:
To which (me thought) came gallants presently,
and drew their bags, and to ^t with a trise
Anon (me thought) some chafde like men half mad,
and lost almost each cross of coin they had.
And they that thus had lost their coin at play,
with heavy heart began leave the company,
And down the hill, (me thought) they took their way,
and looking after them, so by and by
He thought the rest were gone all every one,
and Cards, or Dise, or Tables, there was none.
These men thus gone (me thought) I saw alone,
a propre man of personage, but poor,
In beauy plight, The (...) and last seen^ (...)
go making piteous moan,
half like a man that begde from door to door,
And yet a man might find well by his face:
that he was (sure) sprung of no rascal race.
He likewise took his way down streighte the hill,
ploddinge alone, God wo^ in heavy plighte,
But let him go, as I thus stayed still,
me thought it grew somewhat dark toward night.
And stayinge so, the wretch that stood by me,
thus said to me: mark here what thou do see.
But there, I saw hard happes a thousand more,
then here I can almost well call to mind,
But with those syghts in heart ag^ieue^ sore:
and yet in (...) more such sad sights to find,
Amazd I stood, as one more half aghast,
to see the haps that on that hill had past.
And standing so, alas my friend, quoth I,
what do thou call the name of this same hill?
Hill of hard hap they call it commonly,
where none do come, but sore against their will^
Thus is it called, quoth he, but now (alas)
thy self art like along this Hill to pass.
And to be short, along on still we went,
and to the hill we onwardes took our way:
And sure I know not what the matter meant,
but the foot path (me thought) I went in, lay
Directly so, as he that made such moan,
crossed the path before me all alone.
Well on we went upon this hapless hill, (...) vale (...).

until at last we came unto a vale,
Where I may say, I was against my will:
for I will tell you the most doleful tale,
Of that I saw, that ever any man,
doubtless did see, since first the world began.
First there I saw dark prisons built of stone, he mise^s seen ^re.

with iron bars, and boltes, and fetters cold:
And many a one that made a piteous moan:
that lay in them (against their wills) in hold.
Among the rest (alas) a pite^^s sight, (...)

me thought I saw the gallant youthful knigh^,
That bound, was le^ along the hill before,
in dungeon deep close kept and settered fast:
Where all in vain his hap lamenting sor^,
in sobbing sighs his loathsome life he past:
A piteous sight, believe me, for to see,
so brave a youth in such a state as he.
In other prisons saw I many lie, Second sight of mis^ry^^

some men for debt, and some for robbery:
Some men sore sick, almost at point to dye,
some begd in holes, in extreme misery:
And many more in such a rufull sort,
as for my life I cannot make report.
Now next me thought I saw lame Criples poor,
that limping went and begd for Christ his sake: Third.

That had liud well, now begd from door to door:
and few or none, of them would pity take,
But still they went lamenting of their grief
to many one, but could get no relief.
Among the rest, me thought I did epsy
some of those youths that fought upon the hill, ^ourth.

With wodden legs, and some but with one eye,
go begging food, their hungry guts to fill:
Lamenting there, but God wot all to late,
their froward hap, and their such wretched state.
But let them be, then saw I more (alas)
a piteous sight, believe me, for to see,
With bitter tears and cries poor women pass,
more half bestraught, along the vale by me:
And sure me thought the moon that they did make,
with very grief did make my heart to ache.
Which viewing well, me thought I plain did see,
the women, that went running from the town
That late was sackte, go to and fro by me,
with sighs and sobbes, and heddes all hanging down, (...)

Lamenting sore, but God wot all in vain,
the loss of goods, and child, and husband slain.
Then saw I more some men in wretched state,
quite mouilesse, and ill appareled:
That welthy were, and liude at ease of late, (...)

now had no lodge wherein to hide their head,
But ragde and torn, without or coin or friend,
in beggars state, were like their lives to end.
Among the which, (me thought) I saw at last,
the youths that lost their coin at dise of late,
Now grown so poor, Eight.
as had no coin to wast,
but begging went, in miserable state:
A grievous sight to see such youths as they,
so suddenly, to fall to such decay.
But let them go, then further saw I next,
a doleful sight, and that did grieve me sore:
Wherewith (me thought) I was so sore perplexte,
as naught I saw (me thought) did grieve me more: (...).

Which sight was this, (me thought) I plain did see,
a man alone, come plodding hard by me.
Which man me thought, seemde doubtless to be he,
that all alone, I saw go down the hill: Tenth. And last seen (...).

And this he said, ah wretched wretch, (aye me)
the heavy heart, what will no sorrow kill,
But shall I thus still pine, in endless woe?
have destenies decreed it shall be so?
What did thou mean to leave thy natyue soil,
thy lands, and goods, and parents, kith and kin?
And take in hand this tough and tedious (...),
and now abide the state that thou art in^
Has little love, fond wretch subdude thee so?
to drive thee into such a world of w^e?
Yea, luckeles love has only bred my hale,
the force of love, perforce has conquered me:
And driune me now, into this doleful dale,
where I can yet no kind of comfort see:
But here am like, bereft of all delight,
to end my days, in dumpes of deep despite.
I travail here to tire my reffles mind,
that being tirde perforce might fall to rest:
But here (alas) no place of rest I find,
but still must walk, with endless woes oppressed:
Well may I sigh, and sobbe, and wail, and weep,
but waking woes will never let me sleep.
Yet rest I must, there is no remedy,
but where might I go seek a resting place?
Oh Lord that I could find some lodging nigh,
or cotage poor, yea were it nere so base:
But well I see, since none I here can have,
I will go see, if I can find a cave.
And therewithal, me thought, he went away,
toward the foot of hard happes hill hard by,
Whereas a while (me thought) I saw him stay,
with sighing sobbes lamenting rufully:
But mourning so, I wo^ not how anon,
I lookte aside, and he (me thought) was gone.
Which muzing at, of him that was with me,
me thought I askde whyther he might be gone.
To which he said, come on and thou shall see:
for I will bring thee to the place anon.
And by and by (ere I was were) me thought,
unto the place he me directly brought.
Where being come, me thought I began epsy,
a foul dark hole, full loathsome to behold:
Yet nerethelesse we went in presently,
but being in, me thought it was so cold,
That all my lymmes, with cold did almost quake,
And even my heart with very cold did ache.
The cave me thought was large, and somewhat round,
made in proportion much like a man's head:
Where walking long, The ca^e of care. Under hard hap^ b^ll.
anon me thought I found,
sitting alone, a man almost half dead,
With wrinckled brows, and hollow watery eyes,
reading a book in very doleful wise.
And by and by, me thought, I plain did see,
the man again whose sight I late had lost:
With book in hand, as heavy as might be,
at study close, with carkas like a ghost,
Uttring these words, oh courteous care I crave,
now let me see what lesson I must have.
Wherewith me thought the man with watery eyes,
and scouling brows that seemde so like a ghost, (...)

Began take a book, and when in wailfull wise,
a thousand leaves he to and fro had tossed:
He answered this, no lesson here I find,
in this distress, that may relieve thy mind.
With that me though the rose, and took his way,
within the cave, but whyther, let that pass:
And of the rest that in the cave did stay,
let me say somewhat, of their state alas:
Some propre youths, and some fair gallante Dames,
which well I knew, but now forget their names.
To these poor souls this man half like a ghost, The book^ of (...)

who as I learnde by name was called Care,
Began lessons reed, of which I think the most
were, of the brain the virtues to declare:
Which whom they serude out of the cave they ran,
the rest began follow all, the wo^ull man
That went before along this wretched cave,
tormented sore in great and deep distress:
And sought in vain the thing he could not have
unto his grief to find some sweet redress,
But where think you, they found him at the last?
where all good hope of comfort quite was paste.
Sittinge (alas) upon a sorry seat
by a poor soul close by a smoky fire Seat of sorrow in cave of care under
hand haps (...).

And neither crumme of either bread or meat
they had (alas) nor ought they did desire:
But weepinge sat with sighs and sobbes so deep,
as would have made a stony heart to weep.
Upon which seat in letters fair to reed
was written this in vale of miserye:
In cave of care, a doleful den in deed,
is so^rowes seat, and that vile wretch am I.
And that was he, right over there whose hedde
did stand this solemn sentence, to be read.
Well on this seat they sat all down anon,
and I (me thought) sat down among the rest. (...)

But (credit me) desirous to be gone
I felt my heart with grief so sore oppressed:
But credit me, desirous to be gone,
I felt my heart, with grief so sore oppreste.
But what of that? I could not as I would,
and therefore there must bide still, as I could.
And sitting there, it were a world to tell,
the sundry sorts of sorrows I did see: Sundry sorrows.

But credit me, if that there be a hell,
doubteles I think that it, if any be
Such, and so many were the sorrows there,
as sure the like are to be seen no where.
There saw I some, to tear their flesh for grief,
some sygh, and sobbe, some beating of their breast,
Some crying out, for some spark of relief,
some more half dead, and not one man at rest,
For diverse causes, some for loss of love,
and they were wurste, that such sore panges did prove.
Some did in vain the loss of friends lamente,
some loss of Lands, some husband, and some wife,
Some of the wealth that they in wast had spente,
and every man quyte weary of his life.
But those that wayld their loss of love, alas,
of all the panges (me thought) yet they did pass.
For one of them that lost their ladies love,
in Jewels ware their Mystris Counterfeate
The sight whereof such sodeine grief did move,
as though before, his grief was very great,
And such in deed as did tormente him sore,
yet sight of that, did make it ten times more.
Some other thought upon their luckeles love,
and then with tears would sigh, in pyteous sort,
And diverse ways such sudden pa^ges did prove,
as for my life I cannot make report:
I want the skill to set out half in kind,
the sundry sorrows, that I there did find.
But this I say, I think there is no pain,
no kind of grief of body nor of mind, The greatest sorrow grief of love.

No secret pange, but there appears plain,
and every man, that comes there may find:
And as I said, so now I say again,
the panges of love do breed the greatest pain.
Well, sitting thus, aside I cast mine eye, Dungeon of Despai^e. Once in

and there me thought, I saw a dungeon deep,
And on the wall, was written but hard by,
this is the dungeon, that despair does keep:
Who comes here, till death shall pine in pain,
and once come in, gettes never out again.
And therewithal, a door was opened,
and one or two went in there presently,
But having scarcely well put in their hedde,
they wroung their hands, and made a p^^eous cry,
And sodaynely, did such a shriking make,
as made me start, and therewithal awake.
And then awake I began to call to mind,
this vision strange, Sudden waking.
that thus appearde to me:
Theffect of which, who so could justly find,
I do not doubt some matter rare should see:
And thus I end, when worldly woes are past,
God send us all the joys of heaune at last.
Finis.
This doleful discourse, of this drowsye dream being fynished, my Muse that
left me over night, came to me again, and ^^^ught to my mind the delicate
Lady whom I took view of in a Garden of which Garden (for her sake,) I wrote
my mind at my coming to my lodging, as before my dream does here appear*
the remembrance of whose heavenly hiew, with perfect proportion of e^he part
from top to toe, with most ^are inward virtues (greatly gessed and almost
plainly perceived by outward countenance) set me of the sudden in such a
people vitie, as more half in a maze my Muse wild me presently to write thus
madly of my passion as you see, which was as follows.

What hap so hard, as lucklesse lottes of love?
what irksome time, to lovers doleful days?
What griping griefs, to pangs that lovers prove?
what travail tough, to lovers weary ways?
What doleful doom, to lovers froward fate?
what loathsome life, to wretched lovers state?
Lo, such a life lead I, though gaynst my will,
I live quoth I, no no, I dye, I dye:
I dye quoth I, no no, I live still, still.
I dying live, that wretched life lead I,
I loath the days that thus in dole I spend:
and yet again not wish them at an end.
Yet ^^uld I wish my sorrow some redress,
and would be glad that all my dole were done:
But would not wish my life one half hour less:
though all my griefs were yet anewe begone.
For only love has bred me this unrest,
and I of force must yield unto his hest.
My lyking first did breed my lucklesse love,
and love again has bred my malady,
My malady does breed the pangs I prove,
the pangs I prove do find no remedy.
Yet must I live, and may not wish to die,
to end my griefs, Oh what a life lead I?
Finis.
A dialogue between a lover, an his beloved.
The lover to his Lady.
IF due desartes may reap desires,
good madam, grant me my reward:
If reason yield, that right requires,
then let my suite at last be hard:
If neither these will serve, why than,
for pitties sake hear a poor man.
Her aunsweare.
Desartes (be sure) will reap desire,
if you of me deserve reward,
What reasonably you will require,
I am content, you shall be hard:
And last of all, for pitties sake,
lets see, I pray, what moan you make.
The lover to his Lady.
The thing good Lady I desire,
is favor yours, which I deserve,
The thing by reason I require,
is due reward to those that serve:
The thing for pitties sake I crave,
is comfort to my grief to have.
Her aunsweare.
My favor that you so desire,
I cannot see how you deserve:
^^e does my reason yet require,
that all should have reward that serve:
Ne yet thy sickness such I see,
as should me move to pity thee.
His reply.
Let pity then regard procure,
where is at al no due desert,
And lend some comfort, for to cure
the sick, that pines in secret smart:
And then will reason justly say,
that you are noble every way.
Her aunsweare.
No sir, reason does give, you say,
of right, reward to due desert,
Then if that you can show some way,
for to deserve some ease of smart,
Doubt not, but pity will procure
some kind of salve, your sore to cure.
His reply.
I think good Lady I deserve,
in that in deed I do desire:
And if the poor man that does serve,
by reason may reward require,
Then both by reason, and desert,
I may crave pity for my part.
Her aunsweare.
In that you do in deed desire,
your truth is for to be regarded:
And reason likewise does require,
that service true, should be rewarded,
And pity says, the poorest man
must be relieved, now and than.
His reply.
In humble wise, then I desire,
regard my truth, reward the same,
Let humble reason eke require
your favor so deserude, fair Da^e,
And pity me poor man God wot,
that lives (alas) but ioieth not.
Her Answer, and so an end.
Then thus I grant thee thy desire,
my favor friendely, what I may,
But if that further you require,
by reason I must say you nay,
Til pity move me to regard,
to give a poor man his reward.
Finis.
Now this Gentileman one day standing in a great muze of his Mystris, and in a
strange perplexity for the love of her, sodeinly starte out of his study, and
being alone in his Chamber, took Pen and Incke and Paper, and in half a mad
mood, wrote upon the state of lovers: which I (having some acquaintance with
him) one day coming in to his Chamber found lynge in his window, which
having read over, I bare in mind as I could, yet having almost forgotten it,
my Muse brought it again to my remembrance, and made me write as follows:
which though it were imperfect, and not full finished, yet for that it somewhat
likde me, I have here placed it with other imperfections.

OH bitter bale that wretched lovers bide,
now well, now il, now up, now down again:
Now clime, now fall, now stand, now backewarde slide,
now joy with hope, now faint with fear again:
Now simile, now sigh, now sing, now seem to cry,
now well in health, now sick, now live, now dye.
And as their joys by diverse means arise,
even so their griefs, of sundry causes grow:
Some joy to gaze upon their Ladies eyes,
and think in deed, they make a heaunely show,
Some more do mark the feature of their face,
some most will view her comely gallant grace.
Some greatly note the color of her hear,
some view her body, some her heart, some arm:
Some leg, some foot, and some look every where,
but how now? soft, why faith I mean no harm:
I do but speak of lovers day delyght,
for in the dark, you know there is no sight.
Now as their joys, so see what sorrows spring,
even of those things that wrought the hearts delight,
First from the eyes, which as to some they bring
a heaunely joy, so breed they others spite,
For all one face, can as well laugh as lowre,
by which such looks, it yeeldes both sweet and sour.
For proof (alas) my seely self I vow,
a smiling look does much my heart revive:
And let me see my Lady knit her brow,
that frown my heart into despair does drive.
Thus to be brief, my mystris only eye,
may make the mean to make me live or dye.
Finis.
Not long after he had written these verses, his Mystris upon a coy conceit,
began to frown on him, and give him very evil countenance, which he
perceiving, made many means to move her to pity, but when nothing would serve
his turn, he in great grief one day sytting alone in his Chamber, wrote in
lamenting verse these lines following, which being my chance to read, my Muse
brought me now in remembrance of, and wild me to write as follows.

IF wailfull words might any pity move,
or sighs, or sobbes, or daily bitter tears:
Then might my bale bewray to my beh^oue,
the wretched state, wherein my life it wears:
But what will me prevail to show my grief?
when I am sure to dye without relief.
For peevish pride possesses pityes place,
and rigor rules where sweet remorse did raygne:
Disdain is grown so great with beaulties grace,
that humble suit can now no favor gain:
A froward change (more pity) God he knows,
that gentle dames should grow such stately shrowes.
But since the world is grown to such a pass,
that courtesy is chaungd to cruelty,
And malice lurkes where open meekenes was,
and frowns do stand for friendly amity:
I must (aye me) perforce content remain,
until the world do change ane we again.
Or else, be sure to keep my self aloof,
where Bullet shot of big looks flee I see:
Or armor make of patience of proof,
to break their force that may hap light on me
And when I see that all the shot are past,
then live in hope, that she will yield at last.
Finis.
Not many days after, this youth languishing daily, for lack of his Mistress
love, willing to let his Mistress understand of the woe he abode, and daily
lyude in for her sake: One day in Verse he wrote his mind unto her, And
found means to deliver it unto her. Which how she receiude or requited, I
must not reveal, let it suffice that I only came by the Verses, and that
fryendlye I lend them you to read, which are these that follow.

BEhold I crave oh noble dame no feigned painted tale,
but read in deed a true discourse of the most bitter bale,
That ever any man abode, since first the world began,
which wretched state, (alas) is ^^ine, and I that woeful man.
I can not show in kind the sum of all my smart,
no pen can paint, nor tongue can tell the torments of my heart,
No heart almost can think, nor mind conceive but mine,
how there should grow such passing pangs as those wherein I pine,
But my poor heart does feel, and mind conceaues to well,
although my tongue does want the skill in order how to tell,
Yet thus much I can say, no bale but I abide,
no pleasure that in all the world, but is to me denide,
And if above all griefs, a secret grief there be,
that restes in one odd man alone, that sure does rest in me:
And for to show good proof that it must needs be so,
my wretched state may witness well, in me a world of woe:
The ^aies I pass in dumpes, in doleful dreams the nights,
each minute of an hour, in moan, quite void of al delights,
My heavy heart is furst with sorrow so oppressed,
as never restes, but beats, and throbbes within my woeful breast.
And when in mind I toss the torments of my heart,
I ^^gh, I sobbe, I wail, and weep, and so augment my smart:
And mourning daily thus, my brain distempers so,
as makes me hang even like a logge my hedde, whereas I go.
Mine eyes with shedding tears grow hollow in my hedde:
my flesh is fallen, skin grown to bones, and like a man half dead,
I still consume with care, and thus quite worn with woe,
I linger forth a loathsome life, the Lord of heaune does know*
What shall I say? my heart is so oppressed with grief,
as all the pleasures in this world can lend me no relief,
Save only one (alas) which one, I fear will see,
me die for sorrow for her sake, ere she will pity me:
Alas what have I said, and is it then a she?
yea sure it is, now judge your self what she this she may be.
But what hard heart had she that saw my sorrow such,
and could relieve me in this case, and her good will would grutch?
Believe me now I vow, thou art that only she,
who wrought my woe, and in my woe can only comfort me:
Yea thou dear dame art she, for whom such thought I take,
and for the want of thy sweet love it is such moan I make.
Be not then hard of heart, but some sweet comfort lend,
unto this heavy heart of mine, whose life is near at end:
That I may justly say in heart yet before I die,
I found a friend of noble mind, in mine extremity.
And if it be my hap to live, oh noble dame,
the^ I may say, thou saudste my life, for sure thou do the same.
Consider of my case, and when you see me next,
some sign of comfort show to him, that is thus sore perplexed.
Until which time dear dame, and till last gasp of breath:
farewell from him who looks from thee, for cause of life or death.
In have God send good speed, from me thy servant true,
receive these lamentable lines, and so sweet soul adue.
By him who rests, at thy relief,
to live in joy, or pine in grief.
Finis.
NOw I am sure you think the man was in a marvelous taking when he wrote, and
doubtless so he was, and so let him be, til God send him better hap by desert to
get favor of his Mystris, or present death, too rid him out of his
perplexities: for I am sure, that he would rather wish for, then long to
remain in the wretched state that now he every way stands in. But since my
wishes can neither do him good, nor he him self can find no means too get
ease of grief, I refer him to the help of God, who can help every man that
trusts in him, and prays for his help: and so, letting him rest in his
perplexity, till God only cende him deliverance, I leave to write now any
further of him or his passions.

Finis.
A pretty tale with the Moral upon the same.
A Praeface.
IN feigned tales a man sometime may find,
in secret sort some pretty matter mente:
Which meanings often when they are found in kind,
they breed too some, yea many mynds content,
For proof whereof, my self a tale will tell,
I read of late, that likte me very well.
The Tale.
A Stout strong Oak, grue by a river side:
by which hard by, there grue a weak small reed:
The stately Oak, full puffed up which pride,
disdaind to stand so near so weak a weed.
And in old time, when trees, and stones could speak,
thus to the reed he began his stomach break.
Thou peevish thing, and apishe wretch (quoth he)
What do thee here? such neighbors I disdain,
Which too and froo, thus tossed still I see,
as every wave would seem too rende in twain.
I see right well, thou art to base of mind,
to stoop so low, at every puff of wind.
The simple reed still wagging to and fro,
began answer thus, ah gallant sir quoth he:
None of us both our ends (as yet) do know,
you may in time, come lie along by me:
Content your self, I pray you let me stand
with in your ditche, I trouble not your land.
Contending thus, a sodeine tempest came,
and to be short, down fell this lusty tree:
The little reed beholding of the same,
alas Good sir: what do you here quoth he?
Of all your strength, what may now becumme?
to which the Oak could answer naught, but numme.
His heart was burste, and there stark dead he lay,
the reed he liude, and grue there gallant still,
The Oak so burst, the Landlorde bare away,
and then the reed had all the world at will,
Until with age he grue so very dry,
that sap did want, and then he needs must die.
And farewell he, and so the tale did end,
which though in deed, a feigned toy it was,
Yet he that marks, whereto the same does tend,
may find Iwis, that simple souls alas,
Do hold up hedde, when gallant sir does fall,
and breaks perhaps, both hedde, and heart, and all.
Finis.
An other pretty Tale of a Pygeon, and an Ante, with the Moral upon the same.
A Dove sometime did sit upon a tree,
which grue, by chance, hard by a water spring,
Where pretty fool, as Pygeons natures (be)
she proyning sat, and pecking of her wing,
And being fair, when all her work was done,
she cooing sat, with breast against the son.
But ere she slepte, about she began to pry,
for fear some foe would bid her to a feast,
And prying so, down right she cast her eye,
and there she saw a pretty little beast,
By froward hap, but how I can not tell,
a little Ante into the water fell:
And there was like in danger deep to drown,
which when the dove, a little while beheld,
A little twigge, by chaume she brake her down,
to clyme the bank, some help thereby to yield:
And by good hap, but with a little pain,
it serude so well, as helpde her out again.
Then slepte the dove, the ante she crepte about,
and dryde her self, against the glosyng son,
But soddenly, see what a chance fell out,
a fouler lo, to set his nets begone,
To catch the dove, that sat upon the tree:
which when the Ante, the pretty wretch did see,
She slily crepte into the Foulers shoe
and there, so hard she bit him by the heel,
As he in rage not knowing what too do,
the smarte was such, that he thereby did feel,
^s he there with his engynes began let fall,
and so both lost his labor, cost, and all.
For with the noise the pigeon began awake,
and so awake, the fouler did descrye,
And so descride, her flighte away did take,
and so by hap, did save her self thereby:
The Ante again she s^^ly crepte away,
into the grass, where hid from hurt she lay.
Finis.
The Moral.
NOw see, what matter this old toie conteines,
twixte beasts and birds, behold what thankful mind,
And yet twixte men, ungrateful some remains,
yea most perhaps, where they most good do find:
Which proves, (me thinks) a pity not the least,
to see a man wurse naturde then a beast.
An odd gretinge, and as mad a wooing between a clown of the country, and
his sweet heart. Whose names were Simon and Susan. Simon ouertaking his
foresaid sweet Susan, having some former acquaintance with her, and yet not
all so frolyke, as to clappe her on the lippse in a cold morninge after the
country fashion, went cunningly as he durst to work with her: saluting her
with some friendely speech, which she as handsomely answered. The words
between them were these that follow: I laughed at them heartily when I heard
them, and I persuade my self, that some that read this record of them, will
smyle a little at it, be they never so solemn. I pende them for mine own
pleasure. I hope they will displease none, who lykes not the reading of it,
turn over the leaf, and you shall find somewhat else to your contentmente.
Well, to the matter, though women are commonly full of tongue, and ready of
speech, yet when they are wooed, they must be first spoken to, or else they
will condemn their woer for a fool: and therefore Simson having on his
considering cappe, although not a man of the greatest capacity, yet as his
audacity serude him, he boldly brake forth into this salutacion.

Simon. Fair maid well ouertane, what? whyther now so fast?

Sus. To market Sim. it is nine a clock, had not I need make have:

Sim. But sof^e fire makes sweet malte, ^ush you take to much pain.

Sus. The world is hard, they must take pain that look for any gayn.

Sim. Well said, but what? me thinks you ginne to thrive to soon.

Sus. Who lies in bed till Dinner time, gains little after noo^e.

Sim. Why then betymes is best each matter to begin.

Sus. Who lettethe s^ppe convenient time, is little like to win:

Sim. Oh but how should one find that same conueniente time?

Sus. Why it is no more, but taking May, While it is in the prime.

Sim. May grows on every bushe, and Time is common too.

Sus. But that May is not wurth a rushe: that Time will little do.

Sim. Why what, are there more Mayes? and more times to the^ one?

Sus. So I have heard, but for my self, sure I can tell of none.

Sim. I pray thee, tell me

Sus. What times and Mayes they be?

Sus. I told thee once: I know them not, then ask no more of me.

Sim. Yet one thing would I crave, if that with leave I may:

Sus. I am content too answer you, so that no harm you say.

Sim. If that my words offend, think them against my will.

Sus. The^ be aduisde before you speak, else keep your words in still.

Sim. I may think to speak well, yet may be taken amiss,

Sus. Speak plain, and I will take you right, in dark speech doubt there is.

Sim. Yet plainene^ now a days is counted patchery.

Sus. Yet plainenes with plain folks is best, as such as you, and I.

Sim. Then plainly let me know: what means that May in pryme.

Sus. I told you once, it is no more, but taking time in time.

Sim. In deed time wisely taken, bringes many things to pass.

Sus. Then who does loose convenient time, may well be thought an ass.

Sim. How happy is that man whom time does serve a right?

Sus. And he whom no time fitly serves, unhappy is that wight.

Sim. Fortune is friend to fools, and wise men have ill hap.

Sus. But wise men warily will watch, to sit in fortunes lap.

Sim. Some men may watch and wait, yet nere a whit the nere.

Sus. Who lies and sleeps in sowing time, shall reap small gain that year.

Sim. And yet who sowes too soon, at reaping will repent.

Sus. Better too soon yet then too late, when all the year is spent.

Sim. The grain that first is sown, I trow be called Rye.

Sus. But knauish weeds so choke that corn, it proves but trompery.

Sim. What say you then of Otes? they must be latest sown.

Sus. But some will sow them first of all, and mow them scarce half grown.

Sim. Well, but Otes sown in time, will prove a pretty grain.

Sus. But who does seek to sow wild Otes, shall reap but little gain.

Sim. In deed I think wild Otes, are scarcely worth the mowing.

Sus. And yet I see young husbandmen, do think them worth the sowing.

Sim. Among good Otes perhaps they sow some now and then.

Sus. But who does sow the good with badde, is no good husbandman.

Sim. Perhaps too unawares, they sow some here and there.

Sus. How they are sown I know not, but they come up every where.

Sim. When they are sown with Rye, they ranckest grow in deed.

Sus. Well it is pity for to sow such trashe, among good seed.

Sim. Why? then is Rye good corn?

Sus. Yea, if it be right grain.

Sim. If otherwise what then?

Sus. Why then, I eat my word again.

Sus. But go to Sim. in faith me thinks I smell a Rat.

Sim. A Rat my wench, I pray thee say, what do thou mean by that.

Sus. Nay softly Sim. a while, I leave you that to guess.

Sim. I guess thee an unhappy Girl, and thou will prove no less.

Sus. Why I thank God, I had no great il hap of late.

Sim. Go to I say, I see iwis, thou have a shrewishe pate.

Sus. You guess me by your self, I am content to bear it.

Sim. Bear it good Sus, yea and more to then this, I no whit fear it.

Sus. How mean you bearing Sim. although I bear with you,
yet will I bear no more then needs, with none I tell you true.

Sim. No reason, marry wench, you are my friend I see.
that having been so bold with you, that you will bear with me.

Sus. Think not I am your foe, and though I be a shrow,
a shrow is better then a sheep, you will confess I trow.

Sim. Such gentill shrowes as you, are to be borne withal.

Sus. You never tryde my shrowishnes,

Sim. but yet I guess it small.

Sus. I heard my father once say, sittinge at his Table,
a shrow profitable, might serve a man reasonable.

Sim. Well said

Sus. for your self, but leaving of your jest,
will you a matter answer, that I would of you request?

Sus. Yea

Sim. that I will.

Sim. then.

Susan let me know

Si. What thou do mean, I pray thee now to say, that such a shrow
as profit brings, might any man of reason well content,
what ere your fathers words did mean, would I knew what you mente.

Sus. I mean plain as I said, such shrowes as profit bring,
may men of reason well content, I meant none other thing.

Sim. Yes

Sus. if I were sure, I might no whit offend,
I could perhaps give a shrowde guess whereto your words do tend.

Sus. Why Simon say thy mind, I freely give thee leave.

Sim. Why then my wenche, I tell thee plain, I thus much do conceive*
I am, as well thou know, my fathers only son,
thou know again, how madly I my youthful race have run,
and now I think thou see, how I begin to thryue,
and thryuing now you may suspecte, that I would seek to wyue:
and seeking now to wyue, I better were to choose,
a shrowishe wench, then sheepish shut, which reason would refuse.

Sus. In deed you miss not much, for he that well does know
the difference twixt shrowes and sheep, will choose the woman shrow.

Sim. Yet I have herd some say, that both in charge do keep,
they found more ease, and profit to, by keepyng of their sheep.

Sus. But take my meaning right, and I can easily show,
how that a sheep can not compare in goodness with a shrow.

Sim. I pray thee say thy mind, that reason would I see:
twixte shrowes and sheep, to make plain proof, that shrows should better be.

Sus. Then Simon mark my words, a shrowe may have a face,
as fair as sheep, and fairer too, and bear as good a grace.

Sin. Yet some will say that shrowes, are long chinde, and sharp nos^e,
and froward frowning marres their face, when they are il disposd.

Sus. But frowns are quickly gone: when sulleine skouling sheep
will pout and swel, and in their mynds will malice longer keep.

Sim. No: sheep are kind of heart, who rather seem to dye,
to have unkindness offered them, then skoule so sulleinly.

Sus. Yea, some I think in deed, put finger in the eye,
to counterfeit good nature so, sometime without cause why.

Sim. Yea say you so, in deed, have women such odd shifts?

Sus. Yea men and women both, sometime do use deceitful drifts.
But as I said of shrowes, although they frown a while,
yet by and by their anger past, they will as kindly smile.

Sim. In deed

Sus. sulleine sheep are worse then any shrowes,
but of the two if one must choose, the choice is hard God knows,
Yet wenche I pray thee, on some other reason show,
to show the badnes of a sheep, and goodness of a shrowe.

Sus. Why? Shrowes will save a sheep, and gayn perhaps a Hog,
when sheep can scarcely save themselves, without the shepherds Dog

Sim. Sheep do naught but give suck unto the little Lamme,
and if she be a lamb her self, then she must after damme.
and if she be well kept, perhaps she will seem fair,
but if she fall a little sick, her beauty soon will pair.
Besides, they subject are to many sicknesses,
the cough, the rot, and many mo too tedious to express,
and if they fall once sick, what cost with physic then?
such cost, as if they lie long sick, vndooeth many men.
And yet when all is done, the peevish hielding dye,
and then must mourn, for loosyng of a foolish harlotrye.

Sus. When shrowes can tend the sheep, and look unto the lamb,
and now and then as duty wills, they will unto the damme,
and when they find them selves or sick or ill at ease,
a pynte of Malmesey physic is, that cures their disease.
a cup of ale and graynes, a posset of good sack,
will make them merry at the heart, and strengthen well the back.
and more half dead to day, tomorrow up again,
about the house, as merry as if they had forgot the pain:
not puling like a (...), that if her finger ache,
Must have her dinner in her bed with a white buttarde Cake,
And for a se^^ightes space, keep her bed every day,
And so do spend her husbands thriht, and take no care which way.
And when she comes abroad, go puling up and down,
Husband in faith I am not well, when make you up my Gown?
Shall I go like proud every day, and Sondaies in the same?
Good

Sim. if you serve me so you are too much too blame.
And thus gay geere is all, they set their minds upon:
But think not how the world will go, when coin is spent and gone.
Now many other things, I could as easily show,
To prove a sheep may not compare in goodness with a shrow.

Sim. Berlady

Sus. well said, thy reasons well approve
Commodious shrowes, far more then sheep do justly merit love:
And were thou such a shrowe, as so would save a sheep,
I soon would wish my self the charge, so good a shrow to keep.

Sus. If, and, or, but, and such, are words for Lawyers fit:
Who will not venture at a mark, is never like to hit.
Of women sheep from shrowes are hard to be espide:
What thing can perfectly be known, till it be thoroughly tried.

Sim. Naught venture nothing have, in deed so some will say,
But some in ventring often to far, do work their own decay:
And he that takes in hand to venture on a wife,
Is like to gain, by ventring so, a woe or joyful life:
Now then ere a man choose, he had need well to know
The disposition of his wife, if she be sheep or shrowe.
But to the purpose

Su. that first I meant to say,
And that which was the only cause, that made me come this way:
For to be plain, is this, be thou or sheep or shrow,
A sheep thou art not out of doubt, nor greatly shrow I trow.
This is my mind my wenche, now I would seek to thrive,
And that I think no man can do, unless he seek to wiue,
And having now desire to wedde, and take to wise a wi^e,
With whom to live upon mine own, and lead an honest life,
And yet not having set my love on any one,
Mine own good Susan, now that we be both here al alone,
I pray thee tell me now, could such a shrow as thou,
Content thy self with such a sheep as I, how say thou now?

Sus. A sheep, nay by the Roode, I rather would have guest
you, more a Hog like, then a sheep: But touching your request,
I thus do answer you: it lies not in my hand:
What pleases God, I must of force with that contented stand.
And if you can content your self to match with me,
I do not think a matter small should make us disagree.

Sim. Give me thy hand of that.

Sus. Nay soft, bar hands I pray,

Sim. No hand? why then, I see we shall no bargayne make to day.

Sus. Bargayne? why no.

Sim. soft, what bargayne should we make?
I have no ware for you, I must at market money take.

Sim. Yet would I cope with you for some ware that you have,
that you will not at market sell. But pray thee let me crave,
thus much yet at thy hands, thou will not angry be,
what ere I say, for in good sooth, I do but jest with thee.

Sus. Then if you do but jest, it may be as you say,
we are not like as I do think, to bargayne sure to day.

Sim. Tush Susan you take me wrong, I swear vnsaignedly,
give me thy hand, and we will make a bargayne by and by.

Sus. Oh Sim. I say bar hands, lets hear the matter f^rst,
For some I know with wringing hands, their giving hands have cursed.
But say your mind, and then I will contented stand,
if that I like the bargain well, to let thee have my hand.

Sim. Then bargayne we or not, the matter wench is this:
I feign would have the for my wife: what, shall I hit or miss?
If well thou can content thy self to match with me,
give me thy hand and here is mine, and we will soon agree.

Sus. Say thou so Sim? Content. Here hold and have my hand.

Sim. A bargayne then.

Sus. Right willingly I do contented stand.

Sus. Let us to market then, there shall I meet my Neame,
about eleven a clock lets meett^, and eat a ^^sse of Cream.
At the old Sarsins head be there and slay for me,
by then my market will be done, and I will come to thee.

Sim. Contented wench, and bring thy brother to,
we will be merry, and w^ll have a quart of wine or two.
A mess of Serwaberies, and Cheries, and good cheer,
and so farewell, it is forward days, the clock strikes (...) I hear.
Thus parxed

Sim. and

Su. to market goes the maid,
to Tavern goes my gentle

Sim. who holds him well apayd,
that he has got

Sus. hand, the bargayne now is made,
A coltish Jack shall wedded be, unto askittish Jade.
in field the hands were (...), in Tavern now shall be
the match made up, now who were there, some pretty sport should see.
So farewell to them both, the bargayne is begun,
God send such shrowes such sheep as he, and so my tale is dun. see.

Fiuis.
A gentleman being of late at an odd banquet, where were diverse women of
diverse dispositions, and being served in at the table diverse comfits of sundry
sorts, being come home from the supper to his own lodging, sitting alone in
his chamber, he compared the women with the comfites, in verse as follows.

NOt long ago as I at supper sat,
whereas in deed I had exceeding cheer,
In order serude, with choice of this and that:
with Flaggons filled with wine, and ale, and beer,
I did behold, that well set out the rest,
a troop of dames, in brave attire addressed.
Great was our cheer, yet supper being done,
to furnish forth the table new again,
Of sundry sorts a banquet new begone:
of Apples, Pears, Marmlade, and Marchpayne,
Sucket, sugarde Almondes, and canded Plummes:
with many other pretty (...).
And marking well each pretty daynty dish,
of comfittes sweet I began great store behold:
For which I saw how many began to fish,
and at the last, I was my self so bold,
Of every sort to take up two or three,
which from the boorde I bare away with me.
Now let the Comfittes in my pocket rest,
and let me view the company a while:
Of women kind, whose view did like me best,
how some could frown, and other sweetly smile:
Some could look coy, in half a skorneful wise,
and some would stare, and same look under eyes.
Some by sharp nose would seem to be a shrow,
and some more half a sheep by countenance,
Some sulleine seemde, by looking down to low,
some gentle seemde, by casting friendly glaunce,
Some seemed proud, by looking too too hye,
and some, would cast on all a friendly eye.
Now began I guess by outward countenance,
the disposition of each deinty dame,
And though perhaps I missed some by chance,
I hit some right, I do not doubt the same:
But shall I tell of each one what I gest,
no^ie, for why, fond tatling breeds unrest.
But let them be such as they were, by chance,
our banquet done, we had our music by:
And then you know the youth must needs go dance,
first Galiardes, then Lar^us, and H^idegy,
^id lusty gallant, all flowers of the broom,
and then a hall, for dauncers must have room.
And to it then, with set and turn about,
change sides, and cross, and minse it like a hau^e:
Backward and forward, take hands the^, in and out,
and now and then, a little wholesome talk:
That none could hear, close rounded in the ear:
well I say naught, but much good sport was there.
Then might my Minion hear her mate at will,
but God forgive all such as judge amiss:
Some men I know, would soon imagine ill,
by secret spying of some knauish kiss:
But let them leave such jealousy for shame,
dauncers must kiss, the law allows the same.
And when friends meet, some merry sign must pass,
of welcomming unto each others sight:
And for a kiss, that's not so much (alas)
Dauncers besides may claim a kiss of right,
After the dance is ended, and before:
but some will kiss upon kiss: that goes sore.
Why it may be they dance the kissing dance,
and then they must kiss oftentimes in deedee,
And then although they ouershoote by chance,
and kiss perhaps more often then they need,
It Is oversight, their skill perhaps is small,
young Dauncers kisses, must needs be borne withal.
Then let them kiss, and coll, and let me leave
to tatle so of kissing, as I do:
For some alas half angry I perceive,
have lost I think some friendly kiss or two.
And all by my fond prattling on the same:
for bashfaste folks will seeldome kiss for shame.
But it is a sport to see some dauncers kiss,
some bluntly lay their Ladies on the lips:
Some kissing smacke, and think it not amiss:
some lay their hands upon their Ladies hippes:
To make their arm an easy resting place,
while they may smouch their lady on the face.
Some deinty dames will proudely turn their cheek,
in skornefull wise to any man to kiss,
And then God wot, young dauncer is to seek,
and knows no way, but turn her head to his:
Which kiss, to them that kissing know in kind,
does make them smyle, and laugh to, in their mind.
Now Courtiers some, in dancing use to kiss,
but in what sort, let them that list go mark,
And I say naught, but only this I wish,
each gallant youth, or in the light or dark,
With his sweet soul, convenient place to kiss.
no more, what? why? who is displeasde with this?
Fair Ladies? no: young gallants? such, much less:
old Syrs? yea: why? their kissing sweet is done,
What though, I know they can not but confess.
and old shaune Friar will kiss an unshorn Numne:
Then for Gods sake, let young folks, coll and kiss,
when oldest folks, will think it not amiss.
But what? I had almost my self forgot,
to tell you on of this same gentle crew,
Some were alas, with dancing grown so hot,
as some must sit, while other dauncde anew:
And thus forsoothe, our dancing held us on,
till midnight full, high time for to be gone.
But too behold the graces of each Dame,
how some would dance, as though they did but walk,
And some would trippe, as though one leg were lame.
and some would my^se it, like a sparrow haulke,
And some would dance upright as any bolt,
and some would ^eape and skippe lyk a young colt.
(...) some would fige, as though she had the Itche,
and some would bow half crooked in the Joints,
And some would have a trick, and some a twitche,
some shook their arms, as they had hong by points.
With thousands more that were to long to tell,
b^t made me laugh my heart sore, I wot well.
^ut let them pass, and now sir must we part,
I thank you sir for my exceeding cheer:
Welcome (quoth the good man) with all my heart,
i^ faith the market serves but ill to year:
When one could not devise more meat to dress:
Jesus though I, what means this foolishnes.
But let that pass, then parting at the door,
believe me now, it is a sport to see
What stir there was, who should go out before:
such courtsies lo, with pray you pardon me,
You shall not choose, in faith you are to blame,
good sooth though I a man would think the same.
Now being forth, with much ado at last,
then part they al, each on unto their house,
And who had markde the pretty looks that past,
from privy friend unto his pretty mouse,
Would say with me, at twelve a clock at night,
it was a parting (trust me) wurth the sight.
But let them part, and pass in God his name,
God speed them well I pray, and me no wurse,
Some are gone, with dancing almost lame,
and some go light, by means of empty purse:
And to be short, home hyeth every one,
and home go I, unto my lodge alone.
Where being come, desirous to take rest,
to bed I go, where scarce asleep, me thought,
I was new bidden to an other feast,
where to the boorde great delicates were brought:
Among which cates, such store of Comfites came,
as that my thought, I wondered at the same.
At last I wakde, and being well awak^,
I saw sun shine, and up my thought I sat:
Wherewith, I heard some what a rattling make,
but for my life could not imagine what:
But at the last, I shook the clothes again,
and then straight way I did discern it plain.
The night before, at supper where I was,
of sundry sor^es of (...), two or three,
Into my pocket privily alas,
I had conveyed, and no man seeing me:
Which Comfites made the foolish rattling so,
as I did stir the clothes to and fro.
Then took I out my Comfites by and by,
minding in deed to lay them in a chest:
But as odd fancies fall out suddenly,
so will I tell you of a pretty jest,
That as I lay thus muzing in my bed,
marking my Comfites, came into my hedde.
I choose me out each Comfite severally,
and took a taste by one and one, of al:
Some one me thought, did taste too lushiously,
so^e bitter sweet, and had a t^ng withal:
Some smelt of Musk, and those were pretty geere,
some care awayes, and they are rare this year.
Now as I took of every one a taste,
my evening dames, came to my morning mind:
By one and one, from first unto the last,
and thinking so, my thought I could in kind:
Compare the com^ites with the women right,
whereof forthwith I thus began to write.
First, I began take long comfites for to taste,
and having scarcely swallowde down the same:
They brought (me thought) unto my mind at last,
a very fair, tal, brave, and galla^t dame:
Now in the comfit was a bitter pill,
so in the dame, might be some bitter will.
Now did I guess the pill an Orange pill,
which though at first in ^ast it (...) seemde:
Yet must I not say therefore, it was ill,
but worthy was for to be well esteemde:
So women's wills that bitter seem at furst,
in time perhaps, are not yet found the wurst.
The Comfites then I tasted next, were round,
wherein I found small Coriander seeds,
Whose taste, although at first I fulsome found,
Yet must I not dispraise them more then needs:
For as I find, and as Physicians say,
that they in deed, are wholesome many a way.
These Comfites then did bring unto my mind,
a round, plumpe wench, which fulsome seemde at furst:
Whom if perhaps I had well known (...) kind,
of all the troop, might not be thought the wurst:
What do you laugh? well, I have seen ere now,
a pretty pigge of an ill favored Sow.
Then next to these, I Ginger Comfites took,
whose taste did set my mouth all in a heat,
These Comfites, like the long Comfites did look,
and as I found, were wholesome for to eat:
And though my mouth, with heat began to smart,
I found they did great comfort to my heart.
These Comfites made me think upon a dame,
of statu^e tall, and yet not very hye:
Whose looks, might set his mouth and heart on flame,
who would desire to taste her thoroughly:
And yet perhaps, when all her heat were past,
she might his heart well comfort at the last.
The next I took, were biskets Sir, to taste,
which made me think upon a pretty wenche:
When suddenly I heard in posting have,
some cryde fire, fire, and othersome cryde quench,
Hard underneath my window where I lay:
with which amazde, I laid my pen away.
Out of my bed, on went my clothes apace,
and forth go I to help to quench the fire:
But all was well, for why by Gods good grace,
it ceased soon, and as I drew me nier,
So many hands were helping at the same,
I saw it nere quite quenched ere I came.
Which when I saw, I home returned again,
and having left my chamber door vnshutte,
When I came up, I found the footesteppes plain,
upon the floor, of some odd lickorous s^utte:
That had dispatchde my Comfites every one,
for credit me, good sooth they left me none.
Which had they not been so conueide away,
I would have wrote my deskant of the rest:
^ut since they are so gone, faith farewell they,
the next, I will lock safer in my chest:
Till when, take these that I have wrote upon,
for credit me, now all the rest are gone.
Finis.
Imprinted at London, nigh unto the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas
Dawson, and Thomas Gardyner.


