A DEFENSE AND DECLARATION OF THE CATHOLIC CHVRCHIES DOCTRINE, touching
Purgatory, and prayers for the souls departed* by WILLIAM ALLEN Master of Art
and student in Diuinitye.

Mortuo ne prohibeas gratiam. Eccles. 7. Hinder not the departed of grace and
favor. man sowing seed AGRICOLAS SPES ALIT


Imprinted at Antwerp by John Latius, with Privilege. Anno. 1565.

REgiae Maiestatis Priuilegio permissum est Gulielmo Alle^o ^tium Magistro, and
sacr^ Theologiae candidato, vti per aliquem Typographoru^ admissorum impune
^iliceat imprimi curare, and per omnes su^editionis Regiones distr^bere, Libru^
inscriptum, ^ Defense of the Catholic Churches doctrine, touching Purgatory,
etcae and omnibus alijs inhibitum, ne eundem absque eiusdem Gulielmi consensu
impriman vel alibi impressum distrahant, sub p^na in Priuilegio contenta.

Dat^^ Bruxellae. 14. Martij Anno. 1564. Stilo Brabantiae. Subsig. N. de Zoete.

TO THE READER.
A Friend of mine, very studious of the truethe and zealous of Gods house, one
that learned to believe first, and then sought to understand afterward (which
I take to be the natural order of a Christian school, where faith must in
most matters direct re^n, and lead the way to understanding) asked of me, as
of ^^e whom he heartily loved, and knevv to be studious in such matters by my
trade of life, upon what grovvndes the Churches doctrine, and the Christian
peoples faith of Purgatory, ar^ prayers for the departed, stood I ansvvered
him then presently, as I could, and shortly after (as his further request
was) in vvrityng, sumvvhat more at la^ge. The which my doing though it was
both rude and shor^ yet he so measured it, ethe^ b^ love, as it commonly
happet^ or else by a singular facility vvherby he mislykethe nothing that is
meante well, that he made it common to many more, then I vvoulde my self. For
though I was well contented, that the simple people or any other should take
profit or pleasure by my pain, yet considering the matter to be full of
difficulty, and to reach to Gods judgments in the world to coom, I called
to my mind the saing of Nebridius, who (as S. Augustine reports of him,
August. epist. 23.
withdraw whom he was very familiare,) being much studious and in^^is^tiue of
the secret points of our faith, vvoulde be excedingly offended, to hear a man
ask of a matter of importance, a brief declaration: his saying was, that he
loved not a short answer to a long quaestion. VVherby, I ^as me ^hought in a
manner admonished, that my treatise though it satisfied my friend, and displeaced
not other, yet could not, written both hastily and briefly, serve so long
and large a matter. I did fear with all, t^ enter, in this my lack of years
judgment, and knouledge, in to the search of such secrets, a^ I knevve, by
that light view tha^ I made of the matter before, the orderly proceeding in the
ca^s^ vvoulde drive me unto: I did (...) arne of ancient Irenaeus, tha^ such
doctrine and mysteries may be safely had, and withdraw ovvte all fear of
error, taught by holy Priests and Bisshoppes Qui cum episcopatus
successione, Libr. 3. Cap. 43.
ch^risma veritatis certum, secundum p^citum patris acceperunt. Who have
received with their ordinary succession in their pastoral sc^^, the gracious
gift of understanding the truethe. And these are they (says he in the same
place) which may with owte all danger to theime selves and their hearers,
expound unto us the holy scriptures. Other men doubtless (which, this
miserable age of ours sees not, that measures all things by a fond
flourishe of learning, whereof yett there was never less store) can not, nor
must not be so bovvld, though their gifts were many more, and study much
longer then mine. And to confess the truethe in deed, 1 was sum what loathe
(such was my foolish fear then) to faule in hand with that matter,
which being well and to ^he bottom ripped, I perceived, of al other causies
in the world, most to touch the very sore of haeresye, and therefore might to
me procure the hatered of such, whose love otherwise I could be content,
either to keep or win. Besides that, I savve the contention of the contrary
part, seeking to make some answer to such things as might in this cause most
grieve their minds, or mar their matter, should drive me from that course
of study, which other wise in quietness I would most gladly keep, to serve
truth and defend my cause, which once of fredo^ and good vvil taken in hand,
must afterward of duty and necessity be vpholde^. Not vvithsta^ding al these
things, good reader, which might most justly hold me back, yet now my
fre^des request, the case and co^ditio^ of this praesent time, and my duty
toward my mother the Ch^^che, may of good reason, and must of necessity
change my former intent, and remove my private study to the benefit of the
common cause. Therefore being at lenghth by just occasion wholy minded to
serve as well as I could that way, I thought good these late mounthes, to
make a more full declaration of that thing, which at my said friends
request, I had so briefly touched before. That as then when he first had it
of me, it only served him for his own contentation, the pleasuring of his
singular and secret friends, and the help of some simple whom he knevve
deceived by over light looking on so grave matters, so now (Good Christian
reader) I trust it may help in common, not only such as have been carried a
way by the gile of haeresye, but other that are much subject to the
dangerous flatterly of this praesent time: with whom, pleasure ever joined
to the protesta^tes doctrine, often more praeuayleth, then the preachers
persuasion. Be bovvlde to charge any of our adversaries, make he never so
great account of him self, with the force of truth here expressly proved
both by argument and authority: if it hovvld him not, he shall (I am sure)
brast ovvte with impudency, and not louse him sellfe by reason, just
dealing, or honesty. And if it be proved to touch with safety the poysen it
self, let no man doubt to use it for a preservative, in this common infectio^
of our time and country. For it were no reason, any man should practice withdraw
the poor people priuyly, in such things as he were not hable to maynteyn
before their pilloures and preachers openly. And for that hatered which I may
procure to my self by mine own travel, it shall not much move me: for I
shall either be partaker thereof, as a common praise in these evil days to most
good men: or else if I be not worthy so much, I will learn to bear it as
sum part of punishment and satisfaction for my sins. I may not bye friendship
withdraw flattery, nor man's love with forsaking Gods truethe. Of such
things then I will not make much reckeninge: but my principal care is, that
in vvriting or vvading in so deep matters, I keep the streght line of the
Churchies truethe, which, in the exceeding rashness of these dark days, a
man may quickly lose. And therefore to make sure, I humbly submit my self, to
the judgment of such our masters in faith and religion, as by Gods
calling are made the lavvful pastors of our souls. Of whom I had rather
learn my self, the^ teach other: if either they had occasion and opportunity to
speak, or I might of reason and duty in these miserable times hold my peace.
Fare well gentle Reader, and if I pleasure thee by my pains, let me for
Christ's sake be partaker of thy prayers.

At Antwerp the Second of May. 1565.
GOOD READER BEAR with these small faults, or other, which in this difficulty
of printing, there where our tongue is not understood, must needs be
committed.
Fo. 12. Page 2. Li. 14. Read for sacraledge sacrilege Fo. 16. Page 1. Li. 7.
Read for iokyng yokyng. Fo. 29. Page 2. Li. 17. Read for mamed named. Fo. 37.
Page 2. Li. 11. Read for hauno have no. Fo. 45. Page 2. Li. 21. Read for non
sum non sim. Fo. 110. Page 2. Li. 13. Read for appirition apparition. Fo. 120.
Page 2. Li. 13 Read for vnfayded unfeigned. Fo. 152. Page 1. Li. 6. Read for
maked naked. Fo. 152. Page 2. Li. 1. Read for so set to set. Fo. 157. Page 1.
Li. 10. Read for so say to say. Fo. 186. Page 2. Li. 17. Read for author
altar. Fo. 196. Page 1. Li. 12. Read for playnes plain. Fo. 224. Page 1. Li.
19. Read for langnange language. Fo. 231. Page 1. Li. 3. Read for
Carthagie^si cruditius, Carthaginensi eruditus. Fo. 234. Page 2. Li. 8. Read
for is his. Fo. 241. Page 1. Li. 2. Read for it is Fo. 243. Page 1. Li. 6.
Read for is it say is to say. Fo. 270. Page 1. Li. 1. Read for Nire Nice.
THE PRAEFACE, VVher in be noted two sorts of Haeretikes: the one pretending
virtue the other openly professing vice. And that our time is more troubled by
this second s^^^. With a brief note of the Authors principal intent in this
Treatise.

ALl though haeresie and all wilful blyndnesse of man's mind, be undoubtedly
a just plage of God for sin, and therefore is commonly joined with evil lyefe
both in the people and preachers thereof, as the historye of all agies, and
sundry examples of the scriptures may pl^^^ely prove: yet by the gyle and
crafty conueiaunce of our common enemy the devil, The devil les ^ra^te in
^^^motyng error.
faulshod is often so cloked in shadow and shape of truethe, and the masters
thereof make such show of virtue and godly liefe, that vow would think it
had no affinity with vice, nor origin of man's misbehauiour at all. So did
he cover the wicked haeresies of Manicheus, Hieron. in 7. cap. Osee
Marcion, Tatianus, and the like, with a fained flourishe of continency and
chastitye: so did he ouercast thenimy of gods grace Pelagius, Augustine. pist.
120.
with thapparance of all gravity, constancy, and humilitye: and so has he
allwaies, where craft was requisite to his intent, made show of a simple
sheep in the cruel carkase of a wyly woulfe. This good condition S. Paul
noted in him, in these words: 2. Cor. 11.
Ipse enim Satanas transfigurat se in Angelum lucis. For Satanas his own
person shapeth him sellfe into an Angel of light. And that his scholars play
the like part, our master Christ of singular love gave his (...) this wache
word, for a special pr^ iso: Matthew. 7.
Attendite a falsis prophaetis qui veniunt ad vos in vestimentis ouium,
intrinsecus autem sunt lupi rapaces. Take heed of fa^^e prophets that coom in
shepes vesture, but with in be ravening woulues. He saw (that sees all
things) that the outeward face of feyned holiness might easily carry a way the
simple: he detected the serpents suttelty, that none might justly plead
ignorance, in a case so common: and vvithall for thenstruction of the
faithful, he gave falsehood and her fortherers this mark for ever, that convey
they never so clean or close, yet their unseemly works should ever detect
their feigned faith.

But all this notwithstanding, if we deaply wey the whole course of things,
we shall fyende that this counterfaityng of virtue and show of pietye, is not
the perpetual intent of the devils devise: but rather a needful shift in
forthering his practice, there only where faith and virtue be not utterly
extinguished, then the full end of any one of all his endeuoures. The devils
mark and thexteame and of haeresy.
For this may we assuredly find to be the scope and prick of all his cursed
travel, to set sin and her folowers in such freedom, that they neade not (as
often else) for their protection the cloak of virtue, nor habit of honesty:
but that they may bouldly encounter with the good and godly, and in open
ostentation of their mischief, over ron all truth and religion. Wherefore as
he often cloketh suttell haeresies in honest lyefe, and virtues weed, so when
he by liklihoods conceyueth hope of better success, and forther adventures, he
then openethe a common schole of sin and wickedness, where mischife may with
out color or craft be bowldely maynteyned. This open schole of iniquitye,
Hieron. sup. 13. Ezech.
and doctrine of sin, he once busely erected in the gentilitye, by the
infamous philosopher Epicurus and his adherentes: teaching to the singular
offense of honestye, pleasure and voluptuousnes to be thonly end of all owre
lyefe and endeavors. The which pleasant sect, though it ever sense has had
some promotours, yet the very shade of feigned virtue, and worldely wisdom of
those days, with ease bare down that enterprice.

This broad practice was yet forther attempted even in Christ's Church: first
by Eunomius, Eunomius.
who doubted not in the face of the world, to auouche that none could perish
(weere his works never so wicked) that would be of his faith. And then by
Iouinianus, Iouinianus
who taught the contempt of Christian fastes, matched marriage with holy
maidenhood, and afterward to the great wonder of all the church, persuaded
certain religious weeme^ in Rome, to forsake their first faith, and marye to
their damnation. For which plain supporting of undoubted wickedness, S.
Hierom callethe theime often, Christian Epicures, Contr. Iou. lib. 2
boulsterers of sin, and doctors of lust and lecherye. Never the less the
force of gods grace, which was great in the spring of our religion, (the
sin of the world not yet riepe for such open show of licentious lyefe)
speedely repressed that wicked attempt* Ad quod vult de. haeresi. 82.
for as S. Augustine declarethe, it was so clear a falsehood, that it never
grew to deceive any one of all the clergy. But not long after, with much
more advantage the like practice was assaied by Mahomet, the deuilles only
dearling; by whom numbers of wyeues to gether, often diuorcyes, and perpetual
change for noueltye, was permitted. By which doctrine of lust and liberty,
the flower of Christiandom (a less for pitye) was carried a way. At which time
thonghe our faith and Christ's Church, were brought to a smaule room, and
very great straites, yet by gods grace, good order, and necessary
discipline, this school of lust has been reasonably till our days kept
under: and the gravity of Christian manners (as the time served) orderly
vphoulden.

But now once again in our cursed days, the great flow of sin tourning
gods mercy from us, with exceeding provocation of his heavy indignation
toward the wicked, has made our aduersarye much more bowlde, and long
practice of mischeffe, Genes. 3.
a great deal more skillful. The serpent passed all other creatures in
suttelty at the beginning, but now in cruelty he far passes him self. The
devil takes better houlde in ovvre time then he did before.
The downfall that he has in a few years rage driven man unto, by thopen
supporting of sinful living, it is sure very woeful to remember, and an
exceeding hearts grief to consider.

Look back at the Christian Epicures whom I now named, and vewe the men of
like endeavor in all agies: compare their attempts to ours, their doctrine
to ours, the whole raise of their proceadinges to ours: And if we match
theyme not in all points, and pass theyme in most, (I except the wicked
Mahomet, and God grant I may so do long: though they had out of his holy
school, their often diuorcyes and new mariagies in their wieues lyefe,)
excepting him therefore, if ours pass not in open practice of mischief and
supportation of sin, all the residue, miscredit me for ever. This is evident
to all men, that things once counted detestable before god, abhorred of the
priests, straung to the Christian people, poonishable by the laws of all
princyes, be now in case to mainteyne theyme selves, to give virtue a check
mate, and with out all color to bear down both right and religion. Thus
does sacraledge bouldely bear owte it sellfe, Behoulde the liberty of sin.
and ouerreacheth the promoters of gods honor: so does incest encounter
with lawful marriage, the unordered Apostates shoulder the ordinarye
successors of the Apostles: Feasting has won the field of fasting: and
chambering almost banished chastitye.

It was surely a wonderful fetch of our busy adversary, when he so joined
haeresy and evil liefe together, that either might be a singular guarde to
the other: and both together, easily be the plage of all good order. And now
the matter broghte to such terms, and so evident an isshue for the clear
gain of sin, here neadeth no Caveat for the fructes of the doctrine, as in
other cloked haeresies before, and continually in case of deceyte is requisite,
(for no man can be deceived here, but he that willingly and weitingly list
perish.) Having no excuse reasonable, why he should follow or credet the
public professoures of plane impiety: vnlest this may be accounted cause
sufficient of his light creditt, that they term the forsaide offensies and
others the like not by their accustomed callinges, Note
but by some honester name of virtue. Which thing rather shewethe their folly,
then excusethe their malice. For they must here be asked, by what right they
change the names of things, that can not allter their natures. Who
authorished theyme to call that extirpation of superstition, which our
fathers cauled sacraledge? Or that blind devotion, which our holy elders
named true religion? How can they for sin and shame honor that with the
name of holy marriage, that S. Ambrose terms aduoultry: Amb. ad Virg. lapsa^
Cap. 5.
S. Augustine worse the^ aduoultery: and they with all the residewe of the
doctors, August. de bono vid. Cap. 8.
horrible incest? But because they can show no warraunt, I must charge theyme
for their labor with gods curse, pronounced upon all such by the
prophets words, thus as foloueth, Vae qui dicitis malum bonum, Isai. 5.
and bonum malum, ponentes tenebras lucem, and lucem tenebras. Woe to you that
call evil good, and good evil: making darkness light, and the light darkness.
But (as I said) in such open show of wickedness, and all vnliklyhood of
their assertions, there can none doubtless join with theime, except they be
allured by present pleasure, Sin drives men to the doctrine of this time.
or drieuen hedlonge by the heavy lode of sin. For as I think, they do not
follow these sect masters, as scholares moved by any probability of their
teachers persuation, but rather join unto theyme as fit fellows of their
lusts, and good companions for their own conditions. Ostendisti tales
discipulos (says S. Hierom to Iouinian) non fecisti. Li. 2.
Thou have but opened to the world who be thy folowers, and not procured
theyme thy self to be thy scholars. 2. ad Tim. Cap. 4.
Yea S. Paul affirms by such lovers of lusts (whom he calls Voluptatum
amatores) that they should give over the true teachers, and provide or make
masters for their own touthe. Ad sua desideria coaceruabunt sibi magistros.
Sin therefore as it semethe, has engendered and framed her sellfe this new
faith, for the guarde and salfty of her person: And the ungodly procured for
their own diete masters of perdition, ready both by life and doctrine, to
forther the lusts of licentious persons, to serve the itchinge ears of new
fangled folks, and so to set theyme in all security, with words of peace
and pleasure.

Call to your memories the first entrance of this misery, Judas in epist. Can.
and you shall find how they had certain persons in admiration (as the
Apostle says) for their own advantage. Sense which time, these preachers
have by observation raised up a perfect school off flattery, and brought
the detestable excusing of most horrible sins, unto a formal art. In Eunuch.
It is long sith the Poet feaned that Gnato would have been thauthor of a
sect, and have had some scholares to bear his name: Here he might have had for
his turn, but that the Epicure has praeuented him. The Prophet Ezechiel
termethe this pernicious flattery in matters of such importance, the
boulstering of wickedness. And gives a heavy blessinge from allmighty God, to
all boulsterers in these words. Cap. 13.
Vae his qui consuunt puluillos sub omni cubito manus, and faciunt ceruicalia
sub capite vniuersae aetatis, ad capiendas animas. Woe be to all theyme that
saw cuisshens under the elbowe of every arm, and bowlster up the heads of al
ageis, meaning to Catch their souls. And surely if this curse took ever
hold of any (as it could not proceade from gods mouth in vain) it must
needs faule streght down upon these men, that wholly bend theime selves thus to
vphoulde iniquitye, and to set sin soft. To such as made no store of good
works, they cast only faith under their elbowe to lean upon. To such as
were bourdened with promise of chastitye, they made marriage a Cuisshen for
their ease. For such as cast an eye upon church gooddes, they borrowed a
pillowe of Judas: Quare non vaenijt trecentis denarijs, and datum est egenis.
Joan. 12.
Why is not this made money of and given to the poor. And so in all points
they artificially follow man's fantasy, nourishe the humor of the ungodly,
and preach peace with pleasure. Commit what you list, omit what you list,
your preachers shall praise it in their words, and practice it in their
works. For look how they teach, and so do they lieue: far passing the
Epicure, 2. De sin.
who (as Cicero says) in taulke praised pleasure, but in all his life, was
full courtese and honest. And much exceeding Iouinianus, who as Augustine
reports of him, Vbi supra haere. 28.
being a Monk mainteyned the marriage of votaries, but yet for diverse
inconueniencies, him self for all that would not be married. But ours being
once in bisshops room, or of that disordered new ministry, ear they be
well warmed in their beneficyes, as in all other licentious liefe they will
lead the daunse, so they must out of hand, for the most part, as though it
wear annexum ordini, as school men term it, have a wieffe with necessary
chirishing to that state belonginge. And good reason it is, that these delicate
doctors having ever in readiness pillowes for their friends ease, should never
want whole coutchies for their own.

But it were to long a matter for me at this praesent, purposing an other
thing, fully to declare how sin in all points has acheyued such liberty,
How this svvhete haeresy first begane.
by the unhappy ioking her self unto haeresye. Only this may be noted brefely
for that point: that generally in the beginning of their endeuoures, they
removed with speed out of their ways, as especial impediments and
stombling stocks, all those means which Christ commanded, or the church
praescribed, or our fathers followed for thabbating of sins dominion: that the
world might well understand, they mente the extolling of all vice, and to make
the way for sin and wickedness. First that sovereign remedy of man's
misdeedes, that grave judgment left by Christ to his Church, for the weal
of us all, that power which the Son of man has in earth to remitte
sins, the true court of man's conscience, the very word of reconcilement,
and the board of refuge after shipwrake, which is the Sacrament of poenaunce,
they have to the unspeakable gain of sin unworthily removed. The subdueing
of man's pride by due obedience to his spiritual pastors, and humble
honouringe of the gyedes of gods church, fitly for their purpouse have they
lowsed. Fasting, which is the bryedell of carnal concupiscence, and torment
of all fleshly lusts, for sins sake they have set at such liberty, that
it is almost lost. And what havoc in all other spiritual exercise is made
for these men's free passage to hell, we see it: all the posterity shall
feel it: and the very workers shall be weary of the way of wickedness, when
they shall lack grace and space to repent theime. But I can not now stand
upon these points: Meaning at this time, only to overthrow an other like
ground of this detestable school, which has no less auaunced sin then
the other, and dishonowred God much more: which has perniciously deceived
not only open haeretikes, but also much weakened the devotion of sum that
otherwiese were Catholics: The harm whereof perteynethe not only to most men
that be a lyeue, but also to many that be dead. That is the abolishing of
paenaunce, discredityng of purgatory, and abandoning of satisfaction for our
offenses committed. All which, being nothing else but a kind of soft
handeling, and swheet cherishing of sin, has wroght such vain security in
men's minds, that few have any feel or fear of gods judgments: few
consider the deape wound that sin makethe in man's soul: and most men
abhor the remedies requisite for so grievous a sore.

When I look back at the flower and spring of Christ's Church, and see sin
counted so bourdenous, and gods dreadful poonishment for the same so
earnestly feared of all men, that no saulue could be so sore, no paenaunce so
paynefull, but they would both have suffered and desired it, to have been
fully free from the same: and with all consider the extreme doloure of heart,
which al men then expressed by often tears, by humble acknouledging of their
mislyuinge to gods ministers in earth, and exceeding paynefull paenaunce, by
long fasting, A proffitable comparing of the time past withdraw our praesent
days.
dangerous peregrinations, contynuall prayers, large almose, so sharply
enjoined, so meekly received, and so duly fullfilled: and then returning
again to our time and state, where I may and must neades behoulde the
pityfull waste of Christian works, the marvelous shake of all good manners,
and more then an image of mere paganism, as in which we find no face nor
shadow of Christianity, no nor any step allmoste of our faithful fathers
paths: then do I well perceive, the isshue and end of the last grownde of
this wasting haeresy, to be nothing else but a canker of true devotion, an
enemy to spiritual exercise, a security and quiett rest in sin, and briefly,
a salfegarde and praesumptuous warraunt, from the judgment of gods mighty
arm, which reaches over thoffensies of the whole world. Evil we were
before by other points of this deceitful doctrine, but by this last part we
are utterly lost. For as truly S. Hierom writes by their praedecessors: Hoc
profecit doctrina istorum, Vbi supra.
vt peccatum ne paenitentiam quidem habeat. This has this doctrine of theyres
won and wroght, that of sin there is no way of repentance: even so may we
much more complain of this pernicious fallsehood, that directely with owte
all color, has rased up both the remedies of sin, and bouldely
discharged us of gods judgment and all penaulty for the same: that as before
by faulshood and flatterly we were led in to the swheete school of sin, so
now by thabbandoning of paenaunce and purgatory, in vain hope and securitye we
might needs for ever remain therein.

Considering therefore the great spread of contagion that this untrue doctrine
has wroght both to the everlasting misery of heretics theime selves, and
also to the grievous punishment that allmighty God of just judgment may take
upon us (that by his great mercy be yet Catholics) because we leeue in wanto^
welthe, with out just care or cogitation of our lyefe paste: Nether doing
any worthy fructes of paenaunce, nor yet endeavoring to make a mendes and
recompense by satisfiyng for our sins, before of mercy so pardned that to
our damnation they can not now any more be imputed, but yet for answhering in
sum part of gods justice, and perfect purging of the same sinful lyefe
past, out of all doubt sharply pounishable: for these things I say, and for
the stirring up of the fear of God in my self, Why this treatise was
taken in hand.
the help of the simple, the defense of the truethe, and thabbatyng of this
great rage of sin and haeresy, I thought good to give warninge (moved
theru^to by my fre^d also) to all such as be not theyme selves hable to
search owte the truth of these matters, of that temporal or transitory
poonishment which god of justice has ordained in the other world, for such
as would not judge theime selves, and praeuent his heavy hand whieles they here
lyeued: our forefathers (more then a thousand year sense) cauled it Purgatory.
The truethe and certain doctrine whereof, I trust through gods gooddnesse
so clearly to prove, The matt^^ ^he first book.
that the adversary (be he never so great with the devil) shall never be able
to make any likly excuse of his infidelitye. The argument o^ the second book.
And that so done, I shall both open and prove the means which the Church
of God has ever proffitably used for the release of her children from the
same punishment, to be soueraing good, and comfortable for the faithful souls
departed.

And here I heartely pray the gentle reader, who so ever thou be, that shall
find just occasion undoubtedly to believe this article of necessary doctrine,
ever constantly set forth by the grauest authority that may be in earth,
that, as thowe faithfully belieues it, so thowe perpetually in respect of the
day of that dreadful visitation, study with fear and tremblyng to work
thy salvation. Let that be for ever the difference betwixt the vnfructefull
faith of an heretic, and the proffitable belyefe of the true Catholic
Christian: that this may work assured paenaunce to perpetual salvation, and
his, vain praesumption to everlasting damnation. And though the matter which
I have taken in hand, be nothing fit for the diet of such delicate men as
have been brought up under the pleasant preaching of our days, yet
perchance, change of diett with the sharpness of this eagre sawse, were,
if they could bear it, much more agreehable to their weak stoomaches.
Truethe was ever bitter, Cyp. epist. 3. li. 5.
and faulshood flattering. For the one by praesent pain procurethe perpetual
welthe, the other through deceytefull swhetnes woorkethe everlasting woe.

But as for these pleasure preachers theyme selves, because I fear me they
have indented with death, and shaked hands with hell, what so ever may be
said in this case, they will yet spourne with the words of the wicked. Isai.
28.
Flagellum inundans cum, transierit non veniet super nos: quia posuimus
mendacium spem nostram, and mendacio protecti sumus. Toushe, the common scourge
when it passethe over shall not tutche us, for we have made lying our
suckoure, and by lying are we guarded. Yet when the light of the Apostolic
tradition shall dase their eyes, and the force of gods truethe bear down
their bouldnes, their oune black afflicted conscience, by inward
acknowledginge that truethe which they openly withstand, shall so horribly
torment their minds, that denieng purgatory they shall think them selves a
lieue in hell. But gentle readers pray for theyme with tears, Prayer is
thonely remedy against vvil full blindness.
that god of his mighty grace would stricke their flesh with his fear. And
if my poor pain with the prayers of us al, could turn any one of theime
all from the way of wickedness, it would recompense doubtless sum of our
sins, and cover a nu^bre of my misdeedes. And ever whilst we leyue let us
praise God that in this time of temptation he has not suffered us to faule,
as our sins have deserved, in to the misery of these forsakers. To whom if
I speak sometimes in this treatise more sharplye then my costume or nature
requirethe, the zele of truethe and just indignation toward haeresie, with
the example of our forefathers, must be my excuse and warraunt. I will be as
plain for the vnlearneds sakes as I may, and the matter suffer. And therefore
now at the first I will open the very ground, as near as I can, of so
necessary an article: that the ignorance of any one piece may not darken the
whole cause. Desiring the studious to read the whole discourse, because every
peculiare point so jointly dependethe of the residewe, that the knouledge of
one, ordrely gives light to all the other. And so the whole together I trust
shall reasonably satisfye his desire.

THAT OFTEN AFTER our sins be forgiven by the sacrament of poenaunce, there
remainethe sum due of temporal pounishement, for the satisfying of gods
justice, and some recompense of the offensies past.

Cap. 1.
AS it is most true, and the very ground of al Christian comfort, Ephesians. 1.
Haeb. 9.
that Christ's death has paid duly and sufficyently for the sins of all
the world, August. Euch. cap. 65.
by that abundant price of redemption paid upon the Cross: So it is of like
crediet to all faithful, that no man was ever partaker of this singular
benefit, but in the knotte and unity off his body mystical, which is the
church. To the members whereof, the streams of his holy blodde and beams off
his grace, for the remission of sin and sanctification, be ordrely, through
the blessed Sacraments as condethes of gods mercy, conueyde. All which
Sacraments, though they be instituted and used as means to derive Christ's
benefits, Mark the ground of the cause.
and bestow his grace of redemption upon the worthy receivers: yett like
effect or force, is not by the meaning of their first author and institutour,
employed upon all receivers, nor gieuen to all the Sacraments. That may wel^
appear, if we mark the exceeding abundant mercy, that is powered upon all men
at their first incorporation and entrance into the household of the
faithful, by Baptism: In which sacrament, the merits of our masters death
be so fully and largely carried down for the remission of sin, that were the
liefe before never so laden with most horrible offensyes, that in this misery
man may commit, yet the offender is not only pardoned of the same, but also
perfectly acquieted for ever, of all pain or pounishement (other then the
common miseries of mankind) which his propper offenlyes before committed by
any means might deserve, And no less free now then the child after
baptism, which only original sin brought thither. So says S. Ambrose by
these words: Gratia Dei in Baptismate no^ quaerit gemitu^, Super vndec. cap.
ad Romans
aut planctum, aut opus aliquod, nisi solu^ ex cord professione^. The grace of
God in Baptism requirethe nether sorrow nor mourning* nor any other work,
but only an hearty profession of thy faith. Whereby he means, that after
our sins be once thus freely wyped away in our first regeneration, there
is no charge of pounishement or paenaunce for farther release of the same.

But now a man that is so freely discharged of all evil liefe and sin
committed before he came in to the familye, yff he faule in to relapse, and
defile the temple of god, Note
then (as gods mercy always passethe man's malice) even in this case also,
he has ordained means to repair man's faule again. That is, by the
Sacrament of paenaunce: which therefore, S. Hiero^ termethe the second table, In
cap. 3. Isai.
or refuge after ship wrack: as a means that may bring man to the port of
salvation, though lightely not with out present damage and daungeour. In
which blessed sacrament, though gods grace have mighty force for man's
recovery, and workethe abundantly both remission of sins, and the discharge
of aeternall poonishement due by just judgment to the offender, yet Christ
him self (the author of this Sacrament as the rest) meant not to communicate
such efficacye or force to this, The force of Christ's death is not so largely
applied unto us in the sacrament off p^^^unce as in Baptism.
as to baptism, for the utter acquieting of all pain by sinful life
deserved. For as in Baptism, where man is perfectly renewed, it was semely to
set thoffender at his first entrau^ce on clear ground, and make him free for all things done a broad: so it excedingly sets forth gods justice, and
nothing imparethe his mercy, to use (as in all common wellthes by nature and
gods prescription is practiced) with grace discipline, with justice
clemencye, with favor correction, and with love, due chastisement of such
sins, as have by the how should children been committed.

Now therefore, if after thy free admission to this family of Christ, thou do
grievously offend, remission may then be had again: but not commonly with
owte sharp discipline, seeing the father of this our holy houshowld
poonisheth where he louethe, Ad Hab. 12.
and chastisethe every child whom he receives. Whose justice in pounishement
of sin, not only the wicked, but also the good must much fear. Whereof S.
Augustine warns us thus: Deus (says he) nec iusto parcit, nec iniusto: Lib
tra Fauscu^ cap. 20.
illum stagellando vt filium, istum puniendo vt impium. God sparethe nether the
just, nor unjust: chastising the one as his child, pounishing the other as a
wicked person.

A child then of this houshowlde contynuing in favor, though he can not
everlastingly perish with the impoenitent sinners, yet he must (being not by
some especial praerogatiue pardoned) bear the rod of his fathers discipline.
And gladly say with the prophet. In flagella paratus sum. Psalm. 37.
I am ready for the rods. And what so ever these wantons, that are run owte
of this house, for their own ease or other men's flattery shall fourge, let
us continue in perpetual cogitation of our sins forgeuen: and by all means
possible recompense our negligencyes paste. Let us not think but God has
sumwhat to say to us, even for our offensyes pardoned: being thus warned by
his own mouth. Sed habeo aduersum te pauca, Apo. ^.2.
quod charitatem tuam primam reliquisti: Memor esto itaque vnde excideris, and
age poenitentiam, and prima opera fac. But somewhat I have against the, because
thowe art faullen from thy first love, Remember therefore from whense thowe
fell, do paenaunce, and begin thy former works again. And the
consideration of this diversity betwixt remission had by baptism, and after
relapse by the sacrament of paenaunce, moved Damascen to call this second
remedy, Deorth. fide lib. 4. cap. 9.
Baptismum vere laboriosum, quod per paenitentiam and lachrimas perficitur. A
kind of Baptism full of travel, by paenaunce and tears to be wroght. In
which God so pardone-the sins, that both the offense it self, and the
everlasting pain due for the same being wholly by Christ's death and merits
wieped away, there may yet remain the debt of temporal poonishment on our
part to be discharged, as well for some satisfaction of gods justice, against
the aeternall order whereof we unworthily offended, (...) Cap. (...).
as for to answer the Church of her right (as S. Austine says) in which
only all sins be forgeuen.

Mary when occasion of satisfiyng for our offensyes in this lyefe is
neglected, or lack of time, by reason off long continuance and laite
repentance, fuffereth not due recompense in our lyefe, which is the time of
mercy, then certes the hand of God shall be much more heavy, and the
poonishment more grievous. And this is with out doubt to be looked for, that
the debt due for sin, must either here by pain or pardon be discharged, or
else to our greater grief after our departure required.

And this to be the grave doctrine and constant faith of the fathers I must
first declare: both for that it shall firmly establishe our whole matter, and
clearly open the case of controversy betwixt us and the forsaken company. Who
would so gladly lyeue at ease in their only faith, that they list nether
satisfye for their sins, nor procure gods mercy by well workyng. In this
case then let us seek the order of gods justice, by the diligent
consideration of some notable personagies, of whom we may have by the plain
scripture evident testimony both of the remission of their sins, and their
paenaunce and pounishment after they were reconciled again.

Ada^ that first did faule, and was first pardoned did yet abide the skourge
for his sins.
Our first father Adam, in whom we may behoulde almost the whole course of
gods judgment, and through whom both sin and all pounishment due for
sin entered in to the world, I think he had the first benefit by Christ's
death for the remission of his disobedience: or at the least (because I
would not auouche an uncertain thing) this I am shure, that by Christ he
was raised up to gods favor again. Of whom we find it thus written in in
the book of wisdom. Cap. 10.
Haec illum qui primus formatus est pater orbis terrarum, cum solus esset
creatus, custodiuit: and eduxit illum a delicto suo. This (says he, meaning
by Christ under the name of wisdom) salfely praeserued him that was first
formed off God, the father of the world, when he was created all a lone: and
raised him out of his sin again. The which disobedience (with what other
sin so ever was thereunto in him joined) though it was thus clearly pardoned,
yet the poonishment thereof, both he felt long after in his own person, and
it lyethe upon his posterity till this day. For which sin he him self
begane to do paenaunce (as Irenaeus says) even in paradise: Li. 3. c. 33
and then God practiced judgment upon him (as Augustine notes) first by his
disenhaeretaunce, then by paynefull tra^ell enjoined, by the unaptness off ^he
earth to serve his turn, by rebellioune of the inferior creatures, by the
trooblesom motions of his own affections, and bryefely, in all points by a
lothsom lyefe and a dreadful death. Yea and that his pounishment ceased not in
this world by his death, but many hundrethe years after remained as forther
condemnation of his disobedience, I shall more conuenyently a none declare.

Now sekyng forther to have clear and open evidence in this case, we can not
wisshe more proof then may be had by the strange workyng and dispensation of
God, in the many foulde affairs of that sanctified people, and chosen nation
of the Israelites. In which peoples perpetual peotection, a man might fiend a
perfect platte off mercy and judgment. So often they faule, so suddenly they
rise: so grievously they offend, such mercy they find, that it is marvelous to
consider. Of this elect family therefore thus God speakethe. Psalm. 88.
Si autem dereliquerint filij eius legem meam, and in iudicijs meis non
ambulauerint, visitabo in virga iniquitates eoru^, and in verberibus peccata
eorum: misericordiam autem meam non dispergam ab eo, neque nocebo in veritate
mea. If his children reject my law, and waulke not in my judgments, with
rod will I viset their wickedness, and in stripes their sins: yet will I
not take my mercy from him (or theyme, as it is also read) nor harm him in
my trauthe. Gods penple first pardoned, was then after poonished.
This people, at their first passage out of Egipte commytting horrible
Idolatrye, was pardoned thereof at the instaunce of Moises: yet so says our
lord God unto him. Ego autem in die vltionis, Exodus 32.
visitabo and hoc peccatum eorum: But yet in the day of reuengement, I will
viset this their offense also. The same people offending grievously ageine by
murmoure and mistrust of gods careful providence toward theyme, at their
Governors humble suit were expressly forgiven in these words. Numer. 14
Dimisi iuxta verbum tuum. I have pardoned theime according to thy word. But
after their assured warraunt for the full remission of the fault, and the
aeternall pain due to that grievous sin, behoulde yet their ponishment
temporal for the same. Attamen omnes homines qui viderunt maiestatem etc. For
all that (says our lord) every one that has seen my majesty, and the
woonders which I wroght in Egipte, and in the wilderness, and yet has
notwythstanding tempted me ten times, shall not behoulde the land for which
I bound my self by oath to their forefathers. But passing the peoples sin,
Moises and Aron theime sellfe, in many points minister abundant proof of this
matter. Who both dying in perfect favor of God, yet for their mistrust
wear discharged of gieding gods people, Number. 20.
or entringe theime sellfe in to the land so heartily desired, and so long
looked for before* of these two the prophet says thus: Custodiebant testimonia
eius et praeceptum quod dedit illis. Psalm. 98.
Deus tu propitius fuisti eis, and vlciscens, in omnes adinuentiones eorum.
They observed his testimonies, and the charge that he gave unto theime. Lord
God thou wast merciful unto theime, and sharply revenged their own
inventions. The like ordinance of gods justice in poonishment of such as he
highly favored, may appear in Samson, in Holy, Iudic. 16. 1. Reg. 3.
and all other notarious personages in the whole scripture.

But the heartely beloved of God king David's example so bearethe down our
adversaries, that I can not well omit it, though I now long to be nearer my
matter. This prophet had an eypresse pardon, with a plain prouiso that he
should notwithstanding bear the heavy hand of God, for the poonishment of his
former sin. Once for taking priede in the multitude and numbryng of his
people, God, though he pardoned him, 2. Reg. vlt.
yet by the Prophet Gad gave him leave to chuese of three named skourges,
which he would: to whom he answhered. Coarctor nimis: sed melius est
incidere in manus domini, multae enim sunt misericordiae eius. I am sore urged:
but better it is to faule in to Gods hands, for his mercyes be exceeding
many. And so according to his election, he had many thousands of his people
perished by Gods plage. Off whose case, S. Gregory says maruailous much in
these few words. Deus delictum delet, sed inultum non deserit: peccato non
parcitur, quia sine vindicta non laxatur. Li. 9. in Job. ca. 82.
God wyepeth a way man's offense, but he leauethe it not vnpoonished: sin is
not spared, because it is not with out revenge released. But before this, he
had a full warraunt off remission of his horrible mourder and adoultery, by the
prophet Nathan, saing unto him thus after his repentance. 2. Reg. 12.
Dominus quoque transtulit peccatum tuum, non morieris: veruntamen quoniam
blasphemare fecisti inimicos nomen domini propter verbum hoc, filius qui natus
est tibi morte morietur. Our lord has removed thy sin: nevertheless,
because thou have made thenimyes blaspheme our lords name by this word, thy
son which is borne unto the shall dye the death. Off which matter S.
Augustine by occasion taulking against Fanstus, asks what manner of pardon it
was, Lib. 23. cap. 67.
that the prophet brought from God unto David. And he answhereth thus. Ad quam
rem nisi ad sempiternam salutim? neque enim praetermissa est in illo, secundum
Dei comminationem, flagelli paterni disciplina. To what end else (had he his
pardon) but to everlasting salvation? For he escaped not the skourge of his
fathers discipline, according as the threatening of God before did portend. All
the forsaide examples then being so evident, they must needs conclude this
assuredly, that after our offenses be remitted, there commonly yet remains
sum pain and right debt, to be discharged by the offenders ponishement,
before he receive the ample benefit of aeternall salvation.

The double and doubtefull shifts of our adversaries pressed by this
conclusion, are removed: and it is proved against one sort, that these
foresaiyde skourgies were in deed pounishements for sins remitted. And
against the other sect, that this transitory pain has often endured in the
next liefe.

Cap. 2.
ANd the weght of this foresaid ground, has ever pressed the adversaries of
truethe so sore, that behoulding as it were a far of, what inconvenience this
might importe, they ever busely endeavored to stay the beginning of their
likly overthrow. But yet (as it was and will be for ever noted in faulse
teachers) they seek diverse escapes, so disagreable, that one hinders an
other, and nether of theyme helps their own cause. One sort not so
impudent, but agreate deal more foulishe then their fellows, agree by force
of the places mamed and evidence of the examples, that there is pounishement to
be suffered, and some temporal pain remanent to be discharged in this world,
Melanch.
after remission of sin, but for the next after this liefe (so ferde they be
of purgatory) they will have none at all. The Other sect masters fearing what
might follow on that grant, in no case will confess, that there is any pain
due for sin, in this world or the next, after the fault be once remitted.
For Calvin captain of this later band, saw well, Caluinus.
that if any debt or recompense remain to be discharged by the offender after
his reconcilement, it must neades rise by proportion, weght, continuance,
number, and quantity of the faults committed before. Whereby it must of
necessity be induced, that because every man can not have time, either for the
hougenesse of his sins past, or his late repentance, or his careless
nagligence, to repay all in his liefe, that there is all, or some part
answherable in the next world to coom. And therefore bouldely and impudently,
as in case of this necessity, he aduentureth to deny with shame, that any of
all these paynefull miseries be as pounishements for the sins of the
sufferers: but certain fatherly checkes, exercises of patience and virtue,
rather then afflictions enjoined for sins. Which vain shifte has no
bearing by reason, or text of scripture: but only is vphoulden by the
exercised audacity of the author. S. Paul in plain words writethe: Corpus
mortuum est propter peccatum, Ad To. 6 Vide August. super illud psalm. 50. in
peccatis concepit me matter mea.
and stipendium peccati mors est. The body is dead because of sin. And
death is the reward of sin. And so of David: because thowe haste slain
Vrias, Non recedet gladius de domo tua says the scripture: the swhorde shall
not depart thy house. And again, because thowe have made the enemies blaspheme
my name, thy child shall dye. And of the people of Israel: Visitabo and hoc
peccatum eorum. I will viset this sin of theyres also. Yet in this light of
scripture, where, as the pounishement is named, so it is expressly mentioned
that sin is the proper cause thereof, the adversary seekethe a blind mieste,
to dase the simplicyty of the reader, and to mainteyne error. It helpethe our
cause exceeding much, that the very show of an argument, dryues theyme to
such unseemly shifts. S. Augustines words shall for me sufficiently refute
this error, Veritatem dilexisti, impunita peccata eorum etiam quibus ignoscis,
non reliquisti. In psa. 50
(He speakethe to god in the Prophets person). Thowe loves righteousness, and
have not lafte vnpounished, no not the sins of theyme whom thou love.
Notwithstanding, this is very true: that all these afflictions though they
come of sin, and for the reward of man's offensies, yet God of mercy
turnethe theyme to the exercise of virtue, August. lib 2. de pecca to mer. cap
33.
and benefit of such as shall be sayued. But it is one thing to dispute of
what cause they come, and an other to reason of the wisdom of God in the use
of the same. Who, as the said Augustine witnesses, is so mighty in his
provident governance, that he is able to turn, even the very sins theyme
selves, to the benefit of such as by grace and mercy shall be raised up to
salvation. And much more is he ready to frame the pounishement which he him
self of justice workethe for correction of sinners, to the salvation of the
elect.

But now the other sort which be more curteise, The confutation of the second
opinion.
and confess that in this world the just may suffer of reason for his sins
already remitted, but not in the next liefe, as their doctrine is very
untrue, so it gives great license and liberty to evil lyuers, and is the very
moother of praesumption. For if man wear s^ere to be discharged at his
departure hense of all pain for his sins, then certes wear it madness, to
travel in this life forther for his offensyes, then he must of necessitye. Yea
more, it makethe the case of grievous sinners till the hour of their death
(so that they then at last repent) much better, then of smaulle offenders
converted long before. For these must be pounished in their liefe, the other
can not be pounished (as these suppose) after their death. What a vain
absurdity is this, that the prophet offending once or twice in all his time,
should suffer so heavy judgment: and the party which abidethe in wickedness
till the end of his liefe, when sin rather leaves him, then he sin, must
because of his late conversion, with out pain be carried at ease to heaven?
This is not doubtless semely to Gods justice and ordinance, whose ways be
truethe and uprightness. Homil. 11. in Leuit.
Est apud iudicem iustum poenae moderatio, non solum pro qualitate, sed etiam
pro quantitate. To a just judge there must be consideration had of
pounishement, both for the quality and quantity (so says Origin). And the
holy scripture thus. Quantum glorificauit se, and in delitijs fuit: tantum date
illi tormentum and luctum. Look hou high she exalted her sellfe, and hou
delicately she lieued: and give her so much woe and torment again, Cap. 16.
It is spoken as of Babylon in the revelations of S. John.

And because this touches our matter, and the very point thereof: I will stand
with the adversary the longer. Here then I ask him, why God takethe
pounishement in this world, for sin already remitted? His answher must
needs be, for the revenge and hatered of sin, and satisfiyng of justice. Now
the^ does god practice judgment and justice no where but in this world? Or if it
be not here answhered, because of lack of space, or late reco^ciliation of the
offender, shall our lord of necessity be forced to remitte the debt, and
release his sentence of justice for lack of means to pounishe in an other
world? No no, Gods hand is not abbridged by the terms of this liefe. Late
repentance can be a benefit to no man: God forbed it should. Especially
seeing poonishement and judgment for sin (as many learned do suppose, and as
reason with scripture bearethe) properly apperteineth not to this world, but
by a special grace, and singular benefit, which God of peety grants to
such as he louethe, that they may here praeuent his anger: which else in the
next lyefe should be found more grievous, where properly is the reward of
sin, and judgment kept ordinarily for the same. As it is plain mercy and
grace, when man may take pounishment of him self (as S. Paul says) and be
his own correctour, 1. Cor. 11.
to avoid the judgment of God. And thereof the next liefe is termed commonly
dies domini: where there is no place for our woorking, but sufferance alone:
where the account of man's lyefe must be straightly required, and the sins
even of the just, not otherwise amendid, sharply visited. Eusebius. Emiss. homil
de diuersis viti
Therefore if Melanchthon grant that the rightuous and reconciled persons, may
justly bear the skourge of God, for satisfying for their sins before
pardoned, in this world, where, though poonishment be exercised for
wickedness properly, yet at the least not so ordinarilye as in the next, where
God has laid up the great store of reward, as well for the good as the
badde: he must neades by force of reason acknouledge, that the world to coom
is no less (if it be not more) appointed of our lord for just iudgeing of
our faults forgiven, then the time of this present lyefe, where as many an
evil lyeuer escapes all poonishment, so diverse of great virtue suffer full
grievous torments. Excellently well said S. Augustine: Euch. c. 6.
Multa mala hic videntur ignosci, and nullis supplicijs vindicari: sed eorum
paenae reseruantur in posterum etc: much evil may seem here to be pardoned,
and with out all poonishment released: but the pain for such things is
reserved till the world to com.

But let us step a fout farther, and yet so much nearer the matter: and note
well whether we may find any case, where the payment for sins remitted,
passes the bonds of this lyefe, and so required in the next* that by plain
dealing and orderly proceadinge, Mark well that God pounisheth in the next
life, the sins of the just.
we may the better instruct the simple, confound the adversary, and make
truethe stand upon it self.

Consider then with me that our first father pardoned of his sin, as I
proved before, was poonished for the same, and with him all the just off
those days, not only in the time of this praesent mortal lyefe, but many
hundrethe years after their departure. For whose delivery, the Catholic
Church houldeth and our Creed teaches ^lso, that our master Christ descended
down in to hell. And that no man he^e be deceived, he must understand, that
it was no smaule pounishment to be banished so many worlds to gether from the
land of the lyeuing, and to ^acke the joyful fruition of heavens bliss:
which of it sellfe, but that it was not aeternall, Augu. En chi. ca. 112
had been more then all temporal pains, that may be suffered, And this to be
one of those miseryes which our first fathers disobedience wrought and so to
be pain for sin, I think^ every wise man will confess. Yea (...) was the
greatest dominion of sin tha^ could be, for the overthrow of which, Christ
him sellfe vouchsaulfed to enter in to the land of darkness. It is called of
the Prophet, lacus sine aqua (...) a lake with out water: zach. 9. 1. Pet. 3.
And of the Apostle Carcer, a prieson. Where the fathers be also named, vincti
tui, thine that were bound. Whereby we must understand that Christ had a
flock impriesoned and bound, for the debt of sin in a another world. But
that we may make invincible proof, that this their captivity was a just
enjoined plage and paenalty for sin, we must report what we find in ancient
Ireneus of this matter. And he affirms that Adam was judged and condemned for
his wilful faule, till Christ's coomming, Li. 3. ca. 33
in these words. Necesse fuit dominum ad perdicam ouem venientem and tandem
despositionis recapitulationem facientem, and suum plasma requientem, illum
ipsum hominem saluare qui fa^tus fuer at secundum imaginem and similitu^inem
eius, id est Adam: implentem tempo^a eius condemnationis, quae facta fuerat
pro^ter inobedientiam* and streght after. ^olutus est condemnationis vinculis,
qui cap^iuus ductus fuerat homo, thus I english (...): It was necessary that
our lord coming to the lost sheep, and making a re^apitulation of his
appointed ordina^nce, and view of his own handewoorke, should also save the same
man which was fourmed after his own image and liknesse: I mean Adam, then
fulfillinge the time of that condemnation which was for his disobedience
appointed, and so the man led in to captivity was released of the bonds of
his condemnation.

Eusebius Emissenus yet more expressly helpethe our cause, as follows.
Homil. 1. de festo Pasch.
Confestim igitur aeterna nox inferorum, Christo descendente, resplenduit:
siluit stridor ille lugentium, and Cathenarum disruptae ceciderunt vincula
damnatorum. Out off hand at Christ's coming in to hell, that aeternal
darkness shyened bright: the gnasshing of the mourners ceased, and the
brosten bands of condemned persons, fell from theyme. Here lo many one, by
the judgment of this holy writer, were loused from much misery by Christ's
descending down. Where, to our purpose we must especially be advertised, that
all the just in those inferior parts were not in like faelicitye with our
father Abraham, or other of such perfect holiness: (allthoughe he also
suffered the common lack, in long looking for translation to joy) for some
there were of meaner virtue, and yet in the favor of God, which suffered
personal pain for purginge and recompense of their sins committed in this
lyefe: Some were released of pain, at Christ's desce^.
of whom this Author seems to mean.

And as S. Augustine supposethe, the scripture must needs import such a like
thing: undoubtedly teaching that Christ was not only in the place off rest,
where Abraham and other in his harbor were, but also in placyes off torment,
which could not touch his holy person: Act. 2.
Quem Deus suscitauit solutis doloribus inferni: Whom God raised up again
after he had lowsed hell pains. Thus says this holy Author. Quia euidentia
testimonia and infernum co^memorant and dolores, nulla causa occurrit, Epist.
^9.
cur illo credatur venisse Saluator, nisi vt ab eius doloribus saluos faceret:
sed vtrum omnes quos incis inuenit, an quosdam quos illo beneficio dignos
iudicauit, adhuc requiro: suisse tamen eum apud inferos, and in eoru^ doloribus
consttutis hoc beneficium prestitisse non dabito: Because (says he) evident
testimonies make mention both off Hell and pains, I see not why we should
believe that our Savior came thither, but to discharge some off the pains
thereof: mary whether he loused all, or sum whom he thought worthy of that
benefit, that would I learn. For I am out of doubt he was in hell, and
bestowed that gracious benifite upon some that were in pains* thus far spoke
Augustine. Let no man here take occasion to think that this father meant of any
release of the damned in the inferious hell: for that error he ever detested,
and writes ernestly against Origin for the same. De fide and operibus cap. 16.
Then it must neds be, that he spoke of some which were in pain and torment,
and yet worthy to receive mercy* (so he termethe their estate both here,
Cap. 33.
and in the.xij. book of the literal exposition on the Genesis, where he
has the same words with more large proof of the conclusion) which nether
agrees with the state of Abraham's rest, nor yet with the forsaken souls. And
the name of hell is now commonly taken for any one of the inferior parts,
where God practices judgment for sin everlastingly or temporally: though
(as Augustine says) it can not be found in plane scripture, that Abraham's
happy resting place should be termed Hell, or Infernum.

But I need not seek forther in the deape mystery of Christ's affairs in the
inferioure parts. For as I am not ashamed to be ignorant upon whom he
bestowed the grace of delivery, so with Augustine, or rather with Gods
Church, I dare believe, that he loused sum, upon whom he exercised judgment
before. And forther may bouldely auouche, that as there were certain at his
coomming down, not unworthy after long pains tolerated to be released in his
praesens, so there be yet some, which by mercy and means of gods Church be
released daily. Not of that sort which died out of Gods favor: Bernard.
ser. de. s. Nicolao.
Quibus clausa est ianua misericordiae, and omnis spes interclusa salutis:
Upon whom the door of mercy, and the hope of health be closed and shutt up
for ever, but of the just departed in faith and piety, and yet not fully
pourged of all corruption of iniquity.

Let thenimyes of Gods truethe comme now, and deny if they can for shame,
that Gods justice for sins remitted, reaches not sometimes to the placies
of poonishement in the next liefe: let theime with purgatory raze up the
fathers resting place so plainly set fourth by scripture, believed of the
whole Church, and always tought by the holy fathers. Yea let theime that will
hauno pleace for sinners, fiende with blasphemy, hell like torments for Gods
oune Son, with the damned spirits. My heart surely will scarce serve me to
report it, and yet cursed Calvin was not a fearde to write it: and with
arrogant vauntes ageynste the blessed fathers, to auouche the same. That
miserable forsaken man saw, that the only grant of the oulde fathers
poonishme^t by the lack of everlasting joy, might of force drieue him to
acknowledge, that God sometimes exercises his justice upon those which he
loves, in the next liefe: and so consequently that Purgatory pains might be
inferred therevppon, therefore he fell hedlong to this horrible blasphemy,
Caluins blasphemy upon the article of Christ's descention.
that Christ went not to lowse any from the pains of the next liefe, but to
be pounished in hell with the deadly damned him self, for to amend the lack
of his passion upon the Cross. O our cursed time, O corrupt conditions:
this beast writes thus against our blessed saviors death, and against the
sufficiency of the abundant price of our redemption: and yet he lieueth in
man's memory, yea his books be greedely read, read? Nay by such as would
be counted the chief of the clergy, and bear bishops names, they are
commanded to be read: and the very book wherein this and all other
detestable doctrine is uttered, The haeretikes privily set forth by books
that which they dare not openly preach.
especially by their authority commendid to the simple curates study: that
they might there learn closely in deuilishe books, such wicked haeresies as
the preachers theime selves dare not yet in the light of the world utter nor
maintain.

But other be not so far faullen, therefore they must of reason confess,
that God by just correction, has before Christ's coomming visited in the next
world many hundred years to gether, the sins of those whom he dearly
loved. Althoghe not only in all that time, the souls of the holy Patriarchs
felt the lack of the abundant fruition of the Majesty, but also for sin they
both then in rest, Excepting some that by peculiure praerogatiue have already
received their bodies.
and now in unspeakable foelicity, want till this day the increase of joy and
bless, that by the receiving of there bodies yet liyng in doust, they are
undoubtedly suer of. Therefore it is over much praesumption to limit the majesty
of God in the government of his own creatures, to the borders of our short
liefe, and almost it touches his very providence with injury, to say that he
lets him skape without poonishement for his sins, that repented not till
the hour of death: as for whom he has no skourge in the next liefe, as he
had here, if death had not prevented his purporse. These childishe cogitations
can not stand with the righteousness of his will, that for the first sin
committed, doothe not only pounishe many everlastingly of the forsaken sort,
but also for the same, poonisheth both his best beloved in earth, and for a
time abbatithe the foelicitye of the blessed Sanctes in heaven. But I will not
stray after these men. My matter is so fructfull that I may not roue. And
though the sects of these days have so infected every branche of our
Christian faith, that a man can not well ouerpasse theyme what so ever he
takes in hand, yet I will not meddle with theime no forther, then shall
concern the quick of our cause, and the necessary light of our matter.

That the practice of Christ's Church, in the court of binding and lousing
man's sins, does lieuely set fourth the order of Gods justice in the
next liefe, and prove Purgatory.

Cap. 3.
THis being then proved, that God him self has often visited the sins of
such as were very dear unto him, let us now diligently behoulde the grave
authority of lousing and binding sins, and the court of man's conscience
which Christ would have kept in earth by the Apostles and Pastors of our
souls: where we neade not doubt but to find the very resemblaunce of Gods
disposition and ordinance, in poonishing or pardoning offensies. For the
honor and pour of this ecclesiastical government, is by especial
commission so ample, Note.
that it contains not only the preaching of the gospel and ministry of
the Sacraments, but that which is more near to the might and majesty of God,
and only aperteynethe to him by propriety of nature, the very exact judgment
of all our secret sins, with lousing and binding of the same. Joan. 5.
For as God the father gave al judgment to his only Son, so he at his
departure hense, to the honor of his spouse and necessary giding of his
people, did communicate the same in most ample manner (as S. Chrisostom says)
to the Apostles and priests for ever: that they practicing in earth terrible
judgment upon man's misdedes, might fully repraesent unto us the very
sentence of God in poonishement of wickedness in the world to coome. Lib. de
sacer. 3.
The princes of the earth have pour to bind too, but no further then the
body, but this other (says he) reachethe to the soul it self, and practiced
here in the world benethe (which is a strange case) has force and effect in
heaven above. The pour of all potentates, under the majesty of the blessed
Trinity, in heaven and earth, is extreme baseness compared to this.

By this grave authority therefore, the pastors and priests imitating gods
justice, have exercised continually poonishement, from the spring of Christian
religion, down till these days, upon al sinners: perpetually enioyning for
satisfiyng of gods wrath, poenaunce and works of correction, either before
they would absolve theime, as the oulde usage was, or else after the release
of their offensies, wiche now of late for grave causes has been more vfed. In
which sentence of their judgment we plainly see, that as there was ever
account made amongst all the faithful of pain due unto sin, though the
very offense it self and the giltinesse (as you would say) thereof, were
forgiven before: so we may gather that it was ever enjoined by the priests
holy ministry, after the quality and quantity of the fault committed.
Whereupon they charged some meaner offenders with certain prayers only other
with large allmose, diverse with long fasting, many with perilous
peregrinations, sum with suspending from the sacraments, and very grievous
offenders, with curse and excommunication.

Whereby thou maiste not only prove that there is pain to be suffered for thy
sins, Excommunication has the image of gods justice in the world to coom.
but also have a very image of that misery which in the next lyefe may faule,
not only to the damned for ever, but also to all other which neglected in
this time of grace the fructes of poenaunce, and works of satisfaction for
thanswer of their lieues past. This great correction of excommunication and
separation from the sacraments, Virgam.
S. Paul terms the rod, wherewith he often threatened offenders: 1. ad Timo.
yea and somtymes though it was with great sorrow (the pounishment was so
extreme) he mightily in Gods stead occupied the same. Cap. 2. 1. Cor. 5.
As once against Himemeus and Alexander: and another time toward a
Corinthian, upon whom, being absent, he gave sentence of their delyuery up
to Satan: not to be vexed off him as Job was for thencrease of merit, In 1. ad
Cor. ca. 5.
(says Chrisostom) but in their flesh meruelously to be tormented for
payment for their grievous offensyes: and as the Apostle writes of the
Corinthian, that his soul might be false in the day of our lord.

This poonishment was ever by cutting of from the Christian society, and often
joined with torment of body or sickness. And sumtymes with death. Act. 5.
Note.
As in thexcommunication off Ananias and Zaphiras: Which Christ's vicar S.
Petre, to the great terror even of the faithful, gravely pronounced on
theyme for retayning back certain Church gooddes, which by promise they
had before dedicated unto god and thapastles distribution.

August. de Carrep. and gra. ca.. 5.
This kind of poonishment of sinners was ever counted so terrible, that we
fiend it caulled of the oulde fathers damnation: Ita Greg^. Nis. orat. de
Castigatione.
as one that most resembles the pains of the world to coom off all other. And
if man could see with corporal eyes the misery of the party so condemned in
Gods church, his heart would brast: and it would move terroure of forther
damnation even to the stubborn contemners off the Churches authority. The
which censure of gods priests, though it was sumtymes to the everlasting
woe off such offenders as neglected the benefit of that present pain, yet
commonly it was but chastisement and loving correction of our dear moother,
for their delivery from greater grief in the lyefe to coom.

And for this cause, as thexample off all agies past may sufficiently prove,
Aug. Euch cap. 65.
were certain times and ordinary terms of poenaunce appointed, for just
satisfaction for every offense: and by the holy Canons so limited, that no
sin weetingly might be reserved to Gods ^euy revenge in the end of our
short days. It were to long to report the rueles and prescription of
poenaunce, out of Nice Council or Ancyre: ^icen c* 12. Ancyre. 5
or out of S. Cyprian, for their pounishment that fell to Idolatry in the time
of Decius and Diocletianus: or out of Ambrose, the notable excommunication of
Theodosius the emperor. By all which and the like, in the historys of the
ecclesiastical affairs, he that can not see what pain is due unto sin,
even after the remission thereof, I houlde him both ignorant and malicious
blind. And if any man yet doubt why, or to what end the Church of Christ thus
grievously tormenteth her oune children, by so many means of heavy correction,
whom she might by good authority freely release of their sins, let him
assuredly know, that she could not so satisfye gods justice always, by
whom she houldeth h^ authority to edifye and not to destroy: to byind as
well as to lowse. Although such dolor for offensyes committed, and so ernest
zele may she sum times find in thoffender, that her chief and principal
pastors may by their sovereign authority, wholly discharge him of all pains
to coom. But else in the common case of Christian men, this poenaunce is for
no other cause enjoined, Ibidem.
but to save theime from the more grievous torment in the world following. In
the which sense S. Augustine both speak the him self, and proves his
meaning, by thapostles words as follows. Propterea de quibusdam temporalibus
poenis, 1. Cor. 11.
quae in hac vita peccantibus irrogantur eis quorum peccata delentur, ne
reseruentur in finem, ait Apostolus: si enim nosmetipsos iudicaremus, a domino
non iudicaremur. Cum iudicamur autem a domino corripimur, ne cu^ hoc mundo
damnemur. Therefore (says he) it is of certain temporal afflictions which
be laid upon their necks, that being sinners have their trespasses
pardoned, lest they be called to an account for theime at the latter end, that
the Apostle means by, when he says: If we would judge our selves, we
should not then be judged of our lord. And when we be judged of our lord,
then are we chastened that we be not damned with the world. This only
careful kyndnesse of our moother therefore, that never remitted sin that was
notorious in any age, but after sharp poonishment, or ernest charge with sum
proportional poenaunce for the same, doothe not only give us a loving warning
to be ware and prevent that heavy correction of the world to coom, which S.
Paul callethe the judgment of God, because it is a sentence of justice: but
also in her own practice here in earth, of mercy, in pardoning: of justice,
in poonishement: she gives us a very clear example off both the same to be
undoubtedly looked for at thandes of God him self, by whom in the kingdom of
the church, these both in his behallfe be proffitably practiced* for if there
were no respect of the dreadful day in thend off our lyefe, nor any pain
forther due for sins remitted, in the next world, then were it cruel
arrogance in theministers to charge men with poenaunce, needless to the
offender, and folly to the sufferer. But god forbed any should be so malipert or
misbeleuing, as to miscredet the doings and doctrine of the Catholic Church,
which by thauthoritye she has to bind sins, and the protection of the
holy ghost, has used this rod of correction to the proffite of so many, and
hurt of none, ever sense our masters death and departure.

That the many foulde works and fructes of paenaunce, which al godly men
have charged theyme selves withdraw all, for their own sins remitted, were
in respect off Purgatory pains, and for the avoiding off gods judgment
tempotall as well as aeternall in the next life.

Cap. 4.
THere be of the Epicures of our time, that seeing the usual practice of
paenaunce not only by the Churcheis praescription, but also by man's oune
voluntary acceptance, openly to tend toward the truth and proof of
Purgatory, Melanch.
have bouldely improued (not withstanding the express counsel of the Apostle,
where he wills us to judge our selves) all chastisement of our bodies, as
unnatural torments to the injury of our own person, and the excellencye of
our nature. Against these corruptors of Christen conditions and virtuous
liefe, though the examples of all faithful woorshippers of God sense the
world began, do clearly stand, yet the notable history of the Prophet David's
repair after his heavy faule, because it has an especial warraunt of his
pardon, a plane process in poenaunce, a goodly platte of due handelinge the
sores off our sins after they be remitted, and contains a manifest fear
of Purgatory, shall best serve our turn.

This Prophet then, though he was assured of his pardon, and afterward (as I
said before) by Gods own hand poonished, yet cries out with abundant
tears. Amplius laua me ab iniquitate mea, and a peccatis meis munda me. Psalm.
50.
More and more wash me from my iniquity, Cap. 4. Apol. David.
and of my sins pourge me clean. David offended (says S. Ambrose) as kings
commonly do, but he did poenaunce, he wept, he groned, as kings lightly do
not: he confessed his fault, he asked mercy, and throwing him self upon the
hard ground, bewailed his misery, fasted, praide, and so protested his
sorrow, that he laft the testimony of his confession to all the world to come.
What moved this blessed man, by Gods oune mouth pardoned of his sins, so
to torment him self? That happy awe and deape fear of Gods judgment in the
next world, which the cursed security of this swheete poysened doctrine of
our days has now taken away, even that necessary fear of the things
that might faule unto him in the next liefe, caused this holy prince and
prophet so to vex and molest him self. It was hell, it was Purgatory that this
poenitent did behoulde: either of which he knew his sins did well deserve.
S. Augustine shall bear me witness, in words worthy of all memory. Yea the
prophets own words uttered in a bitter prayer and a psalm full of sorrow,
shall bear me witness: thus says S. Augustine. In psa. 37.
Haec iste grauiora formidans, excepta vita ista in cuius malis plangit and
gemit, rogat and dicit. Domine ne in furore tuo arguas me, neque in ira tua
corripias me: Non sum inter illos quibus dicturus es ite in ignem aeternum qui
praeparatus est diabolo and angelis eius: Neque in ira tua emendes me, vt in
hac vita me purges, and talem me reddas cui emendatorio igne opus non sit. This
man, besides the miseries of this liefe in which he was when he thus houleth
and wepeth, forther makethe suit and says, O Lord rebuke me not in thy
fury, let me not be one of theime to whom thou shall say, away from me in
to fire perpetual, which is provided for the devil and his aungells. Nether
yet correct me in thy wrath, but so purge me in my liefe time and wholly frame
me, that at lenght I may have do neade of the Amending fire. So far speaks
this doctor. By whom we may learn that David after sharp poonishement taken
first at Gods hand, and then in the midst of many miseries of this mortal
liefe, did yet before hand behoulde the horrible judgments in the next
world: the one for the damned souls and spirits, the other for the amendment of
such as God loved and shall be saved: in the earneste memorial of which
assured pains, and for the avoiding thereoff, he so afflicted him self as is
before said.

His heart was in heuinesse, his soul in sorrow, his flesh in fear, and in
his bones there was no rest before the face of his sins. Think you here a
protestant preacher with a merry mouth in Nathans stead, could have driven
him from this course of poenaunce, dissuaded him from the fear of purgatory,
eased him with only faith, and set him in securitye and perfect freedom from
his offenses past, Ecclesi. 22.
No no, Musica in luctu importuna narratio. Mirthe in mourning is ever out of
season. Flagella and doctrina in omni tempore sapientia. But rods and
discipline be allwaies wisdom. These delicate teachers had never room but
where sin bare great rule. And it is no small licklyhod of gods exceeding
wrath toward us in these days, that such soft phisitio^s please us in so
dangerous diseases. It was not the doctrine of this time that healed
Nabuchodonosor: but this was his plaster. Daniel. 4.
Peccata tua eleemosynis redime, and iniquitates tuas misericordijs pauperum.
Redime thy sins by almose, and thy iniquities, by mercy toward the poor.
It was exceeding fasting and many sorouwfull sobbes, that bare of Gods hand
from the Ninevites, It was the paiynefull works of poenaunce that John the
Baptist first preached. This was Paul's rule, that if we would poonishe or
judge our selves, then would not God judge us. In to whose hands it is a heavy
case to faule. 1. Cor. 11. Haeb. 10.
Horrendum est (says he) incidere in manus Dei viuentis. For he shall call to
account and reakoning (as S. Bernarde supposes) even the very acts of the
just, In cant. 55 ser.
if they be not well and thoroughly judged, and corrected to his hands:

The undoubted knowledge of which strait account, moved our forefathers to
require such earnest afflictions of the people, for satisfiyng for their
sins.

And here gentle reader give me leave, though I be the longer, to give the a
little taste of the oulde doctors dealinges in the sinners case* that thowe
may compare our late handeling of these matters, with their dooinges: and so
learn to loathe these light merchants, that in so grievous plages deal so
tenderly with our sores. And yet I intend not so to roue, but that the very
course of our taulke well noted, shall be the necessary inducing of that truth
which we now defend concerning purgatory. Especially if it be considered,
that in all praescription of poenaunce by the antiquitye, the pain of
satisfiyng was ever limited by the variety of the offense. And then that the
very cause of all pain enjoined, was for the avoiding of Gods judgment in
the liefe to coom. First ancient Origin writes thus. Homil. 3. in lib. Iud.
Behoulde our merciful Lord joining allwaies clemency with seueritye, and
weying tbe just mean of our poonishement in merciful and rightuous balanse.
He gives not the offenders over for ever: therefore comsider how long thowe
haste straied and co^tynued in sin, so long abase and humble thy self
before God, and so satisfy him in Confession of poenaunce. For if thowe amend
the matter and take poonishement of thy self, then God is pitiful, and will
remove his reuengement from him, that by poenaunce praeuentented his judgment.
Thus we see this father so to measure the pain and poonishement of sinners,
that he makes his principal respect the avoiding off the sharp senrence to
coom.

S. Cyprian the blessed martyr, notes certain conuersies in his days, who
thought they had much wrong to be further burdened with poenau^ce for their
faule, more then the return to God again: he touches the manners of our time
very nere, his words sounding thus. Sermon. de Lapsis.
Before their sins fully purged, before the confession of their fault
made, before their consciencies by the priest and sacrifice be cleansed,
before the ire and indignation of God be pacified and past, they think al is
well and make boste thereof. But he enstructeth theime in the same place better,
as folowethe: Confess your selves brethern whilst ye are in this lyefe, and
whilst the remission and satisfaction by the priests apoyntement is
acceptable. Let us turn unto God with all our hearts expressing the poenaunce
for our sins, by singular grief and sorrow: let us call for mercy, let us
prostrate our selves before God, let our heuinesse of heart satisfy him, let
us with fasting weeping and houlyng, appeace his wrath. whom, for that he is
our loving father, we acknowledge to be merciful: and yet because he bears
the majesty of a judge, he is for justice much to be feared. To a deape and a
grievous wound a long and sharp sauluing must be accepted. Exceeding ernestly
thou must pray: thou must pass over the remnaunt of thy time with lamentable
complaints, thou must for thy soft bed take hard earth and asshies, and
tomble thy self in sackcloth, for the loss of Christ's vesture refuse all
apparel, after the receite of the deuilles food, chuese earnest fasting: and
by diligent applijng thy sellfe to good works and almose deeds, purge thy
sin and deliver thy soul from death. So does S. Augustine correct the
error of such, Cap. 3. and 4. de poenitantiae medicina.
as think the change of life with out al cogitation or care off their
offenses past, to be sufficient for man's perfect repair and reconcileation
to our lord again. It is not sufficient (says he) to amend our manners and
turn back from our misdedes, unless we satisfy before God for theyme which
we have allredy committed, by dolor of paenaunce, by humble sighs and groans,
and by the sacrifice of a contrite heart woorking with allmose deeds.

And in this sense again he utters this comfortable ruele Sed neque de ipsis
criminibus quamlibet magnis remittendis in ecclesia, Euch. 65.
dei desperanda est misericordia, agentibus poenitentia^ secundu^ modu^ sui
cuiusque peccati. But we may not despair off Gods mercy for the remission of
sins in the Church, be they never so grievous: I mean to all such as will
do poenaunce according to the quantity of their fault. So S. Ambrose writing
to a religious woman that had broken her vow of chastity (which in those
days was reckoned one of the most deadly and grievous crimes that could be)
warnethe her thus. Grandi plagae alta and prolixa opus est medicina: grande
scelus grandem necessariam habet satisfactionem. A grievous hourt must have a
deape and long sauluing, a henous offense requires marvelous much
satisfaction. Yea and as I take his words, This sin is better boulstred now
a days.
he planely admonishes her, that she shall have much a do to satisfy fully
for her sin duering her liefe: and therefore he seems to will her, not to
look for full remedy and release before she feel Gods judgment. Which he
means not by the general day, but the particulare account which follows
streght upon man's death. But that I deceive no man wiettingly I will report
his own words. Cap. 8. ad virg. laps.
Inhere poenitentiae vsque ad extremum vitae, nec tibi praesumas ab humano die
posse venia^ dari: quia decipit te qui hoc tibi polliceri voluerit: quae ^nim
proprie in dominum peccasti, ob illo solo ^n die iudicij conuenit expectare
remedium. Continue in poenaunce to the last day thou have to lieue, and
praesume not over bouldely of pardon to be obtained in man's day: for who so
ever promises the so, he deceyueth the: for thou that have offended directly
against God him sellfe, must at Gods hand only in the day of judgment
trust of mercy. If he mean by the last Judgment, then thauthor supposethe
that such horrible incest shall be poonished till the day of the general
resurrection, in purgatory: De ciuitate dei cap. 1^. lib. 21.
for after that day as Augustine affirmethe, there shall be no more any of the
elect in pain. He means then surely nothing else, but that there can be no
poenaunce answerable fully in this lyefe to so grievous a crime, and that the
Church ordinarely pardons not the sins, which be not by sum proportion of
pain and poonishmen recompensed. And this is ordinary, though by the supreme
power given to Gods ministers for the government of the church, the offender
may in this case or the like, if his competent dolor of heart and zele so
require, wholly be acquieted through the merits of Christ's death, and the happy
felouship of fanctes, in the communion of the common body: where the lack of
one membre is abundantly supplied by the residewe. Mary it is a hard matter to
be so qualifyed, that a man may not be unworthy of so singular a grace and
vnaestimable benefit. Therefore this praerogatiue perteining not to very many,
excepted, for the residue that by the ordinary Sacrament be raised up from
their fawle, every one must endeavor to do poenaunce more or less,
according to the quantity and circumstancyes of the crime committed: so S.
Augustine said before, so doothe S. Ambrose mean now, giving this woman
warning that her fault was so horrible, that the paenaunce done in this lyefe
could not properly and exactly make recompense therefore, and yet after
poonishment tolerated at Gods apoyntement in the next lyefe, he doubts not
to assure her of pardon at the length, and release of all pain. Thus was
sin handeled in those days. And why it was so painefully riped up to the
very battom, you see. Compare our days and dealing to theires, and thou shall
wonder to see the diuersitye betwixt their manners, and ours: and to see the
phisicions work so diuersely, where the diseases be all one.

I might here well to my purpose repeat the singular praises, that S. Hierom
gave unto noble Paula: In epitaph. Paulae.
who (as he writes of her) with fountaynes of tears, exceeding lauishe
almose, and pitiful fasting, washed away such venial and smaule offensies,
as other men wovlde scarsely do much more grievous crimes. And to seek for
what end this holy matrone vexed her sellfe and tormented her body, it were in
a manner needelesse. for being not gilty of any grievous sins, she could have
no great fear of hell pains: then it must neades be, that she took
poonishment of her sellfe to praeuent Gods temporal skourge in the lyefe to
coom.

She well considered (for it was the doctrine of that holy time) that every
sin be it never so small or common, Note,
does indebt the offender unto God: and therefore the iustest person that lives
(excepting Christ, and for his honor his moother) as S. Augustine says must
confess debte, and cry for pardon by our masters prayer: Dimitte nobis
debita nostra: forgive us our debts. the which, because they be debt, must
either be pardoned by prayer, or paid by pain. And therefore being not here
remitted, or not satisfied by worthy poonishment in this liefe, they must of
justice be purged after our departure, according to the number of theime and
the negligence of the offender. And this faith of Purgatory and respect of
Gods judgments to come, feared the holiest persons that ever were in gods
Church. This drove many a blessed man to perpetual paenaunce: this brought
Hierom him sellfe in to the wilderness of Syria, there to lament the lapse of
his frail youth, ever in expectation of this call: Exi for as Hieronime Coom
out Hierom: this filled the deserts with many a noble heremite, this raised
up the cloisters and all the holy houses of mowrning and prayers in the whole
world, and has in all agyes appeared both in the words and works of all
Christen people, as we shall better a none declare.

But list you see how this doctrine of paenaunce liked Calvin? The shrew saw
that by granting of this satisfaction for sin and the profitable usage
thereof in this liefe, that it might argue of necessity the residue of some
pains in the next if it were here omitted or not ended. And therefore I pray
you see how substantially he answers and how like him self, Parum me mouent
(says he) quae in veterum scriptis de satisfactione passim occurrunt, In
institut.
video enim eorum nonnullos, dicam simpliciter, omnes fere quorum libri extant
aut in hac part lapsos esse, aut nimis aspere and dure loquutos. I make small
account of that which I often find concerning Satisfaction in the ancient
writers, for I perceive diverse of theime, shall I be plain with you? in a
manner every one that ever wrote till this day, in this point to have been
foul deceived, or spoken more roughly then they should have done. Is not
this a fellow a lone? whether think you now our english bragger craking
all the doctors to be on his part, or this man confessing plainly that they
be all against him, and yet setting not a butten by theyme all, whether think
you is more arrogant? I am sure Calvin deals here more sincerely, and
the other more deceitfully. If crakyng had been a maistery in summer games as
lying is, our man might have won of all the world, two games at a clappe.
But there is no remedy he must yield to the learned that have opened his
impudency, Therefore I leave him, and take the benefit of this his masters
confession for forther confirmation of my cause. doubting nothing but that most
wiese men, seeing by the adversaries grant all learned fathers to be on our
side, will accept it either as a fulle proof, or no smaule praesumption of that
truethe which we defend.

A brief joining in reason and argument upon the proved grounds, withdraw the
adversaries, for the declaration of Purgatory.

Cap. 5.
Having undoubtedly wo^ne thus much both by evident testimony off holy writ,
by the warraunt of all the learned fathers, by good reason, and by the
adversaries own confession, I will be boulde to bare the very joints of the
argument, that both the simple may acknowledge my plain dealing, and the
Protestant have his vauntage, if the reason stand not upright. With out color
or gloss then thus I make my proof.

ergo there is sum pain due after sin be remitted. must of justice have
the reward of everlasting pounishement: so it must needs follow, that the
venial fault not here forgeuen, should have the reward which of nature it
requires: that is to say, temporal pain.

And therefore not only the wicked, but the very just also must travel to have
their daily infirmities and frailetie of their corrupt natures forgiven;
crying with out ceassing forgive us our debtes: Quia non iustificabitur in
conspectu tuo omnis viuens. August. Euch ca. 71
For no man a lieue shall be able to stand before the face of God in his own
justice or righteousness, and if these light sins should never be imputed,
then it were needless to cry for mercy or confess debt, as every man does
be he never so passing holy. To be brief, this debt of pain for sin by any
way remaining at the departure hense, must off justice be answered: Which can
not be with out poonishement in the next liefe, then there must be a place of
judgment for temporal and transitory pains in the other world. The whole
discourse made before has given force enoghe to every part of the argument:
the scriptures do prove it, the practice of the Church confirms it, all the
doctors by our adversaries grant, agree upon it. If they have any thing to
say, here I make theime fair play: the ground is open, the reasons laid
naked before their face: remove theime as they can. Let theime deal simply
if they mean truly, and not flourishe as they use, upon a faulse ground,
that in flow of worddes they may cover error, or in raze of their smoothe
talk ouerron truth.

And that every man may perceive that we have not raised this doctrine upon
reason only or curiosity, (although the grave authority of Gods Church
might herein satisfye sober wits) we will now by Gods help go nearer the
matter, and directly make proof of Purgatory by holy scriptures: reciting such
placeis of the oulde and new testament, as shall prove our cause, even in
that sense which the lernedst and godlyest fathers of all agies, by conference
of placies or other lyklyhood, shall fiende and determine to be most true.
Alleging none else but such as they have, in the flower of Christian faith,
noted and peculiarely construed for that purpose which now is in quaestion.
That the adversaries off that doctrine, may rather strive with the said
sanctes and doctors, then with me, that will as they shall well perceive do
nothing, but truly report their words or meaning. Or rather that such as
have erred in that case, by giving over light credit to the troblesom teachers
of these unhappy days, may, when they shall understand the true meaning of
the scrptures, the constant doctrine of the Catholic Church, the words of all
ancient writers, the determination of so many holy counsels, and the oulde
usage of all nations by humble prayers obtain of God the light of
understanding the truethe, and the gift of obedience to his will and word. Or
if there be any so sattled in this vnlickly sect, that he purposes not to
believe the grave writers of old times, nor receive their expositions upon
such placeis as we shall reciete, for that praeiudice which he has of his
own wit and understanding, yet let him not marvel at my simplicity, that
had rather give credet to others then my self: Or that in this hot time of
contention and partaking in religion, I do repose my sellfe under the shadow
of so many worthy writers, as anon shall give evidence in my cause.

That Purgatory pains doothe not only serve Gods justice for the
poonishment of sin, but also cleanse and qualify the soul of man defiled,
for the more seemly entrance into the holy placies, with conference of
certain placies of scripture for that purpose.

Cap. 6.
IF we well consider the wonderful base condition and state of man's nature
corrupted by our first fathers disobedience, and more and more abased by
continual misery that sin has brought in to our mortal liefe, we shall
fiende the work of Gods wisdom in the excellent repair of this his
creature, to be full of mercy, and full of marvel. But proceading sumwhat
further, and weying not only his restoring, but also the passing great
auaunsment to the unspeakable glory of the elect, there shall reason and all
our cogitations utterly faint and fail us.

The kingdom prepared is honored with the majesty of the Glorious Trinity,
with the humanity of Christ our Savior, with the blessed Mary the vessel of
his Incarnation, with the bewtifull creatures and wholly undefiled, of all the
ordres of Angels. There can nothing doubtless present it self before the
seat of Gods glory, nor stand in his sight, that has any blemishe of sin,
any spotte of corruption, any remnaunt of infirmity. There may no creature
match with those perfect pure natures of spiritual substance in the happy
service of the holy Trinity, What purity is required for thentrance in to
h^^ue^.
that is not holy as they be, pure as they be, and wholly sanctified as they be.
Nothing can join with theyme in freedom of that heavenly city, in the joyful
estate of that triumphant co^monwellthe, that is not purified to the point, and
by the work of Gods own hand fully fined and perfieted. This is the new
City of Jerusalem, which the holy Apostle saw by vision: Nec in eam intrabit
aliquid coinquinatum. Apoc. 21.
Nothing shall enter therein, that is defiled. It is the Church with out
spotte and wrinkle, it is the temple of God, it is the seat of the lamb, and
the land of the living.

Now our kind, notwithstanding our pitiful faulle and singular fraylety,
with exceeding corruption and vnaptenesse both of body and soul, has yet by
Christ Jesus our redemer, the assurance of this inestimable benefit, and the
fellowship of perpetual fruition with the Angels. To whom as we must be made
aequall in room and glory, so we must in perfect cleanes be fully matched with
theime. For it were not agreeable to Gods ordinary justice, Leuit. 21.
who in this earthly sanctuary expressly forbids the oblations of the
unclean, Rupert. de diui^i^ of. l. 6. ca. 36.
that he should in the celestial sovereign holy acknouledge any nature that
were not pure and undefiled: or make man's condition not abettered, aequall to
the dignity of Angels that never were reproved: whereby injustice might
appear in God, or confusion in the heavens commonweleth, where only all order
is observed.

And though man's recovery after his faule be wroght by Christ, and the
perfect purgation off sins by the bloodde of him that only was with owte
sin, yet it was not convenient, that the might of that mercy should work
in this freedom of our wills, with owte all pain of the party, or travel of
thoffenders. Wheroff man streght upon his miserable dounefall (as S. Ambrose
excellentely well notes) had warning by the fyery swhord houlden at the
entrance of paradise: In psa. 118 ser. 20.
thereby putting him in remembrance, that the return to bless so soon lost,
should be throghe fiere and swhorde hardely achieued again. Therefore if any
man think the only forgiveness of our sins paste, sufficient either for
the recovery of our first degree, or the atteyning of forther dignity in the
glory of the Sanctes, he seethe not at all what a deape stroke sin has set
in man's soul, what filthe and feebleness it has wroght in the body, what
ruele and dominion it bears in this our mortality, what care all perfect men
have had, not only in the healing of the deape wound, but also in purging
the relics, and full abbating the abundant matter thereof. And yet when man
has with all his might wrastled with the pour of sin, being in this
estate, he can not be able to recover the worthiness of his creation, much
less the passing honor and end of his redemption. Let him wash and water
his coutch with tears, let him weaken his body with fasting, and humble his
heart with sorrow: Happily the fiery swhorde shall not hinder his passage after
his departure, yet till the separation of the body and the soul, full freedom
from sin or perfect purgation thereof (excepting the privilege of certain)
can not be fully obtained. Wherein yet mercy at the end has the chieff stroke,
by which the soul that was the principal vessel of sin, and no less
abased then the body, shall out of hand in the perfectest sort, obtain the
purity of Angels and fellowship with theime for ever.

I marvel not now to see the Prophet seek not only for the remission of his
grievous sins, but to be better cleansed, to have theime wholly blotted owte,
to be made as white as snow: behoulding the purity that is requisite for a
citizen of the celestial Jerusalem. And I note this the rather of the soul,
because I see that the body also, before it can shake of the stroke and plage
of sin, must be driven (by the common course) to doust and elements, that
being at the end raised up ageine in the same substance, may yet wholly in
condition and quality be so straungely altered, that in honor and immortality
it may everlastingly join with the soul again. To the newness whereof,
August. li. 20. de ciuit. ca. 16. 1. Cor. 15.
the very elements that before answered it in qualityes off corruption, shall
be perfectly by fire reformed, and serve in beauty and incorruption aeternall.
Yff sin then be so revenged and thoroughly tried out of man's body, and all
corruption owte of these elements for the glory of that new and aeternall
kingdom, shall we doubt of Gods justice in the perfect revenge of sin in
the soul, or purifying that nature, which as it was most corrupted and was the
very seat of sin, Note.
so namely apperteyneth to the company of Angels and glory everlasting? It
were not otherwise agreeable to Gods justice suerely, nor conuenyent for the
glorious estate to coom: it were nether right, nor reason.

He will then, where man neglects the day of mercy, sharply viset with
torment, him sellfe: and both pourge and purifye the dross of our impure
natures defiled and stained by sin, with judgment and righteousness. Isaie.
4.
A bluet Dominus sordes filiaru^ Syo^, and sanguinem Jerusalem, lauabit de
medio eius, in spiritu iudicij, and spiritu ardoris. Our lord shall wasshe
out the filthe of the doghters of Syon: and will cleanse blodde from the
midst of Jerusalem, in the spirit of judgment, and the spirit of burning.
But because we will not stand upon conjectures in so necessary a point, you
shall see by what scriptures the grave and learned fathers have to my hand
confirmed this believed truth. And first I will recyte those placyes which do
set furthe both the quality and condition of that poonishment, which God
takes upon man for sin in the other world: and also did give just occasion
to our forefathers of the name of Purgatory.

There be two textes of scripture to this purpose so like, that many of the
doctors, for better conference in so weghty a case, have joined theime
together to make their proof full: and so will I do by their example. The
first is in the third chapter of the Prophet Malachie in these words. Malach.
3.
Ecce venit dicit Dominus exercituum, and quis poterit cogitare diem aduentus
eius? Et quis stabit ad videndum eum? Ipse enim quasi ignis conflans, and quasi
herba fullonum: and sedebit conflans and emundans argentum, and purgabit filios
Leui, and colabit eos quasi aurum and argentum, and erunt Domino offerentes
sacrificia in iustitia. Et placebit Domino sacrificium Judah and Jerusalem, and
caetera. Behold he comes (says the Lord of hosts.) And who may abide the
day of his coming? Who can stand and endure his sight, For he is like melting
and casting fire, and as the wasshers herb. Soap
And he shall sit casting and trying out silver, and shall pourge the children
of Leui and cleanse theime as goulde or silver. And then shall they offer
sacrifice in righteousness: and the offeringes of Judah and Jerusalem, shall
be acceptable unto our Lord. And thus far spoke the prophet. The second is
this, Cap. 3.
taken out of the first epistle to the Corinthians. Secundum gratiam Dei quae
data est mihi, vt sapiens architectus fundamentum posui, alius autem
superaedificat. Vnusquisque autem videat quomodo superadificet. Fundamentum
enim aliud nemo potest ponere, praeter id quod est positum: quod est Christus
Jesus. Si quis autem superaedificat super fundamentum hoc, aurum, argentum,
lapides preciosos, ligna, foenum, stipulam, vniuscuiusque opus manifestum erit.
dies enim Domini declarabit, quia in igne reuelabitur: and vniuscuiusque opus
quale sit ignis probabit. Si cuius opus manserit quod superaedificauit,
mercedem accipiet: si cuius opus arserit, detrimentum patietur: ipse autem
saluus erit, sic tamen quasi per ignem. Thus in english: According to the grace
of God given unto me, as a discriete builder I have laid the groundewark: but
another builds thereon. Let every man be circumspect how he builds on it.
For no fundation can be laid, but Christ Jesus, which is already laid. Yff
any man build upon this groundewark, gould, silver, preciouse stones, wodde,
hay, or stooble, every man's work shall be laid open. For the day of our
Lord will declare it, because it shall appear in fiere. And that fiere shall
try every man's work what it is: if any man's work erected upon that
foundation do abide, he shall receive reward, but if his work burn, he
shall sustain loss (or it shall sustain loss, meaning by the work it self,
as the text well serves also) but him sellfe shall be saved notwithstanding,
and that yet as through fire. These be S. Paul's words.

Now as men studious of the truth, careful of our faith and salvation, and
fully free from contention and partaking, let us enter into the search off the
meaning of these two textes, with such plainness and sinceritye that I dare
say the adversaries theime selves shall not mislyke our dealing. Plain de
aling.
We will follow all lyklyhoodes by comparing the scriptures together, and admit
with all, the counsel and judgment of such our elders, as hy their
confession shall be taken for holy, learned, and wise. impure or defiled
works: wrought in the next liefe, then it must needs so induce this sense,
that no meaning may well be admitted, which evidently sets not forth the
truth of Purgatory.

And that this work is not properly taken for any such trouble or vexation
that may fall to man in this liefe, but for a very torment praepared for the
next world, first the quality of the man's liefe wherein he follows his
freedom, is called Dies Hominis: the day of man, because as man in this liefe
for the most part serves his own will, so he often neglects Gods: but at
his death, there begins Dies Domini: Where God executes his ordinance and
will upon man. This trial then of man's misdeedes and impure works, must
either be at his death, or after his departure by one of the two judgments.
But if we note diligently the circumstances of the said letter, it shall
appear unto us, that this purgatio^ was not meant to be only at man's death:
both because it shall be done by best, as well as to the worst or indifferent,
and no less grievous in it sellfe to one then the other, can not be imported by
the fire which shall bring loss to the one sort, and not pain the other. 2. Cor.
5.
admonishes him that our deeds must be laid open before the judgment seat
of God. so here. Dies domini declarabit, quia in igne reuelabitur: the day of
our lord will open the matter, because it shall be Diem aduentus domini:
which is a proper calling of one of the judgments: either that which shall be
general at the last day, or else that which every manne must first abide
streghte after his departure, when he shall be called to the peculiare
reckoning for his own acts. In either of which judgments, Magis. l. 4 did.
47.
this purging and amending fire shall be fownde. For as in that general wast
of the whole world by the fire of conflagration, 2. Petri. Cap. 3.
which is called ignis praecedeus faciem iudicis because it awaiteth to
fulfill Christ's ordinance in the day of his second coming, as in that fire
the whole man both body and soul may suffer loss and extreme pain for his
poonishment or purgation, and yet by that same fire be saved: even so out of
doubt at this particulare judgment streght upon every man's death, the soul
of the departed if it be not before free, must suffer pains and Purgation by
the like vehement torment woorking only upon the soul, as the other shall do
on the whole man. And the prophets words now alleged, do mean principally of
the purgation that shall be made of the faithfuls corrupted works, by the
fiere of conflagration, in the second coming of Christ: though his words
well prove the other also, as S. Paul too, means by theyme both.

That there is a particulare judgment and private account to be made at every
man's departure, off his several acts and deeds, with certain of the
fathers minds touching the textes of scripture alleged before.

Cap. 7.
ANd though such as shall live at the coming of the judge in the later day,
shall then be purged of their corruption and base works of infirmity, by the
fire that shall abetter and alter the impure nature of these corruptible
elements, or otherwise according to gods ordinance: yet the common sort of
all men which in the mean time depart this world, must not tarry for their
purgation till that general amending of all natures, no more then the very
good, in whom after their baptism no filthe of sin is fownde, or if any
were, was wiped a way by poenaunce, must awayte for their salvation: or the
wicked tarry for their just judgment to damnation. The particulare judgment
But streght this sentence either off judgment or mercy, must be pronounced:
and therefore it is called the particulare judgment, by which the soul only
shall receive well the or woe, as at the day of the great account both body
and soul must do. Of this several trial the holy Apostle S. Paul says: Ad
haebr. 9
statutum est omnibus hominibus semel mori, post hoc iudicium: It is determined
that every man once must dye, and after that comes judgment. And a another
scripture more expressly thus: Eccles. 11.
Facile est coram domino reddere vnicuique in die obitus sui, secundum vias
suas. It is an easy matter before our lord, that every man at the day of his
death should be rewarded according to his lyefe and ways. Again in the same
place: Memor isto iudicij mei: sic enim erit and tuum, mihi heri, and tibi
hodie. Have in remembrance my judgment, for such shall thy nowne be: yester
day was mine, to day may be thine. And therefore S. Ambrose says, that with
out delay the good poor man was carried to rest, and the wicked rich owte of
hand suffered torments. That every man (says he) may feel before the day of
judgment, Super 5. ad Roman.
what he must then look for. And in another place the same holy man writes,
that John the beloved of Jesus is allredy gone to the paradise of everlasting
bless, In psa. 118 ser. 20.
passing as few shall do, the fiery swhorde at the entrance off joy with
out all stop or tariaunce: because the fiere of love in his lyefe time had
such force in him, that the amending fire after his change should take no
houlde of him at all, so says Ambrose. But of this private judgment the
Reverent Bid has a goodly sentence in the fyfte of his historye. Cap. 14
Meminerimus facta and cogitationes nostras non in ventum diffluere, sed ad
examen summi Iudicis cuncta seruari, and sieve per amicos Angelos in fine nobis
ostendenda, sieve per hosts. Let us remember (says he) that al our deeds and
thoghtes shall abide, and not be carried a way with the wind, but be reserved
to the examination of the high Judge: and so shall be laid before our face
at our ending, either by our good or adversary Angels.

By all which it is evident, The souls be not in doubt of their damnation
or salvation, til the day of judgment.
that the souls sleep not: (of which error Luther was also noted) nor be
reserved in doubt of their damnation, either perpetual or temporal, till the
latter day: but streght way receive as they deserved before in their lyefe,
either wealth or woeful pains.

In this day of our lord then this Purgatory pains must begin, to all
such as have after their Baptism, where they laid the foundation off
Christ's faith, builded the works off lesser sins and imperfection, and not
washed theyme a way by paenaunce in their life, nor obtained mercy for the
same. The which truth, the places of the Prophet and Apostle before alleged
with out al unseemly wrething or wraesting do so plainly bear, that if ours
were a sense never heard of before, yet the only comparing off the textes,
and necessary circumstancies off the letter might rather drive us to that
meaning, then any other that they can ever allege or prove. But now, as
Catholics ever do, keeping the owlde meaning and fourging no new, giving no
other sense then that which the persuation of all Christian people both
learned and simple has driven from the beginning of our faith down to our
days, and framyng no other understanding then that which we find expressly
in the learning and faith off our fathers both set forth and proved, who is so
rude in judgment, or so enta^gled with any contrary opinion, that will not
acknouledge the truth and doctrine every way so compassed with proof and all
liklihoods?

But as reason is, and my promise was at the beginning. I will let the good
Christian see the words of most notable ancient writers, that he may rejoice
his faith to be so suerly grownded. First then you shall perceive that S.
Augustine expounds the text off the prophet Malachie before recited, Cap. 3.
for purgatory pains even as I said. I am certain he may much move our
adversaries, as one whom they chaleng to be patron of some of their opinions:
but how unjustly in all points, God knows, and in this matter especially
you shall now perceive. After the rehersall of the Prophets words and well
weying the matter, he thus writes. Lib. 20. de ciuit. Cap. 25.
Ex ijs quae dicta sunt videtur euidentius apparere, in illo iudicio quasdam
quorumdam purgatorias poenas futuras. Vbi enim dicitur Quis sustinebit diem
introitus eius? aut quis far poterit vt aspiciat eum? quia ipse ingreditur
quasi ignis conflatorij, and quasi herba lauantium, and sedebit conflans and
emundans sicut argentum and aurum, and emundabit filios Leui, and fundet eos
sicut aurum et sicut argentum, quid aliud intelligendum est? dicit tale aliquid
and Isaias: Lauabit dominus sordes filioru^ and filiarum Sion, and sanguine^
emundabit de medio eorum spiritu iudicij, and spiritu combustionis. Nisi forte
sic eos dicendum est emundari a sordibus, and eliquari quodam modo, cum ab eis
mali per poenale iudicium separantur, vt illorum segregatio atque damnatio
purgatio sit istorum, quia sine talium de coetero commixtione victuri sunt: sed
cum dicit, and emundabit filios Leui, and fundet eos sicut aurum and argentum,
and erunt domino offerentes hostias in iusticia, and placebit domino
sacrificium Judah and Jerusalem: Vtique ostendit eos ipsos qui emundabuntur,
deinceps in sacrificijs iustitiae domino esse placituros: ac per hoc ipsi a sua
iniustitia emundabuntur, in qua domino hostiae displicebant* porro in plena
perfectaque iustitia ipsi erunt cum mundati fuerint: quid enim acceptius deo
tales offeru^t quam seipsos? verum ista quaestio de Purgatorijs poenis, vt
diligentius pertractetur in tempus aliud differenda est. thus in English. By
the foresaid words it seems very evident, that in the time of that judgment
there shall be certain Purgatory pains for sum sort off men. For when it is
said: Who can be able to sustain the day of his coming? who can stand in
his sight? because he shall sit trying owte and purifiyng as it were gould
and silver, and enter in like the fire of the furnace, and as wasshers soap: he
shall make clean the sons of Leui and shall try theime as goulde and silver:
What other thing by all these words ca^ be meant? Cap. 4.
(but purgatory pains) Namely seeing the prophet Esaias has the like in these
words. God shall wasshe a way the filthe of the sons and doghters of Syon,
and purge blodde from the midst of theime, in the spirit of judgment and
fire. Except a man might conveniently say that they shall be washed from
filthe, and as you would say new fourged, when the wicked by final
judgment are severed owte of their company: that so their departure and
damnation may be the purgation of the rest, because after that day they shall
lieue for ever without the company of the badde. But when the Prophet says
more, that he will cleanse the children of Leuy, and purify theime as gould and
silver, that they may offer their oblations in righteousness, and the
sacrifice of Judah and Jerusalem shall pleace our Lord. He surely gives us
to wiet, that even the same self men which shall be purged, must afterward
offer to God the sacrifice of justice, that being once thus amended of their
unrighteousness, in which their offeringes could not be acceptable unto God,
may afterward in pure and perfect justice offer theime selves as a most
pleasant host and oblation unto our Lord. But this quaestion of purgatory
pains I will differ to a further treaty hereafter. All this has S.
Augustine: Whereby we may both acknowledge his mind and the Prophets meaning:
which according to the grace given unto him in the expounding of scriptures,
he has sought owte by conference of that place with other the like owte of
Esaias, by weiyng discretely the whole circunstance of the letter, and finally by
comparing of the other meaning, which to sum might have been reakoned apt
and mete for that place. In all which doing he was as far from rash
judgment, as our new doctors be from good aduisement.

But because he refers us to the further discussing of the same matter
afterward, in the named work: it shall be to our purpose not a little, to have
this doctors full mind and constant judgment therein. In the xxj. book
after much matter uttered, and very deep discussing of the cause, he makes
this grounded Conclusion. Cap. 13.
Temporales paenas alij in hac vita tantum, alij post mortem, alij nunc et
tunc, veruntamen ante illud saeuerissimum, nouissimu^que iudiciu^ patiuntur.
Non autem omnes veniunt in sempiternas poenas quae post illud iudicium his sunt
futurae, qui post mortem sustinent temporales: nam quibusdam quod in isto non
remittitur, remitti in futuro saeculo, id est ne futuri saeculi aeterno
supplicio puniantur, iam supra diximus. Temporal pains (that is to say
poonishement which shall have an end) some men suffer in this liefe, some
other after their death, and other some, both now, and then: Temporal
pains in the next liefe as vell as in this.
But all this before the day of judgment that is the greatest and last of all
other judgments: not all that be temporally poonished after their departure
com in to pains perpetual which shall be after the general day: for we have
already declared, that there be certain which have remission in another
world, that is to say a pardon that they be not poonished everlastingly, that
had not forgeunesse in this. By these words we may be assured, that as in the
next liefe there be pains endless and perpaetuall for the wicked, so in the
same world aftet our end here, there must needs be some transitory poonishment
and correction, for such of the mean sort as shall afterward be saved. And
again he speaks (as I take it) of the fire of Conflagration that shall in
the latter day pourge some that be mean, and waste other that be wicked, and
send theime from that praesent poonishment, to further aeternall damnation. I
will recite his own words, that ye may perceive the perpetual constancy off
this excellent man's mind in this matter. It shall also be a testimony
sufficient for the understanding of S. Paul's words now before alleged. Si
aedificauerit super fundame^tum, ligna, foenu^, stipulam, Sermon. 3. in Psalm. 103.
id est mores saeculares fundamento fidei suae super aedificauerit, tamen si in
fundamento sit Christus, and primum locum ipse habeat in cord, and ei nihil
omnino anteponatur, portentur et tales: Veniet caminus and incendet ligna,
faenum, stipulam: ipse inquit saluus erit, sic tamen quasi per ignem. Hoc aget
caminus: alios in sinistram separabit, alos in dexteram quodammodo eliquabit.
If any man erecte upon the foundation woodde, hay, or straw, that is to say
worldly affections upon the groundewark of his says: if yet Christ be in the
foundation, and bear the greatest stroke in his heart, so that nothing be
praeferred before him, such may well be borne withal* for the fiery furnace
shall come and burn the woodde, hay and stoble, and shall be saved, as the
Apostle says, though it be for all that through the fire, that furnace then
shall part some to the lift hand, and try forth other (if a man man may so
term it) to the right hand.

And as S. Augustine takes these base substances of wood, hay, or stoble, to
signify wordely affections and seculare desires: so S. Ambrose notes by the
same, vain, curious, In com. super hunc locum.
and unprofitable doctrines: the dross of which friuoulous matter much
corrupting the sincerity of our faith, must be separated from the foundation,
by the fire of the said furnace. For this is a general doctrine with owte
exception, that what so ever be understood by those light matters, whether it
be a difformity in liefe or in doctrine, that only defilethe and not utterly
destroys the faith which is the foundation, nor wastes the love due unto
our Lord, what so ever (I say) that be, it must be tried out by the spirit
of judgment and fire. Briefly then, thus S. Ambrose expoundinge the Apostles
words. He shall be saved by fire, In commentarijs super 3. c. 1. ad Cor.
wtiteth, Ostendit illum saluum quidem futurum, sed paenam ignis passurum, vt
per ignem purgatus fiat saluus, and non sicut perfidi aeterno igne in perpetuum
torqueatur. The apostle declares that he shall be saved, and yet suffer the
pains of fire: that being pourged by that fire, he may so be saved, and not as
the unfaithful, perpetually be tormented in everlasting fire.

This temporal torment of the next liefe S. Hierom very fitly calls. A
judgment of god joined with mercy, the continuance whereof, or other
circunstancies to serve men's curiosity he dare not define, being contented
out of doubt to believe that certain sinners be in grievous torments, and yet
not with owte hope of mercy* these be that holy man's words in his
commentaries upon the Prophet Esai, Cap. vlt et in primum Cap. Ezech in illud,
vi di quasi specie^ electri.
taulking by occasion, of the continuance of purgatory pains. Quod nos solius
Dei scientiae debemus relinquere, cuius non solum misericordiae sed and
torme^ta in pondere sunt: and nouit quem, quomodo, and quamdiu debeat iudicare.
Solumque dicamus quod humanae conuenit fragilitati, Domine ne in furore tuo
arguas me, neque in ira tua corripias me: and sicut diabili omni umque
negatorum atque impiorum qui dixerunt in cord suo non est Deus, credimus
aeterna tormenta, sic peccatorum atque impiorum, and tamen Christianorum,
quorum opera in igne purganda sunt atque probanda, moderatam arbitramur and
mixtam clementiae sententia^ iudicis. In english: We must commit this secrette
to Gods wisdom and knowledge, whose not only mercy, but judgment and just
ponishment be paised. For he right well knows whom, how, and what time he
ought to poonish. And let us only as it becomes our frailety cry owte:
Lord in thy furious wrath argue me not, nether correct me in thy anger: for as
we believe the aeternall damnation and torment of the devil with the forsaken
sort and wicked, that said in their heart there is no God, so we suppose,
that upon sinners and evil men, being yet christen men, whose works shall be
both pourged and tried by fire, shall be pronounced a moderate sentence mixed
with mercy and clemency. Lo here, this worthy writer grants there be two
sorts of pounishments by fire, one of the damned spirits and wicked men
aeternall, and an other off certain that in their lyefe were sinners, and sum
wicked men too, who yet being in Christ's Church and using the benefit of the
blessed sacraments, had their sins so forgeuen, that not purging their
wicked lyefe by sufficient poenaunce in their days, they must of necessety
enter into the torment of transitory fyere, there to be poonishid not in rage
and rigor with out pity, but in anger of fatherly correction joined with
clemency and much mercy.

Origin is alleged for our cause, upon whose error in a matter sumvvhat
apperteyning to our purpose, S. Augustines judgment is more largely soght:
and there with it is declared by testimony of diverse holy authors, what
sins be chefely purged in that temporal fire.

Cap. 8.
THese three noble learned men might right well satisfy our search, for the
sense of the textes both off the Prophet and Apostle, and persuade any
reasonable man in the whole cause: yet for that there be some that mean not to
relent in their lewd opinions, for light proffers, I will store theime with
testimonies.

Origenes, one of great antiquity, in many places of his works understands
both the said textes of Malachie and S. Paul in the like sort: by whom we
may well take a great taste of the time and church where he lived, what men
of wisdom and virtue then judged off things, which now of fools be
contemned, and of haeretikes condemned also. But namely upon the prophet Jeremy
in these words: Homil. 12.
Si post fundamentum Jesus Christi, non solum in tuo cord aurum, argentum, and
lapidem praeciosum superaedificaueris, verum and ligna, foenum, and stipulam,
quid tibi vis fieri cum anima seiuncta fuerit a corpore? vtrum ne ingredi vis
in sancta cum lignis tuis, and foeno, and stipula, vt polluas regnum dei? an
propter lignum, foenum, and stipulam, foris residere vis, and pro auro,
argento, lapide precioso, nil mercedis accipere? sed neque hoe aequum est. Quid
ergo sequitur, nisi vt primu^ propter lignum ignistibi detur, qui consumat
foenum, lignum, and stipulam etc. If upon the foundation, which is Christ
Jesus, thou do not only build goulde, silver, and preciouse stone, but also
woodde, hay, and straw, what do thou look for after thy death? willt thou
enter into the holy places with thy wodde, hay, and stoble, and defile the
kingdom off God? or else for thy woodde, hay, and straw, thou will abide
furthe: and so lyese the reward of thy goulde, silver, and preciouse stone?
But that were no reason: then there is no way but one, first to receive fire
for to consume and burn owte thy wood, hay, and stooble: and then afterward to
receive for thy better works, the reward of salvation* so says Origin. Whose
judgment if any man mistrust in this point, because he erred in other, let
him learn to miscredet only his or other men's singular opinions and
private phantasyes, wherein they disagreed from the residew of the common body
of Christ his Church, and not contemn in any man the confirmation of the
universal sense, Basil. Cap. penult. de spiritu sancto.
which he finds in the uniform doctrine of all other Christian Catholics.
In deed it was so evident, that this Purgatory fire of which the Apostle
speaks, should be in the other lyefe, that this learned man afterward,
leaving the meaning which the holy Church had opened for the prouf off
certain transitory poonishment in the next world for meaner offenders, would
of his own head go forward (which is the bane of many a goodly wit) and
mainteyne that all grievous crimes, Vincent lyr
and most wicked manners might be purged by this fire after death, and the
parties in time saved, De fide and operibus Cap. 16.
so that they had faith for their foundation* whereby (as S. Augustine notes
of him) he made only faith to save the wicked, withowte repentance or good
works. Against which perniciouse error the said doctor often writes: and
proves that this place of S. Paul can not make for the delyuery of the wicked
or grievous offenders in any case. And being sumwhat urged by the adversaries
arguments, or else because he would take all howlde from theyme which they
seemed to have by that scripture, he seeks theime owte another meaning, not
contrary at all to the truth of Purgatory: but yet farther off their purpose.
Declaring that this fire might (as he says there) signify sum grefe off this
world, for the abatyng of sum inordinate affections that be found in many
even toward things otherwise lawful. Though he was very loathe to auouche
this as the undoubted meaning of that scripture, being pleaced with any other
whereby they should not be forced to deny the aeternall damnation of
impaenitent sinners: as in deed he never gave this meaning but where the
Origenistes did urge him, and in such places only where he answers to Origens
arguments* for in other places where he was free from contention with the
said sects, he ever in express terms grounded the doctrine of Purgatory
upon the Apostles words. Yea even in the same answer to the adversary he was
so mindful of Gods justice in the world to coom, and ferd lest he might give
any occasion of the contrary error to deny purgatory, that in the same talk
with the Origenistes, he confesses there might well be sum greffe in the
next lyefe also, which might likewise purge and deliver a man from the love
of transitory things, wherwithe the best sort of men be in this our misery
often very sore laden. Allthoughe in deed he doubted whether any such
affection and love of things dear unto us in this world, as of wiefe,
kindred, acquaintance, Euch: C^p. 67. and 68.
or such like might remain in man after his departure hense, and so there in
time to be lessened, and in fine utterly removed or worn away, by some grief
and sorrow which in the next lyefe might by the lack of the said things, vex
and molest his mind. As we see it commu^ly faule in this present liefe, where
man by diverse proffitable troobles of this world, lerneth to set light by
things, which in order he might well love: being for all that more merit to
forsake theyme. Euch: Cap. 69.
And of this point S. Augustine has these words in one place: Tale aliquid
fieri etiam post banc vitam incredibile non est: and vtrum ita sit quaeri
potest, sum such thing may well be after this lyefe, and thereof quaestion may
be made. This clerkly argument our english apology urges.
By which words, the haeretikes of our time either of ignorance or of malice
(which be ever yoked to gether in such men) have borne the simple in hand,
that this holy doctor doubted of Purgatory. A little houlde will serve such
wringers: because he doubted of it, they believe, as they think by good
authority, that with out doubt there is none at al. Yff S. Augustine had but
said, belike there is no such mean place in the lyefe following: mary sir
then they might have picked more matter of their infidelity: and yet of that
speech determining no certeinty, there had been no great cause why they should
have forsaken the judgment of Gods Church. But now he so doubts, that he
fyndeth more cause to think there should be one, then that any man might
gether upon his words, that there should be none at all. No nor he never went
so far good reader, as to make any doubt of Purgatory pains, for
poonishment of sins committed in the world. For in all the same books where
he has the like saing, and almost in the very same places, he houldeth as a
matter of faith, and to be believed of all Christen men, that the prayers of
the lieuing do release some of their pains in the next liefe. And he
constantly as all other Catholics ever did, confesses that the sins or
unclean works of the living not duly by paenau^ce wyped away in this world,
must be mended after our death: all though it be very doubtefull in deed,
whether there be any worldly affections left in man's mind untaken up by
death and resolution of the body and the soul, the care and remembrance
whereof, might be afterward by sorrow both purged and poonished.

And this to be his meaning, and that he terms here purgatory, the grief
which a man has in losing that which he loved in this mortal liefe, his
own words testifye in every off those works in which he keeps this combat
with Origenistes. Lib. 21. de Ciuit. 26.
In one place thus. Quod sine illicienti amore non habuit, sine dolor vrente
non perdet: and ex earum rerum amissione tantum necesse est vt vrat dolor,
quantum haeserat amor. That which by tiklinge love was kept, can not be lost
with out burning grefe. And look how fast the love of such things did
cleave to man's mind, so far must sorrow burn. Ca^
So in the like talk with the said Origenistes, in his book de fide and
operibus, he follows the same signification of Purgatory. Haec igitur (says
he) qnoniam affectu dilecta carnali non sine dolor amittuntur, qui sic ea
habent, in eorum amissione passi detrimentum, per ignem quendam doloris
perueniunt ad salutem: these things being by carnal affection loved, be not
lightly lost with out grefe, and therefore those that thus be affectionate,
feel loss in parting from theime: and so coom to salvation through the fire
of sorrow* such a sadness the young man that demanded of our master the
way to heaven, conceived streght, Matthew. 19.
when motion was only made, of distributio^ of his gooddes. Who being
otherwise in the state of salvation, and to be borne with all, because he was a
just man and lacked not the foundation of his faith, yet the very loss or
leaving of his gooddes, was unto him (if he continued in that affection) a
wonderful great torment, and as S. Augustine here calls it, a kind of
purgatory: the which, perfect me^, that aesteme all the trasshe of this world
as durte and donge to win Christ, feel not at all: whom the doctoure
supposethe therefore, to take no damage in the loss of things which they so
little loved.

Now in every place where this exposition is found (as I think it is never in all his works, lightly, but in conference with the Origenistes) he always
adds, that the like fire of sorrow may also correct the affections eue^ of the
departed, but yet whether it be so or no, he cou^teth it a quaestio^ of
probable disputation, rather the^ any matter of faith* as it is in deed very
doubtful whether any such inordinate affection may remain vntake^ up after
man's departure, which by grefe and sorrow in the other world may be in time
wholly consumed. And further he never doubted. For in that famous work of the
City of God, with in two chapters of that doubt made of this kind of
purgation, which we now have declared, Cap. 24. li. 21.
he utters his faith with Gods Church, off that great torment and just
poonishement of sinful liefe, not sufficiently purged by poenaunce in our
time, which he calls the Amending fire: and thus he says there. Tales
etiam constat, ante iudicij diem per paenas temporales quas eorum spiritus
patiuntur purgatos, receptis corporibus aeterni ignis supplicijs non tradendos,
and cae. It is certain (says he) Constat, which is no word of
doubtefullnesse) that such men being purged by the temporal pains, which
their souls do suffer before the day of judgment, shall not after they have
received their bodies ageine, be committed to the torment of the everlasting
fire. This he utters in the same place where he doubts of the other kind
of purgation: Vide quaest 8. ad Dulcitium.
as he co^fessethe him self to be uncertain of the whole exposition, refusing
none at all that were agreeable to faith, and would not help the falsehood
which he then refuted. In his Enchir: where he disputes ageinste the same
error, Cap. 110.
he so little doubts, that he calls Purgatory damnation though not
perpetual, as that which might be both eased and utterly removed by the
sacrifice and suffragies of the Church.

And thus did that grave author withstand Origin then, whose folowers were as it
may be thought very busy and trooblesom in those days and long after. But yet
his sure staff against that error was this, and the most common defense of
all Catholics, that the temporal pains in the next world could never
deliver the great and grievous sinners that died with out repentance or
remission of their sins, from everlasting death: because that torment was
praepared for the smaule offenseis which we call venial sins: by which the
holy Apostle meant, under the names of the base substances off woodde, hay, and
straw, Ser. 4. de sanctis.
as these words of much importance may well declare There be diverse (says
he) that misconstruing these words of S. Paul before aleaged, by over vain
security and confidence deceive theime selves, believing that if they do build
capital and grievous crimes upon the fundation which is Christ, they shall be
pourged through fire, and theyme selves afterward escape to everlasting liefe:
but this understanding, good brethern, must be corrected. For those that so
flatter theime selves, shamefully do begile theime selves. For that fiere
which the Apostle speaks of in these words: He shall be saved through fire,
pougeth not mortal sins, but smauler offensies only.

To this purpose S. Hieroms words, or the reverent Bedes whether you will,
(for either of their grave authorities shall serve my turn) do wholly agree in
the exposition of this sentence, Mortuo homine impio non erit vltra spes. In
Cap. 11. Proverb.
A wicked man being once departed, is past recovery or hope. Where the author
writes thus. Heu misere hoc pertransit Origenes, qui post universal iudicium
vitam credidit omnibus impijs dandam. Notandum autem quod etsi impijs post
mortem spes veniae non sit, sunt tamen qui de leuioribus peccatis, cum quibus
obligati defuncti sunt* post mortem possunt absolui. Origin passed over this
text pitifully, that believed all the wicked should have at lenght liefe
everlasting, after the day of general judgment. Yet this is to be noted, that
allthough there be no hope of pardon for the wicked after their death, yet
there be certain which may be released of lighter trespasses, in the bond of
which they departed out of this world. And so does Oecumenius a greek author,
expound S. Paul's words off venial sins: for the purgation of which, he
dobuteth not but that there is a fire of judgment in the liefe to come. Ipse
autem saluabitur: quis? Super. 3. Cap. 1. ad Cor.
Qui aurum, argentum, lapides preciosos superaedificauerit: cum enim dixisset
de eo quod mercedem accipiet, nunc qualem mercedem aperit: salutem scilicet.
Saluabitur autem non sine dolor, vt par est saluari per ignem transeuntem, and
adhaerentes sibi leaves maculas purgantem* thus in English. By whom is it
spoken when he says, he shall be saved? By him it is spoken that builds on
the foundation, goulde, filuer and preciouse stones. For when he had towlde us
that such should have a reward, now he opens what that reward should
be: to wiett, salvation. And yet he must not be saved witheoute all pain, as
there is no cause why he should, that must pass through fire, and thereby be
pourged of the smauler spots which stick by him. In the same sense does
Theodoretus both expound the words of the Apostle, and utter his judgment
of Purgatory also: Super. 3. c. Malach.
and almost the rest of all the latin or Greek writers, which my purposed
breuitye with plentiful proof otherwise forcethe me to leave to the studious
reader.

One place more I will only add out of Remigius, because he learnedly may
knitte up the place, by joining both the prophet and Apostles words together,
In. 3. cap. Malach.
upon which we have stand so long. Thus that good author writes. Ipse enim
quasi ignis conflans and peccatores exurens, Ignis enim in conspectu eius
ardebit and in circuitu eius tempestas valida. Hoc igne consumuntur lignu^,
foenum, stipula. Nec solum erit quasi ignis, sed etiam quasi herba fullonum,
qua vestes nimiu^ sordibus infectae lauantur. Porro his qui grauiter
peccauerunt erit ignis conflans and exurens: illis vero qui leuia peccata
commiseru^t erit herba fullonum. Hinc per Isaiam dicitur, si abluerit dominus
etc. Qui enim hahe^t sordes leuium peccatorum spiritu iudicij purgantur: qui
vero sanguinem habent, hoc est grauioribus peccatis infecti sunt, spiritu
ardoris exurentur and purgabuntur. Et sedebit conflans and emundans argentum,
and colabit eos quasi auru^ and argentu^, hoc est intellectum and colloquium:
vt quicquid mixtum est stanno vel plumbo, camino domini exuratur: and quod
purum aurum est and argentum remaneat. Et purgabit filios Leui: In filiis Leui
omnem sacerdotalem ordinem intelligimus, a quibus iudiciu^ incipiet: quia
scriptum est: tempus est vt iudicium incipiat a domo dei: 1. Petri. 4.
and alibi: a sanctuario meo incipite. Si autem sacerdos flammis purgandus est
and colandus, quid de caeteris dicendum est, quos nullum co^mendat priuilegium
sanctitatis? These goulden words have this sense. He shall coom as the
gouldesmithes fire, ^^^^ing sinners. For in his sight a flame ^^l rise, and a
mighty tempest rownd ^boute him: by which fire, our wodde, hay, and stooble,
shall be wasted and worn away. With that, he shall be like the cle^sers herb,
whereby garments very much stained be purged. To all those that have grievously
offended, he will be a burning and melltyng fire: but to the light sinners, he
shall be as the wasshers herb. Which difference the Prophet Esai notes thus:
Cap. 4.
Yff our lord wipe a way the filthe of the doghters of Syon, and blodd from
the midst of Israel, in the spirit of judgment and fire. For such as have
only the spots of venial sins, they may be amended by the spirit of
judgment, but men of bloodde, to wit the more grievous offenders, must be
tried by fire. And he shall sit casting and purifying silver, and shall purge
men as goulde and silver be purified: that is to say our thoghtes,
understanding, and words, I call stannum peuter, moved by the circumsta^ce of
the letter.
from impurity and uncleanness, as from pewter and lead, by Gods furnace
shall exactly be pourged: and nothing shall be left but pure as goulde and
fine silver. And he shall pourge the sons of Leui: that is the order of
priesthood, where this heavy judgment shall first begin. For so it is written:
1. Pet. 4.
Time is now, that judgment begin at the house of God: and ageine: Begin at
my sanctuary. Yff the priest must be purged and fined, what shall we deem of
other, whom privilege of holy order does not commend or help? thus far
goes the author in conference of diverse scriptures. Who, with the rest of all
the holy fathers that compased their senses with in the unity of Christ's
Church, has fownd by evident testimonye of sundry scriptures, the pains of
purgatory: which the busy heads of our time by vain bragging off
scriptures, in singular arrogance off their own wits, can never find.

A forther declaration of this point, for the better understanding of the
doctoures words. VVherin it is opened how purgatory is ordained for mortal
sins, and how for smauler offenses: who are like to feel that grefe, and
who not at all.

Cap. 9.
ANd I think they now have smaule advantage, by thexception of Origens
testimony: by occasion wheroff, such light is fownde for our cause, that we
now by goodly authority have both fownde the placies alleged plainly to
prove purgatory, and also what sins it namely pourgeth, and what men after
their death may be amended thereby* that not only the bare truth, but sum
necessary circumstances to the studious of the truethe, have been here by just
occasion opened, and all error wholly removed. Except this point may somewhat
stay the reader, that hears in some places the pains of Purgatory to be both
a poonishment for grievous sins, and a purgation of lighter trespasses with
all: and yet that it now may appear the contrary, by the mind off some learned
authors, who expressly make that pain as a remedy only for venial sins,
and not to apperteyne at all to the capital and deadely crimes that man often
times doothe comitte: Therefore to be as plain as may be necessary for the
unlearned, or any other that is godly curious in things much tending to the
quiet rest off man's conscience, it is to be noted: that this ordinary justice
of God in the lyefe following for the purgation of the elect, can not discharge
any man of mortal sin, A mortal sin not remitted in this lief is not
discharged by purgatory.
which was not pardoned before in the Church militant upon earth. And
therefore what crime so ever deserves damnation, and was not in man's lyefe
remitted, it can not by purgatory pains be released in the next: because it
deserves death everlasting, and staith the offender from the kingdom of heaven
for ever: no pain temporal in this world or the next but Christ's passion
alone, (the benefit whereof is not by the sufferers will, extended to any that
sins unto death) being able to satisfy for the same.

As often then as thou hear any Catholic man affirm Purgatory to poonishe
or pourge grievous and deadly offenses, be assured his meaning is off the
temporal pain due unto wicked men and their sins, after their bond and
debt of everlasting death, with the very fault it self, be in Gods Church
remitted. A deadly sin remitted is in case of a venial sin.
For as S. Augustine says, a mortal sin forgiven, is becomne a venial
trespass, and so deserves no more pain then a venial sin, which by
transitory poonishment may be fully and perfitely released* thus he says:
Quaedam enim sunt peccata quae mortalia sunt, De vera et falsa poenitent. c. 18.
and in poenitentia fiunt venialia, non tamen statim sanata. There be sins
(says he) which being deadly off their own nature, be yet by poenaunce made
venial, though not always streght healed. Then by this ruele, what so ever
is spoken of venial sins or the purgation thereof: it is meant both by the
smaule offenseis which of their own nature are venial: and also of the
greater, so that they be forgeuen in Gods church before: whereby they are
becomne venial as the other, and deserve propertionally as the other: and may
be taken a way (as the same man affirms) either in this world or the next,
Euch. c. 71
by the same remedies as the othere, though not always so speedely.

Well then, to close up brefely, all this have we fownde by these scriptures
alleged: that being diverse degrees off men, Purgatory apperteineth but to one
sort. First not to such as lack the faith of Christ, for they having no
foundation are allredy judged: nether to such as have not builded upon the
foundation, but rather defaced it with works of death and deuelishe
doctrine. For all these must like widdred branches be cast in to the fiere, not
to be purged, but utterly wasted. There be yet other that keep their
foundation fast, and work there upon both goulde and silver, but yet abased
and sumwhat defiled by the mixture of other infirmityes not sufficiently
redressed in this lyefe: these must of necessity by Gods ordinance, suffer
the Purgation by fire: that their works purifyed and amended by the sentence
of his just judgment, may at length by mercy and grace bring theyme to
their desired end.

Now the perfect estate, which, having this groundewarcke, and building
thereuppon nothing for the most part, but the tried fine works of heavenly
doctrine and perfect charity, can not fear the fire, as in whom it shall
find no matter of waste. For if any dross of seculare desires or worldly
weakness, was in their frailty contracted, their fructefull poenaunce in
their liefe, washed that away by the force of Christ's blood, before the day
of our Lord great and fearful, came upon theime: In which case God will
not poonishe twice for one fault, Naum. 1.
nor enter into judgment with such, 1. Cor. 11.
as have judged theime selves to his hand.

These therefore thus guarded by gods grace, in whom only they challenge this
Privilege, can not feel any danger, their works (as S. Paul says)
abiding the brounte of the fiere, though they were in place of torment with
the rest. For if such do pass the fyrie sword, before they enter into the
joys of heaven, yet they shall even there be so shadowed, that to them it can
nether be any whit molestious, nor one moments stay from the reward of their
pure goulde^ works, which by fire can not perish. For off such, we must
believe with Gods Church, that they go streght to heaven upon their
departure, with owte stay or poonishement in the next liefe. Although Christ
only, of his own force, being not subject to any spotte of sin, did pass
this fire: and enter in to heaven, the aeternall gates opening theime selves
unto him as to the king of glory. Who being before in the places of pain also,
Act. 2.
yet could not possibly be touched thereby, as the Apostle says.

And that is S. Ambrose his meaning (as I suppose) when he said. Vnus ille
igne^ hu^c sentire no^ potuit. Christ only was he, that could not fiele this
fire. He speakethe of the fire through which even the good must pass, before
they coom to aeternall joy. Where he doubts not to auouche, that many a man
that thinks him self gould, and is taken so to be of others too, shall yet
there be proved full of dross and impurity, long to be cleansed before his
final freedom and delivery: and yet to be saved through fire.

But for those that be in deed perfect men, as John the beloved of Jesus, and
Petre with the rest, this holy doctoure was so sure of Purgatory, that he
thought these also to go through the same: and yet the fiery flamme to have
given place as it did to the three children, and as S. Augustine supposes it
shall do in the general conflagration to the bodies of virtuous men, Dan. 4.
when at the very same time it shall both waste the wicked, and purge the
mean: the works of one sort withstanding the flamme, the dross of the other
in a manner feeding the same. S. Ambrose therefore thus writes of the holy
Apostle. De morte Ioannis aliqui dubitarunt, Ser. 20. in psa. 118.
de transitu per ignem dubitare non possumus, quia in paradiso est, and a
Christo non separatur: some doubt of John's death, but of his passage by the
fire, because he is in joy with Christ, we can not doubt. And of S. Peter he
says* sieve ille sit Petrus qui claues accepit regni coelorum, Psalm. 65.
oportet dicat transiuimus per ignem and aquam and induxisti nos in
refrigerium. Yea if it be Peter him self to whom the keys of heaven were
committed, he must say: we passed by fire and water, and thowe haste brought us
into the place of refresshing.

But how so ever God works in this case with the perfyte sort, this the
church believes, and so this doctoure teaches, and therefore I dare be boulde
to say it, that such nether suffer any pain, nor taryaunce by the way.
Though by nature, that fire or torment praepared for the amendment and
poonishing of sin or the dross thereof, might of force and right take hold
there, where corruption of sin by any means has been, thath is not wholly
purified before. Therefore the soul of our savior, being altogether
unspotted, could not be subject to any sufferance in the world to com, by any
ordinance praepared for the poonishment of sin: that fire having no further
grant by creation and natural property, but to waste there where sin is
fownd to have been. Upon other it would work til all corruption were
consumed, if mercy did not praeuent both in purifyng those singular elect
vessels, and in repressing the nature of the flame praepared, that it
practice not justice, where God has abundantly showed grace and mercy before.

All beit I do not say that the fyry sword is in the passage of every soul
toward heaven, for that is Gods secret: and I will with S. Ambrose in the
same place say: Quod legi praesumo, Ibidem.
quod non legi scientibus relinquo. That which I have redd, in grave
authority, that will I bouldely auouche: that which I have not read, with
fear and reverence I commit to men of more knouledge. As with owte exception I
submit my sellfe to the determination of Gods church in all these points of
mysteries, which in this deape matter course of taulke may drive me unto. But
now for the meaner sort that with Christian faith and good works have yet some
baser building of infirmity or lighter trespasses also, those must needs be
tried by the fire of just judgment, in the world to come. And this is that
which S. Augustine calls so often the Amending fire. Vide Ruper tum in 3. ca
genes. In ser. de s. Nicolao.
S. Ambrose the fyry sword, S. Bernarde terms it the place of expiation, In
quo pater benignus examinat filios rubiginosos, sicut examinatur argentum: In
which our merciful father tries his rusty children as silver is tried:
Which all these holy fathers with the rest, oftentimes do name by the common
calling of Purgatory. Read all these place is named if thou haste occasion thy
sellfe, and there thou shalt find to thy singular comforth, sufficient
proof of thy faith, great motion of godly lyefe, with necessary fear of
Gods judgments. Thowe shalt marvel at the ignorance of our time, that
could ever doubt of so plain a matter: thou shall pity with all thy heart the
unworthy deceiving of the unlearned, and have large matter to withstand the
deceivers, and to help the simple home again.

A place alleged for Purgatory ovvte off S. Matthew, with certain of the
Ancient fathers judgments upon the same.

Cap. 10.
ANd yet it shall be convenient, that I help the studious reader with further
proof out of the holy scripture, that he may be fully established in his
faith, and the adversary haeretike wholly confounded in his misbelife: If he
list not rather (as I heartely pray to God that he may) give over that
unnatural plea, houlden too long against the Catholyke Church our moother.
Give ear then unto the words of our savior written in the Gospel of S.
Matthew Esto consentiens aduersario tuo cito dum es in via cum eo: Cap. 5.
ne forte tradat te aduersarius iudici, Lucae. 12.
and iudex tradat te ministro and in carcerem mittaris. A men dico tibi no^
exies inde donec reddas nouissimum quadrantem Be at agreemente with thine
adversary speedely, whiles thou art with him in the way. Lest that adversary
deliver the up to the judge, and the judge commit the to an officer, by whom
thou may be cast into prison: surely I say unto the, thou shalt not get out,
till thou have discharged the uttermost farthing.

Now being desirous of the truethe and true meaning of this letter, (for the
understanding makes all) because there may arise by the darkness of that
figurative speech some diversity of sense, let us indifferently wey every
word, and with diligence examine the circumstances of the text whereby any
light may appear. And first being admonished to agree with our adversary, we
may right well know that he means not by the common enemy of our kind, 1.
Petri. 5.
that rometh about seeking whom he may devour: for his cruel assaults must
only by resistaunce be withstand. (...).
Nether the word which the Evangelists there used, can properly signifye any
malicious enymy, Litigator, seu actor.
that by hatered of our person is become our deadly foe, as those which be
skillfull in the languageis wherein they wrote, do confess: But rather, as
well the word as the just consideration of the place, dryueth us to
acknouledge that this our adversary, here signifies our brother, which has
just quarrel against us in judgment, for that we would not give ear unto him
sharply admonishing us of our faults, being therefore an adversary to our
vicies and fleshly conversation. In which sort, to us that are flesh and
bloodde, and ready to euel from our youth, all be adversaries that preach
Christ, the amendment of licentious manners, repentance of our lothsom lyefe
past, Vide Bern. ser. 85. super cantit.
or else use against us the rod of correction and bodyly poonishment, that
our souls may be saved in the day of thappearing of our lord.

To this kind of adversary, Christ councelleth and commands us, for our
great good, to agree and consent whiles we be here in the way of this our
pilgramage and transitory lyefe: lest all these means which he wroght to
reduce us to the perfection off a Christian godly lyefe, be as it were a
witness of our contempt, and him self our accuser before the judge, that
shall so justly reward every man according to his deeds: Act. 10.
that is Christ him sellfe, to whom the father has given all judgment.
Whose ministers being Angels, either good or badde, for thexecution of justice
upon sinners, shall at his appointment cast us into the prison and dongion,
there to be howlden from lyefe and lyberty, till we have paid the last
farthing: the toleration of which bonds shall recompense the debtes, which
by well dooyng and much mourning, in the way off this world, we refused to
pay: as S. Augustine piththely speaks in these words. Si non reddit faciendo
iustitiam, De libero Arbitrio. lib. 3. c. 15
reddet patiendo miseriam: he that paithe not his debt by doing that which is
just and right, he shall pay it by suffering misery. Which we trust the
pitiful pains of that prison, through the only deserts and merits of
Christ our lord and God, shall so discharge, that after the payment either
pardoned or fully made, we may have joyful access to his blessed presence.

For the form of speech used in like order of words by both the
Evangelists, does us plainly to understand, that we may through Christ make
full payment thereof. Else he would not by liklyhoodd have said, that we
should not escape fourth till we had discharged the utmost farthing, but
rather that severe judge would have given charge, that thoffender should be
bond hand and foutte, and cast into the dark doungion of everlasting damnation,
praepared for the devil, and his Angels: which is the second and everlasting
death. Namely the word off Imprisonment so well agreing thereunto, Carc^r
that it may not well admit any other meaning, but a place of temporal
torment. For a prison is a place of correction and chastisement of such as be
on live, in which as long as lyefe lasts a man may be in hope of liberty,
though his bondage for a time be never so intolerable: but when sentence of
death is once pronounced in this world, or damnation in the next, then we
may right well know Gods mercy to be shut up, and the party desperate of
all recovery. Nether the name off imprisonment in scripture, is lightly taken
for the place of everlasting pounishment, nor can by conference of the sundry
parts of this letter, have here conuenyently any such sense.

And these notes well and diligently considered, may give great light to the
alleged words otherwise somewhat obscure, and therewith prove our matter too.
They be not of my scanning only, as for some part thowe shallte pecceiue by
these words of Rupert, Super. 5. cap. Matt.
an excellent good author. Aduersarius eorum qui erant eiusmodi sermo fuit
euangelij, and omnis praedicator euangelicae veritatis, potestatem habens non
consentientem sibi tradere iudici: and non solum iudici, verum etiam malo
ministro, quemadmodum vnus eorum tradidit hominem satanae. The adversary of
such men was the word of the gospel, and each preacher of the truth, who
had power to deliver him that would not agree unto him, to the judge: yea
further then that, he had authority to commit him to an evil minister, as one
of theime gave up a man to Satan. Here we see what that adversary is, to whom
we must consent in this lyefe: and withal, we have an example in this
judgment of Gods ministers, how man may be committed in the next life to a
tormenter, that may vex him then at Gods prescripsion, as he doothe now at
the charge only of his minister: then in favor and mercy of the judge, as it
is now in love and charity of the vicegerent, then for the atteyning of
heavens bless, as it is now for the salvation of the person poonished. For
the execution of Gods sentence may be either by a good spirit, Lib. 21. de
ciuit. Dei. cap. 13.
or our adversary Angel, or by his will and word only, to whom all creatures
serve and obey.

In this sense Paulinus, who was S. Augustines pear, writes that the holy
Ghost and Gods word, be man's adversaries in earth: to whom if we apply
our selves obediently in this world, our sorrow can not be long in the next
lyefe. But these be his own words. Ad Ama^dum. epi. 1.
Neque septem dies luctus noster excedat, si consentiamus in huius vitae via,
aduersario nostro, id est spiritui ac verbo dei quod nobis peccantibus
aduersatur etc. Our grefe can not be much longer then seven days (he means
it shall be a temporal pain, and not very long) yff we consent in the way of
this lyefe to our adversary that is to wit, the spirit and word of God.
For they be our adversaries when we sin: because the holy Ghost charge the
world with sin, and the word of God, if we obey not, will be our accuser and
promotour up unto the Judge: who will have an account of his talent, to the
uttermost farthinge. Thus far spoke this Author: and in like sense many more
whom I neade not now name. Because there is such store of testimonies, that
not only in some part make for the opening of this scripture: but altogether
for Purgatory. And one or two of theime I will briefly recite: because I
determined with my sellfe, and bound my self, for my discharge and the
readers more safe warraunt, to bring no text of scripture for the proof off
my purpose, except I might find some holy writers of the antiquity that used
the same directly in that sense: that if any man would reprehe^d my meaning,
yet he should not be so bowlde with such as I can name, and prove to be my
authors therein.

But whom may I more safely allege for the contentation of sober wits, and
repressyng the adversaries bowldenesse, then the blessed martyr S. Ciprian? Who
in the fourth book of his Epistles, for the declaration that every one which
here is pardoned of his sins, shall not streght be exalted to the glory of
sanctes and martyrs after their death, uses very fetly (as he does all
other placeis of scripture) the forsayde text, by these words. Aliud est ad
veniam stare, aliud ad gloriam peruenire: Epist. 2.
aliud, missum in carcere^ non exire donec soluat nouissimum quadrantem, aliud
statim fidei and virtutis accipere mercedem: aliud pro peccato longo dolor
cruciari, and purgari diu igne, aliud peccata omnia passione purgari: aliud
denique pendere in die iudicij ad sententiam domini, aliud statim a domino
coronari: In English: it is another thing to stand at a pardon, then owte of
hand to atteyne to glory: it is a another manner of matter to be committed to
prison, See how fully he expresses both the word and meaning of purgatory.
thense not to depart till the last farthing be discharged, and to receive owte
of hand the reward of faith and virtue: It is one thing by great sorrow to
be tormented for our sins, He calls the sentence off God in the next life
judgment.
and by long fire amended and pourged of the same, and another to have
sufficiently pourged them by martyrdom: in fine, it is not all one to hang on
Gods sentence in the day of judgment, and owte of hand to be crowned of our
lord. These words as you see, expressly prove our matter, open the
meaning of the scripture whereon we now stood, and do clearly set forth
the order of Gods justice in the next lyefe. And they shall content the
reader better, if he mark upon what occasion this blessed man spoke these
words. There were many in the persecution of that time, that for fear or
worldly respects, denied their faith, and offered to idolles: who afterward,
the storm off tyranny somewhat being caulmed, confessed their fault, and did
penance for the same, by S. Ciprian and other good bishopes praescription,
that then ruled the church of those days. By whom, after due satisfaction
made, they were admitted to the communion of the Christian company, and receite
of the holy sacraments again. But all pastors not off like mercy or severity
in the case, some were suspended from the use of the Sacraments longer, and
othersom by more clemency with speed pardoned ageine. Now S. Ciprian, though
he were very severe in such a cause, (as in all his works it does well
appear) yet he was blamed by Antonyanus and others, that he dealte over mekely
with such as denied their faith, in so speedy admission of thime to the
peace of Gods church, as they then termed that reconciliation: alleging,
that if such wordely wynd wauerers might be admitted so soon after thopen
denial of their faith, then there would none steadfastly stand to death, by
confession of their belyefe and their masters name, any more: the refusers
being in as good case as they, if pardon might so soon be procured. But S.
Cyprians answer is this: that their admission can not withdraw any man's
zele from martyrdom, or confession of Christ's name, seeing their
reconciliation does not set theime on so clear board as martyrs be, Who being
tried by their blood shall streght receive the croune of glory: When the
others standing but upon pardon of their sins, and not discharged of due
pains for the same, must into prison notwithstanding, til they have paid
their uttermost duty: and by long amending by fire, at the last coom to that
reward, which the martyrs atteined by sufferance at the first. Mark well.
And thus I think this holy Martyr means. His words surely be singular and
being well understand, they contain as much matter for our purpose, as can be
possibly in so little rowme: besides the exposition of the text wherein we yet
do stand: But I will add more, that al may be salfe on every side.

Homil. 3. de Epiphania.
Eusebius Emissenus, an author off great antiquity and much credet in the
Church of God, helps our cause by this notable discourse following. Hi vero
qui temporalibus poenis digna gesserunt, ad quos sermo dei dirigitur, quod non
exient inde donec redda^t nouissimum quadrantem: Dan. 7.
per fluuium igneum de quo propheticus sermo commemorat, and fluuius rapidus
currebat ante eu^, per vada feruentibus globis horrenda, transibunt. Quanta
fuerit peccati materia, tanta erit pertranseundi mora, quantum accreuerit
culpa, tantu^ sibi ex homine vindicabit fla^mae rationabilis disciplina: and
qua^tum stulta iniquitas gessit, Ezech. 24
tantum sapiens poena deseuiet. Et quia sermo diuinus quodammodo aeneae ollae
animam comparans: Pone ollam super prunas vacuam donec incalescat aes eius:
illic periuria, irae, malitiae, cupiditates, quae puritatem nobilis naturae
infecerant, exudabunt: illic stannum vel plumbum diuersarum passionum, quae
aurum diuinae imaginis adulterauerant, consumentur. Quae omnia hic ab anima
separari per eleemosynas and lachrimas compendij transactione poterant. Ecce
sic exigere habet ab homine rationem qui seipsum pro homine dedit, and confixus
clauis, legem mortis fixit. Thus it is in our tongue. As for all such, unto
whom for their offenses our Lords word is especially directed, that they shall
not coom owte till they have paid the uttermost farthing: Those must pass the
fiery floode, by horrible fourdes off skawlding waves: Whereof the prophet
makes mention thus. And a fiery stream ran before bis face. The space of
passage shall be measured by the matter of sin: according to thencrease of
our offensies, the discreite discipline of that flame shall revenge ageine: and
look how far in wickedness our folly did reach, so far this poonishement
shall wisely waste. And like as Gods word compares man's soul to a brazen
pot, saing: Set the pot empty over the coals till the brass thereoff wax
hot: So there thowe shalt see perjury, anger, malice, vnfructefull desires
swheate out, which did infecte the purity of man's noble nature: there the
pewtter and lead of diverse passions, which did abase the pure goulde of
Gods image, shall be consumed away. All which things might in our liefe
time have easily ben wiped away by almose and tears. Such a strait account
lo will he keep with man, He alludeth to the place of the second chapter to
the Colossia^s of the obligation of death which was against us.
that for man's sake gave him self to death, and being throuste through with
nails, has fastened the dominion of death also. So far has Emissenus
spoken: and his words be so weghty, that they have been counted worthy
rehersall in solemn sermons and homilies of the Antiquity, to stir up
their hearers to the necessary awe of Gods judgments, with much provocation
of virtuous liefe. S. Augustine has the self same discourse, almost no word
thereof changed: Homil. 16 tom. 10.
With this addition: I deo (fratres charissimi) conuertamus nos ad meliora, dum
in nostra potestate sunt remedia: Therefore dear brethern let us turn and
amend by time, whilst the remedies be yet in our own dealinge: And in
another place thus he touches the scripture alleged: In psa. 103
Apparebit Deus Deorum in Syon: sed quando? post peregrinationem finita via, si
tamen post finitam viam, non iudici tradamur, vt iudex mittat in carcerem. The
God of gods in Syon shall appear: but when? mary after our pilgramage be
past, and the journey ended. Eccepte it so faule owte, that after our journey
here, we be delivered up to the judge, and so the judge send us to prison.

To this place also S. Bernarde does swhetely, In vita Hu^berti.
but yet fearfully allude in this exhortation: Volat (says he) irreuocabile
verbum, and dum creditis vos cauere poenam istam minimam, incurritis multo
ampliorem. Illud enim scitote quia post hanc vitam in locis purgabilibus,
centupliciter quae fuerunt hic neglecta reddentur, vsque ad nouissimum
quadrantem. Our word, not possible to be called back, flies far: and
whilst you seek to avoid a little grief here, you incur much greater.
For assure your sellfe of this, that after this lyefe, in places of purgation,
all negligencies past must be repaide a hundredth foulde home again, till the
discharge of the last farthinge.

Here now let our adversaries in this bright shining truethe, blind theime
selves: let theime bowldely bost, of their accustomed impudency, that the
Catholics have no scriptures, nor appearance of scriptures: or if they stand
with us for the meaning, let theime shape with all their conueyaunce, any one
shifte to answer these doctors words: Or if the uniform consent of so many
of the best lerning, and greatest wisdom in the whole Church, may have no
rowme with theime, let theime show whereupon their own credets be grown so
great, that with out reason, liklyhod, or authority, men must neades believe
theime. It is a strange case, that what so ever they auouche, it must be
Gods word: what meaning so ever they make for mainteinaunce of their wicked
folly, it must be termed the true sense of scripture: And the truth it self
showing al force, in the conference off diverse places off holy writ, in weght
of reason, in the works and wrytyngs of al antiquitye, shall be so lightly
regarded.

I would to God the people pitifully deceived by such vain flying taulke,
could behoulde the upright ways of truth, The difference betvvixte the
Catholics dealing, and the adversaries.
or could learn by the plain dealing of our side, to require some grownded
proof of these new doctoures deuiseis. They may well perceive, if they have
any necessary care of those weghty matters touching our salvation so nere, that
the Catholic never adue^tureth to bring any scripture for his purpose, but he
will be suer for his warraunt, to have the same so expownded by the ancient
fathers of our faith: lest by his rashness he deceive other, and father some
faulshod upon the holy writers of Gods will: which were horrible sacrilege.
But on the other side if a man might pose master Calvin, or Flaccius, or such
other of that light family, what doctor or scripture they followed in the
exposition of S. James his place, Jacob. 5.
for the anointing with holy oil, when they were not ashamed to give this
sense of that scripture: that it wear good to call the elders off the people,
that had some salve or ointement medicinable to ease the sike man's sore: what
would they say? I am sure such fellows will not excuse theimeselues by
ignorance, (for the arroga^cy of that sort, had rather be counted either
malicious or praesumptuous, then unskillful,) but of passing bowldenesse all
such must neades be noted, that dare shape such an exposition off Gods
blessed word, which they never heard surmised of any wise man before. 1. ad
Tim. 5.
What doctor did they or Luther follow, when they expounded S. Paul's words
of widows marriage after vows made, which the text calls breaking their
first faith, to be meant by the promise of the Christian faith made in
Baptism? Was not this a galant gloss in this sense? she that breaks her faith
of baptism, shall be damned for marriage. Ask theime where these pretty schools
were first picked. Pose master Iuell where he had, that the church of God
might err. You shall see theime ernestly urged in these matters, how little
they have to say, and yet how fast they will tennesse one to another in taulke.

But I will not make a reckoning of their unseemly glosies: I would their
folowers would only but ask theime in all matters, from whense they had such
new meaninges, which they falsely father on Gods word: that we might once
hedge theime with in some compass of reason, as we be contented with all our
hearts, to charge our own selves in every matter that we handle, as partly
they may conceive by our discourse, and shall more clearly anon.

An answer to certain objections of the adversaries, moved upon the diversity
off meanings which they see given in the fathers vvritynges, of the scriptures
before alleged for Purgatory: and that this doctrine of the church stands
not against the sufficiency of Christ's Passion.

Cap. 11.
they be thus expounded of the doctoures, yet they may have some other
meaning, and sumtymes be construed otherwise by the fathers theime selves.
persuation of Purgatory, down from the apostles days to our time, for true
doctrine? Mark well, and you shall perceive that the Church of Christ has
ever given room to the diuersitye of men's wits, the division of graces,
and sundry geftes in exposition of most places of the whole testament:
Diversity of sensies be allowed, so that none of theime contain any fallshood
in it self.
with this prouiso always: that no man of singularity should father any
faulshodde or untruth upon any text: but otherwise, that every man might
abund in his meaning. Mary faulshood she never suffered one moment, to take
hold or bearing of any scripture, vnrepraehended. The diligent watch that
the church keeps over the truth.
Ecclesia multa tolerat (says S. Augustine) and tamen quae sunt contra fidem
vel bonam vitam, non probat, nec tacet, nec facit. the Church bears many
things: yet such things as be hourtfull to faith or good lyefe, she never
approuethe, Epi. 110.
nor does theime her self, nor howldethe her peace, when she sees theime
done by others.

Thereof we have a goodly example in our own matter. So long as any
convenient meaning might be fownde owte by the holy writers, of that place
alleged owte of S. Paul for such as should be saved through fire, she liked
and allowed the same. Some proved that the elect must be saved by long
suffera^ce, some said the tribulation of this life and world must try men's
faith and works, some said the grefe of mind in losing that which they over
much loved, was the burning fire of man's affections: some would have the
grievous vexation of departure owte of this lyefe, to be a purgatory pains: some
construed the text, of the fire of conflagration, that shall pourge the works
of many in the latter day: finially they all agreede, that the temporal
torment of the world to coom is literally noted, and especyally meant by the
fire which the Apostle speaks of. All these so little do disagree amongst
theime selves, that not only by diverse men, but off one man they might well
all be given. And being al in theime self very true, the holy Church so
likethe and allows theime each one, that yet by tho common judgment of al
learned men, that meaning for Purgatory pains, she approves as the most
agreeable sense to the text, and whole circumstance off the letter. But as
soon as Origin went about to prove by the same scripture, that all wicked
men should at length be saved after due purgation by fire: then this pillar
of truethe seeing an open faulshod gathered by the scripture of gods word,
could sustain no longer. She set up against this error her pastors, the
grave fathers of our faith* who ceased not, as occasion served, to give men
warninge of the deceit intended: not only stille mainteining the doctrine of
Purgatory, but also expressly condemnyng all the reprehenders thereof, as
hereafter it shall be better declared: and so misliking no sense that in it
self was true, the meaning of Purgatory yet, has been of all the learned
counted so certain, that in giving any other lykly exposition, that was ever
added with all, as most consonant to the will and words off the writers. So
does Theodoretus, so does S. Augustine, and so in a manner did they all. And
as the said holy doctor says (with whose words I am much delited, because
he of all other makes truth stand most plainly upon it self) One text of
scripture may well have so many understandings as may stand with truethe, 12.
Confess.
and be not repugnaunt to good lyefe and manners. And he hedgeth the diversity
of men's wits in the exposition of scripture, with in the dooble knott of
love, which is toward God and our brother: De doctri. Christiana li. 1. c. 36.
Who so ever (says he) takethe him self to understand scripture or any
part thereof, and in that meaning aedifieth nothing at all the dooble love, of
God and our neightbour, he misseth the true meaning thereof. Butt who so ever
can fiend out such a sense that may be commodious to the increase of charity,
although it were not directly intended by the writer, yet he is not harmefully
deceived, nor fownde a liar therein. so says he. Now as for our matter, I am
well assured, there dare no man, though he were destitute of Gods grace, yet
not for shame of him self, affirm that the doctrine of Purgatory is hourtfull
to virtuous liefe, the only miscreditt whereof, has utterly banished al good
Christian conditions: oriniurious to the faith of Gods Church, which is
not only agreeable, but principally intended by the plain letter of Gods
word, and consonaunt to all other meanings, that may be gathered by any such
scripture as we have alleged there for: and to be short, received of so many
fathers, so wise, and so well learned, as we have named for that purpouse, as a
truethe most reasonable, most natural, and most agreeable to Gods justice.

Well then, the misbeleuers can have no shifte nor escape, by the challenge of
Gods word, or doctures, or diversity of sensies: here is no houlde for
error: all I trust be safe and sure on every said.

Many virtuous persons have been provoked by the meditation of our saviors
sorrows, to leave the flattering welthe of this world, and to charge theime
selves with perpetual vexation of body: but that any did ever so rest upon
Christ's passion, that in respect thereof, they might pass their days middle
welthe off lust and liberty, that was (I trow) unheard of, before this
sinful sect. These fellows argue thus: Christ has paid the full price of
our sins, ergo we must do no poenaunce, nor suffer any pain for theime. But
S. Paul thus: Christ by pain and passion is entered into the glory of his
kingdom, Romans 8.
ergo if we look to be his fellow heirs, or partakers of his glory, we must
suffer affliction with him, and join with him in pains and passion. S. Peter
also thus: Christ has suffered leaving you an example that ye should follow
his steps, 1. Petri. 2.
therefore all his blessed liefe passed in pain must be a perpetual sturring
up of toleration, Matthew. 3.
and glad suffering for his name again. John our masters messenger
praepared the way of Christ's death and doctrine, by worthy fructes of
poenaunce: Mat. 4.
and that was the beginning off Christ's own preaching, therefore I dare be
boulde to say these things are not abrogated by the teaching of the Gospel,
nor void by Christ's passion: which only makes our works and merits, to
be of that value and acceptance, that all catholic men count theime of:
which else to the satisfying for sin should be nothing available, nor to
to the atteining of heaven any thing profitable. But it is folly to make over
many words in a case so plain, seeing the example of both God and good men's
dealing, abundantely proves man's poonishment either temporal or aeternall,
to stand well with the excellent value of our sauioures death. For if pain
for sin, were injurious to Christ's death, then the holy prophet David that
lived long in grievous poenaunce, were injurious to his Lords death: then the
Church were injurious to her own spouse his death, that chargethe all
offenders with poenaunce: then God him sellfe were injurious to his own sons
death, that sharply poonisheth sin forgeuen: then Christ him felfe were
injurious to his own death, that both by his example and holy preaching, did
ever commend sharp poenaunce and pain.

These delicate teachers of our time, that under praetence of preaching the
Gospel, auouching the glory of God and the grace of our redemption, have
served men's lusts, abandoned the owlde austerity of Christian liefe, and
rased out of the peoples hearts the fear of Gods judgments, were
foreseen by the holy Apostle Judas: And he calls theime, Judas in epist.
Impios, transferentes Domini nostri gratiam in luxuriam. Wicked men, turning
the grace of our Lord unto wantonness and lust. Against whom also S. Paul
made this exception: Ad Gal. 5.
that they should not in any wise by the freedom of our redemption challenge
any liberty of the flesh.

Notwithstanding Christ's passion then, we must not otherwise think, but to
suffer for our own sins: not as helping the insufficiency of his merits,
but as making our selves apt to receive that blessed benefit, which
effectually works upon no man, but by means: nor serves any to salvation,
but by obedience of his will and word. Ad Haebr. cap. 5.
For if Christ's death should work according to the full force of it self,
it would doubtless supp up all sin, and al pain for sin: it might wype
away death, both of this praesent lyefe, and aeternall it would leave nether
Hell, Purgatory, nor pain: the price and worthiness thereof being so
abundaunt, that it might, being not otherwise by the unsearchable will and
wisdom of the sufferer limited, save the whole world. But now ordinary ways
by Gods wisdom appointed for the bestowing of that excellent medicinable
cup, (as S. Augustine terms it) and conditions required in the parties
beside, Christ's death does not discharge us of satisfaction for our sins,
Articulo. 1 falso imp.
nor of any other good work, whereby man may procure his own salvation.

And I am not a frade to use the word Satisfaction, The word Satisfaction so
abhorred of haeretikes is common with the ovvlde fathers.
with Cyprian, Origin, Ambrose, Augustine, and the rest of that blessed
fellowship: Who right well knew the value of our redemption, and the force of
that satisfaction which our savior made upon the Cross. I dare well leave
these pety divines and speak with the grand capitanes of our faith and
religion. And I would to God I could as well in any part come after theime,
in example of Christian liefe: Who not so much in word, as in the course of
all their conversation, left unto us perfect paterns of great and grievous
poenaunce. Their long watching and wailing, their strange, wyelde, and
waste habitation, their roughe appareling, their hard lying, their
marvelous fasting, their perpetual praing, their extreme voluntary poverty,
and all this to praeuent gods judgment in the world to coom, for those
smaule infirmities and offensies of their frail life, may make our
adversaries ashamed of theime selves, that nether will follow their blessed
steps, nor yet (which is the greatest sign of Gods anger toward them
that can be) like it, and allow it in others.

An evident and most certain demonstration of the truethe of Purgatory: and
the greuousnesse of the pains thereof, uttered by the prayers and words of
the holy doctoures, and by sum extraordinary works of God beside.

Cap. 12.
ANd we also, that by gods grace and great mercy be Catholics, must needs
here conceive singular fear of Gods terrible judgments, which of justice
he must practice upon our wickedness, that live now in pleasure and
worldely welthe after such a careless sort, that men may judge we have no
respect of the dreadful day, nor care of Purgatory, which in words we so
ernestly maintain. The deape and perpetual fear whereof, For Christ's sake,
let al Catholics here attend.
caused our elders not only to lead their life in such perpetual pain,
but further forced theyme to break owte in bitter tears, and utter most godly
prayers, that they might escape the judgment of God, exercised by the pains
of Purgatory at the end of our short and uncertain life. Sum of theime I
will recite, that our hearts may melte in the necessary foresighte off that
terrible time, and the heretics be a shamed to deny that, which so constantly
in word and work they ever professed.

For fear of this fire to coom, holy S. Bernarde makethe this meditation. O
vtina^ magis nunc daret aliquis capiti meo aequas, and oculis meis fonte^
lachrimaru^, forte enim no^ reperiret ignis exurens, quod interim fluens
lachrima diluisset. Oh would to God some man would now before hand prouid for
my head abundaunce of waters, and to min eyes a fou^tain of tears: for so
happily the burning fire should take no howld, Ser. 55. in Cautic.
where ro^ning tears had cleansed before. And thus again the same blessed man
debateth the matter with his own conscience. I tremble and shake, for fear of
fawlyng in to Gods hands: I would praesent my sellfe before his face
allredy judged, and not then off him to be judged. Therefore I will make a
reckoning whiles I am here, of my good deeds and of my badde: my evil shall be
corrected with better works, shall be wattered with tears, shall be pounished
by fasting, and amended by sharp discipline. Provision must be made that I
bring not thither cockell in stead of corn, or chaf to gether with Wheat. I
shall rippe up to the very bottom al my ways, and my whole study, that he may
find nothing untried, Naum. 1.
or not fully discussed to his hands: And then I hope in his mercy, that he
will not judge for the same faults, the second time.

In the like godly sense spoke a another, Emissaenus dc poenitentia niniuit.
long before his days: Beatus qui hic mala sua deflere, qui hic debita sua
festinat exoluere, and innocentiam quam iam non potest per baptismum reparare,
recuperare studeat per summum poenitentiae fructum: ad tales merito ipse
Dominus loquitur, non iudicabo bis in idipsum. Happy is he that ever he was
borne, that with speed bewaileth his sins, and in time discharges his
debtes: that he may so endeavor to recover by the fructes off poenaunce his
innocence, which by baptism he can never repair again* to such suerly our
lord says, that he will not call twice to account for one fault.

S. Ambrose shows his fear also of Purgatory by this prayer. Praecat prae
paratoria 2. ad mis.
Quod si etiam in illo adhuc saeculo aliquid in me vindicandum reseruas, peto
ne me potestati daemonum tradas, dum scelus meum Purgatoria poena detergis. O
lord (says he) if thowe reserve any whit in me to be revenged in the next
liefe, yet I humbly ask off the, that thowe give me not up to the power of
wicked spirits, whiles thowe wypes away my sins by the pain of Purgatory. Lo
good reader the fear and faith of our fathers: lo how owlde this doctrine
is, how ancient the word is. But in an other place the same author expresses
his care and continual cogitation of this judgment to be practiced in
Purgatory, comparing thus S. Peter his state with his own. Ille (says he of
S. Peter) examinabitur vt argentum, ego examinabor vt plumbum, In Psalm. 118
ser. 20.
donec plumbum tabescat ardebo: si nihil argenti in me inuentu^ fuerit, heu me
in vltima inferni detrudar, aut vt stipula totus exurar. si quid in me inuentu^
fuerit auri vel argenti non per meos actus, sed per gratia^ and misericordia^
Christi, per ministerium sacerdotij, dica^ fortasse ego: Etenim qui spera^t in
te, non confundentur. In english. He shall be tried as silver, but I must be
searched and examined as lead: till the lead melt away, must I continually
burn. And if then there be no silver matter fownde, woe is me, I shall be
throust down to the nether parts of the deape hell, or wholly waste away as
strowe in fire. But yff any goulde or silver be fownd in me, not through my
works, but by grace and Christ's mercy, and for my ministry and priesthood
sake, I shall also once say: those that put their trust in the, shall never
be confownded. A less Ambrose was thowe so careful for wasting away in thy
purgation? what shall become of us, where all is dross, and no fine substance:
so continual sinning, and so little sauluyng: where the dignity of priesthood,
whereby thowe conceived such comforth is almost worn away? his fear was so
hearty, and his meditation of purgatory pains was so ernest, that he conceyuith
a doubt in respect of his deserts, of wasting away, and further castinge in
to damnation: though he knew right well, that man admitted to the temporal
judgment of the next world, could not everlastingly perish, but because the
pains of the one is so like the other, the grief of theime both lightly
occupies man's mind at once: especially where man's case is doubtefull, and
often deserves the worse of the twain. So S. Augustine likewise, after that
he had uttered his fear of hell in the prophet David's person, as I said once
before, streght he adioynethe his request unto God, to save him from Purgatory
pains, by the Prophets words also. I will recyte his mind in English: In
psalm. 37.
O Lord amend me not in thy anger, but pourge me in this life, that I may
escape the Amending fire, which is praepared for such as shall be saved
through fire. And why? but because they build upon the foundation woodde,
hay, and straw* men might build goulde, silver, and praeciouse stones, and so
escape both the fyres, the one off aeternall poonishment for the wicked, and the
other, which shall correct theyme that must be saved through fire. But now
because we read that he surely shall be saved, Note here Christian reader,
whether S. Augustine doubted of purgatory, as the lying and unlearned
adversaries vvoulde make the simple people believe.
therefore that fire is not much regarded, And yet let theime be boulde of this,
that though they be saved by fire, it shall yet be more fearse and grievous,
then any thing that man may sustain in this liefe, though both Martirs and
malefactors have suffered strange torments. Again in an other place the
same holy doctoure utters the like saing: Which I will repeat also, that
the world may behowld the unjust dealing of the contrary part, De vera and
falsae poeniten. Cap. 18.
that in the book of their excuse why they departed owte of the Church (they
call it their Apology) be not ashamed to auouche, that S. Augustine sometimes
denied, and sometimes doubted of Purgatory. Thus he writes then against such
deceivers, and for the defense of him self and the Churches faith. Sed si
etiam sic conuersus euadat, vitam viuat and non moriatur, non tamen promittimus
quod euadet omnem poenam. Nam prius purgandus est igne purgationis, qui in
aliud saeculum distulit fructum conuersionis. Hic autem ignis etsi aeternus non
sit, miro tamen modo est grauis, excellit enim omnem poenam quam vnquam passus
est aliquis in hac vita. Nunquam enim in carne inuenta est tanta poena, licet
mirabilia passi sunt martyrs, and multi nequiter iniqui tanta sustinueruut
supplicia. Studeat ergo quilibet sic delicta corrigere, vt post moreem non
oporteat talem poenam tolerare. Yff a sinner (says he) by his conversion
escape death, and obtain liefe, yet for all that I can not promise him, that
he shall escape all pain or poonishme^t. For he that differred the fructes of
repentance till the next liefe, must be perfyted in Purgatory fire. And this
fire, I tell you, though it be not everlasting, yet it is passing grievous:
for it does far excede all pain, that man may suffer in this lyefe. Never
grefe in this flesh could be so great as it, though Martirs have abiden
strange torments, and the worst sort of wicked men, exceeding great
poonishments. Therefore, let every man so correct his own faults, that after
his death he may escape that pityfull pain. So far S. Augustine: By whom we
see not only the truth of our our Catholic doctrine lively and vehemently set
forth, butt to the great fear of us all, the weght of Gods sentence, and
the pain of that intolerable poonishment, as the Church of his time taught
and believed, to pass all mortal and transitory woe in the world.

Whereof, The pains of purgatory has been reveled to many holy persons.
it has pleaced allmighty God sometimes, to give man a taste, by calling
sum one or other above the common raze of nature out of this mortal liefe,
and speedy restoring him from the state of the departed, to the company of the
living again. Which work though it be strange in nature, thought unlikely
to misbeleuers, and contemned of such as would extinguishe the spirit of God,
1. Tessal. 5.
yet it has been the usual practice, sense the beginning of our faith and
religion, off the holy Ghost, so to trade man's fraylty in faith and fear of
Gods Judgments. Sometimes, the living is in trance or sodden change by
Gods omnipotency taken up, to the vewe as it wear, of the unspeakable
treasures of the praepared joys, or extreme calamities of the world to coom.
So was the Apostle S. Paul, he could not tell how him self, 2. Cor. 12.
called to the behoulding of Gods majesty and mysteries unspeakable: Apocal.
20
So was S. John in spirit caused often to behold, and praesently in a manner to
see, not only the affayires of gods Church til the worlds end, but also the
happy Seat of the la^be, the aeternal joy of thelect, and the everlasting lake
of the damned, with the infinite sorrow of all the forsaken sort. And so have
many one since that time, in the same spirit, had a praesent taste of all those
judgments, which by any means through the unsearchable ordinance of God, be
praepared for sinners.

Ecclesi. 46 1. Reg. 28.
Sometimes also, by the same force of the Spirit, the departed have appeared
amongst the lieue: as Samuel the prophet to king Saul, uttering things to
coom. Or if that were not Samuel him self, because that practice of unlawful
arts may be thought not convenient for the procuring of the Prophettes own
persons appirition: Matthew. 17.
yet Moses was in deed personally praesent with Christ in the Mount, at his
tra^sfiguration. And as he at Christ's call came from the dead owte of the
bousom of Abraham, so did Elias at the same time coom from Paradise (as S.
Augustine affirms) and were both conversant and in talk with Christ, and in the
sight of the Apostles at once: from whense they departed at Christ's
appointement, Intercourse betwixt the live and dead, though it be not
ordinary, yet it is not impossible.
to their several abode and rest again. Whereupon, the same holy doctoure
confesses, that these rare and marvelous works of god though they follow not
the common order of nature, yet they be nether impossible, nor unpracticed in
Christ's Church. Alij sunt (says he) limits humanarum rerum, alia diuinaru^
signa virtutu^: alia sunt quae naturaliter, alia quae mirabiliter fiunt. De
cura pro mor Cap. 16.
The common course and limits of man's matters, be of one sort: and the
woonderous signs of gods power and virtue, of an other: the works that
naturally be wrought, are nothing like such things, as meruailously and
miraculously be done.

And as Christ in his own person, made many extraordinary works to bear
testimony of his diuinitye, so he would that the glory of god and faith in
him, should take deape root and large increase through owte al nations, not
only by preaching and word, but by works also: which the same holy ghost
for the salvation of the beloved flock, disposes by the aeternal wisdom,
where, when, with whom, and as he lists.

Mary as these be the most secret ways and unknown steps of gods spirit,
and therefore most humbly to be reuere^ced of the faithful: so because they are
so far from the raze of natural affairs, and much ouerreache flesh and
bloodde, they are often of fools contemned, and of the unwise wisdom off
worldlinges, as extreme madness improued. The express signs of Gods
spirit, Mat. 12.
wrought by the Savior of the world in his own person, were with singular
blasphemy, of the proud Jews referred to Beelzebub, The tokens and wonders
wrought by his Apostles, Wicked men have ever resisted the holy Ghost
were attributed to unlawful arts, and misconstrued of most miscreants to
false intentes. It was ever a special note of incredulity, to blaspheme these
peculiare steps of the spirit.

S. Cyprian complainethe of such misbeleuers in his time: that would not
agree to the truth after especial revelations had of the same: Lib. 4. epist.
9.
Which kind of men, he notes in the latter end of an epistle, by these
words. Quanquam sciam, omnia ridicula, and visiones ineptas quibusdam videri,
sed vtique illis, qui malunt contra sacerdotes credere, quam sacerdoti: Sed
nihil mirum, quando de Joseph fratres sui dixerunt, ecce somniator ille venit.
Allthoughe (says he) I know right well how little account they make of
visions, which they aesteme as mere triefles: But yet it is such only, that
had rather believe against, then with Gods priests. And no marvel that is,
seeing good Joseph's own brethern said by him in mockage. Genes. 37.
Lo yender cooms the dreamer. So did they scoff at him, because he had more
familiarity with the spirit of God, then the other had.

Now as the joys of heaven and Paradise, with the torment of sinners and
other secrettes of the next liefe, have been straungely represented to some one
or other in all agies, by sundry means most expedient to our salvation, and
most seemly to the wisdom and will of the woorker, so certainly, no article
was ever with more force of spirit, or more grave authority set fourth sense
the beginning of Christian religion, then this one of Purgatory. Never nation
was converted to the faith, but it hadd this truth not only taught by word,
but by miracle also confirmed. And namely in that abundant floodde of faith,
when it pleaced God, almost at once to spread his name amongst all these
contryes, it was thought most necessary to his divine wisdom, together with the
true worship off his name, to plant in all faithful men's hearts, the awe
and necessary fear of that grievous torment, for the revenge and just judgment
of wicked lyefe. This grievous pain was uttered by the very sufferers theime
selves, as we may see in the notable historyes off Paschasius and Iustus, Cap.
24. l. 4. dialogorum.
reported by S. Gregoryes own mouth. This grievous poonishment was again
declared by Furseus: who, as the reverent Bid reports, Cap. 13. li. 3.
had the behoulding of the aeternall bless, the everlasting misery, and the
temporal pain of the next life. Drichelmus also, Li. 5. c. 13
by the ordinance of God taken from amongst mortal men into the state of the
next world, after he had seen like wise, the terrible judgment of God
practiced even upon the elect, was restored to life again in our own
nation, and was a witness worthy of all credet, of this same truth, not only
by his word (whereof he was so sparing all his lyefe time after, that he would
not utter this same mystery but with singular care and respect of the persons
intent, that asked him thereof) but namely by passinge great poenaunce, and
incredible chastising of his body, which proceaded of the sensible knowledge
that he had of the pains praepared. And being asked sometime (as holy Bid
says) why he so tormented him self, in the willing toleration of extreme
heat, or contrary could, both of froste and snow, he made answer simply and
shortly, Frigidiora ego vidi: austeriora ego vidi: Ah masters I have seen
cowlder: I have seen sharper. Meaning by the unspeakable pains of Purgatory.
The whole history of his visions, with many the like, R. Beda.
may be read in the Ecclesiastical history of our own nation, written by as
faithful a witness, as ever was borne in our land: of such virtue, that he
would begile no man willingly, of so great wisdom, that he would report no
tale nor triefle rashly: off such grace and learning, that he was well able to
discern a false fable and superstitious illusion, from a true and divine
revelation.

For as it were folly and mere vanity, to give credet to every spirit, so to
condemn a spirit, or revelation, or any work of Gods finger approved by
the Church of God, in which there has ever been the gift of discerning
spirits, 1. Cor. 12.
it is properly a sin against the holy Ghost. And because every man has not
that gift, as I would not counsel any man, over lightely to give credet to
every private spirit and peculiar vision, because they may coom of wicked
intentes and sinister motions, so I think it were good, in fear, reverence and
humility, to committ the discerninge of such things, to the spirit and
judgment of Gods Church.

With the belefe of every peculiar man's phantasy, we are not charged: with
humble submission of our wholeliefe and belief, to the Church of Christ,
there are we especially charged. And because there is nothing reported either in
the works of S. Gregory, or in Bid, or in Damascen, or in any other the
like, concerning the pains either of the elect or the damned in the next
life, but as much has been uttered before, by all the holy and learned fathers,
in great agony of mind and fear of the said judgment, we may be the more
boulde to think the best, or rather we are bownd to think the best of that
spirit, which so conformably agrees with the doctrine of the Church, and
faith of all the fathers.

There can no man say more of Purgatory nor more plainly, then S. Ambrose,
Damascenus vocat purgatoriu^ baptisma ignis.
being in a manner a frade him self, of wasting away in that horrible torment:
none more effectually then S. Augustine, that confesses there is no earthely
pain comparable unto it, Lib. 4. Ca. 10. de ortho fid.
none more fearfully then Eusebius Emissenus, who terms it skaulding waves
off fire: none more pithely then Paulinus, that calls those places off
judgments, Ad Amandum epi. ^.
Ardentes tenebras burning darkness. More peculiarely may the circumstances
and condition of that state by god be reveled, but the truth thereof, can not
be more plainly declared, nor better proved. These babes feared no bugges I
warraunt you: nether picked they Purgatory owte of Scipio his dream, but they
had it owte of Gods holy word, and tradition of the holy apostles, and by
the very suggestion of the spirit of truth. All which if it can not move the
misbeleuer, and stay the rashenesse of the simple deceived sort, it shall be
but lost labor to bring in any more, for the confirmation of that truth,
which all the holy doctoures have so fully both proved and declared to my hand.

But now for us, that through Gods great mercy be Catholics, let us, for
Christ's sake, so use the benefit of this our approved faith, to the
amendment of our own lives, that where no argument will serve, nor authority
of Scripture or doctoure can convert the deceived, yet the fructe of this
doctrine showed by good liefe and virtuous conversation, may by Christ's mercy
move theime. Let the priest consider that this heavy judgment must begi^ at the
house of God, Epist. 1. ca. 4. Ambros. vbi supra.
as S. Peter affirms, and so does S. Ambrose prove it must do. In whom, for
the dignity of his honorable ministry, as much more holiness is requisite,
so a more strait reckoning must be required. Let the Lay man learn, for the
avoiding of greater danger in the praesence of the high Judge, willingly to
submitt him self to Gods holy ministers: Who have in most ample manner, a
commission of executing Christ's office in earth, both for pardoning and
poonishement of sin: that sufferinge here in his Church, sentence and just
judgment for his offensies, he may the rather escape our fathers grievous
chastisement, in the liefe to coom.

Therefore I would exhort earnestly the minister of God, that in giving
poenaunce, he would measure the medecin by the malady: aptly discerning the
limitation of the poonishement, by the quantity of the fault: not using like
lenity in closing up of every wound. For they shall not be blameless surely,
that do the work of Gods judgment committed to their discretion,
negligently: nor the simple soul that looks to be set free from further
pain, can, by the acceptance of such unequal remedies, avoid the skourge
of judgment praepared* except he him self voluntaryly receive (as I would
wish all men should) some forther satisfaction, by the fructes of poenaunce:
that of his own accord he may help the enjoined paenalty, and so by Gods
grace turn away the great grefe to coom.

Excellently well, Epist. 2.
and to our pupose said S. Cyprian in the fourth book of his epistles,
taulking of such offenders as were not charged with poenaunce sufficyently, or
otherwise negligently fulfilled the same, by these words. We shall not herein
any thing be prejudicial to Gods judgment that is to coom, that he may not
allow and ratify our sentence, if he find the perfect poenaunce of the party
so require. But if the offe^der have deluded us by feigned acco^plishing of his
paenaunce, then God who will not be deluded because he behouldeth the heart of
man, shall give judgment of such things as were hid from us. And so our
Lord will amend the sentence of his servants. Where this doctor seems to
allude to the accustomed name of Pugatory, which S. Augustine and other do
often call the amending fyere. Though it may well be, that he here calls the
contrary sentence of judgment to aeternall damnation upon the impoenitent
sinner, whom the priest, because he could not discern the fained hipocrasy
of his external dealing, from the inward sorrow of heart, pronounced to be
absolved of his sins, it may stand (I say) that he terms that contrary
sentence of God, the correction or the amendment of the priests judgment.
How so ever that be, it is a work of singular grace and discretion, so to
deal with the spiritual patient, that he have no need off the amending fire.

Of the nature and condition of Purgatotory fire: the difference of their
state that be in it, from the damned in Hell: with the conclusion of this
book.

Cap. 13.
IF any curious head list of me demand, where or in what part of the world
this place of poonishme^t is, or what nature that fire is of, that works by
such vehement force upon a spiritual substance: I will not by long
declaration thereof, feed his curiosity: because he may have both the example
and the like doubt of Hell it self, and many other works of God more. The
learned may see that quaestion at large debated in the books of the City of
God, Lib. 20.
and in the litterall exposition upon the Genesis. And yet after all search
that man can make, this must be the conclusion, with the author of those
books: Libro. 8. cap. 5,
Quomodo intelligenda sit illa flamma inferni, ille sinus Abrahae, illa lingua
diuitis, illa sitis torme^ti, illa stilla refrigerij, vix fortasse a mansuete
quaerentibus, a contentiose autem certantibus nunquam inuenitur: melius est
dubitare de occultis, quam litigare de incertis. I am sure (says S. Augustine)
the Rich man was in wonderful fervent pain, and the Lazare in the rest of a
pleasant abiding, but how or of what nature that Hell flame and fire is to be
taken, or Abraham his bosom, or the glottens tongue, or the intolerable thurst
in that torment, or the drop to quench his heat. All these doubts can
scarsely be dissolved and satisfied, to the contentation of him that with
humility makes search thereof, But to contentious and curious ianglers, they
shall never be known. Therefore better it is to be in doubt of these secretts,
then to stand in contentious reasoning off things uncertain. So must we
think also of Purgatory: that the pain thereof, of what condition so ever it
be, or where so ever the ordinance of God has placed it, is wonderful
horrible. And by force of operation, represents the nature of our fire: and
both by scriptures and doctors, is most termed by the name of fire, as Hell
torment is. It woorketh so upon the soul of man, as the other did upon the
rich man's soul, and all other that be already in Hell, before the
receiving of their bodies into the same misery, at the general day of
Judgment. And the sensible grief may be as great of certain, as in the
other place of everlasting damnation, as Cyrillus Cyrill.
in vita Hieronimi does declare.

The diversity of the damneds case, and of such as be temporally poonished in
purgatory.
But this is the great misery, and the difference: that such as be in the
judgment of Hell pains, have no hope of mercy, no passage from their infinite
woe, no end of torment, no release off pain, no expectation of salvation, no
comfort by Christ: but endless desperation, hatered of virtue, weariness of
their creation: sorrow of their own being and persons: and, which is most
intolerable, perpetual blasphemy, and grisely cursing of Gods holy name.
The other being under their merciful fathers chastiseme^t in purgatory,
suffer great pain, but in quiet peace of conscience, in assured expectation
and warraunt of their salvation, in love of Gods justice and judgment, even
toward theime selves, in the unity of the spirit of God, bearing testimony
of theime, that they be the children of the howshoulde, in perpetual
experience of mercy and grace, in daily hope of ^elease, in perfect love with
owte all sin or danger of sinning, in glad co^ceiuing the benefit of
their redemption for the remission of their offenses paste, and in worship and
confession of Gods holy name, then and after for ever more.

And this is the company of the inferior parts, which boweth their knee,
Philip. 2.
and reuerenceth the name of Jesus, (as the Apostle says) when the other which
bein the deape hell (the prophet bearing witness) can not praise nor confess
his blessed name, which they both detest and blaspheme, to their
unspeakable pain. There has ever be^, sense the death of the first virtuous
man till this hour, and so shall be till the day of later judgment, a company
of elect and chosen people, that do honor God in the loughers parts: as
till Christ's descending to hell, the fathers resting place in general, and
some that suffered for sin further pain beside. And after, co^tinally as
before, the place of Purgatory, to endure for the ponishment of certain, til
the latter day, when all the elect shall reign without grief or pain, with
Christ for ever more.

Vide Greg. 4. dial. 20 and Isiodor. de ordine creatur.
And although, the place of this torment, and the nature thereof, be not
certainly determined, nor known to any, but such as God of his wisdom list
reuele it unto, yet it is with great probability and likelihood, thought of
such learned men as deserve singular credit, that it is in the lower rowmes,
as sinus Abrahae, may appear by scripture to have been, and separated from hell
as it was: because al places of ponisheme^t after this liefe, be cauled of holy
writers, conformably to scripture, Inferna. But with curious search of these
things, as we be not charged, so to believe that justice is there done upon
sinners, by much sorrow and torment of their souls, by the authority of
Gods word and church, we are of necessity induced. The care an co^syderation
whereof, if it take deape impression in our minds, I am sure it shall work
exceeding great change, in our whole liefe and manners.

Therefore I shall desire all Catholic readers, as they believe this grave
sentence of God to coom, and fear the rod of our fathers correction, that
they praeuent the same, by lowly submitting theime selves unto the chastisement
of our kind moother the Church. Who with tears in this her contempt, yet
besecheth the children of her own howshoulde, that they would rather
willingly submitt theime selves to her meek wande in this liefe, then against
their wills to the heavy skourge of their angry and justly moved father, in
the world to coom. The paenaunce which her ministers do charge us with all,
is of it self not great, yet accepted with humility and co^petent dolor of
heart in this time of grace, it may for the most part, if it any thing be
answerable to the faults, or helped by our own zele, either wholly discharge
us, or much ease and abridge the pain to coom. Let us not stick to add
unto the praescribed pain by the priest our pastor, some such fructes of
repentance, as may more and more wash us from our sins: let us make fre^des
of wicked Mammo^: Luc. 11. Dan. 4.
Let us redeem our sins, by almoose and mercy toward the poor: Let us
judge our selves with earnest fasting, abu^daunce of vnfaided tears, often
watching and continual prayinge, and then doubtless we shall not be judged of
our Lord. Let us detest this abominable flattering security, which this
sinful schole so earnestly exhorts us unto: It is the devil no doubt, that
would have man pass his time in pleasure, that he may be reserved to his
everlasting pain. A small remedy by man's freedom, in Gods grace here
willingly accepted, may clear acquitte us of great grief to coom. Love
alone, and ernest zele of Gods house, in this multitude of forsakers, I dare
say shall cover a number of sins: and that which by nature is but duty, in
this time of temptation I take it to be great merit. Let us be circumspect
therefore, and work whiles the day is here, for in the night off the next
world, sinners can not help theime selves, nor work one moment toward
their own delivery or release.

And for the other sort which have been deceived by the Mearemaides song, I
shall humbly in our saviors blessed blood beseeke theyme, to consider with
zele and indifferency what has been said, and whereon it stands. And if God
him self has in all ages chastised his best beloved people and dearest
children, both here and in the next lyefe, if the Church has practiced
discipline, by his authority, upon all obedient persons, if all virtuous have
charged theime selves with pain, if al learned fathers have both preached an
done poenaunce, for the avoiding of pains hereafter praepared, if the word of
God expressly make for this, if all learned men with out exception believed it
and feared it, if it agree with good reason, if it settfourth Gods justice,
if it duly answer to the hatered of sin, if it raise the fear of God in
man's heart, if it be the bane of proud praesumption, if it be the moother of
meekness, of obedience, of devotion, and of all good Christian conditions,
let it for Gods love, I pray the once again, take place in thy heart, and
drive out that rest and quiettnesse of sin, which these delycate doctors,
for thy praesent pleasure, under the color off some honest name, have
deceitfully induced thee unto.

Ask once of thine own masters: and if they be able to answer to any part
of this which I have proved, but by unseemly wrasting of the the scripture,
shameful denial of the doctors, or deceitefull coloring of nothing, in vain
words, with owte grownd, matter or meaning, thowe may better believe theime,
and miscredet me. But yff thowe find they shall never be able to satisfy a
reasonable man in this case, then cast not thy sellfe away willingly with
thime: but betime turn home to us ageine. I my self seek no further credit
at thy hands, but as a reporter of the antiquity: But the scripture requires
thy obedience, the Church which can not be deceived clameth thy consent, all
the owlde fathers would have the join with theime in their constant belefe.
If thou did once feel what grace and gifts were, In populo graui and ecclesia
magna, in the grave people and great Church, (as the Prophett terms Gods
house) or could conceive the conforte that we poor wretchies receive daily,
by discipline and perfect remission of our sins, which can no where but in
this house be profitably healed, thowe would forsake I am sure, all wordely
welthe and wantons abroad, to join with our Church ageine. And that the name
of the Church, deceive the not: this is the true Church (says Lactantius) In
qua est religio, Lib. 4. Cap. 30. de sap.
confessio, and poenitentia, quae peccata and vulnera, quibus est subiecta
inbecillitas carnis, salubriter curat. In which, devotion, confession, and
poenau^ce, whereby the wou^des of man's frailty are profitably cured, be found.

FINIS PRIORIS LIBRI.
THE SECOND BOOK ENTREATING OF THE PRAYERS, AND OTHER ORDINARY relief, that
the Church of Christ procures for the souls departed.
THE PREFACE OF THIS Book, wherein the matter of the treatise, and the order
of the Authors proceading, be briefly opened.

WE have now tarried very long, in the consideration of Gods justice and
mighty scourge, not only for the everlasting outcastes, but also for the exact
trial of the chosen childrens ways. The behoulding whereof, must neades
engender some sorrow and sadness of mind: and with all, as it commonly happeth
in our frailety, a certain bitter taediousnesse both in the writer, and the
reader: 2. Cor. 7.
though for my part, I will say with S. Paul, that it greueth me never a
whit, that I have in my tallke given you occasion of sadness: being assured,
that this praesent grefe, may work perfect poenaunce to undoubted salvation.

But the weariness of that roughe part, which might both by the weight of the
matter, and also by my rude handeling, quickly arise to the studious reader,
I shall in this book wholly wype away: not by art or pleasant fall of words,
which in plain dealing is not much requisite, but by the singular comfort
of our cause. In the continual course whereof, we shall joy more and more at
the behoulding of Gods passing mercy in remission of sins, and mitigation
of the pains, which justice enjoined. For now we must talk, how the fyry
sword of Gods ire may be turned from his people: Which, Ambros.
as one of the fathers truly said, bears a great show of vengeance and
judgment, because it is named a fyry sword, but yet known withal, to be a
tourning sword, that is gladius versatilis, Rupert. in 3. c. Genes.
it shall give great cause of comfort again. O sapientes (says devout
Damascene) ad vos loquor, scrutamini and erudimini, quia plurimus est timor Dei
domini omnium, sed multo amplior bonitas, and formidabiles quidem minae, In
orat pro defunctis.
incomparabilis autem clementia: and horrenda quidem supplicia, ineffabile
autem miserationum suarum pelagus. Thus he speaks of Purgatory, and mercy: O
you of the wise sort: to you do I speak, search and learn, A comparison
off the mercy and judgment off God, toward the souls in Purgatory* and
that mercy is more
that the fear of God the Lord of all things, is maruailous much, but his
goodness far ouerreacheth it: His threatening exceeding fearful, but his
clemency vnco^parable: the praepared poonishme^ts doubtless horrible, but the
botto^lesse sea of his mercies is unspeakable, so said he. Therefore if our
sins forgeuen were never so grievous, or our vicious, life so far wasted in
idle wealth, that space of fructefull poenaunce, and opportunity of well
woorking, by the nights approaching and our Lords sodden calling, be taken
away, (in which long differring of our amendment, heavy and sore execution
must neades for justice sake be done) yet let us not mistrust, but God
measures his judgment with clemency, and has ordained means to procure
mercy, and mitigate that sentence, eue^ in the midst of that fyry doongion:
that the vessels of grace and the redeemed flock, may worthily sing both mercy
and judgment to our gracious God, who in his anger forgets not to have
compassion, nether withdraws his pity in the midst of his ire. Psalm. 76.
For this imprisonment endures no longer then our debtes be paid, this fire
wastes no further, then it finds matter to consume, this discriet and wise
flame (as some of the fathers before termed it) chastises no longer, the^ it
has cause to correct. Yea often before this fire by course of justice can
cease, God quenches it with his sons blood, recompenseth the residew by
our masters merittes, The motions off Gods mercy, In releasing or
mitigation of the pain of Purgatory.
and accepts the careful cry of our moother the Church, for her children
in pain. The memory off Christ's death, lively and effectually settfourth in
the sovereign mysteries upon the Altar in earth, enters up to the
praesence of his seat, and procures pardon in heaven above. The merits of
all sanctes, the prayer of the faithefull, the works of the charitable, both
earnestly ask, and undoubtedly find, mercy and grace at his hand. For of
such the Prophet David asks Nunquid in aeternum proijciet Deus, aut
continebit in ira sua misericordias suas? Psalm. 76.
Will God cast theime away for ever, or will he shut up his mercy, when he
is angry? No he will not: Li. 1. de poenit. Cap. 1.
so says S. Ambrose: Deus quos proijcit non in aeternum proijcit: God casts
of many, whom he doothe not everlastingly forsake.

Then let us seek the ways of this so merciful a Lord, that we may take
singular comfort therein our selves, against the day of our account, and
endeavor mercyfully to help our dear brethren so afflicted: lest if we use
not compassion toward theime, we justly receive at Gods hand, for the
reward of our vnmercyfulnesse, judgment and justice with owte mercy,

The cruel adversary of man kind, as before he wrought his woorste against
Purgatory, so here he busely pricketh forward the school of protestants, to
improve to their own utter damnation, and the notable hinderaunce of our
loving bretherns salvation, all such means as God by scripture or other
testimony of his word, has reveled to be proffitable for thabating of pain,
or the release of the appointed poonishment, in that place of temporal tormente
to com. Against which deceivers, I mean by Gods help in this order to
travel. First I will prove, that sins may be pardoned, or the debt and bond
thereof released, in the next world: then I shall show what means the holy
scripture approves, or thexample thereof a warraunteth to be proffitable for
the souls departed: A brief note of the conte^tes and principal points of
this book.
I will open what the principal pillars, and in a manner the flower of all the
faithful sort in sundry a gies, and almost in all Christian contryes, have
left in writynge for this point: I will declare what they practiced for their
dearest friends privately, and what the churchies of most notable Nations used
for all deceased in Christ's faith, in their public service oppenly: I shall
prove unto you, that the practice of suffragies and Sacrifice for the dead,
isshued down to us from the Apostles days. I shall point you to the first
father of the contrary doctrine, and his principal abettours, in such
troublesome times as such merchants were to be fownde. Ye shall see them
known amongst all the holy of their time by the name of haeretikes: You
shall see their doctrine improoued, and theime selves condemned, by the grave
judgment of Councelles, both General and provincial, for haeretikes. If any
of theime all can say any thing, to the contrary off that, which we upon so
good growndes maynteine, he shall be answered with no worse, then the very
words of the holy ancient writers. Finally, if any other things be necessary
beside, for the declaration of this matter to the simple, or for proof against
our adversaries, they shall not be omitted: as occasion, by course and fall of
the matter, may be given. All which points being avouched and not proved,
shall condemn me of arrogance: But both avouched, and fully proved, they
shall deserve any reasonable man's consent, and bear testimony of the
adversaries impude^cy here, and witness of their contempt of Gods approved
truth, in the world to coom.

That there be certain sins, which may be forgeuen in the next lyefe, and
that the deserved poonishement for the same, may be eased, or utterly released,
before the extreme sentence be to the utmost executed.

Cap. 1.
ANd first, that sins may be pardoned in the next world, that were not in
this life forgeuen, our Saviors own words do teach us, written in the
Gospel of S. Matthew thus: Ideo dico vobis: omne peccatum and blasphemia
remittetur hominibus, spiritus autem blasphemia non remittetur. Et quicunque
dixerit verbum co^tra filium hominis, remittetur ei: Cap. 12.
qui autem dixerit contra spiritum sanctum, non remittetur ei neque in hoc
saeculo, neque in futuro. I tell you, that al manner of sin and blasphemy
shall be forgeuen unto men, but the blasphemy of the spirit, shall not be
forgeuen. And who so ever shall speak against the son of man, it shall be
forgeuen him: But if he speak against the holy Ghost, it shall nether be
pardoned in this world, nor in the world to coom. The same thing in sense,
Cap. 3. Cap. 12.
has Mark and Luke affirming that such offense shall never be forgeuen. The
which word Never, S. Mark expresses thus: in aeternum non habet remissionem,
he shall not have pardon (as you would say) in all aeternity, by which he may
plainly seem, to reach further then the limits and borders of this world,
for the remission of sin. And this speech has as much pith and propre
force in it, as S. Matthewes, who expressly, distinctly, and belike as Christ
spoke it, utters that sense of the aeternity, which passes the measure of
worldely time, by these words: Nether in this world, nor yet in the world to
come. And for that cause S. Mark says, Reus eritaeterni delicti, he shall be
gilty of an aeternall fault, signifyng that in some case a man might perhaps
not speed of a pardon in this life, and yet may obtain it in the next: But
for that horrible blasphemy, he in a manner discharges thoffender of all hope
of remission, either in this life, or in the next that is to coom. Which form
of words can nether be found in scripture, nor in man's common talk, to
have any place in such things as extend no further but to the transitory time
of our life: for in those matters, it had been usually, and truly spoken, it
shall never happen in this world. And therefore instructing us, that sins,
or the pain due unto sins, may either be released in this world, or in the
world to come, he follows that phrase and form of words, in which man might
well co^ceyue, the reach of remission and pardoninge of sins, far to pass
the compass of our time, and life.

But because we have to do with fickle merchants, that will not stick to
brast bowldely the bands of evident scriptures, as anon you shall see, and
therefore, will (as I think) little be moved with reasonable and plain
gathering out of the scriptures: nor much aesteme this lyklyhode, as over
smaule a proof in so great a doubt, therefore I will show my warraunt for
this construction, that thereby the studious reader may see, whom the
adversaries do so rashly contemn herin: and whom we have as authors, in this
meaning of Christ's words now recyted: that nether they may be believed with
owte reason and proof, nor we miscredited, after so good authority of the
ancient writers, as nether they for shame, nor we of conscience can deny. S.
Gregory, whose authority I may bowldly use against theime, because they mislyke
not his judgment, when it may appear to make for theime, (as in deed it
never doothe) he doubted nothing to gether of this our Saviors speech, that
sins might be forgeuen in the next world. And thus he writes for that
point. Lib. 4. dialog. cap. 19.
De quibusdam leuibus culpis, esse ante iudicium purgatorius ignis credendus
est, pro eo quod veritas dicit: Si quis in sancto Spiritu blasphemiam dixerit,
neque in hoc saeculo remittetur ei, neque in futuro. In qua sententia datur
intelligi, quasdam culpas in hoc saeculo, quasdam in futuro posse relaxari:
quod enim de vno negatur, consequens intellectus patet, quia de quibusdam
conceditur, sed tamen, vt praedixi, hoc de paruis minimisque peccatis, fieri
posse credendum est. For certain smaule sins, that there is a purgatory fire
before the day of judgment, we must neades believe: because the truth it
self, uttered so much in these words, If any sin against the holy Ghost,
it shall not be remitted, nether in this world, nor in the world to coom. By
which sentence it is given us to understand, that, as some offensies be
released in this world, so there may some other, be remitted in the life
following. For that which is denied in one sort, the meaning is plain, that
of some other kind it must neades be granted. But, Only small offensies be
remitted in the next life
as is said before, this is only to be taken of lighter offensies, thus far
spoke S. Gregory: and proves lernedly beside, by examples and sundry
scriptures through out the whole work, our matter. If our adversaries
would with desire to learn, as they commonly do to reprehend, read but his
discourse only, they might quickly see their own folly, and amend their
misbeliefe. They call him the last good pope, as he was in deed a blessed man:
and by his authority the perfect conversion of our nation to Christ's faith,
was wrought. I would his holy woorks deserved but as much credet now, with
certain forsakers, as his legates then did, with all the unfaithful people of
our coontrye.

But to go forward in our matter, we shall find in S. Bernarde, the same
words of our savior alleged for our purpose, thus: Ser. 66. in canti.
Non credunt ignem Purgatorium restare post mortem, sed statim animam solutam a
corpore, vel ad requiem transire, vel ad damnationem: quaera^t ergo ab eo, qui
dixit quoddam peccatum esse, quod neque in hoc saeculo, neque in futuro
remittetur: cur hoc dixerit, si nulla manet in futuro remissio purgatioue
peccati? They believe not (says he, by sum haeretiques of his own time) that
there is any purgatory pains remaining after death, but they suppose that the
soul streght upon departure hense, goes either to rest, or damnation: let
such fellows ask therefore of him, that said, a certain grievous crime could
nether be forgeuen in this world, nor in the world to coom, why he so said,
if there were no remission nor purgation of sins, in the liefe following?
thus said Bernard, opening his grave judgment both upon the text, and our
matter: whose authority, if any aesteme less, because off his late writing,
let him know, that the adversaries have none for their side so ancient by
CCC. year, except they name the heretic Aerius, or such like, whose
antiquity makes not so much for them, as his ancient condemnation for
haeresy in this point, makes ageinste theime.

But that in the mouth of two or three witnesses all truethe may appear, and
contrary faulshood vanishe away: S. Augustine him self, gathered by this place
now alleged, even then when he had no occasion given him, by the wranglyng of
any misbeleuer, to wreast any scripture other wise the^ the very words
imported, the truth of remission of certain faults in the next life, in
these words, Ca. 24. li. 21. de ciuit.
Facta resurrectione mortuorum, non deerunt, quibus, post paenas quas patiuntur
spiritus mortuorum, impertiatur misericordia, vt in ignem non mittantur
aeternum, neque enim de quibusdam veraciter diceretur, quod no^ eis remittetur
neque in hoc saeculo neque in futuro, nisi essent, quibus etsi non in isto,
tamen remittetur in futuro. There shall be certain at the time off
resurrection also, who shall obtain mercy, after they have suffered such
pains as dead men's gostes do abide, that they be not cast in to the
everlasting fire: for else it could not in any true sense be spoken, that
certain should nether have pardon in this world, nor in the world to com,
except there were sum, that speeding not of pardon in this life, might yett
have remission in the next: so says he. Being, I warraunt you, so sad
witted and so far from fantasies, that he would not ground any assured
doctrine, upon every light occasion offered, or motion made: had not the very
words and form of phrase, approved it, and Gods Church liked it.

Having then these grave fathers with others, Beda in 3. Cap. Marci.
for our warraunt in the exposition of this place, we do take it for a sure
grownde, that the payine off purgatio^ in the next world may be remitted, that
is to say, either made less, or else wholly released, before the due execution
of Gods sentence be extremely done. Some times Gods justice is an svvered
fully by the pain of the party.
For it is not meant, that the freedom which man may have after full answer and
payment of his sins, in that place of poonishement temporal, should be
properly termed a remission, or pardon: For that is aunswerable to Gods
justice: and although there were no prayers or other ways of help, yet the
patient by toleration, in time, might, under the protection off Christ's
merits, make full satisfaction, and so be discharged: who being a vessel of
mercy, can not be damned. But when we say, that sins may be forgeuen in the
next world, Gods Church (which is the moother of all beleuers) teaches us,
that sum part, as well off the rigor end extremity of the pain, as of the
time and continuance thereof (though God him self has appointed that
poonishment) may yet be merciful released.

That the faithful souls in Purgatory being now past the state of
deserving, and not in case to help theime selves, may yet receive benefit by
the works of the living, to whom they be perfectly knitte, as felovve
members of one body.

Cap. 2.
But now what means may be fownde, to ease our brethern departed, of their
pain? or what ways can be acceptable in the sight of God to procure mercy and
grace, where the sufferers theyme selves, being out of the state of deserving
and place of welworkyng, can not help theyme selves: nor by any motion of
mind, atteyne more mercy, then their liefe past did deserve? Where shall we
then find ease for theyme? suerly no where else, but in the unity and knotte
of that holy fellowship, in which, the benefit of the head perteynethe to all
the members: and every good work of any one member, wonderfully redoundeth to
all the rest. This socyety is called in our creed, communio sanctorum, the
communion of Sanctes, that is to say a blessed brotherhood under Christ the
head, by love and religion so wroght and wrapped to gether, that what any one
membre off this fast body has, the other lacks it not: what one wants, the
other suppliethe: when one smartethe, all feels in a manner the like sorrow:
1. Cor. 12.
when one ioyethe, the other reioysethe wythall. This happy socyety, August. ep.
23.
is not inpared by any distance of place, by diversity off gods gifts, by
inequalyty off estates, nor by change of liefe: so far as the unity of
gods spirit reaches, so far this fellowship extendethe, this city is as
large, as the benefit of Christ's death takethe place. Yea withein all the
compass of his kingdom, this felloweship is fownde. The souls and sanctes in
heaven, Idem tract. 32. in Joan.
the faithful people in earth, the chosen children that suffer chastisement in
Purgatory, are, by the perfect bond of this unity, as one abundeth, ready to
serve the other, as one lacks, to crave of the other. The christian communion
and felouship is expressed.
The souls happily promoted to the joy of Christ's blessed kingdom, in this
unity and knotte of love, perpetually pray for the doubtful state, of their
own fellows benethe: the careful condition of the members below,
contynually criethe for help at their hands in heaven above. Now the
me^bres of Christ's Church here yet traveling in earth, they pray together,
they fast to gether, they desire together, they deserve together. Christ our
head, in whose blood this city and socyety stands, will have no work nor
way of salvation, that is not common to the whole body in general, and
perculierly proffitable, to supply the need of every part thereof. He which
instituted the blessed sacraments, will have theyme in this unity to woork in
common, (as far as thend of each of their institutions requirethe) and out
of it, to have no force at al: he that makes al our works acceptable,
though they be done of one, will have theyme perteyn to all: the holy
sacrifice of the Church, by the will of the author, and the liknesse of
th'xemplare (as in deed being in another manner, the very self same) is made so
common, that it joins the sanctes and Angels in heaven, to the chosen and
elect people, either in earth, or under the earth benethe. The souls departed
in piety are of our church and fellowship.
And that this holy consent of good works, and mutual agreement of prayer,
to the continual supplying of each others lackes, doothe also apperteine to
the souls departed, no man that has any sense of this happy community, can
deny* for being members of our common body, they must needs be partakers of
the common vtilitye. li. 20. de ciuit. Cap. 9.
And so says S. Augustine in these words. Neque enim piorum animae mortuorum
separantur ab ecclesia, quae and nunc est regnum Christi: alioquin nec ad
altar dei fieret eorum memoria, in communione Corporis Christi: for the souls
off the faithful deceased, be not severed from the Church, which is allredy
the kingdom of Christ, else there should be no memory kept for theime at the
altar, in the communion of the body of Christ.

By the force of this unity, what so ever is proffitably practiced in this
world one for a another, as prayer, allmose, fasting, Sacrifice, the same
things may and ought, by thexample of the Church, to be carefully and with
owte ceasing procured for the help of our friends, and Christian brytherne
departed. And Athanasius that great pillar, he by a meruelouse fit example
sets furthe, how the souls in another world, may have the benefits of
the Church or Christian people, derived down unto them, Quaest. ad Ant. 34.
and what sensible feel of release they have, when we desire God for theyme.
Quemadmodum cum in campo vinea virescit, and vinum in vase occlusum rebullit,
ac propemodum feruet: ita etiam sentimus, quod peccatoru^ animae diuinis
beneficijs incruentae Hostiae, and gratiarum actionis pro ipsis habitae,
gaudeant: vt idem solus nouit and ordinat deus noster, The communion expressed
betvvixte the live and the dead, by the natural agreement betwixt the vine
in the field and the wine in the vessel.
qui in viuos and mortuos dominium exercet. As when the vine abroad in the
fyelde does spring and wax green, the wine salfely kept in barells at home,
doothe also work in it sellfe, and in a manner buyle: even so, as we judge,
the souls of sinners, through the benefit of the unbloody host, and
sacrifice of thanks gyuing done for theyme, may wax joyful and glad: as
the same Lord and God only knows how, and has ordained: who exercyseth
his might, upon the lyeue and the dead. See I pray you how he by the actio^ of
gods Church in the holy Mass, in which the unbloody host and oblation is
bestowed, has found some way, of cariyng down the benefit of Christ's
passion, upon the members of his body benethe. And though sum have wickedly
sought, utterly to break the band of peace betwixt theyme and us, as they have
cursedly shaken thunytie of the living amongst theimeselues, yet their
moother Christ's spouse, acknouledgeth her own children stille: she seethe by
the spirit of god (whereby she seethe all truth) the sorrow of her dearest,
so far out of sight, but never out of mind, she in a manner feels a part
of her own body in pain. And can not otherwise do, but by all possible
means and approved ways, assay Gods mercy for their delivery. And this
natural compassion of the Church, passes through every membre thereof, and
ought to move every man, by the law of nature, to procure as much help as he
may.

And so much the more, do we owe this natural duty unto theyme, because they
now ca^ not help them selves, being out of the state of deserving, and place
of well working, only abiding gods mercy, in the sore sufferance of pains
intolerable. They theime selves, as yet your brethern, and a portion of your
body, require to be partakers of your benefits. They feel ease of every
prayer: your allmose quenshethe their heat, your fasting releaseth their
pain: your sacrifice wipethe their sins and sores: so strong is the
communion of sanctes, that, what so ever you do that is acceptable, it
isshuethe abunda^tly down to theyme. Only he that is cut of from this happy
society, has no compassion of theime, nor feelethe not how they are knitt
unto us, by love and unity of one head, and one body. You shall hear his
unnatural, and worse then heathen words: Dum mortuos a nostro contubernio
subduxit dominus, Call. inst.
nullum nobis cum illis reliquit commercium, ac ne illis quidem nobiscum. When
the Lord has taken the dead owte of our company, he has dispatched us of al
intermedleyng with theime, or they with us. This man was borne to break the
band of unity, which he hated both in the live and dead. By whose means it
is now comde to pass, that those which of reason might clame our aid, are
unnaturally disapointed of al such remedies, whereby any conforte might to
theyme arise. Such lack of compassion is driven into our heads, that we
feel not the woe of our own fellows, our kin, our brethern, and our own
members. It is a thousand year and more, since a holy father, not having hallfe
the cause that we now have, yet noted the peoples lack of compassion
toward the departed, Ad frat in herem. 44,
in these words. They that lie in torment intolerable, cry out for succoure,
and few there be, that make answer: they woefully caul, but there is none to
comfort theyme. O Brethren what a kind of cruellty is this? O how much
inhumanity is this? those that in their liefe time suffered much sorrow for
our sakes, now cry again for our aid, and we regard theyme not. Lo how the
sick caules, and the physicians are at hand: the hog gronethe, and the
whole heard grontleth with all: the poor ass fallethe, and every man helps
him up in have: but the faithful alone caulethe, in his grievous torments,
and there is none that answers. Lo our unkindness (says this doctor) and
lo our lack of compassion.

But because all this forgetfullnesse, coommethe by the wicked suggestio^ of
these late deuelishe opinions, which maynteyne that the prayers of the living,
or their works, do not extend to the dead in Christ: therefore, for the
destruction of this unkind haeresy, and planting in our hearts with the
truethe, the feeling of our howsholde fellows sores, I shall prove that in all
times, as well of nature, as the law and gospel, the faithful men have ever
joined in all their prayers and acceptable works, the souls departed: as
unto whom, by right of their communion and fellowship in faith, the relief
of gods grace and Christ's merits do apperteine. Therefore, this once
declared, let us except theime from no painful work of the living, nor
charitable deed, nor good prayer, nor sacrifice, nor tears, no nor from the
inward doloure nor love of man's heart. Learn to know what it is to be in a
common body, and thowe shallte streght perciue, that the least motion of thy
mind, sturred by gods grace, shall be carried to the relief of that part
which thou pitied, and most intended.

What the Church of God has ever principally practiced for the souls
departed, by the vvarraunt of holy scripture: with the defense of the
Machabees holy history, against the heretics of our time.

Cap. 3.
But amongst so many means of help, Gregori. in epist. ad Bonifa.
these have been ever counted most sovereign: Sacrifice, prayers, almose, and
by example of scripture most commended. Though fasting added unto any of
theime, has singular strength in this case, and ever was joined in all
ernest suit, made to god for our selves or other. We can not better begin to
show the practice hereof, then at that scripture, which sufficiently commends
at once, al three: written in the second book of Machabies in these words:
Cap. 12.
Judas hortabatur populum conseruare se sine peccato, sub oculis videntes quae
facta sunt pro peccatis eorum qui postrati sunt. Et facta collatione, duodecim
millia drachmas argenti misit Ierosolimam offerri pro peccatis mortuorum
sacrificium, been and religiose de resurrectione cogitans: (nisi enim eos qui
ceciderant resurecturos speraret, superfluum videretur and vanum orare pro
mortuis) and quia considerabat quod hi qui cum pietate dormitionem acceperant,
optimam haberent repositam gratiam. Sancta ergo and salubris est cogitatio, pro
defunctis exorare, vt a peccatis soluantur. The valiant man Judas, exhorted
the people to keep theime selves from sin, having before their eyes, what
was faulen for the offensies of theime that were slain. And a common gathering
being made, he sent, xij thousand pieces of silver to Jerusalem, to offer for
the sins of those that were departed, a Sacrifice: being well and religiously
minded, concerning the resurrection: for except he had suerly trusted, that
such as were slain should arise again, it might have been counted vain and
superfluouse to pray for the dead. But because he did well consider, that
such as in piety received their sleep, had grace and favor laid up for
them, therefore it is a holy and proffitable meaning to pray for the dead,
that they may be assoyled of their sins. So far the Author of the history
speaks: setting fourth most evidently, the notable piety of Judas in
exhorting theime to releue the departed, the like liberal allmose of the
people, the prayers there in the camp, and the sacrifice at Jerusalem
celebrated for the same purpose. In all which doing, the scripture much
praysethe that worthy zele of Judas, as a thing both proffitable to the
departed toward the remission of their offensies, and no less agreeing to
that his especyall hope off the resurrection to coom: counting it a folly to
pray for theyme, of whose resurrection we are not assured. Whereby, I can not
tell whether a man may well gether, that such as deny the fellowship of the live
with the dead, or condemn prayers made for theyme, steadfastly believe not the
resurrection. And in deed if we note well, Take heed.
we shall find that the prayers for the dead have been ever taken both as an
argument to prove, and as a protestation of the faithful, to show their mind
and faith, concerning the resurrection. So did Epiphanius that holy father,
make confession of the churches faith for the resurrection, and immortality of
the soul, by the praying for the departed, and joining theime to the partaking
of the works of the live. Hi qui decesserunt viuunt (says he) and no^ sunt
nulli, In heresi Aerij.
sed sunt, and viuunt apud Deum, and spes est orantibus pro fratribus, velut
qui in peregrinatione sint. those which be deceased do yet live, and are not by
their departure hense faullen to be nothing, but they have their being, and
yet do live before God: and there is great hope to their orators or beadsmen,
praying for theyme: as for such that be in their pilgramage. So says
Damasce, In oratione pro defunct
that by supplication for the souls, resurrectionis spes solidatur, the hope
of resurrection is established. And therefore Dionisius the ancient in his
mystical prayer and sacrifice for the departed, Ecclesiast. Hierrarch Cap. 7.
declarethe that there was a minister that did solemnly recyte certain
placyes owte of scripture, for to confirm the hope of resurrection. So that
this practice of the faith full has not only been ever accounted a plain
truethe, but it has been a grownd and a princyple to confirm the article of
resurrection and immortalitye of the soul. And therefore the fact of Judas, is
with such commendacion mentioned in the scripture. For in those days the
haeresie of the Saduces deniing the refurrection and the lyefe to coom (as
Josephus writes) began to take great houlde amongst the Jews, Antiq. l. 13
Cap. 8.
about bishop Ionathas his time: in which time of diversity, that true beleuer
thought to make plain protestation of his faith, by his notable fact.

And now I must needs be boulde to tell these enemies of our communion, that
in acknouledging theime selves to have nothing to do with the souls departed,
they are at the next door by, to deny the immortality, and to term theyme
dead souls as Vigilantius did. Hieron. con. vig.
Whom Gods Church very conformably to Christ's calling, and fittly for the
protesting the common faith, names, Dormientes in signo pacis, Prayers for the
departed agreeith to our faith of the resurrection and immortality.
Those that sleep in the sign of peace: and the named scripture, for the same
cause, callethe theime men a sleep in piety. Well, if their denial of
prayers for the deceased, grow so far as the utter impugning of Christian
hope for the life everlasting, and so with purgatory, take away hell and
heaven together, as the Sadduces did, (which God of his might turn from
theime) but if they do, because there is such affinity betwixt both their
teachings: and this of theires, may seem allwaies to have been joined to that
extreme faulshod of the others, then shall Gods Church stille protest the
faith of her children, by prayers and practice for the dead, both by the
example of the fathers in Christ's Church under the gospel, and by the fact
of worthy Judas in the law before.

But now their answer must be here, that this book by which I have urged
theime so far, shall be no scripture. And this is the isshue of haeresye lo.
These me^ that lightely writhe and wreaste Gods word, Heretics deny
scriptures.
from all true meaning to the maintenance of their matter, being forther
charged by evidence of the words, when other convenient shifte can not be
found, they are driven, to refuse utterly the sacred canonical scripture of
God: for notwithstanding their perpetual bragges of scripture, yet there can
no scripture houlde theime, but they will either find a fond shifte to lowse
it, or else a shameful stoutnes utterly to brast and break it. They first
seek by suttelty to vnfasten the bond of Gods truth, which is every way
so enwrapped with the testimonies of holy scripture, the^ as they can not
work by wiles, they bouldely brast the bands in sonder. Thus when for
misconstruing of this plane assertion of the book of Machabeis, they can
convey no fit meaning, they are driven to hard shifts and unseemly, to deny
the whole book to be scripture, and therefore in matters of quaestion, of no
authority. In which point, the authority of the Jews mouethe theime more,
in denying the books to be in the cano^ of gods scripture, then the decree
of the holy Church for the approving of the same to be scripture. But S.
Hierom, though he confess the Jews not to allow theime, In prol. match.
Though against a Jew or an heretic they could not prove any article of
faith nether then nor now, by them. Ca. 48.
yet is boulde to reckon theyme amongst the books of the holy histories: not
measuring their authority by the canon of the Haebrues, but by the ruele of
Christian counsels. The Canons of the Apostles will chaleng theyme from the
Jews and haeretikes, to be scripture stille: Innocentius the first, in his
rehersall of divine books, noombrethe these of the histories of the Machabees
also: the council of Carthage the third, authorisheth theime, S. Augustine in
his books. Ca. 47.
De doctrina Christiana, Li. 2. Cap.
numbering all canonical scriptures, with the rest recites these also. Off
which books in the xviij, Cap. 36.
of the City of God, he thus forther testifiethe, Ab hoc tempore apud Iudaeos
restituto templo, non reges sed principes fuerunt vsque ad Aristobulum: quorum
supputatio temporum, non in scripturis sanctis quae Canonicae appellantur, sed
in alijs inuenitur, in quibus sunt and Machabaeorum libri, quos non Iudaei, sed
Ecclesia pro Canonicis habet. From this time (he meanethe after the history of
Esdras) there was no kings, butt chief governors, after the restitution and
repair of the temple, till Aristo^ulus time: of all which time there is no
chronikle nor count, in the scriptures which be Canonical, but in other that
be extant, we find that supplied: as in the books of Machabeis: which books,
allthoughe the Jews do not, yet the Church of God counts for canonical
scripture.

But what should we stand in this point: the whole Church of God and every
part or province thereof, every learned doctor and virtuous Christen man, has
received and allowed theime for scripture* the which constant and perpetual
judgment of the Church of Christ, if any man refuse, let him be aestemed an
Ethnike. Or because he defends the Jews authority against the determination
of Christ's Church, let him be at this time accounted for a Jew. And yet I
think he over shoots theime herein: for they confess the historye to be
true, allthough not holy scripture: nether have they found any such error
of doctrine therein contained, as he does.

And as for the ancient Christian writers, and famous doctors, they allege
even that place to prove the lawful prayer for Christian souls departed,
whereby these fellows take occasion to say it is no scripture at all. As godly
Damascenus, in these words. Scitis enim quid dicat scriptura, quomodo Judas
ille Machabaeus, in Syon, Ciuitate regis magni, vt cognouit populum sibi
subiectum a Palestinis hostibus occisum, and scrutatione facta, inuenta idola
in sinibus eorum, statim pro vnoquoque eorum ad dominum qui ad misericordiam
facilis and paratus est, munera propitiatoria obtulit, sane ob summam
religionem fraternamque charitatem, In lib. pro defunc.
in hoc facinore, vt in omnibus alijs, a diuinissima scriptura and magnificus
and admirabilis habebatur. You know (says he) what the scripture
reportethe, how that worthy Judas Machabaeus of Syon, the City of the great
king, after he understood certain of his subjects to have been slain of the
Palestines his enemies, and search being made, had found in thyire lappes,
idols, streght ways offered to God, who is much inclined to mercy, for every
of his souldiars so slain, propitiatory oblations* who suerly, for that act,
as proceeding off wonderful religion and brotherly love, and in all other
affairs, is of the holy writ aestemed mighty and marvelous.

Long before this writer, did sanct Augustine use the same book and text of
Machabeis, De eura pro mort. agenda.
to prove the prayers and sacrifice, for the departed in peace. In the book of
Machabes (says he) we read that sacrifice was offered for the dead. But if
it were in none of the oulde scriptures read at all, yet the authority of the
universal Church, which for this point is plain, were af no smaule force,
whereby it is provided, that in the prayers, which be made at the altar by the
pressed, to our lord god, the commemoration of the dead shall have their place.
Thus by these ancient authors, both the books be approved, the text it
felfe, for which our adversaries unworthily denied the book, alleged for the
same purpose, and the doctrine so sure, that if no scripture could be fowde,
it would bear out it self against all faulshod. But this doctor handles
Pelagius the haeretique, denyng the book of wisdom to be scripture, because
there was a sentence out of the fourth chapter thereof, brought against his
wicked doctrine, even as he should be: and as these wranglers in the like case
must be. The place well marked, shall serve our turn when so ever we hear
theime so impudently reiecte scriptures, because they impugn their haeresies,
which else should be as good scriptures as any book of the Bible, if they
either would make with theime or by any crafty coloring not plainly make
against theime. Thus he says. Augustines answer to Pelagius, denying
scripture for that it made against his haeresy.
Nec ideo liber sapientiae, qui tanta numerositate annorum legi meruit in
ecclesia Christi, pati debet iniuriam, quoniam resistit eis qui pro meritis
hominum falluntur: and rursus: omnibus hic liber tractatoribus anteponendus,
quoniam sibi eum anteposuerunt etia^ te^poribus apostoloru^ proximi, egregij
tractatores: qui eu^ teste^ adhibe^tes, nihil se adhibere nisi diuinum
testimonium crediderunt: in english thus. It is no reason that the book of
wisdom, which so many worlds together has been worthy the reading in the
Church of Christ, should now receive such wrong at our hands, because it
plainly resists these fellows, that exalt man's merits (above gods
grace) And again, this book is of more authority then all thexpositours in
the world: for the noble writers hard by the apostles time, did much prefer
this book before theyme selves, who alleging the testimony of that scripture,
doubted not, but they used thereby, the witness of gods holy word. Even so
must we tell our masters, that it were plain wrong, to discredet the history
of the Machabies, which has been in our Bible ever sith Christ's time for
holy scripture, because it has an evident testimony against their faulse
belief, concerning the state of the souls departed: which book, is not only
better to be believed then all Caluins faulse gloses, but of more authority
then all holy expositors. Owte of which book, both S. Augustine and others
many, have used proof of their matters, as of the testimony of sacred and
holy scripture.

But our aduersarye learned not this practice of Pelagius only, for it is an
oulder sore, and a common sickness to al deuisers of deulishe doctrine: as the
skyllfull in the Churchies affairs may acknouledge. For sum there were, that
other wise could not vphoulde haeresy, but by the utter denial of all the oulde
Testament: as Carpocrates, Ceuerus, Manicheus. Augusti. de haeresib. 24. haeres
Tertul. de praescrip. Iren. cap. 26. libr. 1. Eusebius. eccles. histor. libr. 4.
De haeresi. ad quod vult deum 30. heresi.
But Marcion and Cerdon reject al together, saving Lukes gospel. Now
Cerinthus, and Ebion, make count of none of all the evangelical histories,
but the gospel of Matthewe. Cerinthus again and Seuerus, would have robbed
the church of the acts of thapostles. A sect called Alogiani, do refuse the
gospel of S. John, with thapocalipse. Martine, Illiricus, Calvin, and their
companions, that no man, being but an haeretique, should ever out prick
theime, will shoulder with the proudest, and lift out of our bibles the books
of Machabies, with S. James Epistle, and more when more need requirethe. The
which epistle, as also the epistles of John and Judas, were once doubted of,
not as containing any matter, whereof, the truethe was uncertain, but as books
not known to be of like force as canonical scripture in the impugning of
haeresies, or confirming articles of belefe: as al works be, til gods Church
have published their authority, The Churches use in confi^matio^ or
publishing off the canonical scripture.
and declared all things in theime contained to be of the same credet that the
spirit of god is, and of gospel like truethe. And by that authority of the
church what book so ever be allowed, though it was not so taken before, yet
now we must needs accept it, sicut vere est verbum dei, as the very word of
God. And so be these canonical epistles, and books of machabaeis, as before
is declared. Here now every man may learn, that it is a very dangerous
matter to give less creditt to any of these books, or waver in any point of
faith written in theime, for such fellows judgments, that now amongst
theime, have left us nether oulde nor new Testament. Such stubborn
bowldenesse, hadd these wilful men in manteynaunce of mischeuouse doctrine.
Whose open impudency, was counted handsome conueyaunce of their scholars and
adherents, which were very many, notwithstanding the catholic Christian men in
all agies both meruailed, and lamented thiere blyndnes. And yet doubtless it
is not much to be woondered at, to see that man flatly forsake the scripture of
God, who is not abashed, to refuse and condemn that sense and understanding
of the scripture, which the whole church with all her learned me^ have ever
allowed, and counted most holy. Well by the strength of this pillare we have
challenged and saved hitherto, for all the barking of bandogges, the scripture
of God, with the knoune meaning thereof. And so I trust we shall do stille,
from the new adversaries, by the assured promise of thassistance of Gods
holy spirit, which shall lead us not only to the true canonical scriptures,
with the sense of the same: but also gyde us in all truth, necessary for our
salvation.

Let every man therefore here take heed, how he doubtethe of the known and
certain sense, that the Church of Christ, by decree of council or consent of
doctors, applies to any scripture: least by mistrusting the said sense, he go
forward unadvisedly from open denial of the common, A necessary warning-
to fownde a private meaning of his own: in the stubborn defense whereof, when
he shall against the truethe malipertly stand, he goes vnloockely forward,
and at the^d blasphemously reiectethe the blessed word, and sacred scripture
of God: as we have proved the ancient enemies of truethe, to have done: and as
in these new sect masters we may to our great dolor, see. Yet lo, eue^ these
are they that in all agyes, as Vincentius says, fly in their taulke and
teachinge, over the law, the prophets, the psalms, the gospel. That cry
out of pottes and pulpittes, nothing but gods word, the book of the lord,
the testament of Jesus, Christ, Paul, scripture, as it may be supposed, and as
in the end it is proved, to drive owte of doors. Paul, scripture, Testament,
and Christ too: and not to bring in to the peoples heads or hearts, the fear
and love of God, the holsom precepts of Paul's heavenly preachinge, nor the
true meaning of any scripture. Who being urged, will rather credet a
minstrelles ballat, then the Machabeis, or best book in the bible.

But now you may see, that whiles these me^ thought to save their credets, by
miscredetting the scripture, thy have wroght so wiesely, that they have lost
their own credets, both in this point, and in all other for ever. And as they
hoped by denial of scripture, too cloak their error, they have won to
theime selves the property of an haeretike, by open show of their own folly.

That the funeralles of the Patriarchs, both in the law of nature, and
Moses, and Christ, had practice in theime for the relief of the souls
departed.

Cap. 4.
Now therefore, I have great hope to trust so much of all studiouse readers,
for that love which they bear unto truethe, that they will give credet to the
manifest words off scriptur, which so plainly do set forth, not only the
benefit that arisethe to the departed by prayers, but also witness, that
there was practice at Jerusalem by oblation and sacrifice for the same
purpose, by order of their law. Judas followed the order of the Church and
not, praescribed to the Church, any new sacrifice or caeremony.
For otherwise, would that good knight so higly commended, never have praesumed
to bring in, any superstiouse new usage contrary to the rule of that church:
nether would the priests at Jerusalem have offered for the dead with out
contradiction, under the government, of so good a bishop: nether would the
Author of the book, upon so light a beginning have praised the fact: or
otherwise made mention of it, then as of a new divise of the same man. Whom I
doubt not therefore, rather to have followed the continual coostom of the
Church, then to have invented any new unknown order of his own.

Which may well appear at this day, by the ceremonies and sacrificies of the
owlde law, De vniuersa indeoru^ fide. recitatura Grappero in lib. de Eucharist.
yet superstiously observed amongst the dispersed Jews: where, emo^gest other
rites of their law, they offer and make solemn supplication for the souls
departed: as Antonius Margarita, a Jew that forsook his profession, and became
Christian, witnesses in a book that he made of the faith of the Jews. Where
he reportethe owte of their sacrifice, this prayer. Deus Animarum fidelium
recordetur, and in paradisum cum Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, alijsque
integerrimis sanctis collocet: that is: Lord remember the faithful souls, and
place theyme in paradise with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and other thy perfect
sanctes and holy men. And for that purpose they have a memorial book, as he
says, owte of which the names of the departed are yearly recyted. But we much
need not his report herin: for that may well appear to have been used long
before Judas Machabeus his days.

For what other thing does that long mourning, fasting, charitable releuing
of the poor, and other common afflictions which men took upon theime, at the
obites of their friends and fathers, as well in the law of nature, as
afterward continually in Moses time, what else can they mean but perpetual
practice for the rest of their souls? Genes. 23.
Look how religiously Abraham celebrated the rites of his wives funeral,
which the scripture calls Officium funeris, the office of the Burial, which
he fullfilled by weeping and lamentation made over the corpse.

Nether can I think, that the office and just funerals stoude in mourning or
sorowing with out praying, or other remedies of relief toward the departed,
seeing especially that office off mourning, by solemn dirigies, as we now
term them, had place, time, and order, by rule appointed to be executed: yea
and were not ended by many days together, nor at one time another. As it
appears that Joseph and his brethern, Gene. 50.
executed their fathers funerals, first forty days in Aegipte, and then in
their own coontry, celebrabant exequias says the text, seven days
together. So the children of Israel celebrated Moses obsequies, Deuteronomy. 34.
with thirty days solemn mourning, in the downs of Moab. Not by that
weeping which proceeds of private affection toward a man's friend, for that
can not be limited, nor yet prescribed by rule, as all these solemn dirigies
were. But questionless this office contained for the relieffe of the deceased,
almose, prayer, fastes, and tears: al which may well be termed mourning songs,
or weeping over the dead, Ecclesi. 22.
for that time most convenient. Of which the wise man gives this precept,
Super mortuu^ plora, Weep over the departed.

And that thowe may well perceive, these public rites of solemn dirigies, to
perteine properly to the due help of those, for whom they be exercised, Super
obit Theod.
S. Ambrose doubts not to affirm, that of those burialls in the law of
nature, the necessary observation of our Christian days, months, and years
minds kept for the dead, had their beginning: saying thus in his funeral
sermon, made the fourtith day solemnly kept, for the memory of the noble
Emperor Theodosius, Eius Principis and proxime conclamauimus obitum, and nunc
quadragesimum celebramus, assistente sacris altaribus Honorio principe, quia
sicut sanctus Joseph, patri suo Jacob quadraginta diebus humationis officia
detulit, ita and hic Theodosio patri iusta persoluit: and quia alij tertiu^ and
trigesimu^, alij septimum and quadragesimum obseruare consueuerunt, quid doceat
lectio consideremus: defuncto inquit Jacob praecepit Joseph pueris sepultoribus
vt sepelirent eum, and repleti sunt ei quadraginta dies. Haec ergo sequenda
solemnitas quam praescribit lectio. Bonus itaque Joseph, qui formam pio muneri
dedit, and cae. We kept of late the day of this noble kings burial, And now
again we celebrate his fourtithe days mind, the prince Honorius his son,
assisting us before the holy altares: for as holy Joseph bestowed upon his
fathers funeral forty days duty, even so does this prince procure his
fathers obsequies. And because sum observe the third day and the thirtithe,
other keep customably the vij. and the fourtith, let us look upon the text:
which reads thus: Jacob being departed, Joseph commands the prouisours of
the sepulture, to bury him: and so they did, and made up full forty days in
that obite, this solemnly then must we follow, praescribed by the scripture.
Good was this Joseph, that first gave us the form and fashion of so holy a
function. By these words we see the antiquity of our Christian dirigies, and
diversity of days, as yet it is used in mounthes or twelue-mounthes minds,
to have isshued down from S. Ambrose time to ours, from the law of nature by
the patriarchs praescription, to his days: not by mourning and mumchaunse as
the burial of Geneuas book appoints, Geneua book appoints a still burial
but at the holy altares these obites were kept, as with devout prayers, and
sacrifice. Whereof in better place, I shall speak more anon. He alludeth
there also, to our dilexi: and other psalms which we yett singe in Gods
Church, over the departed.

But in the second book of the kings, the example of the holy king David is a
plain proof that they fasted also for the deceased. Cap. 1.
Apprehendens David vestimenta sua, scidit: omnesque viri qui cum eo erant: and
planxerunt, Fasting for the departed.
and ieiunauerunt vsque ad vesperam super Saul and Jonathan filium eius, and
super populum, and super domum Israel, eo quod corruissent gladio. And David
taking hold of his garments tore theime: and so did the men with him, and
they houled wept and fasted upon Saul and Ionathas his son, with the residew
of Gods people, that there were slain. Now what other thing did David here
and his people, but that which Judas Machabeus did afterward, for the like
death of his souldiars? I trow there was no fasting to be found over any
manner a person, lieue or dead, for thy selue, or other, in the whole course of
scripture, but it was to obtain mercy at Gods hand, toward the party for
whom thowe did it. 2. Reg. 12.
So did this same holy prophet weep, fast, lie on the ground, and change
apparel, for his child, which he begat of vrias wife, when he lay at the point
of death, stricken by Gods hand for the poonisheme^t of his fathers fault.
The which he did, as he protests him self, to turn the angry sentence of
god if it might be, and recover the child again. But as soon as the child
was gone, he brake of his long fast, giving his friends to weete, that he
tormented not him self so, of only natural compassion toward the child, or
inordinate love, as they thought, but to obtain his purpose by such bitter
tears, and fasting, at Gods hands, for the childs recovery,

Fasting then over any man, and such solemn mourning, is nothing else, but an
effectual asking of mercy, for whom so ever it be done. As more plainly it
is yet declared, in the burial off Saul and Ionathas before said, celebrated
by the Galadites and Saules souldiars: Where, as the scripture says, Prim^.
Reg. 31.
after they had buried their bodies and bones, they fasted vij. days. Et
ieiunauerunt septem diebus. For no other cause, but thereby effectually to ask
pardon of their offensies. There can I am sure be no reasonable occasion of
their fasting alleged of no man, but that. Which the honorable Bid
testifies for us in these words. Recte et ad literam pro mortuis vt ad
requiem peruenire valiant septem diebus ieiunatur, quia post sex huius mundi
aetates, in quibus in carne laboramus, septima est in illo saeculo aetas
requietionis animarum carne exutarum, in qua beatae tempus illud glorificum,
quando resurgere mereantur expectant. Duly and according to the letter, they
fasted (says he) for the departed, seven days together, to obteinne rest for
them: because after the six agies of the world, in which we travel in
flesh, the seventh age is looked for in that world, when the souls be loosed
from their bodies, when the blessed and happy sort, shall continually be in
expectation of the gloriouse time, by receiving their bodies in the
resurrection again.

And that charitable relife of the poor, by open almose and doles, was also
practiced for the welthe of the departed in the obittes of oulde time, the
scripture it sellfe in the.iiij. chapter of Tobie Tobiae. 4.
makes mention, by report of that godly commandment, that the good old
father gave is son herin: Panem tuum cum esurientibus comede, and de
vestimentis tuis nudos tege. Panem tuum and vinum tuu^ super sepulturam iusti
constitue, and noli ex eo manducare and bibere cum peccatoribus. Eat thy
bread with the hongry and needy, and cover with thy clothes the naked. Set
thy bread and wine upon the sepulture of the virtuous and make not the sinful
partaker thereof, which words off exhortation can have no other sense, but
that, as before in the same place, he gave his son in charge to bestow upon al
me^ according to his hability, for that there was hope to all charitable almose
gyuers of gods mercy, so now he warns him to feed the poor, and break
his bread to such especially, as should coom to the iustes and funerals of
the departed. He would never have put him in mind to have releaued the poor
at burialles, but for some commodity that might arise to the party deceased. for
otherwise his charity might have proffeted the needy at other times as well as
upon men's departure. Some took foolish occasion by this place, so set store
of meat upon the grave it self, where their father or friend was buried, Ser:
de cath. sancti Pet. Lir. super hunc locum
as though the dead had been desirous of corporal food. The which
superstitious error S. Augustine ernestly improueth.

Other some, made great feasts at the day of their friends death. But the
text is plain, it was the needy and good people that were at those solemn
exequies, or other wise by their prayers might be profitably present in the
days of memories houlde^ for theime* which practice was not prescribed as a
new thing to the young Tobie, but it was moved and praised unto him, Tob. 12.
as a holy usage of other burialles in those days, and always before. Bona
est oration cu^ ieiunio and eleemosina: Prayer is profitable, says the holy
Raphel, when it is joined with fasting and almose: and therefore as the fathers
in their prayers for the dead, fasted, as we have proved, so now I doubt not
but almose shall cry for mercy at gods hand for the soul departed, upon
whose sepulture these things be charitably wroght. We have a notable example
in the acts of the apostles, of the force of almose with prayers, which wroght
life and procured mercy, even in the next world. For the benefit of faithful
works and holy prayers, will not be limited by the terms of this world: it
will have course down so far as the fellowship of this Christen society
reaches: the deuell and all his abettours can not stop the raze thereof. The
only show off certain cotes, with the request of the poor wydowes that
wore theime, made to Peter thapostle, Acto. 9.
turned Tabitha to life again after her departure: those garments given by her
when she was a lie^e, by the careful travel of her allmose folks, procured
relief in the world to coom. They warmed the backs of wydowes in earth
(says Emissenus) and the geuer hadd comforthe of theyme being gone from the
earth. Sermon. de initio quadrage.
It is good we should all learn here, that have received benefit of any man
in this liefe, with love and carefullnes, not only in this present world,
but most of all when our friend is departed, to represent unto god before his
altar and holy ministers, with sorrowful weeping and hearty prayer, the memory
of such things as we have received by way of allmose or love, at his hand.
It shall be a sovereign remedy for his infirmities, and thapprouedest way to
procure gods mercy that can be.

Thelders of the Jews, making ernest supplication to our savior, for the
Centurions servant lying in extremity, used the memory of that gentilmans
charitable acts in their church, as the rediest way to obtain grace and
favor at his hands. They cried owte together: Lucae. 7.
dignus est vt hoc illi praestes, diligit enim gentem nostram: and synagogam
ipse aedificauit nobis. Lord be gracious unto him, he is worthy that benefit:
for he louethe our nation, and has him self fownded a Sinagoge. And S.
Cypria^ says notably, that good works make a more effectual intercession
then good words, he speaks of the same Tabitha as folowethe. Ser. de Eleemos.
Circumsteterunt Petrum viduae flentes and rogantes, pallia, and tunicas, and
omnia illa quae prius sumpserant indumenta monstrantes: nec pro defuncta suis
vocibus, sed ipsius operibus deprecantes: the wydowes compassed Petre rownd
abowte, weeping and craving, howlding forth the clokes and cotes, and al
their wiedes which they had given theime before: not requesting for the good
wooman deceased so much by their words, as by her own good works. I pray
god we be not over careless in offering to allmighty god in these our
doolefull days, the inestimable benefits which we have received of our
forefathers, by the buylding of all our collegies, our oratoryes, churcheis,
and chappelles. They were fownded first, to procure gods mercy, they were
many years together in the minds and memoryes of their beadsmen, represented
before the face of God at his holy altar: they are now forgotten with most
men, and offered to God with tears almost off none. We should be much more
dilligent for our friends offensies doubtelesse, then the poor weemen were,
only for restore of there benefactors liefe ageine. And the force of prayers
and allmose workethe rather mercy in remission of sin, then favor for calling
to the life of this world any more. Therefore seeing we read expressly, that
prayers and almose have been proffitable to many, out of the state of our
present liefe, we can not deny but the works of the virtuous pass by gods
providence to the souls separated from their bodies, and work grace and
favor as the case and condition of the party requires.

The soul of Lazarus, whom our savior revived, was four days in the
place and state of the next world when Martha and Mary his sisters prayers,
procured his restore to the land of the living again. Which weemen I am
sure, were as ernest suitors for the rest of his soul, Joan. 11.
as for recovery of his personage: they wisshed Christ had been present in his
sickness, they were assured of his resurrection at the latter day, but being
stinking ripe, they thought our master would not presently call him up at
that turn: yet for his rest, we need not to doubt, but they made suit with
sighs and soroufull tears, every day. Who by custo^ of their contrye, as I
take it, kept solemn prayers for diverse days together, in certain seasons,
at the sepulcher: as the conjecture of Mary's fre^des, which came to comfort
her in heuines, may well declare unto us. For as she soudenly at her sisters
call brake from theime, they, knowing the usage of that solemn weeping at the
sepulcher of the departed, said one to another, quia vadit ad monumentum vt
ploret ibi. she is surely gone to his grave, there to weep. In which weeping,
kept as it were by course, order, and time, if our adversaries yet denie-to have
been used any prayers or words of request, then let theime make proof by
gods word, that they used nothing but unprofitable lamentatio^: which if it
be immoderate, 1. Tessal. Cap. 4.
has especial mistrust of the resurrection, as S. Paul declarethe, but joined
with prayers or almose, as before is proved, it has the lively hope, of the
life of those that sleep in peace.

And that to be the true mourning for the dead, S. Chrisostom witnesses with
me, both often else, and namely, upon the epistle to the Philippia^s thus:
Defleamus istos, Homil. 3.
iuuemus eos pro viribus, procuremus illis aliquid auxilij, modici quidem,
attamen iuuemus eos. quomodo quaue ratione? praecantes pro illis, adhortemur
and alios vt orent pro eis, pauperibusque indesinenter pro illis eleemosinas
demus: 4. Re. 19.
habet res ista non nihil consolationis: Audi quippe quid Deus dicat. protegam
ciuitatem istam propter me, and propter David seruum meum. si memoriae duntaxat
iusti tantum valuit, quando and opera pro tali fiunt, quid no^ poterunt? Let us
mourn and weep (says he) over the dead, and help theime according to our
habilytie: sumwhat let us succoure theime though it be never so smaule, yett
let us put to, our helping hands. But how and by what means? mary both our
selves praying for them, and moving others to do the like: yea and with out
ceasing let us bestow almose for theime. this is sumwhat confortable. For see
I pray you what God says: I will defend this city for mine own sake, and for
my servant David's sake. Truly if the only remembrance of a just man might
make so much with God, what may not charitable works done for the same
intent, obtain at his hand? This was the mourning meet for the Christian
burialles, as this noble father teaches us, and this and no other, was
practiced in the fathers funeralles in Christ's time and before. As in another
place, this same doctor ernestly corrects the use off vain mourning, or
outrageous costely and curiouse covering of the body buried. Homil. 84. in Ca.
20. Ian.
Cessemus quaeso ab hac insana diligentia, sed eam morientiu^ cura^ habeamus,
quae and nobis and illis conferat ad gloria^ dei. Largas pro his elemosinas
faciamus, mittamus eis pulcherrima viatica. Elemosina mortuos suscitauit,
quando circumsteterunt viduae ostendentes quae fecerat ipsis Dorcas. Cum ergo
moriendu^ sit, quisque funus sibi paret, persua deatque vt indigentibus aliquid
relinquat. Na^ si reges haeredes scribentes, familiaribus partem relinquunt in
pueroru^ cautionem, cu^ Christu^ cohaerede^ filijs tuis dimittis, intellige,
quantam tibi, and illis concilias beneuolentiam. Haec sunt funera pulcherrima
and remanentibus, and abeuntibus proficiunt: and caetera. For gods love,
says he, let us leave this vndiscrite and mad curiosity: and let us so
provide for the departed, that we may both help theyme and our selves to the
glory of God. Large almose must we give for theime, in so doing we shall send
unto theime, as you would say, a kind of necessary food and sustenaunce for
their souls. This has raised up the dead, when the widows stood rownd
about, making show of the garments that Dorcas made for theime. Therefore,
seeing dye we must, it were not amiss, that every man procured his own
funeral before hand, that is so say, by determination to leave sumwhat to the
poor and needy. For if mighty kings making their he ires, do bequeathe
sumwhat to their familiars, for the salfe prouiso of their successoures, As
prayers do protest the resurrection, so inordinate mourning shows the lack
of belief therein.
thowe may well understand, when thowe make Christ the copartener with thy
children, thou procurest thereby his mercy, both to theime, and thy sellfe. And
these be the right obittes, these shall be commodious to the living, and
proffitable to the deceased.

Again in another place, he arguethe that this inordinate mourning can not
stand with the steadfast belief of resurrection of the departed, which the
prayers of Gods Church, and the rites of Christian dirigies do plainly
protest, Homil. 32 in Cap. 9. Math.
and prove: these be his words. Cur post morte^ tuoru^ pauperes co^uocas? cur
presbyteros, vt pro eis velint orare obsecras? non ignoro te responsurum, vt
defunctus requiem adipiscatur, and vt propitium iudicem inueniat: his ergo de
rebus flendum atque vlulandum arbitraris? Non vides quam maxim ipsi repugnas?
In his time the priests were desired to pray for men's souls.
Why do thowe gather the poor people, to coom to thy friends burial? Why
desire thou the priests to pray for their souls? Thy answher I am shure
will be, that thowe do these things to provide for his rest, and to obtain
mercy and favor at his iudgies hands. Well then go too, what cause have thowe
to mourn or be wail his case? do thou not perceive that thowe art
contrary to thy self, in thy own fact? now all studiouse men may see, what
force the charity and allmose of faithful people ever had, especially toward
the dead: how little weeping auaylethe, how unlikely it is that the prescribed
days of the oulde funeralles in the law of nature or afterward, were spent in
mourning, with owte words or works for the departed: but namely how this
holy fathers sentence and mind fully sets fourth the meaning of Tobies
praecept, for setting his bread and drink upon the sepulchers, to be nothing
else but a calling together of the poor people, and feeding theime for the
benefit of the person departed: that not only they by earnest prayer, but he
by charitable works, might together obtain rest and mercy for his soul. And
here, the simple sort, and such as be ignorant off the force of almose, or
our fathers practice, for their years, being brought up in this sinful age
when virtue is defaced, A great decay of virtue in our time.
and the works of Christianitye scarce to be seen in a whole country: and
where they be, much merueled at, as things rare, or contemned as
unprofitable, or of the wicked condemned utterly, as superstitious and
ungodly: such good young me^ must look back a great way with me, to learn
their duties of the blessed times paste, that were wholly free from the
contagion off this pestilent waste in religion: even to those days, that our
adversaries confess, to have been holy and undefiled.

Man may be relieved after his departure, either by the almose which he gave
in his life time, or by that which is provided by his testament to be given
after his death, or else by that almose, which other men do bestow for
his souls sake, of their own gooddes.

Cap. 5.
ANd we fiend, the works of mercy and charity, to help the soul of man in
this life, toward remission of his sins, or else in the next world, for
release of pain due unto the same sins. Al which may be done two ways:
first, by thine own hands or appointment, living in this world, Lucae. 11.
and. 16. Dan. 4. Ec. 3. Job. 12.
which is the best, perfecteste, and surest means that may be: for that
pourgeth sins, procurethe mercy, makes friends in the day of dread,
cleansethe beforehand, staithe the soul from death, and lifts it up also
to liefe ever lasting.

Regard not here the ianglers, that will cry out on the, that man's works
must not praesume so far as to win heaven, or to pourge sins, lest they
intermeddle with Christ's work of redemption, and the office of only faith:
make no account of such corrupters of Christian conditions, live well, and
carefully follow these works off mercy so expressly commanded and commended
in the scriptures, keep the within the householde of the faithful, and thy
very good conversation in operibus bonis, shall refute their vain blastes,
and improve their idle faith. Jacob. 2.
Say but then unto theime by the words of S. James. Master Protestaunt, let
me have a sight of your only faith, with out good works: and here lo,
behoulde mine and spare not, by my good works. What religion so ever you be
of, I know not, but I would be off that religion, which the apostle calls,
religionem mundam and immaculatam, Jacob. 1.
The pure and unspotted religion: and that is (as he affirms) to viset the
fatherless, and succoure widows in their need. And then tell theyme
bouldely, that the Church of God has instructed the, that all works,
whereby man may procure help to him self or other, be the works of the
faithful, which have received that force by the grace and favor of God, and
be through Christ's blood so wattered, tempered, and qualyfied, that they may
deserve heaven and remission of sin.

Doubt not to tell them, that they have no sight in this darkness of haeresy, in
the ways of Gods wisdom: they have no feel nor taste of the force of his
death: they see not how grace prepares man's works: they can not reach in
their in fidelity, how wonderfully his death works in the sacraments: they
ca^ not atteine by any guess, how the deeds of a poor wrech, may be so framed
in the children of God, that, whereas of their own nature they are not hable
to procure any mercy, yet they now shall be counted of Christ him self sitting
in judgment, worthy of bless and life everlasting. Bid theime coom in, coom
in, and they shall feel with the in simplicity and obedience, that, which they
could not, owte of this society in the pride of contention, ever perceive. And
if they will not so do, let them perish alone. Turning then from them
thither where we were, let us practice mercy (as I said) in our own time, in
our health, when it shall be much meritorious, as proceeding not of necessity,
but of freedom and good will. And the^ after our departure, the
repraesentation of our charitable deeds, by such as received benefit thereby,
shall excedingly move God to mercy: as we see it did stir up the compassion
of his apostle, in the fullfilling of so strange a request. Wheruppon S.
Cyprian says, that almose delivers often from both the second death,
which is damnation: Sermon. de Eleemos.
and the first, which is of the body.

If thou yet chance to be negligent in the working of thine own salvation
when thou art in strenght and health: when over much carfulness of worldly
welthe hinders the remembrance of thy duty toward God, for all that, help
they self at the least in thy latter end: for though it had been much
better before, yet it is not evil now. I speak not for priests advantage,
(God is my judge) I am not of that rowme my self, and will not condemn my soul
for other. But I speak for pitye of the deceived people, for compassion of the
souls that lack the relief of so sovereign a remedy, for mine oune help,
and those that I so dearly love, against the day of our account. I speak it,
because I believe it, and I believe it, O that was a happy time.
because I find it practiced of those men, and in those days, when true
christianitye was yet fervent in Christ's blood, when the faith was undefiled,
and when works and faith ra^ne together, in the raze of man's life, ioyntely
without co^tentio^. The^ floorished this doctrine: and thowe shalt have
further taste of their usage for mine own discharge: we can not occupy our
pe^ne better. S. Chrisosto^ thus instructed his flock in this case. Citatur a
Dam.
Si adhuc in hac vita co^stitutus, omnia quibus animae tuae prodesse poteras,
been dispe^sare neglexisti, and vel ad call ce^ vitae tuae tuis ma^dasti, vt tua
tibi ipsi submitte^do erogent, bonisque operibus te adiuue^t (eleemosinis dico
and oblationibus) etia^ hac ratione saluatore^ co^ciliaueris: scribein tabulis,
and cu^ filijs cognatisque tuis haerede^ nomina and do minu^. Nulli aute^
viuentiu^ propterea occasione^ damus ne faciat eleemosinas, differendo vsque ad
morte^. If thowe in thine own time was over negligent in disposinge thy
gooddes for the proffet of thy soul, and yet at the very end, do at the
last charge thy fre^des or executors, that they will employ thy proper gooddes
for the relife of they self: and so help the with good works, that is to say
with allmose and oblation: even that way there is great hope thowe maiste
procure gods favor. write in thy will, that our Lord may be named a fellow
haeire with thy children and kinnesfolkes. Nevertheless, let no man take
occasion herby, to be slack in his life time, or to differr his almose and
charity till deaths approaching. This was the preaching of that doctors
days, this proceaded out of his goulden mouth, and this sounded out of every
pulpit. And surely if you knew his liefe and qualities, you would not take him
to be the priests proctor: of whose dignity as he wrote much, so where he
fownde any vicious, he pounished sore. But he was a true proctor of our
souls. Chrisostom was no crauer perdye, nor Christ nether, though they warn
us to make friends by mammon for our own salvation. They ask not much: Marci.
12. Matt. 10.
they thrust out no inhaeretours: it was but a myte that wanne the poor wydowe
that praise, a cup of could water, where more habilitye wants, shall win
heaven at the end. This the^ is the benefit of almose given in the time of
man's life, or otherwise by his appointment, of his own gooddes, after his
departure: both which, procure mercy as well by the deed it self, as by the
prayers of those to whom that charity apperteined.

Now there is an other way of relief by almose of other men, which for ^oue
and pitye they bestow upon the ^oore, that the soul hense departed, ^ay
through their charity receive ^omforte. And this contains a double work
of mercy, principally toward the deceased, for whom it was ge^en: and then
toward the needy that received praesent benefit thereby: and it singularely
redoundeth to the spiritual gain both of the geuer, and the person for whose
sake it is given. And this kind of almose is it, which good Tobie did co^me^d
unto his son, being so much more meritorious to the person that procures
it, the^ the other which we spoke of before, The perfectest kind of almose.
because it is grounded not only of love toward a man's own proper person,
but reaches to the benefit of our neighbor, by the singular gift of
co^passio^, and tender love that we bear eue^ toward them which ca^ nether
help us, nor the^ selves. It is nothing else but a wing of prayer, and a toke^
of ernest suit for the party on whom it is practiced, which no man will use
for his neighbors good, that list not do it before in his own behalf. This
effectual supplication by words and works together, is as strange now a
days in our country, either for the living or the departed, either in our own
lackes, or in other men's necessities, as it was common in oulde time, Tob. 12.
and commended in the scripture. Bona est oration cum ieiunio and eleemosina:
Prayer is sovereign, joined with almose and fasting: the which being done
either for the live or dead, is with speed by angels ministry, carried into
into heaven. For I take it (and so the text excedingly bears) that the
bitter prayers which thaungel so commended in that good father, and which had
such good succcesse, was made in the funerals of the faithefull departed.
Qua^do orabas cu^ lachrimis (says Raphael) and sepeliebas mortuos, and cae.
Ego obtuli oratione^ tua^ Domino. Toby: when thowe with tears prayed and buried
the dead, I offered up thy prayers to our Lord God. he seems to term
that, prayers with weeping, which in other placies of scripture is called,
mourning over the dead. And weying the words with out affection, it must
needs be granted that the just funerals had and required prayers with
weeping, and that the angels of God do speedely offer such effectual request
up to the presens of the Majesty, as well to the relief of the dead, as to
the conforte of the procurer. But I would be loathe to descant upon gods word
for the beating out of any new doctrine or devised meaning, or to avouch a
sense not knoune to the time of persect spring in religion. Therefore to go
surely to work, I will look about me for example of this good Tobies almose.
and prayers for the poor departed souls, that we may learn withal, not
only to be beneficial to our selves, but to our neghboures both a live and
dead. All thantiquitye here offer to take my part in so good and so known a
quarrel. I may have as many as I will, and whom I will. such therefore I do
search for, as be plainest for testimony of open doles, and relief off the
poor in the burials of Christian people. That not only one man's assertion,
but also the plain practice of the church of God may bear down
thaduersaries bouldnes: and the more ancient the better. Origin then shall
help us to the usage of his time and church. li. 3. in Job
He writes thus. Celebramus diem mortis, quia non moriuntur hi qui mori
videntur. Celebramus nimirum, religiosos cum sacerdotibus conuocantes, fideles
vna cum clero, inuitantes adhuc egenos and pauperes, pupillos, and viduas
saturantes, vt fiat festiuitas nostrain memoria^ requiei defunctis animabus and
cae. We solemnly keep the day of our friends departure, because they be not
dead which appear unto us to dye. And this is our way of celebrating their
funerals. We gather the religiouse men and priests, the faithful people with
the cleargye. we inuit also the poor, the needy, and the fatherless with
the widows: and we fille their bealies, that the memorial of their rest may
be kept solemnly. But Tobies scholare may learn his duty yet better, of the
Apostles own scholare S. Clement: In compe^d. and epistolae ad Jacob fratrem
domini.
who once or twice has these words in effect: To viset the sick, to bury the
dead, to keep their obittes, to pray and give almose for theime is
commendable: upon whose words I will not nowestande, because by and by, other
occasion must drive me to repeat, for the worthynes of the man and the weight
of his testimony, more plain evidence of his church and time. If thou here
yet doubt how the prayer, work, or sacrifice, of one man a lieue may help a
another departed, remember always what I said in the beginning, for the knott
of our brotherhood and society in one body and under one head: and thowe
shalt not wonder how one membre by compassion may help and relieve another.
Job. 1. and 2.
And there with, for example, consider how the sacrifice of Job and daily
almose were auayleable for the misdeedes of his children, and appeaced gods
wrath toward his importunate friends. And though his benefit went only
then amongst the living in this world, nether his children nor friends at
that time departed, yet the case of the living emo^gest theime selves
differs nothing herin, from the communion and felouship which the departed in
Christ, has with the living in earth. And therefore I bring thexample of Job
emo^gest many like in scripture, for that S. Chrisostom fitly inducethe the
same, to prove the partakyng of good works to be common as well betwixt the
live and dead, as of the living amongst theime selves. These be his words
in english. Let us help our brethren departed, keeping a memory of theime:
In 15. cap. 1. cor. Homil. 14.
For if the oblation of Job pourged his children, why doubtest thou of the
solace that may arise by our offeringes unto such as be asleape in Christ?
seeing God is pleased with some, for other men's sakes. It was so known a
truethe in that time, that they never putt difference nor doubt, any more of
the mutual help of the live toward the dead, then they did for that
benefit which in Christ's Church one man may houlde of a another.

But that I may serve not only the turn of truth, but with plainnes also
enstruct the unlearned, and with store satisfy the godly greediness of sum,
that list see more for the conforte of their conscience, I will report one
notable place for the declaration of charities force even toward the
deceased, Ex Damasceno pro defunctis
out of Gregory Nissen of the greek church, and another out of Athanasius the
great: both directly touching the practice of good Tobie in compassion off
the dead. Thus says Gregory. Dicitur been, quod si qui hinc non praemissis
bonis migrauerint, and postea a familiaribus neglecta oblatis reliquijs
sarciantur, imputari opus perinde ac ab eis factum fuerit, est enim and haec
voluntas benignissimi Domini, vt cre aturae quae ad salute^ petuntur, sic
peta^tur and distribuantur: et vt exoretur non solu^ qua^do quis pro salute
propria est anxius, sed and quando pro proximo aliquid operatur: in english. It
is very well said, that if any depart this life, his gooddes by almose being
not send to god before him, and yet afterward the matter by his friends in the
offering up the residewe, be amended, that his friends fact shall stand and
be reputed as his own work. For so has God of his mercy ordained, that his
creatures, by use whereof life and salvation may be obtained, should so be
procured, and in this order disposed, that man should not only obtain his
request in the careful study of his oune salvation, butt also when be well
works for his friend or neighbor.

Here may we well perciue, Psalm. 24.
that all the ways of our Lord be mercy and truth. And that he in a manner
releauethe of his own accord our miseries, both here and in the next life,
that there may be no damnation to such as be in Christ Jesus: for whose sakes
he turnethe these base creatures of man's service in this life, to the use of
his pardon and salvation in the life to coom: he acceptethe the good will and
travel of other, for the help of theyme which can not relieve theime selves:
And, which is the property of a most merciful father, where he loves he he
will raise the heart of sum good intercessor, that by patronage and prayers of
sum Just Job, his fury may cease by his own procurement. But how this mutual
work of mercy is current through the members of our common body and how
being practiced by one, it seruethe before God for a another, either in this
lyefe or the next, our holy father Athanasius by his authority might well be a
proof sufficient: but he is content to declare it unto us by an example: and
such an example, that beside the matter, may further put us in remembrance of
the devotion of our elders in an other point, which the studious reader may
mark by the way: thus the^ he says. Quod in pauperes collocatur beneficiu^,
omnis bonae retributionis est augmentu^. Itaque pro defuncto oblaturus eundem
serves scopu^, que^ qui pro paruulo filio adhuc imbecillo and infa^te, interim
du^ puer aegrotat, affert cera^, oleu^, and thimiama, in templum Domini magna
fide, and accendit pueri nomine, neque enim puer hoc faceret, cu^ ignoret
diuinae regenerationis co^stitutiones. Sic cogitet etia^ eu^, qui in dn^o
morte^ obijt, et posse et offerre cera^, oleu^, and caetera quae in
redemptionem offerri solent. The benefit bestowed upon the poor is a
sovereign ground of Gods rewarding. And in thy oblatio^s for the departed,
have always the same intent and scope that a father has, practicing for the
recovery of his sick child, being young and tender: Who for his sick son
brings in to the Church of our Lord God, wax, oil, incense, and with
devotion and faith lights theime in the boys behallfe: for that the child
him self, being wholly unskillful of the ordinauncies of our Christianity,
would never go about any such thing: even so must a man think of the
deceased persons case, that he may and doothe offer, (as in an other ma^s
person) wax, oil and such like, as commonly for redemption are offered.

With proof of our matter in hand, here may be noted beside, the usual
oblation of things apperteining to the mainteinaunce of Church light, and
lamps: In Athanasius his time candels were light in Churchies, for their
sakes that were dead, sick, or absent.
setting up of tapers of singular devotion for sick persons, representing of
our gooddes, and Gods creatures, from profane use of daily occupation, to
Gods honor in the temple: the undoubted hope that al faithefull people had,
as well to procure fououre to theime selves thereby, as mercy to other, for
whose sakes they did it: and especially that in this man's age, that was so
ancient, these tokens off love and duetye toward our Lord, and show of
their homage by such external acts, were taken as peculiare ordinauncies,
and solemn constitutio^s of our Christianity. These things (though the
hedge of my cause forces me to let theime lightly pass) yet as I go by, I
must needs behold, as steps of old manners: with sum mourning to say the
truth, and no little sorrow, in the contrary comparing of our corrupt
conditions. The reader as he list, may perchance with more leisure, or at
least with less injury to other, weye the wonderful waste that sin and
haeresye has wrought in our days of darkness. And when he considers these
things, that be now of most men counted mere madness, to have been lyked,
allowed, preached, avouched, sent owte in solemn works and writings to the
vewe of the world, and the sight of al posterity, from the very heart and
spring of the Christian Church, by Athanasius Athanas. Authority only, vvil
bear down all haeretikes in the world.
the great, O Lord what a mighty man in word and work do I now name: him
do I name, whose memory is blessed in gods Church, in whose lap our
weeryed mother once before, as she has been often, in amaner leaned to take
her rest from the forsaken children: whose only word with out all proof
(though he never speaks but with weight of reason) would bear over all
these pety protestants putt together: so said Tully co^paring the Epicures
with Plato and Aristotele: much more bouldly may I payse al haeretiques in the
world with this man's only word. Him therefore such a man, and so great a
pillor of faith, when the Catholic shall see prove and allow, and practice
those same things, which our masters of sects can not abide, but most
abhor, and by him take a sure taste of his whole time, shall he not wonder
with all wise men, at our downefaull so deep? shall he not marvel under one
name of Christianitye, The name only of Christianity left in many
that goethe yet common to our days with those happy times past, to be such
diuersitye of case and conditions, that the one under so glorious a name must be
nothing else but a cloked paganism? but yet I would not he should occupye
ouermuche his mind in this consideration, till he see the whole rank of
gods holy host, and all the blessed band of Martirs and sanctes stand with
us for the full defense of truth, and the common Church their moother and
ours.

Of certain offeringes or public allmose presented to god for the deceased,
in the time of the holy sacrifice, at me^nes burialles, and other customable
days of their memories: and of the sundry minds kept in the primitive
Church for the departed.

Cap. 6.
Keeping our selves then from by matters, (if those be by, that are so nere) of
relieuing the departed by the almose of the living there we left, and there
must we borowe brefely a word or two more. Because I think it very necessary
to be known, that besides the private procuring of the deceased souls welthe,
and more then the common doles at the day of burial, there was also another
kind of almose not much differing in effect from the other, but in order and
usage not all one. Which, because it was sole^nely praesented to Gods
minister before the holy altar, in the face of the whole faithful assembly,
(...) and dead, and in every mind or memory for the souls principally
procured, the offering of sum part either off the deceaseds own gooddes, or
his lovers, for the upholding the ministry, was also made. Of which kind of
participating whith the departed, we read in the ancient counsel named
Brachare^se thus: si quid ex collatione fideliu^ aut per festiuitates martyru^
aut per co^memorationem defunctoru^ offertur, Can. 39.
per aliquem clericorum fideliter deponatur: and constituto tempore semel aut
bis in anno, inter oe^s clericos diuidatur. If there be any offeringes by the
co^tribution of the faithful, made either in the festiual days of martyrs, or
minds and memorialls of the dead, let theime be laid up aside, in custody
of one of the clergy, that once or twice in the year as time shall serve,
they may be truly parted emo^gest the rest. And because al times have had
certain drawbackes in religion, and hinderers of devotion, the council kept at
Vase of great antiquity, excommunicateth al such as in any wise hinder the
oblations for the departed. And in like case the fourth council holden at
Carthage. Cap. 2. Cap. 95.
Thus runs the decrie of them both. We do curse and excommunicate al
those, that by any means withdraw or else stay from the churches the
oblations of the departed, as murderers of the poor. The decries of both
these notable assemblies, were thought worthy to be confirmed by the.vi.
general council houlden at Constantinople* then are our ministers in the ruff
of their new communion, thrust owte of the oulde holy communion of sanctes, if
either universal or prouincial synod ca^ take hold of men so desperate, that
nether care for man's curse, nor gods blessinge. Well murderers and
manquillers they must be counted, their praedecessors not haulfe so evil,
deserved no better name. Damascene that blessed man, that suffered so much
sorrow for truethes defense, whose authority I must often use in this treatise
because he purposelie stood for this quarrel against certain haeretiques of
his time. He therefore in the life of Iosaphat excedingly praises his passing
love towordes his father departed. in vita Iosaphat.
Who first with all godly devotion, procured his exequies and dirigies on the
day of his burial, then commended his soul to God with seven days solemn
prayer and supplication at his sepulcher: and with a wonderful liberal almose
or oblation for the poor people, he finished up the matter the viij. day. But
if you can find in your heart to credit this good man's report, he will
assure you of the usage of his time. By which you shall perceive, that it is a
horrible slander that the wicked have raised on gods Church and ministers,
which be not ashamed, to say and avouch in their open sermons and vain
libelles, that these yearly, and so many months minds, have been newly
practiced and devised against gods word, and the usage of the primitive
church. Wherein they show them selves exceeding ignorant in thaffaires of the
Church, or else passing bold and malitiouse, in wilful deceiuinge the simple.
For our only months and years oblations, in Damascens days, as he often
affirms, there were customably kept tricesimales, quadragesimales,
anniuersariae memoriae: the thirtithe, the.xl. the years minds: and portions
appointed out, as he says, in testamets for the mainteinaunce thereof. And all
this commonly, besides the peculiare devotion of some, toward their
singularely beloved. If thou list go yet vppeward, thou shall find no less
care for the help of the souls deceased: for S. Ambrose reports of his
time: Super obit Theodos.
that otherwhiles the third and the thirtith, otherwhiles the vij. and the
fourtith mind days were religiously observed: yea and that (as he says) by
good authority, and ancient usage of the patriarchs both in the law of
nature and Moses, Cum frequentibus oblationibus omnibus, with often and sundry
oblatio^s for the rest of the departed. This xxx. days memorial, Iulio
interpr.
old holy Ephreem in his testament and last will provides for him self,
after his departure. The seventh day was also ever in the primitive Church
with great religion observed: because, as Beda says, that has the
representation of the life to coom. And S. Ambrose practiced it for his
brother, for the like protestation and sign of the resurrection and rest
perpetual. De fide resur.
Die septimo (says he) ad sepulchrum redimus, qui dies symbolum est futurae
quietis, the seventh day we coom together again to my brothers sepulcher,
because that day is a pledge of the rest to coom.

Hold on upward stilli, and Tertulian will witness with the, that in that
flower of Christ's Church, with in less then CC. years of our masters death,
Oblationes fiebant annua die pro defunctis: That oblations and sacrifice were
yerly made at the xij. months minds of most men: De Cor. milit.
he meanethe both by the sacrifice of the Church, and offeringes of the
friends of the departed* as there also: In exhort. Castitat.
Repete apud Deu^ pro cuius spiritu postules, pro qua oblationes annuas reddas:
Call to thy remembrance, for whose soul thowe prays, and in whose behallfe
thowe makes yerly offeringes: He speaks of a friend of his, that practiced
thus for his wives departure. And in another place he well declares the duty
of married ^d persons one toward another, De monogamia.
if God by death separate them in sonder. Pro anima eius orat, et refrigeriu^
interim postulat. and offert annuis diebus dormitionis eius, She prays for
her husbands soul, and obteineth in the mean space ease: and offers every
year, at the mind day of his passing hense. And he lets not to affirm, that
the married coople that practice not thus, do not believe the resur^ection.
Therefore he concludes thus: Nunquid nihil erimus post mortem secundum aliquem
Epicurum, and non secundum Christum? quod si credimus mortuorum resurrectionem,
vtique tenebimur, cum quibus resurrecturi sumus, rationem de alter utro
reddituri: What say you, shall we faule to nothing after our death, as the
Epicure thinkethe, and not rise ageine as Christ teaches? And if we believe
the resurrection of the dead, then doubtless we shall be bound to make
account one of an other, This haeresy much joins with the Saduces.
as we shall together rise again. Beware here my masters, once ageine I must
tell you, you are goinge toward the denial of the resurrection, so many as
condemn the usage of the Church in praying or offeringe for the dead.
Tertuliane says you be Epicures in this point, and so you be in all others. I
say you are past privy muttering in your hearts that there is no God: Psalm.
13.
for you are come to plain. Cor. 1. Cap. 15.
Manducemus and bibamus: cras enim moriemur, Let us eat and be merry, we can
not not tell how long we lieue. I say you must answer for parting the
affection of man and wiefe, and the one must be countable at the day of judgment
to an other, that they procured not the duties of the dead by right of Gods
holy Church, for their souls departed. Take heed therefore, you are warned.
But as near as we be Christ's time by Tertulians help, we will approach yet
nyerer, to the very Apostles age, and look out sum record of that time for
oblations and distributions, with memorialles for the departed. And the further
from you of the new sect we go, the more plain destruction of your
doctrine, and more manifest proof of our old devotion shall we fiend, to your
open shame and the conforte of Catholics. S. Clement therefore the Roman, one
co^uersaunt with the apostles, and instru^ted by theime in his faith, a
familiare of S. Paul, and promoted by S. Peter, a ^^ue pastor and a holy
martyr, thus re^orteth of the apostles ordinance in our ^atter. Li. 8. Co^st.
Cop. 48.
Peragatur dies mortuorum in psaltis, in lectionibus, atque orationibus,
pro^ter eum qui tertia die resurrexit, Item ^onus in commemorationem
superstitum at^ue defunctoru^. Etia^ quadragesimus secundum veterem formam,
Moysen enim hoc modo luxit populus: nec non anniuersarium pro memoria ipsius,
deturque de illius facultatibus pauperibus, in commemorationem ipsius. Thus in
english. We will that the third day be observed for the departed, in psalms,
lessons, and prayers, for his sake that rose the third day. And so the ix. day,
for the uniting together in one memory the departed with the living. In like
manner the fourtithe day must be kept according to the order used of old: for
so did, the people observe the bewayling of Moses. And with all these, the xij.
months mind beside. Where for the memory of his departure, let sumwhat be
distributed amongst the poor people. How say you now my masters, is this
popish or apostolic doctrine? was it invented for priests covetousness, or
observed as Christ's ordinance? made we much of late of the little we fownd
before, or of late lost for lack of devotion, that which we had so long
before? Merciful God who would think this gear were so ancient, and so
little set by. Who would think the adversaries were so impudent and yet so
much regarded. What heart think you they read the ancient writers with all?
Or with what conscience can they pass by so plain practice of all the
Chistian world? Or with what face can they name either scripture or doctor? How
dare they look back at any one step of antiquity, all which be nothing
else but a testimony off their wickedness, and as you would say a pointing with
finger at their horrible spoil of old doctrine and devotion? What if one of
their own scholares seeing this light in our matter, should ask of his
master: a less sir, what if this be true that is proved so old, The master
Protestant is posed.
and you chance to lie that are so late, where are we your scholares then? It
is not answered, if you conforte him with fair words, and tell him you follow
the scripture. For he will charge you again streghte, that these men had
scripture, understood scripture, alleged scripture, both of the new testament
and the oulde, and referred their usage sum to Moses and Aaron, other sum to
the fathers in the law of nature, and all to the Apostles of Christ. Where are
you then? no more but this perdy, we understand scripture perchance better
then they, we have the holy Ghost perchance and so had not the fathers:
perchance that is no scripture, perchance this and this is not that doctors
work, because it makes against us. I think he that would believe your
chauncing, that may have such assurance of the truth on the other side, he is
worthy to be deceived. Well, I will close up this part of our talk, for
Tobies allmose board in the obittes of Christian men, with S. Augustines grave
judgment: who, as he is plain for the benefit of oblations in the
memorialles of men's departures, in all placies, so here in a manner he orders
the action thereof, for abusies that might thereon arise, in his epistle to
Aurelius. 64
The offeringes (says he) observed for the souls departed, whereof there is
no quaestion but profet arisethe to theime, let theime not be over sumptuouse
upon the minds of the deceased, nor soulde away, but given with out grudge or
disdain to such as be praesent, and would be partaker thereof: but if moony
be offered, it may be distributed out of hand to the poor* and the^ shall not
those days of their friends memorialles, be to their great grief forsaken
or destitute of company. And the order with honest coomlynesse shall be kept
continually in the church. So S. Clement him self teaches all theime that be
called to such days of prayers for the departed, and to be partakers of those
oblations or charitable relieues, which were by sum honest sober refresshing
even in the Church in those days observed, whether they be of the laity or of
the priests, he gives the^ this lesson. Qui ad memorias eoru^ vocamini, cu^
modestia and cum dei timore comedite, veluti valentes legatione fungi pro
mortuis: cum sitis presbyteri and diaconi Christi, sobrij esse debetis and
priuatim: and cum alijs, v^ possitis intemperantes coercere: All you that are
called to the funeralles of the departed, refressh your selves in measure and
fear of god, that you may be worthy, to be as it were in commission of
entreaty for the dead: and being priests or deacons of Christ, you are bownd
to be sobre even at home: but abroad, for others example and discipline.

That the binefite of prayer and allmose apperteineth not to such as dye in
mortal sin, though in the doubtefull case of man's being, the Church
uses to pray for all departed in Christ's faith.

Cap. 7.
THus far we now are brought, I trust with proof and evidence enoughe, with
reasonable clear light for the good simple peoples instruction, and with full
safety, from all the force our adversaries can make against us. The
patriarchs example, the words of scripture, the practice of the Church, the
natural society betwixt the parts of Christ's mystical body in this world,
and his members in the next, and all our fathers faith have won so much,
that allmose and offeringes in sundry memorialls and diverse observations of
minds and obittes, be singular and sovereign, to procure gods mercy for
the pardon of the souls deceased. And now, lest any man take occasion of
gods mercy, which he seethe to be so ready that it may be won by other
men's works, to live in contempt of virtuous exercise, and to pass the time
of his own life in careless negligence, praesuming to purchesse favor at
gods hand so merciful, by other men's merittes, with out his own deed
or deserte, let that man be advertised, quod non habet partem in sermon isto,
that he shall in that case have no benefit by our tallke: the mercy which we
speak of, pertains not unto him: such idle drone beyes can take no fructe
of other me^nes labors, nether quick nor dead. For that membre which in
this body was so unprofitable to him sellfe, it is no right nor reason he should
have any gaynes by other men's travel. Therefore all these liberal promissies
of favor and grace, to be procured by the works of the live toward, the
departed, reach nether to the unfaithful out of this house, nor to the
impaenite^t who was but an unprofitable bourden of the house. These things
says Clement we mean of the godly: Lib. 8. constit. 49.
for if thowe gave all the welthe of the world to the poor for the wickeds
sake, thowe could not proffitte theime a hear. For he that dyed in gods
displeasure, can not look for more mercy then he deserved. Therefore S. John
thapostle seemethe to abridge our prayers, 1. Epist. Cap. 5.
and the obteining of our petitions, by borderinge theime as with in certain
bonds after this sort. We know that God doothe here us what so ever we
require, we be sure he will acco^pleshe our requests which we make unto him.
Therefore he that knows his brother to sin being not a sin to death, let
him pray and life shall be given to him that sins not to death: there is a
sin to death, for such I do not will any man to pray. This place of
thapostle, seemethe to declare the wonderful force that the prayers of the
faithful have, in procuring grace and remission for others, so that they be
brethern, and pass hense with out the bond of mortal sin. And the letter
well weied, shall make exceeding much to prove the prayers for departed in
piety: as it in a manner forbids all intercession for such, as be known to
pass in continuance of mortal sin. There is no crime so grievous that man
may commit in the course of this life, but the church uses prayers customably
therefore, and for her reverence is often heard. Therefore it may well be thought
that the party must be deceased of whom such diversity of deserts doothe
arise: for all that be a live with out exception, The church may pray for any
sinner in this life, with hope of mercy.
if they be brethren of our family, must be prayde for. And so long as they
be in this world, and may repent, their sin is not so unto death, but life
by prayers may be, and is commonly at gods hand obtained. Then it may well be
deduced, that thapostle means to encourage the faithful to pray for such
their brethren departed, as died withowte bond of deadly sin to their sight,
in a manner warning theime that for such their prayers shall be acceptably
heard. But for others continuing in sin to death, he willethe not them to
pray, nor can assure theime they shall be heard. So does Dionysius, a man not
very ancient, Carth.
but of a full spirit and good grace, expound this text. Whether he means
(says this father) by final impaenitence, or by any mortal sin co^tynued
unto death, it is sure and plain a man must not pray for him that diethe in
it. Then if we be admonished not to pray for one sort of departed, the case is
clear that we may, and are bownd, and shall be heard for the other sort that
sins not unto death. To this place also S. Augustine, disputing in his book
de ciuitate dei that prayers proffiteth not all me^ departed, alludeth, Lib.
21. Cap. 24.
or rather leanethe unto ^t as a sure ground against the Orginistes, that
would have gods mercy by man's prayers obtained for the wicked souls
deceased, after this sort. Si ^ui autem vsque ad mortem habebunt cor
im^anitens, nec ex inimicis conuertuntur in filios, numquid iam pro eis, id est
pro talium lefunctoru^ spiritibus orat ecclesia? cur ita ni^i quia iam in part
diaboli computantur, qui lum essent in corpore, non sunt translati in Christum?
If there be any that till death conntinue in stubburne impaenitency of heart,
and of enemies to gods Church will not be made children, doethe the Church
make intercession for such, that is to say for the souls of theime being
departed in that state? and why prays she not for theyme, but because they be
now reckoned for the deuilles lote being dead, that would not move to
Christ's part when they were in their bodies? And this is the cause, that for
such as in desperation destroy theyme selves: by any kind of wilful or violent
death, or in the stubborn mayntenance of haeresye, offer theime selves to be
extirpate: as well owte of the society of man's life, as out of the communion
of the Christian company, our holy moother the Church, who by her practice is
the best construer off gods word, never uses any means for their quiet
rest. Bracarens. Cap. 34.
Whereon there is a holy decrie of council in this sense* qui sibi ipsis
quolihet modo culpabili inferu^ mortem nulla pro illis fiat commemoratio, neque
cum psalmis sepeliantur. All those that by any unlawful way procure their own
death, Vide Timoth. Alexand. respons. 14
let no commemoration be had of theime, nor be brought home with psalms. The
which has been both diligently observed ever amongst Christians, and for
terror of the wicked often by holy canons renewed. Whereof there is no other
cause but this: that such persons being at thend cut of the common body, can
receive no vtility of that, where unto they are not, nor now can not be joined.
And as in that case where gods church has plain presumption of any persons
everlasting perishing, either by continuance in infidelytie owte of her happy
family, or by haeresie, and separation of him self till the last end, leaping
owte of her holy lap where he once was before, or being and continuing, with
sum open evidence thereof, an unprofitable membre, and a dead branche: as, I
say, in any plain proof of these things, the Church never practices for
his rest, because she nether has hope of getting any grace, nor means to
convey any benefit unto such as be not in the lymmes of lyefe, so if our
said careful moother do bestow of her customable kyndnesse, al her godly
means upon those whom she knowethe not otherwise but in final piety and
paenitence to have passed this lyefe, and yett in deed before god (to whom
only all secrets of man's heart be perfectly open) dyed as abiectes, and
owtecastes in sin and impaenitencye, she can not for all that, any whit help
their aestate so miserable, nor appeace Gods wrath toward theyme being
now owte of the time of deserving, out of the churchies lap, effectually
and finally separated from the chosen people, and out of the co^pase of grace
and mercy. Much less any private man's prayer ca^ be any thing at al
beneficial to his friend, or other that dyed not in Gods favor: whose pain
can nether be finished, nor by any of these ordynary means, one moment
released or lessened. Yet every good faithful person must imitate the
diligence of Gods church herein, that cease not both to offer and pray
for all sorts with in her lymittes, that be he^se in any likelihood of
repentance departed: who had rather they should abu^de to the needelesse,
the^ at any time lack for the relief of such, that might want theyme.

Therefore let no man withdraw his almose, charity, or prayers, from any of the
houshoulde of faith, upon any light praesumption yea or strong conjecture of
any man's final continuance in sin or wickedness: upon whom in the last
spirit of breathe, as God may have mercy, so man's prayers then shall be
both needful, and exceeding beneficial unto him. Only with conscience thou
may, and must cease with Gods Church to practice the ways of mercy upon
such as be not baptized, or otherwise after their baptism, have by leaving
this holy communion of the faithefull, judged them selves unworthy, and made
their case unapt by continuance therein, to receive any benefit either of the
Church, which of their own accord they have forsaken, or of any membre
thereof, whereunto by faith and love they are not joined. And so al haeretikes
shall be void of this mercy and grace after their death, which did in their
life so ernestly abhor the same. Upon all other where any hope may be hadd,
if thowe pray or procure the means of mercy, it shall at least be to thy self
a singular help and gain, though the party for whom thowe do it, either
need it not, being already received into bless, Homil. 21. in Cap. 9. Actuum.
or else in perpetual damnation of hell, be helples for ever. Si praeces pro
mortuis facimus (says S. Chrisostom) si eleemosinas damus, et si ille indignus
sit, nobis Deus placatior erit: If we pray for the dead, and bestow allmose
for their sakes, if he be fownd unworthy, yet God will the rather be merciful
to our selves. And sure it is, that who so ever be fownde so gracious, as with
much compassion of the deceaseds misery, to procure with study and care Gods
merciful pardon toward theyme, that such a one especially shall find grace
and favor at the time of need, and be marvelous apt to receaiue been fite
by others procurement ageine. Who be most apt to receive benefit by the
prayers of the living.
For as it is certain, that no man can receive benefit after his departure by
any work or will of the living, saving such as in their life deserved the
same, so must it needs be, that where these remedies be needful and
profitable, that yet more or less they shall work upon the party for his
relyefe, according to the more or less devotion and deserving in this life.
Therefore this truth of mutual participation of the dead with the live,
gives no man occasion of idle rest or careless affection in his own time and
cause, when he may be assured to lack the relief of others, to whom in his
liefe by well woorkinge he would not join before.

Enchir. Cap. 110.
But I had rather ye heard S. Augustine uttering expressly this meaning of
mine, in his own words. It can not be denied (says he) but that the souls
of the deceased be relieved, when the sacrifice of our redemer is offered for
theime, or almose bestowed in their behaulfe in the Church. But in deed
these are proffitable to none, but to such as in their life deserved yt those
things after their departure might do them good. For there is a state of
life that is nether so perfect but it may well have need of these helps after
death, nor yet so very evil, but such things may well succor theime after
their departure. Mary there is a kind of conversation so virtuous, that it
requirethe no such ayed, and an other kind so wicked, that those which passed
their former life therein, can have after their passage no relief by such
means: for by our merits in this life we do obtain, that after our deaths
we may either atteine to remedy, or else be void of al helps, For it is a
very vain hope, that any man should praesume to win that at Gods hand
after he be passed out of this world which when he was in the world, he never
sought nor deserved. And a little after thus he makethe all plain: When the
sacrifice of the altar, or else any kind of almose be offered for all men
departed being baptized, for the very good they are thanks geuinge, for the
indifferent that be not very evil, they are a merciful deliverance. For the
wicked and very evil, although they be no succoure for them which be departed
and dead, yet they are comfortable for those that be alive. And to such as
receive benefit therbie, either comes full forgiunesse, or else their
judgment and damnation is made thereby sumwhat more tolerable. The which
sentence, almost in like words, for that it merueilously opened this matter,
this author repetethe in the fourth question ad Dulcitium, and else very
often. Whereby the faithful man may learn both how much, and whom these
remedies do relieve. And then that the Church in his days offered sacrifice
for all those that were baptized, and in the faith thereof departed: both for
that it was uncertain who had need thereof, and also, because even then when
the parties were not, nor could not be partakers thereof, that gods glory
notwithstanding was excedingly set forth, and man comforted therbye. Therefore
gods Church in a true sense may be faide to offer sacrifice even for the holy
and blessed martyrs, who no doubt by sheedinge of their blood for Christ's
name, and defense of unity, be fully purged in this their death, and so
perfectly released of all sin and pain that might otherwise have deserved
punishment, and sum expectation of gods mercy in the life to com. For so S.
Cyprian and other of his Church offered sacrifice, Li. 4. epi. 5.
for Celerne, Laure^ce and Ignatius as he testifies him self: Sacrificia pro
eis semper vt meministis offerimus, quoties martyru^ passiones and dies
anniuersaria co^memoratione celebramus: For them we offer sacrifice, as often
as we cerebrate the yerly memoryes of martyrs. For which kind of perfect men,
sacrifice is thanks giving unto God for their glory and gifts of grace,
Tractat. 84. in Ioannem.
and a kind of intercession to them in our necessities. For which cause S.
Augustine affirms, Quod pro martyribus no^ oramus sed ipsi orant pro nobis:
We pray not for martyrs, but they pray for us. Now the sacrifice often
celebrated for the wicked also, that be not known to the Church so to be, is
not beneficial to theyme nether, because their noghty life and death makes
theime unapt to receive co^forth thereby: yet these holy appointed remedies are
both comfortable and meritorious to the geuers and procures, as blessings
which are not lost, How prayer which takes no effect in the departed, is
profitable to the procurer.
but turn ageine to the bestowers. For the profit of other, or the only will to
relieve other, is a singular deserte and means of meritte to a man's sellfe.
Full truly said Damascene, that this careful help and serving of other
men's lackes, is much like to the pain which one takethe in anointing with a
precious baulme an other man's body, which as he temperethe in his hand to
bestow upon an other, it first redoundethe in verdure and virtue to him
sellfe, and then passethe by him, to the use of his neighbor, for whom
principally it was praepared. But notwithstanding this free procurement and
liberal grant of common helps in the departeds case, even there where it is
uncertain whether they take effect or no, the Church yet does not only
abstain from sacrifice and request for such as do openly appear to sin unto
death, as thapostle says, but some times for poonishment of certain
contemptes and disobedience in sum persons, she forbeareth these means, even
there where she might proffet the departed, and peradventure clean discharge
him of sin and pain with all. Which she does by merueilouse grave
authority, to the great terror of offenders. That by the grievous poonishme^t
of certain, many might learn to be careful and wise.

Great is the authority of gods ministers suerly, and heavy is their hand
often upon sinners, Actu. 5.
allwaies to edify and never to destroy. What a strange force had Peter's
words, that drove down to death for dissimulation man and wiefe almost both
at a clappe? what a horrible and dreadful judgment practiced Paul, 1. ad
Tim. 1 1. Cor. 5.
in giving up sum to satan him self, for sin? how sharply did the
primitive church execute judgment upon greuouse offenders, whom sum times
after many years separation from the coomfortable receiving the sacraments,
they would hardely admit at their last end to the fellowship thereof. But
nowher could the majesty of gods church appear with more terroure, then in
this case: when she discharges certain for their punishment, of all common
help by prayers, oblation, and sacrifice after their departure: though they
otherwise died in the favor of God, as I take it, and might be of the chosen
company that shall be saved. And that punishment was nothing else but a keeping
of them in longer correction and pain for their sins under gods scourge
in the next world, for the admonishme^t of others in that case to beware,
whiles she would not use her ordinary means for their release. A notable
example we have thereof, Concilium aphricanu^.
out of a council houlden in afric: the decrie of which assembly, S.
Ciprian him sellfe with a practice in the excution thereof, Epist. 9.
reportethe in the first book of his epistles. Where he wills that one
Victor, who had made Geminus Faustinus being a priest against the order taken
in the council of Aphrik, thexecutor of his testament, should therefore have
no prayers of the clergy, nor facrifice after his departure said or done for
him. For in that time of great persecution, such instant prayers, so often
sacrifice, the scarsity of ministers, the peoples necessity required, that the
priests should perpetually, with out all exception of worldly affayers,
serve the altar. But you shall hear this blessed Martyrs, or rather his
words together with the councelles ordinance. Victor cum contra formam nuper
in consilio a sacerdotibus data^, Geminum Faustinum presbyterum ausus sit
actorem constituere, non est quo pro dormitione eius apud vos fiat oblatio, aut
depraecatio nomine eius in ecclesia frequentetur, vt sacerdotu^ decretu^,
religiose and necessario factu^, seruetur a nobis: simul and caeteris fratribus
detur exemplum, ne quis sacerdotes and ministros dei altari eius and ecclesiae
vacantes, ad seculares molestias deuocet. In english thus: Seeing victor
against the order taken of late in a holy synod of priests, has made Geminus
Faustinus the chief dooer in thexecution of his will and testament, let it be
provided that there be no oblation there with you for his rest, nor yet any
prayers in his behaulfe in the church: that the decrye of the priests before
said, may be religiously observed and executed by us. That thereby all other
our brethren may beware by his example, how they wythdrawe such as should
serve the author, to entangle them selves with worldely affairs.

And here now our adversaries must be called upon, and asked how they can a
way with this gear, The haeretikes called upon to answer
whether this light of truethe be not over vehement for their bleared eyes?
owl light or mooneshyne I trow, or mirke midnight were more fit for their
dark works and doctrine, our way is over much trodden for thieves. All this
course of our cause, The whole matter ordered to our hands.
so agreethe with it self: so standethe with reason: so vphoulden by
scripture, so ordered in all points, that Momus him self could practice no
art, nor pick no quarelles here. For such we must pray: for those we must not
pray: in this case the sacrifice of gods church relieueth the departed, in
that case it is comfortable only to the living: sum men need help aster
their death, others help we need, and not they ours: for open infidelles and
haeretikes prayers are not used, for all secrette offendres, because their case
is not known to the church, of charity toward her children, she openly
prayethe: sum she poonishethe, sum she pardonethe, for all she merueilous
te^derly carethe. This doctrine of truethe is purposely ordered by our elders,
every point is touched and tried to our hands. What time of the day was it in
gods church, say truth, and shame the devil, when holy Cyprian wrote these
things? when the council of aphrick decried these things? when victor was
punished by lack of sacrifice and prayers at his departure? does your time of
ignorance which you have lymited for your waulke, reach up so high in gods
house? but I will spare you to anon, your answer is not ready.

What that holy sacrifice is, which was ever counted so beneficial to the
live and dead. The punishment of our sins by the heavy loss thereof. The
great hatered which the devil and all his side, has ever borne toward
Christ's aeternall priesthood, and the sacrifice of the Church. And that by
the said sacrifice of the Mass, the souls departed are especially relieved.

Cap. 8.
ANd now we must faule in hand with the good Christian Catholic, for the
search of this so often named sacrifice, so comfortable to the live, so
profitable to the dead: and what that oblatio^ is, which the holy catholic and
apostolic Church has ever used through out the world for the sins of the
departed, in place of the offeringes of the law, and that sacrifice which
Judas Machabaeus made and procured at Jerusalem, for the offensies of his
people that perished in battle. Surely it is no other but the sacrifice of our
mediator, as S. Augustine terms it, and the offering upon the altar. It is
no other then that obltation which so fully and lively expressethe the death
and passion of Christ Jesus: Who being once offered by the sheeding of his
blessed blood for the redemption of man kind, has wrought such a virtuous
effect, not only in the holy sacraments for the giving of grace and remission
of sins, but also has left in a merueilous mystery his own holy and
blessed body and blood, as well to feed upon for the especial stre^ght and
comforth of our souls, as to offer up the same for the remembrance of his
death, and clea^sing of our sins. Not in that wise as it was done upon the
cross by the painful sheeding of his blood, but as it was instituted first
in the last supper: Where Christ our God and redemer according to the order of
Melchisedech, gave to his apostles, and offered to God the father that body
which afterward was betraide, and the same bloudde which was shed after also
for the remission of sin, being with all termed by him, the blood of the
new and aeternall testament: as that which in the new law should succeade
the bloddy offeringes of the owlde testament. Whereof, God allmighty being (as
a man woulld say) lothesom or full, has instituted this by his only son,
as a most pure and praecious oblation and sacrifice, to be continued in the
Church through out the costs and corners of the round world: Which being
celebrated in the blessed memory of his sons passion, and having no other
host nor oblation then that which then was offered, can be no other sacrifice
then that which there was made for the forgiveness of sin, and redemption
of the world. The which worthy action of Christ's Church, so fructefully
applies unto us the benefit of our masters death, that thereby we may have
comfortable hope of remission of all such misdeedes, as most justly deserved
Gods wrath, and terrible indignation against us.

Now this is that blessed sacrifice, which S. Augustine with fear and reverence
terms in a thousand places of his works, the sacrifice of the Altar, the
sacrifice of our Mediator, the sacrifice of our price, the sacrifice of the
body and blood of Christ, the holsom and proffitable sacrifice, the sacrifice
of Melchisedech, The common names of honor given to the holy mass in old
time.
the new sacrifice. S. Chrisostom the Reverent sacrifice, the hono^able
Mysteries, the Fearful sacrifice, Athanasius the propitiatory sacrifice, the
unbloody Host. S. Cyprian the sacrifice of the Church, the perpetual
sacrifice, the meat offering, the medicine for our infirmities. Iraeneus the
pure sacrifice, the new sacrifice of the new testament. Clement ageine, the
unbloody sacrifice, the rationable sacrifice: and so doothe the holy council of
Ephesus caull it. Dionisius the sacrifice most excellent of all sacrificies,
and the host of hosts. The latins altogether afterward named it the holy
Mass, so did S. Augustine call it, S. li epist. 33. epist et praecat. prima
praeparante ad missam.
super vndec. prouer.
Ambrose: Histor. tripa^tit 24. cap. li. 10.
Hierom,
Epiph scholastic, with all the posterity both in Latin, and other barbarous
languagies. Besides many other excellent high and peculiare caullinges, which
can agree to no other common worship of God internal nor external, but only
to this most worthy and honorable sacrifice: which by the virtue that it has
received by the first examplare thereof, and by the might and mercy of the
lamb of God, which under the cover of bread and wine is there the appointed
host and oblation, is proffitable both to the quick and the dead. And
therefore is and has been used ever sith the apostles age, and by Christ's
own praescriptio^ and theirs, commanded to be religiously observed, and of
all faithful people honored as the principal protestation of our religion, as
the grownde of al true worship, as the badge of Christian peace, as the bo^de
of holy society betwixt the head and the members, as the love knot betwixt
Christ and his spouse, The force and institution of the holy Mass.
as the uniting of the live with the dead, the holy sanctes with us poor
sinners, angels with men, heavenly things with earthely, and the creator of
all with his own creatures beneth, as the plentiful condethe to derive the
grace of Christ's death and merits off his passion, to the continual
conforthe of our souls, as the only practice of his aeternall priesthod
according to the order of Melchisedech, and as the only effectual memorial
and comfortable memory, of the sheeding of his blessed blood, and sufferance
of so dear and ^ainefull death for our redemption.

What altar so ever be erected against this altar, it is nothing else but a
waste of gods woorship, a canker of religion, a token of dissension, a
separation of the holy society of the Christian communion, The nevve communion
is here described.
a larom toward schism, a departure from Christ, an open badge of heresy, a
saulsy shoulderinge with Christ's Church and ordinance, an open robbry of his
honor and priesthodde, a plain stop of the passage of his gifts and grace
in his loving house, thonly way to paganism and aeternall oblivion of his
death and passion.

The devil which is the oulde serpent, knowing by long experience and often
proof, that the holy mass is the chief bane of sin and his wicked kingdom,
hather ever from the begymyng shot at this mark by all the cursed indeuoures
of wicked haeretiques, to root owte that strong guard of virtue, and pilloure
of devotion and religion. How so ever they dissemble at their first
enteraunce, the diuill has that fetch in his faulse head in all times of
such toil and perturbation of religion. To which horrible endeavor though he
has for our sins and deserving put greater force, and wroght with more
advantage then ever before, yet till the latter day and son of perditions
appearing, which is unknow to him, he shall not bring it to pass. The law,
the sacrifice, the priesthod, the altar of the new and aeternal testament
praefigured by Melchisadech, and perfited by Christ, shall stand with and in
the holy Church, till the worlds end. Haeresy with her disordered ministers,
shall not out face Gods, Church and Christ's aeternall pristhod.
It is not your bare bread and board, not your Ministers, nor your Seniours,
nor Elders, nor your Nuper intende^ts, nor what so ever you list be caulled,
that shall out face gods Church. she has by the spirit of God beaten
down your proudders, the Arrians: the Macedonians: the Anabaptists, and all
your predecessoures. And now I tell you, and be bowlde of it, as owld our
moother waxethe, as contemptible as you make her, so little as you regard
her, she will once yet in her owlde days give the Zwinglia^s, the Lutherans,
or of what other strange soldier so ever your camp standethe, an open
ouertrowe. Psa. 100. Mat. 61.
For yff hell were broken louse, and the gates open, it cowlde not prevail. We
have our Presthod confirmed by a fair oath, we have our mothers right by an
oppen promise established.

And yet never the less, good Catholic Christian, let us thus persuade our
selves, The holy mass taken a way for our sins.
that we have so long lost the inestimable treasure of this holy sacrifice,
for our grievous sins: it is our sins I say (woo is us therefore) which
have deserved this plage, which have set us at variaunce with God and our
merciful redemer, which have taken from us, as unworthy of so great a
treasure, the daily sacrifice, the help of those which are a live, the
comfort of those which are departed, the only ground of al religion and
acceptable woorship of god. And our misery is the greater because few feel
the sore.

The lack of this sacrifice for the departed only with the godly prayers
therein, Men tha were grievous offenders in oulde time punished by lack of the
sacrifice.
was counted when gods truethe and Church floorished, the greatest and
extremest punishment that could be devised, and ever enjoined for sum notable
crime to the terroure of other, as for horrible desparation, for willful
heresye, for contempt of the decries of of gods holy ministers, as by the
late alleged place out of S. Cyprian may be very profitably noted. A less we
have now in amaner lost that wholly, which then was denied only to such for
their greuouse poonishemnts, as were heinous offenders. Otherwise in earnest
consideration of our case can not I think, but that this blessed iuel is now
denied us of allmighty god generally for our grievous offensies, which then was
denied by his ministers to some one offender, for the due poonishment of sin and
wickedness. O good reader what would that holy martyr have said if he had
lived in our days, when to have that oblation either for the quick or dead,
which once was esteemed so necessary that no Christian man nether could in his
life nor after his death lack it, is now of it sellfe odious to most men, and
(which abhorrethe me to speak) poonishable by the laws of the spiritualty,
and condemned well nere of all men? what ween you this blessed bishop would
have said, if he had seen the holy host and offeringe to have been taken
away, De Coena^ domini.
which he once affirmed to be so necessary, that if it were taken away or
wasted, there were no religion nor worship of god at all? would not he think
you, with fervent zele of gods house have cried out upon the sins of the
people, the blindness of the preachers and pastors, the unworthiness of
these our dooleful days? and bewailed his own misery as we should do ours,
Ita Policarp. ex Iren.
crying out with an oulde blessed father? O Deus bone in quae me seruasti
te^pora, vt ista blasphema sustinea^, O Lord that I should be reserved for
these times, to abide such blasphemy. victor de persecut. vandal.
Victor reports in his history of the persecution of the vandalles that were
Arians, that the Governor of that cursed company of cruel haeretikes, would
not suffer the christian men whom he had slain, to be brought home with
service, and sacrifice: but then the good people woonderfully bewailed their
case, seeing them practice cruelty upon their souls also: in that they
would not suffer theime to enjoy at their departure and burial, the rites of
gods church. Thus says that Author. Quis vero sustineat atque possit sine
lachrimis recordari, dum praeciperet nostrorum corpora defunctorum, sine
solemnitatehimnoru^ cum silentio ad sepulchra perduci? O Lord who could have
fownd in his heart to be houlde then, or could yet once think of it with owte
tears, how he gave in charge, that the bodies of our brethern departed, should
be brought to the grave and buried with owte all solemnity of himnes in silence
and sorrow? Ecclesi. Cap. 7.
It was ever given to wicked hard hearted haeretiques, to prohibere gratiam
mortuis: to be unmerciful, and to stay the favor of good men from the
departed. epist. 8. li. 2.
Nouatus as S. Cyprian charge him, noluit patrem fame defunctu^ sepelire:
would not bury his own father dead of honger bane.

But to let such men pass with the praesent bewayling of our unhappy days,
let us with more conforte behold the steps of good men past: how kindly and
brotherlyke they have principally procured the holy sacrifice for their
friends and fellows gone before. For seeing the only prayers of good men have
been proved so profitable, and the repraesentation of some holy works of
almose, has often moved God to pity (as we have proved) toward the release of
the departed his pain, what may we not hope to obtain for our britherne
deceased, when we shall join in prayers with the holy angels, with the
blessed sanctes, with Gods holy ministers in the representation of Christ's
most blessed body and blood before the face of his father? when the whole
church of god in that honorable action prayethe, and Christ him self is both
the sacrifice and the priest, both the asker and the geuer of pardon, when the
majesty of God the blessed trinitye, is passingly pleaced by the merits of
Christ's death so lively set out in these honorable, but unspeakable
mysteries, what may we not here procure for the soul of the churchies child?
what shall be denied to so humble askers in the praesence of gods own son and
begging mercy for his deaths sake? And so does S. Chrisostom assure the
faithful, in these goulden words Non frustra ab apostolis sancitum est, vt in
celebratione vener andoru^ mysteriorum, memoria fiat eorum, qui hinc
discesserunt: Homil. 3. in epistola^ ad philipp.
nouerunt quippe illis multum hinc emolumenti fieri, multu^ vtilitatis. stante
siquidem vniuerso populo, manus in coelos extendente coetu item sacerdotali,
verendoque proposito sacrificio, quomodo deum non placaremus pro istis orantes?
Yt was not for noght that the apostles decried and ordained, that in the
celebratio^ of the honorable mysteries there should be an especial memorial
of the departed: for they right well knew great commodity and benefit to
arise there upon. For the whole multitude houlding up their hands toward
heaven, together with the company and quiere of priests, and the dreadful
sacrifice set forth before all men, how is it possible but we should appeace
gods wrath praying for them? look ye what this man's judgment was, and see
from whense he had it, eue^ of the holy apostles I warraunt you, and no worse
nor latter fownders. But of that point, for the full deriuing of our christian
usage from the first fathers of our faith, more convenient place shall be given
herafter. Now I will serve the cause and the readers desire, first with
certain peculiare examples of most learned and godly fathers worthy of all
credet, in the godly provision for certain of their dearest friends by
sacrifice and prayer, both made by them selves and procured by others. That we
may have here not only whom to believe teaching the truethe, but whom to
follow practicing the same with devotion, which they preached with co^stancye
before.

That the practice of any point in religion makes the most open shevve of the
fathers faith. And that all holy men have in plain words and most godly
prayers uttered their belief in our matter.

Cap. 9.
ANd I take the open practice of any point, to be a more pithy protestation of
a man's faith, the^ by words ca^ be made. Therefore if a man were doubtful
either of the truth of any article, or of the meaning of sum doctors words,
look the same man's practice, and it shall put him out of doubt thereof
streght ways as for an example: seem sum words of S. Augustine to make for
the sacramentaries haeresie, that Christ is in the honorable sacrament but by
a figure? or Theodoretus, or any other ancient fathers declaration? are their
words doubtful to the reader? leave the words the^, if thowe syncerely seek
for truethe with owte contention, and seek owte if thowe can, sum practice of
those same men, and that Church where they lived, for the same point. But what
way of work in this matter consisting in doctrine, may assure us of their
belief, of whose words we doubted before? Theodor. dial. 2. August. super
psalm. 98. Dionis. ecclesiast. hierarch. Cap. 3. Basil de spiritu sanct. Cap. 27.
Mary sir this: look how they behaved theime selves in the receiving of it,
in the ministering of it, in the careful keeping of it, whether they did adore
it with godly honor, whether they solemnly showed it to the people to be
worshipped, whether they praide by solemn and formal words unto it, whether
they taught their children to caulle it God and Christ: Lib. 3. de Trin. c..
10
yea so far that Augustine affirms that the children in his days till they
were after instructed, thought that God appeared in the shappe of bread: as
all these yongers, seeing the honor and reverence of their elders, and theime
selves nurtered to houlde up their hands and knock their breasts, must
yet needs marvel how these owtwarde forms came to so holy an use. further
whether the Christian people were not sclaundered for worshipping and doing
sacrifice to Ceres and Bacchus, Lib. 20. co^tra Faustu^ Cap. 13.
when the wicked infidelles saw their behavior toward the holy Host:
whether it was not used in woorking of miracles, in driving away deuilles, in
daungerouse times of tempests, of traueling, of sickness, and in other
necessities. Well these be plains practices, no haeretike can deny but they
have been so used of the whole Church of God, with many such other like in
that holy action: which can not in any case stand with bare bread, or any
other way of praesence, but only the proper, true, and bodily praesence of
Christ's own person. A doctors words may be misco^strued, may be picked owte
of place: may be writhen and wastred by faulse teachers, but a man's example
can not lightly be misconstrued. And therefore haeretikes, whose purpose is
allwaies by sutteltie to deceive the simple, will never make discourse by the
practice of the church, or exercise and example of the ancient learned men
through out the Church of Christ: having enough for their meaning, to rack
a place or two out of the fathers whole works, that may seem to the
ignoraunte to settforthe their error. So if thowe would know whether that
place that our adversaries impudently do allege out of Gregory the great,
against the sovereignty of the sea of Room, was in deed written for their
seditious purpose, behoulde the practice of the same father, and thowe shalt
find him self exercise jurisdiction, at the very same time when he wrote it,
in all prouincies Christianed through owte the world: both by excommunication
of bisshoppes that governed not well, by often citation of persons in extreme
prouincies, by many appeals made unto him, by continual legacies to other
nations, sent either to convert theime to the faith, or to govern in their
doubtful affairs, and by all other exercise of spiritual jurisdiction. Is itt
not now a very faulse suggestion to the poor people, that this blessed man in
so plain vtterau^ce of his meaning by works and not by words, should yet be
brought as a witness to condemn him self? though the words being well
understand make for no such meaning in deed, as by others it has been
sufficientlye declared. The like impudency it is, to allege S. Bernarde
against the Mass or the praesence of Christ in the blessed Sacrament. Good man
I dare say for him, he said Mass every day, if he were well at ease: For
other business, did not commonly let theyme in those days, from that work of al
other most necessary. So the reciting out of S. Ambrose for the improuinge of
invocation of holy Sanctes, is no more but an abuse of the simples ignorance:
knowing well, that he and all other of that time did practice prayers both
often to all holy martyrs, and sumtimes peculiarly to such, whom for patronage
they did especially chuese of devotion amongst the rest. I speak not this,
that any might hereby judge the doctors words to stand against their own
deeds: but that every man may perceive, that where the works and practice of
al men he so plain, their words in sum one place fownd dark, can not by any
means be praeiudicial to that truth which in all other placies they planely
set forth by words, and by the evident testimony of their own practice, to
the world proteste the same. Therefore I would exhort all men in Christ's
name, for their own saluatio^s sake, to take heed how they give credet to
these libelles co^teining certain wrasted places owte of the doctors works,
against any truth, which by the further discourse of usage and practice, they
are not hable before the learned to iustifye. And therefore that al mistrust of
untrue dealing may be far from us, I will, as I said, let the^ have the
feeling and handeling of our cause throughlye. They shall behold in examples
of most noble personagies, both for their name, virtue, and lerninge, the
peculiare practices in praying and mass saing for the dead both in the
ancient Greek and Latin Churchies. And where may we better begin, then with
this famous Chrisostom? he bare the last witness with us for the relief of
the departed by the prayers and holy oblatio^, therefore the practice of that
excellent benefit shall first be showed upon him sellfe. This blessed man
therefore being banished, by the means of thempresse Eudoxia, for the defense of
the ecclesiastical discipline, and there in exile departing out of this world,
was after her death by the happy and gracious child Theodosius the younger,
translated from his obscure resting place to Constantinople which was is own
seat, Lib. 10. Histo. trip. Cap, 18. and 26.
there with meet honor to be buried, where with grace and wonderful dignity
he ruled the Church before. The History reportethe, that the people of that
city, as thick as men ever went on grownd, passed the watters of Bosphorus,
and covered that cost wholye with light and lamp, with tapers and torcheis
to bring that blessed bisshoppes body that was their own dear pastor, home
again. The which passing treasure, being with all reverence laid up in the
said City, then loathe gracious good Emperor, Theodosius Iun.
ernestly behoulding the grave of S. Chrysostom, made most humble prayers to
allmighty god, for his father and moothers soul, the late Emperor and
Empress: beseching him of pardon and forgyuenesse for banishing that good
Catholic bishop, because they did it of ignorance: and so the words may well
be taken, that he askethe Chrisostom him sellfe mercy also, for his parents
offense unjustly committed against him: and withal full kindly prayethe for
their deceased souls. And so being buried in his own Church, he was the^ by
Atticus a worthy man his second successoure, written in the roll of Catholic
bisshoppes to be praide for at the altar every day by name. Cum Ioannitae
(says Cassiodorus out of Socrates) seorsim apud seipsos sacra solemnia
celebrare^t, 12. Lib. tri partit. Cap. 2.
iussit vt in orationibus memoria Ioannis haberetur, sicut aliorum dormientium
episcoporum fieri consueuit. When Chriso^toms partakers said mass by theyme
selves aside, Atticus gave in commandment that a memory should be had in the
prayers of the Church for him, as the custom was that all bisshoppes after
their death should have. Here is now open practice of that which by words
we proved before, here is an evident testimony of the usage of the greek
Church for the burial of bisshoppes, and general custom of kepinge their
memorial in the public prayers and service of the church. It were not
needful to recite out of Eusebius the form of Constantinus his funerals,
Eusebius. in vita Constantini.
kept in the same Church with solemnitye of sacrifice, singinge, lights and
prayers. Nor the burial of the emperor Consta^tius: 2. Orat in Julian.
who as Nazianzenus writes, was brought forth with common praises of al me^,
with singing, lights, and lamps, all the night long very honorably: with
which things, says he, we Christian men think it a blessed thing to honor
the memories of our friends departed. And if thaduersaries would here
co^tentiously reason that these solemn rites of Christian burialls be nothing
proffitable, or if the simple ask why they be proffitable, S. Chrisosto^ may
enstruct such as list learn, and correct the other that list reprehe^de in
these words. In 2. Cap. ad Hebr. hom. 4.
Tell me says he what al these festival lights in the burial of the deceased
mean? what all this singing of himnes and psalms signifiethe? to what end be
so many priests and musicians called to gether? to which in fine he thus
answerethe: do we not all these things to give thanks to God and everlasting
glory, that he has delivered the departed from the troubles of this mortal
life? do we not this to our comfort, and honor of the departed? And in the
burial of the Noble matrone Paula how the priests did sing, how the
bisshoppes of Jerusalem, and of all Palestine and Syria for the most part
carried torches, Hierom. Epitaph. Paulae.
how the religiouse both me^ and weeme^, did the rites of the dirigies, how
her allmose folks showed their cotes to procure mercy, even as they did at
dorcas departure in the acts of the apostles, how they continued their
singing and saing vij. days together at the Church in Bethlem where she was
buried, S. Hierom him sellfe a true record thereof bearethe witness in the like
words as I have recited, and many more which the fear of weereing the reader
causethe me full sore against my will, to omit. They so settforth not only
the substance of the thing, which standethe in prayer and sacrifice, but also
do prove against thenimies of good order, that the smaulest ceremonies that
our churchies of late have used, were not lately taken up by our covetousness
and superstition, but with more abundance, and number, and continuance, and
sole^nytie, practiced in the flower of Christ's church, in diverse principal
parts of the world: as at Jerusalem and Constantinople: by the praising and
approving of the grauest fathers of our faith. And now S. Augustine being of
Aphrick, so far from the other in distance of place, yet ronnethe jointly
with them in religion. He purposely writing of the solemn rites of Christian
funerals, in that goulden treatise De cura pro mortuis agenda, De cura pro
mortuis agenda.
thus after long consideration of the whole cause determines: that the pomp
of burial, with all such solemnyties as there unto be in gods church joined,
is very seemly for that body which was the vessel of a Christian soul, and
an instrument or companion in well woorking: whereunto it shall be also united
in the resurrection, for to receive together the inhaeritance of the
everlasting kingdom. But the lack of these, where they be not arrogantly
contemned, or can not be had, is nothing hurteful to the good, nor the having
any thing proffitable to the wicked, as the examples of Lazarus and the rich
man may well prove. Therefore, it is the sacrifice and prayers which properly
do help or relieve the departed. De ciuit. 1. Lib. ca. 12. and.13.
Curatio funeris (says he) conditio sepulturae, pompa exequiarum, magis sunt
viuorum solatia quam subsidia mortuorum. Non tamen ideo contemnenda and
abijcienda sunt corpora defunctorum, maximeque iustorum and fidelium, quibus
tanqua^ organis and vasis ad omnia bona opera sanctus vsus est spiritus.
Curiouse provision for the burial, and the pomp of the solemn obites, be
rather done for the solace of the lieue, then for help of the dead:
nevertheless the bodies of the departed, namely of faithful folks, may not
be contemned or cast furthe, the which the holy Ghost used, as vessels and
instruments of well working.

By all which things it may well be noted, that sum things have been usually
practiced in funerals for thanks giving to almighty God, as hymns and
psalms: other sum, for decent coomlynes and solace of the living, as the
place of the burial, the lights, the ringing and such like: although even
these things proceeding of love and devotion, be after a sort meritorious to
the dooers, and a help to theyme for whom they be procured, and good motions
and memories of man's duetye. For which causies those and the like have been
uniformly used through owte the whole Catholic church from the beginning.
But the princypal things perteyning to the iustes of the departed, be prayers
and sacrifice, and other such like, whereby they are assuredly much proffited,
by release of their pains. So says S. Augustine in these words. Cap. 18. de
cura pro mort.
Non existimemus, ad mortuos pro quibus curam gerimus, peruenire, nisi quod pro
eis, sieve altaris sieve eleemosinarum sacrificijs, solemniter celebramus. Let us
never think that any other thing properly apperteineth to the relief of the
departed, saving the solemn sacrifices of the altar, almose and prayer. And
therefore as the said holy doctor confesses, the worthiness of the place
where man is buried of it self profits not at all, The sanctes pray for the
souls in purgatory, and we pray unto sanctes for them.
but in respect of the holy prayers which be there rather made then else
where, and the patronage of holy martyrs and sanctes, to whom he nothing
doubts but intercession may profitably be made for the deceased: for which
cause, as it may appear by Paulinus, Cap. 4 de cura pro mort.
men were very desirous ever in the primitive Church to be buried by some
blessed martyrs body. And so must we think also of burial by the reverent
holy sacrament, that it wonderfully helps man, not for the placeis sake
(allthough the devotion of the desirer is therein commendable) but because the
living may there effectually commend the departed to God in the time of the
holy sacrifice, and may be put in remembrance to call upon Christ's blessed
person there praesent, for the soul of that man, which with care and study
laid his body i^ the hope of resurrection, by the sovereign holy body that is
already risen again. And this was the cause that our forefathers from Christ's
time till our days have had respect and desire, as occasion served, to be
buried there, where by order, prayers and sacrifice were daily had, and where
the patronage of holy sanctes might best be procured. It is a high point of
wisdom surely (good reader) only to see what godly wisdom our fathers used,
in show of their zele, faith, and Christianity. As it is an intolerable
arrogance and a singular sign of infidelity to laugh at, and blaspheme those
things, whereof, not the prowdest haeretike that lives, has any intelligence
at al: Obcoecauit enim eos malitia eorum. For their own malice has blinded
theime.

But leaving the things not principally intended, as sufficiently by use of
the Church approved, let us turn to the practice of the oblation and prayers,
in the dirigies of the ancient: that seeinge theime both pray and say Mass
for their dearest friends souls, thowe may be bold to use the same for
thine. That do I call Mass, which they call sacrifice: Because S. Hiero^
uses it in the same sense, in these words: Super 11. cap prouer.
Sunt qui de leuioribus peccatis cum quibus obligati defuncti sunt post mortem
possunt absolui: vel poenis videlicet castigati, vel suorum praecibus and
eleemosinis, missarumque celebrationibus, and caet. There be sum, which after
their death may have absolution of their lighter offensies, in the debt
whereof they passed owte of this liefe: either after just punishment for the
same suffered, or else through the prayers and allmose of their friends, with
the celebration of Masses. So says S. Hierom, or else as sum think, the
reverent Beda. either of their grave judgments weieth more with me, then any
one man's alyeue. Well therefore, Mass, oblation, or sacrifice, Mass allvvaie
said for the departed.
call it as you will, all is one for our purpose, and like hated of heretics:
how so ever it be named, it was practiced with prayers for the rest of the
departed through owte the Christian world. S. Ambrose exhorts other men to
do it for their friends, he did it for his own. Writing therefore a lettre of
comfort to one Faustinus that over much bewailed the death of his sister,
thus with comfort he gives counsel: Ambros. epist. 8. l. 2
Non tam deplorandam quam prosequendam orationibus reor, nec maestificandam
lachrimis tuis, sed magis oblationibus animam eius Domino commendandam
arbitror. I suppose thy sisters case should not so much be lamented, as she by
thy prayers ought to be relieved: Thowe must not sadden her soul by tears,
but by oblations commend her to our Lord. How many bishops now in
England of the new gise, would follow this kind of consolation by letters? If
the nevve bishops were like S. Ambro. their teaching vvoulde not be contrary
to his.
How many would exhort their friends to got Mass said, or prayers for
their lovers rest? So many as be like good Ambrose surely would so do: that
is never a one: make their account as near as they can. But will you see
how he practiced upon his own prince the Emperor Theodosius? Super obit.
Theodosij Imperatoris.
Da requiem perfecto seruo tuo Theodosio, requiem quam praeparasti sanctis
tuis. Illo conuertatur anima eius vnde descendit: dilexi, and ideo prosequar
eum vsque ad regionem viuorum, nec deseram, donec fletu, praecibus, inducam
virum quo sua merita vocant, in montem Domini sanctum. Give rest good Lord unto
thy good servant Theodosius even that rest which thou have praepared for the
holy Sanctes. Let his soul ascend from whense it came. I loved him, and
therefore I will prosecute him unto the land of the living, I will never leave
him, till with tears and prayers I bring that man according to his
deserving, to the holy hille of Godde. This man knew his duty toward his
prince, whom he loved a lieue, and forsook not being dead. Super obitu
Valentiniani.
So did he pray and offer for Gratianus and Valentinianus: so did he use the
same for his own dear brother the worthy Satyrus, in these words much to be
noted. Now Lord almightye to the do I commend the good soul of my brother
Satyrus now lately departed, In oratione funebr. super Satyr.
to the O Lord do I make my oblation, accept I besiche the this due office of
a broother, and mercifully look upon the sacrifice of a priest. See lo, this
good father used of brotherhood prayers, and because he was a priest he did
sacrifice, in that respect, and said Mass for his brothers souls rest.
Whom in his funeral oration he sets forth with many singular praises and
commendations, especially that he was both Christianed and buried in the unity
of the Roman Church, that is to say (as him self expoundethe it) of the
Catholic faith. Paulinus one off the same time and Bishop of Nola, declares
him self to be of the same faith, by the like practice. He prayethe bitterly
him self for a brother departed, and besecheth Amandus, a holy man of his
acquaintance, to join with him for the help of the departed soul. By his
words the pain of Purgatory is noted, and the benefit of our prayers is
proved: thus he says. Epist. 1. ad Amandu^.
Imperse rogamus, vt quaesi frater vnanimos fratres iuuans, and hanc meritis
fidei tuae mercede^ ac cumules, vt pro eo infirmitati nostrae compatiaris, and
orandi ab ore conspires, vt misericors and miserator Deus, qui facit omnia in
coelo and in terra, and in mari and abyssis, refrigeret animam stillicidijs
misericordiae suae per orationes vestras, quia sicut ignis accensus ab eo
ardebit vsque ad inferni nouissima, ita proculdubio etia^ ros indulgentiae
inferna penetrabit, vt roscido pietatis eius lumine, in tenebris ardentibus
aestuantes refrigeremur. I heartily beseke ye, that as one brother helping an
other, you would increase the deserts of your holy faith, by taking
compassion with me, and joining prayers with me for the departed soul: that
the God of pity and compassion, who woorkethe all things in heaven and earth,
in the sea and the depthe, would at the contemplation of your prayers, refreshe
and cool his soul with sum drop of his mercy. For as the fire kyndled by
him will burn to the bottom of hell benethe, so doublesse the dew of his
grace and mercy, shall pass down to the nether parts, that by the
comfortable lovely light of his piety, the souls broyling in burnig darkness
may be refreshed. And writing also to Delphinus, Epist. 3.
he alludethe to the fervent heat that the rich man suffered in hell when he
craved for Lazarus help. And praiethe him to refresshe the man's soul
deceased, with sum drop of pyty, and his holy prayers. This man was very
dear to Paulinus in his life time, for whom he was so careful after his
death. he doubted not of his salvation, though (as he says) he went owte of
this world a debtor, and therefore feared him to be in great pain. So certain
was the doctrine of purgatory in the primitive church, and so profitable were
the prayers counted, for the deceased in Christ.

But if you will have, an examplare, and a full warau^t of your duty and
devotion, with understanding the usage of the ancient Church, in such
abundance of many the like, you shall (I think) be fully satisfied for this
part by S. Augustine, Ex li. 9. Confess. Ca. 11.13. and vlt.
in the goodly historye of his mothers death, a blessed wooman and worthy of
such a son. Her name was Monica, well known in gods Church, and numbered
amongst the sanctes. This good matrone provided especially, by her testament
that she might not be forgotten at the altar of God, when the names of the
faithful departed were in the sacrifice remembered. For that was common in all
Churchies, as partly is, and yet shall be better declared anon. The which her
worthy wll, her son Augustine so allowethe, that he sets it forth in the
ninth of his confessio^s to her aeternal memory, in these words. My mother
(says he) when the day of her passing hense was now at hand, much regarded
not how her body might curiously be covered, or with costly spiceis powdered:
nether did she count upon any gorgious tumbe or sepulcher: Note the whole
History, and fear not to follow it.
these things she charged us not will all. But her whole and only desire was,
that a memory might be kept for her, at thy holy altar good Lord, at which
she missed no day to serve the: where she knew the holy host was bestowed, by
which the bond obligatory that was against us, was cancelled. Mark good
reader as we go by the way, what that is which in the blessed sacrifice of
thaultare is offered, how clear a confession this man and his moother do
make of their faith and the Churchies belife, concerning the blessed host of
our daily oblation: behoulde that weemen in those days knew by the ground of
their constante faith, that which our superintendents in their incredulity
now a days can not confess. Consider how careful all virtuous people were
in the primityue Church, both learned and simple, as to be present at the
altar in their life time, so after their death to be remembered at the same.
Whose worthy endeavors as often as I consider (and often truly I do consider
theyme) I can not but lament our contrary affection, which can nether abide the
sacrifice, the host, nor the altar in our days, and therefore can look for
no benefit thereby after the day of our death once coom upon us, as our fore
fathers both looked for, and out of doubt had. But leaving the peculiare
consideration of such things to the good and well disposed, let us go
forward in the fathers paths, and see whether this so well learned a clerk
counted this zele of his oulde moother, blind devotion, as we brutes think of
our fathers holiness now a days. For which matter we shall find, The cursed
Cha^ has many children in our days.
that first eue^ as she desired, the sacrifice of the mass was offered for
her, not only for thaccomplishent of her godly request, but because the Church
of god did that office for all that was departed in Christ, as we read in
sundry placies of this man's works, and as in the same book of confessions
he thus declares and testifies: (I leave the Latin, because the treatise
grows to greater length then I was aware of, at the beginning, if I corrupt
the meaning or intent of the writer, let my adversaries take it for an
advantage) thus he says therefore. Nether did I weep in the time of the
prayers, when the sacrifice of our price was offered for her: nor yet
afterward when we weere at our prayers likewise, the corpse standing at the
grave side, etc. Cap. 13. Lib. 9. and vltimo.
Whereby every reasonable man must needs acknouledge that both prayers and
sacrifice was made for her, as her meanig and godly request was before her
passage. she being thus therefore brought home with supplication and sacrifice
solemnly, Master Grindall look in your grammar what figure S. Augustine
used here.
was not yet forgotten of her happy child. But afterward he thus very
devoutly makes intercession for her quiett rest: Now I call upon the,
gracious Lord, for my dear moothers offensies, give ear unto me for his sake
that was the sallue for our sins, and was hanged upon the cross: who
sittethe on the right hand of God, and makethe intercession for us. I know she
wroght mercyfully, and forgave those that did offend her: and now good God
pardon her of her offensies, which she by any means after her baptism
committed, forgive her merciful god, forgive her, I humbly for Christ's sake
pray the, and enter not into judgment with her, but let thy mercy pass thy
justice, because thy words are true, and have promised mercy to the merciful.
And in the same chapter a little afterward, he thus both prays him self
for her, and ernestly inuitethe other men to do the same, in these words:
Inspire my lord God, inspire thy servants my brethren, thy children and my
masters, whom with will, word, and pen I serve, that as many as shall
read these, may remember at thine altar thy hand maiden Monica. And her laite
husband Patricius, through whose bodies, thowe brought me into this liefe and
world. Thus was that holy matrone by her good child made partaker after her
death, of the thing which she most desired in her liefe. And him self
afterward in his own see of Hippo in Aphrick, had sacrifice said for him at
his departure, though the day of his death fell at the pityfull havoc, which
the Vandalles k^pt being Arians in those parties, commanding the christian
Catholics to be buried with out service as I said before. This blessed Bishop
departing out of this liefe in the besiege of his own City, had
notwithstanding, oblation for his rest, as Possidonius writing his life,
Possidonius in vita August.
and praesent at his passage, does testify. Augustinus, me^bris omnibus sui
corporis incolumis, integro aspectu atque auditu, nobis astantibus and
videntibus, ac cum eo pariter orantibus, obdormiuit in pace cu^ patribus suis,
enutritus in bona senectute: and nobis coram positis, pro eius commendanda
corporis depositione sacrificium deo oblatum est, and sepultus est. Augustine
(says he) being sownde in his limbs, nether his sight nor hearing failing
him, I being then praesent and in his sight, and praying together with him,
departed this world in pea^e unto his elders, being continued till a fare age.
And so, we being praesent, the sacrifice for the commendacion of his rest was
offered unto God first, and streght upon that was he buried. Thus lo all these
fathers taught: thus they practiced, thus they lived, and thus they died: none
was saved then but in this faith, let no man look to be saved in any other
now.

That we and all nations, received this usage of praing and sacrificing for
the departed, at our first conversion to Christ's faith. And that this article
was not only confirmed by miracle amongst the rest, but severally by signs
and vvoonders approved by it sellfe. An that the Church is grown to such
beauty by the fructes of this faith.

Cap. 10.
MAny more examples of these matters might be brought out of S. Gregorye,
diverse owte of Damascene, enowe out of what writer so ever you like best:
such choice we have in so good a cause, whereof every man's works are full.
But I will pass over the rest, that I may only report one history owte of our
own Church, in the pure spring whereof, the apostolic faith abundantly isshued
down from the principal pastors of gods Church, with great spread of
religion, which sith that time has bewtified our co^try in all gods gifts
with the best. And amongst many evident testimonies of this truethe, with the
practice thereof, both to be fownd in Gildas and in holy Beda, there is a
strange and a very rare example, not only for the plain declaration of the
usage of our Church in the first fowndation of our faith, but for an open
show by miracle in this liefe, how God releaseth of his mercy, by the holy
oblation at the altar, the pains of the departed in the world to coom. It
shall be comfortable to the Catholics, to consider this part of our belief
to be confirmed by the miraculouse working of God, as all other lightely be, in
placies where the faith is first taught. And that our whole faith which our
nation received of S. Augustine the monk, was so confirmed by the power of God,
not only our own histories do declare, but S. Gregory him sellfe affirms
it, writing his letters to Augustine in this sense: that he should not arrogate
any such woonderous works to his own power or virtue: Beda li. 1. cap. 31.
which then God wroght by him, not for his own holiness, but for the planting
of Christ's faith in the nation where those signs were shewde.

Li. 4. hist. Cap. 21.
Beda therefore, writes this notable history of a miracle done not many years
after our people was converted, in the beginning of his own days: that in a
foghten field betwixt Egfride and Edeldred, two princies of our land, it
fortuned that a^ young gentleman off Egfrides army, should be so greuouslye
wounded, that fauling down both him self with owte sense, and in all me^nes
sightes stark dead, he was letten lie of the enemies, and his body soghte
with care to be buried of his friends. A brother of his, a good priest and
Abbate, with diligens making search for his body, amongst many happed on one
that was exceeding like him (as a man may easily be deceived in the alteration
that streght falls upon the souls departure, to the whole form and fashion
of the body) and bestowed of his love, the duty of obsequies, with solemn
memorials for the rest of him, whom he took to be his brother deceased:
buriyng him in his own monastery, and causing Mass to be done daily for his
pardon, and souls release. But so it fortuned, that his brother Huma (for so
was he caulled) being not all out dead, with in four and twenty hours came
reasonably to hi^ self again: and gathering with all sum stre^ght, rose up,
washte him self, and made means to com to sum friend or acquaintau^ce, where he
might sallue his sores, and close his wou^des again: But by lack of stre^gthe
to make shifte, and by misfortune, he fell into his enemies hands: and there by
the Captain examined of his estate, he denied him self to be of name or
degrie in his coontry. Yet by the lykelyhoods that they gathered of his coomly
demeanure, and gentleman like taulke, which he could hardly dissemble, they
mistruste (as it was in deed) that he was a man of arms, and more then a
common soldier. Therefore in hope of good gain by his raunson, they thought
good after he was full recovered, for fear of his escape to lay yrons upon him,
and so to make sure work. But so God wrought, that no fetters could howld
him: for every day once at a certain hour, the bands bracke lowse with owte
force, and the man made free. The gentleman maruailed at the case him self,
but his kepers and the captain were much more astoyned thereat, and straitely
examined him by what cooning or craft he could with such ease set him self
at liberty: and bare him in hand, that he used characters or letters of sum
sorcery and which craft, with the practice of unlawful arts. But he answered
in sadness, that he was altogether unskillful in such things. Mary (quod
he) I have a brother in my coontry that is a priest, and I know certainly
that he says often Mass for my soul, supposing me to be departed and slain
in battle, And if I were in an other life, I perceive my soul by his
intercession should be so lowsed out of pains, as my body is now from bonds:
The captain perceiving so much, and belyke in sum awe of religion, seeinge
the work of God to be so strange, sold him to a Londoner: with whom the
same things happened in his bonds lowsing every day. By which occasion he
was licensed to go home to his friends, and procure his ranson, for chargeing
him with diverse sorts of surest bands, none could sallfely howlde him. And
so upon promise of his return or payment of his appointed price, he went his
ways, and afterward truly discharged his credet. Which done by friendship
that he fownd in the same coontry, afterward returned to his own parties, and
to his brothers house: to whom when he had uttered all the history of his
strange fortune, both of his misery and miraculous relieuing, he enquired
diligently the whole circumstance, with the hour and time of his daily
lowsinge: and by conferring together, they fownde that his bonds brake lowse
especially, at the very just time of his celebration for his soul. At which
times he confessed, that he was otherwise in his great adversities often
released also, Thus has that holy writer almost word for word, and at the end
he adds this: Multi haec a praefato viro audientes, accensi sunt in fide ac
deuotione pietatis, ad orandum, vel eleemosinas faciendas, vel ad offerendas
Domino victimas sacrae oblationis, pro ereptione suorum qui de saeculo
migrauerant. Intellexerunt enim quod Sacrificium salutare, ad redemptionem val^
ret, and animae and corporis sempiternam. H^nc mihi historiam, etiam hi qui ab
ips^ ^iro in quo facta est audiere, narrarunt ^nde eam, qui aliquando comperi,
ind^tanter historiae nostrae Ecclesiasticae i^rendam credidi. Many hearing thus
such of the party him self, were ^onderfully inflamed with faith a^ zele, to
pray, to give almose, an ^o offer sacrifice of the holy oblatio^, for the
delivery of their well-beloved friends departed owte of this l^^e. For they
^nderstoode that the healthful sacr^fice, was available for the redempt^on of
both body and soul euerlasting^^. And this story, did they that heard of the
parties own mouth, reported unto me. Where upon having so good proof, I dare
be bowlde to write it in my ecclesiastical history. And thus much says Beda
abowte eghte hundred years ago, when our nation being but young in
Christianity, was fed in the true belief, by sundry wondrous works of god.
That faith is the true faith into which our nation was first converted from
infidelity


We must here stay alitle, and ponder in o^^ minds, how our forefathers and
people ^f our own land were taught in this art^^^, when they were first
delivered owte (...) Satan's bondage, and converted to the ^elowship of
Christ's Church. and let us (...) thing doubt, but that which our own
^postles both by word and work, by m^^acle and by martyrdom first proved
unto ^s, is the very true and infallible faith o^ our Christianity. For if
that were not ^ue which at our first conue^sion was preached unto us, then we
^eceiued not the faith, but faulshoode a^ their hands: the^ the histories
do rake a lowdelye, in testifiing we were t^^ned to the Christian faith both
at that time and by such men, then it were no conversion from heathen Idolatry
to the woorship of Christ, but it were a change from one superstition to an
other: and this latter so much worse then the other, because under the name of
Christ there were practice perpetual of execrable sacrilege, in instituting of
a sacrifice to the defasing of our redemption, in adoring bare bread as the
host of our salvation, in offering it up to God for the sins both of the
quick and dead, in practice of unprofitable prayers for the souls deceased,
with the like faulse worship of God in all points. Then their preaching was
highly to Gods dishonor, pernicious to the people, and damnalbe to theime
selves. Then have all that ever ran the raze of that faith and doctrine,
till this day, which they taught, perished with theime: then are they fownd
false witnesseis, whom we have accounted as our undoubted, true and lawful
pastors: then God has purposely deceived us with fained miracles full many,
with numbers off vain visions, then al our labor is lost till this day. The
holiness of so many, good princies and priests is praised in vain, the
blood of Martyrs shed in vain, the exercise of al sacraments in vain: and
because all devotion consisted in our fathers days in the earnest zele of so
faulse a religion, as they think this to be, then the more devotion the
farther from Christ, the less religion, more nere to salvation: then happy was
he that was the worst, and cursed was he that was counted the best: then is
our case most careful, then are we worse the^ all other nations, that never
received the name of Christ: then are we worse the^ we were before our
conversion, then (to be short) thereis no religion, no Christ, no God, no hope
of salvation.

All which things if they repugne to common sense and reason, and to the
comfortable hope of our salvation, which we have received from god by Christ
Jesus, and the assured testimony of the spirit of God, that we be a part of
his chosen Church, and sanctified in his holy name by the word of truethe and
life, which we by the ordinary ministry of man have received (signs and
woonders co^firming their calling and doctrine) then this religion which they
planted first in our contrie, must needs be in all points both holy, true,
and acceptable unto God. Then as by that religion our fathers were ingraffed
first in to Christ's body mystical, which is the Church, in which till this
day they have kept the high way to salvation, so who so ever forsakes this,
or any principal article or branch thereof, and so leauethe that Church into
which we first entered at our conversion, Note and take heed betime.
he leaves assuredly life and salvation, and with out all doubt everlastingly
perishes. Amongst which points of doctrine, our adversaries can not deny,
but the saing mass and offering for the dead, the allmose and prayers for the
departed, was taught with the first, and proved by miracles with the rest.
The which either to deny were over much discredit of the antiquitye, and
plain impudency: or else to attribute theyme to the devils woorking, were
oppen intolerable blasphemy.

Yea this doctrine has brought the Church to this bewtifull order in all
degries as we have seen. All the noble monuments, not only in our
commo^welthe, but through Christ's church do bear sufficient testimony of,
our first faith herin. This doctrine (as the whole world knows) founded
all Bisshoprikes, builded al Churchies, raised al Oratories, If praing for the
dead were taken away there should no step of religigion remain.
instituted al Collegies, endued all Schools, maintened all hospitalles, set
forward al works of charirye and religion, of what sort so ever they be.
Take a way the prayers and practice for the dead, either al these momuments
must fall, or else they must stand against the first founders will and
meaning. Look in the statutes of all noble foundacions, and of all charitable
works, ever sith the first day of our happy calling to Christ's faith,
whether they do not expressly testify, that their work of almose and
devotion, was for this one especial respect, to be prayde and song for, as
they call it, after their deaths. Look whether your Universities protest not
this faith by many a solemn oath, both privately and openly. Look whether
all preachers that ever took degrie in the University before these years, are
not bound by the holy evangelists, to pray for certain noble princies and
praelates of this realm, All our superintendents are deeply and daily
perjured.
in every of their sermons at Paul's, or other placies of name. And so often as
these preachers do omit it, so often are they perjured: so often as they either
eat or drink of their benefactors cost, so often bear they testimony of
their own damnation. Answer me but one question I ask you: Whether the
first authors of such benefits as you enjoy in the Church at this day, A
hard question proposed to the Protestant.
either of bisshopricke, or college, or any other spiritual liuelyhoodde, say
yowre minds unfeignedly, whether they ever me^t that such men, of such a
religion, of such life, of such doctrine, should enjoy that allmose which
they especially ordained for other men, and for contrary purpose? say truethe
and shame the devil, thought they ever to make room in Collegies for your
wives, me^t they ever to maintain preachinge against the mass, against
prayers for their own souls? when they purposely upon that ground began so
godly a work? if they in deed never meant it, as I know theye did not, and
as your oune consciencies bear witness with them, and against your selves
that they did not, how ca^ you the^ for fear of gods high displeasure,
against their own wills, usurp those commodities which they never meant to
such as you be. A less good men, they thought to make friends of wicked
mammon, and full dearly, with both lands and gooddes, have they procured
enemies to their own souls. But if there be any sense in those good fathers
and fou^ders (as there is) and if they be in heaven, as their good deserving I
trust has brought theime, then surely they accuse you most justly of wicked
injustice before the face of God, for deluding the people, for breaking their
wills, for usurping their commodities, against their professed minds and
meaninges. Or if they be in hell (which God forfende, and yet you must needs
so suppose, for raising the monuments of such superstition) then blotte out
their memory and names, that have not only in their life mainteyned
horrible abusies, but also after their death have left such open steps
of superstition, to all posteritye. Suppose I pray you, which yet I would be
loathe should coom to proof or pass, but suppose for all that, that with the
taking a way of this oulde faith of praying and offering for the dead, all
the works of the same faith which isshued down from that fountain, might
shrink with all, or return to the fownders again, because there is no rowme
to fulfill their wills, how many Churchies and chappelles, what Collegies
or hospitalles, would our new no faith bring forth? Would not every
bisshoppes wife build a Church think you, or found a College in such a
necessitye, lest their husbands should be driven to serve in a reformed
frensh barn? Super Aggaeum.
One of these mock bishops complains very so^e in a book of his, that men be
not now bent with such zele and devotion to praeferre gods honor, in
maintenance of his Ministers, as they were in owlde time, and as Co^stantinus,
with the like christian Princies in the primitive church, were. But the good
man marked not whereupon this could devotion arisethe: he considerethe not, that
this is the fructlesse effect of so idle a faulse faith, as his own lordship
preaches: he would not see that the maintenance of gods honor, both by
liefe lands and gooddes, is the peculiare fructe of that charitable loving
faith, which the Catholics do profess: he weyed not well, that the great
grauntes of Constantinus, were made to Syluester Bishop of Rome, and not to the
married Bishope of Duresme. He remembered not, that the like holy works of the
noble kings of our own coontrie, were practiced upon such as would
profess the truth, and serve the altar, and not upon faulse pastors, that
were destroyers of all altars. Such honorable portions were parted out for
gods lote, and not taken from the world, to go to the worldely ageine. Think
you any man were so minded, to take from his own wiefe and children, either
lands or gooddes, to bestow on priests babbes or bedfellowes? No no God
knowethe: it was separated from them selves to the sacrifice, to the
priesthoodde, to the honor of gods Church and ministerye. The which things
by your own preaching (my lords) decaide, would you have the Prince or
peoples devotion toward you, as is was, and would be still, if you were like
your praedecessors, and served the altar as they did? I wisse if the owlde S.
Cuthbert, Wilfride, and William, whom they compare in holiness to horsies (so
good is their opinion of their holy auncieters) had been of the same religion
that the occupiers of their roumes now be, all the praelates in England might
have put their rentes in a halpeny purse. Coom in again, coom in for Christ's
sake, com in to the church again, serve the altar, and then you be worthy to
live of the altar: follow our fathers, and you shall beloved as our fathers
were, confess that religion which our own Apostles first taught, and we all
have believed, and all the works of gods Church protest to be true, and then
you shall be blessed of God, and honored of men.

But let theime think on these matters theime selves. I will turn ageine to
my purpose, allthoughe I can not go far from my matter, so long as I am in
the behouldinge of that faith which our first preachers brought unto us at our
first conversion, or in any stepp of thantiquitye: which we well perceive to be
the fructe only of that doctrine which we have declared, and an evident
testimony off so undoubted a truethe. I think there is no way so certain for
the contentation of a man's self, in this time of doubting and diuersitye in
doctrine, as in all matters to have an eye toward the faith which we
received, when we were first converted. And for that point, I would wisshe
that S. Bedes historye were familiare unto all men that has understanding of
the Latin tongue, and to all other if it were possible: for there shall they
plainly see, the first beginning, the increase, the continuance, the practice,
the works proceeding out of the catholic faith: fear not that is the
truethe, for that was the first, and that was grownded by gods word, and
openly confirmed by miracule. And that point must be considered not only for
our own contrye, but for all others that be, or has been Christianed. For
in to the self same faith were they first ingraffed also* as by the
peculiare practicing of every good man toward his friend and lover, I have
alredye declared, and now for the general usage of gods Church the reader
shall at large perceive, that nothing may want to our cause, whereby any
truth or light may be had.

That in every order or usage of celebration of the blessed sacrament and
Sacrifice, through ovvte the Christian world, since Christ's time, there has
been a solemn supplication for the souls departed.

Cap. 11.
Therefore let us see how the church our moother, of her piety uses
general supplication in all service, and solemn administration of the blessed
sacrament, even for those whole friends have forgotten theyme: whose pains and
travel worldely me^ remember not: whose obscure condition of life or poverty,
would not suffer theime to procure prayers, by their known deeds of charity
or almose. Those men I say, that do lack singular patronage of their
friends, those has she remembered in the rites of celebration, used in all
contries, and in every age since the apostles days. Which ordres of divine
service, as they have been diverse in form of words, so they perfectly and
wholly agreed in the substance of the sacrifice, in praying and offering for the
dead, and supplication to sanctes, as thowe shall streght ways by their used
order of words perceive.

And as we go forward herein, ever let us bear this rule in mind. Quod lege^
credendi, lex statuit supplicandi, in that sense speaks S. Augustine So says
S. Augustine often against the Pelagians.
often against haeretikes: the order of the churches prayer, is ever a plain
praescription for all the faithefull what to believe. And the motherlye
affection that the Church bearethe toward al her children departed, the
said doctor thus expresses: De cura pro mort.
Non sunt praetermittendae supplicationes pro spiritibus mortuorum, quas
faciendas pro omnibus in Christiana and Catholica societate defunctis, etiam
tacitis nominibus quorumcunque, sub generali commemoratione suscepit ecclesia:
vt quibus ad ista desunt parents, aut filij, aut quicunque cognati, vel amici,
ab vna eis exhibeantur pia matre communi. That is to say in our tongue. Prayer
must not be omitted for the souls departed, which the church has
customablye taken in hand for all men passed in the Christian Catholic society,
by the way of a general commemoration, their names not particularely
expressed: that such things may be provided by our common kind moother, to
all those which do lack parents, children, kinsfolk or friends, for the due
provision of such necessary duties. By this holy man's words we may see the
difference betwixt our own tender natural moother, and the cursed cruel
step dame. The one folowethe her children with love and affection in to the
next world, with full sorrowful sighs, many devout prayers, and al holy works:
which she uses to their needeful help: the other being but an unnatural
steppemoother, and all the children of that adoulterouse seed, has them no
longer in mind the^ they be in sight: whether they sink or swhim she makes no
account: she has no blessinge of her own, she hinderethe the mercy of
other. But let us vewe all the orders, that we find extant or used through
the Christian world, for the celebration of the blessed Sacrament and
sacrifice, which now commonly in our vulgar speech we caull the Mass, and
see whether as Augustine said, there has not been in all agies an especial
supplication of the priest and people, for the dead as well as for the lieue.
First S. Clement, Co^stitut. l. 8. cap. 47.
the Apostles own scholare, reportethe how they prescribed this solemn
prayer in their holy ministry for the departed: Pro quiescentibus in Christo,
fratres nostri rogemus. etc. Let us pray (says the deacon) brethern, for all
those that rest in peace, that our merciful Lord, that has taken their
souls in to his hand, would forgive them al their offensies, whether they
were willinglye or negligently committed: and so having compassion upon them,
would bring theime to the land off the holy ones, and happy rest with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob: and all other that pleaced him from the beginning* where there
is nether sighing, sorrow, nor sadness. And a little after in the same holy
action, the Bishop prays him self, in this form. O Lord look down upon
this thy servant, whom thowe have received in to another life: and pitefully
pardon him if either willingly or vnweetingly he has offended. Let him be
guarded by peaceable Angels, and brought to the Patriarchs, Prophettes, and
Apostles, and the rest of all theime that have pleaced the since the world
began. Thus reports Clement, being one of the apostles company, and
continually praesent in the celebration of their mysteries. Again, Eccles.
hierarch. Cap. 17.
Dyonisius Ariopagita of whom mention is maid in the acts (so ancient be
the records of our faith) has not only left in writing what he thought in
this matter, which had been enoughe, but also what the Church Apostolic in
that spring of religion and pure devotion, taught and ordained to be used, and
that by the Apostles prescription: whom he there terms the heavenly gides and
capitaines of truth. For in the last chapter of his book, titled of the
Ecclesiastical soueraintye, he tells in order, how first the body is placed
before the holy altar, how the solemn mysteries with heavenly psalms and
sonets be song and said over the corpse, how the holy Bishop gives thanks
to god, makethe comfortable exhortation to the assembly, to continue in assured
hope off the resurrection: how he anoyntethe the body with holy oil, and
last of all makethe praiyers for him, and so committethe him to God. The
which whole order off the sacrifice, ceremonies, and mystical prayers,
exercised as well in burialls, as at other times in the reverent mysteries,
this author would not fully set owte in writing, for their sakes that could
not for the weakness of faith atteine to the worthy holiness of so high
matters, as he him sellfe professethe, in these words: Praecationes quae in
misterijs adhibentur nephas est scripto interpretari, and misticam eorum
intelligentiam aut vim, quae in eis, deo authore, efficacitatatem habent, ex
adyto in publicum efferre: sed quemadmodu^ a maioribus nostris traditum
accepimus etc: The prayers which be used in the mysteries, may not in anywyes
be set out to the world in writing, nether may the singular efficacy and
grace of theime be made common to all men: but even as we have received by
thandes of our eldres. And as long as this order was religiously kept in
gods Church, the solemn secrets of the blessed sacraments, were not so
conte^ptible as our new oppen communion has of late made theime, where
there is nothing so holy but it may abide the sight and handeling, of whosoever
ever is the worst. The holy and heavenly mysteries of Christ his spouse, were
not the^ profaned by the praesumptiouse babbling of every idle head: The^ were
not the sovereign weghty matters handeled in alehowses, but used at the holy
altares. Then the idle, contentious, ungodly, and unprofitable quirkes and
quaestions, had no other solution but sharp discipline, and worthy correction:
then were not the Gydes of gods people countrowled by every restless fellow,
In homil contra Sabellian. Athan: ad Epictetum.
that could crack of gods word: but it was enoghe for a faithful man's
contentatio^ to say with Basil the great: Dominus ita docuit, apostoli
predicaueru^t, patres obseruaueru^t co^firmaueru^t martyrs, sufficiat dicere
ita doctus sum. Our Lord taught so, the apostles so preched, our fathers
observed the same, the holy martyrs have sealed it, It is sufficient for me to
say: so was I taught. O Lord, that this simple sincere fidelity might once
take place again in our days, for the coomforte of the poor faithful
flock, that are now so burdened with questions of infidelitye, that the sely
simples souls ca^ not tell how to turn theime selves, nor find means to
keep their faith inuiolated, in such a multitude of misbeleuers. Which I
surely hope the earnest and pitiful prayers of so many good men that do
bewail this misery, shall at length after due poonishment of our sins
obtain at gods gratiouse hands. But what shifte do the adversaries here
make, with this evident testimony of this so ancient a writer? mary sir they
endeavor with all their might, to rob this excellent ancient and divine
writer of all his works, which have borne the title of his name ever sith
theye were written: Ita Suidas testatur
which challenge their own author by that grave style that no other man, as the
skillful in that languange do testify, could ever lightly atteyne unto:
which so sauore of the antiquity, and the apostolic spirit, that thowe would
deem theyme to be indicted by sum of the continual hearers of Christ Jesus.
But it were vain to stand in contention for this matter, for we should never
have end, if we should be put to prove that every man made the books which be
extant in his name: it weere to much miscredit of antiquity, and uncertainty
of all things. Allthoughe this man's works have been both named, Origin
Athan. Damascen. Nicenum. 2
and certain sente^cies alleged out of theyme, by most ancient doctors and
councelles. With whom, the adversaries if they list be busy, shall wrestle,
for I will seek out as my purpose was, whether in other times and vsageis of
celebration, this kind memorial of the dead, has not been kept. S. Cipriane
shall not be called to record for the Church of Aphrike or Carthage, because we
heard his judgment before: who plainly commanding the priests under his
jurisdiction not to celebrate for certain notoriouse offenders, Epi. 9. li. 1
gives us to wit, that of right and custom it belonged in his province to
others that, passed hense in obedience and pietye. The which was continued in
that part of the world till Augustines time, De cura pro mortuis. et alibi
saepe.
being about.cc. years after him. Thus breffely he tells you the practice of
his Church. In praecibus sacerdotis quae domino deo ad eius altar funduntur,
locum suum habet etiam co^mendatio animarum. In the prayers of the priest,
which are made to our Lord God at his altar, the commendation of the
departed has a place. Now for the greek Churchies and the east, S.
Chrisostom and Basil in their Massies (for so now the word lyturgia is used
of all the divine writers, and so Erasmus translateth it, and so it must
needs be taken) bear sufficient witness of the Apostolic tradition in this
point. For in S. Chrisostoms service thus the prayer is made for the dead:
Lyturgia Chrisosto.
Remember good Lord our spiritual father and all the brotherhoodde in
Christ, and all those that are departed hense in faith, our fathers and our
brethren etcae. And again in the same Mass after ward, thus he praythe:
Remember all those, good Lord, which have taken their sleep in the hope of
resurrection, and liefe everlasting: Cause them to take rest, where the light
of thy cowntenaunce is showed. Lyturgia Basilia.
In S. Basilles Mass which the Syrians use, there is also prayers for the
departed: in which the minister desirethe God to remember all theime which be
passed out of this world: and that he would refresshe them in his holy
tabernacle, saffely lead theime through the horrible and fearful dwellinges,
and place theime in quiet and joyful abydinge: that he would deliver them
from the land of darkness, troble, and sorrow: that he enter not in to
judgment with theime, finallye that he would mercifully remitte and pardon,
what so ever they committed through the vesture of the flesh, that was
woorthye punishment. This prayer was pithie, and touches the placies of
poonishment and purgation in the next liefe,

So there is extant an other order of divine service and Celebration of the
communion, called the general Canon, vniuersalis Canon.
used in Aethiopia: which lately with the rest was set forth in latin: in
that so general an usage, there is supplication made to God for the souls
also. Remember Lord (says the minister) all those which are a sleep, and rest
in the faith of Christ, place their souls, we besiche the, in the bosom of
our fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. So likewise in the service of the
Armenians, Lyturgia Amentoru^.
consonant for the most part to the greek usage, after supplication in the
time of the holy oblation for the lyuinge, streght way prayers be devoutly made
for the dead. First the deacon says. Rogate dominum pro animabus quae
requiescunt in pace, inprimis episcoporum hic quiescentium. That is to say:
pray unto our Lord for the souls which rest in peace, namely and before al
other, for the Bishops resting in this place. And the^ he prays thus:
Remember Lord and have mercy, and show thy favorable grace to all the souls
deceased, pacify and illuminate theime, adioyne theime to the company of holy
sanctes in heaven, and make theime worthy of thy love. But S. Ambrose in his
praeparatory prayer toward the holy oblation, In prima prece praeparatoria ad
missam.
geuethe us an excellent token of his churchies faith, and a singular example
to follow in the time of the dreadful mysteries, when we remember our frindes
departed: thus he says. Rogamus te sancte pater, pro spiritibus fideliu^
defunctoru^, vt sit illis salus aeterna ac perpetua sanitas, gaudium and
refrigerium sempiternum, hoc magnum pietatis sacramentum. domine Deus meus sit
illis hodie magnum and plenum gaudium de te pane viuo and vero qui de coelo
descendisti, and das vitam mundo: A notable solemn prayer of S. Ambrose for
the souls departed.
de carne sancta and benedicta, agni videlicet immaculati, qui tollis peccatu^
mundi: and potare de font pietatis tuae, qui per lanceam militis de latere
emanauit crucifixi Christi, domini nostri, vt consolati exultent in laud and
gloria tua sancta. This in english: we beseech the most holy father for the
souls of al faithefull departed, that this high and great sacrament of
piety, may be unto theime health and salfty for ever, joy, release, and
perpetual refresshinge: O my Lord God give theime this day great and
perfect comfort of thee, which art the bread that came down from heaven, and
geuest liefe to the world. Let them take joy of thy holy and blessed flessh,
that is to say of the lamb that takethe a way the sins of the world. Give
them to drink of the spring of thy piety, which by the prick of the
soldiers spear, did abundantly isshue out of the side of our savior Christ
and lord crucified, that they being so comforted, may rejoice in thy land and
glory everlastingly. To be brief, all the Christian world agreeing, as
Isiodorus says, upon one way for the celebratio^ of divine mysteries,
makethe intercession for the faithful departed, De ecclesi. officijs li. 1
Cap. 15.
that by the blessed sacrifice, they may obtain pardon and remission of their
sins.

For I assure the good reader, that all realms which now by Gods grace are
in true faith, and their Christianity continuing, or else before have been,
and now by schism do forsake the same, that all those nations as they
received one faith, so in substance they have ever agreede uniformly in order
of service, which they received at their first conversion from the way of
gentilitie, by the good provision of such, as wrought under God in their
happy turn to the Christian faith, and religion. The same men that brought in
the faith of Jesus, with all brought in, this way of worshipping Christ in the
same faith, take away then this order of worship, and solemn supplication
which they planted, thowe must needs overthrow the faith which they taught
also. This I say was ever fownd, in the celebration of the fearful mystery
of Christ's body an blood, besides the oblatio^ of that holy host for the
quick and dead, both namely for certain, and generally for all departed in
Christ, a solemn prayer and supplication. Which no doubt Christ instituted at
his last supper, which the holy ghost afterward secretly suggested to the
Apostles, which they again faithfully delivered to the nations converted by
their preaching, and to diverse of their own disciples: by whom the same was
derived down to our days, taught in all nations, and carefully practiced of
al people. Whereof we have worthy witnessies for all contries almost. For so
the godly doctors Tertulia^, Cypria^, Augustine, both taught and worshipped in
Afric, the same doothe Hiero^ and Damascene in Syria, Origin and Athanasius
in Egypt. Denyse the ancient, and Bernarde in France, Chrysostom in in
Thrase, Basil and his brethren in Cappadocia, Ambrose and Gregory the great
in Italy, Augustine our Apostle and Bid in our contrie of England: with the
rest of all nations baptized, whom I named before, and might do yet a number:
what should I say a number? all that ever were cownted Catholics since the
beginning, were of the same sense in that cause. And to name the residew where
these do not serve, it were lost labor. For whom they can not move, I can not
tell what may persuade him in any matter. Or if he dare not bestow his credet
on these men's doings, whom may he salfely trust? Yff the communion and
faithefull fellowship, of so many godly and gracious men so uniformly
consentinge both in the teaching and practicing of this matter, can not
sattell and quiet a man's conscience, who can appeace his disquieted
unsteadfast mind and cogitation? If in the construing of Gods word and
scriptures, so many of such grave idgement, of so approved wisdom, of so
passing learning, of such earnest studyie in trial of the truethe, of so
virtuous a liefe, of so heavenly a gift and grace in the expounding of Gods
word, may not be salfely followed in this our search, whom should we follow,
or to whom should the simple addicte theime selves, in so great a turmoyle
of learned men: one sort craking so fast of scripture, and the other sort, when
the matter commes to trial, alleging so many, with so ancient and grave
testimony for the true meaning of the same? to which I say, is it wisdom to
give consent and credet? if not to such as faithfully both follow and recite
the scripture with the agreement of the world for the true sense thereof. S.
Augustine writing against Parmenianus the Donatiste, much wonderethe in that
clear light of truethe and the Churchies doctrine, the heretics could be
blind, or not see the evidence of that, which all tbe world but theime
selves saw. And in many placies he reakeneth the most horrible poonishment in
the world, Lib. 2. cap. 3. contra epistolam Parmeniani.
to be the caecity and blindness which God stricketh the stubborn man's
heart with all, in forsaking the feloweship of the Churcheis children. But he
that co^sidereth the process of our cause, may a thousand times more marvel
and fear Gods heavy judgment, in the blinding of the disobedient men's
hearts and sensies for sin. If they theyme selves were of their consciencyes
examined, what else they would wisshe for the trial of any doubt, I am sure
they could name no one point, nor any means in the world, which our cause
would not suffer and admit. For by what way so ever, any truethe in Gods
Church was severally in the ancient times avouched against the adversary
haeretike, I am sure we have the same with the advantage. And for this last
point of prayers in the Massies of all nations, it is so evident, that no man
can gain say it: and so generally pactised, that the usage of praying could
in no matter ever so clearly set owte the certainty of our belief, as in
this.

The haeretikes of our time and contry, be yet further urged with the
practice of prayers for the deceased, their contrary communion is compared
with the oulde usage of Celebration: They are ashamed of the first original
of their Christian faith, they are vveery of their own service, they are
kept in order by the wisdom of the Civil magstrates, and are forced flatly
to refuse all the doctors.

Cap. 12.
THe chief argument, that the Church of god used in oulde time against
Pelagius thenimy of gods grace, was this: that at the holy altar the Priest
prayed to god, for to convert heretics and infidiles to the faith, and evil
livers wicked conversation to virtue and honesty: the which prayers had been to
no purpose, if the grace of God had not borne the principal stroke in the
changing of man's heart. But being assured of this as a ground, that the
prayer of the Priest in the whole Churchies name at the altar, can not but
bear singular strenghte and truethe, it is necessarily concluded, that seeing
the public minister so prays, that we must needs believe, that God has
man's heart in his hand, and may turn it to the belief of his word, or
love of his will, as he likes and listethe: not withstanding the perfect
freedom of man's will, which by gods grace is never perished, but alwaied
perfected. And in this assured foundation of the publke prayers, S. Augustine
who then was the soldier of grace, so triumphed against one Vitalis a
Pelagia^, that he ringeth him this peale. Exerce contra oration nes ecclesiae
disputationes tuas, and quando audis sacerdotem dei ad altar exhortantem
populum dei orare pro incredulis, subsanna pias voces ecclesiae, and dic te non
facere quod hortatur: Epist. 107. contra Vital.
and homo in Carthgaiensi cruditius ecclesia, etiam beatissimi Cypriani librum
de oratione dominica condemna. Hold on fellow, exercise thy contentious taulke
against the usual prayers of gods Church, and when thowe hear the Priest
of God at is altar exhort the people to pray for the misbeleuers, scoff at
the holy words, and make him answer, thou willte not pray as he biddes the:
And being brought up in the Church of Carthage, condemn with all, S.
Cyprians work upon our Lords prayer, wherein he teaches the same. I tarry
now the longer on this point, that thowe may learn to keep an haeretike at
the bay: and to fasten thy stroke so surely upon him, that which way so ever he
shift, he shall bear thy blow upon his neck and shoulders. It is not for our
cause taken in hand, that I now so much travel, for that is long since made
sure enoghe, for all the devils in hell, or their folowers in earth. But I
would in this one example of praying for the dead, give the studious a taste
of all such ways, as the truethe of all other points in controversy, may be
both surely defended, and so planely proved and vpholden, that the adversary
shall not be able to say baff unto any one of the least of all the grounds,
whrereupon Gods truethe standethe. Handeling then our good men as S.
Augustine did the like, say to theyme bouldely: that the same Church which
exhortethe the people to pray sor the misbeleeuers, doothe give us example to
pray for the souls departed: Vitalis and Pelagius were haeretikes for
withstanding the one, they must needs be as very haeretikes for refusing the
other. It was the greatest extremity that Pelagius could be driven to by force
of Augustines argument, to mock at the priests prayer made at gods altar,
and that which then was so foul an absurditye for those faulse teachers, can
it-be borne out of ours with honesty? Vitalis the Pelagian had a foul foil
by S. Augustine, when he charged him with the contempt of S. Cyprians
authority Bisshoppe of Carthage, being him sellfe a chyeld of the same Church:
And shall they go away so smouthly now adays, not only with contempt of
their own English patrons and Apostles, but with impudent denial of all the
doctors at once, that ever were gydes of gods Church since Christ's faith
was taught? It was of Augustine counted a singular arroga^cy not to pray in
that form as gods church and ministers at the altar both pray them
selves, and exhort other to pray: and shall it be such praise for our preachers
to erecte a new service to be check mate with the oulde, to co^troele the
rites and usage of solemn supplication in all coontryes Christianed, and
with the true woorship to banishe together our fathers faith? I would learn
by what Churchies example they have letfe out of their new fangled
fantastical service, the offering and praying for the departed. One of theyme
was so inpudent, to say in an open book that the lyturgies of the fathers made
all against the Catholics, and for the proof of their faulse assertions.
Where in sir I pray you tel-me? I would call you by your name, if I knew who
you were* there you were ashamed of yowr own name, I guess it was M.
Pilkington of Duresm.
therefore ye shall lack the glory of your assertion. But who so ever you be, I
pray you what affinity betwixt their office of celebratio^ and yours, do you
find? they offer the holy host, they worship it, they show it, they pray
unto it, which of all these do you? they bless it with the sign of the
holy cross, they practice the action upon an altar, how well follow you
these? they pray for the dead, they make invocation solempnely to sanctes,
they join with all catholic churcheis in the world, where is your cause here
amended, or ours not plainly proved? If their service like you so well, or
at least better then S. Gregory's Mass, you might with more honesty have
cosed for any one of them, then have forged a new one of your own: which in
deed is directly repugnaunt to all other rites in the Christian world. Which
you may well term the service of contradiction and damnation, as one that
nether communicates with the sanctes in heaven, with the souls in purgatory,
nor with the faithful a live. And being ashamed of the Latin Church, you
challenge an other origin of faith out of the East part: as though your
matter were well amended, if you might shake of that faith and worship which
our contrie in her conversion first received, and in which till this day she
has happily lived, and make the head of our holy tradition uncertain, by
referring us unto an unknown origin. Every man in the primitive church
counted the spring of his faith more pure, and agreate deal more clear, if he
could against an haeretike declare by good testimony that his belief did at
length by just count, faule into the Roman church. So does Irenaeus against
the Valentinians, so doothe Cyprian against the Nouatia^s, so does Tertulian
and Vincentius against all haeretikes, so doothe Augustine and Optatus against
the Donatistes, so does Hierom and all the rest, against the Arians. All
these thought they had a great vauntage, if they cowld by plain account prove
against an haeretike that their doctrine isshued from the bishop of Rome. Go
whether thowe wilt (says Tertulian) and thou shall find sum apostolik seat
to instruct thy conscience: De prescri. aduers. haereti.
thowe have hard by the Philippos, or Ephesus, or Rome, and there lo fetch we
the authority of our faith. S. Augustine that knew best how to fetch an
haeterike over the coals, Epist. 165
vrgethe him ever to reduce his doctrine to sum bishop of Rome: when he had him
once at that strait, then lo, he goethe through the whole rank of holy
Bishops by name, to the number of xlty well near. Bring me once an evident
declaration that your faith isshued from any one bishop of that sea, and
then you may pass throw the long line of that succession with owte bracke,
or any rupture in the world. I could make account (says Irenaeus) of many
successions of Apostolik churches: but that were to long, only Rome shall
serve, that is the greatest, the auncientst, and best known, Lib. 3. ca. 3
and by the tradition of that church confundimus omnes eos, we utterly
confownde all haeretikes. It is a strange thing, that the fathers having store
of Apostolic successions, did ever chuese owte for the warrant of their
faith from amongst the rest, the Roman seat: And now when there is no
apostolic church left in the whole world but it, that they will seek to
churchies whereof there is nether certaynty, Note.
nor succession: when by plain open dealing we may reduce, and most needs
refer our faith to that, which was ever of all other most far from
faulshood. Bring my faith once to S. Gregory, and the very stream shall drive
me to S. Peter and Paul, maugre al their beardes. In which order of Bishops,
find me one that setforthe by decrie any practice of contrary doctrine, to
that which is next praedecessor did before him mayteine, and I will go seek
with the stray, a new moother Church to fownde my faith upon. If all be in
this succession salfe and sownde, what a folly were it to forsake our own
mother, and spring of our belief, to seek other which have often erred when
they stood, and now be almost wholly decaide. But yet it is wisdom for fallse
teachers with all force to fly from so great light, as may arise to the
truth by the recognizing of that sownd succession, and going the just
contrary way from the oulde doctors faith, it is not to be thought strange,
that they directly seek to over throw that bulwarck, which they ever leaned
unto in the storms of schism and haeresie. The shrewes do know full well the
might of truethe in that seat and succession, to have beaten down all their
forefathers, the haeretikes of all agies. They fear their faule, whose
steps they follow. They utter much malice, and torment them self in every
sermon in vain: that Church feels no sore, but in sorrow of compassion
toward her forsakers: she has bidden greater storms the^ this, first by
tyrauntes, then by haeretikes, last and most by the evil liefe of her own
Bishops. In all which she yet standethe, and ever rises to honor, as she is
most impugned. Their own preaching has singularely opened the might of god in
the defense of that seat of unity. When they first began to touch and taunte
the Pope in every sermon, in every play, in book and balate, men that before
living in faithefull simplicity much meddled not with his matters, nor often
heard of his name, began streghte upon their busy ralinge, to conceive by
reasonable discretion, that there lay sum great grownde of matter and weght of
truth upon that point which they cowld not digest in so many years bawling and
barking at his name: they saw the Pope ever in their way, never out of their
mouth, and they doubted not but that singular hatred grew upon sum great
importance: and so admoneshed luckely by the adversaries, they sought the
botto^ of that perfect and deep hatered, and fownde that it was the owld sore
of the Arians, and disease of the Donatistes, and common to all haeretikes:
they perceived by S. Cyprian that the first attempt of such men, De
simplicit. praelatorum.
was to drive away the pastore, that they might with owte resistance devour
and destroy the flock. And which was the prick of all their endeuoures, to
take from us the acknowleging of the great and singular benefit of our
conversion to the faith: that in stopping the head of that condethe, and
plentiful well of our faith, they might in heat of contention and haeresi,
By haeretikes preaching many are become catholics.
easily dry up the whole isshue thereof. And this earnest consideration
causes many at this day to forsake their haeresies: and to be agreate deal
more at this time, which know the truth of this matter, then when they began
first to preach thereof. But I will not press the^ over sore: suppose I grant
them that which they would so gladly win: that we had not our faith
first from Rome, though it be as false, as God is true. But suppose it were
not so, and I give you leave to father your faith where you will. If it be
not upon Latimer (whom a foulishe fellow, in the book of conference betwixt
Latymer and Ridley, terms thenglishe Apostle: as one more worthy of that
name (as he says) then Augustine, but else where you will: and when you have
done, prove me that your moother Church prays not for the departed in her
mass and solemn service, and you shall be exalted up forever. And at your
next change frame your new communion after that old usage on gods
blessinge: If you can find any form of celebration far enoughe from ours,
follow it and spare not

But I am sure, you shall never be hable to find any oulde service in the
world fit for your new diet. They be all to much like our Mass for your
purpose, Our Mass is al one with the Masses of all other coontries and times
as in deed alone in every point of importance with ours. As the Churchies
to whom they belonged, perfectly before their decay, in faith and unity
agreed with ours. I am sure when you can not like your own communion, ye would
not be pleaced with one of an others making. But another you must needs
have, and further you must go from us, walk forward you will to the extreme
end off haeresie, and utter denyinge of Christianitye. All the world can not
stop you faulling from the hill of Gods Church, till you coome in the
bottomless pit of hell. I would be loathe to sclaunder theime with the brute
of the world, which though it be in every ma^s mouth, that they like not
this communion, yet upon that rumor I would not have said so far, but that
they have uttered their own meaning, in a treatise of their own making, in
these words: Ageynste the Chester man.
In marriage as in all oher things beside, we are but to much like unto them:
that is our fault generally that we differ not more from theime in all our
ministry. These words utter their grief that they can got no forther from
us in their service: and that you be not deceived, the author of this book
where this complainte is made, knowethe well the meaning of his fellows herin,
and how glad they would be shiftinge forward. They sit on thorns til they
be doing with a new gise. It is no worse man then the B. of Duresme that
takes could in so long a stand of their communion. My simple head could not
devise how they might possibly go forward, and keep theime with in any bond of
Cbristianity. What they cast in their brain for their forther proceeding I
can not tell, the serpent is suttel, and our sins be great.

I much maruaill not now, to see the temporal Magistrates of their wisedoms,
to hedge these men's wantonness in all their order of life: for they are so
dronken and drowned in haeresie, that they have no sense of common reason. What
a do had the magistrates to make these wild men go in priestelyke apparel,
to keep their Rotchettes, to observe sum step of antiquitye in their
manners? How they were driven to tempre their lusts in provision for sum
ordrely choice of their wyeues: that seeing theyme have no respect on what
woomen they light, Look the Iniunctio^ for the marriage of priests and other
things.
that by Iusticies of peace yet, they might be bestowed, if not well, yet with
their less dishonestie, upon persons not openly infamous. Such fellows are
more fit to be governed, then to bear rule over other: in whom with owte
constraint you shall nether find coomlynesse in manners, order in liefe, nor
co^stancy in religion. God of his mercy give theime sum light to see their own
misery, and the spirit of humility to subject theime selves in time to gods
Church, that is so careful over them, though to their own great harm, they
so deadly hate her. They ca^ show no cause in the world, why they need in any
one point of al those which at this day be in controversy betwixt theyme and
their own moother, rather to credet their own fantasies, then her grave
authority: which only with out farther quaestioning, with obedient children
makethe more, then all argument or eloquence of man, in the earth. And for
such as may for their simplicite be sone deceived by folowinge other men's
errors, The yongers* must thus pose their masters.
with whom the names of doctors, or the only bare brag of scrptures, are as
good as the allegation of placies: Let them ask of their teachers how they
can shifte theime self when they see the practice of gods church generally
so plain for all Catholic assertions, as for the article of praying for the
dead, emongst many other the like, is now before proved. Call upon them, and
ask them in earnest, because it lies upon thy salvation, whether thowe must
give any credet to the perpetual agreement and consent of all ancient
doctors? If they say yea: desire theime to answer first to all these placies,
so evidently confirming our purpose, that they can not abide any cloud or
cover of man's sutteltye, for their shifting to any forged sense. If they can
not, yet let theime allege sum place of any ancient writer theime selves,
which do expressly deny purgatory or prayers for the dead: as we for they
confirming thereof have done in plain terms with owte craft or color many.
If they be not able to do so much, yet go further with theime: ask theyme
whether they have any express words in scripture that deny prayers to be
proffitable for the dead, not by a fond guess of their own heads, corrupt
co^sciencies, or praeiudicate minds, expounded to that prupose, but I say by
express words: or at least (which is liberty enoughe) expounded for that
meaning by any one man of all the antiquity. If they can allege thee but one
word of scripture construed of any one, I say in all agies, to confirm their
understanding to be current, and not framed for their phantasy, to serve the
necessity of their cause, be bold to follow them. I would not put theime to
the pains to make discourse throughowte all agies, churches, times, and
doctors, as we have done: but only let theime to keep their credet and
scholars, and to save their honesties, bring but one or two of all that ever
wrote in the compass of Gods Church, and thowe maiste with less danger,
and better reason, follow their doctrine. But there is no one such place, I
assure the good reader, neither in scripture, doctor, nor council, nor
contrye, nor age since the world began. I will go so far in this point: where
there was ever stepp of any true worship of God, there was prayer fownd for the
dead also. They can not show me any form of ministration in the Christian
world, that was approved, which has it not expressly: if it be known that
it was in deed the service of any ancient Church, not corrupted by theime
selves. The same I dare be boulde to auouche for the law of nature, and
Moises, because it is proved already. All their bragging of thexample of the
primitive Church, the massies of other contryes, of the doctors, of the
scriptures, of the councelles, is but an intolerable delusio^ and abuse of the
simplicity of such, as be not skillful in the authors whom they name. For when
the matter comes to an isshue, when they be hard houlden, either in this or in
any other matter: the^ the doctors (whom they challenged before the simple for
their partakers) were but men, then they might err, then they have learned
only to credit the holy scriptures, then there is nothing but gods word and
book with theime: which else full feign would have the doctors consent, out
of whom it were but a mean place which they would not allege for their
purpose, if it might be fownde. Then if denial of all the doctors judgments
serve not their turn, In accusationem ipsarum scripturaru^ conuertuntur: they
will not stick bowldely to condemn the holy scriptures with all. Irenaeus Lib.
3. Ca. 2.
But if you think that I feane of theyme, you shall see what shameful
shifts the masters and captains of the contrary assertion have devised for
the defense of theime selves: I dare say if the studious be but any whit
indifferent, he will leave their school for ever. The chief Capitane of all
these contentious heads, like an unshamefast child, affirmethe that the
doctors praised and followed the common errors of the ignorant people, in
allmose and prayers for the departed.

Brentius answerethe, that Tertulian making mention of yearly oblations for the
deceased, In confessione VVittenber.
took his error of the hethen usage of the gentility. And Augustine (he says)
affirmed purgatory, prayers, and almose for theime, for thaffiance that he had
in men's merits toward the remission of sins. In Apologia.
Melancthon (as though he were no man that might err him self) says the
doctors were me^, and discented amongst theime selves. As for the usage of any
celebratio^ in the world, what room ca^ it have with these champians, Instit.
de Coena.
when Calvin confesses in plain terms, that the celebration of the Sacrament
has been contaminated even in a manner sith the apostles time, and first
planting of our religion? and to reduce it to the purity again, the man
frames a new one of his own: so far from superstition, that it has no
step of religion or true woorship of God. But well, the word of God it yet
safe with theyme, there a man may houlde theyme. No surely: they are as saulsy
with the very scripture it self, when so ever it makethe against theime.
Brentius before named, is not ashamed to say that he pardons the author of
the Machabeis of his error and ignorance. And that thowe may see the perfect
image of a proud haeretike, Calvin says thus: as for the book of the
Machabeis I will not vouchsalfe to make answer to it. Merciful God what
faithful heart or ear could abide these blasphemous tongues? who of
intolerable arrogance do so deface the examples and doctrine, not only of the
pillours of the whole Christian Church, whom they impudently for lack of a
more reasonable answer, condemn not only of simple ignorance and error in
this point, with the residew of the whole faithful people, which surely is
over much to say of such learned and godly men as they were, but also of
wilful error and superstition, in bearing and maintenance of the common
ignoration, and ethnike persuation of the world in their days: and following
the heathen usage of the gentilitie. And yet not content therewith, these lying
masters of their mere mercy be content to offer a pardon to the author of
that book for his error, which book the whole catholic Church of God
through out Christiandom takes for canonical scriptuture. Which arrogance
and passing bowldnesse, allthough I persuade my sellfe no virtuous man will in
theyme allow, since they now being put to their shifts, utterly do condemn
those fathers, whose names with great oftentation they often to the simple
repeat to make theyme suppose they be not with out scripture or doctors for
the proof of their wilful heresies, yet eue^ the very answer it sellfe which
they imagine her in to disgrace the doctors: and delude the ignorant, is
contrary to it sellfe in sundry points. For they one while affirm that S.
Augustine and others allowed that error which the people by their superstious
devotion had before their time brought in to the prayers of the Church: and
^n other while, that Judas Machabaeus did institute it, who was before these
^uthors diverse hundereths of years: and sumwhile that they borrowed it of ^he
gentilitye, all which points be re^ugnant each to other. For nether ^ould that
begin in our Christian do^tours days, which was used before Christ's birthe:
nether need they to ^orowe it of the heathen which was in ^stimation and
praised amongst the ^ewes.

That the prayng for the dead was apoin^ed to be had in the holy sacrifice, by
the Apo^les commandment and praescription: And that our doctors by the
majesty of their name, bear down our light adversaries.

Cap. 13.
But that this falsehood may better appear in these men, we will by good
testimony try owte, when and by whom, the oblation and sacrifice with other
ordinary reliefes of the departed were so uniformly used through the
Christian world: as like wise it shall be profitable to consider, who were the
first authors of the contrary opinions. And that the holygost by the apostles
own preaching and praescription, was the first author of this solemn
supplication in massies of all vsagies for the departed, I might first prove by
this general rule of S. Augustine: Epistol. ad Ianuar. et de Baptis. contra
donatist. Lib. 4. Cap. 24.
Quod vniuersa tenet ecclesia, nec concilijs institutu^ sed semper retentum
est, no^ nisi authoritate apostolica traditu^ rectissime credimus* that which
the whole Church observes, and has allwaies so been kept, being not
instituted by any council, it can not otherwise be had, but by thapostles
authority and tradition. And so by the like saing of Leo the great.
Dubitandum non est, quicquid in ecclesia in consuetudinem est deuotionis
retentum, Sermon. 2. de ieiunio.
de traditione apostolica, and de S. spiritus prodire doctrina. It can not be
doubted, but that what so ever is in the Church by general custom of devotion
kept and maintained, it came out of the Apostles tradition, and doctrine of the
holygost. But I will seek with them by certain demonstration, and plain
order of reason that it must needs so be. Prayinge for the dead was invented
by no man sith the apostles days: A sure way to try the beginning of any
doctrine.
there can no one be named by the adversary, before whom I can not name an
other that praide for the dead. Let him fay where he list: this man or that man
was the first that ever praide for the dead in Christ's church: if I can not
show an other before him so named, to have praide also, we will take him for
the first author, and then he fully stops our course that we can not bring
this observation so high as the Apostles days. But if the adversary can
apoint me owte no time nor person that began this usage, before which I am not
hable to prove it was practiced, then they can not let us but we must needs
drive it upward, to the apostles and Christ's own institution. If they answer
me, that this usage is crept in to the church since the Apostles time, though
the first author can not be known: I will also provide, that there no shift
shall serve them. Therefore I ask theime whether that man which first preached
it, was resisted by the rest of Gods church which before his preaching
believed the contrary, or no? That is it say, this doctrine of prayng for the
dead when it first came in to the church, did any of the true pastors free
from the same error, bark like a good sheperd against the beginner of that,
which they cownt so great a corruption of truth? Or all the Church was
corrupted with it on one day? say what you think likest in this case, answer
with any probability or reason if you can say plainly, was our doctrine ever
preached ageinste, or never? if it never were preached against, then it never
began as any noueltye or new doctrine? For it could not be that the Church
being free from that doctrine, should streght with owte contradiction allow
that, which they lyked not before. How can any man arise in the commonwelth,
and bring the utter decay of all the oulde ordres which he findethe, and
erecte up a new devise of his own, and never man speak a word against
him, but al in one moment allow and like the same, and that with owte all
record by memory or monument of any chaung? But this thing is most far from
the Churchies and Gods pastors diligence, that never received faulse doctrine
without oppen contradiction, and plain noting the party that first began it,
as we shall pluck our gentlemen by the slieue a none. All those that have any
skyl in the antiquity, will bear me record, that the pastors did never houlde
their peace when any wolf did but once oppen his mouth ageinste the sheep.
They can tell, that she did never bear the preaching or practice of any faulse
and erroneous doctrine for one day together* then it must needs consequently
follow, that the doctrine off purgatory and oblation for the departed with
still consent of all nations received in the Catholyke Church, had no
beginning after the first institutition of our faith and woorship of god, but
has joined from the first grownde of our Christian institution in Christ's
faith, with that sacrifice and due honor off God which the apostles by the
sugestion of the holy ghost planted in all nations with the same faith. Thus I
make my argument: Note.
every faulsehood was preached against, and withstanded when it is first
entered, but this doctrine of purgatory and praying for the dead being always
used, was never controwled, nor gainsaide in gods church therefore it is no
faulshood, nor ever hadd any later institution then the Apostles own
prescription. But what needs all this a do? by their own consent we shall
drieue this doctrine thirtene c. years upward. For so near was Tertulian the
Apostles days, whom they confess to have practiced that point of oblations
for the dead. And ask him where he had it (for surely he invented it not him
self) and he appoints us to his forfathers: De corona militis.
he namethe the Apostles for the authors and fownders thereof, as of many other
things, which he there reakenethe beside, that were generally received, and
now be of haeretikes likewise contemned. We might yet step ij.c. year
forward, and find amongst the Apostles oun hearers, the same doctrine both
allowed and practiced, but that they will make exception of Dyonisius and
Clements works (such shifts men must find that will defend faulshood)
Other I will name, that be owte of their exceptions. Who I think as well for
their time, knouledge, and credit, as their excellent virtue, both can and
will better tell the origin of that thing, the authors whereof were more nigh
their time then ours. If they would believe S. August, as they often profess
they will, the matter might soon be ended: but because I fear they stand so
much in the corrupt conceit of their own singularity, that they will be bold
to reject him, I shall both lay him to their charges and diverse other of
greater antiquitye that shall in express words affirm this usage to coom from
the Apostles own school. That thereby they may either acknouledg their errors,
or else by such grave and vncorrupt iudgies, be condemned of wilful
malicious blindness. Ser. 32. de ver. Apost.
Thus S. Augustine writes. By the prayers of the holy church, the profitable
sacrifice, and almose bestowen for the souls departed, out of all doubt the
deceased be releued, so that thereby allmighty God may deal more mercifully
with theime then their sins required. For this practice delivered unto us by
our fathers, is observed universally in Christ's Church, that for such as be
departed in the communion of Christ's body and blood, when at the sacrifice
they be orderly named, prayers should be made, and the same sacrifice
mentyoned to be done for theime. Here, by his words thowe understands, that
the profit rising by the prayers or facrifice to the departed has no doubt in
it. They were through the world used, not in the church which they say has
been for ix.c. years corrupted by supersticious ignorance, but in that Church,
which our adversaries do confess, maugre their heads, to have been holy,
Catholyke, and Apostolic. And it was not the^ begone, but received by the
provision of gods holy spirit, of thapostles: whom he calls the fathers
of our faith. Athanasius (me think the adversary part should quake when I name
him) who was in his days terrible to the wicked, odible to haeretikes, and to
all virtuous me^ an especial stay in the troblesom times of the Church, whose
grace was so great that he abbrigeth our whole faith in to a brief psalm
called the Creed of Athanasius: which is believed of al christian me^ no less
then the holy scriptures of the new testament. Who as he right well knew how
to defend him self against the wicked Arrians by the doctrine of the Catholic
Church, so he has left us in writing how to arm our selves against the
like adversaries of truethe, with his mind in such other points of weighte,
as in his dayies were not doubted of, which yet might faul in question, by the
contentious wits of many, that can not quiet theyme selves in the holsom
doctrine of christ's church. Amongst other things, what this holy man's
mind was concerning the vtility and usage of prayers and sacrifice for the
dead, and who were the institutors thereof, thou shall now hear. I will
recite but a part of his heavenly taulke, though the whole make wholly for our
purpose. Allthoughe (says this holy doctor) he that Christianly is hense in
faith departed be hanged in the air, and his body unburied, yet after thy
prayiers made to God, stick not to light lamp and taper at his sepulcher: for
these things be not only acceptable to God, but are rewarded. For the oil and
wax be to him as an holocaust or a sacrifice to be consumed by fyere, but that
vnblouddy host is a propitiation and remission to the party.

It may seem by his words, that when by occasion of punishment, or othewise
any person was un buried, yet there was made sim hearse or monument where is
friends lighted tapers, as they do at this day, and procured the holy Mass,
Hostia incruenia.
which Athanasius callethe the Unbloody host or sacrifice, to be celebrated in
his behallfe, for so I take that when he saiethe that a man being hong in the
air may have tapers and Mass at his sepulcher: though sum seek another
meaning, which may well stand too, and it skillethe not for our purpose: for so
much is plane, that in Athanasius his days, the sacrifice was called and
counted propitiatory even for the dead. But now a little afterward in the same
oration, he instructs us for the first authors and institutours of this usage
in the vnbloddy sacrifice, The Apostles be the orderers of our sacrifice.
and in the burialles of Christian men. All these holy things (says he)
thapostles of Christ, those heavenly preachers and scholars of our Lord, the
first orderers of our sacrifice, charged to be observed in the memories and
anniuersaries of the departed: etc. he callethe the Apostles, Curatores
Sacrificiorum, as you would say, men appointed to take order for all things
perteyning to the solemn ministry of the great and high mystery. Psalm.
49.
As in the Psalm, the spiritual gouernoures are named. Ordinatores testame^ti
Dei super sacrificia: The prouisours of gods testament touching the
sacrificies. The residewe of his holy words thowe may find in Damascens
oration of the departed, where he recyteth both the Gregory's of the Greek
church, S. Denise and S. Chrisosto^ too: which writers do rather serve my
turn now then the Latins, because they may put us out of doubt for the usage
of the Greek, and other Churchies, which afterward by schism fell together
from the true woorship of God into diverse errors. The end of schism.
That we may know, those same contryes under the government of these
excellent blessed men, to have observed the same things, which to their own
aeternall miserye, and decay of their Church and contries, they afterward
contemned. For their dissension and division both in this point and others of
no less importance, has procured gods vengeance so much, that now they
have almost no church at all: as we may have right good cause to fear what
will become of us, that follow their steps in such points, as in theime have
duly deserved gods grievous plages. Amongst other, for that Chrisostoms
authority is exceeding grave, I will let you see his opinion for the
institution of these beneficial relieuinges of the departeds pain. These be his
words: Let us sieke out al means whereby we may best help our brethern
departed, let us for their sakes bestow the most present remedy, that is to
say almose and oblatio^: for thereby to theyme ensues great co^modtie, gain
and profett: for it was not rashly nor without great cause provided, and to
gods Church by his disciples full of wisdom delivered, and decried, that in
the dreadful mysteries there should be especial prayers made by the priest for
all those the sleep in faith. For it is a singular benefit to them. These
were Chrisosto^s words, whereby not only the truth of the cause and first
authors of the practice be oppened, but that there is wonderful benefit to
the parties for whom prayers be so made in the holy sacrifice. The which thing
our forefathers well knew, when they were so ernest after their departure to
have a memory at the holy altar. Now adays haeresy has ca^kered eue^ the
very devotion of catholykes, who allthoughe they think it to be true that
gods Church teaches herin, yet the zele of procuring these means is nothing
so great as thimportaunce of the cause requires. But if they note well those
careful admonitions of all these blessed fathers, they shall perceive that
every time that Christ's holy blood is represented unto God in the Mass for
the departed, they feel a present benefit and release of their pains:
Quaest. 34. ad Antioch.
they do rejoice (says holy Athanasius) when the unbloody host is offered
for them. The owlde fathers to put a difference betwixt the sacrificing of
Christ's own body upon the cross, and the same upon the altar in the
Church, do lightly term this way of offering, the unbloody sacrifice: and
the thing offered, which is Christ's oune blessed body, they call likewise the
host unbloody. And Chrisosto^ never putting any doubt of the first authors of
offering for the dead, prouethe that it is exceeding beneficial to the
deceased, because the apostles full of gods spirit and wisdom, would else
never with such care have commanded this holy action to be done for theime.
Alas a less for our dear friends departed, that they must lack this
comfort: But woe everlasting to theyme that are the cause of so much misery.
But hear I pray you what notable words S. Damascen has for the vtility and
institution of these things. Ibidem.
The holy Apostles and disciples (says he) of our savior Christ have
decried, that in the dread sovereign, undefiled, and lively Sacraments (so he
cauleth the Mass) there should be kept a memorial of those that have taken
their sleep in faith: the which ordinance, until this day withowt gainsayng
or controwlyng, the Apostolic and Catholic Church of God, from one cost of
the wide world to another, has observed, and shall religiously keep til the
world have an end. For doubtless, these things that the Christian religion
which is with out error, and free from faulshod, has so many agies and worlds
continued vnuiolably not with out urgent cause, those things (I say) are not
vain, but profitable to man, acceptable to God, and very necessary for our
salvation. Thus far spoke the doctor, setting furthe not only his own mind,
but the faith of a number of the peers of gods Church: wherein to prove
this doctrine to be catholic, he fitly, follows the same way which
Vincentius Lyrinensis gave us once for a ruele to try truethe by. The rule of
truth.
Proving that it has antiquity, as a thing that came and has continued
even from the beginning of the Christian religion: declaring that it has the
consent of all nations, because it is and has been practiced through out all the costs and corners of the wide world: and last, that it has the
approbatio^ of the wiseist and holiest me^ that ever were in the Church of
Christ. And more the^ all this, that it shall so continue till thend (though it
be for a time in sum peculiare nations omitted) because it is received into a
part of that woorship of God, which in the Church ca^ not perish. And this
praescription of truth our adversaries can not avoid, but with such
unseemly dealing as I trust they them selves now be ashamed of, as all other
reasonable men are. For now let them coom with brazen facies and blasphemous
tongues, and say that prayers for the dead be unprofitable, that the rites of
the burial be superstitious, that to say the mass and sacrifice to be
propitiatory for the souls departed, is injurious to Christ's death, that the
doctors praised the errors of the ignorant people of their days, that they
all erred and were deceived, that the church of Christ has been led in
dark ignorance till these our days: let theime bestow these vain
presumptious words where they may take place, for now all wise men do
perceive that all these have their holy institution by Christ and his
Apostles, practiced universally in the primitive Church, embrased of all godly
people, and approved to be wholly consonant to gods word by the pillors of
Christ's church: who so co^sonantly agree together in this point, as well for
the practice and proof, as for the beginning thereof, that to dissent from
theime and trust in these reeds of our days were mere madness, that are
pufte to and fro with every blast of doctrine, that care not what they say, so
that they say not as other their forefathers said, that had rather then they
would give over a singular opinion of their own imagination, refuse and
deny the authority of so many notable, wise, ancient, godly, and well
learned fathers, whom we have named. Although we have left out many of no
worse judgment, planely auouching these things to coom in to Christ's
Church, and woorship, by the ordinance of his holy Apostles. All which
things if our adversaries have read, then they are in a most miserable and
heavy taking, that do withstand an open known truth, Heretics do against
their own consciences
and as I fear against their own consciencies too. Or if they have not read
these plain assertions of all learned men sith Christ's time, then they are
most impudent that so vainly brag in a matter whereof they are not skilful.
But I trust God will open their eyes, and break their proud hearts to the
obedience of his holy Church. If the authors be past hope, yet their folowers
shall take goodly occasion to forsake such wicked masters, and be ashamed of
all their indecent dealyng, if they note and consider with me, that the first
preachers of this perverse opinion, were such, that none of all their
scholares durst ever for shame for the proof of their assertion, name their
own doctors. Note
And truly a man might well meruel why haeretikes having sum that did plainly
profess their opinions, had yet rather pick owte sum dark sentence of any
one of our holy fathers, whom they know to be directly against theime, then
out of those same doctors of their own, which in express words make for
theime. You shall not lightly hear an haeretike that deniethe prayng to
sanctes, or houldeth with open breach of holy vows, allege Iouinianus, or
Vigila^tius. Nor a Sacramentarie, seek for the autoritye of Berengarius, or
Wicleffe, though they be of sum antiquity, and with out color plainly do
mainteyne the doctrine that so well lyketh theime. But they will travel to
writhe with plain injury to the author, Note the gile of an heretic.
sum sentence out of Augustine, or Ambrose, or sum other that by their whole
life and practice open theime selves to the world to believe the contrary: and
all this by sum show of words for the bearing of their faulse assertions.
Mark it well (I say) in heretics that they can not for shame of theime
selves, Note.
ever name any of the plain auouchers of their own opininions. The cause is,
that the only upholding of their opinions made theime infamous to the whole
posterity: And if any honor grew unto theime amongst the simple, because
they lacked not the ways to procure the peoples consent, with admiration of
their eloquence, or other plausible and populare qualities in their days,
yet truethe following time, their fame raised upon so light causies easily
decayed, and the grownde of perpetual infamy sattled in wise men's hearts by
the wickedness of their attemptes, remained for a testimony to all posteritye
of their shame and ignominye. And this I speak not only of the authors of
our common sects, for they never atteined to any shade of famous report in
their days, because they could deceive none but simple weemen, but I mean
by Arius him self, and Pelagius with the like, who in their own time being
of great aesteme emo^gest many whom they deceived, yet after their death more
and more they grew to shame and infamy: so far, that who so ever were of
their opinions afterward, durst not yet for shame use their name or authority
for proof of their own doctrine. See you not in our days how fresh the name
of Luther, Calvin, Buser with that rabble, was amongst the rude people, whom
they had woonne either with speech, or pleasure of licentious doctrine: and lo
now it decays in a manner or their bones be could. The peoples sensies
raueshed with the praesent pleasure of such as they heard last, like theyme so
long as they hear theime, afterward their memory remains only to
malediction. Vidi im pium superexaltatum and eleuatum sicut Cedros Libani,
Psalm. 36.
transiui and ecce non est: quaesiui and non est inuentus locus eius. I have
seen the wicked exalted and set up as the cedre treese of libanus, I passed
by, and lo out of hand he is no body: I sought him, and his abiding can not be
fownde. Who so ever shall seek for our glorious preachers with in this C.
year, he shall find theime in such estimation then, as their forefathers be
now: that is to say, to be unworthy the naming of their own adherents, if
any of that sect live and last so long. For let theime never look to com to
the infamous fame of Arrius, the best of all these sect masters not worthy to
be scholare to a hundredth of his folowers. Thus lo is the case of haeretikes,
liked of fools when they be alieue, contemned of all men when they are dead.
Now in the doctors of Gods Church it is clean contrary, and no less
worthy to be noted for our purpose: for their honor and estimation rising
upon the sure infallible grownde of Gods truethe, by years and time
gathers such force, that not only their memory is in perpetual
benediction before God, but their works follow theyme in the minds of
their posterity, to their own aeternall praise, and benefit of all their
folowers. And which is much more to be wondered at, they have so passed envy
and malice of man, that even those which deadly hate theyme, dare not but
praise theyme. And such as mislike their doctrine, and know of their own
conscience that they be directly ageinste them, yet dare not openly charge
theime with faulshoode, as they do us their scholars, but rather (as I
said) seek sum sentence owte of theime to help their own cause, then with
their plain condemnation of faulshode to refuse their authority. S.
Augustine busyed much with the Pelagians:, and charged by theime in disputation
that he defended the Manicheis doctrine concerning original sin, for his
defense and warraunt, proves unto theime that Sancte Ambrose taught the same
doctrine that he did, and yet they durst not be so bowlde to call him a
Manichie. Dic huic Ambrosio si audes, quae mihi tam petulanter obiectas: Thou
haeretike (says he) say the same by S. Ambrose, if thou dare for shame which
thowe so saulsely and wantonly obiectes to me. Lib. 2. co^tra Julian.
Look I pray you, Ambrose was but new dead when his only name did fear
the heretic, when other alive of as good lerning, was contemned of him, and by
words of reproach charged with the Manichaeis sect, who was a wyked man of
horrible sects not long before those days. Pelagius owte of doubt thought no
better of Ambrose and Cyprian dead, the^ he did of Augustine and Innocentius a
live, because their doctrine was all one: but yet the men departed were of more
authority in gods church, then the living: of whose continuance to the end
men were uncertain before the proof thereof: and their words being dead
might easily be wrasted to sum show of their purpose, when the authority off
the living could not admit any such faulse dealinge, theime selves bearing
witness of the meaning of their own words. Well then our doctoures of
gods Church, being all of holy aestimation and blessed memory, do so dase
the eyes even of their own adversaries, that being of the very same doctrine
that we (who by Gods grace be members of the Catholic Church) be of, yet
they are past the malice of those which like not their doing and doctrine.
For the heretics well knowing them to be the authors, or at the least
especial mainteiners of this our assertion of the valewe of prayers and the
holy sacrifice for the departed, yet they dare not but clokedly reprehende
theyme, when they flow against the poor Catholics now alive, with words
off infinite blasphemye, and sclaunderous reproach.

Therefore I now will call upon theime with S. Augustines words. Coom on all
the pack of you, who so ever is the prowdest protestant upon the earth, call
if he dare S. Denise, Sanct Clement, Athanas. Chrisostom, Ambrose Gregory,
Bid, we are not ashamed of their names as you be of your Masters, Call
these papists for praying for their friends, call theime Idolaters, call
theime superstitious, call theime enemies of Christ's passion: say they be
injurious to his death by providing a new sacrifice for sin: tell theime they
invented Anniuersaries, months minds, and yearly offeringes, for their own
gain: call theime mass mungers, call theime blind gydes. No you dare not
for your ears, you dare not disprayse our heavenly gydes: you dare not once
name your own. Such force has the truethe, and such fear there is in
faulshood: and yet these doctors must needs be in a thousand times worse case
then we be, if the doctrine of purgatory and prayers be not true. We may be
saved or at least reasonably excused, by following: they in leading us in
faulshod, ca^ have no excuse of their impietye. But how glad may all we
Catholics be in our hearts, that have the full consent of all theime in the
proof of our belyfe, out of whose works the adversaries would be glad of
one lyklye sentence. And whose life and doctrine are so glorious in gods
Church, that their oune adversaries raling at us alive, yet dare not but with
great fear once blemish their names departed: Though sumtimes it brastithe
out in sum one of theime to their own miscredit. So beutifull is the light of
truth. And on the other side, how miserable is their careful case that
follow and defend that doctrine, the authors whereof they dare nether
acknouledge nor name: whom all good men with open mouth bouldely do
reprehend, and their own scholares dare not defend. Such a glorious majesty
this doctrine of theires bears, that pricketh up with pride those that be
alive, and blottethe out of honest memory, her doctors that be dead.

The first Author of that sect which denies prayers for the departed is
noted, his good co^dicions and cause of his error be opened, what kind of men
have been most bent in all agies to that sect. And that this haeresy is ever
joined as a fit companion to other horrible sects.

Cap. 14.
But yet, because they have diffamed our practice in praing and offering for
the dead, by referring it to a latter origin then the apostolic authority and
tradition, seeing we have fathered our usage upon such as the adversaries
dare not blame, we will help theime to seek owte the fathers of their
faithles persuasion, lest by the fear and bashfullnesse of their own
scholares, they be unkindly forgotten. Mary to find owte these obscure
loyterers it will be sumwhat painful, because as thieves do, they keep by
ways: and lightly tread not in honest men's paths. For the finding owte of
records for the testimony of our truethe, we kept the day light, the high
way of Gods Church. All the known notable personagies, in the holy City
of God offered theyme selves both to witness, and prove with us. We drove
this truethe from our days through the midst of that holy community
which S. Augustine callethe the City of God: and our adversaries will not
say otherwise but they were the lively me^bres of that happy and heavenly
fellowship. The high way of truth.
We brought the practice of it to the holy Apostles by plain account, we went
with the truethe of our cause to the law of Moses, from thense by like light
to the law of nature. But now for the other sort, we must leave the cyty of
God and the feloweship of these noble personagies, of doctors, Apostles,
Prophets, and Patriarchs, and seek on the lift hand in the other city,
which is of Augustine named the cyty or commonwelthe, as a man migh call it of
the devil: in which body, all practice of mischief and origin of error,
isshuing from that unhappy head to the corrupt and deadly limbs thereof, is to
be fownde. We shall hear of the adversary persuasion then, The by way of
haeresy.
in the company of Anabaptists, of Arrians, of Saduceis, of Epicures: where so
ever the weeds of the common enemies corrupt seed growethe, there shall we
find amongst breares and brembles, this choking weed with all. For as the
true preachers, the Apostles of Christ Jesus, did sow in the beginning of the
Christian church, which was the spring of the word of life and truethe,
amongst other heavenly seeds of true doctrine, that profitable practice for
the relief of such, as were hense departed in the sleep of peace, with the
decent order which ever since the Catholyck church has obedyently followed,
even so, Math. 13.
Inimicus homo superseminauit zizania: the common enemy came afterward and
ouersewe darnell, and cockle, either for the utter choking, or else for the
especial let of that good seed, which the Master of this field by his
houshoulde servants had plentifully sown before. This common aduersarye, as
our master him sellfe expounds it, is the Devil: who, as he in all other
things beneficial to mankind is a great stay, so Christian men's
commoditye in this point he notably hinders by his wicked suggestions and
deuilishe divise, whereby he prouokethe many under the show of Gods word or
bare name thereof (for that is the la^bes cote which this wyely woolfe boroweth
to mask in) to be vnki^d, unnatural, and with out all godly affection toward
their departed fre^des. The which contrary corrupt sede of false doctrine we
right well know came of the said adversary, because it was long after
ouersowen: Tert. de prescrip.
lerning further of Tertulian, Id veru^ esse quodcu^que primu^, id adulterinu^
quod posterius. That to be true that was first taught, and that to be faulse
and forged, which came latter. And yet besides that general and most certain
instruction, learned Damascen, helps us to the trial of this peculiare case.
Doubting not to affirm, that al such cogitatio^s as do enter into man's head
against the prayers or charitable works for the departed, be the deuilles
envious and subtle suggestions, for the hinderaunce off our brethern departed
from the heavenly joys. For thus he writes in a sermon for the same purpose.
That oulde serpent (says he) whose endeavor is to corrupt and deface the good
and acceptable works of God, and to lay snares for the entrapping of men's
souls, who is much perced through brotherly love, and brasteth in sunder for
the envy that he bears toward our faith, and finially is madded by our
natural compassion one toward an other, as one that is the utter renouncer
of all good laws, he enspireth to some, a feigned and faulse imagination clean
contrary to the holy constitutions: that is to say, that al good and acceptable
works, before God, should no whit proffet the departed souls. Our
protestants be inspired by Damascens judgment.
If this writers judgment be good, as it is sure most sound, then must al our
unnatural and unkind preachers have an especial inspiration of the devil him
self, so often as they hinder favor and grace from the dead. For as he
reduced our origin to the Apostles, so he doubts not to auouche, the
contrary persuation to be evidently moved by the oulde serpent, of especial
envy toward man's salvation. And now if thowe list know in whom this
subtle suggestion took first place and root, Of the author of this new sect.
after the long usage of the other, according to the Apostles planting: we
shall make the for thy especial comfort partaker thereof also. We will not use
the adversaries, as they do us: charging us with later preaching or doctrine
then the Apostles planted, and yet can nether tell, where, nor by whom it
began. But we shall by open evidence call the wolf by his name. Let an
heretic but set owte fout, and once open mouth, though he do no harm at
all, yet the watcheman of Israel has him by the back streght. The dogs
were never so doom in gods Church, but they would bark at the first
appearance of any strange cattle. For that, the notation of his arising and
name, was not only a warning to the present time to take heed to their
faith, but an admonition to all the posteritye to beware of the like. And it
was ever counted a refutation of an haeresye to the full, to reduce it to a
latter infamous author, by the certain record of the churchies history. The
which kind of reason both amongst the learned has singular strenghte, and
is sensible for the people, and of the adversary utterly invincible. Irenaeus
uses it against the haeresyes of his time, as a demonstration of much force.
What, says he, before Valentinus there was none of that his faulse sect, Li.
3. Ca. 4
and he came in with his seed, after the first preaching of our faith a good
while. I can tell when he began, how he increased, how long he continued.
Both he and that other Cerdon entered first under the government of Hyginius,
The trial of false preachers.
grew upward under Pius, and continued till Anicetus time: and so making the
like account of other archeheretikes, at lenght thus he concludes: all these
rose up in their apostacy long after that the Church was ordered in faith
and doctrine. In this sense spoke Irenaeus. But the ruele is common and
certain as any can be in the world, and I would stand upon the ground
thereof against all faulse doctrine in the world, A general rule to know
haeresi by.
and thus it is: Any opinion, that may be truly fathered upon any private man,
that was long after the truth was first preached by the apostles, if it be
upon a point of our faith, and contentiously mainteyned, it is an haeresye.
And thus again: who so ever was withstand in his first arising and preaching,
by such as were in the unity of the Church, he was a faulse teacher, and his
abettours be heretics. And the force of this conclusion is so great, that the
heretics theime selves if they can get any likly show of raising of any
doctrine, or practice of gods Church in these latter days, they think they
have a good argument against the Catholics. Therefore they would father
transubstantiation upon this Council, the adoration of the Sacrament upon that
Pope, indulgencies upon that bishop, etc. For they be as saulcie with gods
Church, Counsels, and chief governors, as we be with the Jack strawes of
Geneua. And yet when they have traueled to their hearts ache, they can find no
one thing first invented by any of them, whom they faulsely name to be the
authors thereof. But well seeing it is so strong an argument of haeresye, to
have the offspring of a later author, with plane prouiso of gods Church for
his markinge, let us add so much stre^gthe to our cause, to have the father
of the contrary faulshodde known, and noted of thantiquity, by his name. Cap.
75. Lib. 3. In Anacephal.


Epiphanius that notable man in his book that he wrote for the confutatio^ of
all the haeresies that were before his time, and in other of his works too,
names an obscure fellow one Aerius to be the first author of this haeresie,
that prayers and sacrifice profitethe not the departed in Christ. But what
manner a fellow he was, and how lickly to be the fou^der of such a school,
thou shalt perceive best by the writers words. When Aerius could not
obtain the bisshoprick of Eustathius deposed, after that he was once perfectly
well skilled in Arius doctrine, he invented new sects of his own: affirming
that there should be no offering for the departed. and of him lo the scholares
were called Aerians. Let not the simple (whom I would help in this cause)
be deceived by the lyknes of these two names, Arius: and Aerius: Arius. Aerius.
for this later was the author of their sect, and was a follower of the first
called Arius in his doctrine beside. And of the same sect and sectmaster, S.
Augustine thus says, folowinge Epiphanius: The Aerians were so named by one
Aerius, In li. de haeres. ad Quod vult.
who taking snoffe that he could not get a bisshoprike, fell in to the haeresy
of Arius first: and then added thereunto, other haeresies of his own making:
saing that we should not offer sacrifice for the dead, nor observe the solemn
appointed fastes of the Church, but that every man should absteane when he
list. And there both he and Epiphanius do reckon more of his holy opinions,
which I omit. For it is enoughe for our purpose, and to confownde all the
haeretikes of our days, that this opinion was noted as it spronge up in the
primitive Church for heresy, One that has for saken the Church is
indifferent to what haeresy you will.
and the authors not only condemned as heretics in that point, but in many
other things beside. For I never readde of, nor yet knew any heretic, but if
he once mistrusted the catholic Church, the Devil was hable to persuade with
him as well in a number of matters as in one. And that is the cause that any
man seduced, And therefore they call their doings, Proceeding.
falls from one faulshood to an other, till he wholly be drowned in the waves
of te^pesteous doctrine. And when he comes once at the bottom, then (God
knows) he settith light by the matter, contemns it, and is often past
recovery, Prouer. 18.
as it is said: Peccator cum in profundum venerit, contemnit. Even so did this
Aerius, first through ambitious pride faule to the Arians sect, but because
he counted it nothing glorious to be a scholare, he would be a master, and that
of a misheuous matter, and a matter repugnant to the sense of all Christ's
church, which before his preaching, generally as after, received and
faithfully used prayers and oblation for the dead. Of which consent of the
universal world, and the heretics folly in withstanding the same, the said
Epiphanius says thus: Vbi sup. 13
I will report his words in latin, because they sownde very well, though him
self wrote not in that language: Assumpsit ecclesia in toto mundo, assensus
est factus antequam esset Aerius, and qui ab ipso appellantur Aeriani: quis
autem magis de his nouit, hic neseductus homo qui etiam superest nunc, an qui
ante nos testes fuerunt? and cae. Thus in English. The Church has received
this truth through the wide world, it was sattled in all men's minds before
Aerius was borne, or any of his sect that be now called Aerians. And who I
pray you is most like to know the truethe of these things, this faulse
wretch yet living at this day, or else the faithful witnessies that were
before our time? Behoulde here your woorshipfull master, you may suerly take
great cause of conforte in his lively word: mary sir he might have been an
Archebisshop in our days, for he loved nether fasting nor praying. He was
feign to be an haeretike for anger, because he could not be made a bisshoppe
then, who now if he were in this happy age, when the light is more plentifully
powered upon the people, might have been promoted at Caluins decease to the
ouerlooking of Geneua. But his opinion was so notorious fallse, that it grew
to no great head at that time, or else it was not so much regarded because
it was joined to that horrible faulshod of Arrius, against the blessed Godhood
of Christ Jesus our savior. Note well
Every great waste of religion has many faulse opinions knitte together,
amongst which one being as principal ground, shadoweth the other lesser
branchyes: as now the blasphemy of the holy Sacrificie and Sacrament, being
the fountain of their haeresies, in a manner couerethe the meaner puddelles of
their stinking doctrine. And emo^gest other, this unnatural affection of
forbiddinge the relyfe of the parted, seemethe ever to be joined as an appendix
to other faulshooddes. For in holy Damascenes days this sect appeared again
with other faulse doctrine, as a companion of all mischief. And to prove it to
be an haeresie, he seeks out the first founder thereof, Damascen. in
oratione pro defunctis and de haeres.
and finds eue^ as before, that under the devil this Aerius was the father
of that faythlesse assertion. Whom he bayteth wellfauourdly in a whole oration
and so drives the woolfe in to the wodde again. Then for many a day together
this doctrine was dashte til the time of holy S. Bernard and Petrus the
reverent Abbate of Cluny, by which two notable howsekeping dogs, that were
never doume in the Churchies need, this woolfe appearing once ageine was both
noted and oppenly vanquished. Note well how this faulshood ever joins it
self to other horrible sects.
And in their days, this faulsehod that before was a companion of the Arrians
(mark well the course of things good reader) was now matched with the
Anabaptists: who in that time, as the said writers do record, did call
theime selves Apostolici, that is to say apostolic or folowers of the
apostles, so they would be termed to delude the ignorant by the bewty of that
glorious name, as now their offspring call theime selves, Euangelici: that is
to say, gospellers, and the pure preachers of the word, and gospel. S.
Bernarde touched them to the quick in a sermon, by these words, Lo (says he)
these miscreants, lo these dogs, Sermon. 66 super ^antic.
they laughe us to skorne that we baptize infa^ts, that we pray far the dead,
that we require the help of holy sanctes, they exclude Christ's grace in all
sorts and every kind, in oulde and young, in the live and in the dead. Look
you now, with their gospel like name they were counted no better then
profane dogs of this holy father, that laughed so skornefullye at Christ's
church for praying for the dead and invocation of sanctes: and shall we make
such Iuels of their scholars now a days? In all agyes since this wielde
seed was first sown, the true preachers, the woorkmen of gods harvest, have
ever plucked it up, as it first appeared: The which wede was better known
from the corn, because it ever grew amongst the bundels of briers and
brembles, and was of that waisting nature, that it could not be tolerated with
owte the utter choking of the wheat. This doctrine (I say) being of it self
very perniciouse, yet it is ever in company of other mischief. For the
principal author of this sect was an Arian, then the folowers as Bernard
witnessith, were Anabaptists or worse. To whom all men much meruell that God
should rather reveal such misteryes of truethe, then to other that were
sownde in faith. And in deed I would gladly meet with sum one good fellow
or other of that sect, that weere learned with all, that he might resolve me in
this doubt, why this conclusion of not offering or praying for the dead, of
not keeping thordinarie fastes, of contemning the Sanctes help in heaven, and
the residewe of your new Creed, why God (seeing al light of truethe co^methe
of his grace) openethe these mysteries always and only, to such as you your
selves can not deny to be haeretikes. I trovve no protestant can answer with
reason to this point
Why did he reveal in the primitive Church that doctrine to an Arian, being
an open enymie of his holy name, and not to Athanasius or Epiphanius or some
other blessed men of that time? I stand the longer upon this point, that the
world and who so ever is the simplest, may behoulde your misery and shame:
for I know you can say nothing in this case for your defense, but even bear
with black blotted co^sciencies the infamy of wilful blyndnesse. How say you,
did not your doctrine afterward appear again amongst wicked Anabaptists,
that deny amongst other things, the baptisinge of infantes? it was nether
reveled to Bid nor Bernard I warrant you. Here this sect joins vvih the
sacramentaries and the rest of miscreauntes
But com lower yet to our own time: you know full well we have store of
Anabaptists, of Arians, of Saduceys, of Epicures, and of al other sects that
the devil ever devised (such light of truethe has our happy age by your
praeaching) tell me truth now, be not all these whom you cownte haeretikes
as well as we do, be they not all I say of your opinion in this matter and not
one of theime of ours? Nay I will pose you further, is not your preachinge
the very ready way to all such extreme blasphemies, as they bowldely
mainteyne? did ever man fawle from the Catholic Church to those further
haeresies then you yet openly profess, but he took youres by the way, as a
plane passage to extreme infidelitye? yea your opinions do so well stand with
the other, that they need not afterward to refuse any one point of al your
doctrine to mainteyne their own. There is no article of Catholic doctrine,
but it is as much hated of them, as of your selves. Help your selves here my
masters, Mark well.
or else all the world will take you to be in your hearts, of the same
sects whereunto your faith is allwaies so dearly joined. Put your heads
together, and tell us why your doctrine is so dear to the Arians, and all
wicked men, and so hated of the holy fathers of Christ's Church? If you frame
not your answer well, you liese your credites, your scholares, and your
honesties. Well, thus have I pointed out your author, his name was Aerius: you
must be cauled Aerians: you may keep the name of protestauntes or Evangelists
beside. For a holy new calling is lightly joined to such men. Whereby though
sum simple be deceived, yet wise men be warned. Or if the owlde authors of this
sect be not so glorious as these new reuiuers, if they list and like so, they
may call theime selves Lutherans, or Caluinistes, or what they will, but
Catholics. Although Martyn Luther granted purgatory and prayers, whith this
error: that such as were there, might yet by their diverse deseruings, win or
lose life everlasting, as men of doubtefull state, as they were before in the
world: plain against our saviors admonition, Vide Hieronimum sup. 3. ad
galathas. Joan. 9.
and careful warninge, veniet nox quando iam nullus operari potest. Work
whiele the day lasts, for the night shall coom when no man can labor. But I
need not to stand upon this point, which of nether part is much regarded.
Nether will I spend any more time in gettinge theyme an author of their sect,
seeing they have choice of diverse. Let theime go out of the City of God, from
amongst the holy company, and turn on the lift hand, and look amongst the
owtcastes of al agies, and they shall have fre^des and fellows enowe.

That their falsehood is condemned, and the Catholic truth approved by the
authority of holy Councelles. Their pride in contemning, and the Catholics
humility in obedient receiving the same. And a slight vvherby the haeretikes
deceive the people, is detected.

Cap. 15.
ANd for our part it is sufficient, good reader, that we know the first
founder thereof, and that we be now right well assured, that he in his time,
and his scholares in there is, have been noted, called, and condemned for
haeretikes, in this as in other fond perverse opinions beside, not only by
the singular judgments of diverse learned me^, but by the common sense and
consent of the world, and by ancient counsels both general and particulare,
as we may read in the Councils of Carthage the iiij. of Bracharense, and Vase.
Cap. 79. Cap. 34. Cap. 2.
the decrees of which, by occasion we rehearsed once before. They are both
ancient and of great authority, and honored with the presence of many
notable fathers, as Augustine and other. But especially for the approving of
our faith, and condemnation of the adversaries part, the whole process of the
great council of Florence must be noted. for there the question of purgatory
and prayers for the dead, was fullye handeled, by the most learned of both the
Latin and Greek church, the Patriarche of Constantinople him self, with the
legates of Armenia and other nations of that part, being present: and fully
condescending with the Roman church upon the truth of purgatory, and other
grave mysteries: in to the doubt of which, that part of the church by schism
and miscredet of their forefathers, had faullen into, not long before: and so
made perfect protestation of their faith, Note
with thabiuring of the contrary, as haeresie. But omittting that long
process and large treaty of the matter, for the establishing of every man's
conscience, I will conclude up all the matter with the council and the holy
gostes determination of all the whole cause, in these words: Si vere
poenitentes in Dei charitate decesserint, antequam dignis poenitentiae
fructibus de commissis satisfecerint, et omissis, eorum animas poenis
purgatorijs purgari, and vt a poenis huiusmodi releuentur p^odesse eis viuorum
fidelium suffragia, missarum scilicet sacrificia, orationes, and eleemosynas,
and alia pietatis officia, quae a fidelibus pro alijs fidelibus fieri
consueuerunt, In initio Concilij Florentini.
secundum ecclesiae instituta, We define and determine, The holy Council of
Trent has also determined the same against the haeretikes of our times.
that true poenitents departing in the favor of God, before they satisfied
for their negligencies or faults committed by worthy fructes of poenaunce,
shall be cleansed by purgatory pains: and likewise for the release thereof, the
prayers of the faithful, the sacrifice of the blessed mass and allmose, with
other things customably practiced by the faithful for their friends decessed,
according to the ordinance of Gods church, to be profitable. The which
grave determination if any man be so wilful to contemn, Let him know, that
he dispicethe, being but a mortal frail man, the grauest judgment that God
has left in earth for the determination of any matter. Let him be ashamed
that he being but one man, takes upon him to control diverse hundrethes of
the most chosen for virtue, for lerning, for experience in the whole Church of
God: yea let him if he have any affection of grace, tremble and fear to deface
the dealing of that honorable and universal parliament, that repraesentith
unto us Gods holy whole church, having the assured promise of the holy
gostes assistance for their giding in all truethe. Yet I see before hand the
adversaries will not admit the judgment of these or any other Councelles:
nether in such men do I much meruell to find so little humility, and so much
impudency. For all haeretikes condemned by councelles did ever condemn, as
they could, the same councelles again. So were the first iiij. councelles
which all Christian men with S. Gregory accept as the holy gospelles of God,
All haeretikes do condemn councels.
utterly refused by the parties in them condemned: The Arians by great force
of worldely princies and many assemblies, deuilishly withstood the Council of
Nice, the Macedonians rejected the council of Constantinople the first, the
Nestorians nothing aestemed the council of Ephese, Eutiches and Dioscorus
little regarded the council of Chalcedon: in which they and their folowers
were condemned of haeresy for sundry points, which now were ouerlonge, and
not for our purpouse to rehearse. Then by refusing the heavenly sentence of the
churches judgment, they win nothing else but the assured mark of an
haeretike. They declare theime selves, that as they be in haeresy as deep as
the best, so they in pride and bouldenesse, The humble obedience of Catholics
to the gouernoures of Gods Church
be not behind the worste. But all Catholics and faithful believers, as
soon as they know the determination of such a number of so well learned
fathers gathered in the unity of gods Church and spirit, streght way they
receive it, and submit theime selves, as to the judgment and revelation of the
holy ghost. For so the Christian brethren that were molested by the contentious
clamors of certain troublesome heads at Antioche, being on^e certified by the
letters of that first Christian council, what was decried and enacted
concerning the matters ^^lled in quaestion, they then regarded ^o more what the
adversaries thought ^herin, but out of hand Ganisi sunt su^r Consolatione, they
reioysed in that ^omforte of their agreement. And ^uffinus writes, that when
Constan^^nus the great understood the determination of the doubts proposed
in ^he great council of Nire, he received it as the oracle of God: Ruff^n.
Defertur ad Constantinum sacerdotalis concilij sententia, ille ^aquam a Deo
prolatam veneratur: the decree (says he) of the priests was showed to
Constantine, and he streght with al reverence accepted it, as gods own
sentence. And if our aduersa^ies could learn a little humilitye, they might
quickly be dispatched of ^ great deal of haeresie. The which as ^t first
began with the conceit of singularity and contempt of other, so it procedith
with maliperte boldness, and ends in plain disobedience of of the Church,
of the councelles, of the scriptures, and gods own spirit. Whom with out more
words I would now give over unto God, having (as I trust) already given theime
sufficient occasion by the evident proof of my matter, to remember their
misery and heavy condition, but that I must remove out of the simples way,
such stoombling stocks, as perhaps might sumwhat trouble the unlearned, who
for lack of deep judgment, be most subject to the adversaries deceites.

How they practice with the simple.
And with such thus they lightely practice: first by lofty looks and high
chale^gies, they crake and boste with passing bowldnes, that the learned me^ of
the world, the sage fathers of the ancient times, all the grave cou^celles, the
whole usage of the primitive Church, Great impudency in haeretikes.
with plain scripture, to be on their part. And as for the contrary
teaching, that it came in of late with the decay of lerning and light of
truethe, in these barbarous times when superstition and dark ignorance had
wasted the doctrine of the years past. And in this brag they stand, till some
Catholic man encounter with theime. By whom when they see them selves so
driven from the standinge which they kept with great glory before, that they
must be wholly naked and destitute in the face of the world of al such helps,
as they accounted to have for the owtewarde show of their deceitful doctrine,
then in plain words they confess their teachig not to hang on the
antiquitye, not on councelles, not on Doctors, nor on any man, but on Gods
holy spirit and word, which can not deceive theime. And so at the end, the
owlde use of the primitive church, the fathers, and the general councelles
arrogantly contemned, or rather unworthily condemned (mark well their pretty
conceits) they make then a match between theime selves with gods word on
the one party, and the doctors and fathers with owte Godde^ word, The
sophistry of haeretikes.
on the other party. Affirming that they be not bound to believe theime but
where they agree with the scriptures of God. And then turning their taulke to
the simple, thus they preach unto theime by a captious and foolish demand,
whether they think it more reason or convenient to believe the scriptures, or
doctors: the determination of the true and liuelye word of God, or else the
decrie of a general council: which deceitful wreasting of the state of our
quaestion, somewhat troobles the unlearned, which can not perceive herby that
they betray theime selves, and deface their own dooinges, in so rude a
defense. For who seethe not now, that they renounce all that help of
Councelles and Doctors which with vau^tes they clamed before, whiles they
impudently make a division or contrariety betwixt theime and the holy
scripture? And we take it at their hand as an open acknouleging of their
lack, ^her where they praete^did greatest store. The which thing if they
likewise would confess openly in pulpit and ^n plain words, as they mean
nothing less when they show the people that they were but me^, that they
might ^rre, that they followed the custom of the common people in their time,
that they are not to be received but where they agree with scripture, and that
the^i selves must try whether they be co^sonant to the word of God or no: if
they would, I say, with out such cloked words bouldely pronounce as Luther
their Master did, that they cared not for a hundredth Augustines or Hieroms,
that they aestemed not the consent of all nations, that they would be tried by
the judgment of no council, that they would purposely run Contrary to the
Councels decrye in all causies, that they would take that for thonely truth
which is contained in the holy scriptures, and that for scripture which theime
selves thought good, and last of all, that for the true meaning which agreed
best to the vphoulding of error and haeresye, then would the people leave
these lewd masters on the plain field, which now they keep with them, one
while by the praysies of the doctors and antiquitye, and sumwhiles by thabasing
of theime ageine, and deceyt full referring all to the only scriptures, to
which they say credet may salfely be given, where the docters with out danger
can not be forther followed, then as they benot fownde to disagree with gods
word. So that the cause seemethe now to be driven to this isshue in the eyes
of thignorant, whether men should rather believe the scripture or the doctors,
the word of God that can not be faulse, or the fathers that weere but men, and
therefore might err, deceive, and be deceived.

But this is not the state of our controversy, nor of any question betwixt
the Catholics and theime. And that they know full well, though they
craftelie cloak it with change of words* for we acknowledge most gladly, that
if any Doctor, Prophet, Apostle or Angel (if it were possible) preach unto us
any thing against the word and truth of gods scripture, that he is accursed
of God, and to be rejected of men. But here is the stand, and the point of al
our doubts in general (note it well master protestaunt) whether the ancient
fathers, sum of theime being in Christ's time, diverse of theime scholars to his
apostles, here lies the doubt and diuer siti betvvixte haeretikes and
Catholics.
many within one hundrethe or two of years afterward, most of theime more then
a thousand years since (I speak of such as we have named in our cause) and
all wonderfully learned as well in the knouledge of the secrets of gods
mysteries, as the tongues: all mercifully endued with great gifts and
gracyes, all exceeding studious in the scriptures, all having the same testament
and written word of god that we now have, all using marvelous diligence in
the conference of diverse placies, for the true meaning and understanding of the
same, all having fervent zele in teaching the christian people, al at times
appointed resortinge together from diverse parts of the world to sum one
general search, in which, by humble conferens together and prayer, they doubted
not to obtain the spirit of truth, as it was by our master promised: the
question is now then, I say, whether those holy men, thus helped by nature,
diligens, time, and grace, be not more like to understand the scripture the^
these men, which either lack all these helps, or most of theyme. Secondly it
follows there upon, whether we should rather give credit to them, affirminge
purgatory and prayers for the dead to be not only consona^t, but planely
proved by the scriptures, or else to our new adversaries, auouching these
things to be against the scripture. Wherbye you see, we must not now reason,
whether we ought to believe the doctors or the seriptures better, but whether
for the true sense, we must not believe the owlde fathers, better then these
new fools.

An answer to such arguments as the haeretikes do frame of the holy
scriptures not well understood, against the practice of Gods Church, in
praying for the dead, or the doctrine of Purgatory.

Cap. 16.
Therefore to stop their way at every turn, and because they taulke so fast
of scripture, full feign would I hear what scriptures they have, that make
either expressly against purgatory and prayers for the dead, or else by any
one learned man in all the world, was ever expounded for any such sense. And lo
now (good reader) what scriptures they allege that can abide nothing but
scripture. First owte of Ecclesiastes. Cap. 11.
The tree whether it faule to the southe or the north, it lies ever where it
lights. Then they allege out of S. Matthews gospel, Cap. 7.
that there be two ways, one to bring to heaven, and the other leading streght
to hell. And then owte of the second to the Corinthians, they bring in; Cap.
5.
how we must all stand before the judgment seat of Christ: there to receive
each of us according to our works and life: and that by other men's labor,
our state can not be amended. Again they allege this sentence of the
Apocalipse. Cap. 14.
Beati mortui etc. blessed be the dead that dye in our Lord, for after that,
the spirit says, that they shall rest from trauelles. All which textes, and
the like of that sort, make no more against purgatory, then they do against
hell or heaven: except, that a^ Anaxagoras the philosopher said, Phisic. 1. l.
all things were in every thing, so these divines can find every text of
scripture to make for what purpose they list: and yet if the Catholics
allege a number of scriptures, and theime with the mind and judgment of the
whole world, that doubts not but they prove that, for which they be
recited, yet they set light by theime, and impudently with clamors bear men in
hand, that they have no scriptures at all. Which things as they smelle of
much arrogancy in all men, so in these foulke that so malepertly controwle
others, where theyme selves have no scripture at all, it is intolerable.

And for these, which they here or elleswhere allege, I ask theyme sincerely,
and desire theime to tell me faithefully, what doctor or wise learned man of
the whole antiquity, ever expounded these textes recited, or any one of theyme,
or any other which you bring in else when, against Purgatory or practice for
the dead? Yff they did not, how can you for sin and shame dissent from the
whole Church off Christ, upon so light grounds? Or how dare you be so
boulde, that seek in every controversy express scripture, to allege these
placies, which wise me^, nor I think your selves take for any such purpose?
Or how may you for shame reiecte the evident word of God, by us truly
reported for the trial of our matter, your selves having almost nothing, that
can be wraasted to your sense?

An answer to the first place.
If you stand to the trial of your alleged testimonies, you will be much
abashed I know. For how can you imagine, that the place recited out of
Ecclesiastes, should further your intent any thing at all? Seeing, that even
then when the wyseman spoke those words, the soul of man streght after her
departure, and the faule of the body, continued not where it first fell: for
the just had a place of abidinge and rest in the inferior parts, which was
called of Ezechias the gate of hell. Isai. 38.
In the ghospel Sinus Abrahae, the bosom of Abraham, and now Lymbus Patrum: in
which they all abode till they were delivered by the blood and travel of
our savior Jesus. Bern. ser. 4 de fest omnium sanct Amb. super 5. ad Romanos.
With whom, they after were translated to the aeternal joys of heaven.
Which thing if it be true, as it can not but be true and certain, which the
whole course of scripture, the article of our faith in Christ's descension in
to hell, and all the ancient fathers do constantly setforth, what blindness be
they in then, that bring this place against Purgatory, which as it is a stay
of certain for a time from heaven, so the other before Christ, was the stay
off all. And therefore, it is plain, that this faulynge of the tree meanithe
nothing less, then that every man should streght upon his departure be
conueyde either to hell or heaven.

Or if any wedded to Caluines blasphemous and vnfaithefull paradoxies, do with
Purgatory deny the fathers place of abode, before the cooming of Christ, and
impugn the belief of Gods church so much, that he withstand the article
of our Creed, for Christ's descendinge in to hell, or turn the cause of his
going into hell, to sum other purpose then the lowsing of their captivity that
there were in expectation of his joyful appearance, Caluins absurd doctrine is
refuted.
yet I would demand so much of Caluins successor or scholare, seeing he will
of this figurative speech of the trees fauli^g gether so grounded and general
a rule, that with out delay every man must to heaven or hell streght after his
death, there to remain in perpetual state of his faule in the next life,
either good or badde, I would ask of him (I say) what he thinks by all
those, that were by the Prophets, Apostles, or Christ him self, raised up
again from death to life. Who receiving by death that faule, by their
account must needs abide where they first fell: and so not in case to be
revoked, by this their faulse conclusion they diminishe the power of the
spirit in woorking their raisinge again. Or else they must impute deceit to
the holy men, and our master Christ (which abhors me ^o speak) for that
they raised theyme not being perfectely dead, but in sum deadlye trance, or
appearance of death.

But because the soul of Lazarus, was now iiij days owte of his body before
Christ wroght upon him, The state of such in the next world as by gods
omnipotency were raised to life again.
it is sure and most certain, that it had sum place of abiding after the
separation from the flesh. I can not think that his soul was in heaven: nor
it is not like, that our savior would so much abase the happy condition of
him whom he loved so well, as to reduce him to the uncertain state of this
life. I will define, in this my ignorance, nothing touching the secrettes of
gods wisdom herin. But very like it is, that the parties raised from their
faule and death, were not in the joys of heaven. As before Christ's death, I
am sure they were not, but I speak of Tabitha also or other revoked by
thapostles hands, that then after Christ's passion might full well, diyng in
perfect state of life, go streght to heaven, of such I say it is very
reasonable, that they were not in the joys of thelect. For else Tabitha
should not have had such a benefit by her almose, as the fathers do
witness she had. And they use her for an example, of the benefit which may
rise to one after departure, by charitable works done in this life. It had
been a smaule pleasure to have plucked her from haven to this mortalitye
again, and misery of our common life: and I trow no man may auouche with
salfety of his belefe, that she or any other raised again miraculously, was
revoked from the desperate estate of the damned souls, then she must
necessarily be called from some mean condition of her present abode, and
perhaps from pain too, to this former state of life again. But as in this
secrett of god, no man with owte just reprehension may deeply wade, so it may
reasonably be gathered that the faule of the tree before menti^ned, can not
induce with any proba^ilitie, the necessity of the souls abi^ing in all
respects, where it first ligh^e. Marye we freely grant with diverse of the
ancient fathers, that the faule of the tree into the southe part, may
^ignifie unto us the departure of man in the happy state of grace, and the
nor^he side likewise, the cursed and damnable state of the wicked: and that he
which passethe hense in either of these estates and conditions (as every living
man doothe) can not procure by other, nether deserve by him sellfe, the change
of his happy lote, or his unlucky hap, otherwise then in his life time he
deserved. That is to say, if he pass this world an elect person, in the love
and grace of God, he is out of doubt of all damnation, or rather out of
possibilitye to be rejected: and so the case of the forsaken is utterly
remediless. And further by that figurative speech you had not best on your
own head be over boulde, least some Saduceie of your sect, gather the
perpetual rest of the body, with owte all hope of resurrection. I can not
tell how it faulethe, but yet so it doothe, that your doctrine and arguments
minister over much occasion of error, and that, to the deceived in the
depest matters of our faith. But I will rub you no more on thatsore. I
warned you before, to take heed to the resurrection. An Answer to the second
text.


Now for the other text recited out of S. Matthewes gospel of the double
way, the one to perdicion, an the other to salvation: there is almost none so
simple, but he sees that it makes no more for your purpose, then the other.
For there, as our adversary can not but know (though to deceive he list
dissemble) mention is made, and the meaning is only of these ij ways in this
world and life, in one of which, being full of ease and liberty, the wicked
waulkethe toward hell or damnation: In the which way, the rich man and
unmerciful took his time: of whom Abraham said, that he had received good
in his days. In the other, being both strait and hard, the small number of
the chosen take their journey toward heaven. And yet if you think good,
you may join the place of temporal punishment for sin in the world to
coom, to the strait and painful passage of the elect, though perhaps all
they enter not thereby. And so shall you find this place not only nothing to
forther their cause, but sumwhat to help ours. And so for the other taken
out of the fyft to the Corinth: S. Augustine shall answer you, and bear me
witness, An Answer to the third^ argument.
it makethe nothing for you, his words be these in his Encheridion:

This practice that Gods Church uses in the commendations of the dead, Cn.
is nothing repugnant to the sentence of the Apostle, where he says that we
all shall stand before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive according to his deserts in the body, either good or evil: for this
in his life and before death he deserved, that these works after his death
might be profitable unto him, for in deed they be not profitable for allmen,
and why so? but because of the difference and diuersitye of men's lives, whilst
they were in this flesh, etc. And this same sentence the Doctor often repeteth,
almost in the same form of words in diverse placies, both to correct their
ignorance that might take a way prayers for the dead, because they find the
sentence of gods judgment to be executed on man according to the deserving
of this lyefe: and no less to give monition to the careless, that they omit
not to do well in this life, upon hope or presumtio^ of other men's works
after their decease: which as they be exceeding beneficial to many, so they
help none such, as in their own life would not help theime selves. The
like declaration of this point has S. Denyse in the 7. chapter of his
Ecclesiastical sovereignty: which I omit, lest in this point, by S.
Augustine sufficiently avouched, I weerye the reader without cause.

The last objection, An answer to the last scripture.
of the angels words in the Apocalipse, affirming the state of all those that
dye in our Lord to be happy, to be past travel, and in rest and peace: they be
properly spoken there, of holy men that sheede their blood in the times of
persecution for Christ's sake: to give theime assured comfort, after a little
toleration and patience in the rage of Antichrist, of blessed and aeternal
rest, and so the circumstance of the letter plainly gives, and so does S.
Augustine expound it. Cap. 9. lib. 20. de ciui.
And for such holy martyrs it is needless to pray, as to pray unto theime is
most profitable. Albeit the words are true, and may be well verified of all
that pass hense in the happy state of grace, being past the cares of this
troblesom world, and which is the greatest travel of all other, utterly
dispatched of the toil that sinners take in their ways of wickedness: with
freedo^ from sin, and al fear of sin and damnation, for evermore. So that
this rest from labor, is no more but a happy joy of conscience, with
securitye of salvation and peace in Christ Jesus. For which cause in the holy
Canon of the Mass, it is said, Christianos dormire in somno pacis, and in
Christo quiescere, That Christian folks do sleep in the sleep of peace, and
rest in Christ, though for all that, in the same place, we ask Requiem and
refrigerium, rest and refreshing for theyme. And this holy peace from all toil
of the world, and woorme of tormented conscience, the elect children of God
in their fathers correction, being assured of his aeternall love do blessedly
enjoy. But the wicked be in contrary case, of whom it is said, non est pax
impijs, there is no rest or quietness to the wicked: no not in their days of
joy, much less in their infinite misery of their everlasting torments in the
world to coom. Of whose unhappy state, Isai. 57.
the prophet warns us thus again. Impij quasi mare feruens quod quiescere
non potest: The wicked be right like unto the toomblinge and tossinge sea, that
never restethe. The place of S. John then, being namely spoken of holy martyrs
that streght with owte all pain after this life pass to heaven, may yet very
fitly stand with the happy case of all those that dye in the favor of God,
and assurance of their salvation: though they abide sharp, but swhete pain
of fatherly discipline, for their better qualifiyng to the joys prepared for
theime and all other the elect. So that now, the moving of these doubts has
so little aduauntaged our adversaries, that it has sumwhat given occasion of
forther declaration of our matter, then otherwise perchance we should have
had.

An answer to their negative argument, with the Conclusion of the book

Cap. 17.
But yett one common engine they have, as well for the impugnation of the
truethe in this point, as for the sore shakinge of the weak waules of the
simples faith, all most in all their fight that they keep against the
Catholics. Which, though it be not strong, yet it is a merueilous fit
reasoning for so fond a faith. For if thowe cast an earnest eye upon their
whole doctrine, thowe shallte find that it principally, and in amaner wholly
constithe, in taking a way or waasting an other faith that it fownde before^:
Their nevve no faith is vphoulden by a negative argument
so that the preachers thereof, must ever be destroyers, pluckers down, and
rooters up of the truethe grownded before.

Will you see then, what a protestants faith and doctrine is? deny only and
make a negation of some one article of our belief, and that is a form of his
faith, which is lightelye negative. There is no free will, there is no works
needful to salvation, A protestants Creed.
there is no Church known, there is no chief governor thereof, there be not.
7. sacraments, they do not confer gratiam, give grace. Baptism is not
necessary to salvation, Christ is not present on the aultare, there is no
sacrifice, there is no preesthood, there is no altar, there is no profit in
prayers to sanctes, or for the dead, there is no purgatory, Christ went not
down to hell, there is no limbus, finallye if you list go forward in your
negative faith, there is no hell there is no heaven, there is no God. Do you
not see here a trim faith and a substantial? look in Caluins institutions and
you shall find the whole frame of this waasting faith. There is nothing in
that blasphemous book, nor in their apologies, but a gathered body of this no
faith. For so it must needs be that teaches no truth, but pluckethe up a
that truth wiche before was planted. Is it not a pretty doctrine that Calvin
makes of the sacraments, when he tellethe not the force of any of theime all,
but only standethe like a fearce monstrous swhine, rootyng up our fathers
faith therein?

This negative faith has no grownd nor confidence of things to be hoped for,
nor any certayntye of such things as do not yet appear, but it is an
evident overthrow of all our hope, and a very canker of thexpectation of
things to coom. This faith therefore of these pluckers down, must needs use a
convenient instrument to destroy, and not to build: to pluck up and not to
pla^te, to improve and not to make proof. But what way is that? Like faith like
argument.
mary by way of negative proof, they confirm their negative and no faith.
Purgatory, say they, nor prayers for the dead be not so much as once named in
all the scripture, ergo there is nether of theime to be believed. Which form of
argument served the Arians against the consubstantiall unity of God the
father, and his son our savior. It helped the Anabaptists against the
baptism of infantes, it was proffitable to Heluidius against the perpetual
virginity of gods moother: and it helps all pluckers down, but it never
seruith a buylder. The vanity whereof is so well known, that I will not stand to
talk thereof: namely, seeing it has no place in our cause, for which we have
brought diverse scriptures, all construed by most learned fathers for that
sense: and some so evident, that they drove our adversaries to the open denial
of the holy canonical scripture.

But yet one of these ouerthrowers frames (as he supposethe) his negative
argument, Master Grindall in his funeral sermon.
to the more sure shake of our faith herein, after this sort. In the owlde
law, all sacrificies and expiations both appointed and reakoned even for the
smaulest offensies that man could committ, yet there was never no sacrifice
for the purgation of the dead. How Lord like Master Grindall made his
Argument here? Where he should plainly have inferred the contrary after this
sort. There was no sin so smaule unpardoned, but there was sum sacrifice of
release or expiation thereof in the owlde law, ergo if any man weere bound
with sin, weere it never so smaule, whether he were alive or dead, there was
sum appointed purgation therefore. For there is no consequence nor any
appearance of right deduction, to infer upon the naming or rehersall of all
sins, the peculiare mentioning or plain rehearsal of such persons as may be
burdened with those sins. There were sacrificies then in the owlde law for
weemen as well as men, for the Princies no less then for the poor, for the
priest and for the people, for the dead as well for the live. And where there
was no difference nor respect of persons, in that point there was no
peculiare mention to be made, for the distiction of states. The peculiare
rehersall therefore, was only made for the diversity of offensies, and not
allwaies for the difference of persons. And now the departed in faith being
but distincted by state of life, and not by bond of sin from those that be
alive, must needs in the case of like sin, for the unity which he is in,
have the like remedy as the lyeue has for the same sin. Note
And therefore to help your ignorance sum thing, thus you must learn: that
there was no peculiare sacrifice for the dead, as though they were not of the
common body with the living, but they had the same sacrifice done for theime
that the living in this world in the like case of sin, or pounishement for
offensies, had. Do you not see Gods Church, Master Grindall, sacrifice for
the dead? One sacrifice for the live and the dead.
but not for theyme by a peculiare means of offeringe, but the very self same
oblation she ever uses for her Children departed, that she practisethe for
her faithful flock a live. And in all other practices, there is a perfect
communitye of all benefits betwixt the deceased and their brethren
remaining yet in this world. And therefore when you seek for sacrifice in the
oulde law, look not for any distinct way of handeling their offensies,
which is not common with the living. But consider what there was practiced for
the release of the smaller trespassies, and that was used for bothth live and
dead, without distinction. Mark what sacrifice was for the abating of any
pain due for great offensies, and the same shall be well understand, to be with
owte difference practiced, for the live and dead together. That thereby we may
by good reason conclude, seeing sacrifice was then offered for purgation of
every light offense, that it was done for all states of persons that were
either in this life, or after their death to be perfectelie cleansed from the
same. Although the fact of Judas Machabeus be a plain proof that there was a
common known order of sacrifice: for else how could he have conceived any
such sacrifice never heard of before? how could he lymite the valewe of
procurement thereof, by a certain sum for every soul deceased? how could
he gather in pretense of a thing never used before, the peoples almose with
owte their murmoure or motion therein? Why would he have sent money to
Jerusalem to procure that which had no example in the law, or use in the
church? was he so ignorant that he knew not their order herein, or so unwise
to have sent his money for nothing? S. Augustine Answering an haeretike, Lib.
2. de Orig. Animae Cap. 11.
that by thauthoritye of the fact of Judas, would have proved, that by
sacrifice men might be saved though they died unbaptized, or in deadly sin,
says unto him: that he is not hable to prove, that Judas or any other in the
law, offered for his friend, or any man else being vncircuncised, no more then
the Church now practisethe for any man not baptized. Whereby he plainly
confessethe, that the law had a sacrifice for the dead: which, being urged by
that heretic, he might have denied with good help of his cause, and answer
to the adversary: but that the contrary case was so clear, not only by that
book which he took for Canonical scripture, as before is proved, but also by
the fulle consent of all the Church of God, which both by plain practice,
and most grave ordinance, had from Christ's time set forth and approved the
undoubted truethe thereof.

The conclusion of the vnhole book, with an admonition to the reader.
But here will I now make an end, desiring thee (gentle reader) with such
indifferency to weighe the doing and dealing of both parties, as the
importance of the cause, the love of truth, the necessary care of thyn owe^
salvation, and thy duty toward God and his Church requires. There is none
of al those points, which the unfaithful contention of our miserable age has
made doubtefull, in which thou maiste better behold how vprighte the ways of
truethe and virtue be, and how pernicious, double, and deceitful, the dealing
of haeresy is. The one is vpholden by the evident testimony of holy scripture,
the other mainteyneth her train by bowlde denial of scriptures: the one
seeks with humility the mening at their mouths, whom God has undoubtedly
blessed with the gift of understanding and interpretation, the other by
singular pride fowndethe her unfaithfulness, upon the fantasies of light
and lewd persons, that are pufte too and fro with every blaste of doctrine.
The one rests upon the practice of al nations, the usage of all agies, and
the holy works both of God and man, the other holdethe wholly by contempt of
our elders, flatery of the present days and vphappy waaste of all works of
virtue, religion, and devotion: the one follows the governors and appointed
pastors of our souls, whose names be blessed in heaven and earth, the other
joins to such, as for other horrible haeresies and wicked life, are
condemned both a live and dead, of the virtuous, and can not for shame be
named of their own scholars. The one has the warraunt of Gods who le
Church, the other stands on curse and excommunication by the grauest
authority that ever was under God in earth. To be short, truth: is the
Churchis dearlinge, haeresy must have her mainteinau^ce abroad. This one, holy,
Catholic, and Apostolic Church is it, whereunto we owe all duty and
obedience both by Gods commandment, and by the bond of our first faith
and profession. There is no force of argument, no probability of reason, no
subtelty of wit, no deep compase of worldely wisdom, no eloquence of man, nor
Angel, nor any other motion that can be wrought in the world, that should
make a man doubt of any article approved by her authority. And if thou yet
fear to give over thy whole sense, and thine own sellfe to so careful a
moother, in whom thou wast begotten in thy better birthe, compare our Church
with theires, compare her authority and there is, her majesty and theires.

Ours is that Church, that has borne down hethen Princies, that has
destroyed Idolatry, that has converted all nations to Christ's faith, that
has waded in blood, that has lived in wealth, that has been assalted by hell,
by evil life, by haeresy, and yet she stands. Take a way all this, compare
her constancy in doctrine, with their inconstant mutability: compare the noble
army of Martyrs, the holy company of Co^fessours, the glorious train of so
many blessed, wise, and learned Doctoures, of many thousand saints that ever
accompany her majesty: compare (I say) all these with the rascal soul diars of
the contrary camp: Vbicunqu^ fuerit corpus, Mat. 24.
illic co^gregabuntur and aquila. I warraunt the, gentle reader, fear nothing,
for where so ever so honorable a personage is, there is the kingly company of
egles. Behold her grace of miracles, her works, and her wonders, her
authority in discipline, her wisdom in government, her acquability in all
estates: and I am sure thou shallt confess Quod dominus est in loco isto,
Gene. 28.
and ego nescieba^. Our Lord suerly is in this place, and I was not aware
thereof. For Christ's love, if thowe have followed, or yet have any phantasy to
the severed company, grope with owte flatery of thy sellfe, the depthe of thine
own conscience: feel whether God has not suffered the to faule for some sin.
Coom into this Church, and at the same time thowe shall be healed to thy
aeternal rejoicing. Touch once the hemme of Christ's garment, adore his
foutstoole, cleave unto the alltare, and if thowe ^nde not comfort of
conscience, ease ^f heart, and light of truth, never cre^et me more. Prove
once what is In ^orto concluso, and font signato, in the gar^en enclosed, and
the wellspring so su^ely sealed up. Cantic. 4.
Join with the sanctes ^n heaven, with the souls in Purgatory, with the
fathers of thy faith in earth, with all holy me^ both alive and dead. And
thou shall think thy self all ready in heaven, to match with that happy and
blessed fellowship, owte of which, there is nether light, life, nor any hope of
salvation.

Merueile not, that the masters of dissension will not return: whom,
through pride of heart, disobedience to Gods Church, and wilful
withstanding the known truth, by the heavy hand of Gods unsearchable
judgment, we see to be stricken with blindness of mind, and exceeding
darkness of understanding. Learn to fear God betyme, that haste before
thine eyes in these forsakers, an image and a perfect platte of damnable
desperation. Mightily has God executed this sentence of judgment, upon al
sorts of me^ that has withstand the truth. The Jews feeling it till this
day, the folowers of Mahomet, the Arians, and all other haeretikes that have
forsaken the fellowship of the faithful, The lame^ table case of haeretikes.
and have left the fowntaine of life, cowld never be reduced to the truethe,
could never see their own misery, because God has given theime over for
their withstanding. And let not the forsakers wonder that I should compare
their case to the misery of the Jews, August. in psalm. 30,
seeing S. Augustine confesses, that all haeretikes be much more blinded then
they, because the Prophets speak more plainly of the Church, which properly
all haeretikes do impugn, then they do of Christ him self, whom the proud
Jews do contemn. And therefore let us that be Catholics, bless Gods name
for ever: that he has not taken his mercy from us: that he has not dealte
with us according to our sins. We have offended surely, and have deserved
this plage: our Priests have offended, our Princies have offended, and our
People have offended: yet for his own name sake he has looked upon us, and
has kept us with in the howsehould of salvation. Glory and honor be to his
holy name for ever more.

Amen.
FINIS.
Quoniam Liber iste Anglico Idiomate conscriptus, est lectus ab Anglis Sacrae
Theologiae peritis and mihi optime notis: qui eum per omnia Catholicum and
nationi Anglicae perutilem attestantur, iudico expedire vt admissus imprimatur.

Itae testor Cunnerus Petri de Browershauen Pastor Sancti Petri Louaniensis
indignus
8. Martij. an. 1564. Stilo Brabantiae.
THE ARGVMENTES of every Chapter of both the Books.
Of the first Book.
THe Praeface, where in be noted two sorts of haeretikes: the one pretending
virtue, the other openly professing vice. And that our time is more troubled by
this second sort. With a brief note of the Authors principal intent in this
Treatise. praef. argu. fol. 9. are removed: and it is proved against one sort,
that these foresaid skourgies were in deed pounishments for sins remitted.
And against the other sect, that this tra^sitory pain has often endured in the
next liefe. fo. 29. the adversaries, for the declaration and proof of
Purgatory. fol. 53. fire. fol. 73. of the truethe of Purgatory: and the
greuousnesse thereof, uttered by the prayers and words of the holy doctoures,
and by sum extraordinary works of God beside. fo. 105.
An end of the Arguments of the first Book.
ARGVMENTA CAPIT. LIBRI II.
TThe preface of this book, wherein the matter of the treatise, and the order
of the Authors poceeding, be briefly opened. fol. 23. and that the deserved
poonishement for the same, may be eased, or utterly released, before the
extreme sentence be to the utmost executed fol. 127. was ever counted so
beneficial to the live and dead. The punishment of our sins by the heavy
loss thereof. The great hatered which the devil and all his side, has ever
borne toward Christ's aeternall priesthood, and the sacrifice of the Church.
And that by the said sacrifice of the Mass, the souls departed are
especially relieved. folio. 187. the Church is grown to such beauty by the
fructe of this faith. fol. 210. and praescription: And that our doctors by the
majesty of their name, bear down our light adversaries. fol. 242. praying
for the dead, or the doctrine of Purgatory. fol. 274.
FINIS.

