A SERMON, preached at Paul's Cross on the Monday in Whitson week Anno
Domini. 1571.

Entreating on this Sentence

Sic Deus dilexit mundum, vt daret vnigenitum filium suum, vt omnis qui credit
in eu^ non pereat, sed habeat vitam aeternam. So God loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten son, that all that believe on him should not perysh,
but have eternal life. John. 3. Preached and augmented by John Bridges.

AT LONDON,

Printed by Henry Binneman for Humfrey Toy.

To the right honorable, Sr William Cecill Knight, Baron of Burghley, the
Queens Majesty's principal Secretorie, and one of her highness most
honorable privy Counsel.
AFter the last assembly of the high Court of Parliament was dissolved (right
honorable sir) being earnestly requested to preach at Paul's cross the Whitson
monday following, according as it pleased God to give me at that time his
spirit of vtteraunce (and does to al other that ^pe^ their mouth in the truth
and scare of him) I entreated on this parcel of the Gospel, red that day Sic
Deus dilexit mundum etc. Which Sermon finished, and I ready to depart from the
City home to Winchester, I was importunately of diverse, and those of diverse
sorts of callings, set upon, to have the copy of my Sermon in all the haste to
printing, whose petition for a great while as ^tatly I withstood as they did
earnestly urge the same, and shook off all such suitors, as diverse times in
like cases I had done before to other, ^ommending their zeal, but craving
pardon to dystrust their judgment and deny their request in that behalf. I
was challenged that I should answer for this with him that buried his talent in
the napkin, but I forced not of that challenge, nor of twenty reasons more, in
so much that of some, me thought, I had more mystiking for so stiffely
denying, than I had liking before for preaching, but this I put up also and
rode my ways. Nevertheless when this petition ceased not so, but still I was
more and more solicited with letters, and credibly informed how that of some
it was called in question, whether al things were true alleged against the
adversaries, and how of others it was defended, and that diverse noters of it
were inquired of their notes thereon, and that an extraction of their notes and
sentences was collected, and so they would rawely set it out: th^se things,
although I did not altogether credit them, but counted them as further driftes
to make me the willinger, yet was I thereby (I must needs confess) clean
overcome, and had rather of the twain set it out my self, than it should have
come in any huxsters handling. I know not what moved them to drive me
hereunto, for God wot and all the world may see, there was nothing in it but
that was even Commune Sanctorum (as they say) such matter as every one of them
did know already, as well and better than I could tell them. What of that?
since they will needs have it, it is come forth as it is, and if they like the
plain truth, they will bear with the homely utterance. Glory I sought none
but Gods, God he knows, and they may easily see by the style so roughly
hewn. Yet some will think it more than to smacker of glory to set it out, and
I my self was of the same opinion, but that I saw some men sought glory by
not setting out their doings, retaining better the estimation of things they
have done, by suppressing them, than those that lay them forth to every man's
descant on them. And therefore seeing that is an argument Pro and Contra, not
reckening what men will judge thereon (for I know before hand if one will say
well, another will say ill) I have yielded to mine importunate suitors. The causes
that moved me, was their too too earnest pressing: but I am even with them,
whom if I made eagre before to have it, I doubt me I shall weery them now to
read it. For where I had nothing then but certain imperfect notes to direct
my memory, nor could so well remember (many things passing between) to
follow the tracke of my self word for word as I spoke it: I was content
to record it as I could, and so to furnish my former notes with further
provision, that I have made now, I dare not say for shame a Sermon, but even a
volume thereon. Nevertheless I was the better content to wink at mine own
over shooting my self, because now it should not be I any more that should
speak it unto them, but themselves to them selves that should read me,
should speak it for me, and when they are weary, lay me aside a gods name,
and make four Sermons (if they please) of one: so may I perhaps not be irksome
to them, where had I so spoken in the pulpitas I have written in the paper, I
should have been a great deal more than tedious. But sith that is allowable in
a Book, that is not sufferable in a Sermon, it made me the bolder somewhat* the
more to amplify. Thinking verily that neither Demosthenes, nor Tullie, spoke
altogether, as they wrote, at least not so largely, for so they might have
tired their hearers, notwithstanding all their eloquence. As for eloquence,
here is none: neither I have it, nor my matter desires it. Which though it be
not set forth in sublimibus 1. Cor* 2.
humanae sapientiae verbis, yet have it truth joined with simplicite, it is
enough. Albeit I crave pardon, to atempte to dedicate so mean a treatise to
your Lordship, but the reason that moved me hereunto was this: Where once
before the Queens Majesty's Court (her highness being then in progress at
Titchefield in Hampshire) an acquaintance of mine did preach somewhat about
this argument of Justification, your honor then being present, it pleased you
so to accept the same, that ye desired eftsoons to hear at Southe Hampton
somewhat more thereon, which he to his ability (as the straightness of the time
permitted) did perform. How your Lordeship then liked thereof I will not say,
but, good Lord, what an inward joy and comfort he conceived at that your
honors acceptance, and many a thousand sith, has he privily told me since,
how he more esteemed your judgment, than if all Cambridge had given that
verdicte on him: not that he thought to open away to set forth him self
thereby, for that had been to abuse your honors goodness: nor that he was I
dare say for him, one whitte prouder thereof, for he felt his own infirmities:
but that he greatly rejoiced to see the eurtesie of so noble a heart, so
zealously affectioned to the preachers of Gods word. And as he still commended
this to me, so with this zeal of your L. (whose censure I always drad before)
I was now so emboldened that I durst presume to claim patronage of your
honor to this my Pamphlet, for Sermon will I not call it, since it has
exceeded a Sermons bounds. Neither is the handling worthy of any name,
although the matter can not be named worthily enough. For the matters sake
therefore, not for the manner of it, I shoued it out, when I could not hold it
in, and among others cheefely commend it to your good Lordship, whom as God
has made not only a singular succourer and especial setter forth of his
truth and al good letters, but also a public patron thereunto, and even a
father to our moother and nourice of learning, the renounted vuiuersitie of
Cambridge, that now (God be praised for it) flourishes under your protection:
so he vouchsafe to his glory, your joy, and our comfort, long to bless and
prosper your honor therein.

Your Lordships humble to commaund^ in Christ, John Brigges.

Sic Deus dilexit mundum. etc. So God loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
Everlasting life.
RIGHT Honorable, and dear beloved in the Lord Jesus: This sentence is the
entry into that portion of Scripture, that is appointed to be red for the
Gospel this day, and a parcel of the disputation which Nichodemus had in
the night with Christ. A short sentence, and for the understanding plain and
easy, but for the content of the matter, a most notable sentence,
comprehending in brief words, both all things and the causes of them all. God
the Creator, and all the world created: the merciful love of God, the miserable
perdition of Mankind: Gods election without beginning, man's salvation without
ending: the most singular gift of God without comparison, the Eternal life of
man without merits. To be brief, what is not contained in this sentence? the
whole scope and argument whereof, stands on the causes of our salvation, even
the groundeworke and principles of Christianity, the lock and keye of our
Religion: Which being opened, all controversies at this day in question
between us and our adversaries (as depending hereon) are apparent, and soon
decided. For my playner and easyer process herevppon, I purpose to divide this
sentence into four parts. Whereof the first shall be, of gods eternal purpose
to the world, In these two ends Vt non pereat, sed habeat vitam aeterna^, that
it should not perish, but have eternal life. The second shall be of the cause that
moved Almightye God to this purpose of the worlds salvation, that is to say,
Sic dilexit, even the only jove of God. The third part shall be, to consider
the means that God (being thus purposed and moved) wrought this benefit by,
that is to say, Vt daret filium suum vnigenitum, He gave his only begotten
son to work it. The fourth and the last part, shall be to consider, with
what effertuall instrument we receive and apply those causes of our salvation
to our benefit, that is to wit, Qui credunt in eum, By a steadfast Faith in
him. Wherein are comprehended these four causes: The original cause and
fountain of man's salvation, Gods eternal purpose: the motive cause inducyng
him thereunto, Gods love: the efficiente and formal cause thereof, the Son
of GOD: the (...) and isntrumental cause of the same, Gods gift of Faith in
Manne. Thus this whole sentence, So God loved the world. etc. being (...) and
divided orderly into these four parts, let us make our entry into the
several consyderations of them, with faithful and humble Prayer.

Precatio.
You have heard (dear Christians) whereon I purpose to proceed, even on this
sentence, Sic Deus. etc. Ye have heard what notable matter it conteynethe,
what is the sum and argument thereof, and how I have distributed the same.

Whereof the first part has to behold the eternal purpose of Almighty God in
these ends, that the world should not perish, but have everlasting life. This
part has two things principally to consider. Whereof the syrste is these two
ends, perdition, and life eternal: The second is these two parties, God, and
the world. God that delivers from perdition, and gives eternal life: the
world that is delivered from perdition, and receives eternal life. The former
is comprehended in these words, Vt non pereat, sed habeat aeternam vitam,
that it should not perish, but have Eternal life. Which words are placed
last, and are the end of the sentence, and like wise are the last end that we
shall come unto. But because the drifte whereto the sentence tends, and we
also direct the level of all our life, is to escape perdition, and to
obtain life eternal, not vnorderlye it comes to be first considered. For
although the end is last in practice, yet in mind the end is first of all.
He that is about to build an house, first has his general end and
purpose wherefore he would build, and or ever he set on the building, he
deuiseth his platform, and how he shall be able to compass the same. Quis ex
vobis. etc. Which of you (says Christ) disposed to build a Toure, sits
not down before, and counts the cost, whether he have sufficient to
perform it, least Luc. 14.
after he has laid the foundation, and is not able to perform it, all that
behold him, begin to mock him, saying: This man began to build, and was
not able to make an end? Or what King, going to make battle against an
other King, sits not down first, and casts in his mind, whether he be
able with ten thousand to mere him, that comes against him with twenty
thousand. etc. What man having a journey to go, first considers not the
place whether, the intent wherefore, and the manner how he will travail
thither, and then he sets on his Journey, and last of all comes there? This
is the differnce of the fool and wise (as our Proverb says) to look or we
leap. As Esope tells of the two Froggs, that in a dry Summer sought for
water, and when they came to a deep pit: Here sister (says the one) is a good
place for us to abide in, here is water enough: nay soft (quod the other Frog)
let us view a little ere we leap in, if water should fail here also, how
should we get out again? The wise therefore give this council, Quicquid agas,
prudenter agas, and respice finem, Whatsoever thou do, do it warily, and
forecast the end thereof. Behold, how Christ commends the steward (which
otherwise was a wicked man) for this his industry in prouidyng for the end. O
that the children of life were half so wise, so provident, and forecastyng, as
the children of this world in their generation be. O that rash youth amongst
us, would consider this order in their unadvised enterprises, being carried
aware in the headstronge wilful delight of present Philip. 3. Prou. 2. Romans 6.
pleasures, and will not se the wretched end, Qui ducit ad interitum, that
hurlethe them headlong into destruction: and all because they would not forsee
the sequel and end thereof. Voluptates specta Ludoui^. Viues.
abeuntes, non accedentes, Look not on pleasures face, but look on pleasures
back, look not on pleasure coming toward thee, for she has an whorishe
painted smiling and beautiful face to enamout thee, but look upon pleasure
going from thee, and thou shall se a most vgglie and filthy tail and end of
had I wiste, shame, and wretchedness. O that doting age would consider this
order, not to look back like Lots wife, to the follies of their youth and the
world passed, not neyghing like old stallions, and prouokyng other by delyghte
in fylthie talk, to such bestiall wickedness, as they have lived in, and
can now do no more them seiues, but be stales for the devil to catch other,
not considering the wretched end that them selves are even ready to fall into.
Let us therefore make our Omega our Alpha: our end, our beginning: our last even
our first. As the Philosophers discribed wisdom by a serpente, winding about
in a round circle til she put her tail into her mouth: let us be wise as
serpents, dryuing all the actions of the circle of our life, even to the
tail and end thereof. If then in all worldly things, this be the special
difference of Folly and Wisdom, to begin with the end: how mutche more with
the last end, the chief and everlasting end to make our first beginning.
Memorare nouissima tua, and in aeternu^ no^ peccab^s. Eccl 7.
These ends are here set out in these words, Vt non pereat, sed habeat vitam
aeternam, that it should not perish but have eternal life. By perishing he
means death the contrary to life: but not this transitory death, whereby the
soul for a time is dissolved from the body: for this is via vniuersae terrae,
out eternal death of body and soul in 3. Reg. 2.
hell fire, prepared for the devils and the reprobate. As appears by the
contrary end that here he makes relation unto, that is eternal life. By
eternal life, he means not only the conjunction again of the substance of
body and soul to unmortalitie, but also he comprehends all the unspeakable
glory, joy and felicity, that is prepared for the elect of god. And here
first of al, thou have to set before thee that there are but two ends, not
three ends after this present life, as the Papists do bear us in hand of
Purgatory, but the Scripture here, and in all other places, makes mention of
two only. Secondlye for these two ends, behold the order that our savior
Christ observes, first he places perdition, and then Eternal life. Thou
must first behold the danger thou stand in of condemnation, else will thou
never perfectly seek for salvation. He that perceives not him self to stand
in peril, will never search the means to be delivered. The first thing
therefore is to set before us, this end of perdition, which as it is a most
dreadful sight, the horror of eternal death, so must we consider how it
came, Perditio tua ex te, ^ Israel, etc. Osee. 13.
Thy perdition O Israel, came even of thy self, of thine own wickedness.
Stipendia peccati mors, Romans 6.
the reward of sinis death. And here we see, that in his nature no sin is
venial (as the Papists say) but leads even to perdition: how^eit, not so,
but that by the means in this sentence set forth, not only the same is made
venial, but also clean taken away, and no hindrance to the other end even of
eternal life. Here is the law, and here is the Gospel, in these two words
comprehended: Here is both sin and grace, wrath and favor, even life and
death set before us: here is a wretched end of perdition to be considered on
the one part, an end without end, of all unspeakable pain and torment.
Compare me now this endless end of perdition, to the vain pleasures that
end so soon, of this transitory life, and put them altogether: What Math. 16.
have thou gotten if thou had gained all the world (says Christ, and lost
thine own soul? all the pleasures of this world, are nothing comparable to
the to^me^ts and woes of hell. On the other part, behold the end of eternal
life, those glories and ioys that tongue can not express, nor pen can write, nor
heart conceive, that are laid up for the sons of God, which if thou
viewest-well, will so inflame thee, that the joys and glories of this life,
shall seem but grefes and vile unto thee, the agonies and afflictions of Romans 8.
this life shall seem nothing worthy of the glory that shall be revealed to
thee. Thou would ever fear to sin, to behold perdition, thou would
never fear to dye, to behold Eternal life. Here is not Pythagoras Y to look
upon, but a far more excellent matter than ever Pythagoras was able to
discern. Pythagoras described the life of Man, by this letter Y, that as the Y
ends in two strakes, so the life of man has two ways leading to two ends.
But the true ends of man's life Pythagoras never knew, as his foolish opinions
of the passage of man's soul out of one thing into an other, does declare.
These ends Aristotle never knew, nor all the Peripatetici, that dreamed the
world to have been for ever without beginning, and so to continue without
endyng. These ends Epicure never knew, considering the end of man no further,
than the bodily death. These ends the Platonistes never knew, whether the
soul went after the bodies death, although they imagined the soul was
immortal. These ends the Athenians never knew, that scorned S. Paul, when
he preached to them of the bodies resurectio^. And would to god concerning
these ends, that Pythagoras, Aristotle, and Epicure, that the Academikes and
other Heathen, had no disciples even among us Christians, or rather we were
not worse than they, that knowinge there are these two ends to ensue, are
nothing moved by them. But is there any that knowing these two ends to
follow, are at least not so farrefoorth moved thereby, that they would not
gladly avoid damnation, and be partakers of eternal life? surely none, except
he be worse than mad. Every man would wish him self well: the most wicked
will say on his alebench, God send us to come to heaven, none by their good
will would be in hell, although ye may here some ruffians jest thereat. How
then comes it to pass, that so few obteyn eternal life? but this question
is most easily assoyled. Al run in a race, 1. Cor. 9.
(says S. Paul) but all get not the garlande. All would have it, but they
refuse the means whereby they should obtain it. Wishers and woulders, were
never good householders, their wishyng is but a vain woulding, either they know
not what they would, or they would not what they should. The Turk, the Jew,
the Heretic, they know there is an heaven: they know there is an hell: they
would come to Heaven and not to hell. But alack, they know not what they
would, Nescitis quid petitis: but are carried away with their Matthew. 20
own dreams of heaven and hell, because they reiecte the word of God that
should enstruete them in it. The Papists do know these two ends of heaven
and hell, but they are not content with these two ends, but will make for
lucre, a third end of Purgatory between them both: If they reply, they
make this no end, as it is apparaunt to the contrary, they make it a state
after this life, between Hell fire and Eternal life, and say it differs
nothing from Hell fire, but only in continuance: so in this point of
continuance, they imagine Hell fire to be such an end also, as they with
their Masses can deliver from it, not only those that are alive, an are not yet
f^lne into this end, but also the souls that already are damned the rin. As
they write how Gregory with a Trentall delivered his mother, that came whisking
and crying in the air, when she was already damned, having bin in her life time
a privy whore, and murderer of her bastards. And likewise how T^aia^ that was
an hethe^ Emperor, an enemy of Christ, and damned in hell fire, that their
Masses delivered him. But the Scripture is manifest to prove the^ liers, the
fire of hell is unquenchable, Discedite Matthew. 2^.
a me maledicti in ignem aeternu^, the worm that gnaweth there, shalneuer die.
In inferno nalla est Mark 9.
redemptio, in hell there is no jail delivery. Est magnus hiatus, There is a
greatspace (says Abraham) to the condemned glutton, between you and us, in so
Luc. 16.
much that they which would go hence to you, can not, neither can they come
from thence to us. These therefore, are but Popish lies, as they shall find by
experience when they come thither, except they repent betimes. For it is
impossible for them to taste of eternal life, if that they walk in darkness
and ignorance as they do, the blind leading Matthew. 15.
the blind, both fall in the ditche together. If that they go otherways than
Christ, that says of him self, Ego sum via, if that they enter not by the
door John. 14.
of Christ, that says of himself, Ego sum ostiu^, they John. 10.
must needs perish, and shall never enter into eternal life. Neither is hell
the place prepared for pagans, Turks, Jews, Heretics, and Papists only, but
also for false Gospellers: It shall not avail the Papists to say, Templum
Domini, Templum Domini, The Church of the Lord, the Church of the Lord: Our
holy mother the Ierem. 7.
Church. Neither shall it profit the faise Protestants to say, Verbum
Domini, Verbum Domini, The word of the Lord, the word of the Lord, the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, wherein we learn the true knowledge of these ends:
for what are we the better, or not rather mutche worse, by the knowledge of
these ends, if our living be such as either knows them not, or carethe
not for them. To what security (Lord be merciful to us) are we grown,
even on whom the ends of the world are almost comme, and fear not the case,
nor prepare our selves thereto. hell sire is even at hand, both for body and
soul, and we fare as though there were no such thing toward. We build as
though it were at the Cowre of Babel: we purchasse as though the world
should last for ever: we ruff^e in apparel, as though our carryons should
never turn to dust: we gather and whoorde as though we should never die: we
live in pleasure as though our heaven were here: To conclude, in what point
do we show that we know these ends, or we consider these ends, or
regard these ends, or prepare our selves against these ends, but even in a
retchelesse security rather say, either there are no such ends at all, as
the meckers that Saint Peter prophesied to comme in the last days shall say:
Where is the promise of 2. Pet. ^
his coming? for since the Fathers died, all things continue alvke, since the
beginning of the creation: or else we say with the wicked servant, Tushe,
Matt. 22.
the ^ndes are fa^re of, the Lord differreth his coming, and so eat and
drink, and strike our felows, but thou naughty servant, in an hour thou
look Mat. 22.
not for him, thy Lord shall come to give thee thy wretched end with
hypocrites, Take him and Luc. 12. 1. Peter. 4. Hebr. 10. Apoc. 3. Matthew. 24
Matthew. 25. Matthew. 10.
bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness. Thou shall
perish, and be beaten with many stripes. Behold the end is even at hand,
either of perdition or eternal life. The Lord is coming, and he will not
slack his coming, he standethe even at the door and knocks, and bids
thee watch, and look for the end. Happy is he that looks for the end
with the wise virgins. Woe woe worth him, on whom the end comes unlooked
for. Blessed is he that abides to the end, that prepares him self to the
end, that sets ever before him the horror of eternal death, that has ever
in his eyes the hope of eternal life, that directs to that life that is
eternal, all the actions of this life that is so transitory.

Thus in this first part, as first of all we must consider these two ends,
the escape of eternal death, the obtaining eternal life: so must we consider
these two parties, God, and the world, God that delivers from eternal death,
and gives eternal life: The world that is delivered from eternal death, and
receaueth eternal life. For in the nature of these two, is as much difference
of them selves, God and the world, as is even between eternal death and
eternal life. For first, where as God is al holiness, purity, righteousues,
and goodness: the world is all wickedness, vncleanuesse, 1 John. 5. ^ Ion. 2.
unrighteousness, and even a sink of sin. Totus mundus in maligno positus, All the world is set on mischief. Omne Quam est in mundo, aut est concupiscentia
1. John. 2.
carnis. etc. All that is in the world, is either the lust of the flesh, the
lust of eyes, or the pride of life. Where as God is eternity, perfection, the
fountain of all life, yea life it self, both of grace and glory: the world
is ouerrunne with death, what is in it but vanity, instabilitie, misery, and
wretchedness? and what in the end deserves it but perdition and
condemnation? To conclude, the kingdom of God is not of this world, the
wisdom of this world is folly to God. Last of all, God the Father has
drowned the world, God the Holy Ghost shall reprove the world of sin, of
Justice, and of Judgment: And the Son of God, that the world refused, shall
come in the end to judge the world. So that between these twain God, and the
world, is a great contrariety. Now then prove ye this your first part, will
ye say, that God would the world should not perish, but have eternal life?
Here well-beloved, we must consider, what this word the World in this place
does signify: for by mistakyng thereof, great erroures have grown. The
world has diverse significations, but four in principal. First the world
betokens universally all Creatures, that God the Creator has created,
visible and invisible what soever, Heaven and earth, and all things therein
contained. Mundus peripsum factus est, The world John: 1:
was made by him. Of this signification he speaks not here. For as God by his
eternal purpose, would that the reprobate Angels should everlastingly peryshe,
and not have Eternal Life, so the most of other Creatures, either diverse of
them, have no life at all, or of those that have life, their lives return to
nothing.

Secondely, the world beetokenethe all Mankind, for whose sake all creatures
were made, even for Jesus Christ's sake all was made, Angels and all was made
for Manne. And therefore Manne is called (...), A little World, whose head is
even as it were a little Globe of the World, and conceauethe all worldely
things. And hereunto says CHRIST, Euntes in Vniuersum mundum, praedicate
Mare 16.
Euangelium omni creaturae etc. Going your ways into all the world, preach
the Gospel to every creature, meaning Mankind only, Legenda in vita S.
Francis.
and not as Saint Frauncis fondely imagyned, to stones, to Geese, and
Sparrowes, but unto men. And although that all men are contained in this
name World: yet by a a third signification, in the most places especially
of the New Testamente, the World sygnifyeth only the wicked worldelings:
partly because throughoute the world, they are the greatest and the most
flourishyng part of Mankind: and partly, for that they are altogether
worldely minded, reckenyng chiefly upon this World, seeking for worldely
richesse, glory, power, and pleasures, the which to obtain, they do serve
and woorshyppe the Dyuell, even as their Prince! and God of this World, and
therefore are they called by the name of the world it self. Of these wyeked
ones (says Christ) Non pro mundo oro, I pray not for the world, John. 17.
Mundus gaudebit. etc. The world shall rejoice, but you shall mourn. The world
hates me. The world loves his own. etc. Therefore says Saint John,
Nolite diligere mundum, Love not you 1. John. 2.
the world, nor the things that are in the world etc. But shall then the wicked
worldelyngs, that for these causes are called the world: or all the world in
general and every man, not peryshe but have eternal life? How then does
Christ say, Lata porta, and spatiosa via est. etc. Broad is the gate, Matthew.
7.
and wide is the way, that leadethe to perdition, and many they are that enter
thereby. Narrow is the gate, and straight is the way that leads to life, and
few there be that find it. Yea none fyndeth it but whom the Father draws
to Christ, John. 6. Ephesians. 1.
in whom they were elect even before the constitution of the world. Whereof
Saint Paul has taught the wholle degrees and order. Quos elegit, hos
vocauit. etc. Whom he has Romans 8.
elect, those he called, whom he called, those he justified, whom he
justified, those he glorified, That is, he ordained them to have eternal
life. But how then (says our Savior Christ) He soloued the World: Quos
dilexit, John. 13.
in finem dilexit eos, Those whom he loved, even unto the end he loved them.

Here now therefore, the World is to be understood by a fourth
Signification, even for the elect of God. To whom though this word the World
seem contrary, yet for diverse considerations, even the Godly are called by it,
chiefly for three, first to put them in continual remembrance from whence they
came. Vos non estis, John. 5.
(says Christ to his chosen) ex hoc mundo, You are not of the world, but
withal he tells, that they were of the world, sed ego elegi vos ex hoc
mundo, but I have chosen ye out of the world. Haec fuistis (says S. Paul)
sed abluti estis, etc. 1 Cor. 6.
Such ones ye were, but ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified.
And notable is this vpbrayding the name of the world to the children of God,
not only to stir them up to a thankful recordation, to consider from whence
they are delivered: but also if they forget themselves, and wax proud, to put
them in remembrance what they were, the which greatly abateth the pride of man.
And therefore Agathocles, that of a Potter, was made a Prince, hong up the
potters whele in every place and used no other than vessels of clay, to put him
in remembrance from whence he came. So King Philip of Macedone, Alexanders
father, least he should wax proud of his victories gotten, was every
morning saluted with this Uerse for his breakefast: Remember Philip, thou art
but a man. And so God himself puts thee in remembrance, Quod puluis es, and
in puluere^ reuerteris, That thou Genesis 3.
art but dust, and into dust thou shall return. So God vpbraidyng to his
people their proud forgetfulness, says unto them by his Prophet Ezechiel,
Son of man cause Jerusalem to know her abomination, and say, thus says the
Lord unto Jerusalem, Thine habitation and thy kinrede is of the land of
Canaan, thy father was an Ammorite, and thy mother was an Hethite. And if we
likewise, the people of England, whom God has more plentifully lightened with
his truth, beautified with his graces, and by diverse his bountiful gifts,
has made us nobler than many nations, would consider what an unnoble, what a
rude, savage, barbarous, and brutishe people, naked like Irishe men, painted
like devils, fierce like Scythians, unknown to the world like the new
Indians, neither knowing* God like Gentiles, neither knowing our selves like
beasts, we were in times past, as Chronicles write of us: and what civility,
plenty, peace, kuowledge, and policy, we be now grown unto, it might make
us ashamed so to abuse these benefits, and pull down our pride, in thinking
what we be now, to remember what before we were. And even so the elect of God
are called the world, to remember what of them selves they were, the children
of wrath, a lump of sin, a mass of damnation, and at one word, the world:
neither were they the world only, so that now they are clean delivered out
of the world: nay rather they be not only in the world, but in part, they
bear the world about with them, even as they bear with them the flesh, the
first Adam, the old man, the body of death, the law of rebellion, the
vnperfections, spots, and wrinckles, that our corupte nature is subject still
unto. For although the world be crucified to them, and they to the world,
yet they have not killed the world. Although Gala. 6.
they need not fear the world, for Christ has said, I have overcome the
world. Although John. 12
the world have his Judgment, and be cast out already, yet so long as the
flesh resysteth the Spirit, so long as the Church is militante, so long as
the world lasts, even so long will Satan tempte us by the world, and the
world will hate us, and allure us, because we be still in the world.

Those Monks that said, they died to the world, and they were out of the
world, because they had cast off their former coats, and took a coule,
because they forsook town houses, and dwelte by themselves beside the towns,
did but mock both with God and the world, and so were buried to the world,
that they lived in the chiefest pleasures of the world: they were gone so
clean out of the world, that they had gotten the best lands and wealth of
the world in their possessions. But as those worldelyngs deluded the world,
so is there none, no not the Elect of GOD, that come in this world to such
perfection, but that they may be called even the world, because they were of
the world, and yet are in the world. Neither (says Christ) they be delivered
yet from the world: No^ rogo vt tollas ex hoc mundo, John. 17.
sed vt serves eos a malo, I pray not, that thou would take them out of the
world, but that thou would keep them from evil. And for this first cause,
to humble the elect, by remembering them what yet they were, and in part what
they be, and in what place and state they stand, even the elect of God are
called the world. The second reason why the elect of God may be called the
world is, because they be dispersed through out the world and are of al sorts
and kynds of the world. For as the world is not this or that place, nor one or
two Realms, but all places in every climate of the world: so the Church of
Christ is not tied to Saint Peter's chair at Rome, nor to the Latin church,
as the Papists would bound it, nor to the Affricanes, as the Donatistes
contended, Sed in omnem terram exiuitsonus eorum. Ite in vni Romans 10 Marc. 16.
uersum mundum, but is dispersed throughout all the face of the earth, God has
his elect even thoroughe all the World, and that of every kind and sort:
for as the world is not one state, all are not princes, all are not subjects,
all are not men, al are not women. etc. But the world is all Nations,
kynredes, conditions, states, orders, personages, sexes, ages, and all degrees
of persons: so the Elect are of all sorts, rich and poor, high and low,
weak and strong, wise and simple, old and young what so ever: God accepts
none for his person more than other. There is neither Jew nor Gentyle, manne,
nor Woman, nor any respect of difference in Romans 10. Gala. 3.
Gods election: and therefore the elect may well be called the World. The
third reason is, for the dignity of the Elect, not only for the analogy of
the name which in Greek and Latin, signifies clean and pure, so well as the
world where as in deed the world is corrupt, and subject to vanity for
man's fault: and only the elect are pure and clean, whose filthe is cleansed
with the blood of the unspotted Lamb of God, and so by good proportion, may be
called the world: but also for that the world was even made for them,
although they be the least part of the world, yet they be the best part of the
world, eue^ the choice of god: whom though the world despise, and be unworthy
of them, yet are they before God, and in deed, the very heirs and lords of
the world. So says S. Romans 4.
Paul, of Abraham, the father of the faithful: Quod sit futurus haeres mundi,
that he should be the heir of the world: and so says he also of al Gods
people: 1. Cor. 3.
Omnia vestra sunt, All things are youres, whether it be Paul, Apollo, or
Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come,
al are youres, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. For as Christ is the
heir of all the world, so are the Elect coinheritours with him: In
consideration of which dignity Saint Paul rebuked the Corinthians, for going
to law before Heathen 1. Cor. 6.
Judges, abasyng them selves under the world, being the Judges of the world.
Know ye not (says he) that the Saints shall judge the world? If the
world then shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest
matters? Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels, how much more than
matters worldely? The spiritual manne 1. Cor. 2.
judges all things, and is judged of none. For in deed he only has the true
judgment of al things, and knows how to rule and order them, how to take
them, how to forsake them, how to love them, how to hate them, how to esteem
them, how to despise them, how to use them, how to refuse them: He uses that
that should be but used, and enjoys that should be enjoyed. For this
difference Vti and Frui, Saint Augustine says, is even the Lbi. 1. D^ doct.
christiana.
ground of all our life and doctrine. This do not the wicked, they use that
they should enjoy, they enjoy that they should but use: and therefore whatsoever
the wicked use, enjoy or have, they are but thieves and robbers, it is none of
theirs: but proprely and duly belongs to the sons of God. And therefore for
this cause also may the elect be called the world. Then soloweth it, that there
is no contrariety in these propositions, God by his eternal will and purpose
would, that the world should not perish, but have Eternal life, and yet that
neither al creatures, nor al me^, nor the wicked worldlings should escape
perishing, nor have eternal life, since the elect of God may for these just
causes be called the world that only shall not perish, but have eternal life.
This restraint of this word the world (for the elect of God out of this world)
not considered, diverse have staggred at this and such other sentences, and
fallen into grievous errors. Origin stombling at this block fell fowly in the
mire, affirming, that all men should be saved at the length, yea the dyuels
in Hell and all, but that was too gross an error. The scripture (as I have
noted already against the Papists) is manifest to the contrary. After him came
Pelagius, with a fyner invention, who hearing here, that the world should be
saved, and considering withal how far this term the World does firetch,
even to the wicked, destitute of all grace, and to every man in general:
imagines that God without all election or choice of one more than an other,
would simply have al men alyke to be saved, and that al men have alike free
will, election, and judgment, to choose whether they will be saved or no. This
doctrine being a very plausible doctrine to the itchyng ears of man, tickled
with the pride and love of his own freedom and ability, was by and by so
snatched up for a jewel, that almost there was no part of Christendom that had
it not, yea that was not so infected with such a spice of it, as never could
be pulled out since: Nor almost any doctoure, except Saint Augustine, but had
some smacke thereof, having bin the most of them in their youth Philosophers,
and of Platos and Aristotle's principles sucked out their error. Yea Saint
Augustine was a while him self blemished therewith, till afterward he came to
more sound knowledge, and espied the dryfte and danger of this error, and
then he passed all the Doctoures herein, that either were in his time, or
went before him, or any that has succeeded him. Myghtyly confuted he Pelagius
generality by the Word of GOD, showing how this sentence, and all such
other, are not absolutely to be understood of every manne in the world, but
so that they may agree with the other places, which do clearly set out
Gods election, and reprobation, GOD would 1. Tim. 2.
all men should be saved, that is to wit (says Saint Augustine) none
shall be saved, but whom God would should be saved. God would all men
should be saved. All men (says Saint Augustine) that is, Non de singulis
generum, sed de generibus singulorum, not every man, but men of every sort,
without respect of person, place, time, dignity, or any other regard than
of his own choice and will, even as he him self has Rom 9.
protested, Miserebor cuius miserebor, et misericordiam prestabo cui
misericordiam prestabo, I will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy, and I
will show mercy to whom I will show Prouer. 15.
mercy. And on the contrary, he created the wicked to an evil day, that is,
even unto damnation: he hated Esau before he had done good Rom 9.
or ill: And Pharaos heart he ha^dened against his own commandment. To
conclude, on both Romans 9.
parts the elect and reprobate, Cuius vult miseretur, and quem vultindurat, He
is mercyful to whom he will, and whom he will, he hardens: not that he
delyghteth in their destruction whom he hardneth, or is the author or
partaker of their wickedness (as the Papists blaspheme Gods judgments, and
sclander us, reuiuyng increasing and mainteyning tooth and nail the errors of
Pelagius.) For Gods works to the wicked are just and righteouse, and that he
saves some it is his mercy. He might have damned all if he had would:
And if he had would, without all succor or resistance, we had all been
damned, every mothers child. If he had but said the word and would, it had
benne so undoubtedly, and then woe worth us that ever we were borne, as Christ
Matthew. 26.
said on the lost child Judas. What then? though we had bin utterly undone,
yet god had done but Justice to us all, he had done us no wrong, we had
deserved it, and he had gotten glory on his enemies, as he did on the devils
and Pharao, but the Lords name be blessed immortally, he would not the world
should perish, he would the glory of his mercy should shine above the glory
of his justice. Misericordia eius super omnia opera eius, His mercy is above
all his works. And therefore of his infinite mercy he chose his choice out of
the world whom here for the foresaid causes, he calls the world, and in
other places are called the elect of god. And thus as he would not that every
one should be damned, so he would not that every one should be saved. For if
he would, not only he could, but al undoubtedly should have bin saved. It is an
ill argument to reason from the power of god by it self to the will of god, or
to the work and doing of god, as the Papists do in their article of
Transubstanciation, saying: Can not God make bread his body? can not God make
his body go through a door, the door remaining whole and shut? can not god
make his body be in many places at once? Ergo he will, Ergo he does it: This is
an insufficient consequence. But to reason from the will of God, to the power
of God, is a good argument. To reason from the power and the will of God, to the
effect and work of God, is a necessary sequel, as appears by this argument:
Whatsoever God can do, and will do, that shall be done: but God can and will save
all men, ergo all men shall be saved. This is a right argument, but this is a
manifest false conclusion, for then none should be damned: But the Scripture
says, many shall be damned, as before is proved: Then the conclusion is not
true. but the falshod of the conclusion in a formal argument, comes of some
falshod in the premises, Ex veris p^ssunt nil nisi vera sequi. The mayor is so
evident true that none can deny it, except he will deny god himself, then the
falshod is in the minor. the minor was this, God can and will save all men.
Here the whole rests on these two words, can and will, that God can do it if
he would, is out of controversy, then must the lot light on this word will: To
say therefore it is Gods will that al men should be saved, is a false principle.
But thus say the Papists, and wrest the words of God, to deny his eternal
purpose of election and reprobation, the Papists therefore make an evident lie
of God. For if god would, Voluntati eius quis resistet? who could resist the
will of God? could all the power in the world? could all the Devils in hell?
could man, could we our selves? can any creature in heaven and earth, defeat
the will of the Creator of Heaven and earth and all things in it? Can the pot
alter the potters will? and shall we say then, man can frustrate Gods will? Let
us see for example an instance hereof. Saul that afterward was called Paul,
was a naughty persecuter, a blind Pharisey, and an enemy of Christ and his
religion and of justice deserved damnation, and God could have damned him if he
had would, but God would not that this his enemy should be damned, but have
eternal life. This purpose in God, was determined before Saint Paul was
borne, as he says of him self Elegit ^os in eo etc. Ephesians. 1.
he chose us in him, before the foundations of the world were laid. When the
time came, according to the saying, Quos elegit, vocauit) that Saul Romans 8.
whom God had chosen, should be called, then would God call Saul, and make him
Paul. Saul would not be called that way. No, how prove ye Saul would not? His
purpose was evident to the contrary, his letters, his commission, his journey
was to make hauock in the congregation he breathed out (says the text)
threats, (...) even his breath did blow hostility. Veniamus ad eius
primordia. Videamus Saulum saeuientem, spectemus furentem, spectemus odia
anhelante^ f^nguinemque (...). etc. Let us come says S Augustine) to the very
begin, Aug li. 50. Homili^r. Homili. 17.
nings of him: Let us see Saul cha^ing, let us look on him raging, Let us
behold him breathing hatred yea thirsting blood. This was the way that Paul
went, for as yet his way was not Christ, what had he in his heart? what but
mischief? Then is it evident that Saul was not willing: yet for all that God
was willing: whose will took place, Saul's will or gods will? Let us see the
combat between these contrary wills: suddenly God struck Saul down, he
could have stricken him down to hell, but so he would not, but rather lift
him up to heaven: he struck him blind in his bodily eyes, and he was blind in
the eyes of his mind before: he could have blinded him with the Sodomites,
with the Egiptia^s, with Elimas, with the reprobats blindness of the soul for
ever: but he would make him being blind to see: He called him, Saul, Saul,
Act. 9.
quid ^e persequeris? and Saul was straight converted: if Saul had had his
will, Saul had not ben converted: but God had his will and Saul was con^erted,
and of unwilling Saul was made a willing Paul, not because it was Saules
will, but Psalm. 117
because it was Gods will, A Domino factum est istud, it was the Lords doing
not Saul's, and therefore is wonderful in our eyes. Saul was willing I grant,
but not of him self, he was made willing of unwilling, as he him self
confesses, Deus est Phil. ^.
qui operatur in nobis velle, eue^ that we have a will it is God that works it
in us: For otherwise a colt is not more unwilling to be broken, than we are
unwilling to conform our will to God. And therefore (says Christ) Nemo potest
venire ad me, John. 6.
none can come to me. except my father will first draw him, and if God stretch
out his hand, to draw, who can pull it in to resist? God the father has
drawn his choice, brought them to Christ, given them to him, and put them in
his hand, who shall John. 17.
now take them out of his hand? None (says he) shall take them out of my hand,
and why? because I will lose none of those that thou have given to me. the^ the
will of God is not that all in general should be saved, but those who^ he has
chosen: Secundu^ propositu^ voluntatis suae, according to the purpose of his
own will, secundum consilium voluntatis suae, Ephesians. ^.
according to the council of his own will, secundum Romans 9.
beneplacitum voluntatis suae, according to the good pleasure of his will, and
not according to the will of man, Non est volentis, it is not of man's willing
or man's nilling, for whom he will he makes willing, although they will not: and
whom he will not, they can not be wyllyng, and if they would, their will were
nothing. But here they would slip the collar with a shift of descant, by
distinction of the will of God, and make in God two contrary wills,
antecedentem voluntatem, and subsequentem, a former will and an after will,
imagining that God by his former will would have all men without any choice
saved, and gives every man freedom of will and grace a like, whereby he may
choose whether he will be saved or no: And so (say they) are to be understood
these Ezech. 33. 1. Tim. 2.
sayings: God would not the death of a sinner, God would that al men should be
saved, God would the world should not perish, but have eternal life, God would
Jerusalem should not be destroyed, but called Matthew. 23.
it to repentance, as the hen clucketh her chickens. All this would God (say
they) by his former will: but when he sees how some would not, Et tu noluisti,
Man was unwilling and froward, Psalm. 17.
the^ cu^ peruersis peruerteris. God would by his later will be as backward as
they, be froward with the froward, and take his will and graces from them, and
frame his will only to those, that he sees will be willing. Cum bonis bonus
eris, he will be good and willing to the good and willing, and be as toward as
they are toward. And this will is his after will (say they) and those that he
wills by this after will, they are the Elect of God. But what blasphemy is
this to the Majesty of Almighty God? What a division is this in God? Is not
God unity? Audi Israel deus tuus vnus est, Near Exodus 6.
O Israel, thy God is but one God, yea is unity it self: there is no
doubling, there is no diversity in God: Ego deussum et non mutor, I am God,
and Malach. 3.
I am not changed. And yet is this their Scholemens knurkle deep divinity, to
make God go forward and backward, to determine a thing, and to revoke it, which
had been a shameful matter, even to the heathen, Medes and Persians. And shall we
make God to say the word, and eat his word? to give a thing, and take a
thing, little children say, This is the devils goldring, not Gods gift. Are
Gods Romans (...).
gifts with repentannce? no says S. Paul, the gifts and vocation of God are
such that he can not repent him. God is not such an unconstant God, to
will a thing, and afterward to be unwilling in the same thing, he will and he
will not, this is boe peep in deed, See me and see me not, is there such
daliance in God? Or is there such unadvisedness and imperfection in God, and
that in the weyghtiest matters of all? or do the Papists think there is a God,
and dare thus write of him? or do they not worship a God of their own making
like them selves, for what is more unconstant and unadvised than man? more
altering and fickle than man's will? And shall Gods will depend on man's will?
Nay, they were best make man God, and God man. What a mutable god, an
unconstant God, an vnconsiderat, an unadvised, a not for casting God, do the
Papists worship? it is not God, it is an Idol. it is not our God, the true
living and eternal God, for he is the same Heri hodie Hebr. 13. Exodus 3. 2 Cor.
^. L^c. ^.
ipse and in s^cula, he is sum qui sum, he is he in who^, is not, est et non,
sed est in illo est, he is he A pud que^ non est transmutatio nec
vicissitudinis obumbratio. with whom there is no yea one while and nay another
while, no to day one, yesterday* another, no was and shall be this and that, no
alteration, no change, no turning, no had I wist, no repentance, these things
are in man, Sed non est deus vt homo, quem propositi aliquando paeniteat. the
judgment will and purpose of God is eternal and all one as he him self is
one and the same for ever that has in his everlasting judgments, elected
those in the world, whom he would not to perish, but to have eternal life,
and has refused all other in the world, that they should not have eternal
life but perish. the will of God can not be contrary to it self, nor repent it
self, nor amend it self, but whatsoever God has willed, even as he has
willed it, shall undoubtedly be performed. And whatsoever he wylleth, it is
most perfect, just, and righteous. Why then (say they) how satisfy you
these fore said sentences: where these allegations of Gods will stretche to
all men, and yet all men shall not be saved, though God would have all
men saved: Does not this she we a manifest alteration in Gods will? except
ye will say that man can frustrate Gods will: Nay well-beloved, it is not we
that say so, but they, it is they that of this interrogatiue, No^ potest
saluare te sine te? can not God save thee without thee? do make an affirmative
Non potest saluare te sine te. God cannot save thee without thee. It is they
that make Gods will to depend on man's will: It is they that will tie Gods
will to causes in manne, and yet to man will give free will, bynding Christ and
letting Barrabas go free: but as they see not the miserable bondage of man's
will, which S. Paul Romans 8.
says, held him captive under the law of sin, so they show, how much
less they see the will of GOD, which the more he has revealed to Psalm. 13.
them, and they see it not, they show them selves to have eyes and see not, to
be even blyn^ed of God, and repreb^te, and what so^uer they prattle of Gods
will to other, that it stretchethe not to them. For were they not wilful
blind herein, S. Augustines sober distinctions above rehearsed* on this word
Omnes, All. might have suffised them by restraining all, to all degrees and
sorts of men, not to every particular man, that is manifest sh^l not be saved.
Neither devised S. Augustine this distinetion of his own head, as they do
theirs, but considering the circumstance of the place even the 1. Tim. ^.
text does give it* For where as S. Paul had willed Prayers and supplications
to be made for all men, chiefly for Princes and those that are in authority,
that we might live a quiet life* in all godliness and honesty under them, to
prove that no sort and degree of men is excluded from prayer, he infers this
reason: For, god would al me^ to be sau^d. what means this illatio^ here? but
as who should say: For there is no state or degree among men, but is capable of
the state of eternal life: and therefore pray for all: as this is a plain and
true understanding and no cauillation, so the other of S. Augustine is also a
true and easy exposition, by conversion of the sentence, to infer the
meaning thereof: God would all should be saved: that is, none should be saved,
but whom God would should be saved: and all that God would should be saved,
shall be saved, for his will shall not be hindered: not that he would every
body to be saved. Neither is this so far fet an interpretation, but that our
selves use it commonly. As if I would say, All men go from England by ship to
France, must this needs infer, that every man goth by ship to France? This
school master teaches all the Children in the town, must it needs follow,
that every child in the town is taught of him? who will not renot restrain
this word, All, in this and all such other sayings, to all such as go thither,
to all such as are taught, and not to all simply and to every body? These
expositions then of Saint Augustine, or rather of the text it self, and of
our common phrases, being sufficient to any that is not disposed to wrangle,
both to confirm Gods elections, and to prove no alteration in Gods will: yet
if these would not satisfy them, why should they not rather admit that
distinction of Gods will, which the ancient and godly learned Fathers used of
Voluntas signi, and Voluntas beneplaciti, the will of the sign, and the will
of the acceptable pleasure of GOD, then to devise such a former and after will,
as makes contrariety, infirmity, unadvisedness, repentance, and alteration
in the nature and will of God: and all to wreste Gods will to take away Gods
election. For although God would so far as the sign stretches that even the
reprobate should be partakers of the word and Sacraments, that are the signs
of Gods Church, even so well as his elect, which is a great good will of God
unto the^: And though he would they should receive diverse graces thereby: yet
follows it not, that ever God would, that hereby they should be
inheritours of his gracious favor and everlasting glory. In this distinction
is no variableness, for God ever knew who were his, what he would do, how he
would do that he purposed to do, to whom he would and he would not do it,
how far it should take place in these, and how far in those, and as he
willed: for ever so it was, so it is, so it shall be, so it must be, none can
alter nor defeat his will, whatsoever he will, His will be done in earth as it
is in Matthew. 6.
Heaven, his will be blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

Well say the Papists, how true soever this doctrine be, it is a perilous
doctrine to be taught unto the people, ye ought not to preach it. and why so?
since it is truth, Truth never shames his master, Truth will ever prevail:
and what should we teach in matters of salvation but the Truth, and all the
truth, and nothing but the truth? Would they have us teach lies like them? or
would they have us to conceal the truth in so weighty a matter, and so
necessary to be thoroughly known, as the causes of our salvation? Why God the
Father reuele it, and his prophets endite it? Why did Christ so openly and
plainly preach it, and his Evangelists and apostles put it in writing? to be
covered with a bushel? or to be setin a Matthew. 5.
candelstick? does God give us that that will bread more hurt than good, more
peril than profit? surely they blaspheme God that so say, either of this or
any other doctrine in the scripture. Omnis scriptura diuinitus inspirata, It is
written by the very ^. Tim. 3.
finger of God the holy Ghost, not only to enstruct us, but to confute them.
They say it will breed nothing in us but desperation or presumption, but they
she we a great desperate presumption in them selves, thus impudentely to
sclaunder the word of God: although (were it not the verity of God) they were
the more to be borne withal, because they measure it by their own doctrine:
they that be in hell, think there is no other heaven. The Papists think this
doctrine to breed presumption or desperation, because theirs does so. Does
not theirs bring a man even to the pit brink of desperation, that makes a man
always mystrusting lest he shall be damned? What an anguish and torment of mind
is this? As the Poets feign how the Egle always gnaweth Prometheus his
heart: as Sisiphus is punished still to roll up the restless stone that
always falls down the hill again: so that man can never quiet his mind,
hanging ever between despair and hope. Is not this the very porche of hell?
and yet they say, we must all our life stand in this doubtful perpleritie,
neither can we have any assurance of the favor and love of GOD. And this is
al their doctrines consolation. Who would have thought that the Papists are so
near H^ll and Desperation, as this Doctrine brings them unto? But no
marvel, As they brewe, so they must drink: as their clothe will stretche,
so let them make it. They stand upon the merits of man: They brewe out of
the Cesternes of man's Ierem 2. John 4. Gen 3. Romans 13.
puddles, and let go the fountain of ly^e: they clothe themselves with
fygge leaves, and their own works, and refuse to put on Jesus Christ: They
lean to a broken stycke, to a rotten reed: Alas what is more feeble than is
the force of man? We have here the deep dytche of perdition to leap over,
who would not, having his five wits, be a^rayd to stay him self by a
rotten reed? Who would not think that it is impossible, that the reed
should sustain the peyse of his body? He must needs fall in, over head
and ears, which dare adventure himself and have no stronger stay. This is
the cause of the Papists contynuall doubt. They seek to leap over the
dytche of Hell into Heaven, by the staff and stay of their own Merits.
This is (GOD wot) but a weak staff to make such a leap wythall: And
therefore sum wyser than some, distruste this staff: But not so wise to
seek the true staff, tun up and down after all the Merits of man that
can be devised. They hear of a Mass, and of the force thereof, and thither
they run. They hear of trentals of great force, thither they run. They hear
of a Pilgrimage of more force than that, and thither they run. They hear of a
pardon come fresh from Rome, and thither they run. And although the pardon
promise never so mutche, yet we must be shreuen, and still doubt this is not
enough, and that is not enough, and so ar never settled, doubting whether we
have done enough or no, whither we have gotten a staff strong enough or no, to
leap over the ditch, because we measure al by man's works: which when al is done
that we can do, is but a weak stick, and a very rotten reed to lean to. And
hereof springs all this continual doubting. Non est pax impijs dicit Esa 48
Dominus, they may well say, peace peace, and crake of worldly peace, but in
their hearts and consciences, which peace passes all understanding, The wicked
(says the Lord) have no peace at al, but continual war and turmoile, ever
misdoubtinge that they shall be damned, and is not this a doctrine of
desperation? now if any do trust hereunto as (alas the pity) thousands of
simple people did, since the ditche is so deep and dangerous, since the staff
so weak and brittle, sith the burden of his body and soul, laden with so
many sins, so ponderous, were not this very presumption, to make the
adventure? might he not well say, have over, and lie in the mydst? and well
worthy for his foolish presumption. And what is all their Doctrine but
presumption? To infringe Gods election for man's election, is not this
presumption? To disable Christ's righteousness to enhable their own, is not
this presumption? To embarre the grace of God to establish the merits of man,
is not this presumption? to embezel, and rob the people of part of Gods
sacraments for their Priests estimation, is not this presumption? to make more
sacraments than God made, and alter those that God made, is not this
presumption? to challenge Gods word for insufficient, to set up traditions of
men for necessary Doctrines to salvation, to make them equal, and exalte them
above Gods word, to make them selves judges of Gods word: to take Gods word
away and hide it under a bushel, to sclaunder and rail on it, and in the end
to dare presume to burn it, is not all this presumption? to aspyre to be equal
to Kings and Princes, to clime above them, to tread them down, to take their
scepter, crown, sword, authority, Realm, people, and allegiance from them,
and stir their subjects to rebellion, and other princes to war on them, is
not this yet pre sumption? to presume to forgive sins, to co^mande Angels: to
make their maker: to sit in Gods own seat, to claim Christ's authority,
titles and office, is not all this yet presumption? what is pre sumptio^ if
these things be not? These these, well-beloved, are the doctrines of presumption,
yea it were to impudent presumption to deny them to be presumption. As for the
doctrine of Gods eternal election, is Gods own doctrine, that can not presume:
Nothing is higher tha^ he, nor any thing higher than it, and therefore can not
be the Doctrine of presumption. The wicked may presume, (I grant,) to abuse
it, either by to unreuerente consyderation, or by dryuyng it an other way then
to the purpose GOD has set it out, or by to curious searchyng the deapth
and causes thereof. Qui scrutatur Maiestatem apprimetur a gloria, He that
searches the Majesty of God, Prouer. 25
shall be oppressed with glory.

Pliny too curiously searchinge out the causes of the fiery flames of the
Hill Vesuuius, his vytall sprites were stopped, with the piercyng air of the
sulphur, and so he perished for his curiosity. The fly that flittereth too
near the flame of the candell, burns her self. The manne that with too
ententiue and staryng eyes, be holdethe the bryghte beams of the shynyng
Sun, dimmeth his syghte, and make the his eyes to water: How mutche more
then should we hurt our selves, by abusyng even this heavenly Doctrine? We
grant it may be abused, and that it is abused, but nothing like the abuse
of the Papists, that not only presume to abuse it, and deface it, but would
take it clean away, because it is derogatorie to their abuses: but what is
there, that the wicked will not abuse? though a Be suck Honnie out of a
flower, yet all that a Spider sucketh out of the same, be it never so wholesome,
turns to venom: A cholerike stomach will turn good juice into choler, a
good stomach to good nutriment. A froward person will misconster every thing,
suspecte ill by every body, mar every tale in the reportyng, and make the
worste of the best. But Charitas operit multitudinem 1 Pet 4. 1 Cor. 13.
peccatorum, Charitas non est suspicax, Charity judges the best where she
knows not the worst, and of the worste, she makes the best she can. A snake
will show her kind, and stinge even her bringer up. An ape will be but an
ape, and show ye but an apishe touch, and though ye clad her in cloth of
gold. And the wicked will still be wicked, and abuse all the good gifts of
God. Silver, gold, pearl and stone, when will the wicked not abuse them?
strength, health, authority, beauty, wit, wisdom, knowledge, are not all
these things subject to the wickeds abuse? what is not thrall to vanity by
their abuse in the whole world? do they not abuse the Blessed word of God,
yea God him self, yea and them selves also? what, shall not these things
therefore be had nor used of the godly, because they be abused of the ungodly?
yes, even because there is an abuse of them, it arguethe there is and ought to
be an use thereof. we must take the use, and not take away the thing for the
abuse. This doctrine being ryghtlye used, is so far from any inducemente to
despair or presumption, that it is the most excellent Triacle that can be
received to expel the vyolence of both these poisons: there is no such
medicine, but may be so evil given or taken, that it may work a contrary
effect: but take the medicine as it should be taken, and no wise or learned man
will disalow it. The Corinthians did so unworthily receive the Lords Supper,
that they eat and drank their ^. Cor. 11.
own damnation. And for this cause many were sick and weak among them, and
many died: shall none therefore receive it? yea shall it not be offered to all?
so, many abuse this doctrine of Gods election and reprobation, even to their
own damnation, shall we not therefore receive it at al? yea had not all the
more danger the more need to know how to receive it rightly? The Papists
snatche at the ensamples of those that have hurt them selves by it, and allege
gladly against us what inconveniences may ensue hereof, but they tell not of
the good that comes of it, and how many are confirmed in their faith thereby:
where as the evil is not of this doctrine, but of the devil, and their
abusage. Even as Christ him self is an offense and stomblyng block, an
occasion of war and Matthew. 22. Matthew. 10.
persecution, not of himself, but by the wickeds not taking, or mistaking of
him. This doctrine rightly taught and so received, first shows us what of
our selves we be, children of wrath, enemies of God, an heap of sin,
deseruers of damnation, and even a world of wickedness, we are the world.
This consideration is terrible, and would bring us in deed to desperation, if
it went no further, but it goes further, it shows unto us the comfortable
sight of Gods mercy that has taken us out of the world, and made us
inheritours of another world. Neither that this matter hangs in doubt, but is
already certainly done and ratified, in the book of life Gods eternal
purpose, that cannot be changed: Now for me to doubt, that cannot be changed:
now for me to doubtewhether I am one of this choice number or no, I have no
such cause, lest of all to think, I am one of the reprobate, and so
despair. I learn no such thing by this doctrine, neither ought I to judge
my self at all, mutch less before the time of judgment come, and then let
Christ be my judge, in the mean time, I have good cause to hope the best,
where I know not the worste: for I have Christ on my side, and if he be with
us, who can be against us? Christ justifies, who can condemn? And for warrant
of Christ, I have his word and Sacraments, I hear them, and receive them. And
Christ has said: Qui ex Deo est, Verba De^ audit, propterea nos non auditis,
quia ex Deo no^ estis, John 8.
In which words, he not only comfort me by an infallible token that I
hear his word, which reprobates do not: but also confirms my faith in this
Article, that I hear it because I am of God. I am not of God because I hear
it, for then might I have cause to doubt, if my being of God depended on my
hearing: but my being of God is grounded on him, and thereof springs my
obedience of hearing his word, to be a witness to confirm me that I am of
God. Yea and I ^ecken so much the more that I am of God, that the devil
tempts me to despair. He says to me, Thou art of the number of the damned:
and although in the secret judgments of God, he know no more than I know, no
nor so mutche, because I feel Gods spirit testifying to my spirit, the
assurance of Gods favor: Yet because he assayleth me with this most sharp
temptation: I know he is mine enemy, and he being mine enemy, I know I am
none of his. I am Gods, between whom and 2. Cor. 6.
Belial there is no conuention, but enimitie and tentation. Now then he thus
assayling me, as I fear him not, being in the hand of Christ, and thence can
not he, nor all the devils in hell fetch me, I reason boldly, out of the
hand of Christ, that the devil my tempter is a lier, and was from John. 8.
the beginning, chiefly when he speakethe his own, but this is his own,
when he says I am damned: from whence has he it, he is not Gods counselor:
therefore it is his own devise, and even therefore it is a lie, and it being a
lie, it follows, then am I the elect child of God to be saved. And thus his
temptation, drives not me to desperation, but makes me so much the more surer
of my salvation. But now that the devil can not do by desperation, he
assayeth by presumption. For even thus he assaulted Jesus Christ, first to
drive him Matthew. 4.
to dout, whether he were the son of God, in his favor or no, and to make
him fear that he should perish. Wherein, when he prevailed not, but was
overthrown, even by this confidence, that we ought to have of the providence
of GOD: then hereon he took occasion to tempte Christ by presumption: That
where he certainly assured him self to be the child of God, and so depended
on his providence, that he knew he could not perish: Upon this, would the
devil have drawn him to presume, and by presumption of the certentie of Gods
protection, to have hurled down him self hedlong, and forsake the means of
descending down, that God had appointed. But Chri^te confuted him, saying,
Non tentabis dominum ^eu^ tuum, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God And
even thus, when he can not by this doctrine breed wanhope in us, as he does
to somin^, and the Papists would bring us all to the ner^e door by, of
continual doubt, then he sturreth us up to presumption: that if we be chosen
already, and our names enrolled, the matter purposed and ratified, and can not
be changed, then need thou not fear to do what thou will, to live as thou
lust. What nedest thou take pains? why suffrest thou affliction? what nedest
thou to pray? why sholdest thou go to sermons? what nedest thou do any good?
why ensuest thou not thy pleasure? why live thou in need? why killest thou
not thy self? thou art sure of Heaven already, and shall straight ways be in
glory, whatsoever thou lust to do: thus does the Devil tempt the children of
God, even by this holsom doctrine: and many that are among us, but 1. John. 2.
not of us, Ex^eru^t e nobis, sed no^ fue^u^t e nobis, for if they had be^ of
us they would have continued with us. These whom the devil sets on this hill
top, he makes in deed to presume, as he himself once did, and plucketh the^
down hedlo^g into al mischief, as he himself was hurled down into al misery*
this he does I grant: and herein the Papists sar true and that he does it by
occasion of this doctrine, I ar^u^t also, but that this doctrine is the direct
(...) hereof, that is even more than the deuels ^tio^ the Papists malicious
s^la^der of this doctrine. Was the fast of Christ, the direct cause of the
devils temptation? and yet here on the devil picked his occasion of tempting
Christ. There is nothing ordained of God to so good purpose, but the devil
will seek occasion thereby to work some evil success so far as he can: But
let him tempt as he Matthew. 4. Luc. ^2. Job. 1. ^. Pet 5.
did Christ, let him sift as he did Peter, let him buffet as he did Paul, let
him stryke as he did Job, let him go roaryng like a Lion, as he does about us
all: Christ shall drive him away, Peter's faith shall prevail, yea the gates
of hell shall not prevail Matthew. 16. 2. Cor. 12.
again^e it, Gods virtue in Paul shall be stronger in infirmity, Job shall
never let go this trusty saying: Etiam si interfecerit me, sperabo in eu^,
Job. 13.
Although he kill me, yet will I trust in him. And al we that have this firm
belefe of Gods election shall never be confounded, Spes non pudefacit. Romans 5.
Romans 8.
What shall we say then to these things? If God be on our side who can be
against us? who spared not his son, but gave him for us all to death, how
shall he not give us all things with him also? Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods chosen? it is God that iustifyeth, who shall condemn? It is
Christ which is dead, yea or rather which is risen again, who is also at the
right hand of God, and makes intercession for us: who shall separate us from
the love of Christ? shall tribulation or anguishe, or persecution, or famine,
or nakedness, or peril, or sword? as it is written: For thy sake are we
killed all day long, we are counted as sheep for the slaughter: never the
less in all these things we are more tha^ conquerors, through him that loved
us: For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor power, nor things present, nor things to com, nor height,
nor depthe, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And shall I now fear the sclander
of a railing Papist, to drive me from this houlde and fortress, builte on the
work of Gods eternal election, founded thus in Jesus Christ? go now Papist,
and sclander this doctrine to be presumption, to be the neglecte of all virtue,
to be the inticement to all vice and licentious lyuinge. Thou lie Papist, it
is but thy sclaunder, it is but the Devils temptation. And even as before in
the temptation to despair, so now, even for his temptation and thy sclaunders,
I ground my self the faster thereon, I will spit on my fingers and take better
hold on the merciful election of God than I did before, hurling away all
brittle sticks and rotten posts of man's merits, and leave only to the myghtie
bulwarks and strong battlements of Gods eternal purpose of my salvation.
Neither shall I fall down headlong, neither tempte I God, for trusting to his
mercy: for I know, he that has ordained me to the end of eternal life,
has ordained also the means for me to go thither. And as I thank him hartly
for the one, so I will (by his grace) obey him humbly in the other: look what
soever he commands me, his grace I trust shall not be in vain in me, but
make me able to do all good works, to the glory of him that has elect me:
Haec est spes mea reposita in sinu meo. Go, go, now, sclandering Papist, and
say this is presumption. But let the Papist go, and let us here set down our
first stand^d, against the tempting Deuell, against the wicked world,
against the tremblinge flesh, against the sclandering Papist, and stay our
selves on this first part, Hic murus aheneus esto, Let this be a brazen wall
unto us (that all their gunshotte shall never batter down) the eternal
purpose of almighty God, before the foundations of the world were laid, that
the world, (not the wicked worldlings, nor every particular man in the world)
but the elect of god, y^ he has chosen out of the world, should not perish, but
have eternal life.

The Second part.
THe second part that I divided this treatise into, is to consider the cause
of this Gods goodness toward the world: a passing great benefit is this of
God, that he would not suffer the world to perish, that we are translated from
death, we shall 1. John. 3.
not be damned: but a far more passing benefit is this, that he has
translated us from death to life that we shall not only not perish by damnation,
but Collos. 1.
have life, and that eternal. To the which benefit; no worldly blessings of
god, nor all the riches and felicity of the whole world, is co^parable. For what
should it profit me to win all the world, and lose Marc. 8.
mine own soul, or what should I give to redeem my soul withal? From whence
then proceeded this surmounting goodness of almighty God unto the world, was
there no cause moving him thereunto* yes verily and that a great cause. Here the
Papists, chiefly the Scholeme^, labor meruellously to search out the cause that
moved God, to bestow on the world this excellent benefit of eternal life:
wherein, so it be done reverently, according to the majesty of such a matter,
their travel were not disalowable, but when they presume to go beyond their
bounds to curiously: no meruel if they be stricken as 2 Reg. 6.
was Vzias, for his vnreuerent presumption to touch the ark of god. When they
go quite an other way, when they seek the causes there, where the causes be
not, when will they find the cause thereof? but mistake the cause: as the blind
Sodomites could not find Lots door: as the blinded Syrians were Genesis 19. 4
Reg 6.
mis led to Samaria, and even like the blinded Hob, run up and down about
the house, catching at every thing comes next to hand, crying, this is it,
that is it, wearying them selves, and never finding the cause in deed thereof.
Semper discentes, nu^qua^ 2. Tim 3.
aute^ ad via^ veritatis peruenientes* always learning, but never attaining to
the way of the truth: because they take No^ causas pro causis. no causes for
causes, which is the gretest error in Philosophy that can be, mutch more in
this high mystery of divinity, and the causes of Gods doings, that passes all
man's Philosophy. The Philosophers say, nothing is thoroughly known, whereof
the causes are unknown: and to know each thing by the causes of it, is the
true and perfect knowledge. Herin they said true, but alas, their selves neither
knew the things, nor the causes of them, they neither knew them selves, nor
God: we must not search then the cause hereof by Philosophers: and yet they
did as much as carnal men can do: but Animalis homo non percipit ea quae sunt
Spiritus Dei, the fleshly man perceyueth not those things, that pertain to
the spirit of God. Here Simonides was at his wits end, and required respite:
Here Anaxagoras poynted up to heaven with his finger, but he could tell what
it was in his heart. Here Democ^itus eyes so let him that he put them both
out. Here Cato cried, Mitte arcana dei coelumque inquirere quid sit: here
Socrates durst affirm nothing but this one thing, that he knew nothing: Here
Aristotle confesses he had but owls eyes: And shall we then make his
metaphysiks good divinity, as our Scholemen (more blind than those
philosophers) did, to confirm this matter withal? but they have so rooted them
in the divinity of their god Aristotle, that they can not lift up themselves
from themselves, to search this cause of Gods benefit in God, from whom it
proceeds, but will seek in them selves to find the causes of it. Let us
look on them therefore a little, and see how busily, or rather how bussardly
they look in them selves to find out the cause thereof. For if they
ransacked well all corners in themselves, they should find many a slouenly
corner, and a full sluttish house: many a fylthy synke of dirt, many an heap
of dust raked up, many a rotten post, many a foul copweb, many an adders nest,
and even a cave of Cacus, a Cerberus den, a foul carrion of the body, a
fouler horror of the soul, fr^ught with sin and wretchedness, how soever
like a Phariseys cup, like a painted sepulcher, it carry an outward
countenance. But do they not se this in serching them selves? or if they see
it, how can they abide the sight thereof? nay verily, they se it not. There is
a beam in their eyes called Philautia, self love, and this little preatie
moate does so hinder their sight forsoothe, that they see no such thing, nor
smell any such stench, they are so acquainted with it, nor find any such
fault in themselves, neither is that the thing they seek for: and therefore,
although they saw it, they let that alone, and pass by it with the Priest and
the Leuite, as though they saw it not: but they Luc 10.
seek for the contrary. What merit, what virtue, what cause is in them
selves, wherefore God should bestow this so great a benefit upon man. No doubt
there is a cause in man (say they) wherefore God did thus unto man. He saw some
thing in man, that moved him thereunto. peradventure we have found the cause
even here. had not the world done some good turn to God, and so gift gafte,
one good turn asks another, clawe me, clawe thee, the world might have done
so much for God, that God was indebted to the world: he could not but even
of his Justice, Merito digni vel condigni vel congrui, By the merit of dewty
or worthiness or congruitie, requite the world with this benefit: Stood the
case thus betwixt the world and God? for then here is cause inoughe in man:
no (Papist) the case was nothing so nor so. No^ ex operibus quae fecimus nos,
not of the works that we have wrought, Non secundu^ opera nostra, 2. Tim. ^.
not acording to our works, Ex operibus legis non iustificatur omnis caro, no
flesh shall be justified no not by the works of Gods law. for why, quod erat legi
2. Tim. 1. Romans 3. Rom 8. Rom 4.
impossible, The la we could not perform it, it wrought but wrath in us, and
increased our sin, because we were sinners and could not fulfill it, and
therefore became gi^ty and accursed by it. If God then should work by justice,
Domine quis sustinebit? Psalm 126
Lord who should abide it? we had not done any good to him before at all, that
he should recompense. Quis prior dedit illi, et retribuetur ei? Romans 11.
Who gave him ought aforehand that he should make him retribution? in a
pitiful case were we before he vouch safed for to choose us: will thou see
what thou wast before God chose the, either for any thing in thy parents, or in
thee, even from the first hour thou waste borne? Look the sixteenth chapter
of Ezechiell before cited. The word of the Lord came unto me, saying: Son
of man, Ezech. 16.
cause Jerusalem to know her abominations and say: Thus says the Lord God
unto Jerusalem, thine habitation and thy kinrede is of the land of Canaan,
thy father was an Ammorite, and thy mother an Hethite: and in thy nativity
when thou waste borne, thy navel was not cut, thou waste not washed in water
to soften thee, thou wast no^ salted with salt, nor swadled in cloutes, none
eye pitied thee to do any of these things unto thee, for to have compassion
upon thee, but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the contempt of thy
person: in the day when thou wast borne, and when I passed by thee, I saw thee
polluted in thine own blood, and I said unto thee, when thou waste in thy
blood, thou shalt live, even when thou waste in thy blood, I said unto thee,
Thou shalt live. Lo the pickle that even the Church and choice of GOD was in,
before the Lord did choose her. If thou say, yet peradventure he did
this for her friends sake, she came of good parentage, and was well allied to
those whom God hyghly favored, and to whom God made a great promise, to be
good to them, and to their seed after them, True in deed, he did so: but
yet (in this respect) see how he renounceth this for any cause also, and
vpbraydeth to her even her father and mother, and all the whole stock she
Ezech. 16.
came of. Thou art thy mothers daughter that has cast off her husband, and
her children: and thou art the sister of thy systers, which forsook their
husbands, and their children: your mother is an Hethite, and your father an
Ammorite, and thine elder sister is Samaria, and her daughters that dwell at
thy left hand, and thy young sister that dwellethe at thy right hand is
Sodom, and her daughters. And as more sharpelye in Esaye, he callethe the
Jews, the seed Esai. 1. and. 57.
of the wicked, corrupt children, the sons of Witches, the seed of the
adulterers, and of the whore, rebellious children, and false sede, the eggs of
the Aspis, the webbes of Spyders, the generation of Uipers, boasting in vain
of Abraham's parentage, who himself also before he was called, Gen 12. Iosu. 24.
^sa 59. Act. 7.
was an heathen, was an idolater, till God redeemed and called him: and therefore
neither they nor he had deserved this benefit of eternal life, that God did
purpose to them. What then was the cause that moved God hereunto? was not this
the cause thereof? that although they had done no such good turns to God, by
duty or co^gruitie to move him to recompense, yet they had not offended him
nor displeased him: And therefore God might the easyer be induced to bestow
this benefit on them? But had not even the elect of God offended God? Romans 5.
were they not of old Adam. In quo omnes peccauerunt, in whom all have sinned
that came of him? are they not flesh, and what ar^ the deeds of the Gal. 5.
flesh? Manifesta sunt opera carnis etc. The deeds of the flesh are manifest
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, Romans 3.
want o^nes, Idolatry, witchecraft, hatred, debate, emulation, wrath,
contention, sedition, heresies, envy, murder, drunkenness, gluttony, and
such like: What then (says S. Paul) are we no more excellent, no in no wise.
for we have already proved that all both Jews and Gentiles are under sin, as it
is written, there is none righteous no not one, there is none that
understands, there is none that seeks God, they have all gone out of the
way, they have been made altogether unprofitable, there is none that does good
no not one: their throat is an open sepulcher, they have used their tongs to
deceyt, the poison of aspis is under their lips, whose mouth is full of
cursing and bitterness, their fete are swifte to shead blood, destruction and
calamity are in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known, the
fear of God is not before their eyes. Peace Paul for shame, what a number of
horrible vices reckenest thou up here? Was this the case of all men before Gods
calling? These things seem Romans 3.
to be spoken of the reprobate, is there no difference? there is no difference,
for all have sinned, and are depri ued of the glory of God, Haec fuistis says
S. Paul Rom 6.
even of the elect. Fuistis serui peccati. ye were the servants of sin,
Exhibuistis me^bra vestra, ye gave Gal. 3.
your members to uncleanness and iniquity, to commit iniquity. To
conclude, the Scripture has shut up all under sin, then is not this the
cause neither, that God purposed to bestow this benefit on the world: yet
peradventure for all this there might some good qualities, some Pura naturalia,
some goodness of nature, lie hidden in man that all the world sees not, but
God saw, and therefore, (for all these outward vices, yet for those inward
virtues sake, he would not suffer the world to perish. Ye know he would not
have destroyed Genesis 18.
Sodom and Gomorrhe, had there bin but ten good men in all those five cities,
but two good men in a town. Now perhaps he saw ten good qualities, or two
good qualities, in man, and there fore would not suffer the world to perish.
Were there not some such qualities? no such qualities, no such goodness
at all in manne. If there had, S. Paul should have espied it, he sought
narrowly and could find none at all. Non habitat Romans 7.
in me, hoc est in carne mea bonum, I know (says he) that in me, that is in
my flesh (he means the unregenerate man) dwells no good thing. No grapes
can come of thorns, nor figs of briers. Matthew 7. Luc. 6.
An ill tree can bring forth no good fruit, sine me nihil potestis facere,
without me says Christ ye John. 15.
can do nothing, for the purpose and election of God is in Christ. Elegit nos
per lesum Christum in Ephesians. 1.
sese, He chose us in him self through Jesus Christ: so that before the calling
to this choice, there is no kind of good thing in man to move God to it: no we
can not conceive one good conceyte. Animalis 1 Cor. 2.
homo non percipit, the natural man perceyueth not Gods things, Factus est
similis iumentis et com Psalm. 48
paratus est illis. He became like unto beasts, and was compared unto them,
Sicut equus et mulus in quibus non est intellectus, Even as the Horse and
Psalm. 31.
Mule that have no understanding. In such a beastly plight was man, for so much
as understanding any goodness, no not so much as thinking which is less than
understanding. Non sumus idon^i ex nobis ipsis cogitare quicquam, s^d si
aliquid idonei 2. Cor. 2.
sumus id ex deo est: We are not able to think any thing of our selves, as of
our selves* but our habili tie is of god. well yet for all this, that we could
not so much as think him any good, yet peradventure we thought him no harm,
we bare him no ill will, we were not his enemies, and therefore perchance he was
the sooner moved to save us: Nay, thou wast even the very enemy of God, Cum
inimici essemus, when we were the enemies of God, Romans 5.
the conspiratoures with Satan, the children of wrath, bearyng in us even the
law of rebellion, Ephesians. 2.
fighting against the sprite of God, and leading us captive to death, such
enemies and traitors we Romans 7.
were to God, and therefore this was no cause that moved him thereunto. Wei yet
peradventure, this came not so much of our selves, as by noughty inticement and
ill company, seducyng us: of our selves we might at least have some good
inclination and procliuitie, if we had been able to have followed and
performed it, which GOD seeing, it might be a preparatiue to move God, to
put to his healping hand to ours. Was there no such cause to move him? no
such cause. I grant he was seduced by Satan at the (...), but he so fully
and freely assented to him, that we in our temptations, can not post of the
cause to any other, and put it as Adam did on Eve, (...) as Eve did ^n the
serpent, but every man is t^ (...) ted when he is drawn (says Saint James)
Iacobi 1.
away, by his own concupiscence. For by the first assent to the Serpente, the
whole nature of man body and soul is so infected with syn and enemitie to GOD,
that affectus carnis inimicitia est aduersus Romans 8.
Deum, Even the affections and desire of Romans 7.
the flesh is enemitie against God, For it is not subject to the law of God,
neither in deed can be, affectus peccatorum vigebant, The affections of sin
ruled in my members: even the lust and concupiscence, the froth of sin, and
sin it self, yea the law of sin. Not only the deeds of man are syn, nor the
words only are sin, and answerable to account, Quomodo potestis bona loqui,
cum sitis Matthew 12.
mali, How can ye speak that is good, your selves being evil? neither
only the thoughts are sin, Cogita^io stulti peccatum est, The Poue^b (...)
thought of the fool is sin: but also the place from whence they come is
even a sink of sin. Ex Matthew. 15.
cord exeu^t cogitationes malae, The euel thoughts come from the heart, the
heart is stony, the heart Ierem 17.
is unclean, the heart of man is wicked and unsearchable: the Lord saw that
the wickedness of Genesis 6.
man was great in the earth, and all the imaginations of the thoughts of his
heart were only euel continually, the imagination of man's heart is Genesis 8.
euel even from his youth. where is any inclination Psalm. 13.
here of man to God? no, Prorsus inutiles facti sunt* They were altogether made
unprofitable. What sir? I beseech you, little children and all? (...) the
infants sucking at their mothers breasts? a^acke poor babes, put ye the^ in the
number? what have they done? what have they trespassed that ye make them
sinners also? Quae culpa (says Pigghius) quod peccatum possit esse animae
adhuc innocentis and Pigghius de origin. peccato.
recens nati paruuli. etc. what fault, what sin can there be of the innocent
soul, and of the little child new borne? who for that he has not received
the use of reason, and the faculty of freewil, is not yet under the law, nor
can be obliged by any law, whereof he may be made a transgressour. But as this
is a most false error, and the clean destruction of the Christian faith, so
is this a most true principle, that what soever they be young or old, Deus
conclusit omnes sub peccato, God has shut up all under sin, neither under
the sin of an other only, and not of their own sin, but of Adams their
first father imputed unto them. Naytheyr sin is even their own sin, In quo
omnes peccauerunt, In whom all have sinned: neither is al Rom 5.
sin to be measured by age of man, or will of man or reason of man only, but
Peccatu^ est iniquitas ((...) 1. John. 3.
says S. John) sin is the swaruing from Gods law, which sith it bindethe
all mankind, and none, not regenerat in Christ, are answerable thereunto: it
followethe, they must needs be sinners, old or yo^g, because without
regeneration in Christ not Adam only himself, of whom we came, but all the
whole subst^nce, external and internal of mankind, is so infected and defiled
with sin, that no thing but God c^n cleanse it, Quis potest facere mu^du^ Job.
14.
de immundo co^ceptu^ semine. nisi tu qui solus es, Who can make a clean thing
of a thing that (...) ceyued by foul s^de, but only thou that art alon^. There
is none clean before him from sin. Ne infans quidem vnius diei. No not the
infant that is but one day old, (...) that is less than a day old, while he
is yet in his mothers womb. Ecce (says Psalm. 50.
David that was an holy prophet) in iniquitatibus co^ceptus sum, and in peccato
co^cepit me matter me^, Behold (says he) I was begotten in wickedness and my
mother conceived me in sin. Was David's father an hoorehunter, and his mother
an harlot? Was David a bastard and misbegotten? no such thing, he was the
lawful son of I sat. Ruth 4.
Why then, is the act of matrimony sin and wickedness? no such thing
neither, thou sinnest not 1. Cor 7*
if thou take a wife, says S. Paul, and if a virgin marie, she sins not,
yea marriage is honorable among all men, and is a bed undefiled. How Heb. 1^.
was then David gotten and conceived in sin? For so the he came of sinful
seed, even the sede that begat and conceived David, was corrupt and staynd
with sin: And as the seed was, so was the child, Quod natum est ex carne
caro est, What John. 3.
that is borne of flesh, is flesh, of Adam, is Adam, of a thorn is a thorn,
of a brieris brier, of a crab, is a crabbe, and every thing yeldethe fruit
after his own kind and quality. And therefore of a sinful father, the child
is borne a sinner, even the first day and moment the child is born, yea a
sinner before it is borne. Well (say the Papists) admit all this in old and
young were sin, yet I trust ye will make a distinction of sin: all sin is
not mortal sin, Is no syn^ne venyall? If there be, peradventure then the
worlds sins were not so great, as that they deserved to perysh^ for their
sins, and so might the eas^yer b^e forg^uen, because their sins were
venial. Nay Papist, this helps thee not, no more than thy other shifts. For
although we grant, nor ^uer denied, that there is distin^tion to be made of
sins: of the which some be original, some be actual, some be in
thought, some be in word, some be indede, some be of negligence, some be of
wilfulness, some be of ignorance, some be of malice, some be more heinous than
other some sins be, yea and we admit also this distinction of mortal sin
and venial sin, yet admit we it not in such sort as the Papists do, that
this difference is in the nature of sin, whereby any is venial, as though it
were because it is less sin, therefore it should be venial. For be it more,
or be it less, or of what sort of sin so ever it be, if it be sin, it is
mortal in the nature of it, and deserves no forgiveness, but even death for
recompense: For without all distinction said GOD to Adam, When Genesis 2.
soever thou eatest thereof, thou shalt dye. And from him it has followed,
that Vnius delicto Romans 5.
omnes mortui fumus, By Adams offense we are all dead. Per peccatum introijt
mors, Death e^tred Romans 6. John. 8.
by syn: and therefore Stipendium peccati mors est, The reward of sin is
death. For why, it came from the dyuell, Qui fac^t peccatum ex dia Rom 8.
bolo est, and the devil is a murderer from the beginning: and therefore if
ye live after the flesh, Moriemini, ye shall dye. Neither is this to be
understood of horrible sins only, but even Affectus carnis mors est, The
affection of the Rom 8.
flesh is Death also. Neither is this to be eluded, as though the Apostle
spoke only of a bodyly and temporal death, but he speaks plat and plain
of condemnation. Iuditium quidem Rom 5.
ex vno in condemnationem, The fault came of one offense unto condemnation.
And again: The fault came on all men to condemnation.

Why then (say the Papists) shall all men be damned? And where is then
your Uenyall sin? Forsooth even it follows at the hard heels: Gratia
autem ex multis delictis in Iustificationem, Romans 5.
But the grace is of many offenses to Justification. Here are many offenses
named, and all deserve damnation, but they become Uenyall, yea they hinder not
Iustifycation. How comes this of their own nature? nay, but by grace, by
favor, by the gift of God, and not by the nature of the sin, in which
respect all stand in the state of damnation. But to those that are in Jesus
Christ, nihil est condemnationis, Romans 8.
there is no damnation unto them: not that the sin or sinner deserved this, but
for that they have received the atonement made by Jesus Christ.

Yea, but did not God (says the Papist) forsee that they should receive
Christ, and although they were all sinners, and subject to damnation, yet did
not he foresee that they would repent them of their sins, and become
faithful, and amend their lives when he should call them: and peradventure
therefore he would they should not perish, but have eternal life, even because
he foresaw they should become good men, although they were evil. Nay Papist,
this is no cause no more tha^ the other: nei there their works present,
neither their works to come. For the scripture simply comprehends all
works, whether they be past, or they be present, or they be to come. Vocauit
nos Deus vocatione 2. Tim 1.
sua sancta, non ex operibus nost^is, sed iuxta pro positum suum, God called us
with his holy calling, not by reason of our works, but according Gala. 3.
to his purpose. Neither are we justified by the the works even of Gods law,
In l^ge nemo iustificatur apud Deum, neither saved he us (says S. Paul) for
the works of our righteousness. Tit: 3:
If then, we are neither saved nor justified, nor call led, for our works,
shall we think we be chosen for our works, when Gods choice is before his
calling, his calling before our justifying, our justifying before we obtain
salvation? Nay if our works be not the cause of our saving, nor of our
justifying, nor yet of our calling much less be they the cause of our
election, which was before the foundations of the world were cast. I grant
that God foresaw we should do good works, howbeit our good works were not the
cause of his election, but his election was the cause of our good works.
Elegit nos in ipso ante mundi constitutionem (...). (...).
vt essem us sancti and immaculati in co^spectu eius per charitatem, He chose
us in him before the making of the world, that we should be holy and
unreprovable in his sight through love. Then were not good works to come, the
cause of Gods choice made before, but God, that by his election did ordein them
to glory, ordained them also to do good works after: And so good works are
not in the cause wherefore, but in the purpose whereto the elect of God are
chosen. Conditi sumus ad bona opera, ^phes 2.
We are made of God to do good works, Good works are the fructes of the
sprite of God, Gala. 5. Ad (...). lib. qu^st 2
after he has justified us. Quomodo enim potest just viue^e, (says S.
Augustine) qui non fue^it instificatus? How can he live justly, that before
hand shall not be justified? (...) b^na opera iustificatum non praec^dunt
iustificandum, They follow De ^ide and operibus cap 14 ^ Th^ss 2 Rom 9. (...)
13. 1. Cor. 2.
him that is justified already, but they go not before him that is to be
justified. Then are not good woorks the cause, but the effects of Gods wor^s in
us, He chose us, he called us, he conuert^d us, he gave us faith, he makes us
ayte to do all good works to the praise of his glory, and not to merit our
salvation by them. For (says Saint Augu in Psalm. 6^.
Augustine, (...) facis opera tua vt glorificeris, hoc prohibuit. Si autem vt
Deus glorificetur, hoc iussit Christus, If thou do thy works for this cause,
that thou may be glorified, this Christ forbad thee: But if thou doste them
that GOD may be glorified, this Christ commanded thee.

These therefore, and all these Papisticall cauillations, that make man, or any
thing in man, be it never so good, to be the cause of this good purpose of
Gods eternal Election to the worlds salvation, are but false Popish fetches
and lying vauntes, to establishe their own ryghtousnesse, to deface Gods
glory, and are no causes at all that moved God hereto. Nay soft, says the
Papiste, stay your conclusion: there is one thing yet behind. Be it that none
of all these are the causes, no not man's good works, nor that we ought to
work to merit salvation thereby, but to set forth the praise and glory of
GOD: and that God made all things for his glory: yet notwithstanding might
this be some cause, even that he saw he should get glory by us and by our
works. Neither might this seem so small a cause, for had he not saved us,
then should not he have been glorified by our good works. What then? Bonoru^
meorum non eges (says David) Psa^m. 1^.
Thou haste no need of my good works. May a man be profitable unto God, as
he that is wise Job. (...).
may be auaylable unto himself? is it any thing unto the Almighty, that thou
art just? or is it profitable to him, that thou (...) est thy ways vprighte?
Can his glory shine no other way but by our works, or by our salvation? What
if all we had been lost, had he lost any thing thereby? Lost Christ any spark of
his glory by the lost child Judas? Lost John 17. ^xod 9. Rom 9. Psalm 77.
God any glory by the wickedness of Pharao? Nay he got glory thereby, and so
he does over all his enemies: They hinder not his glory as they think they
do, nor he has any need that we should increase it, and set it out. And
though we had never ben borne, he had lost no glory: and we had utterly ben
lost, he had lost no glory, and no creature had ever been made, he had lost
no whit of glory: It had been al one to him, although not al one to us: for he
has no need of us, nor of any creature, but we have need of him. To conclude
therefore, none of all these are any causes, that moved God to bestow this
benefit on the world, that it should not perish, but have eternal life, why
what is the cause then, is it a causeless thing? is there no cause of it? Yes
verily, and that a great cause. What is that? we have run thorough all causes
that I think may well be reckened up, and you have denied them every one. In
deed Papist, thou haste run round about the wood, and haste assayed at
many a gappe to enter, but canste not get in, like to the old riddle, What is
that that runs round about the tree, and never enters in? They had
wont to say, it is the bark of the tree: but it is a blind Papist, that
sticking only to the trees rind and bark, looks altogether on the outward
apperance of man, and searches to find in the visyble creature the cause of
the highest works of the invisible Creator. O saplesse bark of a rotten and
frutelesse tree, twice dead and plucked up by the roots, when will Iud epist.
thou be able to find out this cause of Gods eternal purpose? he that will
find a thing, must seek it where it is, not where it is not. The Papists seek
this cause where it is not, not where it is. In man they have raked metely well,
but there it is not: they have sought over all the world and every creature,
neither is the cause of Gods purpose to be found in any creature, no not in the
elect themselves. Where must it needs then remain, but even in the Creator,
the cause of the purpose in the purposer, and only in God himself? and to say
the truth, it can not be otherwise. For sith the purposer is God, and God is
agens liberrimum, he can not be tied to causes besides himself, for then he
were not free, since Gods purpose is eternal as is himself without beginning,
and al other things and causes have beginning, then is nothing the cause of
Gods purpose, but Gods purpose is the cause of every thing: For if he had not
purposed ought to have been, it had not ben: but it is, it is then because he
purposed it should be. To conclude, since God is (...) causantiu^, and causarum,
the cause of al causings, and of all causes: when we here it is Gods purpose so
to be, shall we not think even this purpose of god the causer, to be cause
sufficient, but we will seek for other causes in the causes inferior, and
things that themselves are caused? What absurdity were this in man, and what
presumption ahainst god, since we hear it is gods purpose, and we are not
content therewith? Well (say the Papists) be it, the cause be only in God, and
not in man nor any creature, that he purposed to bestow this benefit on the
world: yet she we me a cause in god himself that moved him hereunto. Why, is
not this a sufficient cause of it self, that we have said all this while, it
was Gods purpose? If this will not suffice thee, what will suffice thee? Shall
I say, it is Gods determination? that is al one with purpose. Shall I say it is
Gods appoyntmente? this is all one also. Shall I say it is his good will and
pleasure? what is this but in effect the same also? what shall I say then
that shall content them? Surely neither I nor all the world shall be able to say
any thing, that can satisfy a warbling Papist in this matter. For how should
we satisfy him, that is not satisfied, with the purpose, determination,
appointment, will and pleasure of God? but he will needs know why God purposed,
determined and appointed, why it was his will and pleasure. But see even here,
if this will content the Papist, we have a further cause expressed in the
first beginning of this sentence, Sic dilexit, So God loved the World, Lo,
love is the cause thereof: Yea but what made him love the world says the
Papist, nothing? yes, even because he would vouch safe so to do. Why says
he, this comes to the former cause, he loved it, because he would: But
wherefore would he love it? Here the Papist sets me I confess, neither
will I search, nor can I find any further cause than this: neither am I ashamed
to be so set of a Papist, that I can go no further, when I come to the love
and good will of God: of which if it were so easy a matter to show a further
cause, why was not S. Paul ashamed when he came to the alleging of Gods will,
to cry out that the Judgments of God were unsearchable, and durst go no
further, after he had alleged it to be Gods will: because beyond this cause, he
could find no cause higher, his fadome could reach no further. Here was
abyssus abyssum inuocat, Here was set the Cherubin, Psalm. 15. Gen 3.
and the flaming sword to stop the entry into this unsearchable Paradyse.
Here were the bounds of Gods Mountain Sina limited, Heb. 12. Exodus 19.
that the people nor the Priests, nor any else durst or could enter into,
but only our heavenly Prophet like to Moses, Jesus Christ, not only man but
GOD himself also. And will a beast, a Papist, a brutishe fleshly man presume to
come near this mountayn, yea to go beyond the bounds appointed? Shall not a
dart be cast through him that dare presume thus beastely? What is man that he
should not be content when he hears platte and plain it is Gods will, but he
will demand a reason of the same? Job never durst presume thus far as the
Papists do, yet when in the anguishe of his mind he went beyond his
reach, The Lord out of the whyrle wind Job 38.
said, Who is this that darkeneth the counsel by words without knowledge?
Gyrde up now thy loins like a man, I will demand of thee and declare thou
unto me, Where waste thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? Declare
if thou haste understanding, etc. Will Job. 40.
thou disanull my Judgment, or will thou condemn me that thou may be
justified? or haste thou an arm like GOD, or do thou thunder with a Voice
like him? Deck thy self now with Majesty and excellencye, and arraye thy
self with Beauty and glory: Cast abroad the indignation of thy wrath, and
behold every one that is proud, and abase him, look on every one that is
arrogante, and bring him low, and destroy the wicked in their place, hyde
them in the duste together, and bind their faces in a secret place, then will
I confess unto thee also, that thy right hand can save thee. This
presumption then, not to be content with the expressed good will of GOD, but
to search further causes of his will then he has expressed, that is his
love, is even to make our own right hand our Savior, as the Papists do.
Let us therefore be content with this cause of Gods purpose, that it is his
good will, and proceeds of his mere love, And that his love is the very and
only cause hereof, as our Savior Christ has said, Sic Deus dilexit
mundum, GOD so loved the world. The love of God is the cause of the Worlds
salvation, than the which, what can be a more notable cause, and more
comfortable herein than the love and good will of GOD. But the Papist, whose
mouth is not yet stopped, nor his ambitious mind contented, groynethe hereat,
that all should proceed from the good will and love of GOD: Did not we
(says he) love him before, and then he loved us? No (Papist) we loved him
not, we hated him, as is already she wed. In hoc est charitas, non quod nos
dilexerimus Deum, sed quod ipse dilexit 1. John. 4.
nos, Love consists herein says S. John, not that we loved him, but that he
loved us, Prior dilexit nos, he loved us before, and not we him before: for
then were all this in vain: then were the cause in us, not in God, then were
it no godamercie to God that we are saved, but gramercie mine own self, for
God requited me but love for love. What a pawn checkemate were this to the
love of God? But herein commendat charitatem suam Romans 5.
Deus in nobis, quoniam cum adhuc peccatores es^emus, God not only loves us,
but herein he maruellously sets out the glory and praise of his infinite
love unto us, that even when we were sinners, when we were enemies, he loved
us. The only and whole cause then of Gods purpose to our salvation, is the
favor and love of God. Wherefore was Jacob preferred before his brother Esau?
Jacob dilexi, I loved Jacob. Wherefore chose he Romans 9.
the seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob to be his people, for any merit of
these their fathers which were holy patriarchs? No, Quia dilexit patres Deuteronomy. 4.
tuos, forbicause he loved their fathers. Wherefore says God unto the
Israelites: The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a precious people unto him
Deuteronomy 7.
self above all people that are upon the earth? The Lord did not set his
love upon you, nor chose you, because ye were mo in number than any people, for
ye were the fewest of al people, but because the Lord loved you. Wherefore is
the church of Christ so often called the spouse, the wife, the well-beloved
Cant 1. 2. 3 Os^e. 2.
of Christ, but because the Lord of his only love and mercy chose her?
Wherefore was David chosen king from following the sheep? but because he was
a man Secu^dum cor meum, eue^ after the heart Act. 13.
of God, that is to say, whom God delighted in and loved. Wherefore was Solomon
chosen to sit in the seat of David before all his brethren? but because
Dominus dilexit cum, The Lord loved him? 2. Reg. 12.
Wherefore did Christ choose the twelve Disciples before all other in the
world? Non vos me eligistis, John. 15.
sed ego elegi vos, You chose not me, but I chose you: But because, (says he)
as my father loved me, so have I loved you. Wherefore leaned John on the breast
of Jesus, and durst ask him more boldly than the other Disciples? but because
he was the disciple, Quem diligebat Dominus, whom the John 13.
Lord loved. Wherefore are we chosen to be the people of God in the Jews
place? But even because God has said: Vocabo non plebem meam, Romans 9.
plebem meam, and non dilectam, dilectam, and non misericordiam consecutam,
misericordiam co^secutam, I will call them my people, which were not my
people, and her beloved which was not beloved, and her to have obtained mercy
which had not obtained mercy. Wherefore now that we are chosen of God, are we
afflicted? Quos diligit Dominus, Proue^b 3. Heb. 12.
castigat, The Lord corrects whom he loves. Wherefore can no affliction
overcome us, and make us fall from God, as do the reprobate, the chafe,
Matthew. 3. Matthew. 13.
and seed in the stony ground, but the Elect are purifyed in tribulation,
as gold in the forneys? In his omnibus superamus per eum qui dilexit Romans 8.
nos, In all these things we overcome through him that loved us. Wherefore have
we in those afflictions, such a confident trust in God, that they shall not
hurt us. Quia charitas Dei diffusa Romans 5.
est in cordibus nostris, per Spiritum Sanctum qui datus est nobis, Because the
love of GOD is shead abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is given
unto us. Then the fountain and only cause of all the grace and favor that
we receive of God, is the love of God. Propter Ephesians. 2.
multam suam dilectionem qua dilexit nos, Even for the great love that he
loved us withal. And therefore Christ which is the well beloved son of
God, Hic est filius meus dilectus, in Matthew 3.
quo mihi complacui, This is my well beloved son in whom I am well pleased and
in whom we are made also the beeloued sons of God, and who has so loved us,
that he gave his life John. 15.
for us, than the which, no man can have a greater love: he has fully
declared in the very first words of this Sentence, the very first and
principal cause of the Worlds salvation, saying, Sic DEVS dilexit, So God
loved the world, there is no cause hereof in manne, but only, and all in God.
I do not this for your sakes Ezech 36.
O Israel (says the Lord God) but for mine own names sake. You shall
remember your own wicked ways and your deeds that were not good, and shall
judge your selves worthy to have been destroyed for your iniquities, and for
your abominations: Be it known unto you, that I do not this for your
sakes, says the Lord God. And as God does this mercyfully unto his Elect,
not for any cause in them, but for his own names sake, The cause is altogether
in him, not in us, so the cause that moved him, is his mere goodness, his
infinite mercy, his own good will, and his very love unto us.

What shall we say then to those false prophets that have so sotted us in our
own love, that they have made us believe the cause to be in us of our
salvation, our pure natural qualities, our preparatiue works, our free will,
our good deeds and satisfactions to be the cause why we escape perdition:
our merits and our righteousness to be the cause why we receive eternal
life. Our election to be the cause of Gods election and our love of God, to be
the cause of Gods love to us. Nay soft (says the Papist) ye tell our tale
amiss, we say not that these be the only causes, neither grant we that the
love of God is the only cause, but there are causes in both these parties, God
and the world: which causes both jointly co^curring together, we are thereby
saved from perdition and receive eternal life. We here what they say, but what
says S. Paul? These two (says he) ca^ not in this matter be compartners,
Reliquiae secundum electionem Romans 1^.
gratia Dei saluae factae sunt, si autem gratia, iam non ex operibus, alioquin
gratia no^ est gratia, The remnaunt shall be saved, according to the Election
of the grace of GOD: but if it be by grace, then is it not by works: For
otherwise, grace were not grace. (And so on the contrary part) if it be of
works, then is it not of grace, for otherwise works were not works. And the
reason is, because of the opposition, between grace and works, that the one
has to the other in the cause of Justification: for although in those that be
already justified, works are not severed from grace, nor grace from works, but
rather al their works be graces and gifts of God, as S. Hierome says, Deus
in nobis operatur opera (^am omnia opera In Matthew. cap. 1^.
nostra operatus es domine ait propheta) de eius dono etc. God works all our
works in us of his gift, for as the Prophet says, Thou Lord haste wrought
all our works. Yet in this point of the causes of our salvation, whether they
be altogether of God, or altogether of man, or jointly of God and man together,
that is to say, of Gods grace and man's works concurrent, in this point, grace
and works do so disagree, and are become Membra diuidentia, have such a
contrary aspect the one to the other, that they can not here be joined without
confounding them, yea the one takes away the nature of the other. For first
grace, which signifies free favor and gift (as S. Augustine says) Gratis datur
propter pro gratia nominatur, It is given De natura and gratia contr. Pel ca. 4.
freely or gratefully, whervppon it has his name Grace: But admit there can
be found any cause in the party to who^ it is given, that by any mean^s did
deserve to have it given him, then is it not a mere free gift, proceeding only
of gracious favor, and so is it not grace. Likewise on the contrary part for
works, To him that works, reward (says saint Paul) is not given according
to grace Romans 4.
or favor, but according to duty. He that has wrought for any thing, be
it little or much that he has wrought, so little and so much, it debarreth from
the nature of grace. It is not of mere and free favor, that he has any reward
given, for of good conscience, by right and justice, he deserves somewhat even
of duty. Therefore if he wrought any thing in this matter of the cause of his
own salvation, he deserves then somewhat even of duty to the obteyning of
his own salvation. Neither let the Scholemen go so gingerly to work, with
their threefolde distinction of deseruyng, Merito digni, condigni, and congrui,
by the merit of dignity, condignitie, and congruitie: descanting by which of
these three they should make their claim, least they should seem to
attribute too much to manne. A good plain fellow, that could scarce
understand these quaint terms, what would he think, hearing of desert, but
that it is plain debt and duty* Yea what could he think otherwise? and why
should he not claim for his due, so much as he deserved for his work? And does
not saint Paul here, without any such niceness, go as plain ly to the matter,
and say if it be of work, it is of duty. And again, Dignus est operarius
mercede 1. Tim. ^.
sua, The workman is worthy of his reward. He must be paid it, he is worthy
of it, it is his duty, daly not with him in terms, much less tell him it is
free gift, it proceeds of gracious favor, of mere love and curtesy. Thou
lie, it is his own even of duty, he has earned it well and truly: and
therefore it is not gift, nor favor, nor love* nor curtesy, nor free, nor
grace, but even plain debt and duty. And shall we now say that of duty we
deserve heaven, or deserve some part of our salvation of duty, and that God is
in our debt? This were Jack sauce in deed, to claim debt of God, to challenge
God of duty: but thou must needs do thus, if thou put in works for any
part of the cause of thy salvation. Neither can thou delude god on this wise
by joining these two together, as who should say, thou will not ascribe all
to thy self, like the priest at Mass, but like a good fellow, let God have some
part with the. Ha sut^le fool, Sim subtle deceued himself, Think thou thus
to mo^k God? Thou may so bleare, and deceive a blind Papist. But Deus non
irridetur. God is not mocked. no nor any Gal. ^.
that hearken to S. Paul that says: These two can not be joined together. The
old bottell will hold no new wine, the old coat will not be pieced Mat^h 9.
Marc. ^.
with new cloth, for so the rent is worse, so the bottels are burst and the
wine is spilt. This is an busit match of man's works and Gods grace in the
cause of our salvation. This is worse than Iugum ^. Cor. 6.
ducere cum infidelibus, To draw the yoke with infidels. This were even
Christ and Belial together. For what is man but the child of Belial, before
God give him his grace? and will thou join man's works and the grace of God
together, to be cause of thy salvation? nay, S. Paul has sued such a divorce
already, between these two that if thou will have grace to be a doer, grace
must be all the doer, farewell works: If thou will bring in works, adieu favor,
grace is clean gone. These two cannot be joined together in the causes of
salvation. For says S. Aug. Si vllis bonis meritis Aug. in sententijs ex illo
decerptis.
datur, iam non gratis datur sed debita redditur, ac per hoc non vero nomine
gratia nuncupatur, vbi mer ces etc. If it be given for any good merits, then is
it not given free, but is of duty rendered, and hereby it is not called grace by
a true name, since that (as the same apostle says) reward is accounted not
after grace or favor, but by debt. But if (that it may be favor, that is to
say, free) it finds nothing in man, whereunto it may be rightly indebted,
which is also truly understood that is said, Even for nothing shalt thou
make Psalm. 55.
them safe: then truly favor gives merits, favor is not given for merits,
then favor goes before faith it self, from whom all works have their
beginning.

To conclude therefore as it commethe not by works alone nor chiefly, so not
ioyntlye neither, with the favor and love of God, neither in partnor parcel,
nor any whyt by works at all: for if it should grace is expelled, challenge is
made of duty, debt is claimed, reioising is made but not with god: but it
comes all of favor Gratia saluati Ephesians. ^.
estis, ye are saved by grace: challenge dare not be Matt 6
made of duty, Dimitte nobis debita no^tra, Forgive us our deseruings: Debt is
damnation. Nobis co^ Baruc^
fusio faciei, Unto us belongs confusion of our faces. Vbi est igitur
gloriatio tua* exclusa est. Per quam Romans 3.
legem, factorum? non, s^d per legem fidei, arbitramur enim iustificari hominem
per fidem absque operibus legis. Where is then thy reioicing? It is excluded.
By what law? of works? No, But by the law of Faith. Therefore we deem that a
man is justified by Faith, without the works of the law. If then works are
thus by S. Paul in the matter of Justification thrust clean out of the doors by
the head and shoulders, shall we suffer the Papists to bring them in, and
shoulder out grace, and the favor of God in the cause of his election and of
our salvation? But needs will the Papists join these two that can not be
joined, the merits of man and the favor or love of God. Now sith they will
needs join them together, whether were it fitter to have the better end of
the staff, to be the greater cause of the twain, the cause proceeding from god,
or the cause proceeding from man? a reasonable man would think and say without
any study for the matter, surely the greater cause is in God. Were he not then
unreasonable, and too too wicked, that durst affirm the greater cause of our
salvation to be in man? Well, what say the Papists to this question? Man shall
be saved, why so? Because God loves him, as ye have already proved, yea, but
answer me precisely to this point, wherefore think thou God loves him?
Forsooth because that either he is a good man, a just man, a virtuous man, a man
that loves and fears God, or because he foreseeth he should so be, and
therefore he loves him. Why then ma^s goodness is the cause of Gods love. But,
Vnumquodque propter quid, and illud magis, Every thing, look wherefore it is
done, and the thing wherefore it is done, is greater than the thing that tends
thereto. I eat my meat, wherefore? To nourishe my body: then is the
nourishement of my body a greater cause than my meat, as says Saint Paul,
Esca ventri, The 1. Cor. 6*
meat is made for the belly, and not the belly for the meat. I take Physic
when I am sick, wherefore? to recover my health: the r^couery then of my health
is greater than physic. I lay me down to sleep, why so? to rest my body,
and refresh my spirits: then the rest of my body, and the refreshing of my
spirits, is a greater matter than is my lying down to sleep. I build an
house, what moves me to do such cost? to shelter and shrowde me from wind
and weather, from heat and cold, from danger and enemy, and to defend and
keep me and mine: then this my defense, is a greater cause than my house
buylding is. And eue^ so, God loves a man, why loves he him? because he is a
good man: then the goodness of the man is a greater cause than the love of
God. And thus in conclusion, not only the greater cause of man's salvation is
in man, and the lesser cause in God, but also that little cause in God, is
referred to man's goodness also. And so the cause in God is clean swalowed
up like a drop in the sea* a bean in a Monks hoode, a mouse in a cheese, nay
rather a ciphre in Algorisme, the love of God in the cause of man's salvation.
And yet for fashions sake, the name of Gods love, of Gods grace, of Gods
mercy, of Christ's merits must be pretended: but when all is done, the work
of man, is the efficient, is the formal, is the final and principal cause of
man's salvation. As Bonauenture says, that although the death and resurrection
of Christ, take away our sins and justify us, attamen neutri attribui
potest proprie causalitas iustificationis, habet Super ter tio senten tiaru^
did. 19. quest. prima.
tamen aliquam causae proprietatem, scilicet per modum meriti interuenie^tis,
pro reducitur ad causam materiale^, formalis enim est gratia, hoc est charitas.
etc. Nevertheless the causing cause of Justification, can not proprely be
attributed either to Christ's death, or to his resurrection, although it has
some propretie of a cause, that is to wit, by the means of merit coming
between, which is reduced to the material cause, for the formal cause is
grace, that is to say, charity. Here is a name of grace, but when the name is
expounded, it falls out, he meant not the love and free favor of God, but
charity, that is man's love, the very contrary in this point unto grace and
free favor of GOD. And so man's love is the formal cause of man's salvation,
but it must be called forsoothe the grace of God.

Here is again the Passion and Resurrection of Jesus Christ said, to take
away sins, and to Justify us. What can be a godlyer saying and truer than
this? Who could find fault with this? Who would require more, if they mean as
they say? Why, have they then another meaning? What is that? Forsooth the death
and Resurrection does it, but not proprely as any cause thereof. Lo here is the
cause clean taken away. nay not so, but it is not a cause properly. how is it
the^? it has yet some property of a cause. This is a contrary tale to it
self, at lest it has some property of contrariety. But what kind of
property of a cause, has the death and resurrection of Christ to take away
sins and to justify man? Forsoothe in this consideration, by the means of
man's desert and good works coming between, and being a stickler in the matter.
But how comes it between, as a small cause? Nay, as the material cause also
of his salvation. And so ma^s charity is the formal cause, man's merits are the
material cause, Grace is named, The death and resurrection of Christ is
named, but it is no cause properly: and if it have any propretie of a cause,
it is only by reason of man's merits going between. Is not this a proper
doctrine? Whether will not this doctrine presume to go? Why may not the
Papist say as well that manne is the cause of God, as to say that man's
merits are the cause of Gods love? Is not the love of God, even GOD himself?
Quicquid dicitur de Deo Deus est, The Wisdom of God is God, the power of God
is God, and the love of God is GOD. And so Sain^t John 1. John. 4.
does say Deus est charitas, and qui manner in charitate, in deo m^net, and
deus in eo. God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God and God
in him. Now if man's goodness be the cause of Gods love, is it not then the
cause of God also? What is pr^de, if this be not pride? Where is Adam and Eve,
that would become like Gods, if Genes. 3.
they be not here? Where is that proud king of Babylon that said with
Lucifer, I will a^cende Esai 14.
above the clouds, and I will be like the most high, but in this doctrine?
Where is that man of sin^e that 2 Thessalonians. 2.
would exalt himself above all that is called God, if not in this blasphemous
presumption of the Pa Romans 10.
pists? Qui quaerentes sua^ iustitia^ stabilire, etc. That seking to set up
their own righteousness are not subject to the righteousness of God. But let
this diuelishe doctrine go with the devil down the lane from whence it came,
and let us humbly receive the doctrine of Jesus Christ, that the cause which
moved God to save the world was only in him self, for his own sake, for his
own goodness and most merciful favor, for his tender love, that of his own
accord and good nature, be vouchsafed to bear the world, and not for any
cause of goodness in the world, were it never so little a cause. For how
little so ever thou ascribest to thy self, thou take from God, thou robbest
God of his glory: and of his glory God is a jealous god, neither will he part
stakes with any other for any part or parcel thereof. Oh (says the Papist) it
is a very little thing, a small modicum that we require, and modicum non
nocet, a little hurts nothing, an inche breaks no square. That is not true,
modicum nocet modicum, A little hurts a little, yea and that a great deal in
this case, wherein on the one part, God is all in all, and will have all the
glory of it as right requires, if he have not al, he will have none. There is
no halting between God and Baal, no agreement between God and 3. Reg. 18. 2.
Cor. 6.
the devil, no fellowship with light and darkness. And what is manne else
but darkness* but mancipium Sathanae, the bo^dsclaue of Satan before God
lighten and deliver him. On the other part, the devil will not be content
with a little, grant him never so little in the beginning, as good give him
all, for in the end he will strive to have all, give him an inche, he will
take an elle: give him but his little toe, he will thrust his foot, his leg,
his body after, and seven devils more for company, Matthew. 12.
and the end of that man shall be worse than the beginning. Obsta principijs,
sero medicina paratur, Stop therefore the beginnings, otherwise it will be too
late to seek for healpe. Take away the cause, else the effect will never be
taken away. Man will ever be proud, and glory in himself, if Ephesians. 2.
there be any cause of his own salvation in himself: be it never so small a
work, or never so small a preparatiue or inclination thereunto, he will take to
much heart of grass, and not of grace thereon. Nay (says the Papist) we will
never by Gods grace deny the grace of god: God has a negative voice, he may
dash all, we can not be saved without god. But has not man an affirmative
voice? What will ye leave him then? It is but a little that we require, God wot
a very small spark, and that so ouercouered with the ashes of sin and
corruption, that it can never give of it self, any light or heat of a fire,
except the ashes be blown away, and some sticks laid to, to kindle the fire.
And further then this, say the Papists, we willnot as^e, since ye are so
importune upon us, we demand at the least but this, that ye grant man to have
no more goodness of himself, than such small sparks of election* free will,
disposition, and preparation, as God seeing them peep out, and give but a
glimpse under the ashes of sin, with his word he blows the ashes away, and
puts too matter for us to work our own salvation upon. What, shall we
stick with them (well beloved) in this small request? This seems to be but a
triste. What power is here given to man? When would these sparks make a fire
to warm one by, if the ashes were not blown away, and sticks laid too? which
infers, we can do nothing of our selves without the grace of God. In which
poyne they say true, but they say not all the truth. For not only without
Christ we can not become this good fire, but also without Christ we have no
such sparks in us to begin this fire withal, for the word of God to blow upon.
But as the wood is his, y^ he must put to, his gracious gifts: and as the wind
is his, where with he must blow on us, his blessed word and holy spirit: so
must the sparks be his and all, for else we are nothing but even dead coals
and ashes. Except ye speak of such sparks of the lusts of concupiscence, as
by the devils blowing, and our own laying of sticks together, will of
themselves make such a blase as will burn body and soul for ever. For the
fire whereby we be enflamed with the love of GOD came of him that said: I came
to bring fire into the world, and what Luc. 12.
would I but it should burn? The fire that declared 3. Reg: 18.
God to be the lord and not Baal, came down from heaven, there was none in the
wood but rather water. The fiery tongs that sat on the disciples Act. 2.
heds and warmed their hearts, came not of any sparks of their own, but only
from the ho ly ghost. Then is not this that they count so small a request, in
any case to be granted them, both for the falsenesse of the beginning, and the
inconueme^ce of the sequel of it. For first in the beginning they ground on a
wrong principle, that there is at the least such sparks in man, where as
there is no such at all in man, which as it is therefore alye, affirming that
to be in manne that is not in him: so it makes him proud of that he has not.
That there is no such sparks of goodness in Ephesians 2. Colloss. ^.
manne, is euidente. Cum mortu^ esse^is in delictis, when as ye were dead in
sins says S. Paul, speaking of the time before God called them. But dead
coals are not quick coals, nor have any spark of fire in them, if they be
dead: for otherwise they be not fully dead: But we were dead in sin,
therefore there were no sparks of goodness in us. If ye think the word,
dead, be to straightly urged, and that we were not fully dead in sin, but
half dead, as the Papists wrest that Luc. 10.
parable of the man that fell into the thieves hands: then would I ask the
question whether we were quickened by Christ or no, but Saint Paul saves,
Viu^ficauit nos in Christo, He quickened us in Christ thorough love, Propter
nimiam charitatem qua dilexit nos, Therefore it must needs follow, we were
even dead before, neither was there any spark of the life of grace in us,
before that of his mere love in Jesus Christ, he quickened us. For look how
mutch ye deny the deadness, so mutche also ye deny the quickenyng: But the
quickenyng is only of Love, and in Christ: therefore besides this cause of
love, and besides Christ, there is naught in us but death of sin, there is no
spark alive. And in like case for free will, there is no freedom but in
Christ, Si filius John. 8.
vos liberauerit vere liberi eritis, If the son make you free (says Christ)
then are ye free in deed. But till then, they are held captive in the snares of
the 2. Timo. 2
devil to do his will, they are servants of sin, nor can do ought, or will
do ought, or incline to ought but sin. And so mutche as ye deny this
bondage, so much ye deny that freedom, which Christ has set them in.
Likewise for the filthe of that our natural uncleanness wherein we walowed,
and were so berayed, that even the cleanest Esa. 64. Ierem. 2.
place of us was like a foul cloute, in so mutche that God says, Though
thou wash thee with Nitre, and rub thee never so much with soape, yet art
thou spotted in thine iniquity before me, Until we be washed with the
blood of Jesus Apoc.. 1. John. 13. Esa. 1.
Christ, and then we be clean through out, then were our sins as red as
scarlet, they shall be made as white as snow, yea, Et supra niuem dealbabor,
Psalm 50.
we shall be made whyter than the snow, Ephesians. 5.
or fullers white, sine ruga and macula. without any spot or wrinkle. Look
then how much cleanness thou attributest to thy self, so much thou deniest
the washing of the blood of Jesus Christ. For it is a good co^seque^ce,
whatsoever was washed clean, before it was washed, it was foul. Whatsoever was
redeemed and made free, before it was redeemed, was captive. What soever was
found, before it was found, was lost. Whatsoever was rered up, was fallen. And
whatsoever was quickened, the same was dead before. Then follows it sith all
these benefits are wroughte on us: that we were bondsclaues, we were fallen, we
were defiled, we were lost, we were even dead, we had no freedom, no stay, no
cleanness, no knowledge where we were, no life in us before. This then is a
false assumption, that they would so said have granted unto them, and
therefore in no case to be assented unto. Neither is the sequel hereof so
small and tryf^ing a thing as here to have it granted, they would seem to
make it. It is a paltrie matter (say they) a very little thing, and in a manner
nothing that we require. If it be so small a matter, why do they so earnestly
desire it? why co^tende they so hard for it, and in no case will let it go?
Would they have us relent to the^, that stand in the defense of the glory of
God, and will not they relent to us in so small a matter, yt belongs only to
the glory of man? Wherefore think ye do they thus? Late^ anguis in herba,
There is a Snake in the grass, a padde in the straw: surely there is a
greater matter in it than they pretend, or we are al aware of. Nay (say they)
here is neither snake nor adder. No is? out of dout it is ex genimine
viperarum, Matthew. 3.
of the generation of adders, for so saint John has statly told us. Well, yet
it is but a little one, a young adder, ye need not be so afraid of it ywisse, it
can not sting ye, oh, kill it not, it is a pretty worm: nay, kill it for Gods
sake, it is a mischienous worm. And though it can not sling now, yet says S.
Paul, Ven^num aspidum sub labijs eoru^, (...). 3.
the poison of aspis is under the tongue of it, if it live it will prove a fiery
serpent and sting the Israelite Nume. 21.
even to death. A young cubbe can play pretily like a little whelpe, it will not
bite, the hen may go by it, it will not hurt one chick, O it is a pretty
fool, Alack who would kill it? but for all that kill it say I, else it will
kill chicken, hen, cock and all, and it may come by them: yea not only the old
Foxes but the young cubbes wasted the Lords Uineyard. And therefore says
God, Capite nobis v^lpes Cantic 2.
paruulas Catch us these young Foxes, and suffer them not, neither only the
young Serpent and the cubbe, but also even the young child of the Babylonian, the
very infant of concupiscence. Oh soft, what will ye do? Stay your hand,
it is a sweet babe, kille it not, kill it not, says the Papiste: Kill them
every mothers child, says David. Happy is the manne that takes their Psalm
136. Esa. 13.
children, and dasheth their brains against the stones, Unhappie then is the
Papiste that saves them, and pitt^eth the death of them, as Saul did Agag,
and lost his kingdom for his labor. 1. Reg. 15.
Let us not therefore through foolish pity, that destroys a City,
relente herein to the Papiste, but crucify, mortify, kill the old manne, and
all Romans 6. Gal 5. Romans 6. Romans 8.
the lusts of the flesh, for they are naught but Inimicitia aduersus Deum,
Enemitie against God, and can do naught else but sin.

And if there be any breathe left in this child that old Adam has gotten
of concupiscence, it breaths nothing but the law of Rebellion against the
law of the mind, even in the Saints of GOD, if there be any sparks
suffered, it may breed a perilous danger. A great blase and sore fire may
come even of one spark: Ensample, Let but one spark fall in a barrel of
Gu^pouder, see what a flashe ye shall have, and all of one spark. Beware
therefore of grauntyng the Papists so mutche as one spark of goodness in the
cause of our salvation. For of this one spark whatsoever shall arise, must
be ascribed to this spark, as the original of all, be it never so great a
fire. It neither came of the wind, although the wind increased it, neither of
the layer too of the wood, though he ministered the matter: nor of the wood it
self that burns, for that is but the matter whereon the fire does work:
but all the fire wax it never so big, came of that little spark of fire. So
all the goodness that is in manne after his calling, sprang of this spark of
goodness before his calling: only GOD is made here but the blower of the
bellows, or the wood carier, and layer of the styekes together (a mean office
for God) whereby as we say, such a man made the fire, when in deed the first
spark was the very maker of it, so they give God the name of making and
causing al our goodness: but in very deed that goodness was caused and made
of that first spark of goodness, that the Papists imagine to be in our selves
before God called us. What a wicked doctrine is this? that thus ascribes al to
it self, and nothing to god in the causes of our salvation, except it be such
servile offices in healping to kindle the fire, as we our selves would
disdain, and would put the meanest servants we have, to do. But such doctrine,
such effect it wrought. For out of this wicked root have sprung infinite
horrible errors. Out of this spark so great a flame has risen, as has
mounted up to such an height, that the Papists say they can do all that God
commands. Which though it be a most false blase and crake of their own
righteousness, The just man sins seven times a day, and when we have done
Prouer. 24 Luci. 7.
all that we can do, we are unprofitable servant, yet how shall we now
extinguish this stame? had it not ben better to have quenched it, when as they
say it was but yet a spark? But will it here go out, or stinte and go no
further? Nay rather this stame of pride aryseth greater, mountyng so far
above all the works of erogation, to the works of supererogation, that they
boasted they could do more than ever God commanded. Which has given such a
counterfeyte blase of holiness (the angel of darkness transfiguring himself
like an angel of light) that all the candels 2 Cor. 11.
on Candelmasse day gave not half such a light, as the Popish Uotaries, and
their Uoluntarie works did give. Whereby all these mischieues and thousands mo
did spring, the grace of God was defaced, Gods word it self was burned, the
Priests woorshipped god with strange fire, or rather God himself was quite
abolished, and Idols worshipped in his sted^, the bodies of the Saints of God
the temples of the holy ghost were with this fire cruelly consumed to ashes,
the rage whereof so kindeled* that the sparkles have flowen over all (...)
never so perfect friendship is like unto it.

We read of notable neighborly love in stories. The Heathens lymited this love
to them that dwelt next them: Neither they only, but we also do apply the name
of neighbors to them that dwell nere unto us. And indede a very great
commodity it is, to have an honest neighbor dwell by a man, and no less
ann^ya^ce to be matched with an ill neighbor: In so mutche that the old
Romans when they made a sale or let out an house, among the chiefest
co^mendations that the seller would set it out withal, or the bier would require
or esteem it for, this was always one by name, whether it had a good neighbor
adjoining to it or no. For no small benefits ensue of neighborly love. But the
scripture comendeth a neighbor to us in an other sense* even for the ^rem man
and stranger to me, that I am no kyth nor kin unto, nor acquainted wythall,
nor is my country manne, yea though he be my enemy, yet because he is a man
as am I, has in him the image of god as I have, has a soul as well as I to
be saved, whatsoever he be therefore, he is my neighbor. Ensample: The parable
of the Samaritane, what a neyghborly Luc 10.
part he showed to the Jew, and even the same affection of neyghborly love
is required of us. It is a great love that God here requires: Diliges Matthew.
19
proximum tuum sicut teipsum, thou shalt love thy neyghbor as thy self: This
word, as thy self, is a great matter, a marvelous love. Quis vnqua^ odio Ephesians
5.
habuit carn^m suam? Who at any time hated his own flesh? Who loves not him
self best, at least in his own conceyte? Do not our common proverbs say, It
is a dear colup is cut out of the own flesh? Near is my coat, but nearer
is my shirt. And for this, the devil desired so mutche to touch but the
skin of Job, for he knew, that passed loss of goods and cattle, of
servants and children, and touched him to the quick, and then he durst have
laid Skin for skin, all that Job. 2.
ever a man has he will give for his life. But this love that a man has to
him self, God requires to be imparted to his neighbor also, this the^ is a
marvelous great love that god requires. But where is this love become? no man
can attain to the perfection thereof. Nay where is the other neighborly love
become, of them that dwell about us? Surely it is gone to the Turks and Jews,
and almost clean and it from England. It is wonder to see how Turks will
hold together, how Jews will one help another, how thieves will conspire,
how beasts will agree, how Papists will vaunt of unity, how dyuells will
nestle them selves, seven devils in one man, yea a whole legion Marc 5. Luc. 1.
together in a man: and two neighbors both professing them selves christians,
both (but falsely) calling them selves Gospellers, cannot abide the one the
other, but hates, persecuteth, vndermyneth, and would eat up one an other if
they could: Scarce one town, one city, one country can hold two men: nay
will two towns, two cities, two countries hold one man? This is not one for an
other, and God for us al: but every one for himself, and the devil for all.
Such insatiable covetousness and implacable hatreds reign in our hearts,
that this neighborly love is gone, except in few, and yet all will babble of
this love of God, but in deed al is but babbling. Little care they for this love
of God to them, that set so little by his commandment 1 John. 3.
that loved them. For this is his commandment that we believe in the name of
his son Jesus Christ, and love one an other 1 John. 2.
as he gave commandment. Which if we do not, we are in darkness, our eyes
are blinded, and know not whether we 1* John. 4.
go, yea we hate God, because we hate his creature. For if any man say, I love
God, and hate his brother, he is a liar. How can he that loves not his
brother whom he has seen, love God whom he has not seen Let us therefore
reconcile our selves betimes, if any man have ought against his brother, or thy
brother Matthew. ^.
have ought against thee, agree with thine adversary quickly, lest thine
adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the
sergeant, and thou be cast in prison, verily thou shalt not come out thence,
till thou have paid the utmost Romans 12. Romans 13.
farthing. Be therefore affectioned one to love an other with brotherly love.
Owe nothing to any man, but one to love an other. For he that loves an other,
has fulfilled the law. For this commandment, Thou shall not commit
adultery, thou shalt not steal, thou shall not bear false witness, thou
shall not covet, and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly
comprehended in this saying, even in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. Love does not evil to his neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of
the law. On the contrary part, though I speak with the tongs of men and
angels, and 1. Cor. 13.
have not love, I am as a sou^ding brass or a tinkling cimbal, and though I
had the gift of prophecy, and knew all secrets and all knowledge, vea if I had
al faith, so that I could remove mountains, and had not love, I were nothing:
although I feed the pore with all my goods: and though I give my body that I be
burned, and have not love, it profits me not: Love suffers long, love is
bountiful, love enuieth not: love does not bost it self, it is not puffed up,
it disdaineth not, it seeks not her own, it is not pro uoked to anger, it
thinks no evil, it rejoices not in iniquity: but reioyseth in the truth, it
suffers all things, it beleuethe all things, it hops all things, it endures
all things, love does never fall away etc. Now be it for all this high
commendation of neyghbeurly love, when it once enters comparison with this
surpassyng love of God, it has so many du^ties to bind it, and so many
infirmities to lose it, that So God loved the world, that no brotherly love of
neyghbors one to an other, were it never so entier a love, is able to compare
therewith.

We read in stories of great love, that fathers and mothers have borne their
children, and that children again have borne their parents. This also is a
godly love, and works so effectually in the hearts of the ^ne and the other,
with such privy linkes of natures chain of love, that not only the civil
people, but the most barbarous Scythians are moved there withal. Whom when
Darius pursued with an army royal from place to place Valerius Max. lib. 5.
cap 4.
in the holtes and deserts of they* country, at the length demanding of them
by his Heralt, when they would once m^ke an end of ^light and a beginning of
fight, they answered, that they had neither towns nor lands for the which they
would conten^e, but if he drove them once to the toombs of their parents,
Darius should then feel, that the Scythians could and would lay about them.
In the which one only so notable an aunsweare (says Valerius) the wild and
barbarous nations, have fully cleared them selves of the name of savage. For
nature is such a cunning schoolmistresse that needing no teaching of the voice,
or use of letters, even of her propre and hidden force, she instilleth a love
of the parents into the hearts of the children. Thus wrote the Heathen
Chronicl^r of the Romans, that knew not God, nor ascrib^d this love to him.
Mutch more then, should we be ashamed to degenerate from this natural love,
having the commandment of God to bind us (...). (...).
thereunto: Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be prolonged in
the land, which thy Lord thy God has given thee. This is the Ephesians. 6.
first commandment says S. Paul, that has a promise annexed thereunto, and
therefore we ought a great deal more to embrace the same: yea it is Exodus
(...).
endorsed with a cur^e on the contrary, not only of putting the disobedient
child to death: but if this law were not at all, yet the parents curse should
Eccl* (...).
pull up the house by the roots. ^nsa^ple the cursed seed of Cham, ensample,
the late story (if it be be true) that is written of credible authors to be
Nich. (...) necser^s in to* ^ (...) dagogiae*
done in Germany, within this twenty years: of a father, that having ^idden
his child go on his his errand, when the child stood still and would not
go, the unadvised father in his fumish anger cu^sed him, and said, Stand
thou still? stand still then, and so still standing, I pray God thou may
abide. And even sodeinly so soon as the curse was spoken, the child stood
still, and so standing there aboade till the day of his death. A terrible
ensample of the wrath of GOD against childrens disobedience: and to the
confirmation of the authority that God has given the parents over their
children. For of our parents we have not only our bodily goods, but even our
bodies and al. And shall we not then love them, by whose love we have our being,
our life, our norishing, and under God the beginnings of all we have? Many
fathers and mothers now a days complain of the disobedience, wilfulness, and
lack of love in their children, more than they had wont to do. What is the
cause here of? first this is a general observation (although in particulers it
be not altogether true) that the parents love is greter to his child than the
child's love is to his parents, where of the townsmen of Nich. Sel^ in to 1.
Paed.
(...) set up a monument. For where as, on a time they had condemned a father
and his son, for certain notorious crimes committed: on much entreatie made
to the senate for the^, it was at length granted, that but one of them should
die, and that on this condition, that the one should do the execution on the
other, and he that executed the other should him self escape, agree on the
matter as they could which of them should suffer: The son being asked,
refused to die for the father, and had rather execute his father tha^ his
father should execute him. The father being demanded, was content to su^fer
death him self of his sons hand, though his sons unnaturalness did grieve
him, rather tha^ he would put his son to death. Whervppon this monument was
erected for a perpetuail memory, the pictures of both father and son, the
son beh^dding his father, engraven in marble, and this poesy written underneath,
Amor descendit n^n asce^dit. Love descends but not ascends. And so the
ryuers course descends but not ascendethe: A stone naturally descends, not
ascends. And the scripture commends many fathers unto us, that full entierly
have loved their sons, but few sons like Isaac, Joseph and Tobie, are commended
unto us, for the like love again unto their fathers. This natural love
wrought not in the vnnatural^ son Absalon, but it wrought so deep in the
father David, that he cried out again, Absalon fili mi, fili mi, Absalon fili
mi etc. O Absalon my son, my son Absalon, my son, would to God I might
die for thee, O Absalon 2. Reg. 18.
my son, my son. The second reason of the sons disobedyence, is the
fathers cockeryng. And that was the cause of David's weepyng, and Absalons
destruction, even his fathers indulgence. 1. Reg. 4.
This destroyed Hely and his sons also: And has brought many foolyshe
fathers to their grave with heaviness, and has brought many sons to the
Gallows with wr^tchednesse. Esop. fab.
Remember the Fable of the child that bitte of his mothers nose, when he went
to hanging, because she would not bite his breche with a good rod, when he went
to filching. A great many mothers now a days can not abide to (...) their
children beaten, and a number of fathers as wise as the mothers: the
Schoolmaster that should fetch bloudde of their child, out alas, It were a
pityfull syghte. But were it not a more pitiful syghte to see how myserablye
the one destroys the other? they think it love, it is more than morta^l
hatrede, this foolyshe co^heryng of their children. Which if they feel not in
the miseries of this life, whereby repentance may save the soul, howesoeuer the
body abye the folly of this hateful cockering love: if not: yet after this
life, the father and mother may mete the son in hell, and there repeat
those heavy and horrible curses that Gregory te^s of, Cu^sed be the hour
says the father, that ever thou wast borne, Cursed be the time, says the
son, that ever thou begattest me: and thus the one shall curse and ba^ the
other, and al because of this their cursed cockering. Dye fathers and morhers,
especially you of this noble city of London, sha^e not your City, undo not
your children and your selves also. We are thorough out all the Realm called
cockneys that are borne in London, or in the sound of Bow bell this is your
shame, recover this shame: as god be praised ye do, more than ever was wont to
be done. It had went to be an old saying, that few or none but were
vnth^ifts, and came to nothing, that were cockneys borne, for so are we termed
abroad. But God be praised, this is now a false rule, and has been a good
while since, chiefly since the Gospels light has shined on this noble city,
it has brought for the many worthy governors* not able preachers, godly
pastors, wise cou^selors, pregna^t wits, grave students, welthy citi^ens, and
is full of marvelous toward youth God bless them, and I trust will every day
more and more so bless this renoumed city, that where before, for w^nton
bringing up it has been (although in other things famous in^ug he, yet in
this point of our births place, a speck of blushing, a term of cockney, a note
of nipping us) It shall hereafter (by Godly education) be a thing to glory in,
that we borne in such a glorious city, as not only God has made the head of
other in wealth and honor, but also a myrror of other in godliness and
religion. And that this may be, love your children but hate cockering. Read and
read over twenty times, and write it in steel and iron as Job says, that
is, grave it in your memory that worthy chapter (in this point) the
thirty chapter of Jesus the son of Syrach, and there thou shall see, Eccl.
30.
what the cockering of the child, will bring both father and chyide unto, and
what the contrary.

The third cause of childrens disobedience is the ill ensample of their
parents: soon crookes the tree that good camocke will be. It soon pricks
will be a thorn: the young cockrel will learn easily to crow as he hears the
old cock: A great many such crauen cocks there are, that crow full ill
f^uoredly, and teach their cockrels to do the same scarce ere they be out of
the shell. We are prone enough, and to prove of our selves to all vice, without
a teacher, and alas shall the father and mother teach it them? nay it is no
marvel, how could the old Crabbe teach the young Crab to go, but a byas?
They have nous^ed up them selves in all wickedness, and so they teach their
children, so that as it were they claim hell by inheritance. It is a world to
see how ^oone we are decked up to be proud, or ere we know what pride
means. What a laughter and sport it is to the parents, to se their young
child do any unhappy touch. But Extrema gaudij luctus occupat, this wicked
beginning must needs have a wretched endyng. Will thou look (thou foolish
father) to reap virtue, and sowedst naught but vice? thou wast disobedient to
God, and wilt theu look thy child shall be obedient to thee? Nay look how thou
have done to thy children, thy children will do the like to thee. What measure
ye mete withal: shall be met to you again. Luc. 6.
Beware therefore of nourishing them in vice, of giving evil ensample to them,
tinder will not so sone take fire, as the child will take hold of evil ensample.
And he that offends one of these little ones (says Christ) that believes in
me, it were better Matthew. 18.
a mylstone were tied about his neck, and he thrown into the bottom of the
sea. Neither does Christ here except father, mother, or any other, but who
so ever he be that is occa^ion of sin to the child, by ensample,
instruction, encoraging, or by any other means, this heavy sentence is
pronounced on him. Thou father therefore if thou love thy child, yea if thou
love thy self, both for his part and for thine own part, beware of euel
ensample. The fourth cause of disobedience, is the lack of knowledge of his
duty. Thou bring up thy son in ignorance and idely, and how can he then
but prove a stubborn piece? chiefly when he has no knowledge, nor fear of God.
Now will he stand in awe of thee, or know his duty to thee? Do thou love in
deed thy child? love tha^ the more principal part of him, love his soul more
than his body, love the eternal life of him better than this temporal life.
For else thou love him not. For proof that thou love him, thou show me
what riches thou have gathered for him, what lands and rentes thou have
purchased for him, what lyuings and offices thou haste provided for him, what
pain, what cost, what trouble, what suit, what travel, what cares, and God
knows withal what conscience thou had to compass these things for thy
child, and is not all this a sufficient argument to prove thou love him? No
surely is it not. But I will healpe thee with a better argument. Thou art
content for thy child to go like a carle to the dyuell before, that thy child
may come after to the devil like a gentleman. This is a token thou love thy
child, that art content so thy child may be damned, thou will be damned too:
Now likest thou this love, is it not more worthy to be called hatred, and worse
it thou can devise ^ worser name for it, this preposterous love of thine to
thy child. Ah say thou, shall I not then provide for my child? then were I
worse (says Saint Paul) than an infidel. I deny not, but thou may yea
and ought to provide for him: by all convenient and godly means thou can:
But the principal thing that thou ought to provide for thy child, is the
Riches of the soul, the knowledge, the fear, and the love of GOD. Primum
quaerite Matthew. ^. L^c. (...).
regnum Dei, and (...) omnia adijcientur ^obis, First seek that thy child
may be a Citizen of the kingdom of God, that thy sons (as David Psalm 14*
says) may be As plants growyng up in th^yt youth, in all Grace and
U^ttue) that thy daughters may b^ polished like the corner stones of the temple
(of God) shining in the clear beawty of shamefastness and modesty, and
become old mothers in Israel. And then all other things shall be cast unto
them by Gods providence: When thou art dead and fair buried, they shall have
inoughe to live on, and do full well, although thou had left them never a
penie. I was young and now am Psalm. 36.
old^, says David, as who should say, I have seen great experience of many
things in my dais, yet never saw I the rightouse man forsaken and his seed beg
their bred. No, though his father die, yet is he as though he were not dead,
for he has left one Eccl 30.
behind him that is like him. In his life he saw him and had joy in him, and
was not sorry in his death, neither was he ashamed before his enemies, he left
behind him an auenger against his enemies, and one that should show favor to
his friends. Lo, thus Psalm 127.
shall they be blessed that fear the Lord, because they bring up their
children in instruction and information Ephesians 6.
of the Lord. This is the true love of the fathers and mothers to their
children. And this shall make, if any thing will make, this love of the parents
descending to the children, to ascend again from the children to the parents,
so effectually, that no earthly love can be of greater force. But be this love
also never so excellent, when it once enters this comparison of gods love,
because it is so tied with the linkes of nature and bounden dewty on either
part, although it somewhat resemble this love of God our Father in heaven, to
us his adopted sons in earth, Whereby David says, Sicut pater miseretur
filioru^, misertus est nostri Psalm. 103.
dominus, As the father has mercy on his children, so God has had mercy on
us: Can the mother forget Esa 49.
her infant that she should not pity the child of her womb? although the
mother could forget her child (says the Lord) yet will not I forget thee:
for I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are ever in my
sight: Therefore I conclude on this love, as of the other, that So God loved the
world, that no natural love of fathers and mothers to their children, of
children to their fathers and mothers, is like this love of God out heavenly
father to us.

We read of great love that servants have borne their masters, that
masters again have born their servants, the one has suffered death to save
the other. This was a notable love: Where are such masters and servants now
become? nay it is now the old proverb up and down, trim tram, such master,
such man, such cup, such cover, neither barrel better herring, both
master and man may go in a line together, for a great many of men and masters
now a days. In many places where I come, I hear the masters complain of
their servants stubbornness and unfaithful dealing, of their servants
dissoluteness, and lack of awe. But the master sees not how God punishes
him with his own rod, how his own self is the cause here of. He would
have his servant all for lucre, all on the penny, all for advantage, neither
to care ought how he comes by it, swering and stering, cursing and banning,
even to deceive his own father: on my faith and honesty it cost me thus much,
having in deed neither faith nor honesty to swear by, and therefore it were
the leise matter, if he appealed only to his false faith and little honesty:
But he spares not to take to wit nesse the righteous judgments of almighty
God that sees his falshod, and yet will he not spare to say, now as God shall
save me, as God shall judge me, thus and thus it stands me in, and yet it
stands him not in half the money, yea often times the bier shall have it for
the third penie that the seller asks. O merciful God, what an order is this
among Christians? And no nation noted for this horrible abusage more than
englismen. We think we should not thrive if we should not use this curset kind
of bargayning. We count it almost nothing now adays, it is grown into such
a cusstome, every second word to be poudred with an oath for credit, yea to
blaspheme God and his dreadful judgments, to renounce God and the benefit of
our salvation, and that for a little credit, or for a paltrie gain: Curfed be
that gain that wins such a loss, that body and soul is lost, to the which
all the winning of the wide world were but a trifle. Cursed be that credit,
that to retain his estimation with an haede beleuyng man, will not styeke to
blaspheme and renounce his part of God. But thou louedst cursing and cursing
will (...) ^08.
come upon thee. Cushe a point, says his master, that fingreth the gain,
Iura periura secretum prode^e noli. Swear (h^oreson) and for swear, be wray
not my mystery. This is a mystery with a very mischefe, that the coue^ouse
mas^ter without all conscience teaches his man. Is this the way to thrive?
Have these men (I will not say any fear of God for they have none) Non est
timor d^i Psalm. 13.
ante oculos eoru^. But have they any opinion there is a God? No truly, they
say in their hearts with the fool there is no God. For if they thought there
Psalm. 13
were, they durst not thus abuse him. And therefore the master cares not for
the servants instruction, how he should come to the knowledge of God, but with
his servant would have all days alike Sabbath day and other. And never passes
whether his servant here, know, or believe God and his word or no. The servant
now being without all knowledge like a beast, and his master without all
conscience like a dyuell: he has as little conscience to deceive his master, as
his master would have him have to deceive others. And hence comes so many
stubborn knaves, saucie merchants, crafty varlets, privy thieves, ruffianlye
cutters, ryottous prentices, and all the wicked sort of such unfaithful
servants among artificers and merchants, that deceive so many other men, make
their masters bankruptes, and bring them selves to miserye. And though the
principal fault herein, be in the master that complayneth on his servant,
yet is not this a bolster to the servant, whose duty is, though not to
assent to their master in wickedness, yet in every rightefull thng, to obey
honor and love their master with all service, truth and diligence: If they do
not, either they shall never be masters them selves, or be like wise punished
in their servants. Behold the faithful seruise of Abraham's man and how god
blessed Genesis 24.
his journey, and his master made him the guide of all he had. Behold the
faithful service night Gen 29.
and day, hot and cold, of Jacob to Laban, and how ple^tifully God multiplied
and increased his stock. Behold the chaste fidelity of Joseph to his master
Genesis 39.
Putiphar, and his trusty diligence under the keeper of the prison, and how the
Lord made every thing to prosper that he did, and exalted him to the lordship
of all Egypt, and made all his kynne to honor him. Servants therefore be
obedient unto Ephesians 6
them that are your masters according to the flesh, (that is, which have
power over your bodies, not over your souls) In all things, not with eye
service as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart fearing God. And whatsoever
ye do, do it heartily as to the Colloss. 3
lord and not as unto men, knowing that of the lord ye shall receive the
reward of the inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ: And ye masters do
unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye have also a
master in heaven. And if thou Eccl. 33.
have a faithful servant let him be unto thee as thine own soul, etc.
Entreat him as thy brother. Let thy Eccl. 7.
soul love a good servant, defraude him not of liberty, neither leave him a
poor man. etc. And thus this love between the master and his servant, will
become an exceeding faithful love. But be it never so excellent a love, yet
because it is but duty in the servant, and of the master comes for his
servants painful* trusty, and profitable service: therefore, So God loved the
world, that this is but hireling and servile love to be compared to it.

We read of great love that Princes have loved their subjects withal, and
subjects again have loved their Princes. This is a goodly and Godly love also,
and would to God it were so faithful in every country, as it ought to be. Then
should we not have hard of such oppressions and civil wars in foreine
realms, nor of such conspiracies and rebellions as has been in our own. A
Prince ought to be a father and mother to their people, and to make reckning
of so many children as they have subjects. The subject again ought to be as a
child unto his Prince, and to make reckenyng of his sovereign, as of his own
father or mother, yea to make a greater account of him or her, than of his
father that begat him, or his mother that bare him, not only for that the
state is greater, and even immediate next to God, and representing god him
self: but also for the greater commodity, that both he, his parents, his kin,
and all his country, receive by the peasable and virtuous government of the
Prince, not only of infinite benefits of body and goods, but that passes all
bodily and temporal matters, the free passage of the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
the mayntenance of his true Religion, the faithful feding on his word and
sacraments that refreshe and nourishe his soul to life everlasting. Therefore
next under God, there is no love ought to be greater than this, that the
natural subject does owe his natural Prince: nor any thing is a surer
defense to the Prince next under Gods protection, (whose anointed the Prince
is, and in whose hands is the princes heart) then Prouer. 20
is the faithful love of his subjects. No horse nor harness, no guard, nor
gunne, nor garrison, no forte nor castle, no army, no treasure, nor any thing
that a Prince can devise in yearthe, to defend him self, and save his
honor by, is of more value than this one thing, the Subjects faithful love.
Neither has the subject a greater earthly treasure given him of GOD, than a
godly and loving Prince: nor a greater scourge in this life can there be, than
when Propter peccata populi facit hypocritam regnare, For the peoples Job. 34.
wickedness God sendes an hypocrit, a false worshipper of God, a setter up of
superstition and idolatry, an hateful and cruel tyrant, that loves not his
subjects, to reign over them. Consider then with your selves, how exceedingly
we the people of England are bound in this great benefit (among infinite
other) to Almighty God, that we be subjects under such a most gracious
Prince, that without suspicion of lie or flattery, we may truly say, Non
taliterfecit omni nationi, He has Psalm. 147
not dealte so with any nation as he has dealte with us. Look thorough out
all Christendom, (comparisons are odious) and ye shall find no country, no
kingdom, no realm, no city, no state, nor any people, to enjoy all those
benefits, all that while, and after that sort that we have done, and long
shall do I trust, under our most blessed Sovereign. The Lord that has
wroughte these benefytes to us by her, be blessed for her: and as in a
stretched out arm he has by her delivered us from the bondage of Egypt and
Pharaos tirannie,: as he has to the preserving, gathering together, and
feeding us, poor, strayed, scattered, famished, and weryed sheep of his
fold, stirred her 1. Reg. 17.
up to be our shepherde, delivered her and us from the Bear and the Lion: as
he has infeoffed her not only with royal honor and supreme government,
but also endowed her with such princely qualities and excellent virtues, that
other people wonder at her as a myrror, other Princes learn at her as a
pattern, and we feel the benefit of her as a mother: So God that for his
glory and our profit, has given her to us, and us to her, for his mercy
and truths sake, vouche safe to continue, increase, bless, defend, and
prosper her long to reign over us, and of a young Lady make her an old and
lusty mother amongst us, that has such motherly love unto us. What now
remains on our parts to her, but like faithful subjects to honor and obey
her with all our industry, like loving and natural children to love her with
all our hearts, like Godly Christians, with all prayer and supplication to
pray for her, and like true Englishemen, to fight for her with all our
might, to healpe her with all our goods, yea and need were to die for her
also. For this I durst say for her, that if need were (as God forbid) or if
her death could do us good (as it can not but bring us greatest hurt) she
would not stick to suffer death either for Gods cause or for ours. And this
she showed full well, when time was, how ready she was to become a constant
mar^ir for the truth even to the very pinche of death. She went with Christ
over Cedron into the garden, and there slept not as some of the disciples did,
but saw even the cup and horror of death before her. So well she took his
cross and followed him. But God delivered and exalted her to restore his
truth, and God preserve her to maintein it. Amen. Let us therefore well-beloved of
God and loved of her, render love for love again unfeignedly. And al false
harlots, all doggish Doegs, all dissembling Papists among us, that say, Amen,
from their teeth, and would if they could eat her with their teeth, God turn
their hearts for his mercy, or for his Justice detect and root them out, that
she our loving prince and we her loving subjects, maugre al Gods, hers, and our
enemies, may long time live and love in God together: Amen for Jesus sake.
Ame^. But what is this love also? were it never so unfeigned, or any of all
these loves, or all these loves, and put them altogether, and add on the head
of al these loves, the love that we owe to God above all things, which is most
principally to be considered, to love God with all our heart, with all our Luc.
10.
soul, with all our might, and in respect of this love to set all other loves
aside, yea to hate our selves in comparion of this love of God: yet all the
loves that we are able to bear one to another, and all to God, we are bound to
them by so many causes, that they are all rather duties than love. And our
love when it comes to his most perfection is so imperfecte, and has so many
bracks and blots, till this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and 1. Cor.
15.
this mortal put on immortality, yea when that which is perfect is com, and
the imperfect abolished, 1 Cor. 13
and that faith and hope shall cease, and only love continue: yet shall it never
com nere this incomparable love of god to us, whereby, So God loved the world
that for y^ worlds salvation, he gave his only begotten son. Why sir, may not a
prince here in this world so love his people, to give also his only begotten
son for them, and that for naughty caitiues, thieves, wicked ones, and
traitors to him and to their country, and that by the laws they ought to
suffer a most reprochefull death: yet may not this prince (minding the justice
of the law shall pass) so fervently love those malefactors that he will not
spare to give his only begotten son to the laws severity and bitter death,
for the redemption of those tra^sgressors so entierly beloved of him? surely
this were a marvelous hard case, we can not put a harder, no though he died
him self for them. We never read of any such prince. The ensample of Codrus
that procured his own death to save the Athenians: The ensample of the
Philenian brethren, that voluntarily were buried quick for the enlarging their
country bounds: The ensample of the Decij, and Curtius, and such as gave them
selves to death for the preservation of their countries: this was marvelous
great love that moved them, but nothing like the case here put. How beit this
is nothing like to Gods case neither. For if the prince bare such love to
those malefactors, no great love in any creature could com with out great
causes on their parts, either that they had don for the prince, or might do
for him, that moved him to bear them this exceeding love. But in God the
creator, there was no cause at all (as is already declared) on the worlds
behalf, wherefore he should love the world, neither benefit nor personage nor
any thing, besides the love it self of God. The Prince in this case might not
favor his son, or love those offenders more than he did his son, but the
son of God is his best beloved, neither did he this to his son as not
loving his son, or less loving his son than us, but only he did it for the
love of us, and yet his love of us is only in and for his son: The Prince
might seek glory and renown by this strange fact, as the Philosophers did in all their sufferings, but Christ sought ignominy due to us, to bring us to
reign in glory with him. In the end the Prince must needs die and his son
also, and how soon either of them, God knows. And whether by not so famous a
death or no, God knows. And how they should have lived, with what troubles,
fears, and changes, God knows. These things might move them to be the
willinger to suffer death that once they must needs suffer and this they know:
But the son of God was not subject unto death, he neded never to have died,
for death had no power over him, as he truly said, Habeo potestate^ pone^di
John. 10.
animam meam, and iterum sumendi eam, I have power to give over my life, and to
take it again. It lay in his own power to die or not to die, but that of his
mere love he vouchesaued for to die. Moreover the Princes death could work but
a small and trifling benefit, the saving of their bodily life for a while, that
perchance might die body and and soul within a minute of an hour after: But
the death of our unspotted Lamb, the son of God, is become such a sweet
and acceptable sacrifice to GOD the Father, and so effectual unto us, that if
any man sin, we have an Advocate with 1. John. 2.
the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, he is the propitiation for our sins,
and not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world. To
conclude, there is as mutche difference between this, or any other case, that
can be put, of any creature, husband, wife: parents, children: friend, enemy:
neighbor, stranger: master, servant: prince and subject, or whose love soever
it be, as is between the creature and creator, as is between the person of a
wretched mortal man, and the person of the living and immortal GOD. The love
of God therefore whereby he so loved the world, that he gave his son for it,
does excel all comparison, does excede all speech, doothe pass all
understanding, We 1. Corin. 13.
speak but in a dark speech thereon, we understand it but as children, we see
it but thorough a gl^sle, we know it but in part, yea the angels marvel at
Ephesians. 3.
it, and cannot fully conceive the breadth, the length the depthe, the heigthe,
of this incomprehensible love of God to manne, and to know this love of
Christ, which go^th beyond all knowledge. But that we may have some taste of
this sweet love of God, some joy of this his excellent gift, let us (dear
beloved) as we may, a little behold the same. He gave his only begotten son.
Here are two things to be considered. The one is the thing it self that for
this love he bestowed upon us. The other is the manner of his bestowing it. The
thing that he bestowed, was even his son, not his servant, John 16. John. 10.
Colloss. 1. John 1 John. 8. John. 14. Hebr. 12. 1. Petr. 2. 5. John. 15. 6. 1.
Cor 10. John. 4. Marc 12. Luc 20. 1. Petr. 2. Psalm. 23. Esa 9. Hebr. 10. 9
John 1. Col. 1. Matthew 1. John. 1. Luc 24. Act 28. Col. 2.
but his son, not his friend, but his son: even his true begotten son,
and that his only begoten son. Such as the father is, such is the son, the
Father is God, the son is God: God of the substance of his father, very God
and equal to his father in substance, eternity, grace, glory, power, and
every thing. For all that the Father has, he has given to him, and he and
the father are one. He is the express image of the invisible God, the first
begotten of all creatures, the wisdom of his father, by whom the world was
made, the light of the world, the way, the truth, and the life, the author
and fynisher of our faith, the prince of pastors, and great shepeherd of our
souls, the true vine, the bread of life, the rock and fountayn of the living
waters, the corner stone of the building and foundation thereof, the king of
glory, the prince of peace, the anointed of God, the high priest, the mediator
of the new Testament, the lamb of god that takes away the sins of the world,
the reconciler of God and man, the Emanuel, the Messiah, the blessed seed, the
hope and redemption of Israel, The lord and savior Jesus Christ, in whom is
the fullness of the divinity, in whom only is laid up the unsearchable
treasorie, of all the riches of the glory, grace, favor, and of this infinite
love of God, even the only begotten son of God. So much more excellent Hebr 1.
than the angels, in as much as he has obtained a more excellent name tha^
they. For unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my son, this
day have I begotten thee, And again, I will be his father, and he shall be my
son: and again, when he brings in his first begotten son into the
world, be says, And let all the angels of God worship him. etc. and to the Son
he says, O god, thy throne is for ever and ever, the scepter of thy kingdom is
a scepter of righteousness, thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity,
wherefore God even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
thy fellows. And thou Lord in the beginning, have established the earth, and
the heavens are the works of thine hands, they shall perish, but thou do
remayn: and they al shall wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture shall
thou fold them up, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy
years shall not fail. Unto which of the angels said he at any time, Sit
thou at my right hand til I make thy enemies thy foot stool. And has he then
poured forth on us poor and wretched sinful misers, such treasures of his
blessings that he has given us, even this his son, 1. Pet. 1.
in quem desiderant angeli prospicere, on whom the angels desire to look? yea
says the same son him self, Dedit vnigenitum filium suum, He gave his only
begotten son. O infinite and unspeakable love. O most preciouse gift, O most
orient pearl, Matthew. 13.
O most happy merchant that can get this jewel. The price of this gift can
not be told, the value of this jewel is inestimable, silver and gold, pearl
and stone, is nothing comparable to this wonderful gift of God. No, we are
not bought with corruptible 1. Pet. 1.
things as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, the son
of God? The son of God? why, could no lesser gift have served us? might not
he have given us an angel? But even his son? And that his only begotten son?
Might not he have given us one of his adopted sons? some notable man or
woman, some patriarche, some Prophet, some apostle, or some holy saint of god?
No, God spared not to give his his only begotten son for man. Yea nothing
could sufficiently pacify Collos. 1. Romans 5. Heb 10. 2. Cor 5. 1. Cor. 15. 2.
Tim. ^. Coll. 2. ^ Cor. 3. Col. 3. Ephesians. 1. Heb. 7. 1. Pet. 1. Acts. 2. Romans
5. 8.
the wrath of God, satisfy his justice, make due recompense for our undue
offense, reconcile us to the favor of GOD again, vanquishe death hell sin
and satan, cancel the hand writing against us, triumph over all our enemies,
transform us into a new man, enter into heaven like a victorious conqueror in
our behalf, and purchase for us the hope of a better inheritance, send us
down the holy ghost to comfort and strengthen us in our journey thither, make
us have bold access unto God the father and call him our father, and claim
sonship of him. No man, no woman, no angel, no creature, no earthly or
heavenly, bodily or spiritual thing, could have wrought these mighty works for
us, but only the only begotten son of God. Nor any thing that we can
conceive, could so have set forth the fathers love in these doings, as this
that he vouchsafed to give his only begotten son to do it.

What madness then has bewitched the Papists minds, to seek other
mediators than the son of God, other satisfactions, other gifts, other
reconciliations, other means to salvation and pardon of their sins, than that
which God him self of such high love and favor has given us, as a most
excellent and effectual worker of all these things, the only begotten son of
God? Is not this a great unthankfulness, a foul beastlynesse, a very
folly? or by what worthy name may I call their unworthy demeanor to GOD, to
them selves, to the son of God, to the world, to refuse so notable a love,
and forsake so fre and Ierem. ^.
rich a gift: to seek trifles, and let go the principal: to run to puddles
of error, and go from the flowing stream of grace and fountain of life: to
cleave to them selves, and to renownce the son of God. O brutishe Papists,
and insensible, or rather led too much by sensuality: O horse and Mule, in
whom there is no understanding: O Image Psalm. 11^
makers, how like be ye unto your images, Of whom (says David) they are
like to them that made them, having ears to hear, and hear not, eyes to see
and see not, noses to smell, and smell not. For if ye had either hearing,
seeing, smellyng, or sauouryng of any thing petteynyng to GOD, ye could not
be thus senseless. But this shows ye are but flesh Matthew. 1^
and blood, which can not reveal the son of the living GOD. Good Lord
what is manne, if he be cast off of God, and left to him self, given over
to his own lusts and a reprobate sense* But the saying of Esaye is verified on
them: He has Esa 53. John 12.
blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not see with
their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and
I should heal them. For were it not that God had sent them strong delusion,
that they should 2 Thessalonians. 2
believe lies, and be damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure
in unrighteousness, they would never so like swine have trod underfoot this
most precious perle the son of God, and delight to wallowe in the mire of
men's traditions, and durtie deeds of their own righteousness as they do:
and had rather like Grillus that was bewitched Plutarchi Grillus.
of Circes, be still a swine, and sosse in swil, than return to the form of a man, and be with wise Ulysses: had rather live in Egypt with sclauish
bondage, and food fit for sclaues, onions, leekes, Numer. 11.
and garlike, than live in liberty, trauailyng to the land of promise, and be
fed with angels food. Here is a notable gift if we value it well, all the
riches in the world is but dross unto it: How do the Papists value this
excellent jewel? Let us see if they be good jewels yea or no, or if they be
as wise prysers of the value hereof, as Esops donghyll Cock, who fynding a
precions Fabul. A^sopi.
stone, had rather have had a sillye barley corn to cramme his croppe, than
all the precious stones in the world: And do not the Papists as fondly,
esteem and worse handle this precious Jewel that GOD the Father has given us
His only begotten son? How do they value Matthew. 26.
Christ? That traitor Judas valued him but at an easy price, when he sold
him for thirty pence to the Priests. This was too mutche under foot in
conscience for such a Jewel. But thieves have no conscience, they will make
Robyn Hoodes penywoorthes, to dispatche and away, with all that they can come
by. Well, Judas sold him for thyrtie pence to the Priests, but the Priests
since that, have esteemed him at a great deal lesser value than Judas did.
They bear us in hand, that that little round white cake, which the Priest
at his Mass does consecrate, (as they call it) is Christ him self. But ye
should have had any morrow Mass priest, have sold ye thyrtie Masses,
thyrtie consecrations for thirty groates, a whole Trentall for a royal: and
so the price of Christ was come down to four pence, mutche under Judas price.
But there was a reason of the fall of the price: For why, the making of Christ
was so easy, and there were such a company of those Christmakers, and of
those Christ's, Here is Christ, and Matthew. 24.
there is Christ, that this pulled down the markette. But if that were
Christ, how ordered they him? Forsoothe they ordered him even as they prysed
him, that which they might have of so easy a price, a fourepenie matter was
ordered even thereafter.

First they turned Christ out of his own likeness, and made him look like a
reunde cake, nothing like to Jesus Christ, no more than an apple is like an
oyster, nor so mutche: for there appears neither arms nor hands, feet nor
legs, back nor belly, head nor body of Christ: but all is visoured and
disguysed under the form of a wafer, as light as a feather, as thin as a
paper, as white as a kerchiefe, as round as a trenchour, as flat as a pancake,
as small as a shilling. as tender as the Priests lemman that made it, as much
taste as a stycke, and as dead as a door nail to look upon. O blessed GOD,
dare they thus disfigure our Lord and savior Jesus Christ? or can they make
such a strange Metamorphosis of the son of God? They say they do this. But
now what do they with him, having thus tra^sformed him? Forsooth even as the cat
does with the mouse, play with it, dandle it up and down, hoise it ever her
head, toss it hither and thither, and then eat it clean up: even so for all
the world, did they order Christ. Mark a Priest at Mass, and mark a Cat with
a mouse, and tell me then what difference. Now if Christ were not eaten up of
the Priest, did he so escape the Priests hands? Nay, even as a mouse kept in a
trap till she pine to death, as a bird in a pitfal til she be st^rued, as a
caytif in a dungeon til he be famished, so was Christ thrust up into a copper
pixe, and there hanged up till even the worms did eat him, and scraule all
over him, and the very hoarie moulde did rotte him, and then was he taken
down and burned, because he could keep himself no better. O cruel Canibali,
O barbarous Priests: worse than Judas that betrayed him, worse than Cayphas,
Annas, and Pylate, that arraigned and judged him, worse than the very tarmagant
Jews, that so despitefully put him to death. Could they find in their
hearts, thus again with more despite, to handle and execute (for even so and
that ryghtly they called it) their Lord and master, Jesus Christ? Alas poor
Christ, what an hard handlyng was this? But thanks be to God, this was not
Christ, as they think, nevertheless if it had been he, they show their good
wills unto him, and how they would order him amongst them. What is this, but
even to say, Hic est haeres, venite occidamus eu^, This is Matthew. 21.
the heir, come let us kill him, and then the inheritance shall be ours? And
even thus as they order the person of Christ, so order they al his dignities,
prerogatives, and titles that his father gave him, and all the offices whereto
God the Father sent him, Diuiserunt sibi vestimentamea, They have divided
Psal^, (...).
my garments amongst them says Christ, they have made havoc and spoil of
all, and have left him nothing. What one point is there of his royal
kingdom, of his high priesthode, of his perfect sacrifice, of his precious
purchase, of his continual mediation, or any other office, that they have not
taken the same to themselves, or given the same to other? Do not they take upon
them the forgiveness of sins? Do they not take upon them to be sacrificing
Priests? Do they not give to their Pope the kingdom and all the titles of
Christ? Do they not send us to other mediators beside Christ? have they left
any thing to Jesus Christ, but a bare name of Jesus Christ? Yea of what value
do they esteem the death of Jesus Christ, but to take away the bare name of a
thing? For first all the Papists do affirm, that the death of Christ is fully
effectual only for original sin: that is to say, for infants that can make
no satisfaction, wanting will, reason, knowledge, and al ability thereunto. But
all other actual sins we must our selves make satisfaction for them,
besides the death of Christ. And hereon aryseth their doctrine of
satisfaction, wherein if a man have done an offense, he must confess it to
them, and they enjoin him penance, which if he do, he satisfies for his sin,
If it be to hard a penance, O good master gostly father, says the penitent,
this penance is too sore, for gods sake an easier penance. Then buie it out
says he, ye may turn it to money. And I warant ye, he pays full sweetly
for it. For, every sin be it never so horrible, is rated at his price, and
that is mutch higher than they make the price of Christ, and this is their
satisfaction, for all their actual sins. but whereto the^ serves the death
of Jesus Christ? For original sin say they: And is this al^well, yet this
is somewhat, and that indede a great matter. Original sin is a horrible
co^tagion and corruption of the whole nature and substance of man, and therefore
a grievous sin. No, no (says Pigghius) what man, ye are more afraid then
needs. Original sin is in deed no sin at all. No is? why is it then of al
men called sin? Ha thou fool, why call thou thy writing thy hand, is thy
writing thy hand in deed? No, but because it was written by my hand, it has
the name of my hand. And even so (says Pigghius) is original sin, a name
of sin but not in deed any sin, Sed tantu^ Pigghius de peccato orig.
qua diximus analogia peccatum dici, quomodo dici mus scripturam manum, aut
frigus pigrum. It is no sin neither before nor after baptism, etc. But only
may be called sin by the proportion aforesaid, even as we call our writing
our hand, or cold slow, because it makes us slow. Is not this a proper
doctrine of the Papists? Who would have thought they had held such horrible
erroures of the very principles of our faith? But whereto tends this, How is
it against the death of Christ? Lay these two doctrines together in form of
argument, and see what conclusion will rise thereon. Original sin is no sin in
deed, but only a bare name of sin. The death of Christ is fully effectual
to take away only original sin, for all other actual sins require besides
satisfaction for them: Ergo, the death of Christ is fully effectual to take
away no sin in deed, but only a bare name of sin. Here is a very low price
that this jewel is now come to, yet was it better before when it was at a
grote, and now it is come to nothing, no not so much as three half pence, the
price of an old dog. Thus trod they down, and brought to no purpose, the
most high ransom of our souls, the precious death and passion, the holy
perfect and propiciatorie sacrifice on the altar of the cross, made once for
Heb 10. Matthew. 21. Act. 4. 1 Pet. 2. Ephesians 2.
ever by our high priest Jesus Christ. Thus cast these foolish builders
aside that stone, that God has made the head corner stone whereon all the
building rises. This have they esteemed and prised this jewel, and in the
balance of their own self love have made them selves to waygh a greater paise
than Christ. Thus have they ordered the only begotten sonn^e of God, whom of
his infinite love God gave to the world, that it should not perish, but have
eternal life. They pretend otherwise as Herod did to worship Christ, and
doucke and courtesy down to the ground at the very name of Christ, for they
had left him nothing but his name. But to what purpose was all that honor to
his name, misusing thus his person, and spoiling him of his office? Is not this
Judas trayterouse kiss, openly to say, Aue rabbi, all hail master, and to
Matthew. 26
say privily Ipse est tenete eum, Lay hand on him, it is even he and his very
body, eat him up or hang him up? They say they did this to honor him, would
they be content with such honor? This is an honor with all my heart, and
God give them such honor as they give God. In name they give him honor,
but the more hypocrites they. Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas, Their fained
holiness is double wickedness. what do they less than did the Jews, to clothe
him in purple like a king, crown him with thorn like a diadem, give him a
reed like a scepter, and to give him a bare name like a babble, and spoil him
of all his merits like a theef^, is not this also to cry Crucifige,
crucifige, like a Jew, and even to crucify the son of God again, so mutche
as in Heb. 6.
them does lie, that thus do order him? surely, surely, the very Turks think
better of Jesus Christ that are our open and professed enemies, then the
Papists what soever they thought of him, did order him, that pretend and
vaunte to be his chiefest seruitors, and most holy catholic children. But they
lie the more, that have the more to answer for, I mean the cancred Papist,
and mayntener of these wicked doings against God and his anointed Christ, and
with the bare name of Christ, abused the credulous and simple people. But let
us (dear Christians) now that the mystery of iniquity 2 Thessalonians. 2.
wrought by them, is opened, them a^ of sin disclosed, even the child of
perdition, which is an adversary, and exalts him self against all that is
called god, or that is worshipped, sitting as God in the temple of God, and
bosting him self as god: Let us now be no longer be deceued by him, but be
rather ashamed, y^ we have bin so fowly and so long missed. And since God Luc
11. John. 1.
has lightened us sitting in darkness and the shadow of death with the light
of his truth, yea with his own son, the true light of the world: Let us go
Hebr 14. Heb 10.
forth of their tents, let us be bold to enter into the holy place by the blood
of Jesus, let us draw near with a true heart in the assurance of faith, since
we have an high priest which is over the house of God, let us acknowledge to
be our only lord and savior, this most excellent gift of God that all the
world is not able to counteruaile: to be that king that only is able, and does
rule, defend, and preserve Heb. 10.
his Church throwout the world: to be that priest that has made of his own
body, a full perfect sacrifice once for all, sufficient for all the sins of the
1. John. 2.
world. To be that only mediator, that only intercessor, that is able to
stand betwixt God and us. Vnus est deus and vn' mediator homo Jesus Christus.
1. Tim. 2.
There is one God and one mediator, the man Jesus Christ. He only trod the
wine press, he only Esa. 63.
iusteyned Gods wrath, he only fulfilled Gods justice, he only reconciled
Gods love and favor, he is the only means that God has used to work our
salvation by. And here well-beloved, see and dread the justice of God against
sin, nothing could pacify it but his son. It is not such an easy matter to
put away sin as the papists pretend: if any such thing could have don it, to
what purpose neded God have given his only begotten son. To what purpose neded
his son have suffered the sharp stoures of such a bitter and reprochefull
death, if sin and our delivery from sin had bin so small a matter? But
sin is most horrible in the sight of God, and seuereth us from god,
Iniquitates vestrae diuiseru^t inter vos and Deum vestrum. Your sins have Esa
59.
made a division between you and your God says Esaie. In how infinite places
does God threatten Deuteronomy 9. Esa. 30. Deuteronomy. 4. Rom 2.
his wrath against sin and sinners that provoke him to anger, that stir up
his indignation, that kindle his fury, that heap wrath on them selves: But
how sore a matter this is, to sustain Gods wrath, read the eight and twenty
and nine and twenty Deuteronomy 28. and 29.
chapters of the Deuteronomie, how the wrath of the Lord shall smoke against
the sinner. How his wrath is a consuming fire. Who knows the Psalm. 90. Hebr.
10.
power of thy wrath says David? Horrendum est incidere in manus dei, It is a
dreadful thing to fall in the hands of God. No saint, no angel, no creature,
can abide his displeasure. The heavens shall 2. Petr. 3.
flee, the elements melt, and the earth shall burn before him. Only Jesus
Christ sustained the brunt of his wrath, and that with a most hard bicker. It
made him sweat even dropps of blood with water, Matthew 27.
it made him cry out on the cross, My God, my God, why haste thou forsaken
me? This great wrath sustained he, because he took on him our Ephesians. 2.
sins that were the sons of wrath to (...) us children of grace. To make
us righteousness (...) 2. Corin. 5. Gal 3. Ephesians. 2 Coll. 1.
was accounted sin that knew no sin. To make us blessed, he became
accursed. He is our peace and has reconciled us to god by the cross in his
blood. Even because he loved us, he gave him self for us to be a sacrifice
of sweet smell to God, that was Ephesians 5. Psalm 39
appeased with his obedience: Ecce veni^, who most redily offered himself to
his father for us, Behold 1 Thessalonians 5.
I come, and am ready to do and suffer thy will, with which oblation, the
Father is so well pleased that he has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtein
salvation by the means of our lord Jesus Christ, which died for us. Let us not
therefore wallow in this security, if God spared not his son for us, will he
spare us, that neither fear his wrath, nor yet are moved by his love? if the
green tree were Luc 23. Matthew. ^.
thus ordered, shall the rotten tree stand? nay, the axe is even at the root
thereof to hew it down to be cast into the fire, that brings not forth good
fruit. For although Christ be made unto us of God, our 1. Cor. 1
wisdom, our righteousness, our holiness, and Matthew. 10. 1 Cor. 14. Ephesians
5.
our redemption: yet must we be wise as serpents, not be children in wit, but
walk wisely redeming the time: he is our righteousness, but we must be
righteous also, for (says S. John) If ye know that he is righteous, know ye
that he which do the righteously is borne of him, and therefore give not 1.
John. 2. Romans 6.
your members weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, but of righteousness
unto GOD. We Ephesians 6. 1. Pet 3.
must put on the brestplate of righteousness, and suffer for righteousness
sake, and then shall we be blessed. Christ is our holiness, yet follows it
not, we must therefore be unholy: but on the contrary Leuit. 1 and 19. 1. Pet.
1. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
Sancti critis quoniam ego sanctus sum, You shall be holy, because I am holy.
Non enim vocauit nos Deus ad immundi^iem, sed ad sanctificationem, For God has
not called us to vnholynesse, but to holiness. This is the will of God even
your holiness. He is our redemption, and has redeemed us, not from all kind
of service, but from the service Gal.
of sin, vt vltra non seruiamus peccato. From the cnrse of the law, Christus
redemit nos a maledictione ^. Tim. 1.
legis. He took away the force from dearh, Hebr 2.
and brought life to light. He destroyed through death him that had the
power of death, that is, the devil, and that he might deliver them which all
their life time were subject to bondage: He gave himself for us to deliver
us from all unrighteousness. Tit. 2.
What shall we say then? shall we continue still in sin, that grace may
abound? God Romans 6.
forbid. How shall we that are dead to sin, live yet therein? etc. Shall
we sin by cause we are not under the law, but under grace? God forbid.
Nay, we are not so redeemed, but still remain in bondage and debte to GOD,
his children and servants, having our fruit in holiness and the Romans 6.
end everlasting life. Which life we shall have Psalm. 36. 1. Pet. 3. 2. Tim
2. Ephesians. 4. Romans 13.
by Christ, if we dye with Christ, if we forsake evil, and do good, if we
put of the old man, and put on the new, if we cast away the works of
darkness, and put on the arm our of light, if we dye to sin, to live to
GOD. To conclude, Christus mortuus est pro omnibus, vt qui viuunt, iam no^ ^.
Cor. 5.
sibi viuant, sed ei qui pro ipsis mortuus est, and refurrexit. Christ dyed
for all, that those which live, should not hencefoorthe live to them selves,
but live to him that dyed and rose for them. And if ^. Pet. 1.
these things be among you, and abound (says Saint Peter) they will make ye
neither shall be idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ, For he that has not these things, is blinded, and can not see a
far off, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins: shall
have no benefit of the death of Christ, shall not enter into the kingdom of God,
shall heap wrath Romans 2. Col^oss 3.
on them selves in the day of wrath. For the wrath of God abides on the
children of disobedience. To whom the wages of unrighteousness ande mist of
darkness is reserved, that speaking in swellyng words of vanity, 2. Pet. ^.
beguyle with wantonness through the lusts of the flesh, them that were
clean escaped from those that are wrapped in error, promising unto them
liberty, and are themselves the servants of corruption. For of whom soever a
man is overcome, even to the same he is in bondage. For if they, after they
have escaped from the fylthinesse of the world, through the knowledge of the
Lord and of the savior Jesus Christ, are yet again entangled therein, and
overcome, the later end i^ worse with them than the beginning. For better had
it ben for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than after they
have known it, to turn from the holy commandment given unto them. But it is
comme unto them according to the proverb, The dog is returned unto his
vomit, and the sow that was washed to the wallowyng in the mire. And the vayn
iangling and cou^terfeit protestant, to make as little account of this precious
jewel, the son of God, and bring to as small effect by his licencious living,
the kingdom, the priesthode, the office, the death, passion, resurrection and
all the merits and benefits of Jesus Christ, as the false and wicked papist by
his devilish doctrine did. Let us therefore dred gods wrath, fear his justice,
harke^ to his voice ob serve Gods commandments, be enflamed with his love,
marvel at his wisdom, and above al things, Custodi depositum, keep and make
most of this inestimable 1. Tim 6.
jewel of everlasting life, the only begotten son of God* our lord and savior
Jesus Christ.

Thus we see what a jewel God has bestowed upon us, let us now see how he
bestowed it. Did he sell it us? no, God can not be bought nor sold. Simon
Magus thought to bie and sell god, Act 8.
and so the Papists made a sale of him, and of all his graces, all went by
money. They had learned this lesson of Judas, Quid vultis mihi dare, and ego
Matthew 26
vobis eum tradam? What will ye give me, and I will deliver him to you? This
lesson was so well conde without book, that there was nothing but money would
fetch it. For money Pope Boniface the third, bought of the tyrant Phocas the
title Platina. Benno Cardin.
of supremacy to his sea of Rome. For silver pope Syluester sold himself to
the dyuel. For fifteen hundred pound Pope Benet the nynth sold his popedom
to Gregorye the sixte. This was somewhat above the price of Christ. For a
thousand ounces of gold Pope Gregory the nynthe assoyled Baleus in ^itis
pont.
the Emperor Frederik. For money the Popes gave pardons for quick and dead, for
many mo thousand years than ever the world shall stand. In so much that by one
pardoner were brought to Leo the tenth to buy the papacy, a hundredth and
twenty thousand Ducates. And John the three and twentieth had gotten before two
hundredth and five thousand ducates. And the Popes ordinary Annates only, were
esteemed yearly to exceed six millions, nine hundred three score and seuentene
thousand and five hundred florens. But what speak I of twenties, of hundreds,
of thousands, or of millions, of ducates, of floreints, of crowns, of nobles,
of angels, of pounds, that they gate by setting up stews, by revenues of
hoores, by licenses of concubines, and a thousand knacks besides: by voyages
and wars of Jerusalem, by dispensations for every kind of mischief, by
setting Princes by the ears, by poisoning of Cardinals, by Bulls, palles,
graces, provisions, pensions, and the devil Abbas Vrspurg.
and all. This made the Abbot of Vrspurge cry out on Rome, Gaude matter nostra
Roma. etc. Rejoice our mother Rome, for the water gates of the tresures in the
earth are opened, that rivers and heaps of money may flow into thee, rejoice
on the wickedness of men: for thou gottest thy money to make a recompense of
all those great mischieues. Rejoice thou at thy helper discord, which is
broken out of the bottomless pit of hell, that many money bribes may come
rolling into thee etc. This is all the rejoicing at Rome. Whereon came the
common proverb, Omnia venalia Romae, al things are sale at Rome. And their own
Friar Mantuan does complain, ^empla, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae:
Libro. ^. calamita.
ignes, thura, preces, coelum, est venale Deusque, Temples, Priests, aultars,
orders, crowns, fires, frankincense, prayers, heaven, yea God and all is
Egloga. ^. in Roman.
saleable. Si quid Roma dabit nugas dabit, accipit au rum verba dat, Heu Romae
nunc sola pecunia regnat, If Rome give ought, it gives naught but toys, at
takes gold, and gives words: Alas now a days, only money bears all
the rule at Rome. Of the which, the Romanists are so insatiable, that no
marvel at the answer of Benet the twelfthe, who being desired to increase
the number of his Cardinals for the greater magnificence of his Court at
Rome: I would glady (quod he) make their number bygger, but I would first
have the world made somewhat bigger, for the world as it is, will scarce
suffice these that be already. These are Priests of Balaams mark, hired with
the reward of wickedness, they have exercised their hearts with
covetousness, cursed children and false prophets, of whom Pe^er prophesied
long ago, that such false teachers should com amongst us, which privily shall
bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord 2. Pet. 2.
that has bought them, and bring upon themselves swi^te damnation, and many
shall follow their damnable ways, by whom the way of truth shall be euel spoken
of, and through covetousness shall they with fained words make merchandise of
you. whose judgments long agone is not far off, and their damnation slepeth
not: Having thus robbed the people for tri^les, and making them believe they
could sell this i^well the son of God unto them. No, it can not be bought
neither for money nor money worth, nor for any thing that manne can give to buy
it. And if it could be bought and sold, the value is so inestimable, that no
man on the whole earth is able to pay for it. For every man was more in debt to
God than he was worth, there was none but ought at the least ten thousand
talentes, and was not worth himself the ground he went* on. Now what a
proud and foolish presumption were this, to attempt to buy so high a
purchase, and himself worse than naught, if every body were paid that he
owes unto, or only Gods debte reckened. Dicis dives sum, and ditatus sum, and
Apoc ^.
nullius egeo, neque nosti te esse aerumnosum and miserabilem and pauperem and
caecum and nud^m, Thou say I am rich, and made welthie, and need of
nothing, and thou know not how thou art wretched and miserable, and poor,
and blind, and naked. This jewel then, canue not be boughte of man, although
it were to be sold of God, as it is not. Let us therefore with Saint Peter,
bid this Popish money monger be packing. Pecunia tua tecum Act. 8.
sit in perdition^m, quoniam donum Dei existimasti pecu^ia possideri. etc. Thy
money (O Papiste) perish with thee, because thou haste thought the gift of
GOD may be got with money, thou haste no part nor fellowshippe in this
business. How had we it then? got we it by strength? Matthew. 1^. Genesis 3.
alas what is weaker than manne, a reed shaken with the wind, dusi^, and
ashes, that may say to corruption, Thou art my father, and to the Job 17. Esa
40.
worm, Thou art my mother. A voice said cry, and he said what shall I cry?
all flesh is grass, and all the glory there of is as the flower of the
field, the grass withers, and the flower fades, because the spirit of the
Lord blows upon it, surely the people is grass, the grass wythe^eth, the
flower fades, but the word of our God shall stand for ever. Manne that is borne
of woman is of short Job. 14.
contynuaunce and full of trouble, he shoo^eth forth as a flower, and is cut
down, he vanishes as a shadow, and continues not. The children of Psalm. 62.
men are but vanity, yea the chiefest men are liars, to lay them upon a
balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity. Uaine is the healpe of man.
Psalm. 10. 107. Ierem. 17
Cursed be he that puts his trust in manne, and makes flesh his arm.
Nothing is weaker to do this feate than man: neither delights God in the
strength of a horse, nor has pleasure in the Psalm. 146 1. Cor. 1. Luc. 1.
legs of man: he chooses the weak things to confound the strong: he puts
the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble and meke: he takes
from the donghil, and sets them equal 1. Reg. 2. Eccli. 33.
to Princes. And even as the clay is in the potters hand, to order it at his
pleasure: so are men also in the hand of their Creator. Then is there no
strength, nor force, nor valor in man, that is able to atchieue and get this
jewel of God: how got we it then, of duty? Nay, by duty as is already
showed, we had deserved to be damned every mothers child. How then did he
bestow it upon us? Dedit says Christ, he gave it, it was his free gift, for
if it were not free, it were no gift: if it were bought, it were no gift: if
it were won, it were no gift: if it were due, it were no gift: but it was a
gift. Non sicut delictum ita and donum, si enim vnius Romans 5.
delicto multi mortui sunt, multo magis gratia Dei and donum in gratia vnius
hominis Jesus Christi in plures abundauit, The gift is not so as the guilt, for
if by the offense of one many be dead, mutche more the grace of God and the
gift by grace which is in Jesus Christ has abounded in many. And therefore
says Christ, Dedit, he gave it, it proceeded altogether of his own mere
voluntary goodness, and grace, and not of any thing in us. For if it had, then
should we have had somewhat to boast upon, Ephesians. ^.
but Non ex operibus ne quis glori^tur, all boastyng is gone, thou have nothing
to crake of thy self, but give all the glory to God the gyuer thereof. Yet
have thou to boast upon, even this gift of God Absit mihi gloriari nisi in
cruce Domini nostri Jesus Gal. 6.
Christi. God forbid (says S. Paul) I should boa^t in ought but in the cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Qui gloriatur, glorietur in domino, He that bosteth,
let him boast in the Lord. Gloriamur in Christo, 1. Cor. ^. Philip ^.
and non in carne fiduciam habentes, We boaste in Christ, and not having trust
in the flesh. This is all our boasting against all our enemies, as for the
world, Non timebo quid mihi faciat homo, I will Psalm (...) Psalm ^.
not fear what man can do unto me. Non timebo millia populi circundantis me,
I will not fear thousands of the people enuironing me: yea death and hell we
dare insult upon it, and say with Paul: Death where is thy sting? Hell where
is thy victory? 1. Cor (...).
How dare we thus provoke them, and bost over these our adversaries? Because
we have peace Romans ^
toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access
through Faith unto this grace, wherein we stand and boast under the hope of the
glory of the sons of God. Glorying in this, that God has given us Christ
his son, Romans 8.
And he that has given us his son? what will he not give us with his
son? Neither has he lent us his son for a time, and then his son to be
taken away again, but Dedit filium, he gave his son. That which is given us is
ours for ever. And this is our exceeding joy, y^ Christ is given unto us. Se
well-beloved this wonderful love of god, for more assurance of both parts betwixt
God and us, how interchangeably this gift is given. God the father has given
us unto Christ. Tui erant (says Christ unto his Father) Et mihi ^os dedisti,
They John. 17.
were thine and thou gave them to me. Then are we Christ's, and Christ will not
l^se one of those that John 6.
his father has given him: then shall we be Christ's for ever, for we are not
lent to Christ, but given to Christ. But ^o again, god has given Christ to
us, Christ is ours, and we are Christ's, we have him, and he has us, we are in
him, and he in us. Even as Christ prayed unto his father for all that the
father gave him. Vt omnes vnum sint, sicut tu pa^ter in John. 17.
me and ego in te etc. That al they may be one as thou (O father) art in me and
I in thee, even that they may be also one in us, that the world may believe that
thou have sent me, and the glory thou gave me I have given them, that they
may be one as we are one, I^n them, and thou in me, that they may be made
perfect in one, and that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have
loved them as thou have loved me: What a joyful state, what a notable gift is
this? Christ rejoices in his gift, let us rejoice in our gift, God
repents him not of his gift, GOD grant us so to keep and enjoy this
gift, that Christ may be ours, and we may be his for ever: And then as God
has given all power to Christ, Sicut dedisti ei potestatem omnis carnis, As
thou O John 17.
Father (says Christ) haste given power of all flesh unto the son, Vt
omne quod dedisti ei det eis vitam aeternam, That all that thou haste given to
him, he may give them eternal life: So says Christ for the assurance of his
good will herein: Pater John. ^7
quos dedisti mihi, volo vt vbi sum ego, and illi sint mecum, vt videant
claritatem meam quam dedisti mihi, Father, those that thou haste given me, I
will that where I am, they be also with me, that they may see the glory thou
haste given unto me. Thus being given to Christ, and Christ to us, he will
be with us till the worlds end, and we again, world without end shall
be Apoc. 13.
with him, and follow the Lamb, and reygne in that everlasting life of
glory, whereof he has made a gloryons purchase for us, and of his free
gift, shall give the same unto us. Thus mutche then also for the third part,
the means that God wrought it by, the efficient and formal cause of our
salvation, Dedit vnigenitum filium suum, He gave his only begotten son, Jesus
Christ our Lord and Savior.

The fourth part.
THE fourth part is of our receipte hereof, whereby, we apply this
effectually to our benefit of Salvation* For, be a gift never so frank,
never so liberal, never so rich in it self, yet if it be not taken, what
avails it to the refuser? Be a plaster never so excellent, if it be not
suffered to be laid to the sore, it heals not. If a medicine have never so
great virtue of helping the sick, if it be not received it recouereth him
not: if meat be never so much a strengthening to the body, if it be not eaten
and disgested in the stomach it norisheth not: If a pardon be never so gracious
and free, if the guilty renounce it, it saves him not: Even so this most
excellent gift of God Jesus Christ, this souerain plaster of our wounds S^pi.
^. Esai 53. 2. Tim. ^. John 6.
by whose stripes we are healed, this physician of our souls that has raised
us from death to life, this bread of life that came down from heaven, that all that eat his flesh and drink his blood should have life everlasting, this
true and only pardoner of all our offenses: If he and his pardon and his meat
and his medicine and his plaster and his gift be refused and not received,
what profit get these refusers by him? Nay, to them he is Lapis offensionis a
stone whereat men stumble, and a rock Psalm. 117. Esa. 28. 1. Pet. 2. Luc 2.
whereat they be offended. Behold this Child (says Simeon) is set to be the
fall and vprising again of many in Israel, and for a sign which is spoken
against. To the Jews offense to the ge^tils folly, To both of them that
refuse him even the savior 2. Cor. 2.
of death to death. So that none but the receauers have these benefits by him.
Who then are the receyuers hereof? Omnis qui credit in eum (says Christ) All
that believe in him. All those that put their trust and confidence not in
themselves, nor in any other thing or person, but only and altogether in him,
that is, in Jesus Christ: those only receive the benefit of this gift. All that believe on him. Here are three special words in the consideration of this
receipt, that would require to be diligently weighed, than time will now permit
me, having ben so large in the other, that I must needs for shame, be brief
in this last part. The first of these three, is this word All, comprehending
the persons, to whom this gift is offered. The second Qui credunt, is a
restraint of this word Al, to them that believe, comprehendyng the persons that
receive it, and the means whereby they take it, that is belief or faith. The
third in eum, shows the person, on whom they should believe, and is the
ground, foundation, form, scope, and direction of their belief.

Of this word All, I have already spoken somewhat, to show how far it
stretches, and how it is restrained. Of it self it is a general word, and
excepteth nothing, but by that which follows it, is straighter laced, and
that with a very precise bounder, whereby so many even at the first choppe, are
quite dashte out, that this word All, is restrained to a marvelous small
number, in comparison of All those that are none of all these, which receive
this benefit. Howbeit because this gift is offered by the preaching of the
word unto all, to all nations, tongs, and people, to all sorts, ages, sexes,
degrees, and all kind of persons what so ever: And that the word of God
being thus generally proclaimed to all, never returns again in vain, (as
God by his prophet Esaias testifies) Esa 55.
but evermore more or less, some receive this gift so freely by the word
offered unto them: and that this some is of all these sorts and kinds of
persons, whose number although to us (as appeateth in the seventh of the
Revelation) it be great Apoc. 7.
and infinite: although to the world and those that tread the broad path, it
be a small number and a very little stock: although to God, small or great,
Matthew. 7. Luc 12. 2. Tim. 2.
it be determinate and appointed, Firmum fundamentu^ Dei stat, habens
signaculu^ hoc, cognouit Dominus qui sunt eius, The sure foundation of God
stands fast* having this seal, the Lord knows who are his: yet because we
are not deuisers of Gods privy council, but voices of criers and proclaimers
of Gods open offer: therefore so far as our commission stretches, we travel
to all, we call all, we preach to all, we teach all, we exhort all, we reprove
all, we labor to win all, we exempt none, we drive away none, we debar it
from none, nor none from it, we bid none despair, but all to trust and believe
in God, and to take this gift thus freely offered to them, whereof we be
appointed the bringers and the offerers, In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum,
their voice (says the Prophet) has Psalm. 18. Rom 10. Esa 3. Rom* 10.
gonouer all the yerthe. not that we know not before that a great many will not
receive it, Domine, quis credidit auditui nostro? Lord, who has believed our
preachings? But we know not who these shall be that will refuse it, nor who
those shall be that shall receive it, we know not who shall be saved, nor who
shall be damned: but this we know, all those shall be saved that believe, and he
that believes not, and so continues, shall be damned. Here there fore follows
the restraint of this word Al, qui credunt, that believe, Wherein is both
declared who shall be saved (only the beleuers) and also the means whereby
they receive their salvation, that is belefe. The nature of this word belefe,
comprehe^deth three things, knowing, acknowledging and trusting: as when I say
I believe in God, I infer by this word believe, first that I think and know
that God is, Credere enim oportet accedentem ad Heb. 11.
Deum quia est, He that comes to God must believe that God is. Secondly I
assente to this my thought and knowledge, and with a firm persuasion,
acknowledge and profess him, whom I so know and think to be. Thirdly, I
trust unto him and with an assured confidence recke^ upon him. Al which this
word belefe, does comprehend. For look how much I want of any of these three
points, so much in deed I do not believe. And therefore the devils that can not
chose but take the first, and all the wicked ones which take the first and the
second, because withal they take not the third, although so farfoorth they
have a belefe, yet fully, rightly, and proprely they can not say they believe:
For where as this word GOD comprehends all power, truth, goodness, grace
and glory, and god makes a promise to me of his grace, goodness, and glory,
I must not only stand on this point that he is power, he is almighty, and he
can perform it: but I must go further, and make my reckening that he is truth
also, and therefore will not break promise, but undoubtedly will perform his
good and gracious promise of his glory to me. which if I do not, I make God a
lier, which is as much as to make god not god, if 1. John. 5.
I do not believe him to be a true God: To believe therefore in God requires al
these three things, and principally the more principal, and wherein I glorify
and honor him, Vt iustificeris in sermonibus tuis, Psalm. 50.
I make him a just and a true God in his sayings and promises: and also benefit
my self thereby, having as it were already in this point of my belefe, that is
my trust and confidence in the promiser, Hebr. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
who is faithful and will not fail me the thing that he promised me, and I
fully reckon upon, and am assured for to have it of him. So says Saint Paul,
we have heaven already, Conuersatio nostra est ^n coelis, Our conversation is
in heaven. Although we be not yet in it, by faith we have it, Propter spem
quae reposita est vobis in coelis, for the Philip 3 Colloss. 1.
hope which is laid up for us in heaven: and Christ in our flesh has taken
possession of it for us. And therefore says S. Paul to the Hebrews, Faith is a
sure ground or confidence, a sound and firm foundation consisting in the
bottom, Hypostasis, a Heb 1^.
substance of things hoped for: and an argument, a certain and infallible
proof, an euidente euiction of things, although they be not seen, yet nothing
doubtyng but with a full assured confidence, that we shall see even as we be
seen, and taste and enjoy the fullness of Gods promise. Thus much propreprely
and fully imports this word belefe.

Now although to repose our selves on the verity of Gods promises be belefe,
yet except this third parcel concur withal, that is in eum, in him, that
our belief rest and settle it self on the promises of God in him, that is in
Jesus Christ, it is no true nor right belefe in god, nor is capable of any the
foresaid benefits. For where as of all the promises of God, this promise is the
ground and principal, that was made in the beginning of the blessed seed,
for Adam and Eve and al their offspring to ground their faith upon, Ipse
conteret caput (...) Genesis 3.
He (that shall come of the woman's sede) shall tread down the serpents head,
the power of Satan: And where as God renewing the same promise to Abraham, when
he first chose him a peculiar people, said to him, In semine tuo benedicentur
omnes nationes, Genesis 26.
All nations shall be blessed in thy seed: and where as all the ceremonies of
the law were but Heb. 10. Gall 3. Deuter. 18*
shadows and figures of him, and the law it self but a schole master to
drive us to him, and Moses by whom the law was given, referred us to an other
prophet, that is to wit, to him: and that in fullness Gall. 4.
of time God performed this his promise, and sent him into the world, and sent
us only to him, Matthew. ^
Hunc audite, here him: and all the favor and graces of God, all the
forgiveness, reconciliation, and redemption of man, comes by him: and there
is none other name whereby we may be saved, but in the Actor. 4. Act. 10.
name of him, and all the Prophets bear witness unto him. Therefore the ground
of this our knowledge and acknowledging, of this our assent and persuasion, of
this our assurance and confidence that we have in god, is only, wholly, and
altogether, reposed grounded and as^ied on him, that in him, and for him, and
by him, and only him, we are elected, predestinate and written in the book of
life: we receive the love and favor, and all the gracious gifts of God: we
are delivered from perdition, and shall John. 3.
have eternal life. And he that believes not in him, the wrath of God abides
on him, and is already judged, because he believed not on the only son of God and
even this is his judgment, that light came into John. 3.
the world and the world loved darkness more than light. And here we see what
is the means whereby the elect of God receive this benefit, belefe in him, and
why the wicked shall be damned, not for their wickedness so much as for their
infidelity. For when the holy ghost shall come (says Christ) to confirm the
godly, he shall reprove the world of sin. John. 16.
Of sin, even for that it has not believed on me. For if they had believed on
him, all their sins had been covered from the face of Gods justice, neither had
their sins but the righteousness of Christ ben imputed to them, and then had
they as David says, ben blessed. Beatus ^ui dominus no^ imputauit peccatu^,
Romans 4. Psalm 31. Sapient. 5. Matthew. 13.
And this is the reason, that the godly shall stand upright in judgment, and
shine as the sun, not any godliness of their own in them, but because they
believed in him, by which belefe they received Christ into them, and so the
righteousness of Christ does shine in them, because he is by faith in them,
and they in him. These then only receive this benefit, all they that believe in
him. Here first are excluded and quite cut of, all the heathen, all the Turks,
and all the Jews from this benefit, that refuse to believe in him. Neither can
it avail the Turks to allege that they profess and believe in one living and
eternal GOD, creator of heaven and earth: For he that will believe in this god,
must believe in him, in such form as he has taught him how to believe, and not
as he will him self believe, for that is no belefe. In vanu^ colu^t me, docentes
doctrinas Esa. 29. Mar. 7.
and praecepta hominu^, They worship me in vain (says god) teching the
doctrins and precepts of men But what a belefe is that in God, that will not be
leave the very voice of God, that openly not privily, aloude not like a Priest
in his Meme^to, did manyfestly sownd out this most comfortable voice from
Matthew. 3.
heaven, This is my wellbeloued son in whom I am well pleased, here him. Now,
if they will believe God, in whom they say they believe, the^ must they here what
Jesus Christ says to them, who plainly proves him self the son of God, and
that none knows the son but the father, nor the father but Luc. 10.
the son, and he to whom the son will reuele the father. John. 14. John* 10*
And that he is in the father and the father is in him: and he and the father
are one. This must he here of Christ, and believe in him. And if he will not
John. 10.
believe for ye words he spoke, let him believe for the works he did. These
arguments serve also against the Jew, y^ simply denies not Christ as does the
Turk, but denies Jesus the son of the virgin Ma ry to be Christ, and looks
for Christ yet to com. But the law and Prophets that he admits clean con
fute him, and yet of a blind zeal and obstinate defense of his auncesters
wicked murder of Christ he still denies him. And therefore he has no part in
this business, till God shall call him to the knowledge and faith of his son,
Reliquiae tamen saluabu^tur, Romans 9.
we trust God will call the remnant of them. And as Jews and Turks that believe
not in him, receive not this benefit by him, so, no hereti^s that believe not
aright in Christ. For not to believe aright, is not to believe at al: A false
belefe is no belief, for God is true, and it must be true, that must have
true salvation.

Here the Papists cry out to the simple people, that we be heretics that teach
this doctrine, but till they can prove this doctrine heresy, or any other that
we teach, it will be hard for them to prove us to be heretics. In the mean
season thus mutche we are able to prove against them, that they are none of
these Qui credu^t in eum that believe in him. But by what name they may be
called that are neither heathen, Turks, nor Jews, neither believe on Christ,
and yet prete^de to believe upon him, by what name these may be called besides
heretics, mainteining their not belefe in him so obstinatly as they do, let
other give them other names, I know not what else to call them.

Now if I prove not this, that they believe not in Jesus Christ (always I
presuppose a true and right belefe, for else it must follow they be heretics)
then hardely let the Papist say or think, that I do him open wrong and fowly
sclander him. Here I let go that I have already proved against him, which were
inoughe and more than enough, to prove he has no true faith in Jesus Christ,
that would so order him: But besides al those errors, doctrines and abuses,
thus I prove it: To believe in other creatures besides him, is not to believe in
him: But the Papists believe in other creaturs besides him: Ergo, they believe
not in him. The argument is evident, and then the conclusion must needs follow,
except the Papist can improve any one of the premises, or any part thereof. If
he deny the Minor, that the Papists believe in other creatures besides him, and
cry out I sclaunder him in his this saying: and that how fowly soever
otherwise he erred, yet he kept the head sure, and always believed only in God:
How shall I know the certeintie of this? I would it were so for his own sake,
and that I lied on him herein. But what? shall I trust his false faith? there
is little hold in it, although he had sworn it, and written it, and sealed
it. Example their faith to John Husse, and their general rule, Nulla fides
haereticis est habenda, No faith must be kept with heretics. And he before
hand judging me an heretic, and protesting to be false unto me, how shall I
believe him? neither will he believe me, and both he and I are parties. Let then
an indifferent judge be vmper to see whether they believe in any other creatures
besides Jesus Christ or no. Why, who can judge the heart but God? that is
true, where the heart shows no outward declaration, but Ex fructibus eorum
cognoscetis Matthew. 8.
eos, By their fruits (says Christ) ye shall know them: belefe can not be
hidden: Credidi prop Psalm. 115.
ter Quam locutus sum, I believed, and therefore I spoke says David. S. Paul
then, (except the papist will refuse him,) shall be this vmpier, that makes this
question of the effects of faith: Quomodo ergo 2. Cor 4.
inuocabunt in quem non crediderunt? How then shall they call upon him in whom
they have not believed? As who should say, if they had not believed in God, they
would not have made invocation on him: But they have made invocation on him, and
therefore it must needs follow that they believed in him, For how could they have
called upon him on whom they believed not? And this rule of S Paul is a
general rule in all belefes. For ensample, how shall I know a Gentiles belefe.
Mark the Gentiles invocation: He makes invocation to Jupiter, Juno, Mars,
Venus, Mercury, and such other idols: Ergo he believes in them. How shall I
know a Turks and Saracens faith? mark his invocation: he makes invocation
to Mahomet, Ergo he believes in Mahomet. How shall I know the Indians faith at
Calecute? mark his invocation. He makes invocation to the devil inthronized
and crowned like the Pope, it follows then he believes in the devil. How
shall I know the faith of the wyld heathens and savage pagans in Scythia
Africa and America? mark their inuocations, they inuocated the Sun, the moon,
the stars, beasts, birds, fishes, serpents, and such like, it follows the^
they did believe in them. And even so to know a papists faith, mark a papists
invocation. He makes invocation to Saints, Ergo the Papist believes in
Saints: but to believe in Saints, is to believe increatures besides Christ,
therefore he believes not in God only, as he said he did. Now if he deny the
mayor of my argument, which was this, to believe in other besides him is not to
believe in him, and affirm that he does and may believe in both, but
principally in him, and secondely in Saints: then press I him with this
sayng of Christ, Qui credunt in eum, not in eos: they that believe in him, not
they that believe in them: But the Papists credunt in eos, they believe in
them, therefore Non credunt in eu^, they believe not in him. neither is this
emphasis that Christ here uses of the singular number, to be slightly passed
over: for even with the like observation S. Paul does press upon the Jews,
GOD had promised Genesis 26.
unto Abraham, that in his seed all Nations should be blessed. The Jews,
although they referred this to the Messiah in especial, as the Papists
pretend to believe on Christ in especial, yet as the Papists will believe
on all their Saints besides, so the Jews referred this to all their whole
stock and nation besides. But Saint Paul lets not siyppe the promise so,
but very earnestely urges the word, whereon he proves Christ to be that
promised seed, Abrahae dictae sunt promissiones and semini Galat. 3.
eius, non dicit, and seminibus, quasi in multis, sed quasi in vno, and semini
tuo, qui est Christus, Unto Abraham (says Saint Paul) were the promyses
spoken, and to his seed, he says not, and to his seeds, as though it were
to many, but as in one, and to thy seed which is CHRIST. Thus confuted he
the Jews, and even so shall we confute the Papists, that no less take away
the belief of Christ than did the Jews, but still urge them with this
saying of Christ, Qui credunt in eum, not in eos, They that believe in him,
not in them: and ye shall quyte confound them: nor all the Papists in the
world, (well may they champe on the bridle, and wrangle, after their confuse
manner) but they shall never be able to answer directly to this one argument,
that euidentely proves them not to believe in God, nor to be any partakers of
this benefit, except they forsake their invocation with their other errors,
only believe in him. And although here the Papist might be clean rejected as
none of the household of faith, yet because he quarelleth Gal. 3.
also in this part: of receiving this gift of God by faith, and can not abide
that we should ascribe the receipt hereof to faith, let us hear what he has
to say against it. But first note, that all his drift is against faith: And
the controversy of faith, is the matter, that of al other he can not abide.
And why is he such an enemy unto faith? because he himself has no faith,
but always doubts and hangs between despair and hope. For as Scientia non
habet inimicos, nisi ignorantes, Science has no enemies but those that know
it not, so the Papiste is the enemy of faith, because he knows ^ot what
faith is. First he is offended that Faith should be so extolled before all
other virtues, and would have love more principally required, and cries out
that by this doctrine, charity is waxen very cold, and almost clean
extinguished. But this is not that the Papist has such liking of love and
charity, except it be as is aforesaid S. Francis charity, that he loves his
Popes courtizans more than he believes in God, and therefore would have love be
set before belief: As for that charity that does good to her enemies, and so
heapeth burning coals upon their heads, rather than the Papists Romans 12.
would seem to want it, they will not cast ashes in our eyes, as did Pope
Bonifacius the eight on Ash wednesday to Porchetto archbishop of Genua, nor
only heap very burning coals upon our heads, but cover all our bodies
with faggots also, and burn us clean to ashes, so fervent hot is their
charity against us, or rather their boiling hatred and envy that they bear
us, and do these murderers so vaunt of love, and lament the decay of charity.
This is even as the thief, that having robbed a poor man, asked him if he had
any more, the poor man denied it, but when the thief serching him further,
found somewhat more than the poor man thought had been about him: Ha good
Lord (quod the thief) what a hard world is this, whom shall a man trust now a
days? And even so the Papists spoil and murder, with all kind of most
barbarous cruelty, the poor professers of the Gospel and faith of Christ,
and yet they cry out, Ha good God, where is charity, where is charity? What a
hard and uncharitable world is this? It is not charity therefore that the
Papiste reckeneth on, though he use the name of charity to bleare the simple
people withal: for rather than he would lose one jot of his advantage, or the
pope one title or inche of his honor, he cares not and all the world were
together by the ears, yea he will clap them on the back, and set them to it,
as at this day he does. This then is not charity, but under the name of
charity, he means man's works, because charity is the bond wherewith
they are all tied, and so are all comprehended under the name of charity: and
therefore says he, charity is the principal, by the preparatiue works
whereof we receive even faith it self. But herein he lies, we receive not
faith by the preparation of any works, but whatsoever work springs not out
of faith, the same work how glorious soever it seem, is nothing else but sin.
Quicquid non est exfide peccatum est, Whatsoever is not of Romans 14.
faith, is sin: mark this word ex, of, if it be not of it, if it come not
out of it, it is sin. then faith goth before all other things in this matter
of justification, and so faith is the principal thing and root of all: Yea not
only the principal, but in this matter, faith only, and that without works
does it. And here again, the Papist is more offended than before, that faith
is made the only means of receiving this benefit. What (says he) and
nothing but faith? No (say I) Christ mencioneth here nothing but faith. Qui
credit in eum, He that believes Mar 9. Matthew. 8. Matthew. 15. Matthew 18. Luc 7.
John. 3.
in him. Si potes credere, If thou could believe says Christ, all things are
possible to him that believes. Confide fili, tantum creed, only believe. Be it
unto you acording to your faith, Fides tua te saluum fecit, fides tua te saluam
fecit, Thy faith (says Christ) has saved thee: Qui credit in filium habet
vitam aeternam, He that believes in the son, has life everlasting, John 17.
and this is life everlasting (says Christ) to believe thee to be the true God,
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. And therefore say we with Jesus Act. 15.
Gal. 3. Abac. 2. Romans 1. Gal. 3. Rom 10. 1. Tim. 1.
Christ, we receive this benefit even only by faith in him: By faith (says S.
Paul) our hearts be purified, by faith the just man lives, by faith we are all the sonns of God, even because we believed in Jesus Christ, by faith with the
heart we believe to righteousness. By faith were all those benefits wrought
that S. Paul to the Hebrews reckeneth up. We Hebr. (...).
conclude therefore with Saint Paul, as he concludes with Jesus Christ, that
we receive this benefit only by faith in him. What by bare and naked faith
says the Papiste, without all manner of works? Says not saint James, show me
thy Iac ^.
faith by thy works? True it is he does so, and that rightly. Neither are we
against it, that faith show it self by works, but rather they, that dare not
let their works come to the light and show of the word of God, least the word
should reprove their works, and show them to be but works of darkness, to be
their own devises, and not any such good works at all, as they to the simple
do crake upon. For the trial of this they shun the light* and therefore it
is a good argument of our (...) Christ against their works that they be
naught. John. 3.
Qui male agit, odit lucem, nec venit ad lucem, ne arguantur opera eius, He
that do the evil, hates the light, and comes not to the light least his
works should be reproved. Whereas therefore faith should be showed forth by
works, even by this argument of S. James Ex effectibus fidei, of the effects
and and works of faith, besides the forlayd argument of Saint Paul, are they
again consuted to to have no Faith. For where they not only do the works
of darkness, but openly defend and maynteyne them, as the sitting up of
stews and brothell houses, and that even under their own Popes nose: And this
is a ruled case of Christ, A Matthew 7.
good tree can not bring forth evil fruit: Then surely if they were true
beleuers on Jesus Christ, they could not maintain and defend such
wickedness, which is a thousand parts worse than the doing ^. Ion. 3.
of it. But as S. John says, In hoc manifesti sunt filij dei and filij
diaboli, In this is manifest who are the sons of God, and who are the sons of
the devil. The sons of God do sin, but it is of infirmity, but to
maynteyn their sinful work, is the very declaration of the child of Satan.
Oh (say they) we mainteyne it not as good, but confess it to be evil,
howebeit we maynteyne it to drive away a greater evil. But says S Paul, Non
faciamus Romans 5.
malum vt inde eueniat bonum. Let us not do evil that good may come of it. For
it follows, Quorum damnatio iusta est, Whose damnation is just. Now if they
shall justly be damned that will do evil, that good may come thereon, shall
they escape more just damnation, that will do evil, not that so much as good
may come thereon by their own confession, but only the avoiding of a greater
evil, and yet that is no necessary avoiding of it neither. Now if these evil
doers shall be damned, and no true beleuers shall be damned, then are the
Papists no true beleuers: much less (were they not extreme impudent) can
they boast of works, that maynteine such open wickedness. But they will say,
they boast not of this (as in deed they have little cause, and might more
honestly seek fygge leaves to hyde their shame therein) but they have infinite
other works to show their faith by, and that I do them injury, they
vpbrayding want of worls to us, to show our faith by, and we to stand in
examining of their works, to improve thereby their faith: but I cry them
mercy, I will no further rippe up their evil works, but be content for this
once to have showed this one evil herb, that I think is able to mar all
their pot of porrage, (For I tell ye it is Mors in olla, Death in the porrage
pot, and that no less tha^ damnation) 4. Reg. 4.
had they twenty good herbs besides. But let them do now as mutche for us
hardily and spare not, and lay in our dishe so much as but one like fault. I
speak not this as though we were without fault, we are sinners and grievous
sinners, the iustest of us all: and if we should say, we had 1. Ioh ^.
no sin, we should deceive our selves, and there were no truth in us. This
do the Papists that say, they can do all that God commanded, but God
commanded not to sin, and therefore in saying they can fulfill the
commandments of GOD, what do they say, but that they can be without sin?
Which the proud Pharisey vaunted of, Luc. 18.
that he was not a sinner as other men. We sin even with the Publican, but
with the publican we are sorry for, and repent us of our sin. But name me one
work that God forbids and we bid, defend and mainteyne the same: one
good work that god bids, and we forbid, oppugn, and write against the
same. This we have named in them, neither shall they be ever able to name the
like in us. But what need we name (say they) any particular vice publicly
defended of you, when this only doctrine takes away all good works. For if I
be justified only by faith, what need I do any good works, are they not all
clean taken away? No forsooth are they not taken away at all, because they be
removed from the article of Justification, the works remayn, and that as
necessarily to be done as before is showed, but they be not set in the place
where the papists would have them placed, in this article of receauyng
Justification, where only faith consists. Why then (say they) ye turn faith
out of her clothes, if ye take works from her, ye leave her naked, and does a
naked and bare faith justify us? In deed works are the clothes of faith,
and serve as clothes do deck and set this lady out, but as the body was
before the clothes, and without the clothes, and is of an other substance than
the clothes, so was faith before works, and is borne of God as naked as my
nail, in respect of any merit of works, either preceding or concurring. And
thus was always faith pictured, Nuda fides, a naked faith: But not so, but
that she is clad straight ways, with the fruits of the spirit, and the
ornaments of al good works: but it is not her apparel that sets her Heb. 4.
out to God. Omnia nuda sunt and aperta oculis eius, All things are naked and
open to his eyes. But her apparel sets her out to man. And so says S. James
being a man, Show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith
by my works. Therefore works serve to show forth faith to them that can not
see but by outward showing, and so justifies one man before an other,
declares unto me, y^ such an one is justified: and not to justify him before
God, who sees the things not seen. Nec iuxta intuitu^ hominis ego iudico.
Homo enim videt ^. Reg. 16.
ea quae pare^t, Dominus aute^ intuetur cor, Neither do I judge (says God)
after the sight of man, for man sees those things that appear, but the Lord
beholds the heart. He looks on the faith hidden within. Domine, oculi tui
fidem recipient, says Ierem. 5.
Jeremy, O Lord, thy eyes look upon the faith. Cord creditur ad iustitiam,
says S. Paul, with Romans 10. Hebr. 11.
the heart we believe to righteousness: Fides est argumentum non
apparentium, Faith is an argument of things that appear not: But works must
appear, Sic luceat lux vestra, Let your light so Matthew. 5.
shine before men, that they may se your good works. And therefore works of S.
James are called Iac. 3. Phil. 1. Gal. 5.
Fructus iustitiae, the fruits of rightousnesse, fructus spiritus, the fruits
of the spirit. The fruits of the tree, are not the cause of the trees juice
and sap, but the juice and sap is the cause of the trees fruits, The fruits are
not the cause that the tree lives, but the sap and juice is cause of the
trees life. The tree has not fruit before it has sap and juice, nor yet
has fruit in receiving sap and juice: But after it has received sap and
juice, then in due time it brings forth his fruit. And very well herein
does the scripture in diverse places liken a justified manne to a good and
fruitful tree: for first (says Christ) the tree must be Matthew. 12. Psalm.
1.
made good: it must be planted (says David) by the water side to take his
juice. We must (says Saint Paul) be grafted in Christ, and his Romans 6. Iac.
^. John. 1^.
word (says Saint James) be ingrafted in us. We must be branches of
the true Uine, we must have his sap and juice in us first, and this is our
faith in him, and our life in us, or ever we can bring forth our fruit. Now
being thus replenished with the most sweet juice of faith, it is not more
impossible for a tree to be fruit less, tha^ it is for a faithful man to be
without good works. We do not say therefore faith is without good works, for
good works immediately follow faith, and wait upon her, as their maistresse, at
an inche, and be always attendant on the bidding and beck of faith, to do
whatsoever she comaundeth them: but the maistresse is one, and the maiden is an
other: only we deny, that the handmaiden intermedleth in this high matter of
Justification, which is alone between God and us and faith, she only on our
part makes up the spousall betwixt Christ and us, Desponsabo te mihi fide,
I Osee. 2.
will (says Christ) espouse thee to me by faith: faith shall join our hands
together. A saucie Iill were that handmayden, that would intrude her self in
to her mistresses privilege. This then belongs to faith alone, to receive
this benefit at gods hands, and to nothing but only faith, for she alone can
fully do it. Why then says the Papist, what should let but that the devil
may be saved, and that the devil may do good also, and so be no more the
devil, that was a lier and murderer from John. 8.
the beginning. For the devils have faith, Daemones credunt, (says S. James)
the devils believe. Iac. 2.
The devil in deed was a lier from the beginning, and a murderer, Et qui
facit peccatum ex diabolo 1. John. 3.
est, He y^ wilfully and maliciously commits and maynteineth these sins,
is even a limme of the devil. But how the Papists legende or rather legion of
lies, will euicte them to be wilful mainteyne^s of lies, let them look to
it, as for their murders all the world does ring of them, and openly cry with
Christ, Vos estis ex patre vestro diabolo, ye are even John. 8.
of your father the deuell. And as this is an argument against the deuell, that
he has not faith: Even so is it an argument against them, that they have no
faith neither. And where in the devils defense they reply that the devil
believes, this argues not that he has the true and right belefe: No say they?
Did not he cry out to Christ, that he Matthew. 8. Mar. 3. Luc 4.
was the holy one and son of the living God? Here was belefe and profession of
it, and the thing that they professed to believe, is true: What will they gather
hereon? that saying of the Apostle, If we confess Romans 10.
with our mouth the lord Jesus Christ, and believe in our heart that God raised
him from death we shallbe safe? Do they think the devil believes on this
fashion? They show themselves earnest proctors for the deuell, but the deuell
has no true faith for all that he so said, nor they his proctoures neither,
though they confess Christ, and think him to be the son of God even as
mutche as did the deuel: although their works show the contrary, that they
think him not so mutche to be Christ as the deuels did think him for to be.
For if they did, they would at least have that the dyuels have with all, a
fear and trembling at him, they would fear so shamfully to abuse him as they
do: For saint James joins these two things together in the devils, Daemones
credunt and contremis^unt, Iac. ^.
The devils believe and tremble. Which later word of horror and fear, having
hatred joined withal, (Quem metuu^t oderu^t, whom they fear they hate him)
this the Papists leave out: As the devil alleging scripture to Christ, left
out the best part of it, and hacked and hewed the sentence, as the Papists
mangled the word of God in piece meal, and dare not set it out whole, as God
has set it out. This therefore shewethe they have no more faith tha^ the devil
has. Yea they know not what faith does mean. For as already is said, belief
is not only a knowledge, nor an acknowledging of Christ, whereby we verily
think him to be the son of God and savior of the world, and approve this our
thought with assent thereunto, alowing it so to be: But also it is a steadfast
confidence and trust in him, apprehe^ding him, and applying him to us. And this
thing, which is the principal thing in belefe, the devils have not, nor can
not have. They have the first part, of knowledge: and a show they made here of
the second, that is acknowledging: But the third and especial thing in
belefe, a trusty confidence in him, they had not: Which if they had had, they
would have fled unto him, and have caught hold on him, but they feared and
hated him, and therefore with trembing fled from him: Now this third thing in
faith, which is principally to be reckened upon, the Papist considers not:
And this is the cause why he so staggereth in a continual doubt, whether he
shall be saved with Christ, or he shall be damned with the devil, and feling
this continual trembling in himself, (for who would not tremble standing in
this perplexity) And hearing that the devils tremble also in their belefe, he
concludes, that belefe is no more but a fyrme opinion of a thing so to be, and
at the most a trembling assent thereunto. And therefore says the Papist the
devil has faith. But seeing withal, the devils apparent condemnation, that
he is not nor can be justified, he concludethe hereon, that only faith
justifies not, for if it did the devil were justified. Then reasons he, if
faith be not able to justify, we must seek help of good works to justify
us, which good works the devil has not. Now, seeking to be justified by
works, he is entered into such a laborsom mase and infinite labyrinthe, that
he is never able to wind him self out, to sit down and rest him in a quiet
conscience, and persuade him self that he is already justified. For how can he
thus quiet himself, seeking justification by works, when he hears Christ
say, When ye have done all Luc. 17.
that ye can do, ye are unprofitable servants, and he feelethe still in him
self many doubts and mutche imperfection: And therefore he makes a
general resolution, that we can never attain to any certainty, whether we
be justified or no, and so ought continually to hang in a doubt thereof, and
that it suffyseth us in the mean space, to recomforte our selves with a
general belief, that some shall be saved, but whether we shall be saved or
no, that we still stand in doubt of, say the Papists. Thus blyndely,
myserablye, and infinitely they run from one error to an other, for Ex
quolibet se quitur quodlibet, Grannte one falshoode, and a number will follow:
and all comes of this, that boasting of faith, theyknow not what faith
means. And so, contending with us about faith, they bewray them selves that
they have no faith, but instead of faith, mayntein plain infidelity. That
which Christ flatly reproves, O ye of little faith, in respect that they
douted, that Matthew. 6.
do they allow for good and necessary. That which made Peter to sink and
cry for help, they crake Matthew. 14.
they swim safely, and hold up themselves by the chinne therein. This argues
says Saint James (whom they allege for their devils faith) that they them
selves have no true faith in God, nor shall obtain any thing at his hands. For
says he, Postulet in fide nihil haesitans, qui enim haesitat Iacobi. ^.
similis est fluctui maris, non enim existimet homo ille Quam accipiat aliquid
a domino, Let him ask of the lord in faith doubting nothing at all, for he
that doubts, is tossed of the wind, and carried away like a wave of the sea.
Neither let that man think that he shall receive any thing of the lord. For a
wavering minded man is unstable in all his ways. By this popish doctrine then,
we shall obteyn nothing at the hands of God, least of all salvation, which
above all there things we ought to pray for, if we doubt of Gods promises
therein, we shall never be partakers of it. But the Papists defend we must
continually doubt thereof, let not those Papists therefore think, that they
shall receive any goodness, no not faith, or any grace of god, or wisdom, where
of S. James did speak, left of all that ever they shall be saved, but ever be
faithless, graceless, godless, frutelesse, hopeless and all, even because
they ever doubt in God, and call in question the verity of his promises,
which is plain to deface them, and to make him a lier like them selves, as
says S. John, Qui non credit deo mendacem facit eum, 1. John. 5.
He that believes not GOD makes him a lier: and so much the greater lier do
they make him, as God has bound him self by an oath, and therefore says S.
Paul, When God made promise to Abraham, because he had no greter to svvere
by, he swear by him Heb 6.
self. etc. So, God vvilling more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
promise the stablensse of his council, bownd him self by an oath, by two
immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie, that we might
have strong consolation, which have our refuge to hold fast the hope that is
set before us, which we have as an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast:
Ideo ex fide says S. Paul, Therefore it is of faith, that it might come by
grace, and the promise might be sure to all the seed, not to that only which
is of the Romans 4.
law, but also to that seed which is of the faith of Abraham who is the
father of all, as it is written, I have made thee a father of many nations
before God, whom he believed, who quickens the dead, and calls those
things which be not, as though they were, which Abraham above hope believed
in hope, that he should be the father of many nations, according to that which
was spoken, even so shall thy seed be as the stars of heaven and the sands of
the sea, and he fainted not in faith, nor yet considered his own body, which
was now dead, being almost an hundred years old, neither yet that Sara was
past child bearyng, he staggered not at the promise of God thorough unbelief,
but was strengthened in faith, and gave glory to God, being full assured, that
he which had promised was able to do it, and therefore it was imputed to him
for righteousness, nevertheless it is not written for him only, that it was
reckned to him for righteousness, but also for us to whom it shall be imputed
for righteousness, so that we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord
from the dead, who was delivered to death for our sins, and rose again for
our justification. Thus S. Paul most pithyly expresses the nature of true
faith, most contrary to the Papists wavering doubt, and their general
houeryng in the air of an opinion knowing and acknowledging such a thing to
be: but true faith is a steadfast and confident application thereof to our
selves, whereby we may be able to say unto Christ with Thomas, Dominus meus and
Deus meus, My Lord and my John. 20. Psalm 26.
my God: To say with David, Dominus salus mea quem timebo, The Lord is my
salvation, whom Psalm. 30.
shall I be afraid of? In te Domine speraui, non confundar in aeternum, In
thee Lord have I trusted, I shall never be confounded. The Papists call this
a bold presumption, but God grant us to presume on this fashion, as says S.
Bernard, Ego fidenter quod ex me mihi deest vsurpo ex visceribus Bernardus in
cantica sermon 61.
Domini, quonia^ misericordia affluunt nec desunt foramina per quae efflua^t,
That that I have not of my self, I will boldly usurp of the bowels of the
Lord, for because they flow in mercy, neither want they holes whereout they
flow. This boldness and usurpation, is a good presumption. It is a firm faith
that shall stand like mount Sion, and nor Psalm. 124 Matthew. 7. Matthew. 16.
be moved. It is buylt on the rock that no tempest (...) ouertur^e, and not on
the sands of men's works, that every doubtefull wave shall toss and shatter
it, no, the gates of hell shall not prevail against this faith, Si ambulauero
in medio vmbrae Psalm. 22.
mortis, If I walk in the middle of the shadow of death, I will not fear,
for thou art with me, says David, And therefore says S. Paul, Iustificati ex
fide pacem habeamus erga Deum, Being justified by faith, let us have peace (not
doubt) to Godwarde, let us assure our selves of the love and favor of God.
Qui credit in filium, habet testimoniu^ 1. John. 5.
in seipso, He that believes in the son, has the witness in himself. For
when you believed (says S. Ephesians. 1.
Paul) you were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest
of our inheritance. So Ephesians. 3.
that we have boldness and entrance with the confidence which is by faith on
him. Nolite itaque amittere Heb. 10.
confidentiam, Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has a great
recompense of reward. This is the trust that we have in him, that if we ask
1. John. 5.
any thing according to his will, he hears us. And if we know that he hear
us, whatsoever we ask, we know we have the petitions that we desire of him.
This is no devils faith, never a devil in hell can do this: Neither is this y^
faith of those wicked ones that are his members, howsoever they vainly crake of
that they have not: neither is this the papists faith, by the papists own
profession, that he must still wave in suspe^ce and ha^g in doubt: but this is
the faith of all those y^ shall receive eternal life. These 1 John. 5.
things (says S. John) have I written to you, that believe in the name of the
son of God. (Not that ye should hang in doubt) but that ye should know how
that ye have eternal life: That ye have it (says he) not that ye may have
it, and may go with it, but ye have it for (said he) immediately before, He
that has the son has life, and he that has not the son of God, has
not life: Such is the virtue of true belefe and faith, that he has already
life in true assurance, because he has him assuredly the which is truth and
life: Well (says the Papist) for all this heauing and shouing ye shall not
have all your will, we have yet then at the least one good quality and virtue
which shall save us, and that is even our faith if ye will admit no more. But
here the Papists begin to cauell and wra^gle, which is a sign they draw to the
last cast. For they know well enough, where the scripture thus ascribes
justifying and salvation to faith, that it takes not faith in that respect,
that it is any quality or habit in us, no not infused of God, nor any virtue
theological, nor yet any action of the mind: But only in respect of the
relation that it has to Jesus Christ, to grace, to the mercies, to the
promises, and to the gift of God: God is all in all, the gift Christ is only my
justification, but because the feet wherewith we com unto it, is faith, We are
brought in (says S. Paul) Through faith Romans 5. 2. Cor. 1. and. 5.
into this grace wherein we stand, Nam fide statis. By faith we stand. Per fidem
ambulamus, with the feet of faith we walk to the mount of God: Because the
eye whereby I look on Christ is faith, Abraham John. 8.
vidit diem meu^, Abraham saw my day (says Christ) with the eye of faith:
Because the hand whereby I receive it is faith, Quotquot receperunt John 1.
eum: So many as received him, even those that believe in his name he gave them
power to be the sons of God, by which hand God guided the Isralites, Apprehendi
manum eorum vt edueerem eos e Heb. 8. 1. Tim. 6.
terra Aegipti, I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of
Aegipt, And by which hand we take hold on heaven, Apprehende vitam aeternam,
Romans 10. Ephesians. 3.
Take hold fast on eternal life with this hand of faith: Because the heart
wherein I keep it is faith, Cord creditur, with the heart we believe, and he
dwells in the heart by faith, Because all these things are ascribed to
faith: Therefore the scripture says, that faith does iustisie us, when Christ
does justify us, because by faith I receive Christ, which is my
justification. This I do not by my works, but by my faith, therefore I say
with S. Paul, Faith justifies without works, that is, faith only applies
the mercies and merits of Jesus Romans 3. and 4
Christ freely offered unto me, without any preparation or merit at all of
mine. And thus does S. Paul plainly expound him self in the second chapter
to the Ephesians. Ye are saved by grace Ephesians. ^.
through faith, and that not of your selves, for it is the gift of God, it
comme the not of works, lest any man should boast him self. For we are his
workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained
that we should walk in them. Here is first set down the state of justification
how we be saved. Works are excluded from this matter, yea our selves and all,
as any cause hereof. The reason is alleged, least we should boast our selves.
and so all the glory should not rede^nde to God: Then do they deface Gods
glory and beast themselves, that put works, or any thing in them selves, in
the cause of justification. The only (...) is here made grace, and least we
should think any part of this grace to be in us, that is debarred also, and
grace is pronounced to be the only gift of God. Then is the mean showed whereby
we receive this justification through faith says he, here again works are
left clean out, and only faith is mentioned: And thus is our justification
wrought: which done, then begins S. Paul to deal with good works, and
shows the end and ordinance of them, not to be our justifying, or our
meriting, but only to walk in them. And shows withal, what good works are,
such as God has ordained in Jesus Christ, and not our own traditions. And so
in short and most pithy words, knitteth up all this controversy. Now if the
Papist require to be further satisfied, where S. Paul has said we are saved
by grace, how it is wrought by grace, least he should mistake grace for the
good gifts that God has given us thinking by them for to be saved S. Paul
with the like pithe and brevity, in the fourth of the Romans, declares all
the circumstance to him how it is wrought. To him that works Romans 4.
not (says he) but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
accounetd for rightousnesse even as david declares the blessedness of the man
unto whom God imputes righteousness with out works saying blessed are those
whose iniquities are forgeuen and whose sins are covered, blessed is the man
to whom the lord imputes not sin. The party justifying is God, the party
justified is the ungodly man, the ungodly manne has no godly works, how then
shall he be justified? God offers his promise of justification in Christ
his son, the ungodly man and destitute of all godly works believes Gods
promise, straight is this man accepted before God for righteouse. Why, he has
no righteousness in him. What though? he is accepted for righteous. He is
altogether ungodly. What of that? All his ungodliness is clean covered,
neither shall any point thereof be laid to his charge, even as though he had
none at al: And this is blessedness and grace, that that goodness he has
not, is imputed to him, even as though he had it: And that wickedness that
he has* is not imputed to him, but covered as though he had it not, and so
is suddenly transformed into another man. Who is able to do so strange and
miraculous a work? the iustifier. Who is that? GOD. Doothe God justify the
ungodly? Esa. 5.
Does not God say, Woe be to them that make evil good etc. and that justify
the wicked? True, he says so of them, and woorthyly, that approve that for
good, which is evil: but this manne is not now evil, but was evil, and of
evil is made good. And therefore, woe again to them that make good evil: Why
what goodness has he to make him good? Forsoothe even the greateste
goodness that can be devised or wyshed for, and that is even the Son of GOD
himself. That is goodness enough. But what has he to do with that? Christ's
righteousness is not his ryghteous nesse. Yes (says the sinner) though that
I have none of mine own, I have Christ's. He is my righteousness, that I
might be made the 1. Cor. 1. 2. Cor 5.
righteousness of God, because I have put on Jesus Christ. because I have
received him by faith, and so with him his righteousness is in me. And he and
his righteousness being in me, though I be ^al. 2.
of my self a sinner. Iam non ego, viuit vero in me Christus, quod autem nunc
viuo in carne, in fide viuo filij Dei qui dilexit me, and tradidit semetipsum
pro me, Now it is not I, but Christ does live in me, as for that I now live,
I live in the faith of the son of God that loved me, and gave himself for
me. Why, is thy faith of such virtue then to work this matter? No, my faith
only apprehends Christ, that is my righteousness, and God of his favorable
mercy, accepts this my faith, that is the apprehender, for his sake that is
apprehended as though the righteousness of Christ were even mine own: God
does not this for my sake, nor for my works sake, nor for my faithes sake,
but for his own sons sake, whom I flee unto, and flee from my self, and
from all other, and catch hold only upon him by faith. And this my faith in
him, is imputed to me for righteousness. Thus was it imputed to Abraham for
righteousness, and it shall be like wise imputed to you for righteousness, if
ye believe in him that raised up Jesus Christ. So y^ this belefe deserves it
not, no more than any other work deserves it, though belief be the only
receyte and apprehension of it, yet all consists but in imputation and
acception, in vouchsafing and accompting this to be ours, that in it self is
not ours, we do but only receive by faith Jesus Christ offered of GOD the
Father unto us, whom if we do receive, Cum filio suo nobis Romans 8.
omnia donat, He gives us all things with his son, and so are we counted
righteous.

Well (says the Papiste), were there no more in us, but even this, yet lies
it in us to receive Christ into us: here is some thing, and that no small
matter even the receiving of it. See (well-beloved) so sain the Papist would have
some thing to boast upon, he will play small play rather than he will sit
out. What a hearing were this in a miserable caitife beggar, that had not one
penny in all the world to bless him, but lies in the streets, an outcast in
extreme wretchedness: an honest man's comes by, and even unasked, of mere
pity, bids him hold out his hand, and gives him a good liberal a^mes:
the beggar, where he should (had he any grace) render at the least his humble
hearty and reverent thanks unto him, that so freely gave him this relief,
goes craking away, and ^osting of him self, that except he had put forth
his hand and (...) it, the other had not given it him. Were this proud beggar
worthy his alms that thus impudently would blemish the liberality of the
geuer, because he was the receauer? He had done a great matter had he not
trow you, for letting the alms to fall into his hand? A thief condemned to
death, and even ready to be executed, findyng in himself no cause wherefore he
should be pitied, nor in any other any means whereby he might be healped, and
sees even before him the horror of death that he has deserved: suddenly,
unlooked for, vnsued for, unasked, unthought upon, most of all undeserved,
comes the Queens Majesty's pardon, that she of her own voluntary, of her
own gracious mercy and pity, sends him, sealed and written with her own
hand, and freely without any condition or exception offers it unto him,
bids him take it, and he shall not suffer death, but be freely pardoned,
clean forgiven, and be accounted as no such felon, even as though he had ever
been a good subject, and be received again into as much grace and favor,
yea and greater than ever he was before. He puts out his hand, and
receives it: And as soon as he has it, he boasts by and by what a myghtie
deed he has done to receive this pardon, for otherwise says he if he had
not so done, the Queen could not have saved him, it lay in his own choice
and power whether he would be pardoned yea or no, I pray you were such a
fellow worthy to be pardoned? But thus deal the Papists with this pardon
of Jesus Christ, nay, they deal far worse in this matter with GOD and
Christ his son, than any man is able to deal with manne. For as this offer
and gift of GOD, excels all comparison of Princes offers, so manne in
respect of GOD whom he has offended, is in far more wretched estate of
sins captivity, and danger of eternal death, than all the beggers' and
prisoners in the world. Neither can he (if he well consider and weyghe his
case) do so much as the beggar or prisoner may: for though he may resemble
them in the refusal, and so with them be most unworthy either of alms or
pardon: yet has not he that liberty in this matter of the soul to receive it
of his own free will, as they have liberty to receive that is offered them in
bodily matters. For although this gift ^e offered unto all, yet none do nor
can receive this gift, but those to whom the means also to receive it is
given. The means is Faith, but every manne has not Faith, nor faith is not
of us, though it be in us, Faith is the gift of GOD, flesh and blood
reueales it not, but he Qui diuisit vnicuique secundum mensuram fidei, 1. Cor.
12. Matthew. 16 Romans 12.
That has divided to each manne according to the measure of Faith. Unto you
(says Saint Paul to the Philippians) it is given that ye should 1. Tim. 1.
not only believe in Jesus Christ, but also suffer for him. And for his own
part (says he) Misericordiam Philip. 1.
consecutus sum vt sim fidelis, I have obtained mercy that I might be
faithful. And therefore it is not a voluntary matter of our choice, to put
out the hand of Faith, and take hold of Christ: No says Christ
himself, Hoc est opus Dei, vt credatis in eum, This is the work of God John.
6.
that ye believe in him, whom he has sent, It is not your work, Donum Dei
est, It is Gods gift, Then man has nothing at all in him self, not so mutche
as to put out his hand and receive this gift, except GOD give him this gift
also to receive it, except God give him this hand to put out how can he put
out that he has not? it must needs be then that those that receive this
gift, the son of GOD, are even the elect of God. Crediderunt quotquot
praeoidinati fuerunt Act. 1^.
ad vitam aeternam, Even so many believed, as were ordained to eternal life.
And further then this we will not, we dare not, we can not wade (how soever
the devil, the world, the flesh, the Papists do startle hereat) but most
humbly let us praise and magnify God for this, and say with Christ,
Confiteor tibi pater. etc. I give thee thanks O Father, Lord of Heaven and
earth, because thou Matthew. 11.
haste hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and haste opened them
unto babes, it is so (father) because thy good pleasure was such, It is not so,
because it was our pleasure, our will, our merit, our work, our
preparatiue, or any thing in us. But GOD has only of his mere mercyful love,
begun it, wrought it, and performed it in his choice vessels of mercy,
thorough his only begotten son, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Thus have I (derely beloved in the lord) a great deal to long I grant,
detained your patience, but the matter for me (I hope) will plead my pardon. A
matter of no less momente in it self, than containing the weyghtiest points
of our religion, the chiefest controversies of our contention, and all the
causes of our salvation. Neither might we pass through these matters (having
to deal with such crafty and warbling adversaries (so soon as the ordinary
time in this place does require: but I have presumed in this extraordinary
Sermon, or rather was driven thereto, to drive out the time extraordinarily:
for the adversaries, to step their mouths, and if it please God to win their
hearts also, at least for our selves, to confirm and strengthen ours, against
all their cauillations. Which effect that it may work in them and us, let us
never forget this most worthy sentence, So god loved the world that he gave
his only begotten son, that all that believe in him, should not perish, but
have eternal life. Let us remember all the four parts, into the which I
divided this sentence: In the first, let us seriously set before us these two
ends Everlasting death, and Everlasting life: Secondly these two parties God
and the world, chiefly considering the eternal purpose and election of God,
the first cause and original of our salvation: In the second part let us
consider, what moved God to elect us to life everlasting, nothing in the world
but all in him self, even only his own mere love. Wherein remember withal,
how greatly they have abused you, or rather abused God, by little and little in
taking all from God, and let us render all to him, from whose love all procedes
to us. In the third part consider by what means god has wrought it, even by
Jesus Christ His only begotten son. What a passing love this was surmounting
all kinds of love, what an excellent gift it was, and how the Papists trod
it under foot, and let us beware least we misuse this gift by security of
life, as they by false doctrine dy^ deface it. Last of all, let us receive
this gift by faith, the only means we take it by, and take heed of them, for
in every thing they have showed them selves to God and man unfaithful, neither
know they what faith means, and therefore are they such enemies of this
doctrine, that only a steadfast faith apprehending, The son of God does make
us acceptable unto the father. But let us (leaving them to Gods judgments to
come upon them) admit and believe this his eternal truth, and praise God for
these his unspeakable mercies poured on us in Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom
with the father and the holy ghost three persons and one most perfect and
everliving Godhed, be all praise and glory now and for ever. Amen:

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Fol. 9. line. 29. for an read and. Fol. 17. line. 1. for what yet they were,
read, what they were. Fol. 38. line. 5. for apprimetur, read, oprimetur. Fol.
45. line. 26. for plucketh, read, plungeth. Fol. 48. line. 7. for he could
tell, read, he could not tell. Fol. 124. line. 12. for jewels, read,
iewellers. Fol. 131. line. 2. for no longer be deceived, read, no longer
deceived. Fol. 142. line. 6. for genen, read given. Fol. 144. lin. vlt. for,
to be diligently, read, to be more diligently. Fol. 152. line. vlt. for his,
read this. Fol. 156. line. 2. for errors, only, read, errors, and only.

