Postscript.
P^ge 53. line 3. read by that. p. 78. l. 35. for declension read Gender or
declining. p. 87. l. 16. for eu^r read a^way. p. 115. l. 9. put i^ so far as I
know. p. 116 after the 11 line, put i^ so in others for most part. p. 191, l.
^7. put out ^ound. p 202. l. 25 for of Grammatica, read at Grammatica. p. 2^0.
l. 32 put out secondly. p. 251. l. 20. for most, read many. p. 274. l. 22. put
out kind. 297. l. 35. for rest, read^ rise.

Faults escaped by the Printer.
IN P^ge 20 line 3 the Alphabet should have been distinguished by threes,
thus; Abc.def.ghi. and so for the rest.

Page Line False True. 20 25 thus this 30 24 long longest 30 36 a book books
31 22 m i t. m c. t. 31 30 without or without 46 1 Third A third 56 9 of or 59
29 manui soelicis manui ^oelici 63 3 parsed p^ased 63 27 parsing poasing 72 23
more most 73 1 go truly go surely 79 3 speedily specially 102 12 Que Que 18
Virtutem. virtutum 36 weapon we^pons 114 9 must will 137 2 ascio ascio 144 3
and 11 vincit vincet 179 31 fittest fithest 182 17 curiously cursorily 192 1 in
manner in good manner 221 37 so great great 231 16 Nomenclaton Nomenclator 234
35 Th^ogius Theoguis 235 22 his this 236 19 be also also 241 13 who which 278
24 ^derint oderunt.

Page 200. in the margent against line 18 for youngest, read highest.

THE POSING OF THE PARTS.

OR, A most plain and easy way of examining the Accidence and Grammar, by
Questions and Answers, arising directly out of the words of the Rules.

Whereby all Scholars may attain most speedily to the perfect learning, full
understanding, and right use thereof; for their happy proceeding in the Latin
tongue.

Gathered purposely for the benefit of Schools, and for the use and delight of
Masters and Scholars.

The second Edition, corrected, and enlarged.

In omni disciplina, infirma est artis praeceptio, sine summa assiouitate
exercitationis.



LONDON, Printed for THOMAS MAN. 1615.

TO THE Worshipful, his much respected friend, Mr. ABRAHAM IO^NSON,
Counsailour at the Law, of Lincolns Inn.
MAny have been the wel-willers and furtherers of my labors, for our
Grammar-schoole: yet few there are to whom I owe more, then unto your worthy
and loving fathers, M. Johnson and M. Chade^ton; both for their direction and
encouragement which they have given me therein. Having therefore b^thought me to
whom the Questions of Grammar (which ^re to make all difficulties in the
Accidence and Grammar most plain and easy, and which contain the very ground
of all) might most fitly appertain; I find none, after those unto whom I have
ded^cated my former School-labours, to whom these do more of duty belong then
unto your self: that I may in some part repay unto you, or at least unto
yours, that debt which I owe unto themselves. And first for M. Johnson your
father: because he has yielded unto me the greatest help (next unto my
Honorable Lord) in laying the foundation of all my School travels; both in
setting me more earnestly thereunto, by his grave advise, and also supporting
me by his bounty, that I might be able the better to go through with the
Work. Moreover, for that (besides his singular endeavors for the furtherance
and advancement of all good Learning, whereof both in University, City, and
Country he has given so good testimony) I have known none, who has come
near unto him, in his great care, that the best* speediest surest and most
easy ways might be found out, for all Schools, according to our received
Grammar, and most approved School Authors, and the same to be made
universally known, that all even the meanest both Masters and Scholars may
proceed with delight, and all good Learning may go happily forward. So for
your father in law M. Chaderton: because he has not only vouchsafed to peruse
some part of my labors, and to afford me his judgment and censure therein, but
has also been pleased to afford some principal experiments, which himself
has observed. Who therefore can (...) ^is^ike, that I thus dedicate unto you,
this first Ground work of our grammar school, contained in these questions?
Which being rightly laid, it is concluded by the joint consent of all the
learned, that the whole building must needs go most happily forward. Yea, I
dare be bold to affirm, that a scholar of any aptness, being made perfect in
these questions (which he may learn together with his Accidence and Grammar;
and that as soon, as he would learn the bare rules alone, if not much sooner)
shall find such a furtherance to attain those six helps of Learning, which
wise Socrates so much commands, as he shall go forward with all ease and
cheerfulness ever after. That I may fully persuade all men of the truth
heerof; I will first rehearse all the seven marks which Socrates gives, of
him who is fitted to make the most excellent scholar, as our most learned
schoole-maister M. Askam has set them down. His hopeful scholar must be 1.
(...), that is, as he expounds it, one apt of wit, and having all qualities of
mind, and parts of body, meet to serve Learning. as, wit, will, tongue,
voice, face, stature and comeliness. 2. (...), that is, of good memory, which
is called the mother of Learning. 3. (...)* a lover of learning; which love
will overcome the hardest learning in time: and without which, the scholar
shall never attain unto much. 4. (...), a lover of labor, one who still take
pains at his book. 5. (...), one that is glad to hear and learn of others. 6.
(...), one that is apt to move questions, d^sirous to search out any doubt,
not ashamed nor afraid to ask, until he be fully satisfied. 7. (...), one
that loves to be praised of his father, master, or others for his well doing.
A child of this nature thus loving praise, will fervently love and earnestly
desire Learning, gladly labor for it willingly learn of others, boldly ask
any doubt. Now for th^se helps, though the two first be special benefits of
nature, yet may they be much increased and preserved (chiefly the Memory) by
this perfect understanding of all the grounds of Grammar; thorough this plain
order, so directly in all things agreeing with their Accidence. But for the
five last, there will never any means be found, whereby they will more
speedily be wrought, and appear in children, then heerby; when they can
answer so readily and perfectly to every Grammar question. For this (if they
be well applied) will win them such love from their masters, and Parents,
and also such praise and commendations, from all who examine them, or hear
them posed with so much ease through the plainness of it, as will make them
to strive who shall carry away most commendations; and so who shall take the
most pains. And then the first Authors being seconded with the help of
Grammatical translations, so used as is prescribed, not to make them truants,
but to lead them surely by the hand* past the difficulty of all school
Learning, and still afterward with other new supplies of Commentaries and the
like, shall make the whole way so del^ght some, as they shall never wex weary
in all their course but be ever made more earnest to climb up to the top of
all good Learning. If it be objected that questions of Accidence and Grammar
have been set forth by others, I answer that sundry have indeed taken very
profitable and commendable pains herein: To all them I acknowledge our
Schools much beholden; and my self especially. And yet aiming at the same
general benefit and furtherance of Learning, which they do, I hope none of
them can be offended, if out of all of them laid together, and not iniuring
any one of them, I have endeavored to gather one more plain, easy, full, and
more agreeing to our Accidence and Grammar in all things; and to make all their
labors of much more use to Schools then ever heertofore. For besides that some
points of principal use and arising directly out of the Book, are wanting in
all them which here you shall find, they have more-ouer many hard and strange
questions intermixed, not so necessary for the first enterers, and which do
much trouble the younger sort. Many also of those questions in them, which are
gathered directly, are placed out of the order of the Accidence, or else
distinctions of the Chapters are not observed, or they are set down in too
obscure terms, or ouershort for children to conceive: that both masters and
scholars do soon cast them out of hand, and that very few of them are known
in our Grammar Schools. I have therefore labored to draw these so, as they
may serve most fitly and easily, for all schools, according to the course
which must of necessity be taken, so long as our Accidence and Grammar
remain; which cannot be altered, without very great inconveniences to
Schools, and setting both masters aend schollar^ almost newly to beg^n, to be
acquainted with their new rules, or at the least to bring much disturbance. I
have also striuen to make them so plain, that not only the Teach^rs, but even
the young scholars themselves may appo^e one another by them, and understand
each thing fully. For the necessary qu^stions, which I have adjoined, only
for making the rest more cl^are, I have set an Asteriske upon them* to
distinguish them from those which are contained directly in the book, to use
or omit as the master will, and a hand p^inting at some places which are of
most necessary use. For other questions (to the end that our young scholars
may not be troubled at all with them, nor hindered by them in learning their
Accidence; and yet may in fit time be acquainted with all of them, which shall
be most needful: that nothing may be wanting hereunto to make our scho^^a a
sound Gramarian) I purpose (God willing) so much as (upon further advise) shall
be thought fit, to set them briefly in the marg^^ts over against the rul^s to
which they belong, as I have done some few alreadi^; or el^e in the end most
shortly by themselves. Accept this beginning as a token of my thankfulness to
those your grave father^, who have des^rued so well of the Church of God, and
of all good learning, that I wish to keep a perpetual memory of them; and
withal, as a pledge of my thankful affection even unto your self for your
ancient love, and of my hearty desire, to add somewhat to yours by these and
other my trauail^s. Accept them as a witness of my unfeigned study, for that
good, which ^ trust shall hereby be conveyed unto Schools and all good
learning, in making the first entrance so even, as that it may be run in with all loving emulation. By the welcome and kind entertainment of my first
labors, I shall be more encouraged to go forward with the work during my life;
until I may either put the last hand unto it, or that others after me may
supply whatsoever is wanting in my poor endeavors, being but thus entered into.
January 12. 1611.

Yours in all thankful affection, JOHN BRINSLEY,

To the judicious Reader.
FIrst, cause the Scholar in learning his rules, to understand them well,
according to these Questions or the like: after, to get his rules, and keep
them perfectly by daily repeating: then, by posing, or reading over these, all
will be made his own most easily and surely, to go forward in construction
with all alacrity and s^eede. Farewell.

The Authors Postscript.
Loving Reader, correct (with thy pen) what still has escaped. Future Editions
(God willing) shall amend continually what is amiss, and supply what is
wanting.

THE POSING OF the Accidence.
Q. WHat Book do you learn?

A. The Accidence.

Q. What book is that?

A. A book which teaches all the first grounds of the Latin tongue.

* Q. Why is it called the Some think it to be so called of Accedo, as a thing
coming to, or whereby the learners do come to the Grammar, or enter first
into the knowledge of the Latin tongue; but then it should be called the
Accedence, e long; not Accidence, i short.
Accidence? Because it teaches first and chiefly the Accidents; that is, the
things belonging to the parts of speech.

Q. Into how many parts is your Accidence divided?

A. Into two. First, an Introduction of the eight parts of the Latin speech.
Secondly* the Construction of the eight parts of speech.

* Q. What mean you by an Introduction of the eight parts of speech?

A. An entering, or leading-in the learner as by the hand, to know the eight
parts of speech.

* Q. What mean you by the Construction of the eight parts of speech?

A. The construing or framing, and setting together of the eight parts of
speech.

Q. Where begins your first part, or the Introduction of the eight parts of
speech?

A. At In speech.

Q. Where begins the second part?

A. At For the due Joining of words, etc.

Q. What mean you by those words, Speech is properly the uttering of our mind
by w^rds, or the words whereby we utter our mind.
In speech?

A. In every tongue or language; as namely, in the Latin speech or tongue,
which we are to learn.

Q. How many parts then are there of the Latin speech?

A. Some make but four parts of speech, Noune, Verb, Aduerbe* Co^junction:
because Pronou^es, and Participles may be joined to (...) Nounes; ^repositions
and Interjections to the Aduerbs.
Eight: Noune, Pronoune, Verb, Participle, Adverbe, Conjunction, Preposition,
Interjection.

Q. Are there no more parts of all your Latin speech but only eight?

A. No: for every word whereof speech is made, is one of these eight parts.] It
is either a Noune, or a Pronone, Verb, or one of the rest though there be many
thousand words, yet each is one of these.

Q. How many of these parts are declined? how many undeclined?

A. The four first are declined: the 4. last are undeclined.

Q. Why are they said to be declined?

A. Because Or because their last letter or syllable may be changed into other
letters or ^yllables.
they may be That many Nounes and Verbs are undeclined is in regard of use,
that they are not wont to be declined* not in regard of the nature of the
words.
declined: that is, they may be varied or changed, from their first ending,
into diverse endings:] as, Magister, magistri, magistro. Amo, amas, amat.

Q. Why are the rest called undeclined?

A. Because they cannot be so declined or changed: as, hodi^, ^ras, a^.

* Q. How many of them are declined with case? how many without?

A. Three with case, one without case.

That many Nounes and Verbs are undeclined is in regard of use, that they are
not wont to be declined* not in regard of the nature of the words.
Q Which three are declined with case?

A. Noune, Pronoune, and Participle with case: Verb without case.

Of a Noune.
Q WHich is the first part of speech?

A. A Noune.

Q. What is a Noune?

A. A Noune is the name of a Ni^il* is a Noune, though it signify nothing:
because it is not meant properly nothing at all, but a thing of no value, having
the name of hilum* the black in the top of a Bean: as ne-lul, or ne hilum, not
so much as the black in a Bean.
thing, that may be seen, felt, heard, or understood.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. It is a In Grammar we have to consider words* not things.
word that signifies the name by which we call any thing whatsoever may be
seen, felt, heard, or understood.

Q. Give me examples of it.

A. A hand manus, a house domus, goodness bonitas.

* Q. Is a hand a Noune?

A. A hand it self is not a Noune: but the word signifying a hand, is a Noune.

Q. How many sorts of Nounes have you?

A. Two: a Noune Substantive, and a Noune Adjectiue.

Q. What is a Noune Substantive?

A. A Noune Substantive is that stands by himself, and requires not another
word joined with it to show his signification.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. It is the name of a thing which may be fully understood of it self,
without the help of any other word to show it by: as, a hand, a book.

Q. How know you when a word may be fully understood of it self?

A. If I may fitly put a, or the before it: or if I cannot fitly join this
word thing unto it; as, a book, the house.

* Q. What are then the notes or marks in English, to know a Noune Substantive
by?

A. A or the, or if I cannot fitly put this word thing after it.

Q. With how many Articles is a Noune Substantive declined?

A. With one: as, hic Magister, a Master; or with two at the most: as hic and
haec Parens, a father or mother.

Q. What is a Noune Adjectiue?

A. Which cannot stand by it self in reason or signification, but requires to
be joined with another word.

Q. What mean you, when you say, a Noune Adjectiue is that cannot stand by it
self?

A. I mean, it is the name of such a thing, as cannot be fully understood of
it self, without the help of an other word to make it plain.

Q. Show me an example how.

A. Bonus good, is a Noune Adjectiue: for when any one speaks of good, I know
he means something that is good; but I know not what thing it is that he
calls good, except he put some other word unto it: as a good boy; a good
house; or the like.

Form and figure belong to all words: for every word is Primitive or
Deriuatiue. which is called the form: and Simple or Compound, which is called the
figure. Primitive, which is of it self Deriuatiue which is derived of another.
Simple, is a word not made of more Compound is a word mingled of more.
Q. Have you any special mark to know a Noune Adjectiue by?

A. Yes. If I may put this word thing to it, it is a Noune Adjectiue; as, a
good thing, an evil thing.

Q. What is a Noune Adjectiue declined with?

A. Either with three terminations, or with three Articles.

Q. How with three terminations?

A. As, Bonus, bona, bonum.

Q. How wi^h three Articles?

A. As, Hic et haec levis, et hoc leve ^ight.

Q. How many sorts of Noune Substantives are there?

A. Two: Proper and Common.

Q. Which is a Noune Substantive Proper?

A. Such a Noune or name as is proper to the thing that it betokens, or
signifies: or which belongs but to one thing properly, as Edvardus, Edward;
and so each man's proper name.

Q. What is a Noune Substantive Common?

A. Every Noune which is common to more: or which is the common name of all
things of that sort: as, homo* a man, is the common name to all men; so a
house, a city, virtue.

Q. How many things belong to a Noune?

A. My book sets down five; Form and figure belong to all words: for every
word is Primitive or Deriuatiue. which is called the form: and Simple or
Compound, which is called the figure. Primitive, which is of it self.
Deriuatiue which is derived of another. Simple, is a word not made of more
Compound is a word mingled of more.
Number, Case, Gender, Declension, and Comparison.

Numbers of Nounes.
Q. HOw many Numbers belong to all parts of Speech which are declined.
Numbers are there in a Noune?

A. Two: the Singular and the Plural.

Q. What is the Singular Number?

A. That which speaks but of one thing: as, Lapis a stone; meaning but one
stone.

Q. Which is the Plural number?

A. That which speaks of more then one: a^, Lapides, stones.

Cases of Nounes.
* Q. WHat is a Case?

A. Every several ending of a Noune in the declining of it] and so of all
other parts of speech, which are declined like a Noune.

Q. How many Cases are there?

A. Six in either Number; that is, six in the Singular, and six in the
Plural.

Q. Rehearse the Cases.

A. The Nominative, Genitive, Dative, Accusative, Vocative, and Ablative.

Q. How may these Cases be known asunder?

A. They may ^e known in Latin, f^r the most part, by the terminations of the
Declensions.
The Nominative and Accusative by their places, the other by their signs.

Q. Which is the place of the Nominative?

A. It usually comes before the Verb in due order of speech.

Q To what question does it answer?

A. To the question who, or what: as, if I ask, Who teaches; the answer is
in the Nominative case: as, Magister docet, the Master teaches.

Q. What is the sign of the Genitive case?

A. Of.

Q. To what question does it answer?

A. To the question whose, or vvherof:] as, if it be asked, Whose learning is
it; The answer is in the Genitive case, Doctrina Magistri, the learning of the
Master.

Q. What is the sign of the Dative case?

A. To, and sometime for.

Q. To what question does it answer?

A. To the question, to whom, or to what: as, if it be asked, To whom do you
give a book: the answer is in the Dative case, thus: Do librum Magistro, I
give a book to the Master.

Q. How know you the Accusative case?

A. It follows the Verb in due order of speech.

Q. To what question does it answer?

A. To the question whom, or what: as, if the Scholar be asked, Whom do you
love; he answers in the Accusative case thus: Amo Magistrum, I love the
Master.

Q. How know you the Vocative case?

A. By calling or speaking to: as, o Magister, O Master.

Q. How know you the Ablative case?

A. Either by Prepositions serving to the Ablative case, being joined with it,
or else by signs.

Q. Which are the signs of the Ablative case?

A. In, with, through, for, from, by; and than, after the Comparatiue degree.

Articles.
Q. WHat follows next after cases*

A. Articles.

Q. What is an Article?

A. The mark to know the Gender by in declining.

Q. How many Articles are there?

A. Three, Hic, haec, hoc.

Q. Whence are these borrowed?

A. Of the Pronoune.

Q. Decline them all together.

A. Singulariter Nom. Hic, haec, hoc. Genesis Huius. Dat. Huic. etc. and so forth,
as it is in the book.

Q. Decline them severally, each Article by it self, and first the Masculine.

A. Singul. Nom. Hic. Genesis Huius. Dat. Huic. Accus. Hunc. Voc. Caret. Abl. Hoc.
Plu^. Nom. Hi. Genesis Horum. Dat. His. Accus. Hos. Voc. Caret. Abl. His.

Q. Decline Haec.

A. Singu. Haec, huius, huic, hanc, hac. Plur. Hae, harum, his, has, his.

Q. Decline Hoc likewise.

A. Sing. Hoc, huius, huic, hoc, hoc. Plur. Haec, horum, his, haec, his.

* Q. Why are they set here before the Genders and Declensions?

A. Because they serve to note out the Genders, and also to decline Nounes in
every Gender.

* Q. What signifies Hic, haec, hoc.

A. When it is used as a Pronoune, it signifies this: but when it is declined
with a Noune, it is only an Article, like as it is taken here, and has no
signification at all.

Genders of Nounes.
* Q. WHat is a Gender?

A. The difference of Nounes according to the sex.

* Q. What mean you by that?

A. It is the difference whereby a word is noted to signify the male, or
female, or neither: that is, either he or she, or neither of them.

Q. How many Genders have you?

A. My book makes seven: the Masculine, the Feminine, the Neu^er, the Common
of two, the Common of three, the Doubtful, and the Epicene.

Q. Which is the Article of the Masculine Gender?

A. Hic: as, hic vir a man.

* Q. What does it belong to?

A. It belongs properly to Masculines; that is, unto males or he is, and unto
such words as have been used under the names of he is.

Q. Which is the Article of the Feminine Gender?

A. Haec: as, haec mulier a woman.

* Q. What belongs it to?

A. To Feminines; that is, to females or she is, or things going under the names
of she is.

Q. What is the Article of the Neuter Gender?

A. Hoc; as, hoc saxum a stone.

* Q. What belongs it to?

A. It belongs properly to words which signify neither he nor she.

Q. What Article has the Common of two?

A. It is declined with hic and haec.

* Q. What belongs it to?

A. It belongs properly to words signifying both male and female; that is,
both he and she.

Q. What Articles has the Common of three?

A. Hic, haec, and hoc.

* Q. What belongs it to?

A. Only to Adjectiues.

Q. What Articles has the Doubtful?

A. Hic or haec, as we will: as, hic vel haec dies a day.

* Q. What does it belong to?

A. To such living creatures most properly, in which the the kind is unknown;
whether they be he or she.] As a snayle, a snake, etc. and to some others.
Also to some liuelesse things, as a day, a channel, and the like.

Q. What is the Epicene Gender declined with?

A. Only with one Article, and under that one Article both kinds are
signified] that is, both he and she. In names of fowls, fishes, and wild
beasts: as, Hic passer, a sparrovv, either the cock or the hen, haec
aquilae an Eagle, both he and she: hoc hale^ a herring, both milter and
spauner.

* Q. Is the Epicene Gender a Gender properly?

A. No; it is not properly a Gender, nor has any proper Article.

* Q. You said, that your book did make seven Genders: are there not seven
simply?

A. No: there are but three simply. The Masculine, Feminine and Neuter: the
other four are compounded or made of these three.

The Declensions of Nounes.
Q. WHat follow next after Genders?

A. Declensions.

* Q. What call you a Declension?

A. A varying of a word into cases,] or the varying and changing of the first
name of a word, into diverse other endings, called cases.

Q. How many Declensions of Nounes are there?

A. Sundry Greek words made Latin words; yet declined wholly or in part,
after the Greek manner, cannot be referred to any of these five Declensions
properly, as Tita^, Pan, Daphnis, and the like, being of the first Declension
in Greek. So Feminines in o, having the Genitive in us, and the Accusative in
o, as, Sappho, Manto, Clio, Dido, Ecch^, etc. which belong to the fourth
Declension of the contracts ending in o, as (...) Leto, Genesis Letoos, Letous,
Accu. Letoa, Leto. So Anchises, Penelope, and others of other Declensions.
Five.

Q. How will you know of what Declension a Noune is?

A. By the termination of the Genitive case singular.

* Q. What mean you by termination?

A. The end of a word in the last letter or syllable.

Q. How ends the Genitive case singular of the first Declension?

A. In ae diphthong.

Q. How the Dative?

A. The rest of the terminations, both in this and all other Declensions, may
be posed thus by the Accidence.
In ae dipthong, etc.

Q. What is your example of the first Declension?

A. Musa.

* Q. What serves this example for chiefly?

A. This, and all other examples following in each Declension, serve to show
their rules by, and also to decline or frame others like unto them.

Q. Decline Musa,
and give the English with it in every case, Make your scholar perfect in this
kind of declining of Nounes and coniugating Verbes, and you shall soon find
the benefit of it above that which you will imagine.
according to the signs of the cases.

A. Singul. Nom. haec musa a song.

Genesis huius musae of a song.


Dat. huic musae to a song.


Accus. hanc musam the song.


Vocat. o musa O song.


Ablat. ab hac musa from a song.


Plural. Nom. hae musae songs.


Genesis harum musarum of songs.


Dat. his musis to songs.


Accus. has musas the songs.


Vocat. o musae o songs.


Ablat. ab his musis from songs.


Q. Why do you give a, for the sign of the Nominative case; and the, of the
Accusative?

A. Because these are the most usual signs of these cases, and may most fitly
serve hereunto.


Q. Give me the signs by themselves to decline any word by.

A. A, of, to, the, o, from or fro.

Q. Decline Musa with the English first.

A. A song, musa: of a song, musae: to a song, musae: the song, musam: o song,
o musa: from a song, ab hac musa.

Plur. Songs, musae: of songs, musaru^: to songs, musis: the songs, musas: o
songs, musae: from songs, ab his musis.


* Q. Why do you decline them so?

A. Because giving English to the Latin, will teach me to construe and parse
Latin speedily: and giving Latin to English, will help me as much for making
Latin.

For other questions concerning the Declensions, because they are very many and
ouer-hard for children, I take it much better for the Teachers, to show them to
their scholars out of the Latin rules (where most of them are set down at
large) as their scholars shall have occasion to learn them, in their Authors,
then either to trouble their memories, or margents with them.
Q. Do your Datiues and Ablatiues plural, end always in is, in this
Declension?

A. No: Filia and nata are excepted, which make the Dative and Ablative plural
in is, or in abus. Also Dea, mula, aequa, liberta, which end in abus only; as,
Deabus, mulabus: not deis, mulis.

The second Declension.
Q. HOw ends the Genitive case singular of the second Declension?

A. In i.

Q. How the Dative?

A. In o, etc.

Q. Give me an example of the second Declension.

A. Hic Magister, a Master.

Q. Decline Magister as you decline Musa: that is, both Latin before the
English, and English before the Latin.

A. Sing. Nom. Hic Magister, a Master. Genesis Huius Magistri, of a master, etc.

Q. Does your Vocative case in the second Declension end always like the
Nominative?

A. No: but for most part.

Q. How many exceptions have you of it?

A. Three: first, of Nounes ending in us. Secondly, of proper names of men,
ending in ius. Thirdly, of some common Nounes, making their Vocative in e, or
in us.

This is only to be understood of Nouns of the second Declension; for in the
fourth, manus makes o manus: and of words of the Masculine or Feminine Ge^der
only, not of the Neuter.
Q. When the Nominative ends in us, how must the Vocative end?

A. In e: as, Dominus, o Domine.

Q. Words ending in os, also, of the second Declension, make the Vocative
likewise in e, like words in us, as, logos, o log^.
Do all words in Panthus and Oedipus, having the Vocative in u, are not of the
second Declension in Latin, but of the third, of contracts in Greek, like
Basileus, o Basileu.
us, make the Vocative in e?

A. Yea, all but two: Deus that makes o Deus, and Filius that makes o Fili.

Q. If the word be a proper name of a man ending in ius, how must the Vocative
end?

A. Latmius for Latmi, in the Vocat. is an Atticisme, that is, after the Attick
dialect, the Voca. like the Nomi.
In i: as, Georgius, o Georgi.

Q. How many words have you which make the Vocative in ^, or in us?

A. Six: agnus, lucus, vulgus, populus, chorus, fluuius: for agnus, makes agne,
vel agnus in the vocative case: so all the rest.

Q. Are Nounes of the Neuter Gender declined like Nounes of the Masculine and
Feminine?

A. No: all Nounes of the Neuter Gender, of what Declension soever they be,
have three like cases in either number.

Q. What three cases are those?

A. The Nominative, the Accusative, and the Vocative.

Q. And how do these 3. cases end in the plural number?

A. This is meant only of Nouns which are regular, that is* declined after the
common manner, not of irregulars or heteroclits, as words wanting the Plural
number, or the like.
In a.

Q. Give me an example of the Neuter Gender, and decline it both ways, as you
did Musa.

A. Sing. Nom. hoc regnum, a kingdom. Genesis huius regni, of a kingdom. So, a
kingdom, regnum: of a kingdom, regni, etc.

Q. Are no words excepted from being thus declined?

A. Yes: Ambo and duo, are found to be the same in all Genders, like as duo in
Greek, as, ambo anguis, for ambos angueis, or angues. Plaut.
only ambo and duo of the first and second Declension; which make the Neuter
Gender in o, as ambo, not amba: and the Dative and Ablative in bus; as,
ambobus, ambabus, ambobus, not ambis.

Q. Here declining of Latin before may suffice: and so in Adjectiues.
Decline Ambo with the English.

A. Plur. Ambo, both Masculines: ambae, both Feminines: ambo, both Neuters. So
in the rest.

The third Declension.
Q. HOw ends the Genitive case singular of the third Declension?

A. In is, etc.

Q. Give me an example of the third Declension, declined as before both ways.

A. Sing. Nom. hic lapis a stone.

Genesis huius lapidis, of a stone, etc.

So, Nom. hic et haec Parens, a father or mother.

Genesis huius Parentis, of a father or mother, etc.

Thus again English first.

The fourth Declension.
Q. HOw ends the Genitive case singular of the fourth Declension?

A. In us.

Q. Give an example.

A. Sing. Nom. haec manus, a hand, etc.

The fifth Declension.
Q. How this Genitive case is sometimes in e, sometimes in ij, see the Latin
rules.
HOw ends the Genitive case singular of the fifth Declension?

A. In ei.

Q. Give an example.

A. Sing. Nom. hic meridies, a noone-time of the day, etc.

Q. Of what Gender are Nounes of the fifth Declension?

A. Of the Feminine Gender, except meridies and dies.

Q. Show me how the Genitive case singular ends in each Declension together.

These are to be made perfect by continual posing each way.
A. Of the first in Some words of the first Declension have the Genitive
singular in as, as* Familias, auras, terras, etc. in imitation of words of the
second Declension in Greek, which end in da, tha, ra* and a pure; viz. which
have a vowell before a. This is called Graecismus, that is an imitation of the
Greek. Other words have ai, for a: as, pictai, aulai, for pictae, aulae. This
is called Archaismos: an imitation of the ancient kind of speaking. Hereof
also see the Latin rules.
ae dipthong, as, Musae.

The second in i: as, Magistri.

The third in is: as, lapidis.

The fourth in us: as, manus.

The fifth in ei, as, meridiei.

Q. Show me how the Datiues end, and so all the rest in order.

A. The Dative case singular of the first, in ae diphthong: as, Musae.

The second in o: as, Magistro.

The third in i: as, Lapidi.

The fourth in ui, as, Manui.

The fifth in ei, as, Meridi^i.

The Accusative case singular

Of the first in am: as, Musam.

The second in um: as, Magistrum.

The third in em, or im: as, Lapidem, ^iti^.

The fourth in um: as, Manum.

The fifth in em: as, Meridiem.

The Vocative for the In the first Declensio^, the Vocat. is like the Nom.
except in Greek words in as, which make the Vocat. in a; and in es, which make
the vocat. in a, or in e. That Pithias and Dorias, names of women, do make the
vocat. in as, is after the Attick Dialect in Greek* making the Vocat. like the
Nom. These words are also rather to be taken to be of the second Declension in
Greek, then of the first; and their termination after the manner of the
barbarous tongue, from which they were taken.
most part like the Nominative.

The Ablative case singular

Of the first in a: as, Musa.

The second in o: as, Magistro.

The Ablat. of the third is often in i, as, parti, colli, ciui, fusti, etc. by
reason of the usual change of e, into i, amongst the Ancients, like as here,
and heri, etc.
The third in e or i: as, Lapide, tristi.

The fourth in u: as, Manu.

The fifth in e: as, Meridie.

The Nominative case plural

Of the first in ae diphthong: as, Musae.

The second in i: as, Magistri.

The third in es: as, Lapides.

The fourth in us: as, Manus.

The fifth in es: as, Meridies.

The Genitive case plural

Of the first in arum: as, Musarum.

The second in orum: as, Magistrorum.

The third in um, or ium: as, Lapidum, tristium.

The fourth in um: as, Manuum.

The fifth in erum: as, Meridierum.

The Dative case Plural

Of the first in is: as, Musis.

The second in is: as, Magistris.

The third in bus: as, Lapidibus.

The fourth in ibus, or ubus: as, manibus, arcubus.

The fifth in ebus: as, Meridiebus.

The Accusative case plural

Of the first in as: as, Musas.

The second in os: as, Magistros.

The Accu. case plural of the third, did indifferently and in es, or eis, as,
parteis, omneis, especially in those whose Genesis plural end in ium; and sometime
eis, is co^tracted into is, as for angueis, anguis, for omneis, omnis.
The third in es: as, Lapides.

The fourth in us: as, manus.

The fifth in es: as, meridies.

The Vocative plural is ever like the Nominative.

The Ablative plural, is ever the same with the Dative.


Q. Scholars being made perfect in these terminations, will soon grow to
readiness in giving any case of a Noune, and keeping them most surely.
Give me shortly the terminations alone, in every case together.

A. Of the Genitive case singular, ae, i, is, us, ei.

Of the Dative, ae, o, i, ui, ei.

Of the Accusative, am, um, em, um, em.

Of the Ablative, a, o, e, u, e.

Nominative plural, ae, i, es, us, es.

Genesis For Dardanidarum, is used Dardanidum, by the figure Syncope; so
Anchisaidum, Troijgenum: like as virum for virorum* in the second.
arum, orum, um or ium, uum, erum.

Datiu. is, is, bus, ibus or ubus, ebus.

Accus. as, os, es, us, es.

Vocative like the Nominative.

Ablat. is, is, bus, ibus or ubus, ebus.

* Q. Are there no special terminations of the Nominative cases in each
Declension, to know the Declensions by?

A. Not certain: Other terminations are either of words coming from the
Greek, or of other strange tongues: as am, in the first Declension, is a
termination of the Hebrew; as, es, e, of the Greek.
yet these are the most usual in words which are merely Latin, and regular.

The Nomi. case of the first, ends in a. Of the second, in r, us, or m. Of
the third, in l, n, o, r, s, x. Of the fourth, in us. Of the fifth, in es.

The Declining of Adjectiues.
Q. Now that we have done with Noune Substantives, what are we to come to
next?

A. To Nounes Adjectiues.

Q. How many sorts of Adjectives are there?

A. Two: Adjectives declined with three terminations, and Adjectives declined
with three Articles.

Q. What Adjectives are of three terminations?

A. Such as have in most cases three terminations] that is, three diverse
endings, showing their Genders, as Bonus, bona, bonum.

Q. * How know you their Genders by their terminations?


A. The first word, as Bonus, is the masculine: the second, as Bona, is the
Feminine: the third, as Bonum, is the Neuter.

* Q. What if they have but one termination, that is, if they have but one word
in any ^ase, as Abla. Bonis, what Gender is the word then?

A. That word is of all Genders.

Q. Adjectiues ending in us, er, or ur, are declined like bonus: except vetus,
veteris, ending in us: and those in er, which may end also in is, as Camp^ster,
and his fellows: with cicur, cicuris, in ur: and these following, which are
declined like unus.
What is the example to decline words of three terminations by?

A. Bonus, bona, bonum, good.

Q. How decline you Bonus with the English with it?

A. Bonus, a good masculine: bona, a good feminine: bonum, a good Neuter.
Genit. Boni, of a good masculine: bona, of a good feminine: boni, of a good
neuter. So in the rest.

Q. Are all Adjectiues of three terminations declined like bonus?

A. All, except eight with their compounds: which make the Genitive case
singular in ius, and the Dative in i.

Q. What are those declined like?

A. Like vnus, a, um.

Q. Has unus the plural number?

A. No: except when it is joined with a word lacking the singular number.

Q. Which are those other words which are so declined like nuus, having the
Genitive case singular in ius, and the Dative in i?

A. These words are also among the ancient Writers declined like bonus in the
Gene. and Dat. as, ulli, alters* for ullius, alterius.
Totus, solus, and also ullus, alius, alter, uter, and neuter.

Q. Are these in all things declined like unus?

A. Yes: saying that the five last, that is, ullus, alius, alter, uter, and
neuter, do want the Vocative case: and alius makes aliud, not alium, in the
Neuter Gender.

* Q. Of what Declension are Nounes of three terminations, as Bonus, bona,
bonum?

A. Of the first and second] for the first word, as Bonus, is declined like
Magister or Dominus; the second, as bona, is declined like Musa; the third, as
bonum, is declined like Regnum.

Q. Which do you call Adjectiues of three Articles?

A. Such as we put Articles to, in every case to express their Genders: as,
Nom. Hic, haec et hoc Foelix. Gene. huius foelicis, etc. Hic et haec tristis,
and hoc triste.

* Of what Declension are all Nounes of three Articles?

A. Of the third Declension.

* Q. What Genders are Adjectiues of 3. Articles of?

A. Of the Common of three.

* Q. If they have but one termination is any case, as, Foelix, what Gender is
that of?

A. Of all three Genders.

Q. If they have two terminations, as Tristis and Triste, what Gender are those
words of?

A. The first, as Tristis, is the Masculine and Feminine Gender: the second, as
Triste, is the Neuter.

* Q. What are all such Adjectiues of three Articles declined like?

A. If they have but one ending in the Nominative case, as, foelix, or audax,
they are declined like foelix. If they have two, like tristis and triste, levis
and leve, they are declined like tristis.

Comparisons of Nounes Adjectiues.
Q. WHat else belongs to a Noune besides Number, Case, Gender, and Declension?

A. Comparison.

* Q. What is Comparison?

A. The altering the signification of a word into more or less by degrees.

Q. Does Comparison belong to all Nounes?

A. No: it belongs Some Substantives are compared but only by abuse, not
properly, as also some Pronouns. No words are compared properly but Adjectiues
and Aduerbs coming of them. Participles when they are changed into Adjectiues,
and some Prepositions changed into Aduerbs, may be compared thereupon.
properly to none but to Adjectiues.

Q. May all Adjectiues be compared?

A. No: none but only such, whose signification may increase or be diminished.

* Q. What is it to increase or be diminished?

A. To be made more or less: as, hard, harder, hardest. So back again;
hardest, harder, hard.

* Q. What mean you by a degree of Comparison?

A. Every word that alters the signification by more or less, is a degree.

Q. How many degrees of Comparison are there?

A. Three: the Positive, the Comparatiue, and the Superlatiue.

Q. Which is the Positive degree?

A. That which betokens a thing absolutely, without excess.

Q. What mean you by a thing absolutely, without excess?

A. Such a thing as The Positive is improperly called a degree of Comparison.
signifies neither more nor less; but is absolute of it self, without
being compared, or without having respect to any other: as, Durus hard.

Q. What call you the Comparatiue?

A. The Comparatiue is that which somewhat exceeds the Positive in
signification.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. The Comparatiue is a word drawn from the Positive, wherein the
signification of the Positive is somewhat increased, or made more:] as, Durior
harder, or more hard; minor less, or more little.

* Q. What is the sign of the Comparatiue degree?

A. More: either being set down, or understood.

Q. Of what is the Comparatiue degree formed, and how?

A. Of the first case of the Positive that ends in i, by putting to or, for
the Masculine and Feminine Gender; and us, for the Neuter.

* Q. Show me how?

A. Of Durus, dura, durum, the Genitive case is duri: which by putting to or,
is made durior: and by putting to us, is made durius.] So the Comparatiue
degree, is hic et haec durior, for the Masculine and Feminine, and hoc durius
for the Neuter. So also of Tristi and Dulci.

Q. What is the Superlatiue?

A. The Superlatiue exceeds his Positive in the highest degree] that is, it
increases the signification of the Positive to the highest: so that one thing
being compared with many, is said to be most of all this thing or that: as
Durissimus, hardest, or most hard.

Q. Whence is the Superlatiue formed?

A. Of the first case of the Positive that ends in i, by putting to it the
letter s, and the word simus: as, if I put to duri, s, and simus, it is made
durissimus.

* Q. How do you compare these three degrees?

A. By declining all three degrees together,
in each Case and every Gender; I mean each Gender in every case together: as,
Sing. Nom. Durus, durior, durissimu^.
Dura, durior, durissima.
Durum, durius, durissimum.
Genit. Duri, durioris, durissimi.
Durae, durioris, durissimae.
Duri, durioris, durissimi.


This Table heedfully observed, will teach presently to form Comparisons, by
declining all three degrees together.
Case. Article. Positive. Comparatiue. Superlatiue. Nom. Hic Durus* durior,
durissimus. Haec Dura, durior, durissima. Hoc Durum* durius* durissimum. Genit.
Huius Duri, durioris* durissimi. Huius Durae, durioris, durissimae. Huius Duri,
durioris, durissimi. Dat. Huic Duro, duriori, durissimo. Huic Durae, duriori,
durissimae. Huic Duro, duriori, durissimo. Accus. Hunc Durum, duriorem,
durissimum. Hanc Duram, duriorem, durissimam. Hoc Durum, durius, durissimum.
Nom. Hic Foelix, foelicior, foelicissimus. Haec Foelix, foelicior,
foelicissima. Hoc Foelix, foelicius, foelicissimum. Genit. Huius Foelicis*
foelicioris, foelicissimi. Huius Foelicis, foelicioris, foelicissimae. Huius
Foelicis, foelicioris, foelicissimi. Nom. Hci Tristis, tristior, tristissimus.
Haec Tristis, tristior, tristissima. Hoc Triste, tristius, tristi^simum. Genit.
Huius Tristis, tristioris, tristissimi. Huius Tristis, tristioris,
tristissimae. Huius Tristis, tristioris, tristissimi, etc.

Q. Are there no exceptions from these general rules of comparing Nounes; that
is, from this manner of comparing?

A. Yes: there are four exceptions.

Q. What is the first exception?

A. Of Nounes which have no Comparatiue or Superlatiue degree, but borrow them
of others.

Q. How many such have you?

A. All other irregular comparisons may be much better showed the scholars out
of the Latin rules, as they shall have use of them, then hee^e to trouble
them, or the books with them.
My book names five: Bonus, malus, magnus, parvus, and multus.

Q. Compare Bonus.

A. All other irregular comparisons may be much better showed the scholars out
of the Latin rules, as they shall have use of them, then hee^e to trouble
them, or the books with them.
Bonus, melior, Paruissimus, multissimus, egregijsimus pijssimus, and the like,
are old words, and out of use.
optimus: bona, melior, optima: bonum, melius, optimum. Genesis Boni, melioris,
optimi: bonae, melioris, optimae: boni, melioris, optimi, etc. So Malus, peior,
pessimus, and the rest as before.

Q. What is your second exception?

A. Of Positiues ending in r.

Q. If the Positive end in r, how must the Superlatiue be formed?

A. ^hus must also celebr^^, salubris, acris, alacris, have the Superlatiues,
because they have the No^. also in r; as, celeber, salub^r, saluberrimus.
Of the Nominative case, by putting to rimus: as Pulcher, pulcherrimus.

Q. Which is the third exception?

A. Of six Adjectiues ending in lis.

Q. How do you make their Superlatiue?

A. By changing lis into These six are in prose most truly written with a
single l, i^ into limus: they are in verse with a double ll, for the verse sake.
limus, and not into lissimus.

Q. Which are those six?

A. Humilis humble, similis like, facilis easy, gracilis, slender, agilis
nimble, docilis apt to learn: for, we say, Humilis, humilimus, and not
humilissimus.

Q. How do all other Nounes ending in lis, form the Superlatiue?

A. They follow the general rule afore-going.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. That they form the Superlatiue, by putting to s and simus, to the first
case of the Positive ending in i; as utili, vtilissimus: as before.

Q. What is your last exception?

A. Of such Adjectiues as have a vowell coming before us: as, Pius, Assiduus,
Idoneus.

Q. How are these compared?

A. By these two Adverbs, Magis more, and maxim most; putting-to magis in
steed of the Comparatiue degree, and maxim in steed of the Superlatiue:] so
declining the three degrees together, as before in every Case and Gender in
order: as Pius godly, magispius more godly, maxim pius most godly, etc.

* Q. Why are these so compared?

A. For avoiding the meeting together of vowels, which cannot be so well
pronounced together: as we cannot say well, Pius, piior, etc.

Of a Pronoune.
Q. WHich is the second part of speech?

A. A Pronoune.

Q. What is a Pronoune?

A. Pronounes supply the place of Nounes, and have for most part the nature of
nouns.
A part of speech much like to a Noune, which is used in showing or rehearsing.

* Q. Why is it called a Pronoune?

A. Because it is put for a Noune.

Q. Wherein are Pronounes used?

A. In showing or rehearsing some thing which has been uttered before, or may
well be discerned.

Q. How many Pronounes are there?

A. ^here are but 15. Pronounes properly, the rest are compounded of them, or
added to them.
Sundry other Pronounes are found in old Writers, as, an am, for eam, em and im
for eum, hibus for his, med, ted, mis, it is, campse, quoi, ibus, etc. These and
the like are to be known, and not used.
Fifteen: as, Ego, tu, sui, etc.

Q. Have all Pronounes all the cases?

A. No: only four of them have the Vocative case: all the rest want it. Also
sui want^ the Nominative case.

Q. May not some other be added to them?

A. Yes: three compound Pronounes, Egomet, tute, idem: and also Qui is added to
the Pronounes, because it is used in rehearsing something, and it is declined
much like words of the second Declension of the Pronounes.
Qui, quae, quod.

* Q. Whereof are these three compounded?

A. Egomet, of ego and mete tute, of tu and te: idem of is and domum.

* Q. How many kind of Pronounes have you generally?

A. Two: Pronoune Substantives, and Pronoune Adjectiues.

* Q. How many Pronoune Substantives are there?

A. Three: Ego, tu, sui, with their compounds; all the rest are Adjectiues.

Q. How does your book divide the Pronounes?

A. Into Primitiues and Deriuatiues.

Q. How many Pronoune Primitiues are there?

A. Eight: Ego, tu, sui, ille, ipse, iste, hic and is.

Q. Why are they called Primitiues?

A. Because they are first words, and not derived of others.

Q. What are these Primitiues called besides?

A. Demonstratiues.

Q. Why so?

A. Because they commonly show a thing not spoken of before.

Q. Are not some of them called Relatiues?

A. Yes.

Q. Which are those?

A. Hic, ille, iste, is, with idem and qui joined to them.

Q. Why are these six called Relatiues?

A. Because they serve to rehearse a thing that was spoken of before.

* Q. Can Hic, ille, iste, and is, be both Demonstratiues and Relatiues?

A. Yes; in respect of the diverse uses to which they serve: that is, both to
show and to rehearse.

Q. Which of these is most specially called a Relative?

A. Qui. Qui of some Gra^marians is taken for a Noune.


Q. How many Pronounes Deriuatiues are there?

A. Seven: Meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester, nostras, vestras.

Q. Why are they called Deriuatiues?

A. Because they are derived of their Primitiues, Mei, tui, sui, nostri, and
vestri; the Genitive cases of Ego, tu, sui.

* Q. Show me how.

A. Meus comes of m^i, the Genitive case of Ego: tuus of tui, the Genitive case
of tu: suus of sui: nostras of nostri, the Genitive case plural of ego:
vestras of vestri, the Genitive case plural of tu.

Q. How many sorts of Deriuatiues have you?

These follow alter.
A. Two; Possessiues, and Gentiles.

Q. How many things belong to a Pronoune?

A. My book names five: Number, Case, Gender, as are in a Noune, Declension
and Person.

* Q. How will you know the Genders in Pronoune Substantives; as, in Ego, tu,
sui?

A. Though these are not properly of any Gender, yet they are to be understood
to be of that Gender, whereof the word or thing is, whereto they are referred,
or whereof they are spoken.

* Q. As how?

A. If they be referred to a word of the Masculine Gender, they are of the
Masculine; if to a word of the Feminine, they are of the Feminine: as, Ego
understood of a man, or any thing of the Masculine Gender, it is the Masculine
Gender; of a woman* or any thing of the Feminine Gender, it is a Feminine.

Q. How will you know the Genders in Pronoune Adjectives?

A. Like as in the Noune Adjectives.

Declensions of Pronounes.
Q. HOw many Declensions are there of a Pronoune?

A. Four.

* Q. How will you know what Declension every Pronoune is?

A. By the ending of the Genitive case singular, like as in Nounes.

Q. Give me the terminations of the Genitive case singular of each Declension.

A. Of the first in i: as, Ego, mei.

The second in ius, or jus: as, Ipse, ipsius: Qui, cujus.

The third in i, ae, i* like Adjectiues of three terminations; as, Mei, meae*
mei.

The fourth in atis; as, Nostras, nostratis.

Q. How many Pronounes are of the first Declension?

A. Three: Ego, tu, sui.

Q. Decline them Latin and English together.

A. Ego I, mei of me, mihi to me, me to me, a me from me. Nos we, nostrum vel
nostri of us, nobis to us, nos us, a nobis, from us.

So, English first. I ego, of me, etc. Tu thou, tui of thee, etc. Sui of
himself, or of themselves. Sibi to himself, or to themselves, etc.

Q. Then Sui is the same both in the singular and in the plural number.

A. Yes: in all the cases which it has; for it wants the Nominative and the
Vocative case.

Q. How many Pronounes are of the second Declension?

A. Six: Ille, ipse, iste, hic, is, and qui.

Q. What are they declined like?

A. Much like to unus, una, unum. Genesis unius.

Q. Do they all make their Genitive in ius, like unus?

A. No: these three, Haec is oftentimes used for hae in old Writers.
Hic, is, and qui, make the Genitive in jus: as, huius, eius, cuius.

Q. Are ille, ipse, iste, declined alike?

A. Yea: they are declined like iste. saving that ipse makes ipsum in the
Neuter Gender of the Nominative and Accusative case singular, not ipsud.

Q. But have not is and qui, a several declining?

A. Yes: they differ somewhat.

Q. Decline these, Latin and English together, and first iste.

A. Iste that Masculine, ista that Feminine, istud that Neuter, or that thing.
Genit. istius of that Masculine, Feminine, Neuter.

So, Is he, ea she, id that thing. Qui which Masculine: quae which Feminine:
quod which Neuter, etc.

* Q. Why do you say in the Ablative case of Qui, Ablat. quo, qua quo vel qui.

A. Because Qui, in the Ablative case is of all genders, and may be put for
quo, qua, or quo.

Q. How are Quis and Quid declined?

A. Note when Quis is compounded* it makes qua for quae, both in the Feminine
singular, and Neuter p^urall: as ^^qua, nequa; not nequae: so aliq^is, numquis*
Ecquis makes both ^^quae and ^^qua.
As qui, quae, quod: putting quis before qui, and quid after quod, thus;

Nom. Quis vel qui, quae, quod vel quid. Genesis cuius, etc.

So* Accus. Quem, quam, quod vel quid.

Q. How decline you Quisquis?

A. Sing. Nom. Quisquis, Quicquid.
etc.

* Q. What difference is there between quod and quid?

A. Quod requires commonly a Substantive, or Antecedent with it. Quid is
always a Substantive of the Neuter Gender.

Q. What Pronounes are of the third declension?

A. Five: Meus, tuus, suus, noster, and vester.

* Q. What are these called?

A. Possessiues.

Q. Why so?

A. Because they signify possession, or owning; as, Meus mine: tuus thine:
suus his: noster ours: vester yours.

Q. How are these declined?

A. Like Bonus: except that meus makes Meus for m^ in the Vocat. is by
Antiptosis as Virg. Tro^ce ^ela manu sa^ ^uis m^us.
mi, in the Masculine Gender of the Vocative case singular; and that tuus,
suus, vester, have no Vocative case at all.

Q. How many Pronounes are of the fourth Declension?

A. Two: nostras and vestras.

Q. What are these called?

A. Gentiles.

Q. Why so.

A. Because they properly betoken pertaining to some Of Gens, a Nation.
Country or Of Gens, a Nation.
Nation; to some sect or faction: as Nostras, one of our Country, or of our
sect or side. Vestras, one of your country, sect, or side.

Q. But your book ads Cuias: is it a Pronoune?

A. No: it is a Noune.

Q. Why is it declned here, being a Noune?

A. Because it has the same manner of declining with Nostras, and Vestras;
Arpinas of Arpinum* and Rauennas of Rauenna, are so declined.
like as all other Nounes that be Gentiles have: and because it comes of Cuius,
the Genitive case of Qui, quae quod.

Q. What signifies Cuias?

A. Of what country, or what countrie-man.

Q. What are these three declined like?

A. They are in all things declined like Tristis: saving that in the Nominative
and Vocative case singular, they make as for atis.

Q. Show me how by example.

A. Sing. Nom. H^c et haec Nostras et hoc Nostrate; for hic et haec nostratis,
et hoc nostrate: the termination atis being drawn into as.

Of the Persons in a Pronoune.
Q. WHat is the fifth thing belonging to a Pronoune?

A. Person.

* Q. What mean you by a Person?

A. Any person or thing which speaks of it self, or is spoken to, or spoken
of.

Q. How many persons be there?

A. Three.

Q. What is the first Person?

A. A word whereby any person speaks of himself alone or with others: as,
Ego I, Nos we.

Q. How many words are of this Person?

A. Ego, and nos: and no more properly.

Q. What is the second Person?

A. Any person or thing which is spoken to, either alone, or with others: as Tu
thou, Vos ye.

Q. How many words are of this Person?

A. Tu and Vos: and no more properly.

Q. But your book says, that every Vocative case is of the second Person.

A. That is by a figure, called Evocation.

Q. What is the reason of it?

A. Because Tu or Vos are understood in every Vocative case; and so the
Vocative case is made of the same Person with them.

Q. As how, for example?

A. When we say, o puer, o boy: we understand, o tu puer, o thou boy.

Q. What is the third Person?

A. That which is spoken of; as, Ille he, Illi they.

Q. What words are of the third Person?

A. All Persons belong to Nou^es Verbs and Participles, by reason of some Person
of the Pronoune joined to them expressed or understood, not properly.
Nounes, Pronounes and Participles; except Ego, nos, tu and uos.

Q. But these three, ipse, idem and qui, are sometime of the first and second
Person.

A. That is likewise by the figure Evocation, when they are joined with words
of the first or second Person, expressed or understood: as, with Ego, tu, nos,
or vos. For then they are made of the same Person.

Q. May not any Noune or Pronoune be of the first or second Person by the same
figure?

A. Yes.

* Q. To what end serve these Persons in Pronounes?

A. To express our mind fitly when we speak of any Person. For other
questions see the Latin Pronoune.
] More specially they serve for the forming of Verbes, wherein they are ever
expressed or understood in every word, in each Mood and Tense, except the
Infinitive.

Of a Verb.
Q. WHich is the third part of speech?

A. A Verb.

Q. What is a Verb?

A. A part of speech declined with This is meant of perfect Verbes. That Aue,
faxo, quaeso, etc. are not declined with Mood and Te^se, it is in regard of
use, not the nature of the words.
Mood and Tense, and betokens the doing, suffering, or being of any thing.

Q. Show me how it betokens doing, suffering, or being.

A. Thus: Doing, as, Amo, I do love: suffering, as, amor I am loved: being,
as, sum I am.

* Q. What is then the difference between a Noune and a Verb?

A. A Noune signifies the name of a thing: a Verb signifies the manner of
doing, suffering, or being of that thing.

Q. How many kind of Verbes are there?

A. Two: Personal, and Impersonall.

Q. What mean you by Personal?

A. A Verb that has Persons.

Q. What a Verb is that?

A. Such a Verb as is varied by diverse Persons: as, I love, thou love, he
loves, we love, etc.

Q. What is an Impersonall?

A. That which is not varied by more Persons, but only is formed in the third
Person singular, with this sign it: as, Decet it becomes.

Q. How many kind of Personalls are there?

A. Five: Active, Passive, Neuter, Deponent, and Common.

* Q. How do these differ one from another?

A. Three ways: First in termination or ending. Secondly, in signification.
Thirdly in declining or forming.

Q. How do they differ in Termination?

A. Some end in o, some in or, some few in m.

Q. What Verbes in o,?

A. A Verb Active, and a Verb Neuter.

Q. What Verbes end in or?

A. Passiues, Deponents, and Commons.

* Q. What Verbs end in m?

A. A few Neuters: as, sum, forem, inquam, possum: with other compounds of them.

Q. How then ends a Verb Active?

A. In o.

Q. What does it betoken or signify?

A. To do: as, amo I love; or I do love.

Q. What may a Verb Active be made?

A. A Passive.

Q. How?

A. By putting to r: as, of Amo I love; put to r, is made Amor.

Q. How ends a Verb Passive?

A. In or.

Q. What does it betoken?

A. It betokens passion or suffering, or something to be done: as Amor I am
loved.

Q. May not a Verb Passive be made an Active?

A. Yes.

Q. How?

A. By putting away r; as, of Amor take away r, it is made Amo.

Q How ends a Verb Neuter?

A. In o, or m: as, Curro I run: Sum, I am.

Q. Cannot a Verb Neuter take r, to make it a Passive, as Actiues do: as, of
Curro by putting to r, to make curror?

A. No: There is no such word as Curror.

Q. How is a Verb Neuter Englished?

A. Sometime Actiuely: that is like an Active; as, Curro I run: sometimes
Passiuely, or like a Passive; as, Aegroto, I am sick.

Q. How ends a Verb Deponent?

A. In r, like a Verb Passive.

Q. How does it signify?

A. Either like an Active: as, loquor, I do speak: or like a Verb Neuter
signifying Actiuely, not Passiuely; as, glorior, I do boast.

Q. How ends a Verb Common?

A. In r, like a Passive.

Q. How does it signify?

A. Both Actiuely and Few Verbes Commons are now in use, viz. signifying
Passiuely as well as Actiuely, except Criminor* Frustror, Osculor, and some
other, although many Participles of the Preter tense of Verbes Deponents may be
found signifying Passiuely, as Complexus, Meditatus, Interpretatus, Comitatus,
etc.
Passiuely: that is, both as a Verb Active, and as a Verb Passive: and
therefore it is called a Verb Common; as Osculor, I kiss, or am kissed.

* Q. How many I know in any place whether a Verb Common do signify Actiuely,
or Passiuely?

A. By the construction. For if it be construed as a Verb Active, it
signifies Actiuely; as, Osculor te I kiss thee: but if it have the
construction of a Verb Passive, it signifies Passiuely: as, Osculor a te I am
kissed of thee.

Q. Whether can a Verb Deponent or a Verb Common loose r, to be made Actiues?

A. No: Loquor cannot be made loquo, nor Osculor osculo.

* Q. But some of these kinds of verbs are said to be Transitiue, others
Intransitiue: how may I know which are Transitiue, which Intransitiue?

A. Those are Transitiue whose action or doing passes into another thing, and
have not a perfect sense in themselves: as, Amo Magistrum, I love the Master.

* Q. What is the way to know them?

A. If I may fitly ask the question whom or what, made by the Verb, to show
the meaning of it. As, when you say Amo I love; another may ask whom or what
do you love; or else he understands not your meaning.

Q. Which are Intransitiue?

A. Such as have an absolute or perfect sense in their own signification,
without asking any question: as, Curro I run, Aegroto I am sick.

* Of all the five kinds which are Transitiues?

A. Actiues, Deponent, and Commons signifying Actiuely, that is when they are
construed like Actiues.

Q. Which are Intransitives?

A. Verbs Passiues, Neuters and Cmmmons signifying Passiuely, that is, being
construed as Passiues.

Moodes.
Q. YOu said a Verb was declined with Mood and Tense: what is a Mood?

Or a Mood is the manner of speech used in signifying the doing suffering or
being of any thing.
A. The manner of speech wherein the signification of a Verb is uttered: as, in
declaring, commanding, wishing, or the like.

Q. How many Moodes are there?

A. Six: the Indicative, Imperative, Optatiue, Potentiall, Subiunctiue and
Infinitive.

Q. What is the Indicative?

A. That which only shows a reason true or false: as, Amo, I love; or else
asks a question: as, Amas tu? do thou love?

What sign has it?

A. None.

Q. How know you the Imperative?

A. It bids or commands, as, Ama, love thou.

* Q. What sign has it?

A. It may have the sign Let; except in the second Persons: where it is
evidently known by bidding.

Q. How know you the Optatiue?

A. It wishes or desires.

Q What signs has it?

A. These signs; Would God, I pray God, or God grant.

Q. What has it joined with it in Latin?

A. An Aduerbe of wishing: as, vtinam Amem, God grant I love.

Q. How know you the Potentiall Mood?

A. It shows an ability, will or duty to do any thing.

Q. What signifies it?

A. May, can, might, would, should, ought or could: as, Amem, I may or can love.

Q. How differs it in Latin from the Optatiue and Subiunctiue, seeing that
they have all one termination?

A. Because it has neither Aduerb nor Conjunction joined with it.

Q. How know you the Subjunctiue Mood?

A. It has evermore some Conjunction joined with it: or some Aduerbe having
the nature of a Conjunction: as, That, if, when, whereas: as, Cum amarem, when
I loved.

Q. Why is it called the Subjunctiue Mood?

A. Because it depends upon some other Verb in the same sentence, either
going before or coming after it; as, Cum amarem eram miser, when I loved I was
a wretch. Amarem, I loved, depends of eram, I was.

* Q. Is there no difference in Latin, between the Optatiue, Potentiall, and
Subjunctiue Moodes?

A. No: save in signification, and signs of the Moodes.

Q. What signifies the Infinitive?

A. To do, to suffer, or to be.

Q. Whether has it Number and Person, as other Moodes have?

A. No: it has neither Number, nor Person, nor Nominative case.

Q. What is the common sign to know it by?

A. To: as Amare to love.

Q. When two Verbs come together without any Nominative case between them,
what Mood must the latter be?

A. The Infinitive: as, Cupio discere, I desire to learn.

Gerunds.
Q. WHat are there moreover belonging to the Infinitive Mood?

A. All Verbs Personalls which are perfect and regular have Gerunds and
Supines, except only Passiues: and such are excepted and noted to want their
Supines. Impersonalls have none.
Gerunds and Supines.

* Q. Why do they belong to the Infinitive Mood?

A. Because their signification is infinite, like to the signification of the
Infinitive Mood; not making any difference of Number or Person.

Q. How many Gerunds are named of Gerendo, because they signify the manner of
doing something. Supines (as Melancthon thinks) of Supinus, because they
have no case before them.
Gerunds are there?

A. Three: the first ending in di, the second in do, the third in dum.

Q. What signification have they?

A. Both the Active and Passive: as, Amandi of loving, or of being loved:
Amando in loving, or in being loved: Amandum to love, or to be loved.

Q. Some decline these, Genesis Amandi, Accusat. Amandum, Abla. Amando, But I take
it better to decline them only as they are declined in the Verb.
How will you decline these?

A. They are declined in the Verb.

Supines.
Q. HOw many Supines be there?

A. Two: one ending in um, called the first Supine: the other ending in u,
which is called the later Supine.

Q. Why is that in um called the first Supine?

A. Because it has It has the signification of a Verb Passive, when it comes
of a Verb signifying Passiuely: or when it has iri, the Infinitive Mood of
itur joined with it.
for the most part, the signification of the Infinitive Mood of the Verb
Active: as, Amatum to love.

Q. Why is that in u called the later Supine?

A. Because it has for the most part the signification of the Infinitive Mood
Passive: as, Amatu to be loved.

Tenses.
* Q. What is a Tense?

A. The Tense signifies the time wherein any Person is said to do or suffer
any thing.
The A Noune may signify time, as a day, etc. but not the doing, suffering, or
being of a thing in time, as a Verb does.
difference of a Verb according to the times past, present, to come.

Q. How many Tenses are there?

A. There are properly but three senses or times.
Five: The Present tense, the Preterimperfect tense, the Preterperfect tense,
the Preterpluperfect tense, and the Future tense.

* Q. How may these be known asunder? The time past, present, to com.
Our book diuides the Pretertense or time past, into three* ( viz.)
Preterimperfect tense, not perfectly past. Preterperfect tense, perfectly past.
Preterpluperfect tense more then perfectly past.


A. By the times which they speak of, and by signs.

Q. What time does the Present tense speak of?

A. The time that is now present: as, Amo, I love.

Q. What signs has it?

A. Do, do^st, or does, in the Active voice: and am, are, art, is, or be, in
the Passive.

Q. What speaks the Preterimperfect tense of?

A. Of the time that is not perfectly past, but as it were still present: as,
Amabam I loved or did love.

Q. What signs may it be known by?

A. By these, did or did, in the Active voice: and was, were, were, in the
Passive.

Q. What time speaks the Preterperfect tense of?

A. That which is perfectly past, though lately: as Amaui, I have loved.

Q. What signs has it?

A. Have, have or has in the Active: have been, have been, or has been, in
the Passive.

Q. What time speaks the Preterpluperfect tense of?

A. Of that which is more then perfectly past, or past a long while since.

Q. What signs has it?

A. Had or had in the Active: had been, or had been, in the Passive.

Q. What time speaks the Future tense of?

A. Of the time to come.

Q. What signs has it?

A. Shall or will in the Active: shall be, or will be, in the Passive.

* Q. Give me all the usual signs of the Active together.

A. The principal signs of the Active, are, Do, did, have, had, shall or
will.
Do or does; did or did; have, have, or has; had or had; shall or will.

* Q. Give me the usual signs of the Passive.

A. Am, be, is, are, art; was, were, were; have been, had been, shall or will
be.

Persons.
* Q. WHat is a Person in a Verb?

A. Every several word, in every Mood and Tense: except the Infinitive Mood;
which has no Person.

Q. Why are these called Persons?

A. Because one of the three Persons of the Pronoune, is understood in every
one of them: as, Amo I love, is as much as, ego amo; amas thou love, as much
as tu amas; amat he loves, as much as ille amat: and so in the rest.

Q. How many Persons are there in Verbs?

A. In Verbs Personals* there are three in either Number; like as in the
Pronoune.

* Q. Has every Mood and Tense, three Persons in either Number?

A. Yea, in perfect Verbs; except that the Imperative Mood wants the first
Person of the singular Number; and the Infinitive has no Persons at all, as
was said.

* Q. What differ your Persons in Verbs, from Persons in Nounes and Pronounes?

A. The Persons in Nounes and Pronounes, signify who or what Person it is,
that does, or suffers any thing. The Persons in Verbs signify, what it is,
that such a Person does or suffers.

* Q. Show it by an example.

A. Magister docet, the Master teaches: Magister is the Person of the Noune
doing something; docet, the Person of the Verb, signifying what he does.

Coniugations.
* Q. WHat is a Conjugation?

A. A Conjugation is a fit varying of verbs by their final terminations in
both Numbers, and in every person, in each Mood and Tense.
The varying of a Verb, according to Moods, Tenses, and Persons.

Q. How many Coniugations have Verbs?

A. Four.

Q. How may they be known asunder?

A. By their several vowels; which are their marks to know them by.

Q. What is the vowell of the first Conjugation to know it by?

A. Do and certain compounds of it are excepted: as, circundo, pessundo,
secundo, which make a short, as, damus, circundamus, as is in the Latin
Prosodia.
A long, before re and ris: as, amare, amaris.

Q. What of the second?

A. E long, before re and ris: as, docere, doceris.

Q. What of the third?

A. E short, before re and ris: as, lege^e, legeris.

Q. What of the fourth?

A. I long, before re and ris: as, audire, audiris.

* Q. Where must you find this re and ris which you speak of?

A. Re, in the Infinitive Mood Active; which is the fourth word in declining
the Verb in the Active voice: as, Amo, amas, amaui, amare: and ris, in the
second Person Passive; that is, in the second word in declining a Verb
Passive: as, Amor, amaris.

Of declining and coniugating Verbs.
Q. THat you may be skilful in all Verbs (which with the knowledge of the
Nounes,
is accounted the most speedy help to attain the Latin tongue) what must you
do?

A. I must learn to be very perfect, in Declining a Verb, is the rehearsing
of the first and second Person of the Present tense, with the first Person of
the Preterperfect tense of the Indicative Mood: the Present tense of the
Infinitive mood: the Gerunds* Supines and Parciciples belonging to that Verb
and voice.
declining and coniugating any Verb.

Q. How many examples have you to decline, and conjugate all perfect Verbs by?

A. Four; according to the number of the Conjugations.

Q. In how many voices are these examples Forming or conjugating a Verb, is
the breaking or vary^ng the first word of the Verb, into sundry other words
coming of it, by Persons, Tenses, Moodes.
formed?

A. In two: Active, and Passive. All Verbs in o, are formed like Amo, Doceo,
Lego or Audio. All Verbs in or, like Amor, Doceor, Legor, Audior.

* Q. Are Deponents and Commons declined like Passiues?

A. Yes: saving that they are to have Gerunds and Supines declined with them,
because they want Actiues: and they have Participles, as they are set down in
the Participle after.

* Q. What is the chief benefit of this perfect readiness, in declining and
conjugating?

A. To be able, as in the Noune, to give either the English to the Latin; or
Latin to the English of any Verb, in each Mood, Tense, and Person: and
thereby to be able to proceed most speedily in construing, parsing, and making
Latin.

* Q. How will you do that?

A. By being perfect in all the Persons, thorough each Mood and Tense, to be
able to give both English to Latin, and Latin to English in them: and after
to run the Terminations of every Tense and Person, in my mind; together with
the signs of every Person in English.

Q. But how will you do in the Imperative Mood, which has no first Person
singular?

A. Give it in the second Person.

Q. Show me an example hereof: and first of saying the Latin before.

A. Amo I love, amabam I loved or did love, amaui I have loved, amaueram I had
loved, amabo I shall or will love.

Imperative second Person, Ama amato love thou.

Optatiue vtinam Amem grant I love, etc.

Q. Give me the English first.

A. I love Amo, I loved or did love amabam, etc. as in declining Nounes.

Q. But let me hear how you run the Terminations: as, in Amo.

A. O, as, at, amus, atis, ant. So in Amabam, bam, bas, bat, bamus, batis, ba^t.

Q. Which are those English signs, which you must run in your mind, with
these terminations?

A. The Persons in English; I, thou, he, we, ye and they.

Q. Then if you can give the first Person in any Tense, you can by this means
give any Person of the same, by remembering, or running in your mind, the
terminations and signs together.

A. Yes.

Q. How say you, I loved or did love?

A. Amabam.

Q. They loved or did love?

A. Amabant.

Q. If you be asked any Person which you cannot tell, what must you do to
find it?

A. Call to mind but the first Person of that Tense, and run the rest in my
mind until I come to it.

Q. How, for example?

A. If I be asked, how I say, We had taught, I straight remember I had taught
docueram: and so running in my mind, ram, ras, rat, ramus, ratis, rant; and
withal, I, thou, he, we, ye, they; I find docueramus we had taught.

* Q. Give me the first Persons of those Tenses, which come one of another:
and first which come of the Present tense.

A. Amo, amabam, amabo, amem, amarem, amare.

* Q. Give those which come of the Preterperfect tense.

A. Amaui, amaueram, amauerim, amauero, amauissem, amauisse.

Q. Rehearse them together as they stand in the book.

A. Amo, amabam, amaui, amaueram, amabo: Ama, amato; Amem, amarem, amauerim,
amauissem, amauero, amare, amauisse.

Q. Rehearse them Actiuely, and Passiuely together, as they stand in order.

A. Amo amor, amabam amabar, amaui amatus sum vel fui, amaueram amatus eram vel
fueram, amabo amabor.

Imper. second Person, Ama amato, amare amator.

Optat. Potentiall and Subiunctiue, Amem amer, amarem amarer, amauerim amatus
sim vel fuerim, amauisse^ amatus essem vel fuissem, amauero amatus er^ vel
fuero.

Infinitive, Amare amari; amauisse, amatum esse vel fuisse.

Illi polliciti sese facturum omnia. Est quod speremus deos bonis benefacturum.
Amaturum esse, amatum iri vel amandum essem.

Amandi, amando, amandum; Amatum, amatu; amans, amatus, amaturus, amandus.

* Q. Give the terminations of the first Persons of the Active voice alone.

Make these terminations exceeding perfect: all the rest will be soon gotten
and easily kept by often repeating these over thus.
A. O, bam, i, ram, bo or am. Em or am, rem, rim, sem, to.

Q. Give the signs of the Tenses answering.

A. Do, did, have, had, shall or will; as before.

Q. Give the terminations of the Active and Passive together.

A. O or, bam bar, i sum vel bo bor, am ar.
fui, ram eram vel fueram Em er am ar
rem rer, rim sim vel fuerim, sem essem vel fuissem, to ero vel fuero.

Infinite. e, i: se esse vel fuisse.

* Q. Is there yet no further help for knowing the several Persons?

A. Yes. The first Persons Active end in o, am, em, im, or i: the second in as,
es, is or sti: the third in at, et, it: the first Plural in mus; the second in
it is; the third in nt.

Q. How end the first Persons Passive?

A. The first Persons end commonly in or, ar, er; the second in aris, eris,
iris; the third in tur; the first Plural in mur; the second in mini; the third
in ntur.

In the Preterperfect tenses, Preterplup. and Future tenses Passive, the
terminations are the same with the tenses in Sum, es, fui, of which they are
borrowed: except the Future tense of the Indicative Mood.

* Q. Which do you account the speediest way of all, to get and keep these
Verbs?

A. This often repetition of these terminations in Latin, and of the English
signs of the Moodes, Tenses, and Persons: and also much examination of the
Active and Passive together: as, asking, I love, Amo: I am loved, Amor: he
loves, amat: he is loved, amatur: they love, amant: they are loved, amantur,
etc.

Of Sum and other Verbes out of rule.
Q. WHat rules have you for Verbes ending in m?

A. There are no rules for them, they are irregular: that is, without rule.

Q. Are none of them declined in your book?

A. Yes: Sum and Possum.

Q. How are others in m declined?

A. They with most other lame Ve^bs, or which are irregular, At Sed (...) vt
totum
are set down in the Latin Grammar by themselves: except volo, nolo, malo,
edo, fio, fero, feror; which do follow after.

Q. Is not a perfect readiness in this verb Sum, as necessary as in any other
of the Verbes?

A. Yes, and more also.

Q. Why?

A. Because it serves for declining of all Verbs in or, and also for that it
is of perpetual use.

Q. How will you come to be perfect in this Verb Sum?

A. By the same means as in Amo, doceo, etc. and so in volo, nolo, malo, and
the rest of those Verbs out of rule: chiefly in being perfect in giving all the
first Persons, both English to Latin, and Latin to English.

Q. Have you not some special observations concerning these two Verbs, Eo and
queo?

A. Yes.

Q. Wherein do they differ from other Verbes?

A. In the Preterimperf. and Future tense of the Indicative Mood, and in the
Gerunds.

Q. How do they make their Preterimperfect tense?

A. A^dibant leni^ant, scibar^, sae^tham, and the like, are by the figure
Sy^cope.
Ibam and quibam; not iebam.

Q. How do they make their Future tense?

A. Ib^ and quibo: not iam.

Q. How do they make their Gerunds?

A. So they make the oblique cases of the Participle of the Present tense: as,
of Ien^, the Genitive is euntis, so eunti, etc.
Eundi, eundo, eundum; not ieudi: so queundi, queundo, qu^undum.

Q. How are they varied in all other Moodes and Tenses?

A. Like Verbes in o, of the fourth Conjugation.

Q. What Tenses are formed of the Preterperfect tense of the Indicative Mood?

A. All other Preterperfect tenses, Preterpluperfect tenses, and Future tenses;
except the Future tense of the Indicative Mood.

Q. How are these formed of the Preterperfect tense of the Indicative Mood.

A. Those which end in ram, rim, or to, be formed of it, by changing i, into e
short: and then putting to ram, rim, or to: as, of Amaui, are made amaueram,
amauerim, amauero. Those which end in sem, or se, be formed of it only by
putting to s and sem, or se: as of Amaui, amauissem, amauisse.

Impersonals.
Q. We have done with Verbs Personals: to come to Impersonals, how are they
declined?

A. They are not declined as Verbes Personals, but only formed in the third
Person singular through all Moodes and Tenses: as, Delectat, delectabat, etc.

Q. What signs have they to know them by?

A. They have commonly before their English this sign it, and sometimes there.

Of a Participle.
Q. WHat is your fourth part of speech, which is declined?

A. A Participle?

Q. What is a Participle?

A. A part of speech derived a^ a Verb, taking part of a Noune, etc.

Q. Of what is a Participle derived?

A. Of a Verb^, from whence it has the beginning.

Q. Why is it called a Participle?

A. Of taking part. Because it has nothing of it self, but what it takes from
others.

Q. What parts of speech does it take part of?

A. Part of a Noune; part of a Verb; and part of both a Noune and a Verb
together.

Q. What does i^ take of a Noune only, or severally?

A. Gender, Case and Declension.

Q. What of a Verb alone?

A. Tense and signification.

Q. What does it take of both of them together?

A. Number and figure.

* Q. How is a Participle declined?

A. With Number, Case and Gender; as a Noune Adjectiue.

Q. There are two of the Active voice; as, the Participle of the Present and
the Fut. in rus. two of the Passive; that is, the Participle of the
Pretertense, and Future in ^us.
How many kinds of Participles are there?

A. Four: one of the Present tense, another of the Preter tense, one of the
Future in rus, an other of the Future in dus.

Q. How can you know them?

A. Partly, by their endings; partly, by their signification.

Q. How ends the Latin of the Participle of the Present tense?

A. In ans, or ens: as, amans, docens.

Q. How ends it in English?

A. In ing: as, loving.

Q. Is every word ending in ing, a Participle of the Present tense?

No: unless the Latin end also in ans, or ens, having the other properties of
a Participle.

Q. What time does it signify?

A. The time present.

Q. What is the Latin of the Participle of the present tense formed of?

A. Of the For forming ^articiples of Verbs (...).
Preterimperf. tense of the Indicative Mood, by changing the last syllable into
ns: as, of Amabam, bam turned in ns, is made amans: so, of Auxiliabar,
auxilians.

Q. What does a Participle of the Future in rus, signify or betoken?

A To do; like the Infinitive Mood, of the Active voice: as, Amaturus to love,
or about to love.

Q. What time does it signify?

A. The time to come, but Actiuely.

Q. How ends it in Latin?

A. In rus: as, amaturus.

Q. What is it formed of?

A. These Participles (...) are formed irregularly. Stockwood.
Of the later Supine by putting to rus: as, of Doctu, docturus.

Q. How ends the English of the Participle of the Pretertense?

A. In d, t, or n: as, loved, taught, slain.

Q. How ends his Latin?

A. In tus, sus, xus: as, amatus loved, visus seen, nexus knit.

Q. Do all of them end either in tus, sus, or xus, in Latin?

A. Yea all; except Mortuus dead, which ends in uus.

* Q. What time does a Participle of the Preter tense signify?

A. The time past.

Q. What is it formed of?

A. Of the later Supine by putting to s: as, of Lectu, lectus.

Q. What signifies a Participle of the future in dus?

A. To suffer; like the Infinitive Mood of the Passive voice: as, Amandus to
be loved.

* Q. What time does it signify?

A. The time to come Passiuely.

Q. Of what is it formed?

A. Of the Genesis Case of the Participle of the Present tense.

Q. How?

A. By changing it is, into dus: as, of Amantis, turn it is into dus, and it is
made Amandus.

Q. But has it not sometimes the signification of the Active voice; and of the
Participle of the Present tense?

A. Yes: as, Legendus reading. As in this sentence; Legendis veteribus
proficis; In reading old authors thou do profit.

Q. Is it then properly a Participle of the Future in dus, when it signifies
Actiuely?

A. No. It is rather an Adjectiue Gerundiue.

Q. Has every kind of Verb all the four Participles?

A. No.

Q. How many Participles have Verbs Actiues and Dolendus and carendus, are out
of rule. Erratus, excursus percursus, are taken to come of Verbs Impersonals of
the Passive voice: so regnatus, triumphatus, or abusiuely.
Neuters, which have the Supines?

A. Two: one of the Present tense, and another of the Future in rus.

Q. But what if these lack the Supines?

A. Then they want the Future in rus.

Q. Why so?

A. Because it is derived of the later Supine. As, of Disco is only discens;
without a Participle of the Future in rus.

Q What Participles have Verbs Passiues, whose Actiues have the Supines?

A. Two: a Participle of the Preter tense, and of the Future in dus: as, of
Amor, comes amatus, amandus.

Q. But what if the Actiues want the Supines?

A. They want then the Participle of the Preter tense.

Q. Why so?

A. Because the Participle of the Preter tense should be formed of the later
Supine which is wanting. As, of Timeor is only timendus.

Q. What Participles has a Verb Deponent?

A. Three: one of the Present tense; another of the Pretertense, and one of the
future in rus: as, of Auxilior, comes auxilians, auxiliatus, auxiliaturus.

Q. Can it never have a Participle of the Future in dus?

A. Yes; if it govern an Accusative case, as being a Verb Transitiue: as,
Loquor ver^u^; Loquor, may form loquendus.

Q. How many Participles has a Verb Common?

A. All the four Participles: as, of Largior, comes largiens, largiturus,
largitus, largiendus.

Q. How are the Participles of the Present tense declined?

A. Like Nounes Adjectiues of three Articles: as, Nom. Hic, haec and hoc Amans;
like Foelix.

Q. How are Participles of other tenses declined?

Like Nouns Adjectiues of three diverse endings: as, Nom. Amatus, amata, amatum;
like Bonus, a, um: so all the rest.

Of an Aduerbe.
Q. WHich is your fifth part of speech; and the first of those which are
undeclined?

A. An Aduerbe.

Q. What is an Aduerbe?

A. A part of speech joined to the Verbes, to declare their signification.

Q. Why is it called an Aduerbe?

A. Because it is vsu^lly joined to V^rbs, in speaking.

Q. May it not be joined unto other parts of speech also?

A. Yes: to such words as are in the place of Verbes, and some other; as,
sometimes to Nounes, sometimes to Aduerbes.

Q Whereto is an Aduerbe joined to the Verbs?

A. To declare their signification; that is, to make their signification more
plain and full.

* How?

A. By some circumstance of time, place, number, order, or the like, according
to the the several kinds of Aduerbs; As, when I taught, where, how often, in
what order: and the like hereunto.

Q. Rehearse the sorts of your Aduerbs.

A. Aduerbs are of Time, Place, Number Order: and so as they stand in the book.

Q. Give me your Aduerbs, Englishing them in order.

A. Aduerbs of time: as, Hodie to day, cras to morrow, heri yesterday: perendie
they day after to morrow, olim in time past, aliquando sometimes, nuper of late,
quando when.

Of Place: as, vbi where, ibi there, hic here, istic there, illic there, intus
within, foris without.

Of Number: as, Semel once, bis twice, ter thrice, quater four times, iterum
again.

Of Order: as, Inde from thence: deinde afterward: denique to conclude:
postremo last of all.

Of Asking or Doubting: as, Cur wherefore, quare wherefore, vnde from whence,
quorsum to what end, number whether, numquid whether.

Of Calling: as, Heus hoe, o hoe: ehodum hoe syrrah.

Of Affirming: as, Certe surely, nae verily, profecto truly, sane truly or
doubtless, scilicet doubtless or truly, Scilicet q. scire licet.
licet be it so, esto be it so.

Of Denying: as, Non not, haud not, minime no, or in no wise, neutiquam not, or
in no wise, nequaquam no, or in no wise.

Of Swearing: as, ver. Pol in good-sooth, ver. Pol by Pollux. Aedepol by the
Temple of Pollux.

Me dius fidius, as Fidus the son of Jupiter, and God of faithfulness, love
me; like Me Hercule, as Hercules shall help me.

Sodes q. si audes.


aedepol in good-sooth, H^rcle truly, Medius-fidius in faith or truth.

Of Exhorting: as, Eia go to, or well, age go to, agite go ye to, agedum
well, go to yet.

Of Flatering: as Sodes if thou dare, or on good fellowship, amabo of all
love.

Of Forbidding: as, Ne no, not.

Of Wishing: as, vtinam I would to God, si O that, o si O if, o oh that.

Of Gathering together: as, Simul together, vna together, pariter together, non
modo not only, non solum not only.

Of Parting: as, Seorsim asunder, or one from another: sigillatin^ every one
asunder or peculiarly, vicatim street by street, or village by village.

Of Choosing: as, Potius rather, imo yea rather.

Of a thing not finished: as, Pene almost, fere almost, prope nigh, or near, or
almost, vix scarsly, modo almost.

Of Showing: as, En behold, ecce behold.

Of Doubting: as, Forsan peradventure, forsitan peradventure, fortassis it may
be, fortasse it may be peradventure.

Of Chance: as, Forte by chance, fortuito by chance, or at adventure.

Of Likeness: as, Sic so, sicut like as, quasi as, ceu as, tanquam even as,
velut as.

Of Quality: as, Been well, male euilly, docte learnedly, fortiter valiantly.

Of Quantity: as, Multum much, parum little, minimum the least of all,
paululum very little, plurimum the most of all or very much.

Of Comparison: as, Tam so or as well, quam as, magis more, minus less, maxim
especially.

Q. Are not some Aduerbs compared?

A. Yes; certain are: as, Docte learnedly, doctius more learnedly, doctissime
most learnedly. Fortiter valiantly, fortius more valiantly, fortissime most
valiantly. Prope near, propius nearer, proxime the nearest of all.

Aduerbs coming of Nou^s which are compared irregularly, do follow their
manner of comparing: as, of Bonus, Melior, optimus, is Been, melius, op^ime.
* Q. Do these form the Co^paratiue, and the Superlatiue degree of their
Positive, as Adjectiues do?

A. No: they have no Comparatiue nor Superlatiue degree, of themselves; neither
do form any Comparison properly.

* Q. How then have they these degrees?

A. They do borrow them of Nounes Adjectiues of the Comparatiue and
Superlatiue degree.

* Q. How do their Co^paratiue and Superlatiue degrees end?

A. Their Comparatiues end in us; like the Neuter Gender of the Adjectiue of
the Comparatiue degree.

Q. How end their Superlatiues?

A. They end for most part in e, like the Masculin Gender of the Vocative case
of their Adjectiue of the Superlatiue degree. Of which they seem to be
formed: as Docte, doctius, doctissime.

Q. Neuter Adjectiues ^re often put for Aduerbs as, recens pro r^center, toruum
for t^rue.

This is when they are taken Aduerbially, signifiing as Aduerbs.


Do not some Superlatiues end in um?

A. Yes: some few which have the termination of the Neuter Gender, of the
Vocative case, whereof they come: as, Plurimum, potissimum.

Q. Are not Prepositions sometimes made Aduerbes?

A. Yes: when they are set alone without a case.

* Q. How may we know Aduerbs?

A. Easily. Many of them are set down in the Accidence. The rest may be known
partly by their English, partly by their Latin; chiefly by their English and
Latin together.

* Q. How by their English?

A. Most of them, besides these in the book, are Aduerbs of Quality, and do
commonly end in ly, in English: as, wisely, learnedly.

Q. How by their Latin?

A. They end commonly in e, or us, and are marked over the head with a grave
accent, to distinguish them from Nouns: as, Docte, doctius, doctissime. Or else
they end in er: as, Prudenter, wisely.

* Q. How by their English and Latin together?

A. Thus: as, Docte learnedly, doctius more learnedly, doctissme most
learnedly. Fortiter valiantly, fortius more valiantly, fortissime most
valiantly.

Q. But have you not some ending in o, like Ablative cases?

A. Yes: as, Tanto by so much: and some also in im: as, furtim theeuishly,
coming of the verb furor. But these have their accents to know them by, like
as those in um, and the rest.

Of a Conjunction.
Q. WHich is your second part of speech undeclined?

A. A Conjunction.

Q. What is a Conjunction?

A. A part of speech that joineth words and sentences together.

* Q. What is then the use of Conjunctions?

A. To join words and sentences.

Q. How many kinds have you of them?

A. Twelve: Copulatiues, Disjunctiues, Discretiues, Causals, Conditionals,
Exceptiues, Interrogatiues, Illatiues, Aduersatiues, Redditiues, Electiues,
Diminutiues.

Q. Give me your Conjunctions, Latin and English together.

A. These are called Copulatiues, because they serve to couple parts of
sentences absolutely. Disiunctiues, by which parts of sentences are so
severed, as if one only could be true. Discretiues, by which the parts are
lightly severed. Causals, which show a cause of a thing going before.
Co^ditionals, by which the part following is knit, upon condition of that going
before. Exceptiues, do except against something going before, or from something
following. Interrogatiues ask a question. Illatiues, bring in some conclusion
or show something. Aduersatiues show some diversity of things. Redditiues,
answer to the Aduersatiues. For the order of the Conjunctions how they are to
be placed, and other questions, see the Latin Conjunction.
Copulatiues: as, Et and, que and, quoque also, ac and, atque and, ^oc neither,
neque neither.

Disjunctiues: as, Aut either, ve or, or either, vel either, sen either, sine
either.

Discretiues: as, Sed but, quidem but truly, autem but, vero but, at but, ast
but.

Casuals: as, Nam for, namque for, enim for, etenim for, quia because, vt that,
quod that, quum since that, quoniam because, and quando (set for quoniam) since
that, or because.

Conditionals: as, Si if, sin but if, modo so that, dum so that, dummodo so
that.

Exceptiues: as, N^ except, nisi except, quin but, alioquin except that, or
otherwise, praeter quam except that.

Interrogatiues: as, Ne whether, an whether, utrum whether, necne whether or
no, anne whether or no, nonne is it not so.

Illatiues: as, Ergo therefore, ideo therefore, igitur therefore, quare
wherefore, it aque therefore, proin therefore.

Aduersatiues: as, Et si although, quanquam although, quam^is although, licet
although or albeit, esto be it so.

Redditiues to the same: as, Tamen notwithstanding, attamen yet notwithstanding.

Electiues: as, Quam how, ac as, atque as, or then.

Diminutiues: as, Saltem at least, vel yea, or at the leastwise.

Of a Preposition.
Q. WHich is your third part of speech undeclined?

A. A Preposition.

Q. What is a Preposition?

A. A part of speech most commonly set before other parts of speech, either
in Apposition, or in Composition.

Q. Why do you say, most commonly set before other parts?

A. Because some Prepositions are orderly set after their cases; the rest also
may be set after, sometimes.

Q. What mean you by Apposition, when you say a Preposition is set before in
Apposition?

A. When a Preposition is only set before an other word, yet is not made one
with it, but remains a perfect word of it self: as, Ad patrem.

Q. What mean you by Composition, when you say a Preposition is set before in
Composition?

A. When it is made a part of the word which it is set before: as, indoctus
unlearned.

Q. To what use do Prepositions serve specially?

A. To govern cases: or to serve to cases, as our book has it.

* Q. What cases do they serve to?

A. To three. Some to an Accusative, some to an Ablative; some both to an
Accusative and an Ablative.

Q. How many Prepositions serve to the Procul is sometimes a Preposition, and
joined both to the Accusative and to the Ablative cases. Cooper.
Accusative case?

A. Two and thirty: namely, Ad to, apud at, ante before, etc.

Q. How many serve to the Ablative case?

A. These fifteen. Portat prae sibi, h. e. praeportat sibi, or prae, h. e.
praesidium sieve co^meatum, sibi. Lamb. in Plau. Venio advorsum tempori, h. e.
advorsum Menechmum tempori, h. e. opportune. Stockw.
A, ab, abs, from or fro, etc.

Q. How many serve to both cases?

A. Only these four; In, sub, super, and subter.

Q. What Prepositions are set after their cases?

A. These three: versus, penes, and tenus, are ordinarily set after; also cum
and vsque, sometimes: as, mecum, ad occidentem vsque.

* Q. May not the rest of the Prepositions be so set after their cases also?

A. Yes: by the figure Anastrophe: as, Italiam contra.

Q. Can no Preposition serve to a Genitive case?

A. Yes; Tenus.

Q. When is that?

A. When the casual word joined with Tenus is the Plural number, then it must
be put in the Genitive case, and be set before tenus: as, Aurium tenus, up to
the ears; genuum tenus, up to the knees.

Q. If Prepositions be set alone without any case; whether are they then
Prepositions?

A. No: they are then changed into Aduerbs: and so if they do form the
degrees of Comparison.

Q. May those four which serve to both cases, have either an Accusative case
or an Ablative, as we will?

A. No: except Subter, which we may use at our pleasure.

* Q. How know you then when to join them to the Accusative case; when to the
Ablative?

A. By their signification: for when they are put for other Prepositions
serving to the Accus. case, they will commonly have an Accusative case: so for
Prepositions serving to the Ablative, an Ablative.

Q. When does in, serve to the Accusative case?

A. When it has the sign to, joined with the English: as, in vrbem, into the
City. Or, when it is put for Erga toward, contra against, or ad unto.
Otherwise, it serves to an Ablative.

* Q. When does Sub govern an Accusative case?

A. When it is put for Ad, per, or ante; that is, when it signifies unto, by,
about or before. Otherwise, it gouerns an Ablative.

* Q. When does Super govern an Accusative?

A. When it is put for vltra beyond. Else it will have an Ablative.

* Q. Have you no more Prepositions but these?

A. Yes: These have commonly these significations or the like, which by use in
reading may easily be observed; Am about, di from, etc. dis asunder, re back or
again: se asunder: con together. se q. scorsim. con. q. cum.
These six; Am, di, dis, re, se, con.

Q. Do these serve to any cases?

A. No: they serve only to make Compound words; so that they are never found
alone, but only in Composition, compounded with other words.

Q. Are not Prepositions compared?

A. No: except some of them when they are changed into Aduerbs as, Prope,
propius, proxime.

Of an Interjection.
Q. WHat i^ your last part of speech?

A. An Interjection.

Q. What is an Interjection?

A. A part of speech, which signifies some sudden affection, or passion of
the mind, in an imperfect voice.

Q. How many kinds of Interjections have you?

A. So many as there are sudden passions or motions of the mind:] as of
mirth, sorrow, dread and the like: as they are in my book.

Q. Give me the English of your Interjections; as you did of Aduerbs and
Conjunctions.

A. They are imperfect voices: and so have no proper English words: yet we may
English them thus, after our custom of speech.

Some be of mirth: as Euax hey, vah hey-da.

Sorrow: as, Heu alas, hei ah alas.

Dread: as, Atat oh, or out-alas.

Maruelling: as, Pape o wonderful!

Disdaining: as, Hem oh or what, vah ah.

Shunning: as, Apage get thee gone, or fie away.

Praising: as, Euge o well done!

Scorning: as, Hui hoe, alas.

Exclamation: as, Proh Deum atque hominum fidem. Oh the faith of Gods and men.

Cursing: as, Vae woe, malum in a mischief.

Laughing: as, Ha, ha, he; ha, ha.

Calling: as, Eh^, oh, io, hoe syrrah.

Silence: as, Au auh.

Q. But are all Interjections such imperfect voices?

A. Yea, all which are properly Interjections: as, Euax, vah, etc.

* Q. What say you then of malum, signifying in a mischief, is it not a
perfect voice?

A. Malum is not properly an Interjection, but a Noune: and is only then taken
for an Interjection, when it is put to express such a sudden passion.

* Q. May not other perfect words also, be made Interjections?

A. Yes: any part of speech may; but especially Nounes and Verbes, whenever
they are used to express these sudden motions of the mind:] as, Infandum a
thing not to be spoken of, Amabo of all good fellowship, Peri^ alas, are made
Interjections and undeclined.

Q. May one word then be of many parts of speech?

A. Yes: being taken in a diverse signification; or in a diverse respect and
consideration.

* Q. As how, for example?

A. As: Cum when, is an Aduerbe of Time; Cum seeing that, is a Conjunction
Causall; Cum with, a Preposition. And cum taken for this word cum, or for
itself, is a Noune Substantive and undeclined.

* Q. It seems hereby that a word of any part of speech may be a Noune
Substantive.

A. Such words are Substantives not properly, but technicos, that is,
artificially, or materially, as some Grammarians do speak.
Yes: when it is taken for the word it self, or as for a word of Art.] As,
Habeo this word habeo. Or when it is put in place of a Noune Substantive: as,
Bonum mane good morrow. Mane is here declined, Hoc mane inuar^abile.

The Concords of the Latin speech.
Q. We have done with the Introduction of the Eight parts of speech, or the
handling of the eight parts severally, which is the first part of your
Accidence: now we are to come to the rules of Construction of the Eight parts
of speech, called the English rules. What mean you by Construction?

A. That construction is to be accounted lawful, which the most approved of
the ancient Writers have used both in writing and speaking.
The due joining, or right ordering and framing together of words in speech.]
Or the right joining of the parts of speech together in speaking according to
the natural manner; or according to the reason and rule of Grammar.

Q. How many things are to be considered, for the right joining of words in
Construction?

A. Two: 1. The Concords of words. 2. The governing of words.


* Q. What mean you by Concords?

A. The agreements of words together, in some special Accidents or qualities:
as in one Number, Person, Case or Gender.

Q. How many Concords have you?

A. Three: The first between the Nominative case, and the Verb.

The second, between the S^bstantiue and the Adjective.

The third, between the Antecedent and the Relative.

* Q. Why must these six so agree together?

A. Because three of these are weak, and cannot be placed orderly in speech,
except they be guided and holden up by the three stronger.

* Q. Which are those three weak once?

A. The three later: that is, the Verb, the Adjectiue and the Relative.

Q. What must the Verb have to agree with?

A. His Nominative case.

Q. What the Adjectiue?

A. His Substantive.

Q. What must the Relative have?

A. His Antecedent.

The first Concord.
Q. WHat is then your first Concord?

A. Between the Nominative case and the Verb.

Q. When an English is given to be made in Latin, what must you do first?

A. Look out the principal Verb?

Q. What if you have more Verbs then one in a sentence, which of them is the
principal Verb?

A. The first of them.

Q. Are there no exceptions?

A. Yes; three: first if the Verb be of the Infinitive Mood, it cannot be the
principal Verb. Secondly, if it have before it a Relative: as, that, whom,
which. Thirdly, if it have before it a Conjunction: as, vt that, cum when, si
if, and such others.

* Q. Why can none of these be the principal Ve^be?

A. Because all these do ever depend upon some other Verb, going before them
in natural and due order of speech.

* Q. Must not the same course be taken, when a Latin is to be construed, or
turned into English?

A. Yes: the very same* I must likewise first seek out the principal Verb,
and mark it carefully.

* Q. Why so?

A. Because that will point out the right Nominative case, which is that which
ag^e^th with it, both in Number and Person, and also in reason; and so it does
very much direct the construing of all the sentence.

Q. When you have found out the principal Verb, what must you do then?

A. Seek out his Nominative case.

Q. How?

A. By putting the English, who or what, with the English of the Verb; and
then the word in the same sentence, which answers to the question, shall be
the Nominative case to the Verb.

Q. Give me an example how.

A. Venit ne rex? Does the King come? If you ask here, who comes, the
answer is, the King; so the word King, is the Nominative case to the Verb.

Q. Must we always thus seek out the Nominative case?

A. Yes, in Verbs Personals: except the Verb be an Impersonall, which will have
no Nominative case.

Q. And where must your Nominative case be set, in making or construing Latin?

A. Before the Verb.

Q. Are there no exceptions?

A. Yes: three. First, when a question is asked. Secondly, when the Verb is of
the Imperative Mood. Thirdly, when this sign it, or there, comes before
the English of the Verb.

Q. Where must the Nominative case be placed, if any of these happen?

A. Most usually after the Verb, or after the sign of the Verb: as, Amas tu
love thou? or do thou love?

Q. And what case must your casual word be, which comes next after the
Verb, and answers to the question, whom or what, made by the Verb?

A. It must commonly be the Accusative case.

Q. Why do you say commonly? Is there any exception?

A. Yes: if the Verb do properly govern another case after him to be
construed withall] for then it must be such case, as the Verb gouernes
properly.

Q. Give an example.

A. Si cupis placere magistro, vtere diligentia, etc. Here placere the Verb
gouernes properly magistro a Dative case; and vtere gouernes diligentia an
Ablative case, not an Accusative.

Q. What does a Verb Personal agree with?

A. With his Nominative case.

Q. In how many things?

A. In two; in Number and Person.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. The same Number and Person that the Nominitiue case is, the same must the
Verb be.

Q. Give me an example.

A. Praeceptor legit, vos vero negligitis.

Q. In which words lies the special example, and force of the rule, to apply
them to the rule?

A. In Praeceptor legit, vos negligitis.

Q. How are these to be applied?

A. Thus; Legit the Verb is the singular Number, and third Person, agreeing
with Praeceptor his Nominative case, which is the Singular Number, and third
Person. And negligitis is the Plural Number, and second Person, because it
agrees with vos his Nominative case, which is also the Plural Nunber, and
second Person.

Q. Must the Verb be always the same Number and Person, that the Nominative
case is?

A. No: For there are three exceptions, in the three rules following.

Q. Which is the first exception?

A. Many Nominative cases Singular, having a Conjunction Copulative, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. When there are more Nominatiues cases coming together, with a Conjunction
Copulative coming between them; though all the Nominatiues cases be of the
Singular Number, yet the Verb must be the Plural Number.

Q. But what if the Nominat. cases be of I^ and ij may be of all Persons as
well as idem; by the ^igure I^v^cation, having Ego or nos, Tu or vos,
understood; as, Agimus ij, ij poteramus esse pares, etc. for Nos ij agimus, etc.
diverse Persons, with which of them must the Verb agree in Person? may it
agree with any of them?

A. No: It must agree with the Nominative case of the most worthy Person.

Q. Which is the Nominative case of the worthiest Person:

A. The Nominative case of the first Person, is more worthy then of the second;
and the second more worthy then the third.

Q. Which is your second exception?

A. When a Verb comes between two Nominative cases of diverse Numbers, the
Verb may indifferently accord with either of them, so that they be both of one
Person.

Q. What mean you by that, when you say, it may indifferently accord with
either of them?

A. It may agree either with that Nominative case, which goes before the
Verb, or with that which comes after the Verb; so that both the Nominative
cases be of one Person.

Q. Which is the third exception?

A. Here note also that sometime the Infinitive Mood of a Verb, etc.

Q. What mean you by that rule?

A. That not only a Casual word is the Nominative case to the Verb; but
sometime an Infinitive Mood, sometimes a whole clause going before, and sometime
a member of a sentence may be the Nominative case to the Verb.

* Q. What mean you by a Casual word?

A. Such a word as may be declined with Cases.

Q. How can an Infinitive Mood, or a whole sentence be the Nominative case to
the Verb? Can any word be a Nominative case to the Verb, but only a Noune
Substantive?

A. Yes: a Noune Substantive, or whatsoever is put in the place of a Noune
Substantive; as these are.

Q. How will you decline these, when they are put in place of a Noune
Substantive?

A. Like Substantives of the Neuter Gender undeclined: as, Hoc nihil
inuartabile: so, Hoc diluculo surgere inuariabile.

* Q. May not a Relative be the Nominative case to the Verb?

A. Yes: but that is only by reason of the Substantive or Antecedent
understood with it, or in whose place it is put.

* Q. And may not an Adjectiue also be the Nominative case to the Verb?

A. Yes: but then it must be an Adjectiue in the Neuter Gender, put alone
without a Substantive, standing for a Substantive.

* Q. What Number and Person must the Verb be, when a whole sentence, or a
piece of a sentence, are the Nominative case to the Verb?

A. If the Verb be referred, or have respect but to one thing, it shall be
the Singular Number, and third Person: but if to more, it shall be the Plural
Number and third Person.

* Q. What if it be a Noune of Multitude of the Singular Number? I mean, a
Noune signifying more then one?

A. It may sometimes have a Verb of the Plural Number.

* Q. How many things may be the Nominative case to the Verb?

A. Six: first, a Casual word, which is either a Substantive, or a Relative;
or an Adjectiue standing for a Substantive. Secondly, a whole reason or
sentence. Thirdly, a clause or piece of a sentence. Fourthly, an Infinitive
Mood. Fifthly, an Aduerbe with a Genitive case. Lastly, any one word or more put
for themselves, or whatsoever is put in stead of the Nominative case.

Q. What if your Verb be of the Infinitive Mood, must it have a Nominative
case before it?

A. No: It must have an Accusative case before it, in stead of a Nominative.

The second Concord.
Q. WHat is your second Concord between?

A. Between the Substantive and the Adjectiue.

Q. When you have an Adjectiue, how will you find out his Substantive?

A. As I found out the Nominative case:] that is, by putting the English who or
what to the English of the Adjectiue; and the word or words answering to the
question, shall be the Substantive to it.

Q. In how many things does the Adjectiue agree with his Substantive?

A. In three: in Case, Gender and Number.

Q. Why does your book say, The Adjectiue whether it be a Noune, Pronoune or
Participle?

A. Because all Pronounes are Adjectiues by nature; except Ego, tu, sui: and so
are all Participles; and therefore agree with Substantives as well as the
Noune Adjectiues do.

Q. Is your Adjectiue always the same Case, Gender and Number, that the
Substantive is?

A. No, not always: fos there are three such exceptions as in the first
Concord, though my book name but one.

Q. What is the first exception?

A. Many Substantives Singular, having a Conjunction Copulative coming between
them, will have an Adjectiue Plural; which Adjectiue shall agree with the
Substantive of the most worthy Gender.

Q. Which is the Substantive of the most worthy Gender?

A. The Substantive of the Masculin Gender, is more worth then the Substantive
of the Feminine; and the Substantive of the Feminine, more worthy then of the
Neuter.

Q. Is this always true?

A. Yea: except in things without life; I mean such as are not apt to have
life: as we shall see after.

Q. What Gender is most worthy in these?

A. The Neuter: as, Arcus et calami sunt bona.

* Q. Which is the second exception?

A. When an Adjectiue comes between two Substantives of diverse Genders, it
may Nunquam aeque ac modo p^^pertas mihi visum est onus et miserum and grave.
Terent. paupertas visu^ onus.
indifferently accord with either of them.

* Q. Which is the third exception?

A. That the Substantive is not always a Casual word: but a whole sentence, a
piece of a sentence, an Infinitive Mood, an Aduerbe with a Genitive case, or
any word put for it self, may be the Substantive to the Adjectiue.

* Q. Why so?

A. Because all these things which may be the Nominative case to the Verb, may
be likewise the Substantive to the Adjectiue, and the Antecedent to the
Relative.

* Q. What Case, Gender and Number, shall the Adjectiue be, when any of these
are his Substantive?

A. Such as that which stands for his Substantive, is accounted to be.

* Q. What if the Adjectiue have respect but to one thing alone (as to one
sentence, or one piece of a sentence) what Gender and number must it be?

A. The Neuter Gender and Singular Number.

* Q. What if it have respect to more things then one?

A. It must be the Neuter Gender and Plural Number.

The third Concord.
Q. WHat is the third Concord?

A. Between the Antecedent and the Relative.

Q. When you have a Relative, what must you do to find out his Antecedent?

A. Put the question who, or what, to the English of the Relative; and the
word that answers to the question is the Antecedent to it.

Q. What mean you by the Antecedent?

A. The Antecedent is commonly such a word, as goes in the sentence before the
Relative, and is rehearsed again of the Relative.

Q. In how many things does the Relative agree with his Antecedent?

A. In three: in Gender, Number and Person.

* Q. Is one Substantive or Casual word the Antecedent always to the Relative?

A. No: all the same things may be the Antecedent to the Relative, which may be
the Nominative case to the Verb, or the Substantive to the Adjectiue.

Q. When any of these, except a Casual word, are the Antecedent, what Gender
and Number must the Relative be?

A. If the Relative be referred but to one thing, it must be the Neuter Gender,
and Singular Number: but if it be referred to two things or more, it must be the
Neuter Gender and Plural Number.

Q. When the English word that, may be turned into which, what part of speech
is it?

A. A Relative.

Q. If it cannot be so turned, what part of speech is it then?

A. A Conjunction; which in Latin is called quod, or vt, signifying that.

Q. Must it always needs be so made in Latin by quod, or vt, signifying that?

A. No: we may oft-times elegantly leave out both quod, and vt, by turning the
Nominative case into the Accusative, and the Verb into the Infinitive mood.

Q. If many Antecedents of the Singular Number come together with a Conjunction
Copulative coming between them; what Number must the Relative be?

A. The Plural.

Q. But with which of the Antecedents must the Relative agree in Gender?

A. With the Antecedent of the most worthy Gender.

Q. Which call you the most worthy Gender, in things not apt to have life?

A. The Neuter.

Q. But what if the Antecedents be of the Masculine or Feminine Gender, and
none of them of the Neuter; may yet the Relative be the Neuter?

A. Yes: as, Arcus and calami quae fregisti, quae the Relative is the Neuter
Gender; though Arcus and calami the Antecedents be the Masculine.

The Case of the Relative.
Q. HOw many chief rules are there to know what Case the Relative must be of?

A. Two: When there comes no Nominative case between the Relative and etc.
And, when there comes a Nominative case, etc.

Q. When in making or construing Latin, there comes no Nominative case
between the Relative and the Verb, what case must your Relative be?

A. The Nominative case to the Verb; as it were a Noune Substantive.

Q. But when there comes a Nominative case between the Relative and the Verb;
what Case must the Relative be then?

A. Such Case as the Verb will have after him: that is, such Case as any Noune
Substantive should be, being governed of the same Verb.

Q. May not the Relative be the Substantive to the Adjectiue, as well as it may
be the Nominative case to the Verb?

A. Yes.

Q. Are there no other words which have their Cases, as the Relative has?

A. Yes: Nounes Interrogatiues and Indefinites: as, Quis, vter, qualis,
quantus, quotus, etc.

Q. Do Relatiues, Interrogatiues and Indefinites, follow the words whereof
they are governed, like as Substantives, and other parts of speech do?

A. No: these all come before the Verb; that is, they are set before the
Verb, or other words, whereof they are governed.

* Q. Does a Substantive never stand before the word whereof it is governed?

A. Yes: when a word is joined with it which goes before by nature; as, a
Relative, or an Interrogatiue, or Indefinite: As, Quem librum legis; librum
goes before legis whereof it is governed, like as quem does.

Q. Why so?

A. Because of the Relative which goes with it.

Q. But is the Relative always governed of the Verb, which he comes before?

A. It is governed of whatsoever a Noune Substantive may be governed: as,
sometimes of an Infinitive Mood coming after the Verb. Sometimes of a
Participle. Sometimes of a Gerund. And so of other words, according to my book;
and in all things like unto the Substantive.

* Q. But how can you know of what word the Relative is governed?

A. By putting in stead of the Relative the same Case of Hic, haec, hoc; and
so construing the sentence.

* Q. Why so?

A. Because then the word which is put for the Relative, will in construing
follow the word which the Relative is governed of, as other parts of speech
do.

* Q. Show how in this sentence; Quae nunc non est narrandi locus.

A. Put haec in stead of quae, and then it will follow thus in construing: Nunc
non est locus narrandi haec: so quae is governed of narrandi.

Q. But if a Relative come between two Substantives of diverse Genders, with
which of them shall it agree?

A. With either of the^ indifferently, as we will; yea, though they be of
diverse Numbers also.

Constructions of Nounes Substantives.
Q We have done with Construction in the agreement of words: now we are to
come to construction in governing of words. Where begin your rules for
governing words?

A. At, When two Substantives come together, etc.

Q. In what order do these rules stand in your book?

A. In the order of the eight parts of speech.

Q. Show how.

A. First, the Rules for construction of Nounes Substantives. Secondly, of
Nounes Adjectiues. Thirdly, of Pronounes. Fourthly, of verbes Personals.
Fifthly, of Gerunds. Sixthly, of Supi^es. Seauenthly, of all such words as
signify Time, Space, between Place. Names of places. Eightlie, of verbs
Impersonals. Ninthly, of Participles. Tenthly, of Aduerbs. The eleventh, of
Conjunctions. The twelfth, Prepositions. The thirteenth, Interjections.

Q. In what order are the rules placed for all these?

A. According to the order of the cases. First, rules for the Nominative case,
if the word do govern a Nominative case. Secondly, for the Genitive. Thirdly,
for the Dative. Fourthly, for the Accusative. Fifthly, for the Ablative.

* Q. Why do you not mention any rules for the Vocative?

A. Because the Vocative is governed of no other part of speech, except an
Interjection. And also it may easily be known; because whenever we call or
speak to any Person or thing, we do it in the Vocative case.

* Q. How then will you find out the rule for any word in a sentence to know
why it is put in the Genitive, Dative, or any other case?

A. First, I must construe the sentence.

* Q. What mean you by construe?

A. To construe, is to place every word in a sentence, according to the
natural order of speech; and to give every word his proper signification in
English.

* Q. Why must you construe thus first?

A. Because every case is commonly governed of the principal word which goes
next before it, in this right and natural order of construing.

Q. How will you then seek out the rule for the case, when you have construed?

A. First, I must consider what case my word is, and of what word it is
governed. Secondly, what part of speech the word is, whereof it is governed,
and of what signification. Thirdly, I must turn to the rules for such a case,
after such a part of speech.

* Q. Show me how: for example, if it be a Genitive case after a Substantive,
how do you find it?

A. I must turn to the rules of the Genitive case after the Substantive: and
marking the signification of the word, I shall find the rule in one of those.

* Q. Show me this by an example in this little sentence, Virtutis comes
inuidia. What must you do here first?

First I construe it, thus; Inuidia envy [ est is] comes a companion virtutis
of virtue.

* Q. What case is Comes here, and why?

A. Comes is the Nominative case, governed of the Verb est, going next before
it in construing, by the first rule of the Nominative case after the Verb;
that is, Sum, forem, fio.

* Q. What case is virtutis, and why?

A. The Genitive case, governed of the Substantive Comes, going next before it
in construing, by the first rule of the Genitive case, after the Substantive;
When two Substantives, etc.

* Q. Seeing you must construe right before you can tell your rule; For this
Rule see it more at large in the Grammar school.
what order must you observe in construing of a sentence?

A. First I must read distinctly to a full point, marking all the points and
proper names if there be any, with the meaning of the matter as much as I can.

* Q. How can you know which are proper names?

A. They are all such words as are written with great letters; except the
first word of every sentence, which is ever written with a great letter.

* Q. What word then must you take first?

A. A Vocative case if there be one, or whatsoever is in steed of it; and the
words which hang on it to make it plain.

* Q. What next?

A. I must seek out the principal Verb, and his Nominative case; and take
first the Nominative case, or whatsoever is in steed of it; and that which
hangs of it, serving to make it plain.

* Q. What next?

A. The principal Verb, and whatsoever words depend on it, serving to make it
plain; as, an Infinitive Mood, or an Aduerbe.

* Q. What then?

A. Such case as the Verb properly gouernes: which is commonly an Accusative
case.

* Q. What must you take next?

A. All the Cases in order; first a genitive, secondly a Dative, lastly the
Ablative.

* Q. Give me the sum of this Rule briefly.


A. First, Every Scholar should be able to re^eat this Rule.
I must read my sentence plainly to a full point, marking all the points and
proper names. Secondly, I must take first a Vocative case, if there be one, or
whatsoever is in stead of it, and that which depends of it. Thirdly, I must
seek out the principal Verb, and his Nominative case; and take first the
Nominative case, and that which hangs on it. Then the Verb with the
Infinitive Mood, or Aduerbe. Next the Accusative case, or such case as the
Verb properly gouerns. Lastly, all the other cases in order: as, first the
Genitive, secondly the Dative, after the Ablative.

* Q. What if there be not all these kinds of words in a sentence?

* A. Then I must take so many of them as are in the sentence, and in this
order.

Q. Is this order ever to be kept?

A. More shortly: It is often altered by Interrogatiues, Relatiues, Partitiues,
certain Aduerbs and Conjunctions. See Goclenius his Analysis. p. 9.
It is often altered by words of exciting or stirring up: as, by Interjections,
Aduerbs of wishing* calling, showing, denying, exhorting, etc. Secondly, by
some Conjunctions. Thirdly, by Interrogatiues, Indefinites, Partitiues,
Relatiues: as, by Quis or qui, vter, qualis, quantus, quotus, etc. Lastly, by
such words as have in them the force of relation or dependence.

Q. What words are those?

A. Such as have some other words depending upon them in the later part of the
sentence; or are referred to something going before. As, Cum, deinde, deinceps,
quemadmodum, sic, sicut, sicuti; dum, donec, primum, quando, quia, quoniam,
li^et, post quam, quam, quanquam, et si, quamuis, and the like.

* Q. Why is the order changed by these?

A. Because these commonly go before in a sentence, beginning the sentence.

* Q But are there not some special things to be observed in construing?

Special things to be observed in construing.
A. Yes, these: first to mark well the principal Verb, because it points out
the right Nominative case, and usually directs all the sentence. Secondly, that
commonly the Nominative case be set before the Verb; the Accusative after the
Verb; the Infinitive Mood after another Mood; the Substantive and Adjectiue
be construed together, except the Adjectiue do govern some other word, or
have some word joined unto it, to which it passes the signification; that the
Preposition be joined with his case.

Q. Well; to return again to the Rules in order: What cases do Substantives
govern?

A. A Genitive commonly; some an Ablative.

Q. How many rules are there of these?

A. ^iue.

Q. Name the beginnings of each rule in order.

A. When two Substantives come together betokening, etc. 2. When the English of
the word Res, is put with an Adjectiue, etc. 3. An Adjectiue in the Neuter
Gender. 4. Words of any quality or property to the praise, etc. 5. Opus and
vsus, when they be Latin for need.

Q. When two Substantives come together betokening diverse things, what case
shall the later be?

A. The Genitive.

Q. Give an example.

A. Facundia Ciceronis.

Q. Which is your Genitive case, and why?

A. Ciceronis is my Genitive case, governed of facundia; because it is the
later of two Substantives.

Q. Is there no exception from this rule?

A. ^he first of the two Substantives is o^t vn^erstood by a figure called
Ecli^sis: as, No^ videmus manticae quod in te^go est, for id m^nti^ae, as in
the Latin rules.
Yes: if the Substantives belong both to one thing.

Q. What if they belong both to one thing?

A. Then they shall be put both in one case.

Q. When you have the English of the word R^s, that is, thing, put with the
Adjectiue, what may you do then?

A. Put away the word Res; and put the Adjectiue in the Neuter Gender, like a
Substantive.

Q. If an Adjectiue in the Neuter Gender, be put alone without a Substantive;
what does it stand for?

A. For a Substantive; and so is said to be put Substantiuely, or for a
Substantive.

Q. What case will it have when it is so put.

A. A Genitive, as if it were a Substantive.

Q. What case must Nounes be put in, that signify the praise or dispraise of
any thing, and come after a Noune Substantive, or a Verb Substantive: as,
after Sum, forem, or fio, etc?

Verbals in ^o were wont to have the same cases with the verbs which they come
of, as to say, Nihil in ea re captio est, for nihil in ea re ceperis. Quid tibi
nos tactio est, for quid nos tangis. Lamb. on Plautus.
A. In the Ablative, or in the Genitive.

Q. Puero opus est cibum. Plaut. Lectionis opus est. Fab.
Opus and vsus, when they signify need, what case must they have?

A. An Ablative.

Constructions of Adjectives.
The Genitive Case after the Adjectiue.
Q. HOw many general rules are there belonging to that Chapter of the Genitive
after the Adjectiue?

A. Five: Adjectiues that signify desire, Nounes Partitiues, etc.

Q. What case will Adjectiues have which signify desire, knowledge,
remembrance, ignorance or forgetting, and the like?

A. A Genitive.

Q. Nounes Partitiues with Interrogatiues, and certain Nounes of Number, as
these set down in the book, and the like; what case do they require?

A. A Genitive.

Q. When you have a question asked, as by any of these Interrogatiues, in what
case must you answer?

A. In the same case wherein the Question is asked.

Q. And in what tense of a Verb must you answer?

A. In the same tense.

Q. How many exceptions have you from this rule?

A. Three: First, if a question be asked by Cuius, cuia, cuium: Secondly, if it
be asked by such a word, as may govern diverse cases: Thirdly, if I must
answer by any of these Pronoune Possessiues; Meus, tuus, suus, noster, voster.

Q. Nounes of the Comparatiue and Superlatiue degree, being put as Nounes
Partitiues (that is, having after them the English of or among) what case do
they require?

A. A Genitive.

Q. Nounes of the Comparatiue degree, with this sign than or by after them,
what case will they have?

A. Quam nemo omnium elegantius explicauit a Cicerone, for Cicer^ne, or quam
Cicero.
An Ablative.

The Dative case after the Adjectiue.
Q. These art set down more shortly for the more speedy examining; as being
most plain of themselves.
WHat Adjectiues govern a Dative Case?

A. Adjectiues that betoken profit or disprofit; likeness, unlikeness;
pleasure, submitting, or belonging to any thing.

Q. What other Adjectiues?

A. Of the Passive signification in bilis; and Nounes Participials in dus.

The Accusative Case after the Adjectiues.
Q. WHat Adjectives govern an Accusative case?

A. Such as betoken the length, breadth or thickness of any thing, will have
an Accusative Case of such Nounes as signify the measure of the length,
breadth or thickness.

Q. Do they ever govern an Accusative case?

A. No: sometimes an Ablative; and sometimes a Genitive.

The Ablative Case after the Adjective.
Q. WHat Adjectiues govern an Ablative Case?

A. Adjectiues signifying fullness, emptiness, plenty or wanting.

Q. Do these always govern an Hispania in omni ^rugum genere foecunda. I^st.
Foecundu^ in frauds hominum genus. Sil.
Ablative?

A. No: sometime a Genitive.

Q. What other Adjectiues govern an Ablative case?

A. Quid dignus siem. Pla^.
Dignus, indignus, Praeditus, captus, contentus, and such like.

Q. What may the Adjectiues, dignus, indignus, and contentus, have in stead of
their Ablative case?

A. An Infinitive Mood.

Constructions of Pronounes.
Q. WHat Cases do Pronounes govern?

A. None at all.

Q. What then does that rule of the Pronounes (These Genitive cases of the
Primitiues) teach?

A. It teaches when to use Mei, tui, sui, nostri, and vestri, the Genitive
cases of the Pronoune Primitiues, signifying of me, of thee, etc. and when to
use Meus, tuus, suus, noster and vester, the Pronoune Possessiues, signifying
mine, thine, etc.

Q. When must Mei, tui, sui, the Genitive cases of the Primitiues, be used?

A. When suffering or the passion is signified.

Q. When is that?

A. When a Person is meant to suffer something, or to have something done unto
it, but not to do any thing: as, Amor the love mei of me; not meaning the love
which I have, but the love wherewith others love me, or which others have of me.

Q. When must meus, tuus, suus, be used?

A. When doing or Quisnam a me pepulit tam gra^iter fores? a me pro mea^.
possession is signified.

Q. When is that?

A. When a person is meant to do or possess something: as, ars tua, thy Art or
skill; that is, that Art which thou have.

Q. Where are Nostrum and vestrum used?

A. After Distributiues, Partitiues, Comparatiues, and Superlatiues.

Construction of the Verb; and first with the Nominative case.
Q WHat Verbes have a Nominative case after them?

A. Sum, forem, fio, existo, and certain Verbs Passiues of calling: as, Dicor,
v^cor, salutor, appellor, habeor, existimor, videor, and such like.

Q. Will these ever have a Nominative case after them?

A. No: but when they have a Nominative case before them.

Q. Why so?

A. Because they have such Case after them, as they have before them.

Q. What if they have an Accusative case before them, as Infinitive Moodes have
commonly?

A. Then they must have an Accusative case after them; Quod si ciui Romano
licet esse Gaditanum h. e. ciuem esse Gaditanum: or Gaditanum for Gaditano, by
Antiptosis; so in many others.
and so having a Dative before them, they have a Dative after them.

Q. What others Verbes have such Cases after them, as they have before them?

A. Verbes of Gesture.

Q. Which call you Verbes of Gesture?

A. Verbes of bodily moving, going, resting, or doing.

Q. What is your general rule, when the word going before the Verb, and the
word coming after the Verb, belong both to one thing?

A. That they be put both in one Case; By this rule, And generally when the
word that goes, etc.

The Genitive case after the Verb.
Q. WHat Verbes require a Genitive case after them?

A. The Verb Sum, when it betokens possession, owing, or otherwise
appertaining to a thing as a token, property, duty or guise.

Q. Is there no exception?

A. Yes: Meus, tuus, suus noster, vester, must be the Nominative case, agreeing
with the Substantive going before, because they be Adjectiues.

Q. What other Verbes require a Genitive case?

A. Verbes that be^oken to esteem or regard.

Q. What Genitive case?

A. A Genitive case signifying the valewe.

Q. What other Verbes besides require a Genitive case?

A. So all the Verbes taken in the same signification of accusing or condemning
etc as, Terdo, appello, pos^ulo, arcesso, insimulo, desero, arguo, incuso,
castigo, increpo, vrgeo, plecto, alligo, obligo, astringo, teneor, cito,
i^dico, conuinco, redarguo, noto, insamo, prehendo, deprehendo, purgo,
commonefacio, interrogo, contemno, anquiro, doceo; as, docco de iniurijs.
Verbes of accusing, condemning, warning, purging, quitting or assoiling.

Q. What Genitive case will they have?

A. A Genitive case of the crime, or of the cause, or of the thing that one is
accused, condemned or warned of.

Q. May they have no Case else?

A. Yes: an Ablative case; and that most commonly without a Preposition.

Q. What other Verbes yet require a Genitive case?

A Satago de vi. Aul. Gel.
Satago, misereor, Indoleo:
miseresco.

Q. What Case do Reminiscor, obliuiscor, recordor and memini require?

A. A Genitive; and sometime an Accusative.

The Dative case after the Verb.
Q. WHat Verbes require a Dative case?

A. All sorts of Verbes which are put acquisitiuely?

Q. What is that, to be put acquisitiuely?

A. To be put after the manner of getting something to them.

Q. What tokens have such Verbes after them?

A. These tokens, to or fro.

Q. What Verbes do especially belong to the rule which have thus a Dative case?

A. Sundry of these Verbes have sometimes other cases; as, Nun^io ad te. Plaut.
Credere duarum rerum, and omnium rerum credere. Plaut. Ignosco, cond^no te.
Verbes which betoken, First, to profit or disprofit. Secondly, to compare.
Thirdly, to give or to restore. Fourthly, to promise or to pay. Fifthly, to
command or show. Sixthly, to trust. Seauenthly, to obey or to be against.
Eightthly, to threaten or to be angry with. Ninthly, Sum with his compounds
except possum, when they have to or for after them. Tenthly, Verbes compounded
with Satis, been and male. Eleuenthly, Verbes compounded with these
Prepositions, Prae, ad, con, sub, ante, post, ob, in, and inter; except praeco,
praeuinco, praecedo, praecurro, praeuertor, which will have an Accusative case.

Q. What Case will Sum have, when it is put for habeo to have?

A. A Dative.

Q. When Sum has after him a Nominative case, and a Dative; what Case may the
Nominative be turned into?

A. Into the Dative: so that Sum may in (such manner of speaking) have a double
Dative case.

Q. Can only Sum have a double Dative case?

A. Not only Sum, but also many other Verbes may have a double Dative case, in
such manner of speaking.

Q. Whereof?

A. One Dative case of the Person, another of the thing.

The Accusative case after the Verb.
Q. WHat Verbes require an Accusative case?

A. Verbes Transitiues.

* Q. What Verbes are those?

A. All Actiues, Commons, and Deponents, whose action or doing passes into
some other thing to express it by, Transiti^a, quorum actio transit in rem
aliam.
and have no perfect sense in themselves.

Q. Whereof may they have an Accusative case?

A. Of the doer, or sufferer.

Q. May not Verbes Neuters have an Accusative case?

A. Yes: of their own signification.

Q. Are there not some Verbes which will have two Accusative cases?

A. Yes: Verbes of Interr^go, posco, postulo, flagito, exigo.
asking, teaching and Celo.
arraying.

Q. Whereof?

A. One of the Accus. cases may be turned into the Abla. with a Preposition or
without, as in the Latin rule.
One Accusative case of the sufferer, another of the thing.

The Ablative case after the Verb.
Q. WHat Verbes will have an Ablative case?

A. All Verbes require an Ablative case of the instrument, put with this sign
with before it; or of the cause, or of the manner of doing.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. All Verbes will have an Ablative case of the word that signifies the
instrument wherewith any thing is done, having this sign with put before it; or
of the word which signifies the cause why any thing is done; or of the manner
of doing of it.

Q. What case must the word which signifies the price which any thing cost,
be put into, after Verbes?

A. Into the Vili, paulo, etc. are often put without Substantives, and the
Substan. pretio or the like understood: so multo, pauco, caro, immenso.
Ablative.

Q. Must it be always in the Ablative?

A. Yes: Some Substantives of the price are also put in the Genitive case
governed of the word pretio understood, or the like word: as centussis,
decussis.
except in these Genitiues, when they are put alone without Substantives: as
Tanti, quanti, pluris, minoris, tantiuis, tantidem, quantinis, quantilibet,
quanticunque.

* Q. What if these words be put with Substantives? what Cases must they be?

A. The Ablative; according to the Rule.

Q. What other words are used after Verbes, of price, in stead of their Casual
words?

A. These Aduerbes, Carius more dear, vilius more cheap, melius better, peius
worse.

Q. What other Verbes require an Ablative case properly?

A. Verbes of So Sca^eo, d^ficio, nitor, frando, abdico, as, cumulo, orbo,
viduo, augeo, fas^idio, done, interdico, dico, as, opulento, as.
plenty, scarsenesse, filling, emptying, loading or unloading.

Q. What other?

A. Vtor, Fungor, fruor, potior, egeo, careo, etc. have sometimes other cases;
some an Accusative, some a Genit.
fungor, potior, fruor, laetor, gaudeo, dignor, muto, munero, communico,
afficio, prosequor, impertio, impertior.

Q. What Case will Verbes have, which signify So disco, dimitto, amitto,
summoueo, abigo, amoueo, redimo, relego, prohibeo pro defendo, vindico,
depello, refraeno, retraho reprimo, arceo, reueco, declino.
receiving, distance or taking away?

A. An Ablative case, with one of these Prepositions; A, ab, e, ex, or de.

Q. But may not this Ablative case be turned into a Dative?

A. Yes; after Verbs of taking away.

Q. What Case will Verbes of comparing or exceeding have?

A. An Ablative case.

Q. What Ablative case?

A. Of the word that signifies the measure of exceeding.

Q. If a Noune or a Pronoune Substantive, be joined with a Participle, either
expressed or understood, and have no other word whereof it may be governed;
what case shall it be put into?

A. The Ablative case absolute.

Q. What mean you by absolute?

A. Without other government.

Q. By what words may this Ablative case be resolved?

A. By any of these words, Dum, cum, quando, si, quanquam, postquam.

Constructions of Verbes Passiues.
Q. WHat Case will a Verb Passive have after him?

A. An Ablative case with a Preposition, and sometime a Dative of the Dooer.

Q. What mean you by a Dative of the Dooer?

A. Of the Person which is meant to do any thing.

Q. What if the sentence be made by the Verb Active, in steed of the Passive?

A. Then the Dative or Ablative must be turned into the Nominative, before the
Verb.

Gerunds.
Q. WHat Case will Gerunds and Supines have?

A. The same Case as the Verbes which they come of.

The Gerund in di.
Q. WHen the English of the Infinitive Mood Active, or of the Participle of
the Present tense, comes after any of these Noune Substantives, Studium,
causa, etc. what may it be fitly made by?

A. By the Gerund in di.

Q. What may the same Gerund in di be used after also?

A. After certain Adjectives.

The Gerund in do.
Q. WHen you have the English of the Participle of the Present tense, with this
sign So with any of these signs In, with, through for, from, or by.
of or with, coming after a Noune Adjective; what must it be made by?

A. The Gerund in do.

Q. What else must be made by the Gerund in do?

A The English of the Participle of the Present tense coming after a
Substantive, with this sign in or by, before him.

Q. How is the Gerund in do used?

A. Either without a Preposition, or with one of these Prepositions; a, ab, e,
de, ex, cum, in.

The Gerund in dum.
Q. IF you have an English of the Infinitive Mood, coming after a reason, and
showing a cause of that reason; what must it be put in?

A. It must be put in the Gerund in dum.

Q. What is the Gerund in dum used after?

A. After one of these Prepositions; Ad, ob, propter, inter, ante. Gerunds may
be turned into Adjectives Gerundiues. The Gerund in di into the Genit. case.
The Gerund in do into the Ablative. The Gerund in dum into the Accusative.


Q. If you have this English must or ought, in a sentence, where it seems
that the Latin should be made by the Verb Oportet, signifying It must or It
behooves; what may it be fitly put into?

A. The Gerund in dum, with this Verb est, being set Impersonally, joined
unto it.

Q. What Case then must that word be, which seems in the English to be the
Nominative case?

A. The Dative.

Supines.
Q. WHat signification has the first Supine?

A. The Active, signifying to do.

Q. What is it put after?

A. Verbes and Participles, which betoken moving to a place.

Q. What signification has the later Supine?

A. The signification of a Verb Passive.

Q. What does it follow?

A. Nounes Adjectiues.

Q. What may this Supine be turned into?

A. Into the Infinitive Mood Passive; that we may say indifferently, Facile
factu, or facile fieri, easy to be done.

The Time.
Q. WHat Case must Nounes be, which betoken part of time?

A. Most commonly the Ablative; sometime the Accusative.

* How can you know this?

A. By asking the question when.

Q. But what Case must Nounes be, which betoken continual term of time,
without any ceasing or intermission?

A. Commonly the Accusative; sometime the Ablative.

Q. How can you know when Nounes signify continual term of time?

A. By asking this question, How long.

Space of Place.
Q. WHat Cases are Nounes put in, which signify space, between place and
place?

A. Commonly in the Accusative; sometime in the Ablative.

A Place.
Q. NOunes Appellatiues, or names of great places (that is, names of Countries)
if they follow a Verb signifying in a place, to a place, from a place, or by a
place, whether must they be put with a Preposition, or without?

A. With a Preposition.

Q. In a place or at a place, if the place be a proper name of a less place,
as of a City or Town, of the first or second Declension, and Singular Number;
what Case must it be put in?

A. In the Genitive.

Q. What common Nounes, or names of places, signifying in or at a place, are in
the same manner put in the Genitive case?

A. These four: Humi, domi, militiae, belli.

* Q. What Adjectiues may be joined with these Genitiues, Humi, domi, etc.

A. Only meae, tuae, suae, nostrae, vestrae, alienae.

* Q. If any other Adjectiues be joined unto them, what case must they be put
in?

A. In the Ablative.

Q. But if the place, in or at which any thing is done, be a proper name, of
the third Declension, or Plural Number; in what case must it be put?

A. In the Dative, or Ablative case.

Q. Is there no common Noune so put?

A. Yes; Rus: as, we say, Ruri or rure, at or in the country.

Q. If your word be a proper name of some less place, as of a city or town,
and signify to a place; in what case must it be put?

A. In the Accusative case, without a Preposition.

Q. What other Nounes are so put?

A. Domus, and rus.

Q. From a place or by a place, in lesser places; in what case must it be?

A. In the Ablative case, without a Preposition.

Q. Are no other common Nounes so put?

A. Yes: only Domus and rus; all other Nounes may have Prepositions.

Impersonals.
Q. WHether have Verbes Impersonals any Nominative before them, as Personals
have?

A. No.

Q. What is their sign to know them by?

A. It, or there.

Q. But what if they have neither of these signs before them?

A. Then the word that seems in the English to be the Nominative case, shall
be such case as the Verb Impersonall will have after him.

Q. What cases will verbs Impersonals have after them?

A. Some a Genitive; some a Dative; some an Accusative; some both an Accusative
and a Genitive.

Q. How many Impersonals require a Genitive case?

Interest. q. in re est. Refert q. refert. Hoc dominus ac pater interest;
Interest is here a Person^ll, signifying does d^^ter: as if, Dominus interest
hoc, ac pater interest hoc, by Zeugma.
A. Three: Interest, refert, and est, being put for interest.

Q. Will these have a Genitive case of all words?

A. Yea: except mea, tua, sua, nostra, vestra, and cuia, the Ablative cases of
the Pronounes Possessiues: for these must be put in the Ablative case.

Q. What Impersonals require a Dative case?

So certum est, co^sert, competit, conducit, displicet, dolet, euenit, nocet,
obest, praestat, stat, restat, benefit, malefit, satisfi^, sup* rest.
A. Libet, licet* patet, liquet, constat placet, expedit, prodest, sufficit,
vacat, accidit, conuenit, contingit; with other like, set down in the Latin
Syntax.

Q. How many will have an Accusative case only?

A. Four: Delectat, Decet vo^is is a Grecisme. because we say, (...).
decet, tuuat, oport^t.

Q. How many will have an Accusative case with a Genitive?

A. Six: Poenitet, taedet, miseret, miserescit, piget and pudet.

Q. Verbs Impersonals of the Passive voice, This is besides the ca^e of the
Doer. So a^l Verbs Pas^iu^s have the same c^se of the thing with the Actiu^s.
if they be formed of Verbs Neuters, what case do they govern?

A. Such case as the Verbs Neuters whereof they come.

Q. What cases of the person have all Verbs Impersonals of the Passive voice,
properly?

A. The same cases as other Verbs Passiues have: that is, an Ablative with a
Preposition, or sometimes a Dative of the Dooer.

Q. Is this case always set down with it?

A. No: many times it is understood.

Q. When a deed is signified to be done of many, the verb being a verb Neuter;
what may be done elegantly?

A. The Verb Neuter, may be fitly changed into the Impersonall in tur.

Q. May not Impersonals be turned into Personals?

A. Yes, sundry of them may sometimes; as, Vterum dolet, arbustaiuuant.

Construction of Participles.
Q. WHat cases do Participles govern?

A. Such case as the Verbs that they come of.

Q. What may Participles be changed into?

A. Into Nounes.

Q. How many ways?

A. Four.

Q. Which is the first?

A. When the voice of a Participle is construed with an other case then the
Verb that it comes of.

Q. Which is the second way?

A. When the Participle is compounded with a Preposition, with which the
Verb that it comes of cannot be compounded.

Q. Which is the third?

A. When it forms all the degrees of Comparison.

Q. Which is the fourth?

A. When it has no respect, nor express difference of time.

Q. When Participles are thus changed into Nounes, what are they called?

A. Nounes Participials.

Q. What cases do Participles govern, when they are so changed into Nounes?

A. A Genitive.

Q. Do all Nounes Participials require a Genitive case?

A. Exosus, perosus, pertaesus, are excepted, and specially to be marked.

Q. Why?

A. Because though they seem to be Participles of the Passive voice: yet they
commonly have the Active signification, and do govern an Accusative case.

* Q. Have they not always so?

These Participles, Natus, prognatus, satus, cretus, creatus, ortus, editus,
have properly an Ablative case.
A. No: Exosus, and perosus do sometimes signify Passiuely, and have then a
Dative case: as, Exosus Deo, odious to God, or hated of God.

Construction of Aduerbs.
Q. WHat Cases do Aduerbs govern?

A. Some a Genitive, some a Dative, some an Accusative.

Q. What Aduerbs require a Genitive?

A. Instar also may either be used as an Aduerbe with a Genitive case, or else
as a Noune undeclined, with ad expressed or understood: as, instar montis, ad
instar castrorum.
Aduerbs of Quantity, time and place.

Q. What Aduerbs govern a Dative case?

A. Certain Aduerbs derived of Nounes Adjectiues, which require a Dative case:
as, Venit advorsum mihi.
Obuiam derived of obuius, similiter of similis.

Q. Have you not some Dative cases of Nounes Substantives, which are used
Aduerbially; that is, made Aduerbs?

A. Yes; Tempori, luci, vesperi.

Q. What Aduerbs require an Accusative case?

A. Certain which come of Clanculum patres. Plaut. Cla^culum a clam, governing
an Ablat. and sometime an Accusative: as, clam vi^u^. Plau.
Prepositions serving to the Accusative Case: as, propius of prope.

Q. How many ways may Prepositions be changed into Aduerbs?

A. Two: First, when they are set alone without their case: Secondly, when
they do form all the degrees of comparison.

Construction of Conjunctions.
Q. WHat cases do Conjunctions govern?

A. They govern non^; but couple like cases.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. They join together words in the same case.

Q. What Conjunctions do couple like cases?

A. All Copulatiues, Disjunctiues, and these four, quam, nisi, praeterquam, an.

Q. May they not sometimes couple diverse cases?

A. Yes: in regard of a diverse construction.

Q. Do Conjunctions Copulatiues and Disjunctiues couple nothing else but cases?

A. Yes: they commonly join together like Moodes and Tenses.

Q. May they not join together diverse Tenses?

A. Yes: sometimes.

Construction of Prepositions.
Q. IS the Preposition in, always set down with hi^ case?

A. No: it is sometimes understood; and yet the word put in the Ablative case,
as well as if the Preposition were set down.

Q. Are not sundry other Prepositions often understood also, as well as in?

A. Yes.

Q. What cases do Verbs require, which are compounded with Prepositions?

A. They sometimes require the case of the Prepositions which they are
compounded with; that is, Abdicauit se praetura. Cic. Appulit terram.
the same case which their Preposition requires.

Constructions of Interjections.
Q. WHat Cases do Interjections require?

A. Some a Nominative, some a Dative, some an Accusative, some a Vocative.

Q. What Interjections require a Nominative case?

A. O.

Q. What a Dative?

A. He^, and Ve^.

Q. What an Hem astutias. Ter. Hem tibi voluptatem.
Accusative?

A. Heu and proh may sometime have a Nominative case.
Heu and proh.

Q. What a Vocative?

A. Proh.

* Q. Are not Interjections sometimes put absolutely, without case?

A. Yes: often.

THE POSING OF THE Rules, called Propria quae Maribus.
General rules of proper Names, and first of proper Masculines.
Q. HOW can you know what Gender a Noune is of?

A. I have certain rules at Propria quae maribus, which teach me the Genders
of Nounes.

Q. How can you know by these rules?

A. First, I must look according to the order of my Accidence, whether it be a
Substantive or an Adjectiue: If it be a Substantive, I have my rule between
Propria quae maribus, and Adiectiua vnam, etc.

Q. If it be a Substantive, what must you look for next?

A. Whether it be a Proper name, or a Common called an Appellatiue.

Q. If it be a proper name, what must you look for then?

A. Whether it belong to the male kind or female; that is, to the he, or she.

Q. If it be a proper name belonging to the male kind, what Gender is it?

A. The Masculine.

Q. Where is your rule?

A. Propria quae maribus tribuuntur, etc.

Q What is the meaning of that Rule?

A. All proper names belonging to the male kind, [or which were wont to go
under the names of hees] are the Masculine Gender.

Q. How many kinds of proper Masculines have you belonging to that Rule?

A. Five: Names of heathenish Gods, men, Styx, Cocytus, Lethe, are Greek words,
and names of standing ponds or fennes, not rivers, and so are of the feminine
Gender.
Albul^ pota Deo; aqua is understood by Synthesis. So tepidum ^ader; flum^n is
understood: or else it is the Neuter, because it is a barbarous word undeclined.
floods, months, winds.

Proper Feminines.
Q. IF it be a proper name, belonging to the female kind, or she is; what Gender
must it be?

A. The Feminine.

Q. Where is your Rule?

A. Propria foemineum.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. All proper names belonging to the female kind, [or going under the names
of shees] are the feminine Gender.

Q. How many kinds of proper Feminines have you belonging to that rule?

A. Five: Names of Goddesses, women, cities, countries, Islands.

Q. Are all names of Cities the Feminine Gender?

A. Yea, all; except two of the Masculine: as, Abydos is a Greek word, and
thought to be the name of a straight or narrow sea: or i^ a town it is to be
referred to Mascula Sulmo, Agragas.
Sulmo and Agragas. Three of the Neuter: as, Argos, Tybur, Praeneste: And one
both Masculine and Neuter; as, Anxur.

Q. Where is your rule for those which are excepted?

A. Excipienda tamen quaedam.

General rules of Appellatiues.
Q But if your Noune be none of these proper names, but some Appellatiue or
common name: how must you find the Rule?

A. It is then either the name of a tree, or of some bird, beast, or fish, or
some other more common name; all which have their special rules.

Q. Where is the rule for names of trees?

A. Appellatiua arborum erunt, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. All names of trees are of the feminine Gender: except spinus and olcaster
of the Masculine; and Siler, suber, thus, robur and acer of the Neuter Gender.

Epicens.
Q. WHere is the Rule for birds, beasts and fishes?

A. Sunt etiam v^luerum.

Q. What is the meaning?

A. The names of birds, beasts, and fishes, are the Epicene Gender.

Q. What is the common exception from all Nounes?

A. Omne quod exit in um.

Q. What is the meaning of that?

A. That all Nounes Substantives proper or common, ending in um, are the So
Londinum, Ebora^um, Bru^dusium are Neuters.
Neuter Gender: so is every Substantive undeclined.

* Q. Are all Substantives ending in um, the Neut. Gender?

A. All, but names of men and Glycerium, Philotium Phanium, being proper names
of women and made Latin words, are the femin Gender though they com^ of Greek
Appellatiues which are the N^ur.
women: according to that rule of Despauterias; Vm neutru^ pones, hominu^ si
propria tolles.

Q. But how shall the Gender be known in Epicens, and so in all other
Appellatiues?

A. By the Genitive case.

Q. By what rules?

A. Dicta Epicoena quibus, etc. And, Nam genus hic semper dignoscitur ex
Genitiuo.

Q. How by the Genitive case?

A. By considering whether it increase or no; and if it increase, whether it
increase sharp or flat; or as we may term it more easily, long, or short.

Q. When is a Noune said to increase?

A. When it has more syllables in the Genitive case, then in the Nominative:
as, virtus virtutis.

Q. How many special rules have you to know the Gender; by the increasing, or
not increasing of the Genitive case?

A. Three.

Q. Which be they?

A. The first is, Nomen non crescens Genitiuo.

Q. The Second: Nomen crescentis penultima si Genitiui syllaba acuta sonet, etc.

The Third: Nomen crescentis penultima si Genitiui sit grauis, etc.

The first special Rule.
Q. WHat is the meaning of your first special Rule? Nomen non crescens?

A. Every Noune Substantive common, not Aula^^, aura^i, and the like do not
increase properly, but by changing and resolving the dipthong a into a^i after
the old manner
increasing in the Genitive case This not increasing is meant of the Genit.
singular only, not Plural.
singular, is the feminine Gender; except those excepted in the rules following.

Q. How many sorts have you excepted?

A. Some of the Masculine Gender, some of the Neuter, some of the Doubtful,
some of the Common of two.

Q. How many Rules have you of Masculines excepted, not increasing?

A. Four: 1. Mascula nomina in a, etc. 2. Mascula Graecoru^, etc. 3.
Masculaitem verres. 4. Mascula in er seu venture.

Q. What mean you by Mascula nomina in a dicuntur, etc?

A. Many names of offices of men ending in a, are the Masculine Gender; as, Hic
Scriba, ae, a scribe or a scriuener.

Q. What is the meaning of the second Rule? Mascula Graecorum, etc?

A. All Nounes of the Some few are excepted: as Charta, Margarita, Cataracta,
Catapulta, which are of the feminine. Stockwood.
first declension in Greek being made Latin Nounes, and ending in as, es, or
a, are the Masculine Gender: as, H^c Saetrapas, ae, hic Athletes, ae, or
athleta, ae, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of the third Rule? Masculaite^ verres?

A. These words are also the Masculine Gender; verres, natalis, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of Mascula in er, seu venture, etc?

A. Nounes Substantives ending in er, os, or us, no^ increasing in the Genitive
case, are the Masculine Gender: as, hic venture ventris, hic logos gi, hic annus
i.

Q. Is there no exception from that rule?

A. Yes: Foemine^ Generis sunt matter, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. That these words ending in er, os and Anus for an old woman is sometimes
found to make anuis in the Genitive case singular, as if it were of the third
declension, after the old manner.
us, are the feminine Gender, excepted from Masculain er, etc. as Haec matter
matris, etc. so ficus of the fourth declension put for a fig. And words ending
in us, coming of Greek words in os: as, papyrus, etc. with sundry other of the
same kind, us coming of feminines in Greek.

Q. Where is your rule of Neuters not increasing?

A. Neutrum nomen in e, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. Every Noune ending in e, having is in the Genitive case; and every Noune
ending in on, or in um, Iusiurandum does not increase properly, that is in the
last word and last syllable; but only in the first wherewith it is co^pounded
not increasing; also hippomanes, cacoethes, virus, pelagus, are the Neuter
Gender: Vulgus is the Masculine and Neuter.

Q. Where is your rule for Doubtfuls not increasing?

A. Incerti generis sunt talpa, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. These words are of the doubtful Gender; ta^pa, dama, etc. so ficus for a
disease, making fici in the Genitive ease, etc.

Q. Where is your rule for Commons not increasing?

A. Compositum a verbo dans a, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. Every compound Noune ending in a, being derived of a Verb, and not
increasing, is the Common of two Genders: as, Graiugena, being derived of the
Verb Gigno, etc. so are senex, auriga, and the rest of that rule.

The second special Rule.
Q. WHat is your second special Rule?

A. Nomen crescentis penultima si Genitiui syllaba acuta sonet, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. Every Noune Substantive common, increasing sharp or long in the Genitive
case, is the feminine Gender; except those excepted in the rules following.

Q. What mean you by that, To increase sharp or long?

A. To have the last syllable, but one, of the Genitive case increasing, to be
lifted up in pronouncing, or to be pronounced long: So dos dotis: coscotis: res
rei: spes spei. Dote sero in Plaut. seems to be false printed; fero for fera
or fere.
as, Virtus virtutis.

Q. How many chief exceptions have you from this Rule?

A. Four: some words of the Masculine, some of the Neuter, some of the
Doubtful, some of the Common, are excepted?

Q. How many rules have you of acute, or long Masculines excepted?

A. Three: 1. Mascula dicuntur monosyllaba, etc. 2. Mascula sunt etiam
polysyllaba in n. 3. Mascula, in er, or, and os.

Q. What is the meaning of the first rule, Mascula dicuntur, etc?

A. These Nounes of one syllable increasing acute or long, are the Masculine
Gender* as, Sal, sol, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of Mascula sunt etiam polysyllaba in n, etc?

A. All Nounes ending in n, being of more syllables then one, and increasing
long in the Genitive case, are the Masculine Gender: as, Hic Acarnan, anis. So
all such words ending in o, signifying a body, or bodily thing: as, Leo,
curculio. So also senio, ternio, sermo, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of the third rule, Mascula in er, or, and os, etc?

A. All Nounes ending in er, or, and os, increasing sharp or long, are the
Masculine Gender; as, crater, conditor, heroes, ois So all other words in that
rule, and many ending in de^^, ^s, So of As Sextans. of As Quadrans. of As
Triens. of As Quincunx vucia. As. Septunx vucia. As. Deunx vucia. As. Dextans.
vucia. As.

bidens, with words compounded of As, as^i^: as Dodrans, semis, semissis, etc.

Q. Have you no exception from these two last rules?

A. Yes: there are four word^ except, which are of the feminine Gender (as,
Siren, mulier, sor^r, vx^r) by Sunt muliebre genus siren, etc.

Q. Where is your rule for Neuters increasing sharp or long?

A. Su^t Neutralia and haec monosyllaba, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. These words of one syllable increasing sharp or long, are the Neuter
Gender: as, Mel, fell. Also all words of more syllables ending in all, or in ar,
increasing long: as Capital, alis, laquear, etc. Only Hal^c is of the Neuter
and Feminine Gender: as, Haec vel hoc halec.

Q. Where is your rule for long Doubtfuls?

A. Sunt dubia haec, python, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. These words increasing sharp are the Doubtful Gender: as, Python, scrobs,
etc. So stirps for a stump of a tree, and calx for a heel. Also dies a day;
except that dies is only the Masculine Gender, in the Plural Number.

Q. Where is the rule of sharp or long Commons?

A. Sunt commune pa^ens, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. These words increasing sharp, are the Common of two Genders: as, Parens,
author, etc. And so the compounds of frons, as bifrons; with cust^s and the
rest of the rule.

The third and last special Rule.
Q. Give me your third special Rule.

A. Nomen crescentis penultima si Genitiui sit grauis, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that Rule?

A. Every Noune Substantive Common, increasing flat or short in the Genitive
case, is the Masculine Gender.

Q. What mean you by that, To increase flat?

A. To have the last syllable, but one, pressed down flat in the pronouncing:
as, S^nguis* ^anguinis.

Q. How many exceptions have you from this Rule*

A. Four: some Feminines are excepted, some Neuters, some Doubtfuls, some
Commons.

Q. How many rules have you of Feminines increasing short?

Two: Foeminei Generis sit hyperdissyllabon in do; And Graecula in as, vel in
is, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of the first rule, Foeminei generis si^
hyperdis^yllab^n, etc?

A. Every Noune of more syllables then two, ending in Cupido for a greedy desire
is sometimes used in the Masculine Gender; as, Au^i coe^us cupido: so when
there is allusion to Cupid.
(...), and making dinis in the Genitive case (as, Dulcedo, dulcedinis) and in
go, making ginis (as, compago, compaginis) if they increase short, are the
Feminine Gender: so are virgo, grando, and the rest of that rule.

Q. What is the meaning of the second rule, Graecula in as, v^l in is, etc.

A. That Latin words ending in as, or in is, if they be made of Greek words,
and increasing short in the Genitive case, are the feminine Gender: as, Lampas
lampadis, iaspis iaspidis. So pecus, udis, forfex, cis, supellex ilis, Mulier
may better be referred to this rule, because it commonly increases sho^t; and
may be joined to the end of the rule thus; Et malier, namque hac melius (...)
locatur
and the rest of that rule.

Q. Where is your rule of short Neuters?

A. Est neutral^ genus, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. All Nounes ending in a, signifying a thing without life, if they increase
short are the Neuter Gender.] So all such Nounes ending in n, as omen, in ar,
as iubar, in ur, as iecur, in us, as onus, in put, as occiput: Except pecten
and furfur; which are the Masculine. And so all the rest of that rule are the
Neuter Gender: as Cadauer, verber, Iter makes iti^^ri^, in the Genitive of an
old word itiner Spinther a tache or clasp, may be referred hither, being of the
Neuter.
iter, etc. and pecus, making pecoris.

Q. Give the rule of short Doubtfuls.

A. Sunt dubij generis cardo, margo, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. These words increasing short are the Doubtful Gender: as, cardo, margo,
etc.

Q. Give the rule of short Commons.

A. Communis generis sunt ista, etc.

Q. What is the meaning?

A. These words are the Common of two, increasing short^ as, Homo and nemo are
sometimes found in the feminine Gender: as, Scioneminem peperisse hic. Quia
homo nata erat. Cicero. Nec vox hominem sonat: o Deacerte. Virg.
vigil vigilis, etc.

The general Rule of Adjectiues.
Q. WHere begins your rule for Adjectiues?

A. Adiectiua vnam, etc.

Q. How many rules are there of them?

A. Five. 1. For all Adjectiues of one termination like foelix. 2. for all of
two terminations like Tristis. 3. for all of three terminations like bonus. 4.
for Adjectives declined but with two Articles like Substantives. 5. for
Adjectives of proper declining.

Q. Give your rule for all Adjectives of one termination like Foelix.

A. Adiectiua vnam duntaxat, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that Rule?

A. In Adjectives having but only one word or termination in the Nominative
case, that one word is of all three Genders: as, Nom. Hic, haec and hoc foelix.

Q. Give your rule for all Adjectives of two termination^ like Tristis.

A. Sub gemina si voce, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that Rule?

A. If Adjectives have two words or terminations in the Nominative case, as
omnis and omne; the first word as omnis, is the Common of two Genders, or the
Masculine and the Feminine, the second as omne is the Neuter: as, hic and haec
omnis and hoc omne.

Q. What is your rule for all Adjectives of three terminations, like bonus, a,
um?

A. At si tres variant voces, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. If Adjectives have three words or terminations in the Nominative case, as
Sacer, sacra, sacrum; the first as Sacer is the Masculine, the second as sacra
is the Feminine, the third as sacrum is the Neuter.

Q. Where is your rule for those Adjectives, which are declined like
Substantives, with two Articles only?

A. At sunt, quae flexu, etc.

Q. Give me the meaning of that rule.

A. These Adjectives are almost Substantives by declining, yet Adjectives by
nature and use: as, Hic et haec pauper, Genesis huius pauperis: so puber, and the
rest.

Q. But may not some of these be found in the Neuter Gender?

A. Yes: Dives opus, sospes depositum, pauperis tugurij, ubere solo, etc.
sometimes; but more seldom.

Q. Give your rule for those which have a special kind of declining.

A. Haec proprium quendam, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. These words have a special declining differing somewhat from all examples
in the Accidence.

Q. Show me how.

A. Thus: Hic campester, haec campestris, hoc campestre: or hic and haec
campestris, and hoc campestre. Genesis huius campestris. In the rest of the cases
they are declined like tristis.

Q. What is the meaning of the last rule, Su^t quae deficiunt, etc?

A. That there are certain other Adjectives which are Defectiues: which shall
be spoken of in an other place, with some others.

Q. Where is that?

A. In the Heteroclits.

POSING OF THE Rules of the Heteroclits, called commonly, Quae Genus.
Q. HAVE you not some other Nounes, of an other kind of declining then these?

A. Yes: we have sundry, in the rules which we call Quae Genus.

Q. What are those Nounes termed properly?

A. Heteroclits.

Q. What mean you by Heteroclits?

A. Nounes of an other manner of declining; that is, Nounes declined otherwise
then the ordinary manner.

Q. How many general kinds are there of them?

A. Three: Variantia genus, defectiua, redundantia: that is, such as change
their Gender or Declining: Secondly, such as want some Case or Number. Thirdly,
such as have overmuch in declining.

Q. Where are these set down together?

A. In the two first verses of Quae genus.

Q. Show me how.

A. First these words, Quae genus aut flexum variant, do note those that vary.
Secondly, these words quaecunque nouato ritu deficiunt, do signify the
defectiues. Thirdly, these words, superantue, do signify those which redound
or have too much.

Heteroclits varying their Gender.
Q. WHere begin your Rules for those which vary their Gender and declining?

A. Haec genus ac partim, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of the rule?

A. These words change their Gender and declining.

Q. How many sorts have you of these?

A. Six; set down in three general rules.

Q. Name the sorts.

A. First, some of the Feminine Gender in the Singular Number, and the Neuter
in the Plural. Secondly, Neuters in the Singular Number, Masculines and
Neuters in the Plural. Thirdly, Neuters Singular, Masculines only in the
Plural. Fourthly, Neuters Singular, Feminines Plural. Fifthly, Masculines
Singular, Neuters Plural. Sixthly, Masculines Singular, Masculines and Neuters
Plural.

Q. Where is your rule for Feminines Singular, Neuters Plural?

A. Hoc Pergamo^ is a Greek word, Pergamum is found in Plautus in the Neuter.
Stockw.
Pergamus infoelix, etc. Singula foemineis, neutris pluralia gaudent.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. These two words Pergamus and supellex are the Feminine Gender in the
Singular Number, the Neuter in the Plural: as, Haec Pergamus, pergami; In the
Plural, Haec pergama, horum pergamorum: so haec supellex: Plur. haec
supellectilia.

Q. Give your rules for Neuters Singular, Masculines and Neuters Plural.

A. Dat prior his numerus, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. These four words, Rastrum, fraenum, filum, and Capistrum, are of the
Neuter Gender in the Singular Number, Masculine and Neuter in the Plural: as,
hoc Rastrum. Plural. hi rastri vel haec rastra, etc.

Q. Where is the rule for Neuters singular, which are Masculines only in the
Plural?

A. Sed audi: Mascula duntaxit coelos, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of that rule.

A. Coelum and Argos are the Neuter Gender, in the singular Number, and the
Masculine only in the Plural: as, Hoc coelum, Plural. hi coeli tantum: so hoc
Argos, Plural. hi Argi.

Q. Where is the rule for Neuters singular, Feminines Plural?

A. Nundinum and hinc Epulum, etc.

Q. What is the meaning?

A. That these three, Nundinum, epulum, balneum, are Neuters in the singular
Number, and Feminines only in the Plural.

Q. Are none of these the Neuter Gender, in the Plural Number?

A. The Poet Iuuenal has Balnea in the Plural Number.

Q. Give me the rule for Masculines singular, Neuters Plural.

A. Haec maribus dantur, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that?

A. These eight words are Masculines singular, Neuters Plural: to wit,
Maenalus, Dyndimus, Ismarus, Tartarus, Taygetus, Taenarus, Massicus, Gargarus.

Q. Where is the rule of Masculines singular, Masculines and Neuters Plural.

A. At numerus genus his dabit, etc.

Q. Give the meaning.

A. These four words, Sibilus, iocus, locus, Auernus, are of the Masculine
Gender in the Singular Number, Masculine and Neuter in the Plural.

Defectiues.
Q. WHere begin your rules for the Heteroclits, called Defectiues?

A. Quae sequitur manca, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. All these sorts of Nounes following, are lame [or defectiue] in Number, or
in Case.

Q. Rehearse the several sorts of Defectiues, as they are set down in your
Book, before the rules or in the margents.

A. Aptots, Monoptots, Diptots, Triptots, Nounes wanting the Vocative case:
Propers wanting the Plural Number: Neuters singular wanting certain cases in
the Plural: Appellatiues Masculines wanting the Plural: Feminines wanting the
Plural: Neuters wanting the Plural: Masculines wanting the Singular,
Feminines wanting the Singular, Neuters wanting the Singular.

Aptots.
Q. WHich are those which you call Aptots?

A. Such as have no several case, but are alike in all cases.

Q. Where is the rule of them?

A. Quae nullum variant casum, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. These words have no case, and are therefore called Aptots: As, Frit, the
light corn in the top of the ear; Git, the herb Nigella Romana; Tax, a
yerk or sound of a lash, or of a whip, are also Aptots.
Fas, nil, nihil, instar: so, many ending in u, and in i. In u, as Cornu, genu;
In i, as Gummi, frugi: So also Tempe, tot, quot; and all numbers, from three to
a hundred.

Q. Have these no number?

A. Yes; Fas, nil, nihil, instar, cornu, genu, gummi, are of the Singular
Number undeclined. Pon^o is used both in the Singular and Plural
Frugi, both Singular and Plural undeclined. Tempe is the Neuter Gender, and
Plural number of the first Declension of the Contracts in Greek, as Teichea,
Teiche; so it makes ^ long in the rule Sic Tempe, tot quot, etc. as Thessala
Tem^e.
Tempe of the Plural undeclined. Tot, quot, and all numbers from three to a
hundred (as Ambo and duo are found to be of all Genders and Cases undeclined,
as duo in Greek.
Quatuor, quinque, etc.) are the Plural number undeclined.

Q. Are none of these declined in either Number?

A. Yes; Cornu and Genu, with others ending in u, are declined wholly in the
Plural Number.

Q. How decline you Fas, and the rest of the Singular number?

A. Sing. Hoc Fas inuariabile.

Q. How decline you words in u, as Cornu?

A. Hoc cornu inuariabile in Singulari; Plural. Haec cornua, horum cornuum, his
cornibus, etc.

Q. Decline Tempe.

A. Singul. and Plural. Tempe inuariabile.

Q. How decline you Tot, and those of the Plu. Number?

A. Plur. Tot inuariabile: or, Hi, hae and haec Tot inuari: so Hi, hae, and
haec quatuor inuar. etc. This is the usual manner.


Monoptots.
Q. WHich call you Monoptots?

A. Such words as are found only in one oblique case.

Q. What mean you by an oblique case?

A. Any besides the Nominative and the Vocative.

Q. Give your rule for Monoptots.

A. Est que Monoptoton, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. These words Noctu is found of the feminine Ge^der for nocte.
Noctu, natu, iussu, iniussu, astu, promptu, permissu, are of the Ablative case
Singular. Astus is read also in the Plural Number. Inficias is found only in
the Accusative case Plural.

Q. Decline Noctu.

A. Ablat. Noctu; so the rest.

Q. Decline Inficias.

A. Accus. has inficias.

Diptots.
Q. WHat words do you call Diptots?

A. Such as have but two cases.

Q. Give the Rule.

A. Sunt Diptota quibus, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of the Rule.

A. These words have but only two cases in the singular number, fors forte,
spontis sponte, plus pluris, iugeris iugere, verberis verbere, tantundem
tantidem, impetis impete, vicem vice. These have two in the Plural number,
repetundarum repetundis, suppetiae suppetias.

Q. Have none of those words of the Singular number, all the cases of the
Plural number?

A. Yes: these four, verberis, vicem, plus and iugere.

Q. Give the rule for them.

A. Verberis, atque vicem, sic plus, etc.

Triptots.
Q. WHat words do you call Triptots?

A. Such as have but three cases in the Singular number.

Q. Give the Rule.

A. Tres quibus inflectis, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. These two words, Terence has preci in the Dative. Nihil est preci loci
relictum.

Vis is seldom read in the Dative.


precis and opis, have but three in the singular number: as, precis, precem,
prece; opis, opem, open: frugis and ditionis want only the Nominative, and
Vocative; and vis commonly wants the Dative: but they all have the Plural
number whole.

Q. Give your Rule for those which want the Vocative case.

A. Quae referunt, vt qui, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that Rule?

A. All Relatiues, Interrogatiues, Distributiues, Indefinits, and all
Pronounes, besides tu, meus, noster and nostras, do lack the Vocative case.

Q. Give your Rules of Proper Names, wanting the Plural Number.

A. Propria cunctanotes quibus, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that Rule?

A. This shortly: All proper names, names of grain [or corne] weights, herbs,
moist things, metalls, do naturally and commonly want the Plural number.

Q. But may not proper names sometimes have the Plural number?

A. Yes: but not properly, that is, not when they are taken for proper names;
but when they are taken for Appellatiues or common Nounes: Or when there are
more of the same name.

Q. Show me how by example.

A. As, when Catones are taken for wise men, such as Cato was; Decij put for
valiant men, such as Decius was; Maecenates put for worthy Noble men, such as
Maecenas was; then they are in the Plural number. Or as, sundry called Decius.

Q. Give the rule for this exception.

A. Est vbi pluralem retinent, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that?

A. These sometimes have the Plural Number, sometimes they want it.

Q. Give your rule of Neuters singular, wanting certain cases in the Plural.

A. Hordea. This rule is set for an exception from Propria cunctanotes.
Ordea, farra, forum, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. These Neuters, Hordeum, far, forum, mel, mulsum, defrutum, thus, have only
three cases: that is, the Nominative, Accusative, and Vocative, in the Plural
Number.

Q. Decline Hordeum.

A. Sing. Nom. hoc hordeum, Genesis huius hordei. Plur. Nom. haec hordea, Accus.
hordea, Voc. hordea.

Q. Give your rule of Appellatiues Masculines wanting the Plural Number.

A. Hesperus and vesper, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. These Masculines, Hesperus, vesper, pontus, limus, fimus, penus, sanguis,
ether, and nemo (which is of the common of two Genders) do want the Plural
Number.

* Q. Has Nemo all the cases in the Singular Number?

A. It is seldom read in the Genitive, or Vocative: according to that rule of
Despauterius; Nemo caret Genito, quinto, numeroque secundo: Nemo wants the
Genitive, and Vocative Singular, and the Plural Number.

Q. Give your Rule of Feminines, vvanting the Plural Number.

A. Singula Foeminei generis, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of that rule.

A. These Feminines do commonly want the Plural Number; Pubes, salus, talio,
indoles, tussis, pix, humus, lues, suis, fuga, quies, cholera, fames, bilis,
senecta, iuuentus. But Sob^les and labes have the Nominative, Accusative and
Vocative in the Plural Number: and so have all Nounes of the fifth Declension;
except res, species, facies, acies, and dies, which have all the Plural Number.

Q. Are there no other Feminines wanting the Plural Number?

A. Yes: names of virtues and vices do commonly want the Plural Number: as,
Stultitia, inuidia, sapientia, desidia, and many other words like.

Q. Give your Rule of Neuters wanting the Plural.

A. Nec licet his Neutris, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. These Neuters want the Plural Number, Delicium, senium, laethum, coenum,
salum, barathrum, virus, vitrum, viscum, penum, iustitium, nihilum, ver, lac,
gluten, halec, gelu, solium, iubar.

Q. Give me your Rules of Masculines vvanting the Singular Number?

A. Mascula sunt tautum, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of it.

A. These Masculines do want the Singular Number; Manes, maiores, cancelli,
liberi, antes, menses, being taken for an issue of blood, lemures, fasti,
minores, natales, penates; with certain proper names of places, of the
Plural Number: as, Gabij, Locri and the like.

Q. Give your rule for Feminines wanting the Singular Number.

A. Haec sunt foeminei generis, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of it.

A. These Feminine^ want the Singular Number. Exuviae, phalerae, and so the
rest. So plaga signifying nets, with valuae, diuitiae, nuptiae, lactes, and
names of Cities which are of the Feminine Gender, and Plural Number: as,
Theba, Athenae, and the like.

Q. Give your Rule for Neuters wanting the Singular.

A. Rarius haec primo, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of the Rule.

A. These Neuters want the Singular Number; Moenia, tesqua, praecordia,
lustra, arma, mapalia, bellaria, munia, castra, iusta, sponsalia, r^stra,
crepundia, cunabula, exta, effata, also the feasts of the heathenish Gods: as,
Bacchanalia and the like.

Heteroclits, called Redundantia.
Q. Give your Rules for those words which redound, or which have more in
declining then Nounes have commonly.

A. Haec quasi luxuriant, etc.

Q. How many rules have you of them?

A. Five* First, of such words as are of diverse terminations, declining and
Genders. Secondly, such as have two Accusative cases. Thirdly, such as have
diverse terminations, and some of them diverse declinings in the same sense and
Gender. Fourthly, such as are of the fourth and second declension. Fifthly,
Adjectives of diverse terminations and declining.

Q. Where is your rule for those which are of diverse Terminations, Declining
and Gender?

A. Haec quasi luxuriant, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of that rule.

A. These Substantives have diverse Terminations, Decliclining and Genders: as,
hic tonitrus hoc tonitru, hic clypeus hoc ^lypeum, hic baculus hoc baculum, hic
sensus hoc sensum, hic tignus hoc tignum; hoc tapetum ti, hoc tapete it is, and
hic tapes etis; hic punctus hoc punctum, hoc sinapi inuariabile hac sinapis,
hic sinus hoc sinum, hae^menda hoc mendum, hic viscus hoc viscum, hoc cornu
inuariabile hoc cornum and hic cornus, hic euentus hoc euentum, As Rete and
retis, perduellus and perduellis, pecus udis, and pecus oris* and pecu,
inuariabile: Fames, is and ei, artus, u^, and artu, inuariab. and artua, ^um,
in the Plural. Problema and problematum, dogma, schema, thema: Schema, atis,
and schema, ae^ so pascha, atis, and pascha, ae; Iuger, and iugerum, i, and
Iuger, is, and iugeris, is. So Labium and l^bia, aeuus and aenum, nasus and
nasum, collus and collum, vterus and vterum. Hic guttur and hoc guttur:
Ulysses, is, and Vlysseus, Vlyssei; by Synare^is vlyssei, and by contraction
Vlyssi, of Vlysseus of the third Declension of the contracts in Greek; like
Basileus. So are Achilli, Oronti, Achati, when they are used in the Genitive
case as they are often; as is manifest by the Adjectives agreeing with them in
the Genit.
and many other like unto them.

Q. Give your rule for those which have two Accusative cases.

A. Sed tibi praeterea, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of that rule.

A. Certain Greek words, when they are made Latin words, have two
Accusative cases; one of the Latin, an other of the Greek: as, Hic panther
eris. Accus. hunc pantherem vel panthera; so crater, is, Accus. hunc craterem
vel cratera; cassis idis, Accus. hanc cassidem vel cassida; ether, aetherem
vel aethera.

Q. May not other Substantives be made of the Greek Accusative case?

A. Yes: as of panthera may be made hac panthera pantherae.

Q. Where is your rule for those which have diverse terminations in the
Nominative case, in the same sense and Gender?

A. Vertitur his rectus, sensus etc.

Q. Give the meaning of the rule.

A. These words have diverse Nominative cases, and some of them sundry
declinings, keeping the same sense and Gender: as, puerus, eri, puer, eri:
nubes and nubis.
Hic Gibbus by, and gibber eris, hic cucumis vel cucumer cucumeris, haec stipis
stipis, and haec stips is, hic vel haec cinis cineris, and ciner cineris, hic
vomis vel vomer vomeris, haec scobis vel scobsis, hic vel haec puluis vel
puluer eris, hic and haec puber vel pubes eris. Haec pubesis,


Q. What other words have you belonging to this Rule?

A. Words ending in or, and in os: as, Hic honor and honos oris; hoc ador and
ados adoris: so haec apes and apis is, haec plebs and plebis, is.

Q. Are there not other Nounes also belonging to this Rule?

A. Yes: many coming of Greek words: as, hic Delphin nis, and delphinus i,
hic elephas it is and elephantus ti, hic congrus vel conger i, hic Meleagrus vel
Meleager i, hic Teucrus and Teucer i: so, many other like.

Q. Give your rule for those that change their Declension.

A. Haec simul and quarti, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule? Tumultus, ornatus, gemitus, senatus, are
found also of the second Declension. So anus, us, and anus, anuis.


A. These Nounes are of the second and fourth Declension: as, laurus, quercus,
pinus, ficus, colus, penus, cornus (when it signifies a Doggetree) lacus and
domus.

Q. Decline Laurus.

A. Haec laurus, Genesis lauri vel laurus, etc. so the rest.

Q. Where is your Rule for Adjectives of diverse declinings and endings?

A. Et quae luxuriant sunt, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. There are certain Adjectives which have two manner of endings and
declinings; and especially those which come of these words* arma, iugum,
neruus, somnus, clinus, animus, limus, fraenum, cera, bacillum.

How do these end?

A. Both in us, and in is: as, inermus, and inermis, coming of arma.

Q. How are these declined?

A. Ending in us, they are declined like bonus; in is, like tristis: as,
inermus, a, um; and hic and haec inermis and hoc inerme.

THE POSING OF THE Rules of the Verbes, called As in praesenti.
Q. WHat are the Rules of Verbes for?

A. For the Preterperfect tenses and Supines of Verbes.

Q. In what order are those rules of the Verbes placed?

A. First for the common Preterperfect tenses of simple Verbes ending in o.
Secondly, for the Preterperfect tenses of compound Verbes. Thirdly, for the
Supines of simple Verbes. Fourthly, for the Supines of compound Verbes. Fifthly,
For the Preterperfect tenses of Verbes in or. Sixthly, for Verbes having two
Preterperfect tenses. Seauenthly, for the preterperfect tenses of Verbes Neuter
Passiues. Eightthly, for Verbes borrowing their Preterperfect tense. Ninthly,
for Verbes wanting their Preterperfect tense. Tenthly, for Verbes lacking their
Supines.

Q. For the Preterperfect tenses of simple Verbes ending in o, what order is
kept?

A. According to the order of the four Coniugations. First, for Verbes of the
first Conjugation like Amo. Secondly, for Verbes of the second Conjugation like
Doceo. Thirdly, for Verbes of the Third Conjugation, like Lego. Fourthly, for
Verbes of the fourth Conjugation, like Audio.

Of the common Preterperfect tense of simple Verbes of the first Conjugation.
Q. Give your Rule for all simple Verbes ending in o, of the first Conjugation
like Amo.

A. As in praesenti perf^ctu^, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that Rule?

A. That Verbes of the first Conjugation, having as in the Present tense, as,
Amo amas, will have aui in the Preterperfect tense like amani: as, Nonas, naui;
except Lano and so the rest excepted may seem to have been sometimes of the
third Co^iugation. They make the Preterper. tense very seldom in aui, though
sometime some of them are found so: as, necaui. Plaut.
lauo, lauas, which makes laui, not lauaui; so iuuo iuui, and nexo, seco, neco,
mico, plico, frico, domo, tono, sono, crepo, veto, cubo, which make ui: as,
nexo as, ui. Also do das, which makes dedi, and sto, stas, steti.

The second Conjugation.
Q. WHere is your Rule for Verbes of the second Conjugation like Doceo?

A. Es in praesenti perfectum, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of that rule.

A. Verbs of the second Conjugation, having es in the Present tense like doceo,
doces, will have ui in the Preterperfect tense like docui: as, Nigr^o nigres
nigrui.

Q. Have you no exceptions from this rule?

A. Yes: my book seems to make six.

Q. What is the first?

A. Iubeo excipe iussi, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of it?

A. These Verbs are first excepted; Iubeo which makes iussi, not iubui; sorbeo
having sorbui and sorpsi, ^^ulceomulsi, luceo luxi, sedeo sedi, video vidi,
prandeo pra^di, Stridere, feruere, cauere, are sometimes read as if of the third
Co^iugation. Frigeo has also friguit in the Preterperfect tense, and so
refriguit.
strideo stridi.

Q. What is the second exception?

A. Quatuor his infra, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of that rule.

A. That the first syllable of the preterperfect tense is doubled in these
four Verbes: Pendeo, making pependi, mord^^ m^mordi, spondeo spospondi, tondeo
totondi. Memordi and spospondi are out of use.


Q. What is the third exception?

A. L velr ante geo si stet, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that Rule?

A. If l or r be set before geo, geo must be turned into si, in the
Preterperfect tense: as, vrgeo vrsi, mulgeo mulsi and mulxi. These ending in
geo, make xi: as, Frigeo frixi, lugeo luxi, augeo auxi.

Q. What is the fourth exception?

A. Dat fleo fles, fleui, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. These Verbes in leo make vi, in the Preterperfect: as, Fleo fleui, Leo
leui, and the compounds of Leo: as, deleo deleui, so pleo pleui, and neo neui.

Q. What is the fifth exception?

A. A maneo mansi, etc.

Q. Give the meaning.

A. Maneo makes mansi; so torqueo torsi, and haereo haes^.

Q. What is the last exception?

A. Veo fit vi, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of it.

A. Verbes ending in Veo make vi: as, ferueo ferui; except niueo and conniueo
coming of it, which make both niui and nixi. To which may be joined cieo
making ciui, and vieo vieui.

The third Conjugation.
Q. WHere begin your rules for Verbs of the thi^d Conjugation like Lego?

A. Tertia praeteritum formabit, etc.

Q. Have these any common ending of the Preterperfect tense, as the Verbs of
the first and second Conjugation have?

A. No: but so many several terminations as they have of their Present tense,
so many kinds of Preterperfect tenses have they.

Q. What is then the meaning of that rule, Tertia prateritum, etc.

A. That Verbs of the third Conjugation form their Preterperfect tense,
according to the termination of the Present tense: as in the rules following.

Q. How can you know the right Preterperfect tense and rule by those Rules?

A. I must mark how the Verb ends, whether in bo, co, do, or any of the rest;
according to the order of the letters, and as they stand in my book: and so
shall I find my rule.

Q. If your Verb end in bo in the Present tense, how does it make the
Preterperfect tense?

A. By changing bo into by: as Lambo lambi; except scribo which makes scripsi,
nubo nupsi, and cumbo cubui.

Give the rule.

A. Bo fit by, vt Lambo by, etc.

Q. Tell me shortly the meaning of every of those rules in order.

1. What is (...) turned into?

A. Co is turned into ci: as vinco vici; except parco, which makes both Parciui
is out of use; so sciscidi and scindidi of scindo.
peperci and parsi, dico dixi, and duco duxi.

Q. What is do made in the Preterperfect tense?

A. Di: as, mando mandi. But findo makes fidi, fundo fudi, tundo tutudi, pendo
pependi, tendo tetendi, pedo pepedi; so cado cecidi, and caedo to beat cecidi.

Cedo to give place makes cessi; so all these Verbes, vado, rado, laedo, ludo,
diuido, trudo, claudo, plaudo, rodo, make their Preterperfect tense in si, not
in di: as, vado vasi, etc.

Q. What is go made in the Preterperfect tense?

A. Go is made xi, as, iu^go iunxi: except r be set before go; for then it is
turned into si, Tergeo and s^geo are found for tergo and sugo.
as, spargo sparsi. But these Verbes ending in go make gi: as, lego legi, ago
egi, tango tetigi, pungo punxi and pupugi; pango when it signifies to make a
covenant, will have pepegi; but when it signifies to join it will have pegi,
and when it signifies to sing it will have pauxi.

Q. What is ho made?

A. Ho is made xi: as, traho traxi, and veho vexi.

Q. What is Lo made?

A. Lo is made ui: as, colo, colui: but psallo with p, and sallo without p, do
both make li, not ui: (...) psallo, psalli. Excello excellui. Percello in
Terence makes perculsit; unless it be printed false, or percussit of percutio.
Also vello makes velli and vulsi, fallo fefelli; cell^, signifying to break,
ceculi, and pello pepuli.

Q. What is mo made?

A. ui: as vomo vomui. But emo makes emi. And como promo, demo, sumo, premo
make si: as como compsi, etc.

Q. What is no made in the Preterperfect tense?

A. Vi: as, Sino siui; except temno which makes tempsi, sterno straui, sperno
spreui, lino which makes leui and sometimes lini and liui, cerno making crevi:
gigno makes genui, Posiui for posui, and occanui for occinui are out of use.
pono posui, cano cecini.

Q. What is po made?

A. Psi: as, Scalpo scalpsi; except rumpo which makes rupi, strepo strepui, and
crepo crepui.

Q. What is quo turned into?

A. Qui: as, Linquo liqui; except coquo, that makes coxi.

Q. What is to made?

A. Vi: as, Sero, to plant or to sow, seui; but in other significations it
makes serui: verro makes verri and versi, vro ussi, gero gessi, quaero quesiui,
tero trini, curro cucurri.

What is so made?

A. Vi: as, Accerso accersiui; so arcesso, incesso, lacesso: but capesso makes
capessi and capessiui, facesso facessi, viso visi, and pinso pinsui.

Q. What is sco made?

A. Vi: as, Pasco paui: but posco makes poposci, disco didici, quinisco quexi.

Q. What is to made?

A. Ti: as, Verto verti: but sisto, signifying to make to stand, will have
stui: so sterto has stertui, meto messui. Words ending in ecto will have exi:
as, Flecto flexi: but pecto makes pexui and pexi, and necto nexui and nexi.
Mitto makes misi: peto has petij and petiui.

Q. What is Vo made?

A. Vi: as, Voluo volui: but viuo makes vixi, nexo has nexui, and texo texui.
Q. What is cio made?

A. Ci: as, Faecio feci, i^cio ieci: but the old word l^cio makes lexi, and
specio spexi.

Q. What is d^o made?

A. Di: as, F^dio f^di.

Q. What is gio made?

A. Gi: as, Fugio fugi.

Q. What is pio made?

A. Pi: as, capio cepi: but cupio makes cupi^^, rapio makes rapui, sapi^ sapui
and sapiui.

Q. What is rio made?

A. Ri: as, Pario peperi.

Q. What is tio made?

A. Tio is made ssi with a double ss: as, Quatio quassi.

Q. What is uo made?

A. ui: as, statuo statui: but pluo makes pluvi, and plui: struo makes struxi,
and fluo fluxi.

The fourth Conjugation.
Q. WHere is your Rule for words of the fourth Conjugation, like Audio?

A. Quarta dat is ivi, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that Rule?

A. All Verbs of the fourth Conjugation make their Preterperfect tenses in ivi:
as, scio, scis, sciui. Except venio, which makes veni: so cambio, raucio,
farcio, sartio, sepio, sentio, fulci^, haurio; which make si: sauxio makes
sauxi, and vincio vinxi; salto has salui, and amicio amicui.

Q. Do these never make their Preterperfect tense in ivi?

A. Yes: sometimes, though more seldom: by the rule Parciu, vtemur, cambiu^,
etc.

Of the Preterperfect tenses of Compound Verbes.
Q. WHere is your Rule for the Preterperfect tens^^ of Compound Verbes?

A. Praetoritum dat idem, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. That the Compound Verb has the same Preterperfect tense with his simple
Verb. As, D^ceo docui, edoce^ edocui.

Q. Are there no exceptions from this rule?

A. Yes: diverse.

Q. Which is the first exception?

A. Sed syllaba semper, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that exception?

A. That the first syllable of the Preterperfect tense, which is doubled in
some simple Verbes, is not doubled in their compounds: except only in these
three, praecurro, excurro, repungo; and in the Compounds of do, disco, sto, and
posco.

Q. Show how for example.

A. Curro makes cucurri; but the Compounds of it, as occurro makes but occurri,
not occucurri: so all other compounds; except praecurro, which makes
praecuc^rri: and so excurro, repungo, etc.

Q. Which is your second exception?

A. Of the Compounds of plico, oleo, pungo, do and s^o, as they are noted in
the margent of my book, and have every one their several rules.

Q. What is your rule for the Compounds of plico?

A. A plico compositum, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. Plico being compounded with sub, or with a Noune, will have aui, in the
Preterperfect tense: as, Supplico as, supplicaui: so multiplico, compounded of
multum and plico, will have multiplicaui: but all the rest of the compounds of
plico have both ui and aui: as, applico, applicui, vel applicaui: so complico,
replico, explico.

Q. Give your rule for the Compounds of ^l^o.

A. Quamuis vult oleo, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. Although the simple Verb oleo makes olui in the Preterperfect tense, yet
all his Compounds make oleui: as, Exoleo exol^vi; except redoleo and suboleo,
which make ol^i: as, redoleo, redolui, etc.

Q. Where is your rule for the compounds of pungo?

A. Composita a pungo, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. All the compounds of pu^go make punxi; except repungo, which makes repunxi
and repupugi.

Q. Give your rule for the compounds of do.

A. Natum a do quando, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. Though many co^pounds of Do are of the third Co^iugation, yet the simple is
now ever of the first.
The compounds of do, being of the third Conjugation, do make didi, not d^di:
as Addo, addis, addidi; so Credo, ex cretum et do.
credo, edo, dedo, and all the rest of them: except abscondo, which makes
abscondi.

Q. What do the compounds of sto make?

A. Stiti, not steti: by the rule, Natum a sto stas, stiti habebit.

Compounds changing the first Vowell into e, every where.
Q. WHat other exceptions have you, wherein the compound Verbs do differ from
the simple?

A. Three general exceptions.

Q. Which are those?

A. The first, of such Verbs as when they are compounded do change the first
vowell every where into e. The second, of such as change the first vowell into
i every where. The third, of such as change the first vowell into i every
where but in the Preterperfect tense.

Q. Give the rule of those which change the first vowell into e.

A. Verba haec simplicia, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of that rule.

A. These simple Verbes, if they be compounded, do change the first Vowell
every where into e: as, Damno being compounded with con makes condemno, not
condamno; so of lact^, obiecto: and thus in all the rest.

Q. Have you no special observation of any of those Verbes of that rule,
which so change the first Vowell into e?

A. Yes: of some compounds of pario and pasco.

Q. What is your observation of the Compounds of pario?

A. That two of them, that is comperio and reperio, make their Preterperfect
tense in ri: as, comperio comperi, and so reperio reperi: but all the rest of
the compounds of pario make ui: as, aperio aperui, and operio operui.

Q. Is there nothing else to be observed in the Compounds of pario?

A. Yes: that (except in the Preterperfect tense) they are declined like Verbes
of the fourth Conjugation, although the simple Verb be of the third
Conjugation: as, aperire, operire, reperire.

Q. What is the observation of the compounds of pasco?

A. That only two of them, compesco and dispesco, do change the first Vowel
into e, and make their Preterperfect tense in ui: as, compesco is, compescui,
and dispesco dispescui: but all the rest of the compounds of pasco, do keep
still the vowell and Preterperfect tense of the simple Verb: as, epasco,
epascis, epaui, etc.

Compounds changing the first Vowell into i, every where.
Q. Give your Rule of those which change the first Vowell into i, every where.

A. Haec babeo, lateo, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. That these Verbes habeo, lateo, sal^o, etc. if they be compounded, do
change the first vowell into i; as, of habeo is made inhibeo, and of rapio,
eripio, erip^i: and so in the rest.

Q. Have you no special observation of the compounds of cano?

A. Yes: that they make their Preterperfect tense in ui; though cano it self
make cecini: as, concino, concinui.

Q. Give the rule.

A. A cano natum praeteritum per ui, etc.

Q. Have you no other special rules which are joined to this rule; Hac habeo,
lateo, salio, etc?

A. Yes: the compounds of placeo, pango, maneo, scalpo, calco, salto, claudo,
quatio, lauo.

Q. What is your rule for the compounds of placeo?

A. A placeo, sic displiceo, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of that rule.

A. That all the compoundes of placeo, do change the first vowell into i: as,
displiceo; except complaceo, and perplaceo, which are like the simple.

Q. Give your rule for the compounds of pango.

A. Composita a pango retinent a quatuor ista, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. That these four compounds of pango, signifying to join: that is, depango,
oppango, circumpango and repango, do keep depango depegi, and depanxi: so
repango.
: all the rest of the compounds of pango are changed into i (as, impingo,
impegi) by the rule Haec habeo, lateo, etc.

Q. Give your rule for the compounds of maneo.

A. A maneo mansi, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. That these four compounds of maneo, praemineo, emineo, promineo and
immineo, do change the first vowel into i, and also make minui in the
Preterperfect tense: as, praemineo praeminui; but all the rest of them are in
all things declined like maneo: as, permaneo, permansi.

Q. Where is your rule for the compounds of scalpo, calco, salto?

A. Composita a scalpo, etc.

Q. What is the meaning?

A. That the compounds of scalpo, calco, salto, do change a into u; as, for
excalpo we say exculpo: so for incalco, inculco, for resalto, resulto.

Q. Give the rule for the compounds of claudo, quatio lauo.

A. Composita a claudo, etc.

Q. Give the meaning?

A. The compounds of claudo, quatio, lauo, do cast away a: as, of claudo we
do not say occlaudo but occludo: so of quatio, not perquatio, but percu^io: of
lauo woe say prolu^, not prolauo.

Compounds changing the first vowell into i, every where but in the
Preterperfect tense.
Q. WHere is your Rule for compounds changing the first vowell into i, every
where but in the Preterperfect tense?

A. Haec si componas, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of it.

A. That these Verbs ago, emo, sedeo, rego, frango, capio, iacio, lacio,
specio, premo, when they are compounded, do change the first Vowell every
where into i, Except in the Preterperfect tense: as, of Frango we say refringo
refregi; of capio, incipio, incepi, not incipi.

Q. Have you no exceptions?

A. Yes: I have exceptions for some of the compounds of ago, rego, facio, lego.

Q. What is the first exception?

A. That perago and satago, are declined like the simple Verb ago, keeping a
still.

Q. Give the rule.

A. Sed pauca notentur: Namque suum simplex, etc.

Q. What is the second exception?

A. Vtque ab ago, dego, dat degi, etc.

Q. Give the meaning.

A. That these two compounds of ago, dego, and cogo, and p^rgo and surgo
compounds of rego, do cast away the middle syllable of the Present tense.

Q. Show me how.

A. As we do not say deago, but dego: so for coago we say cogo, pergo for
perago; and surgo, for surrego.

Q. What is the exception for the Compoundes of Facio?

A. Nil variat facio, nisi, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of it.

A. The compounds of Facio, do not change the first Vowell into i, but in those
which are compounded with Prepositions; as, inficio: the rest, as Olfacio of
olere facio: and calfacio of calere facio, or calidum facio.
olfacio, and calfacio, keep a still.

Q. What is the exception for the compounds of lego?

A. A lego nata, re, se, etc.

Q. Give the meaning.

A. That lego being compounded with re, se, per, prae, sub, or trans, does
keep e still; as, relego not religo: the rest of the compounds of lego, do
change the first vowel into i: as, intelligo, not intellego.

Q. How do the compounds of lego make their Preterperfect tense?

A. Three of them, intelligo, diligo, negligo, make their Preterperfect tense
in lexi; all the rest have legi in the Preterperfect tense.

Of the Supines of Simple Verbes.
Q. HHovv will you know the Supine of a simple Verb?

A. By the ending of the Preterperfect tense.

Q. Why so?

A. Because the Supine is formed of the Preterper. tense.

Q. Give your Rule.

A. Nunc ex praterito, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that Rule?

A. That we must learn to form the Supine, of the Preterperfect tense.

Q. If the Preterperfect tense end in by, how must the Supine end?

A. In tum: as, Bibi bibitum.

Q. Give the Rule.

A. By sibi tum format, etc.

Q. What is ci made?

A. Ci is made ctum; as, vici victum, ici ictum, feci factum, ieci iactum.

Q. What is di made?

A. Sum: by the rule, Di fit sum, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of that rule.

A. Di, in the Preterperfect tense, is made sum in the Supines: as, vidi visum.
And some of them do make it with a double ss: as, pandi passum, sedi sessum,
scidi scissum, fidi fissum, fodi fossum, not fosum.

Q. What special observation have you in that Rule?

A. Hic etiam aduertas, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. That the first syllable which is doubled in the Preterperfect tense, is not
doubled in the Supines: as, Totondi makes tonsum, not totonsum: so, cecidi
caesum, and cecidi casum, tetendi is made tensum and tentum, tutudi tunsum,
pepedi peditum, dedi datum.

Q. What is gi made?

A. Gi is made tum: as, legi lectum: pegi and pepigi make pactum, fregi
fractum, tetigi tactum, egi actum, pupugi punctum, fugi fugitum.

Q. What is li made?

A. Li is made sum: as, salli, signifying to season with salt, makes salsum,
pepuli pulsum, ceculi culsum, fefelli falsum, velli vulsum, tuli makes latum.

Q. What are these terminations, mi, ni, pi, qui, made?

A. Tum: as, emi emptum, veni ventum, cecini cantum; cepi coming of capio
makes captum, and coepi* of coepio, coeptum, rupi ruptum, liqui lictum.

Q. What is ri made?

A. Ri is made sum: as, verri versum; except peperi, which makes partum.

Q. What is si made?

A. Si is made sum: as, visi visum; but misi makes missum with a double ss.
These which follow make tum: as, fulsi fultum, hausi haustum, sarsi sartum,
farsi fartum, ussi ustum, gessi gestum, torsi makes both tortum and torsum,
indulsi has indultum and indulsum.

Q. What is psi made?

A. Psi is made tum: as, Scripsi scriptum: but campsi makes campsum.

Q. What is ti made?

A. Ti is made tum: as, steti coming of sto, and stiti coming of sisto, do
both of them make statum: except verti, which makes versum.

Q. What is vi made?

A. Vi is made tum: as Flavi statum; except paui, which makes pastum: so laui
has lotum lautum and lauatum, potaui potum and potatum, caui makes cautum,
seui coming of sero makes satum, liui litum, solui solutum, volui volutum,
singultiui singultum, veniui to be sold makes venum, sepeliui sepultum.

Q. What is ui made?

A. ui is made itum: as, domui domitum: but if the Preterperfect ui come of a
Verb ending in uo, it is made utum in the Supines, and not itum: as exui
coming of exuo makes exutum; except rui of ruo, which makes ruitum, not rutum:
Secui makes sectum, necui nectum, fricui frictum, miscui mistum, amicui
amictum, torrui tostum, docui doctum, tenui tentum, consului consultum, alui
makes altum and alitum, salui saltum, colui cultum, occului occultum, pinsui
pistum, rapui raptum, serui sertum, and texui textum.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule, Haec sed ui mutant in sum, etc?

A. These Verbes turn ui into sum: as, censui makes censum, cellui celsum,
messui messum: but nexui makes nexu^, and pexui pexum. Patui makes passum,
carui cassum and caritum.

Q. What is xi made?

A. Xi is made ctum: as, vinxi vinctum. But five Verbes ending in xi, cast away
n: as, Finxi makes fictum, not finctum: so minxi mictum, pinxi pictum strinxi
strictum, and rinxi rictum. Also these four Verbes ending in xi, make xum, not
ctum, fl^xi flexum, plexi plexum, fixi fixum, fluxi fluxum.

Of the Supines of Compound Verbes.
Q. WHere is your Rule for Supines of Compound Verbes?

A. Compositum vt simplex formatur, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that Rule?

A. That Compound Verbes form their Supines, as the simple Verbes whereof
they are compounded: as Docui makes doctum; so edocui edoctum.

Q. Is there no exception?

A. Yes: Quamuis non eadem stet, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. That there are some compound Supines, which have not the same syllable,
which the simple have.

Q. Which are those?

A. The compounds of tunsum make tusum, of ruitum rutum, of saltum sultum, and
of satum situm. So captum, factum, iactum, raptum, cantum, partum, sparsum,
carptum, fartum, do change a, into e: as of captum inceptum, of factum
infectum* etc.

Q. Have you no other observations of the Supines of compound Verbes?

A. Yes: of Edo and nosco.

Q. What for Edo?

A. That the compounds of Edo do not make estum, as the simple Verb edo does:
but esum alone: as, exedo makes exesum: only comedo makes comesum and
comestum, by the rule, Verbum Edo compositum, etc.

Q. What is your observation for the compoundes of Nosco?

A. A Nosco tantum duo, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of it.

A. That only these two compounds of Nosco, cognosco and agnosco, have
cognitum and agnitum. All the rest of the compounds of nosco make notum: as,
pernosco pernotum; none of them make noscitum.

Preterperfect tenses of Verbes in or.
Q. WHere is your Rule for Verbes in or?

A. Verba in or admittunt, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that rule?

A. That all Verbes Passiues, whose Actiues have the Supines, do make their
Preterperfect tense, of the latter Supine of the Active voice, by changing u
into ui, and putting to sum velfui: as of Lectu is made lectus sum vel fui.

Q. Is there no exception from that rule?

A. Yes: At horum nunc est Deponens, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of it?

A. In Verbes Deponents and Commons which form the Preterper. tense after the
ordinary manner as Passiues do* we must feign later Supines to form them of.
That Deponents and Commons are to be marked; because they have no later Supine
of the Active, whereof to be formed: and especially those are to be noted which
seem to differ from the common kind of declining.

Q. Repeat those which are observed in your book.

A. Labor makes lapsus, patior makes passus, and the compounds of patior: as,
compatior compassus, perpetior perpessus: fateor which makes fassus, and the
compounds of it: as, confiteor confessus, diffiteor diffessus: gradior making
gressus, with the compounds of it: as, digredior digressus. So fatiscor fessus,
metior mensus, vtor vsus, ordior signifying to weaue making orditus, ordior, to
begin orsus, nitor nisus vel nixus sum, vlciscor vltus, irascoriratus,
reorratus, obliuiscor oblitus, fru^r fructus vel fruitus, misereor misertus,
tuor and tueor both make tuitus, although they have both tutum and tuitum in
their Supines. Loquor makes loquutus, sequor sequutus, experior expertus,
paciscor pactus, nanciscor nactus, apiscor aptus, adipiscor adeptus, queror
questus, proficiscor profectus, expergiscor experrectus, comminiscor commentus,
nascor natus, Merior, eris, tuus sum, mori. Orior, oriris vel oreris ortus sum
oriri.
morior mortuus, orior ortus.

Of Verbes having a double Preterperfect tense.
Q. WHere is your Rule for Verbs which have two Preterperfect tenses?

A. Praeteritum actiuae, etc.

Q. Give me the meaning of that rule.

A. These Verbes Neuters have a Preterperfect tense, both of the Active and
Passive voice: as, Coeno coenaui and coenatus sum, iuro iuraui and iuratus sum;
poto potaui and potus, titubo titubaui and titubatus, careo carui and cassus,
prandeo prandi and pransus, pateo patui and passus, placeo placui and placitus,
suesco sueui and suetus, veneo to be sold venivi and venditus sum, nubo to be
married nupsi and nupta sum, mereor meritus sum and merui, libet makes libuit
and libitum est vel fuit, licet makes licuit and licitum est velfuit, taedet
taeduit and pertaesum est vel fuit, pudet puduit and puditum est vel fuit,
piget piguit and pigitum est vel fuit.

Of the Preterperfect tense of Verbes Neuters Passiues.
Q. Have you not some Verbs which are called Neuter Passiues?

A. Yes.

Q. What Verbes are those?

A. Verbes Neuters having for most part the Passive signification, and the
Preterperfect tense of the Passive.

Q. What is your rule for them?

A. Neutropassivum sic praeteritum, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of that rule.

A. These Neuter Passiues have a Preterperfect tense, as if of the Passive
voice: as, Ga^de^ gauisus sum, fido fisus sum, audeo ausus sum, fio factus sum,
soleo solitus sum, moereo moestus sum. Although the Grammarian Phocas count
moestus a Noune.

Of Verbes borrowing a Preterperfect tense.
Q. WHere is your Rule for those which borrowe their Preterperfect tense?

A. Quaedam praeteritum verba, etc.

Q. Give me the meaning of that Rule.

A. These Verbs have no Preterperfect tense of their own, but borrow a
Preterperfect tense of others: as, 1. Verbes Inceptiues ending in sco, being
put for the Primitive Verbes, whereof they are derived, do borrow their
Preterperfect tense of them.

Q What mean you by Inceptiues ending in sco, put for their Primitiues?

A. Verbes which end in sco, signifying to begin to do a thing, or to wax
more: as, Tepesco, to begin to be warm or to wax warm, being put for tepeo
to be warm, has tepui in the Preterperfect tense: and so fervesco put for
ferveo will have ferui.

Q. Name the other Verbes which borrow the Preterperfect tense.

A. Cerno has vid^ of video, quatio makes concussi of concutio, ferio has
percussi of percutio, meio has minxi of mingo, si^o has sedi of sedo, tollo
has sustuli of suffero, sum has fui of fuo, fero tuli of tulo, sisto
signifying to stand will have steti of sto, furo has insaniui of insanio: so
vescor makes pastui sum of pascor, medeor will have medicatus coming of
medicor, liquor liquefactus of liquefio, reminiscor makes recordatus, of
recordor.

Of Verbes wanting their Preterperfect tenses.
Q. WHere is your Rule for Verbes wanting their Preterperfect tenses?

A. Praeteritum fugiunt vergo, ambigo, etc.

Q. Give the meaning of that Rule.

A. These Verbes want their Preterperfect tense. First, these six; vergo,
ambigo, glisco, fatisco, polleo, nideo. Secondly, such Verbs Inceptiues ending
in sco, which are not put for their Primitiues, but for them selves, or which
have no Primitive Verbes: as, Puerasco I begin my boys age; which is derived
of Puer, not of any Verb. Thirdly, such Verbes Passiues, whose Actiues want
the Supines, whereof the Preterperfect tense should be formed: as, metuor,
timeor. Fourthly, all Meditatiues besides parturio, which makes parturiui, and
esurio esuriui.

Q. What Verbes do you call Meditatiues?

A. All Verbes signifying a meditation or a desire to do a thing, or to be
about to do something: as, Scripturio, I am about to write, esurio, I hunger
or have a desire to eat.

Of Verbes wanting their Supines.
Q. Give your Rule for Verbs wanting their Supines.

A. Haec raro aut nunquam, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of that Rule?

A. All these Verbes do commonly want their Supines; Lambo, mico, rudo, scabo,
parco, dispesco, posco, Of Parco are found parsum and par^itum; but out of use.
disco compesco, quinisco, dego, ango, sugo, lingo, mingo, satago, psallo,
volo, nolo, malo, tremo, strideo, strido, flaueo, liueo, auco, paueo, co^niueo,
ferueo. So the compounds of nuo: as, renuo: the compounds of cado, Excello and
pracello compounds of cello do want the Supines. The compounds of linguo have
the Supines: as, relictum; though it be seldom read in the simple.
as, incido: except occido which makes occasum, and recido which makes recasum.

Also these Verbes want their Supines; respuo, linquo, lu^, metuo, cluo,
frigeo, caluo, sterto, timeo, lucco and arceo: but the compounds of arceo do
make ercitum. So the co^pounds of gruo want their Supines: as, ingruo.

Finally, all Neuters of the second Conjugation, which have ^i in the
Preterperfect tense, do want their Supines: except oleo, doleo, placeo, taceo,
pareo, careo, ^oceo, pateo, lateo, valeo, and caleo; which have their Supines.

FINIS.

