LVDVS LITERARIVS: OR, THE GRAMMAR SCHOOL; SHOWING HOW TO Proceed from the
first entrance into learning, to the highest perfection required in the GRAMMAR
SCHOOLS, with ease, certainty and delight both to Masters and Scholars; only
according to our common Grammar, and ordinary Classical Authors:

BEGVN TO BE SOVGHT OVT AT THE desire of some worthy favorers of learning, by
searching the experiments of sundry most profitable Schoolemasters and other
learned, and confirmed by trial:

Intended for the helping of the younger sort of Teachers, and of all
Scholars, with all other desirous of learning; for the perpetual benefit of
Church and Commonwealth.

It offers it self to all to whom it may do good, or of whom it may receive
good to bring it toward perfection.

(...)
(...),
(...).
(...).
Theognis. Nullum munus Reipub. affere maius meliusue possumus, quam sidoceamus
atque erudimus iuuentutem. Cic. 3. de Divine. Quaerendi defatigatio turpis est,
cum id quod quaeritur sit pulcherrimum. 2. de Finibus. LONDON, Printed for
THOMAS MAN. 1612.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, Henry, Prince of Wales; and to the most Noble
and excellent Duke, Charles, Duke of York; I. B. unfeignedly wishes all grace
and glory, and humbly commends the Patronage of his Labors.
SEeing that all of us of this Nation ( most Gracious and Excellent) do above
all people, owe unto the Highest, our lives and Religion, with all our
blessings; and next under him, to his Anointed, your most royal Father, our
drad Sovereign; to whom he has given us, by whose hand he has so
miraculously saved us, and does still preserve us alive in the midst of our
enemies: we are therefore every one always bound (in what thing soever he shall
enable us thereunto) to testify our acknowledgement. Pardon then the desire of
your devoted and most affectionate poor servant, if he shall endeavor in all
humility, to witness his thankfulness unto the Lord of heaven, and to his
Anointed, by seeking to add somewhat unto the Honor, and deserts of his
royal progeny: even of you, who are the rich gifts of the heavenly bounty,
and the flourishing branches, of that happy spreading Cedar. And what is it,
which might still more advance you in the eyes and hearts of all the people of
your most noble Fathers Dominions; then if now from your first years, you
might begin to be the blessed instruments of the Almighty, of an everlasting
benefit to the present and all succeeding generations? whereby you might knit
all hearts more surely unto the holy God, and his supreme deputy here amongst
us; as also to your selves his Regal issue, and unto yours for ever. Accept
therefore, to this purpose (I beseech you) this weak labor thus begun, of
searching out, and inquiring of all the speediest, surest and most easy
entrance and way to all good learning in our Grammar schools. To the end, that
those rare helps of knowledge, which the Lord has granted to this last Age
(some of the principal whereof have been scarce known, or very little
practiced, so far as I can find; and most of the rest have bin only known
amongst some few) might by your Princely favors, be made common unto all, for
the public good of the present Age, and of all times to come. The Lord God
has given unto your Highness and Excellency, to be born, and to live in the
time of most glorious light, and knowledge; in which, if the experiments of
sundry of the learnedest, and most happily experienced Schoolemasters and
others, were gathered into one short sum, all good learning (which is the
chiefest glory of a nation) would daily flourish more and more, and be conveyed
to all places and times; that not only this age present, but also al posterity
should have just cause evermore to magnify the God of glory for you: for how
must this needs oblige all sorts, if this heavenly gift of learning, might
thorough you be attained with much more ease, delight, and certainty; and also
in shorter time, with less charges to Parents, without that extreme sharpnes
used ordinarily in schools amongst the poor children? How shall it increase
your lasting comfort and honor, if by your Highnesses favors, the work thus
entered into, shall soon come to an happy end! For as some very learned and of
much experience, have begun already to help herein; so others of the chiefest
gifts and imploiments in this kind, shall not disdain to lay-to their hands to
bring it in time to some perfection. Why should we the liege subjects of JESUS
CHRIST, and of this renowned kingdom, be ouergone herein, by the servants of
Antichrist? many of whom bend all their wits and join their studies, for the
greatest advantage of their learning, even in the Grammar schools, only to
the advancement of Babylon, with the overthrow of this glorious nation, and of
all parts of the Church of Christ; to bring us under that yoke again, or else
to utter confusion. Or why should we omit any time or opportunity, which the
Lord offers hereunto? The hope therefore of your poor servant is, that your
Highness and Excellency will not impute any presumption to this endeavor,
(though thus undertaken by me the vnablest of many thousands) but that you will
accept it, according to the desire that has bin in me, to do good thereby to
this Church and Nation. And the rather, for the undoubted assurance of the
exceeding benefit, which must needs come in time, by the best courses once
found out and made public: and for that though such a work have bin long
talked of and wished, yet it is still generally neglected. The experience also
which the Lord has showed, In the true Watch and Rule of life, made far more
perfect and plain in this 5. Editio^.
in the readiness of sundry very learned, in a work of not much less
difficulty, to help most lovingly, with their best aduices, to bring still to
better perfection, does give your servant certain hope of the like cheerful
assistance herein. Howsoever; yet it shall remain for a further testimony of
duty to the heavenly Majesty, of thankfulness and loyal affection toward
our Liege Sovereign, and you his Royal Progeny. That as you are the worthy
sons of a Father most renowned of all the Kings of the earth, for singular
learning, and for holding up, and aduauncing by all means the glorious light
thereof; and as you are not inferior to any of the Princes of the world in your
education and first years: so all sorts may thorough you receive an increase
of the same shining light, and all hearts may be still more firmly bound by
your perpetual benefits. To you thrice happy Prince, I offer it most humbly, as
the poor Widows mite, amongst the great gifts presented unto your Highness:
And to you right noble Duke, the study of your servant, if he might but in any
one thing further you in that sweet and pleasant way of learning, wherein you
are so graciously proceeding. Finally, I trust that it shall ever stand as a
true witness of an unfeigned desire toward the perpetual flourishing of this
Nation, with all the Church of CHRIST. And in this humble desire, I commend
your Highness and Excellency unto him who aduaunceth and sets up Kings in
their throne, and has said that he will honor those who honor him. The whole
success I commit to that Supreme Grace, who looks at the heart, and accepts
the will: whom you desiring to follow shall reign with him in that most
blessed light eternally.

Your Highness and Graces humbly devoted in all loyal and faithful
observance, IO. BRINSL^.

A COMMENDATORY Preface.
ARts are the only helps toward humane perfection. Those therefore which are
the helps toward the easiness, maturitie, perfection of Arts, deserve best of
mankind. Whence it is, that God would not suffer the first deuisers, so much
as of shepherds tents, of musical instruments, of Iron-works, to be unknown to
the world: Tubal-cain.
the last whereof even heathen Antiquity has in common judgment continued,
without much difference of name, till this day; although I cannot believe that
any of the heathen gods were so ancient. Yea, hence it is, that the holy Ghost
challenges the faculty even of manuary skill, to his own gift; as being too
good for Nature, and too meritorious of men. That Bezaleel and Aholiab can
work curiously in silver and gold, for the material Tabernacle, is from Gods
spirit, and not theirs: How much more is this true, in those sciences which are
so essential to the spiritual house of God? As Arts are to perfection of
knowledge; so is Grammar to all Arts. Man differs but in speech and reason
(that is, Grammar and Logic) from beasts: whereof reason is of Nature; speech
(in respect of the present variation) is of humane institution. Neither is it
unsafe to say, that this later is the more necessary of the two: For we both
have, and can use our reason alone; our speech we cannot, without a guide I
subscribe therefore to the judgment of them, that think God was the first
Author of letters (which are the simples of this Art) whether by the hand of
Moses; as Clement of Alexandria reports from Eupolemus: or rather of the
ancienter Progeny of Seth in the first wotld; as Josephus. He that gave man
the faculty of speech, gave him this means, to teach his speech: And if he
were so careful to give man this help, while all the world was of one lip (as
the Hebrews speak) how much more, after that miserable confusion of tongues?
wherein every man was a Grammar to himself; and needed a new Grammar, to be
understood of others. It is not therefore unworthy of observation, that God
(knowing languages to be the carryage of knowledge) as in his judgment he
divided the tongues of those presumptuous builders; so contrarily he sent his
spirit in cloven tongues upon the heads of those master builders of his Church.
What they were suddenly taught of God, we with much leisure and industry
learn of men; knowing the tongues so necessary for all knowledge, that it is
well, if but our younger years be spent in this study. How serviceable
therefore is this labor, which is here undertaken, and how beneficial, to make
the way unto all learning, both short, and fair! Our Grandfathers were so long
under the ferule, till their beards were grown as long as their pens: this age
has descried a nearer way; yet not without much difficulty, both to the
scholars, and teacher: Now, time, experience, and painfulnesse (which are the
means to bring all things to their height) have taught this author yet
further, how to spare both time and pains this way unto others; and (that
which is most to be approved) without any change of the received grounds. It
is the common envy of men, by how much richer treasure they have found, so much
more carefully to co^ceale it. How commendable is the ingenuity of those
spirits, which cannot ingrosse good experiments to their private advantage?
which had rather do then have good: who can be content to cast at once into
the common Bank of the world, what the studious observation, inquisition,
reading, practice of many years have enriched them withal: That, which this
Author has so freely done; as one that fears not, least knowledge should be
made too easy, or too vulgar. The Jesuits have won much of their reputation,
and stolen many hearts with their diligence in this kind. How happy shall it
be for the Chnrch and us, if we excite our selves at least to imitate this
their forwardness? We may outstrip them, if we want not to our selves: Behold
here, not feet but wings, offered to us. Neither are these directions of mere
speculation, whose promises are commonly as large, as the performance
defective; but such as (for the most part) to the knowledge of my self, and
many abler Judges, have been, and are daily answered in his experience, and
practice, with more then usual success. What remains therefore, but that the
thankful acceptance of men, and his effectual labors should mutually reflect
upon each-other? that he may be in couraged by the one, and they by the other
benefited: that, what has been undertaken and furthered by the grave counsel
of many, and wise; and performed by the studious endeavors of one so well
deserving; may be both used and perfected to the common good of all, and to the
glory of him which gives, and blesses all.

IOS. HALL. Dr. of Divine.

THE CONTENTS IN GENERAL, OF the chief points aimed at, and hoped to be
effected by this WORK.
1 TO teach scholars how to be able to read well, and write true Orthography,
in a short space. 2 To make them ready, in all points of Accedence and Grammar,
to answer any necessary question therein. 3 To say without book all the usual
and necessary rules, to construe the Grammar rules, to give the meaning, use,
and order of the rules; to show the examples, and to apply them: which being
well perfomed, will make all other learning easy and pleasant. 4 In the
several fourmes and Authors to construe truly, and in propriety of words
and sense, to parse of themselves, and to give a right reason of every word why
it must be so, and not otherwise; and to read the English of the Lectures
perfectly out of the Latin. 5 Out of an English Grammatical translation of
their Authors, to make and to construe any part of the Latin, which they have
learned; to prove that it must be so: and so to read the Latin out of the
English, first in the plain Grammatical order; after as the words are placed
in the Author, or in other good composition. Also to parse in Latin, looking
only upon the Translation. 6 To take their Lectures of themselves, except in
the very lowest fourmes, and first enterers into construction; or to do it with
very little help, in some more difficult things. 7 To enter surely in making
Latin, without danger of making false Latin, or using any barbarous phrase. 8
To make true Latin, and pure Tullies phrase, and to prove it to be true and
pure. To do this in ordinary moral matters, by that time that they have bin
but two years in construction. 9 To make Epistles imitating Tully, short and
pithy, in Tullies Latin and familiar. 10 To translate into English, according
to propriety both of words and sense: and out of the English to read the
Latin again, to prove it, and give a reason of every thing. 11 To take a
piece of Tully, or of any other familiar, easy Author, Grammatically
translated, and in propriety of words, and to turn the same out of the
translation into good Latin, and very near unto the words of the Author; so
as in most you shall hardly discern, whether it be the Authors Latin, or the
scholars. 12 To correct their faults of themselves, when they are but noted
out unto them, or a question is asked of them. 13 To be able in each form (at
any time whenever they shallbe apposed of a sudden, in any part of their
Authors, which the have learned) to construe, parse, read into English, and
forth of the translation to construe and to read into the Latin of their
Authors; first into the natural order, then into the order of the Author, or
near unto it. 14 In Virgilor Horace to resolve any piece, for all these points
of learning, and to do it in good Latin; In Construing to give propriety of
words and sense. Scanning the verses, and giving a reason thereof. Showing the
difficulties of Grammar. Observing the elegancies in tropes and figures. Noting
phrases and Epithets.

15 So to read over most of the chief Latin Poets, as Virgil, Horace,
Persius, etc. by that time that by reason of their years, they be in any
measure thought fit for their discretion, to go unto the University: yea to
go through the rest of themselves, by ordinary helps. 16 In the Greek
Testament to construe perfectly, and parse as in the Latin; to read the
Greek back again out of a translation Latin or English: also to construe,
parse, and to prove it out of the same. To do the like in Isocrates, or any
familiar pure Greek Author; as also in Theognis, Hesiod, or Homer, and to
resolve as in Virgil or Horace. 17 In the Hebrew to construe perfectly, and to
resolve as in the Greek Testament; and to read the Hebrew also out of the
translation. Which practice of daily reading somewhat out of the translations
into the Originals, must needs make them both very cunning in the tongues, and
also perfect in the textes of the Originals themselves, if it be observed
constantly; like as it is in daily reading Latin out of the translation. 18 To
answer most of the difficulties in all Classical school Authors; as, in
Terence, Virgil, Horace, Persius, etc. 19 To oppose schollarlike in Latin, of
any Grammar question necessary, in a good form of words; both what may be
objected against Lillies rules, and how to defend them. 20 To write Theames
full of good matter, in pure Latin, and with judgment. 21 To enter to make a
verse with delight, without any bodging at all; and to furnish with copy of
Poetical phrase, out of Ovid, Virgil, and other the best Poets. 22 So to
imitate and express Ovid or Virgil, as you shall hardly discern, unless you
know the places, whether the verses be the Authors or the scholars: and to
write verses ex tempore of any ordinary Theme. 23 To pronounce naturally and
sweetly, without vain affectation; and to begin to do it from the lowest
fourmes. 24 To make right use of the matter of their Authors, besides the
Latin; even from the first beginners: as of Sententiae and Confabulatiunculae
Pueriles, Cato, Esops fables, Tullies Epistles, Tullies Offices, Ouids
Metamorphosis, and so on to the highest. To help to furnish them, with variety
of the best moral matter, and with understanding, wisdom and precepts of
virtue, as they grow; and withal to imprint the Latin so in their minds
thereby, as hardly to be forgotten. 25 To answer concerning the matter
contained in their Lectures, in the Latin of their Authors, from the lowest
fourmes and so upward. 26 To construe any ordinary Author ex tempore. 27 To
come to that facility and ripeness, as not only to translate leasurely, and
with some meditation, both into English and Latin, as before in the Sect. or
Article, 10. and 11; but more also, to read any easy Author forth of Latin
into English, and out of a translation of the same Grammatically translated, to
read it into Latin again. As, Corderius, Terence, Tullies Offices, Tullie de
natura Deorum, Apthonius. To do this in Authors and places which they are not
acquainted with, and almost as fast as they are able to read the Author alone.
28 To write fair in Secretary, Roman, Greek, Hebrew; as they grow in
knowledge of the tongues. 29 To know all the principal and necessary Radices,
Greek and Hebrew; and to be able to preceede in all the learned tongues of
themselves, through ordinary helps, and much more by the worthy helps and
means, to be had in the Universities. 30 To be acquainted with the grounds of
Religion, and the chief Histories of the Bible. To take all the substance of
the Sermons, for Doctrines, proofs, uses, if they be plainly and orderly
delivered: and to set them down afterward in a good Latin style, or to read
them ex tempore into Latin, out of the English: To conceive and answer the
several points of the Sermons, and to make a brief repetition of the whole
Sermon without book. 31 To be set in the high way, and to have the rules and
grounds, how to attain to the purity and perfection of the Latin tongue, by
their further labor and practice in the University. 32 To grow in our own
English tongue, according to their ages and growthes in other learning: To
utter their minds in the same both in propriety and purity; and so to be
fitted for divinity, law, or what other calling or faculty soever they shall
be after employed in. 33 Finally, thus to proceed together with the tongues
in the understanding and knowledge of the learning, or matter contained in the
same. To become alike expert, in all good learning meet for their years and
studies; that so proceeding still, after they are gone from the Grammar
schools, they may become most exquisite in all kinds of good learning to which
they shall be applied.
These things may be effected in good sort, thorough Gods blessing, in the
several forms, as the scholars proceed, by so many in each form as are apt
and industrious, only by the directions following, if they be constantly
observed; If the Masters being of any competent sufficiency, will take meet
pains; and if the scholars being set to school so soon as they shall be
meet, may be kept to learning ordinarily, having books and other necessary
helps and encouragements. That so all scholars of any towardlnesse and
diligence may be made absolute Grammarians, and every way fit for the
University, by fifteen years of age; or by that time that they shall be
meet by discretion and government. And all this to be done with delight and
certainty, both to masters and scholars, with strife and contention amongst
the scholars themselves; without that usual terror and cruelty, which has
been practiced in many places, and without so much as severity amongst good
natures.

How greatly all this would tend to the furtherance of the public good,
every one may judge; which yet it will do so much the more, as the Lord shall
vouchsafe a further supply, to the several means and courses that are thus
begun, by adioining daily the helps and experiments of many more learned men, of
whom we conceive good hope, that they will be ready to lend their helping
hands, to the perfiting of so good a Work.

To the loving Reader.
CVrteous Reader, who tenderest the poor Country schools, for which this
labor has been undertaken, or did ever feel or know the wants in many of
them, accept my vvilling mind for their good. And take this first impression
as not set forth: but chiefly to the end, to have store of copies, to go to
many learned wel-willers to the Work, for their help: like as it has
heretofore, to sundry much reverenced for their learning and wisdom. Of all
whom, I humbly entreat their kind assistance, for amending that which is
amiss; by adding what is vvanting, cutting off whatsoever is superfluous,
changing what is unbefitting, and reducing every thing into the right order:
That it may speedily come forth more plain and perfect; and thereby, if not
themselves, yet their friends may reap some benefit of their labors. For the
liberty and boldness used in it, consider that it is but a Dialogue to incite
and encourage others; as, I took it, far more profitable and delightsom to
read, then a bare narration. All who are friendly and unfeigned favorers of
good learning, will I hope think so of it. It shall wrong no man willingly:
far be that from me. I will right them again, so soon as I know it. Be the
faults never so many, thorough my weakness and want of meet leisure (as they
must needs be the more, by my absence from the Press) yet time, I trust will
reform them. In the mean while, let my travel and the good things weigh
against the rest. For the length of it, remember for whom I write, even the
meanest teachers and learners: with whom though I sometime use repetitions, I
cannot be ouer-plaine; since they commonly get so little of short Treatises, be
they never so learned. Consider also that I would hide nothing, which GOD has
vouchsafed me in my search: that out of all, the most profitable may be
selected, and in the mean time the best only used. And for the matter of the
Dialogue, take it as that which is desired to be effected in time; and which I
hope all shall find, when once the helps belonging hereunto, shall be
supplied and perfected.

Account this, but as a mere entrance into the work: which if seven years
shall bring to perfection fully to accomplish that which is wished, I shall
think my pains most happily bestowed, if GOD so far forth prolong my days.
I seek not my self: if I may do some little service to God and my Country, I
have enough. I oppose my self to none. Show my oversight in love, and I will
amend it. I prescribe to none: no, not the meanest; but only desire to learn
of all the learned, to help the unlearned. In the work I take nothing to my
self, but the wants. What I received of others, I received to this end; after
full trial made of them to publish them for the common good. This I have
professed from the beginning of my travel. I would also give every one his due
particularly, what I have had of him; and will, if it shall be thought meet.
I have promised nothing but my labor: that I have and do desire to perform
to my ability and above. The weaker I am, the fitter shall I be to apply my
self to the simplest: and the more honor God shall have, if he shall give
that blessing unto it, which I do humbly beg. If any man shall oppose, and
detract from these my labors; forasmuch, as he shall therein (as I take it)
show himself an enemy to the common good of the present Age, and of all
posterity (the benefit whereof, as God is my witness, I have intended
principally in these my endeauours) I can but be sorry, and pray for him.

Thine in Christ, I. B.

FOr the manner of proceeding used in this work, it is prescribed in the
Preface to the Reader, which is set before our common Grammar: where it, having
showed the inconvenience of the diversity of Grammars and teaching, does
direct thus;

Wherefore it is not amiss, if one seeing by trial an easier and readierway,
then the common sort of Teachers do, would say that he has proved it, and for
the commodity allowed it; that others not knowing the same, might by
experience prove the like, and them by proof reasonable judge the like: not
hereby excluding the better way when it is found; but in the mean season
forbidding the worse.

OF GRAMMATICAL Translations.
THere is a way (says Mr. Askame) touched in the first book of Cicero de
Oratore, Mr Askame 1. Book page 1
which wisely brought into Schools, truly taught, and constantly used would
not only take wholly away that butcherly fear in making Latins, but would
also with ease and pleasure, and in short time as I know by good experience,
work a true choice and placing of words, a right ordering of sentences, an
easy understanding of the tongues, a readiness to speak, a facility to
write, a true judgment both of his own, and other men's doings, what tongue so
ever he does use.

This way, as he shows, is by causing the Scholar first to understand the
matter which he learneth: secondly, to construe truly: thirdly, to parse
exactly: fourthly, to translate into English plainly: fifthly, to translate out
of the English into the Latin of the Author again: and so after to compare
with the Author how near he came unto it. Finally, by much translating both
ways, chiefly out of the English into Latin, as he sets down in the
beginning of his second book; and hereby he saw those strange experiments of
the increase of learning, which he reports of Mr. John Whitney, and others.
Now, whereas these things are very hard to be performed in the common
schools; especially for lack of time to try and compare every scholars
translation, and ever giving them new pieces to translate, and those such as
are meet for every form; by the means of these translations of our first
school Authors, all these things may be performed in every Author and form,
most certainly and constantly, and with much ease and delight both to Master
and Scholars; as I trust will be found. The manner hereof I have set down in
the 8. Chapter, and others following. Therefore since the time that God made
these known unto me (which was about some four years ago or not much
above, upon the occasion of a late worthy experiment related unto me,
confirming the testimony of Mr. Askam) I have labored in these translations
above all other things, First, to find out the Grammar rule of construing
truly and perfectly, whereby to guide these translations, and whereupon they
chiefly depend: Secondly, to find out the parricular uses and benefits of
them: Thirdly, to find out and set down such directions, as whereby to frame
the translations to serve for all the uses most plainly: Fourthly, to
translate so many of our first Authors after the same manner, as since that
time I have had occasion for my scholars in each form to read: Fifthly, to
have certain trial and experience of every thing, so much as in this time I
could; and upon trial to commend them to Schools, to help hereby to bring
into Schools that excellent way of learning, which he so highly commends,
and whereof I have very great hope; and so by them a perpetual benefit to all
schools and good learning: which I unfeignedly wish and pray for. ()

Advertisement by the Printer.
CVrteous Reader, whereas in the later end of this Book it is signified in
what forwardness the Authors translation of Sententiae Pueriles and Cato, are;
take notice also that his book entitled, The Poasing of the Accedence, is
since come to my hands, and likely to come forth at the same time with Cato.

Ludus Literarius: OR The Grammar School.
CHAP. 1.
A Discourse between two Schoolemasters, concerning their function. In the end,
determining a conference about the best way of teaching, and the manner of
their proceeding in the same.
SPOVDEVS. PHILOPONVS. Spoud. GOd save you, good Sir: I am glad to see you in
health.


Phil. What mine old acquaintance, M. Spoudaeus?


Spoud. The very same, sir.


Phil. Now, I am as right glad to see you well: you are heartily welcome to
this my poor house.


Spoud. Sir, I give you many thanks.


Phil. But how have you done these many years?


Spoud. I thank God I have had good health, The Schoolemasters place ordinarily
wearisome, thankelesse.
ever since we lived in the College together: but for my time, I have spent
it in a fruitless, wearisom, and an unthankful office; in teaching a poor
country school, as I have heard, that your self have also been employed in
the same kind of life; and am therefore persuaded, that you have had some
experience of my grief.


Phil. Experience, say you? yea indeed I have had so much experience of that
whereof you now complain, that if all other things were according thereunto, I
might be able to teach very many. But I pray you sir, what good occasion has
brought you into these parts? It is a wonder to see you in this country. I
should hardly have known you (it is so long since we lived together, now above
twenty years, and also for that you seem to me so aged) but that I did
better remember your voice then your favor.


Spoud. Sir, you see the Proverb verefied in me; Cura facit canos. They who
have felt the evils of laboring without fruit in their calling, will neither
spare labor nor cost to help the same.
Cares and troubles have made me aged long before my time. As for my journey, a
very great and necessary occasion has driven me into these quarters, to come
even unto you, to seek your help and direction, in matter wherein (I hope)
you may exceedingly pleasure me, without hurt any way, or so much as the least
prejudice unto your self.


Phil. You might think me very unkind, and forgetful of our ancient love,
if I should not be ready to show you any kindness; especially since you have
taken so long a journey unto me. If for to gain a little politic experience or
to see fashions, many will adventure both by sea and land, into enemies
countries, to the hazarding ofttimes both of body and soul; how much more
ought we to travel at home, amongst our friends, to gain lasting comfort in our
labors?
But I pray what is the matter?


Spoud. The matter (if you will give me leave) is this. I have heard that you
have long taken great pains in teaching; and that of late years* you have set
your self wholly to this happy kind of travel; to find out the most plain,
easy, and sure ways of teaching, for the benefit both of your self and
others: whereby you have attained much happy knowledge in this behalf. Now my
long journey has bin for this same very purpose, to desire some conference
with you, and to entreat your loving favor and help. I should think my self
for eu^r bound unto you, if you would vouchsafe to impart unto me some of those
experiments, which I have been certainly informed, that by your travels you
have obtained. For, I my self have so long labored in this moyling and
drudging life, without any fruit to speak of, and with so many
discouragements and vexations insteede of any true comfort, Many honest and
painful Schoolmasters weary of their places, live in continual discontent,
through lack of knowledge of a good cour^e of teaching.
that I wax utterly weary of my place, and my life is a continual burden
unto me. Insomuch as that it causes me to fear, that God never called me to
this function, because I see his blessing so little upon my labors; neither can
I find any delight therein: whereas, notwithstanding, I hear of some others,
and even of our old acquaintance, whom GOD blesses greatly in this calling;
though such be very rare, Some few God much blesses in this calling though
they be very rare.
some one or two spoken of almost in a whole country.


Phil. Indeed I have traveled in this too unthankful a calling (as you do
most justly complain) and that in all this time, since we lived together* In
the greatest part whereof, I have been well acquainted with your griefs and
vexations; which are no other then do ordinarily wait upon this our function:
yet this I thankefully acknowledge (according to your former speech, and to
give you likewise some reviving) that now of late, since I set my self more
conscionably and earnestly to seek out the best ways of teaching, by
inquiring, conferring and practicing constantly all the most likely courses,
which I could hear or devise, God has granted unto me, to find so great
contentation and joy of this same labor in my school, that it has swallowed
up the remembrance of all my former grieuances. For I do plainly see such a
change, More true contentment may be ^ound in this calling rightly followed,
then in any recreation whatsoever.
that now I do not only labor in my place usually without grief, or any
weariness at all, but that I can take ordinarily more true delight and
pleasure in following my children (by observing the earnest strife and
emulation which is amongst them, which of them shall do the best, and in the
sensible increase of their learning and towardness) then any one can take in
following hawks and hounds, or in any other the pleasantest recreation, The
fruit of this travel is ever the sweetest in the remembrance of it after.
as I verily persuade my self. And the rather because after my labor ended,
my chiefest delight is in the remembrance thereof; and in the consideration of
the certain good, that I know shall come thereby, both unto Church and
Commonwealth: and also that my labor and service is acceptable to the Lord,
though all men should be unthankful. So that now I am never so well, as when I
am most diligent in my place. Yea I do seem to my self to find withal so
great a blessing upon my labors, Knowledge and practi^e of the best courses
will much augment the blessing of our labors, and fill our lives with
contentment.
above all former times, that if I had known the same courses from the
beginning, I do assure my self that I had done ten times more good, and my
whole life had been full of much sweet contentment, in regard of that which
it has bin. Although my labors have never been utterly unprofitable, but that
I have still sent forth for every year, some unto the Universities, and they
approved amongst the better sort of those which have come thither: yet this
has been nothing to that good which I might undoubtedly have done.


Spoud. Sir, Feeling of the grief and want of others, will make us more
compassionate.
I am persuaded that you speak as you think: and therefore I do grow into
greater hope, that you having had so much experience of the grief in the one,
and joy in the other, will be more compassionate of me, and more ready also to
impart your experiments with me, to make me partaker of your comfort.


Phil. For communicating unto you, for your help and comfort, what God has
made known unto me, I take it to be my duty. We are but stuards of Gods
gifts and to be accountable for every talent.
We all of us know the danger of hiding our talent, or keeping back our debt,
when the Lord having given us ability, does call upon us to pay it.


Spoud. I thank God unfeignedly (good sir) for this hearty affection, which I do
find in you, and for this readiness to communicate with me the fruits of
your trauells. What our affection and resolution should be in receiving any
special blessing from the Lord: as namely direction how to walk more
fruitfully in our calling.
You shall see. I hope, that I shall receive them, with like alacrity and
thankfulness, and be as ready to employ them to the best, to do my uttermost
service in my place and calling hereafter. So that although my first beginnings
have been small, through ignorance of better courses, yet I trust my after
fruits shall much increase. Hereby my last days shall prove my best, and make
some amends for that which is past: and also my new comforts shall sweeten all
the remainder of my life, and make me likewise to forget the days that are
past. How true is that Proverb of wise Solomon, that heaviness in the heart
of man does bring it down, but a good word does rejoice it? You have revived my
heart, and put new spirits into me, by that which you have already said.


Phil. The Lord will revive you, How the way of all good learning may be more
easy then ever in former ages.
I hope, and all of us also who labor in this toyling kind; by causing us to
find more ^ound fruit, and pleasant content in our teaching, then ever yet we
felt; if we will but set our selves to seek of him, and readily impart our
several experiments for the good of all: if withal we will receive
thankfully, and cheerfully put in practice those gracious helps of so many
learned men, which he in this last age of the world has afforded aboundently,
above all former times, very many whereof lie utterly hid and unknown to the
greatest sort, Many most worthy helps lie utterly hid from the greatest part,
only through neglect.
unto this day. And that partly through lack of care and conscience, to do
that good which we might, and ought in our places; partly through extreme
unthankfulness, neglecting the rich gifts of the Lord, so plentifully powered
down from heaven upon us, to leave the world more without excuse. But as for
mine own self, all that I can promise is, only my study and desire, to do
you and all other the greatest good that ever I shall be able; and hereunto we
have all bound our selves. If I know any thing wherein I have, or you may
receive benefit, I acknowledge it wholly where it is due, even to him who
gives liberally to all who seek him aright, and casts no man in the teeth.
And resting upon his rich bounty for a further supply, if you shall propound in
order the particular points, wherein you would wish my advise, I shall very
willingly go on with you; and acquaint you with all things which hitherto I
have learned in all my search, and more hereafter as his wisdom shall add
unto me.


Spoud. I rejoice in your confidence and wish that so it may be. In the mean
time I like well of your motion, of going through in order the principal
matters of difficulty. If therefore you shall think meet, I shall reduce all
to certain heads, which a friend of mine showed unto me of late, set down in
a certain Table, which it may be that your self have seen.


Phil. Let me hear what was contained in it, and then I shall soon answer
you, whether I have seen it or no.


Spoud. There was contained, in it, a brief sum of sundry particular
benefits, which may be brought to Grammar Schools, to make scholars very
perfect in every part of good learning meet for their years; and that all
both Masters and Scholars may proceed with ease, certainty and delight, to
fit all apt Scholars for the University every way, by fifteen years of
age. Concerning which several heads, although it were a most happy work if
they could be attained unto (all of them being in my mind very excellent,
and indeed the whole, such a work as must needs bring a perpetual benefit,
both to Church, and Commonwealth, and that not only to the present but to all
succeeding ages) yet that I may speak freely, what I conceive of them, many of
them seem very strange unto me. And, although I will not say that they are
utterly impossible: yet indeed I take them to be altogether unlikely;
considering the continual pains and vexation that my self have undergone,
and yet could never come in many of them, near unto the least part thereof.


Phil. By that little which you have mentioned, I take it that I have seen the
very same: and for them I do not only think it, All the things mentioned in
the contents may be effected through diligence, constancy and Gods blessing.
but also do know assuredly, that by the Lords gracious assistance and
blessing, through constant diligence they may be all effected; for that I have
known so much trial of al of them, as is sufficient to induce any man
thereunto: besides that they do all stand upon plain and sure grounds, as I
trust I am able to make evident demo^stration in each particular, See the
particulars in the contents set before the book.
so as any man of understanding may perceive clearly, that they may be done.
Neither do I doubt but to satisfy you in every point, and to cause you to
yield unto the evidence hereof, before we part, if you will but only ask
and still show me wherein you are not satisfied. Moreover, I am so very
confident herein, not only upon mine own reason and experience, but because I
have known the judgments of sundry very learned and experienced both
Schoolemasters and others, who have been acquainted with these selfsame
heads, which you have mentioned: who, though at the first reading of them, they
have been of your judgment, and have thought as you do, yet within a quarter
of an hour after that they have taken a little trial, in some of the most
unlikely, and seen the reason of them, have rested fully satisfied and assured
of the whole, that all might be done, as standing on the like grounds. And
therefore I have no cause to distrust the like success with your self.


Spoud. Sir, if you shall do this for me, I shall acknowledge my self to
have received a very great benefit, and be thankful unto the Lord, and to your
self as his instrument; and do my uttermost endeavor to put them all
constantly in practice, that I may confirm them by mine own experience, and
find the same happy comfort, that your self have done.

I will therefore begin in order according unto those heads, and so propound
the questions, how each thing may be done, and desire your answer unto them
severally.


Phil. Nay rather, The most easy and profitable manner of procee^ing in this
conference*
for the manner of proceeding, I take this to be far more easy and commodious
to us both, and whereby God may direct this conference so, as to profit many
others besides our selves: To go through all the whole course of learning, from
the first step, beginning at the very first Elements, even at the A. B. C. and
so to ascend to the highest top of learning, which can be required in Grammar
schools; to make a scholar each way fit for the University. Thus to run
through all the necessary points appertaining to the same, as near as we can
remember; To make hereby the whole way easy and ready to all good learning,
and to rank every head in the right order and proper place, according to the
due manner of proceeding in Schools. So we may insert these points which you
have spoken of; dividing the whole into s^uerall chapters, for the full
distinguishing and plain setting down of every matter. To the end therefore that
I may be the better guided and occasioned to impart all things unto you, I
shall request you, first to propound all the several points of learning in
order, from point to point as we proceed. Secondly, in the propounding of them,
to show me in every one, what course you your self have taken, wherein you
have found so little fruit or comfort, as you complain, and which you think
to be most ordinary in the country schools. Wherein you shall fail in
omitting any necessary head or chapter, or in misplacing any, I shall afford
you my best direction.


Spoud. I will accomplish your desire so well as I can. I doubt not of your
patience, seeing you take me thus of a sudden; and that you who have better
thought of these things, will guide me continually, until we have gone through
the whole.


Phil. I trust you are so persuaded of me. Therefore I pray you begin.


CHAP. II.
When the Scholar should first be set to the School.
Spoud. THat I may begin at the very first entrance of the School: The first
point. How soon the child is to be set to the school.
let me inquire this of you, how soon you would have your child set unto the
School; for I think that worthy to be first known, if so be, that you
purpose to have your scholar fitted for the university by fifteen years of
age.


Phil. I like your reason well, to enter there. But to the intent that I may
more fully make known unto you, what I think and have found in this behalf,
let me hear first of you, as I wished in general, at what age you use in
your country, to set your children to begin to learn.


Spoud. For the time of their entrance with us, in our country schools, The
time of the first entrance in country schools, at 7. or 8.
it is commonly about 7. or 8. years old: six is very soon. If any begin so
early, they are rather sent to the school to keep them from troubling the
house at home, and from danger, and shrewd turns, then for any great hope and
desire their friends have that they should learn anything in effect. The
child of any ordinary towardliness, to begin to learn about 5. year old.
Reasons.



Phil. I find that therein first is a very great want generally; for that the
child if he be of any ordinary towardness and capacity, should begin at five
year old at the uttermost, or sooner rather. My reasons are these:

1 Because that then children will begin to conceive of instruction, 1. Because
they are then meet to conceive of learning and to delight in it.
and to understand; and be able not only to know their letters, to spell and
to read, but also to take a delight therein, and to strive to go before their
fellows. Experience herein will quickly teach every one, who shall make
trial of it, if so be that they do follow a right course.

2 Very reason must needs persuade every one of this. 2. For that they are
apt much sooner to learn shrewdness, and those things which are hurtful.
For, if they be apt much before five years of age, to learn shrewdness,
and those things which are hurtful, which they must ^ee taught to unlearn
again; why are they not as well fit to learn those things which are good and
profitable for them, if they be entered and drawn on in such a manner, as they
may take a delight and find a kind of sport and play in the same. This
delight may and ought to be in all their progress, and most of all in the
first entrance, to make them the better to love the School, and learning, as
we shall see after.

3 Many of them, 3. To avoid much rudeness, and that too much sweetness which
they feel in play and idleness.
do learn so much untowardness and n^ughtinesse amongst other rude children,
in that time before they come to school, that they are worse for it
continually after: and also they feel such a sweetness in play and idleness,
as they can hardly be framed to leave it, and to take a delight in their
books without very much ado.

4 This first age, 4 This age is most easily be^ded, and ac^ustomed to good
things.
is that wherein they are most plant, and may be bended and fashioned most
easily to any good course. And being thus accustomed to good things from their
infancy, and kept so much as may be, from all practice and sight of evil,
custom becomes unto them another nature. So great a thing it is (according to
the old proverb) to accustom children, even from their render years; and so
undoubtedly true is that common verse, Quo s^mel est imbuta recens seruabit
odorem testa diu

5 Above all these, 5 Two or three years may be gained by this means, to fit
the^ sooner for the University or other imploiments, which is no small benefit.
this is a principal benefit, that by this means two or three years may well
be gained, to fit your Scholar so much sooner for the University or for any
honest trade or calling. So that a child thus entered rightly, shall do much
more at eight years old, then an other so neglected can do at ten, or it
may be at eleven or twelve. Also many such shall be meet for trades and like
employments, when they have no learning to fit them thereunto. This must needs
be a great grief to the Parents of such, whose children have so lost their
time, as it is a joy to others whose children have been so well brought up,
when they see their children compared together.

6 Lastly, 6 Parents ought to labor to see their childrens good educatio^
before their eyes, so soon as may be.
our time being so short* it much concerns every parent, to see their
children to have the best education and instruction, which is the chief
patrimony, and the greatest comfort and hope both of the Parents and children,
and also of their houses and posterity. And this so soon as ever may be, to
fit them for some profitable imploiment for Church or Commonwealth.


Spoud. But they will say with us, Ob. It will hinder their growth.
that it will hinder the growth of their children to be set to school so
young.


Phil. Let the school be made unto them a place of play: A. The school being
rightly used will not hinder any more the^ their play.
and the children drawn on by that pleasant delight which ought to be, it can
then no more hinder their growth then their play does, but rather further it,
when they sit at their ease; besides that continual experience does confute
this error.


Spoud. Be it so as you say: Ob. 2. It will cause them to hate learning.
yet this is a received opinion, that it will cause them to hate the school,
when they should be set to it in good earnest.


Phil. Nay rather it is clean contrary: A They will rather love it better.
for being acquainted with the school so young, and with the sport and
pleasure which they find amongst other children there; and also being kept
from feeling the over much sweetness in play, it shall cause them to love and
to delight in the school continually, and to go on without any repining, or
so much as thinking of being away from the school: whereas they being nuzled up
in play abroad, are very hardly reclaimed and weaned from it, to stick to
their books indeed.


Spoud. But yet it is thought that they can get but little learning then, Ob. 3
It is a small matter to lose a year or two then.
being so very young, and therefore there is the smaller loss of a year or
two, at that time.


Phil. The loss will be found in the end, although it be indeed in the
beginning. A The loss of a year or two will be found in the end.
For look how many years they lose in the beginning if they be apt, so many
in the end they will be shorter, of such of their fellows, who are but of
their own age, and applied all alike being of like capacity. Therefore, as
we will not let them lose a day, when they grow toward the University, so
neither should we when they are young; but prevent this loss, and take the
time in the beginning.


Spoud. We see notwithstanding some very long ere ever they begin, Ob. 4. They
will learn the faster.
who then go forward with it the fastest of all.


Phil. It is true in some pregant wits, and who are industrious: A So in higher
learning at those years.
but you shall ^^^ue others as blockish and dull. Also, for those, if they go
so fas^ in the rudiments and first grounds, how much more would they do so at
the same time in better studies? Neither can they have half that learning in
all things, which others of like age and aptness have, who have been well
applied from their first years.


Spoud. I yield to all which you have said in this behalf; and I do see
plainly the exceeding benefits, that must needs come hereby, especially in
gaining of time; if they may be entered in that playing manner, and go forward
with alacrity and contention; and moreover so, that they be not any way
ouerloaded or discouraged, nor yet in dangered, by the over charging of their
wits and memories.


Phil. For that take you no fear; you shall (God willing) see the evidence of
that, and a plain direction in every Chapter how to proceed in that easy
and playing kind. Therefore, if you be satisfied in this, let us come unto the
next point.


Spoud. Very gladly sir: for I long to hear this, how you would teach your
child being so young to read so soon and readily.


Phil. I like the point well: proceed according to your order.


CHAP. III.
How the Scholar may be taught to read English speedily, to fit him the
sooner and better for the Grammar school.
Spoud. BEfore we enter into this question, yet let me put you in mind of one
thing, The inconvenience of having the Grammar schools trobled with teaching
A. B. C
which does much trouble me concerning this very matter. That it seems to
me an unreasonable thing that the Grammar schools should be troubled with
teaching A. B. C. seeing it is so great a hinderance, to those pains which we
should take with our Grammar scholars, for whom we are appointed: Because it
does take up almost one half of our time, and thereby does deprive us of a
chief part of the fruit of our labors; especially when our minds are so
distracted, and our thoughts carried so many ways, to do good to all. The
very little ones in a town, in most country towns which are of any bigness,
would require a whole man, of themselves, to be always hearing* poasing and
following them, so as they ought to be applied: for continual applying in a
right course, Continual applying in a right course is above al means
is in this and all other parts of learning, above all other means. And young
ones, by a little slaking our hands, run faster back, then ever they went
forward; as boats going up the stream.

Besides, it is an extreme vexation, that we must be toyled amongst such
little pettyes, and in teaching such matters, whereof we can get no profit, nor
take any delight in our labors.


Phil. I am well inured with this grieuance, which you speak of, and do know
by long experience your complaint to be too just in this behalf. I my self
have complained of it many a time. For it were much to be wished, that none
might be admitted to the Grammar schools, until they were able to read
English: as namely that they could read the new Testament perfectly, and that
they were in their Accidences or meet to enter into them. How this might be
remedied by some other school in each town for this purpose.
There might be some other school in the town, for these little ones to
enter them. It would help some poor man or woman, who knew not how to live
otherwise, and who might do that well, if they were rightly directed. Also it
would be such an ease to all Grammar Schoolemasters, as they might do much
more good in their places. The redress of it to be sought.
Wherefore, all such Schoolemasters who are encumbered with this inconvenience,
are not only to wish, but also to labor to have it reformed in their several
schools. To be borne with patience where it cannot be remedied.
Yet notwithstanding, where it cannot be redressed, it must be borne with
wisdom and patience as an heavy burden. Patience shall make it much more
light. And therefore every one is to do his best endeavor, to know how to
make it most easy, if it do lie upon him. Moreover, seeing we purpose, God
willing, to go through all the whole course of learning, and also since our
labor is to find out the means, whereby to make the way plain, to train up
every child from the very first entrance into learning, (as was said)
until we have brought him unto the University, we cannot omit any point,
which may tend unto the same, much less the first step of all. For, a child
well entered is half made: The first entering of children to be looked to
carefully.
according to that Proverb, Principium, dimidium totius. The foundation well
laid, the building must needs go forward much more happily. This is specially
true in learning; wherein children feeling a sweetness in the beginning, are
very much encouraged, as daily experience will manifest to every one.


Spoud. I see well the necessity of undergoing this burden, in those places
where remedy cannot be had, without greater inconveniences. And therefore,
since that necessity has no law, nor for my self I know no means h^w to be
freed from it; I pray you let us return again unto the point, and let me
still entreat of you your best direction, to make this burden so light as may
be. To teach to read well in a short time is of great profit
This is a thing worth the diligence of all, who must be employed amongst
little ones: to wit, to teach children how to read well, and to pronounce their
letters truly; as also to spell right, and to know how to write true
Orthography in a short space. For (that I may acknowledge the truth, and which
has bit no small discredit unto me in this behalf) I have had some who have
been with me, two or three years, before they could read well. Grief and
discredit of the want of this.
And that which has yet bin much more grievous to me, I have sometimes been
so abashed and ashamed, that I have not known what to say, when some being a
little discontented, or taking occasion to quarrel about paying my stipend,
have cast this in my teeth, that their children have been under me six or
seven year, and yet have not learned to read english well. I my self have
also known, that their complaints have been true in part; though I have taken
all the pains with them that ever I could devise. Therefore good sir, set
down as plainly and shortly as you can, how this may be helped. Both my self
and many others shall be much beholden for your direction in this first
entrance. For my manner of en^^ing them, it is that which I take to be every
where: to teach and hear them so often over until they can say a lesson, and so
to a new.


Phil. I likewise have been well acquainted with this your trouble: and
therefore I will endeavor, to afford you so much as I have yet learned, how to
avoid these clamors; and how any poor man who will employ his pains, may
learn to teach children to read well in a short time, though this may seem
unbefitting our profession.

First the ch^^de is to be taught, 1. To teach children how to call and
pronounce their letters right.
how to call every letter, pronouncing each of them plainly, fully and
distinctly; I mean in a distinct and differing sound, each from others, and
also naturally, from the very first entrance to learning. More specially to be
careful, for the right pronouncing the five vowels, And first the 5. vowels.
in the first place, as a, e, i, o, u. Because these are first and most
natural, and do make a perfect sound, so that they may be pronounced fully
of themselves; and they being rightly uttered, all the rest are more plain.
After these vowels* to teach them to pronounce every other letter: The
Consonants.
which are therefore called Consonants, because they cannot make a perfect
sound of themselves, without a vowell.

This may be done, Right calling the letters before the children do know them.
and also the teaching of children to spell any syllable, before the child do
know any letter on the book; and that, some wise and experienced do hold the
surest and best course. But they are, at least, to be taught to pronounce their
letters thus, as they do learn them; to prevent the grief and wearisomnesse
of teaching them to forget evil customs in pronouncing, which they took^ up
in their first ill learning. And so ever in teaching to read, the teachers are
to continue the like care of sweet and natural pronun^ia^ion.

Secondly, 2. How to teach children to know the letters the soonest.
for the knowing of the letters (besides that common manner practiced in
Schools, which is by often reading over all the letters forwards and backwards
until they can say them) they may be much furthered thus; That is, To cause
them to find out any letter.
by causing the child to find out, and to show you which is a, which b, which
c, which f, and so any other letter. First to find them in the Alphabet, then
in any other place. Or if you will let them learn but one letter at once, The
surer way is to learn but one letter at a^ once.
until they can readily know or find out that letter in any place, and after
that an other in the same manner; This is holden the surer and more easy way:
But this at your own judgment.

3 You may help them to spell thus, 3. How to teach to spell.
besides that course which is usual. Let so many as are beginners, or who
cannot read perfectly, stand together, and then poase them without book, one
by one. First in syllables of two letters, as they are set down in their A. B.
C. and where one misseth let his next fellow tell, M. Coots English
Schoolmaster might be profitable to this purpose, in which book are
syllables and words of all sorts.
if he cannot then some other. Then examine them in syllables of three letters,
after in more. And ever what syllable they miss, mark it with a dent with the
nail, or a prick with a pen, or the like: and when you have marked out those
wherein they so miss, poase them often over, not forgetting due praise to them
who do best. One half hour would be spent daily in this kind of examining,
To make children to take delight in spelling.
until they be perfect in any syllable or word. To make children to take a
delight in spelling, let them spell many syllables together, which differ but
only in one letter, as hand, band, land, sand, etc. These syllables and words
following, I have observed, to be of the hardest for children to spel: I will
set you them down together in this short brief. They may serve for spelling,
reading, or writing, and may soon be gotten by being often poased, read or
written over.

Ac, Some of the hardest syllables to practice children in the spelling of
the^. These would be written in some little table to poase them often.
ec, ca, ce, ci, co, cu, ag, eg, ah, az, ae, ai, au, ga, ge, gi, go, gu, va,
wa, we, we, bac, bace, bag, bage, gage, badge, bau, baye, dawe, dew, iawe,
rac, race, rosse, rose, yell, you, gua, cha, cla, dwa, gla, pha, tha, sca, sha,
swa, wra, chra, phra, spha, thra, two, thwa, able, abs, ach, adge, afle, apt,
ath, own, blow, browe, chrou, dregg, dredge, dwarf, frogg, gnash, gnaw,
plowe, snow, stewe, slugge, they, thom, throne, twain, twigge, school,
cockle, puddle, pegle, good, gold, gogle, balm, fallen, stolen, scalpe,
false, thumb, couple, pearce, charm, chapt, moth, mouth, nymphs, uncle,
tenth, strength, height, depth, breadth, weight, joint, laud, beauty, deed,
language, guide, feed, feude, vow, brave, dou, dove, knife, knives, yeoman,
enough, air, heir, doubting, Island, isle, buy, league, hatchet, laugh,
yeugh, bough* public, quishon.

These are some of the hardest syllables, Note in spelling.
as I said: your self may add more as you meet with them. Also this is to be
observed in spelling; that before (on) you spell or write commonly (ti) not
(ci) as salvation not salvation, though we pronounce it as (ci.) But this is to
be known chiefly, by the latin words from whence they come.

Right pronuntiation of words, Right pronou^cing makes right spelling.
and continual practice in spelling, are the surest way to come to spell
truly.

If you pronounce the word false, which you would have your child to spell,
he spelleth it false: for he spelleth according as it is pronounced to him,
or as he uses to pronounce. As for example; ask the child how he spelles a
strea, (as in many places the country manner is to pronounce it) he will
spell strea or stre: but ask him how he spells a straw and so pronounce it,
and he will spell straw.

To direct further how to come to perfection in spelling or writing right,
Further direction for spelling after.
I shall have occasion to speak after.

In ioining syllables together, 4. Joining syllables together.
they must be taught, to utter every syllable by it self, truly, plainly,
fully, and distinctly, as we heard of the letters before; and so also as that
others who hear may understand; Understanding the matter.
ever sounding out the last syllable: as sal-ua-ti-on.

Thus they may go through their Abcie, Books to be first learned of children.
and Primer. And if they read them twice over, that they may be very perfect
in them, it will be the better for them. For, the second reading of any book
does much encourage children, Abcie, Primer. Second reading of a book.
because it seems to be so easy then; and also it does imprint it the more.
Besides that they will run it over so fast at the second time, as it will be no
loss of time at all unto them.

After these they may read over other English books. Psalms in meter.
Amongst which, the Psalms in meter would be one, because children will learn
that book with most readiness and delight through the running of the meter,
as it is found by experience. Testament.
Then the Testament, in which the discreet Master may keep his scholar less
or more, until he think him meet to enter into the Accidence.

If any require any other little book meet to enter children; School of
Virtue.
the School of Virtue is one of the principal, and easiest for the first
enterers, being full of precepts of civility, and such as children will soon
learn and take a delight in, through the roundnesse of the meter, as was said
before of the singing Psalms: And after it the School of good manners,
School of good manners,
called, the new School of Virtue, leading the child as by the hand, in the
way of all good manners.

By these means, 5. In what time children well applied, may easily learn to
read English.
children if they be well applied, and continually kept unto it, may be taught
so to read within a year or little more, as they may be meet to enter into
their Accidence, by that time that they be six year old at the uttermost;
especially if they be in any measure apt, and much practiced in spelling the
hardest syllables.

For dividing or distinguishing of syllables this one observation is to be
remembered; Dividing and distinguishing syllables.
That what consonants are usually joined in the beginnings of words, those are
not to be disioined and separate in the midst of words, except in Compound
words. But of this we shall speak more fitly after. And thus much may suffice
for the present, for the speedy reading of English; for hereof I have had much
certain experience.


Spoud. I cannot justly dislike of any thing which you have said herein, it
stands all with so great reason: chiefly, to make children so perfect in the
hardest syllables. For, they being perfect in these must needs attain all the
rest in a short space. Except only one thing which you uttered; which indeed
seems a strange Paradox to me: Namely, that some wise and experienced, would
have children taught to call and pronounce all their letters, and to spell any
syllable before they know a letter on the book.


Phil. This is very true which you say; it may seem a Paradox to them who have
not tried it. I my self was of your mind when I heard it first. 6. To teach
little ones to pronounce their letters, and to spell before they know a letter,
is the pleasantest way
Yet setting my self to make some trial of it, for the reverence I bare to
him of whom I heard it, and for that he showed me experience of it in a child
not four years old; I found it the easiest, pleasantest and shortest way of
all, where one would begin in a private house with little ones playing. The
manner is thus* 1. You must teach them, as I said, to call their five vowels,
and to pronounce them right: Which they will presently learn, How little ones
will presently pronounce their five vowels.
if you do but only cause them to repeat them often over, after you, distinctly
together thus; a, e, i, o, u. after the manner of five bells, or as we say; one,
two, three, four, five.

2 Then teach them to put the consonants in order before every vowell, To put
the co^sonants in order before the vowelles pronou^cing them.
and to repeat them often over together; as thus: to begin with b, and to say
ba, be, by, bo, bu. So d. da, de, di, do, du. f. fa, fe, fi, fo, fu. Thus teach
them to say all the rest, as it were singing them together, la, le, li, lo, lu;
The hardest to the last, as ca, ce, ci, co, cu. and ga, ge, gi, go, gu. In
which the sound is a little changed in the second and third syllables. When
they can do all these, then teach them to spell them in order, To teach to
spell these thus, putting the consonants first.
thus; What spells b-a? If the child cannot tell, teach him to say thus; b-a,
ba: so putting first b. before every vowell* to say b-a ba, b-e be, b-i by, b-o
bo, b-u bu. Then ask him again what spells b-a, and he will tell you; so all
the rest in order. By often repeating before him he will certainly do it. After
this if you ask him, how he spells b-a, he will answer b-a ba. So in all
others.

Next these teach them to put the vowels first, as to say, ab, eb, ib, ob, ub.
Then thus, a-b ab, e-b eb, i-b ib, o-b ob, u-b ub. After; what spelles a-b,
e-b, etc. Thus to go with them backward and forward, cross, in and out until
they can spell any word of two letters. Then you may adioine those of three
letters: Afterward, all the hard syllables, to tell what any of them spells,
til they be perfect in all, or as you shall think meet. Repeating th letters
of thee Alphabet, by roate.
By this means, and by a little repeating of the letters of the Alphabet over
before them, by three or four letters together, as they stand in order, so as
they may best sound in the childrens ears, they will soon learn to say all
the letters of the A. B. C. if you will. As to repeat them thus. A. b. c. d. e.
f. g. h. i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. s. t. u. w. x. y. z. and. To say them thus
by roat will nothing hinder but further them.

Then they may presently be taught to know the letters upon the book, To teach
them to know their letters as before.
either one by one, finding first which is a, in the Alphabet; and after in any
other place. Then to find which is b, and so through all the rest as you will.

Then when they are cunning in their letters, and spelling, To cause them to
know the matter by questions or often repeating to the^.
if you make them to understand the matter which they learn, by questions, for
a little at the first, they will go on in reading, as fast as you will desire.
The easier and more familiar the matter is to them, the faster they learn.

Thus may any poor man or woman enter the little ones in a town together; Any
one who can read, may thus enter children for reading english
and make an honest poor living of it, or get somewhat toward helping the
same. Also the Parents who have any learning, may enter their little ones
playing with them, at dinners and suppers, or as they sit by the fire, and
find it very pleasant delight.

So they may help to gain their children a year or two in learning at the
beginning, and also the Grammar Schools of this labor and hinderance.


Spoud. You have persuaded me very much concerning this doubt also. Surely sir
howsoever thus may seem but a toye, yet all tender parents will much rejoice
in it, and acknowledge it an exceeding benefit, to have their children so
entered; and this time being got^en in the beginning, will be found in the
end as you truly said. Yet there is another matter that comes unto my
remembrance, about which I have taken no small grief and discouragement many
a time, concerning this point of reading English. I will mention it here, and
desire your judgment how to redress it, although it might happily
come-in-fitter afterward.

The trouble is this. That when as my children do first enter into Latin,
many of them will forget to read English, 8. The inconvenience of children
forgetting to read English, when they enter first into latin, and how to
avoid it. Complaints of Parents for children forgetting English.
and some of them be worse two or three years after that they have been in
construction, then when they began it.

Now if you could teach me how to help this likewise, that they might as well
go forward still in reading English as in Latin, I should account this a very
great benefit. For, some of their Parents, who use me the kindliest, will be
at me that their children may every day read some Chapters of the Bible, to
help their reading of English. Now this I cannot possibly do, but they must
needs be hindered in their latin, in some lessons or necessary exercises;
and either be behind their fellows, or else trouble all their fellows very
much, that they cannot go so fast forward as they should, but stay for these
readers. Others being more ignorant or malicious, upon every light occasion,
are ready to rage and rail at me, for that their children as they say, do
get no good under me, but are worse and worse. For, whereas they could have
read English perfectly (it may be) when they came to me, now they have
forgotten to do it. Thus am I grieved on every side, and vexed daily, let me
labor never so much, and spend my heart amongst them for to do them good.


Phil. Sir, herein I can say, as she in the Poet; Haud ignara mali miseris
succurrere disco. For I have tasted deeply of the same grief until very
lately, within this year or two. Yet now I seem to my self, to find as
sensible and continual a growth amongst all my Scholars, in their English
tongue as in the Latin. And not only for the reading of it, but also for
understanding it, and ability to utter their minde^ of any matter, wherewith
they are acquainted, or which they learn in Latin; and also how to express
the meaning of the latin in prop^iety* and purity of our own tongue:
Complaint of want of care in our schools for growth in our own tongue is in the
latin.
so that I am quite d^^uered from that clamor.

But to tell you what I think, wherein there seems unto me, to be a very
maine want in all our Grammar, schools generally, or in the most of them;
whereof I have heard some great learned men to complain; That there is no care
had in respect, to train up scholars so, as they may be able to express their
minds purely and readily in our own tongue, Our chief indeauor should be for
our own tongue.
and to increase in the practice of it, as well as in the Latin or Greek;
whereas our chief endeavor should be for it, and that for these reasons.
Reasons.
1. Because that language which all sorts and conditions of men amongst us are
to have most use of, both in speech and writing, is our own native tongue. 2.
The purity and elegancie of our own language is to be esteemed a chief part
of the honor of our nation: which we all ought to advance as much as in us
lies. As when Greece and Rome and other nations have most flourished, their
languages also have been most pure: and from those times of Greece and Rome,
we fetch our chiefest patterns, for the learning of their tongues. 3. Because
of those which are for a time trained up in schools, there are very few which
proceed in learning, in comparison of them that follow other callings.


Spoud. This complaint is notwithout just cause: Few Scooles which have any
regard for our English tongue
for I do not know any school* wherein there is regard had hereof to any
purpose; notwithstanding the general necessity and use of it, and also the
great commendation which it brings to them who have attained it: but I think
every minute an hour, until I hear this of you, how my trouble and shame may
be avoided, and how I may obtain this faculty to direct my children, how they
may go thus forward, not only in reading English perfitly, but also in the
propriety, purity and copy of our English tongue, so as they may utter their
minds commendably of any matter which may concern them, according to their
age and place.


Phil. I will but name the means unto you now: for I shall have occasion to
show them all more particularly hereafter.

Besides the daily use of distinct reading over their English parts to get them
perfectly, Means to obtain this benefit of increasing in our English tongue, as
in the Latin.
and of right reading all other things which they learn in latin, as your self
do know; these means following, by the blessing of God will accomplish your
desire.

1 The continual use of the books of construing of Lillies rules, 1. Daily
use of Lillies rules construed.
by causing them to learn to construe, and to keep their Grammar rules, only
by the help of those translations. This I find one very good use of these
books, besides some other which I shall mention after.

2 The daily use, 2. Continual practice of English Grammatical translations.
and practice of Grammatical translation in English, of all the School
Authors, which the younger sort do learn; causing them each day out of those
to construe and repeat, whatsoever they learn. This I also have proved by
happy experience, to be a rare help to make young Scholars to grow very much,
both in English and Latin. But of all these, for the manner, benefits, and
use of them, I shall have occasion to speak at large.

3 Besides these, 3. Translating and writing English, with some other School
exercises.
they would have every day some practice of writing English heedily, in true
Orthography; as also of translating into English; or, of writing Epistles, or
familiar Letters to their friends, as well in English as in Latin. Amongst some
of them, the reporting of a Fable in English, or the like matter, trying who
can make the best report, does much further them in this. And generally,
amongst all those that can write, the taking of notes of Sermons, and
delivering them again, or making repetitions, is a special means. Also
striving to express whatsoever they construe, not only in propriety, but in
variety of the finest phrase, who can give the best. This chiefly in the higher
fourmes: So reading forth of Latin into English; first in propriety, then in
purity. By these, and some use of the History of the Bible, and the like,
which I shall be occasioned to mention after; you may find their growth,
according to your desire, and much above your expectation.


Spoud. Undoubtedly sir, these must needs be very available; because scholars
may have hereby, so much use of the English every day, above that which is
practiced in any School which I have known. But for any such translations
of the School Authors, I have not heard of them, Only I have seen the books
of construing Lillies rules, and some of my children have them, though I feared
that it would rather make them idle, being but a truants book. Indeed I never
conceived so much of them as you say: I shall better think of the use thereof.


Phil. There is not the best thing but it may be abused. But for that book as
the others, I shall show and prove unto you the commodities of them, above all
that you would imagine. The chief fault of the children going backewards in
reading English, when they first learn latin, is in the Parents themselves.
Experience makes me confident: Yet to return unto your self, concerning the
complaint of the Parents, for their children going backward in reading English,
when they first learn latin; the chief fault in truth is in the Parents
themselves; although we poor schoolemasters must be sure to bear all. For if
such murmuring Parents, would would but cause their children, every day after
dinner or supper, or both, to read a Chapter of the Bible, or a piece of a
Chapter, as leisure would permit, and to do it constantly; thereby to show
their love to the Lord, and his word, and their desire to have the word dwell
plentifully in their houses, to have their children trained up in it, as young
Timothy was; then I say, this complaint would soon be at an end: for they
should either seethen, their children to increase in this, or else they should
discern the fault to be in their childrens dullness, and not in our neglect.
Notwithstanding, since that they are so very few of whom we can hope, that
they have any care of this duty in their houses, in respect of all the rest
who omit it, and yet all the blame must surely rest on us, it concerns us so
much as we can to redress it; and therefore use all good means, to cut off
all occasions of clamours, and of discrediting our selves, and our schools,
and to contend for the greatest profiting of our children, as well in this, as
in any other part of learning; the use of this being, as we heard, most
general and perpetual.


Spoud. You have directed me very rightly how to answer such Parents: now I
shall be able to show them where the fault is, and be calling upon them to
redress this at home. I shall also endeavor to put all this in ure, and more as
you make the particulars more fully known unto me; and as I shall find by
trial the fruit hereof. But now, that you have thus satisfied me in all these
my doubts; I cannot but demand yet one other point, wherein I find another
great want, though not comparable to the former; because there is not so much
use of it: which is about the ordinary numbers or numbering. For I am much
troubled about this, that my readers and others above them, are much to seek
in all matters of numbers, whether in figures or in letters. Insomuch, as when
they hear the chapters named in the church, many of them cannot turn to them,
much less to the verse.


Phil. This likewise is a very ordinary defect, An ordinary fault, that most
scholars are to seek in matters of common numbers, which they may be taught
in an hour or two.
and yet might easily be helped by common means, in an howr or two. I call it
ordinary, because you shall have scholars, almost ready to go to the
University, who yet can hardly tell you the number of pages, sections,
chapters, or other divisions in their books, to find what they should. And it
is as you say, a great and a foul want; because, without the perfect knowledge
of these numbers, scholars cannot help themselves by the Indices, or Tables of
such books, as they should use, for turning to any thing of a sudden: although
it be a matter whereof they should have use all their life long. And to
conclude, it is a great neglect, because it is a thing so easy, as that it may
be learned in so short a time, only by most usual means, as by these
following. For numbers by letters, use but only to appose them, Numbers by
letters known easily, yet often neglected.
according to the direction in the latin Grammar at Orthographia, and they
will do them presently. As if you ask what I. stands for, what V. what X. what
L. etc. And back again, what letter stands for one, so what for five, or
forten. But specially if you desire to have them very ready herein, cause them
to have these written, and then to practice to read them over often, until that
they can answer any of them perfectly. Warn them also to remember always* that
any number set after a greater, or after the same number, does add so many mo,
as the value of that later number is. As, I. set after X. thus, XI. does make
eleven. XV. fifteen* XX. twenty. But being set before, they do take away so*
many as they are: as I. before X. thus, IX. nine.

If you wish an example more at large this may serve; let each of them that
should learn have a brief of these, after this manner, to show them all the
chief numbers. I. one, II. two, III. three, IIII. or IV. four, V. five, VI.
six, VII. seven, VIII. eight, IX. nine, X. ten, XI. eleven* XII. twelve,
XIII. thirteen, XIIII. fourteen, XV. fifteen, XVI. XVII. XVIII. XIX. XX.
XXI. XXV. twenty five, XXX. thirty, XL. forty, L fifty, XC. ninety, C. a
hundredth, D. five hundredth, M. a thousand. And thus much shortly for numbering
by letters.

For the numbers by figures, Numbers by figures.
this rule must also be observed; That the figures do signify in the first
place so much only, as if they were alone, or one time so many. In the 2. place
tennes, or ten times so many. In the third place, hundreths, or a hundredth
times so many. In the fourth place thousands, or a thousand times so many. In
the fifth place ten thousands. In the sixth place hundredth thousands; the places
being reconed from the right hand to the le^t. As for example, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. twenty. 21. 22. 23.
etc. 30. thirty. 31. 32. 40. forty, 41. etc. 50. fifty 51. 60. sixty, 70.
seauentie. 80. eighty. 90. ninety 100. a hundredth. 101. a hundredth and one,
102. 110. a hundredth and ten. 120. a hundredth and twenty. 130, etc. 200. two
hundredth, etc. 1000. a thousand. 10000. ten thousand. 100000. a hundredth
thousand.

These being learned backewards and forwards, so that your scholar be able to
know each of them, to call them or name them right, and to find them out, as
the child should find any letter which he is to learn: in a word, to tell
what any of these numbers stand for, or how to set down any of them; will
perform fully so much as is needful for your ordinary Grammar scholar. If
you do require more for any; you must seek Records Arithmetique, or other like
Authors and set them to the Cyphering school.


Spoud. This is a defect that I see is most easily supplied by a very little
pain and care in examining. I have troubled you ouerlong in this, being in it
self so very a trifle, though the want generally be to be blamed. Now
therefore let us hasten unto our profession for the Grammar Schoolmaster. For
I desire earnestly to be in our own element, as more befitting and beseeming
our place.


Phil. I am very willing to make all the haste that we can: Why this Dialogue
is so long
for this I see, that though we neither use digressions, nor needless words;
yet this our conference will prove very long, before that I can make my mind
plain unto you. Unless I should be so short, as either to be obscure, or to
omit many things which I take to be very necessary: But yet before we come to
make entrance into the Latin, if we do keep order, we are to go through
the way of writing, as being more general, and which chiefly appertains also
to our English tongue; in respect of our more frequent use of it: I mean
chiefly for the writing of our ordinary hand called the Secretary hand,
which is almost wholly in use amongst us.


CHAP. IIII.
How the Master may direct his Scholars to write very fair, though himself
be no good Penman.
Spoud. TO come therefore unto writing, Fair writing a great benefit and
ornament to Schools.
and the manner of teaching it; That which you affirm may be done herein,
cannot but be a very great benefit, and a notable grace to schools, and also
to all learning, if it can be so effected. That all Scholars in general, may
be directed to write co^mendably, and a great part of them which are more apt
to write very fair; and that in the several hands of the learned tongues, as
they do proceed in every one of them. For many of the best Scholars, have
been wont to write very ill; It has been a received opinion a ^ong many,
that a good Scholar can not be a good writer.
in so much, as it has been a received opinion, as you know, amongst very
many, That a good Scholar can hardly be a good penman. Moreover you shall
find very few good writers in Grammar Schools; unless either they have been
taught by Scriueners, or be themselves marvelous apt hereunto, and very rare,
or where the Master does apply himself chiefly to teach to write.

The want of this, has bin another part of my grief: for besides the
complaint and grudging of the Parents; The trouble of Schoolemasters, for the
want of this faculty to teach Scholars to write.
I have also seen, after they have bin a great while with me, that they have
not bin able to write so, as to be fit for any trade; but they must after be
set to learn of the Scriuener: much less have they bin able to write a letter
to their friends, or to perform any such business with their pen, in any
commendable manner. You shall therefore do me no less a pleasure, then in the
former, if you can direct me, how to help all these evils, and to attain to
that dexterity, whereof you speak.


Phil. I hope to satisfy you herein also. But first relate unto me, what
courses yourselfe have taken, to teach your Scholars to write; whereof you
have found so little profit: and after I shall add, as in the former, what I
have learned, to the better effecting hereof.


Spoud. Surely I have done this: The ordinary course in Schools to teach to
write.
I have daily set them copies, so well as I could; which has bin no small
toil unto me: or else I have caused some of my Scholars, or some others to
do it. Also I have made them now and then to write some copies; and it may be,
I have corrected them for writing so badly, or guided some of their hands, or
showed them how to amend their letters. This I take to be the most that is done
in Schools ordinarily; unless any do procure Scriueners, to teach in their
towns: whereof we find no small inconveniences.


Phil. I take it to be as you say, that this is all which is done in most
Schools: and hence so many of us have experience, of the like murmurings
against us. Now I will let you see plainly and as familiarly as I can, how to
help this evil, and to attain this so great a benefit.

1. The Scholar should be set to write, 1. When Scholars should begin to
write.
when he enters into his Accidence; so every day to spend an hour in writing,
or very near.

2. There must be special care, 2. To have all necessaries.
that every one who is to write, have all necessaries belonging thereunto; as
pen, ink, paper, rular, plummet, ruling-pen, penknife, etc.

3. The like care must be, 3. Ink and paper, of what sort.
that their ink be thin, black, clear; which will not run abroad, nor blot:
their paper good; that is, such as is white, smooth, and which will bear ink,
and also that it be made in a book. Writing books kept fair.
Their writing books would be kept fair strait ruled, and each to have a
blotting paper to keep their books for^ soyling, or marring under their hands.

4. Cause every one of them to make his own pen; otherwise the making, 4. Every
one to learn to make his own pen.
and mending of pens, will be a very great hinderance, both to the Masters and
to the Scholars. Besides that, when they are away from their Masters (if they
have not a good pen made before) they will write naught; because they know not
how to make their pens themselves.

The best manner of making the pen, The manner of making the pen.
is thus:

1. Choose the quil of the best and strongest of the wing, which is somewhat
harder, and will cleave.

2. Make it clean with the back of the penknife.

3. Cleave it strait up the back; first with a cleft, Cleft of the pen.
made with your penknife: after with another quill put into it, riue it
further by little and little, till you see the cleft to be very clean: so you
may make your pen of the best of the quil, and where you see the cleft to be
the cleanest, and without teeth. If it do not cleave without teeth, cleave it
with your penknife in another place, still nearer the back: for if it be nor
strait up the back, it will very seldom run right. After, make the nebbe and
cleft both about one length, somewhat above a barley corn breadth, and small;
so as it may let down the ink, The neb of the pen.
and write clean. Cut the nebbe first slant downwards to make it thin, and
after strait overthwart. Make both sides of equal bigness, unless you be
conning to cut that side, which lies upon the long finger, thinner and
shorter; yet so little, as the difference can hardly be discerned. But both of
equal length is accounted the surest.

The speediest and surest way to learn to make the pen, The surest way for
making the pen.
is this. When your Shollar shall naue a good pen fit for his hand, and well
fashioned; then to view and mark that well, and to try to make one in all
things like unto it. It were good for the learner to procure such a pen made,
and to keep it for a pattern, to make others by until he be very perfect in
it. A child may soon learn to make his pen; yet, few of age do know how to
make their own pens well, although they have written long and very much:
neither can any attain to write fair without that skill.

Next unto this, How to hold the pen.
cause your scholar to hold his pen right, as near unto the nebbe as he
can, his thumb and two fore-fingers, almost closed together, round about the
neb, like unto a cats foot, as some of the Scriueners do term it.

Then let him learn to carry his pen as lightly as he can, To carry the pen so
lightly as to glide on the paper.
to glide or swim upon the paper. So he shall write the cleanest, fairest,
and fastest, and also his pen shall last the long.

Insteede of setting of copies and to save that endless toil, Copies. In
stead of setting copies to have copy books fastened to the top of their books.
let every one have a little copy book fastened to the top of his writing
book, with a strong thread of a spanne long, or thereabout; that always when
he writes, he may lay his copy book close before him, and that the side of
the copy, may almost touch the line where he writes, that his eye may be upon
the copy, and upon his letter both together. And also, to the end that ever
when he has done writing, he may put his copy book into his writing book
again; so that the copy may never be out of the way, nor the Scholar write
without it.

The fittest volume for their writing a book is, to have them in quarto.

Moreover, the copy books would be made thus. Manner of the copy books.
Not above two inches in breadth; four or six copies in a book, half
secretary, half Roman. The copy books might be made thus most fitly as I
take it.

1 One line of small letters, of each letter one, except in those which have
letters of diverse kinds, and therein both kinds to be set down: as i. j. s. 8.
u, v.

Under the line of small letters, would be set a line of great letters, after
the same manner; and under them both a line or two of joining hand, containing
all the letters in them.

Examples of both sorts for the present until better can be found may be
these. I mean copies both of Secretary and Roman, containing all the letters
in them.

For Secretary thus:

Exercise thy self much in Gods book, Examples of copyes containing all the
letters in one line of joining.
with zealous and fervent prayers and requests.

For Roman thus:

Aequore cur gelido zephyrus fert xenia kymbis?

Respect not the verse, but the use.

Under all these, may be fitly set in very little room those characters or
letters, out of which all the rest of the letters may be framed: as in the
small letters in Secretary, m. i. t. v. z. s. In the great letters, (...). So
under the Roman copies after the same manner.

In the end of the copy books, in a page or two, might be set down all the
hard syllables mentioned before. The hardest sylables and principal numbers to
be set in the end of the copy books.
That by often writing them over they might be helped to spel, and to write true
Orthographie. And after those, the numbers mentioned, to be able to write or
totel any of them upon the book without it. Then what scholar so ever were not
able to tell any of them, after a little poasing, The copy books to be printed
and how, with the benefit of them.
were well worthy to be corrected. If such copy books were finely printed,
being graven by some cunning workman, and those of the most perfect and plain
forms of letters, that could possibly be procured, in a strong and very white
paper, one book or two of them would serve a scholar near all his time, that
he should never need to change his hand.

The often change and following of diverse hands, Inconvenience of following
diverse hands.
does as much hinder writing, as often change of schoolemasters does hinder
learning. Therefore, the best is to be chosen at the first, and ever to be
stuck unto without alteration, if it may be.

In the mean time, The best written copies to be procured.
until such copies can be had, some would be procured of the master, to be
written by the best Scriuener who can be gotten, after the manner aforesaid,
for each scholar to have one to fasten to his book, and to use as before.

Otherwise when for lack hereof, Inconvenience of the lack of such books.
the Master, or Usher, or some other Scholar is compelled every day, to write
each scholar a new copy; it is both an endless toil, and also an extreme
loss of time: besides the inconvenience mentioned, of change of hands, and
that few Masters or Vshers are fit pen men, to write such copies as were
necessary.

Lastly, because thorough want of such copies, scholars do write ordinarily
without direction or pattern, in all their exercises; whereby they either grow
to very bad hands, or do profit in writing, Fair writing to be practiced by
all the scholars once every day.
little or not at all.

This exercise of writing fair, would be practiced by all the Scholars through
the School, at least once every day, for an hours space or near; and that
about one of the clock: for then commonly their hands are warmest and nimblest.

Now those that write exercises, may take the opportunity of that time,
General rule in writing; To make all like unto the copy.
to write them so fair as they can.

In all writing this general rule would be observed straightly, to cause them to
strive to make every letter, as like to the copy letter in all proportion, as
the one hand is to the other. And that they never think a letter good, until
no difference can be found between it and the copy letter; To keep even
compass.
that it cannot be discerned whether is the better.

Great care would be had withal, to make every writer to keep even compass
in the height, greatness, and breadth of his letters; that no one letter stand
either too high or too low, be over long, or over short, nor any way too
big, or too little, too wide, or too narrow.

To the end, How to write of even height.
that they may write of even height; cause them to rule their books with a
ruling pen, and then that they make the body of each letter, to touch their
rules on both sides, I mean both at the tops and bottomes of the letters; but
not to go one hair breadth higher or lower. Thus by practice the scholar will
in time attain to write very fair of himself without any ruling pen.

That every one may rule their books thus, Each to have his ruling pen, and
what on^^.
cause them to have each his ruling pen, made of a quill, somewhat like unto a
pen; but only that it is to be made with a nocke in the neb or point of it,
like the nocke of an arrow, the nebs of the nocke standing just of the breadth
of their copy letters asunder, that they may rule their rules meet of the
same compass with their copies.

The points of the nebs of the ruling pens, The neb of the ruling pen, and
how to rule with it.
must not be made over sharp, nor pressed down over hard in ruling; because
they will then race the paper, and make it that it will not bear ink. They are
moreover to rule but a few lines at once: because the lines being drawn but
lightly, will soon go out, and not be seen before that the learners come to
write in them.

Also this care must be had in ruling, to carry the ruling pen so even and
straight forward,
that both the lines which are drawn by it, may be seen together; or else to
draw the lines so often over with the same, until that both the lines may be
well seen. Even writing to be straightly looked to, by the help of a ruling
pen.
This would be observed carefully, until that time that they can begin to
write even and straight of themselves: for the even compass does especially
grace a hand, and the fair show of it will cause children to take a delight in
writing fair.

Every scholar who writes Latin should have two of these ruling pens: one
for Secretary, and an other for Roman; or else to have one made of iron or
brass, the one end for the one, the other end for the other.

Moreover, the books of all the new beginners or enterers, whilst they write
letters, would be ruled well with cross lines, with the ruling pens on this
manner: It is found to direct them very much. Ruling the books of the young
beginners with cross lines thus.




Thus their books shall be kept fair. Benefit of this ruling.
The compass or the space within the cross lines, serves to keep and guide
the body of each letter to make it of a just proportion. The straight lines
direct and guide the child to make every stroke straight forward, or up and
down, and also how to frame the head and tail of each letter.

Thus much for the compass of the letters; The compass in greatness or
neernesse of the letters.
chiefly in the tops and bottoms of the letters.

Now that the letters may not be over big or over little, set too near one
another or far off, this may be one good direction;

Cause your scholar to draw his lines, on which he will write his copies, of
the very same length with the length of the line of his copy: and then if he
write just so much in his line as is in the copy, it is very like that he
makes his letters of a good proportion, not too big nor too little, and the
compass even, not one over near, or far off from an other. But if he write
more in a shorter space, then is in like space in the copy, he either makes
his letters too little, or sets them too near one another; letters, or words,
or both. And so on the other side, if he write less in a line, then is in his
copy in the same space, and length, then he makes his letters too big, or
too wide asunder.

The letters would be joined in every word: yet so as no one be set over near
another, but just as the copy, observing blacks and whites, as the Scriuener
terms them. And each word in a sentence, would be set about the breadth of an
a, or an o, from one another.

For writing straight without lines (after that they have practiced this a good
while, Writing straight without lines.
to write with double lines, ruled with the ruling pen, and after with single
lines) this may help to guide them well;
to cause them to hold their elbow so close to their side and so steadily, as
they can conveniently: for the elbow so stayed, will guide the hand as a rule,
especially in writing fast. Afterward, looking at the end of the line, as we
use to try the straightnes of an arrowe, they shall see easily where it is
crooked. Practice will bring facility

These also may be special furtherances for the first enterers: Special
furtherances for the first enterers in writing. When they cannot frame a letter.
When the young scholar cannot frame his hand to fashion any letter; besides
the guiding of his hand, and also the showing where to begin each letter and
how to draw it, some do use to draw before them the proportion of their
letters, with a piece of chawke upon a board, or table, or with a piece of
black lead upon a paper; and then let the child try how he himself can draw
the like upon it; and after this to let him to do it with his pen, following
the letter of his book.

Or thus; To follow a letter with a dry pen.
Let him take a dry pen, that cannot blot his book, and therewith cause him
to follow that letter in his copy, which he cannot make, drawing upon the
copy letter very lightly, and a little turning the side of the pen, where the
letter is small; but leaning harder upon it where it is full, and there also
turning the broad part of the pen. Only warn him to be careful, that he do
not hurt the letter in the copy, by his hard leaning upon his pen, or by the
overmuch sharpness of it* Thus let him follow his copy letter, drawing his pen
so often upon it, until he think his hand will go like unto it. Then direct
him, to try with another pen with ink, whether he can make one like to that
of his copy. If he cannot, let him go to it with his dry pen again, until
that he can fashion one like unto it.

This also is a special observation: That the more leasurely the child
draws at the beginning, Leasurely drawing as the Painter.
as the Painter does, and the more lightly, the sooner a great deal he shall
learn to frame his hand to write fair.

This likewise some good Scriueners observe; To learn to make one letter well
first, then another.
to suffer the child to learn to make but one kind of letter at once, until
they can make that in some good sort, then another: as first a, then b. But
especially to begin with those letters, out of which all the rest may be
framed, to make them perfectly, as m, c, t, v, z. For so all the rest will be
the easier.

To help to write clean, To help to write clean, fast and fair together.
fast and fair together, call often on your scholars to exercise their hands in
making of f strokes, that is, dashes of f, and s thus (...); and the stroke of
the great C, and B, thus, (...)

Also some use to cause the learners, Making florishes, gliding upon the paper.
to practice their hands to run upon the paper, either with ink or without,
until they be very nimble and cunning to glide upon the paper; and namely, to
make certain rude florishes.



Call on them in all exercises, To observe ornaments of writing.
to be careful to observe the graces of letters: as the keeping of great
letters, accents, points, as comma, colon, period, parenthesis, and whatsoever
may serve for the adorning of writing; and evermore to take a delight in
writing fair: which delight is in each art the one half of the skill;
but to fly all long tails of letters, and to make all their letters so
plain as they can: To make the letters most plain.
the plainer the better. Beware that you suffer no one to learn a bad hand,
or to make any bad letter, so near as you are able to prevent it. Mischiefs
of getting a bad hand.
For it will be found much harder to teach such to forget their bad letters and
hands, then to teach other which never learned, to write the good.

So that if you teach such, a better hand, after that they have learned and
been long inured to the worse; although they seem to have learned to write
well, yet unless they be holden continually to practice their good hand each
day a little, they will fall unto their bad hand again: so great force has
any evil custom.

This therefore must be our wisdom,
to procure from the beginning the most excellent copies, To procure the most
excellent copies from the beginning.
for our scholars, whatsoever they cost; and to keep them constantly to them:
they will soon quite the cost both to Master and Scholar.

To the end that any Master may be the better able to teach thus; That the
Master may teach his Scholars to write fair, what to be don.
let him either try to attain this faculty of writing fair (which much
commends a Master) or at least, let him labor to be well acquainted with these
directions, or the like: and also let him cause his Scholars to observe them
constantly; or so many of them, as need shall require.

And to this end,
let him use to walk amongst his Scholars as they write all together; To
walk amongst the scholars, to see they observe these directions*
and see that they do practice these things duly: but chiefly that every one
have his copy book laid close before him; and to mark well wherein any one
of them misseth in any letter or stroke, that it is not like to the copy,
there to point him to the copy, and to show him where they differ, or to cause
him to compare them himself: so to appoint them to be mending their faults,
until their letters be in all things like the copy letters. And what letters
they make the worst, To observe all the bad letters and faults in writing.
to make them so often over, in some void place of their book, or some waste
paper, until those be as good as any of the rest, and like the copy, as was
said. Amongst others, to look specially to these three letters together, f. g.
h. and to m. which being well made, do grace all the rest, and yet are commonly
made the worst of all.

Thus any one of the scholars, Any Scholar may help the Master.
chiefly one of them who write the best, may help the Master to direct the
rest.

By these means the Schoolmasters may bring many of his Scholars to be very
good penmen, The meanest writers may bring many of their scholars to be good
penmen.
and all generally to some competent sufficiency, to the credit of the
School, the good contentment of the parents, and the great benefit of the
Scholars, though he cannot write well himself, if he can but only thus
far forth direct, as to cause his Scholars to follow these observations.

Hereby the Schools also may be freed from having any need of the Scriueners,
which go about the country; at least, which go under the names of Scriueners,
To avoid the evils by wandering Scriueners.
and take upon them to teach to write; and do ofttimes very much hurt in the
places where they come. For they draw away the minds of many of the Scholars
from their books; even of all such as cannot endure to take pains, nor have
any great love of learning and cause many, of good hope to leave the school
utterly. Besides that, very often, so soon as ever these Scriueners are gone,
the Scholars whom they have taught, do forget what they seemed to have gotten
by them, unless they be kept to practice their writing daily.

So that all that cost and time is commonly lost; besides the former
inconveniences, that sundry by them lose all the learning which they had
gotten. Also most of the younger sort, who seem to write fair, and so leave
the School in a conceit of that which they have gotten by the Scriuener; yet
do write so false Orthography, as is loathsome to see, and ridiculous to read.

For these properties should be joined together in every penman, Things
necessarily required in commendable writing.
who would have any approbation; to be able as well to write a good style (I
mean to indite, and to express his mind in some good form of words, and true
Orthographie) as to write fair.

As for the use of Scriueners in the common schools, it would be this (if
any); The use of Scriueners in the Grammar Schools, what.
either to make every scholar his book of copies, to use after the manner
prescribed, until such printed ones can be had: or else to set all the
scholars in a good way of writing for right framing their letters, and the
like. To do it only at such times as the Master shall appoint; that it may be
without any great hinderance to the scholars for their learning, and warily
preventing all the former inconveniences. For schools and good learning being
such a singular benefit, and so great a gift of God to Church and
Commonwealth, all hindrances would be wisely foreseen, and heedfully
prevented.

These are the special helps, which hitherto I have learned, for the direction
of scholars in writing: and by these I am assured upon trial, that what is
promised in this behalf, may be effected through Gods blessing.


Spoud. Sir, these must needs be very profitable: yet my memory being weak,
and they many, I shall hardly think of them to put them in practice. I pray
you therefore repeat unto me again in a word or two, which of them you take to
be the principal and of most continual use.


Phil. These I take to be the principal,
and almost the sum of all; The sum of the principal and most necessary
directions for writing, to be ever remembered: and therefore here shortly
repeated that we may have a brief notion of them.
and which would ever be had in memory: that the scholars have good pens, thin
ink, fair and good copy books; and those made fast to their books, to have
them ever laid close before the^ when they are to write fair; which would be
once every day; and then all of them together. That they have their books ruled
strait and lightly, and that with ruling pens amongst all the younger sort: and
that therein a care be had, that they ever touch both the lines of the ruling
pen with the bodies of their letters. Also that they have their faults showed
them, by pointing them to the copy letters; and where their letters are unlike
to the copy, thereto cause them to be amending them continually, until they
attain to write as fair as it. To call on them ever to have an eye to the
copy, and to have the fashions of the letters in their minds. To take a
delight in writing; striving who shall do the best: to this end, to let their
hands glide lightly on the paper; to strive to write very clean; to make
minimes, and such like letters sharp at tops and bottoms, or just to the
proportion of their copies: to hold their pens very low: their elbow something
near their side: to keep their copies and books fair, vnblotted and vnscrauled:
to have void places or waste papers for assaies, etc.

Most shortly, these three are almost all in all; good copies, continual eying
them well, a delight in writing: although I think it very necessary, that you
be acquainted with all the former directions, as they are set down at large,
to use them as need shall require. You may soon attain the knowledge of
them, when you have them written down: the labor of learning them will be
nothing to you in regard of the benefit; and much less in regard of the long
search and observation, which I have used to find them out.


Spoud. It is true indeed; and I am the more beholden unto you: but give me
leave this one word; that which you said even now, may seem to make very much
against the Scriueners.


Phil. Not at all; This makes nothing against the honest Scriueners, but to
prevent the abuse of shifters, and hurt to Schools.
it onlely helps to redress the great abuse by some shifters, who go under
the name of Scriueners: for all good Scriueners have their callings and
employments, wherein to serve to the profit and good of the Commonwealth, and
not unto the hurt thereof. This only may teach us to prevent and avoid those
intolerable abuses, and hurts to schools mentioned; whereof there has been,
and is daily, so much experience.


Spoud. Sir, I cannot but like of your answer; I my self have had some
experience of the truth of the complaint: it is very necessary that such evils
should be prevented. Now therefore that you have thus showed me how to make my
scholars good penmen, and that they may grow therein, as in their school
learning; and thus prepared the way to our Grammar school: let us at length
come to that which has been the special end of my journey, and wherein our
chief travel and employment lies. A first let us begin with the rudiments of
the Grammar, I mean the Accedence; wherein our first entrance is.


Phil. Very willingly: but first let me acquaint you with certain general
observations, which concern our whole course of teaching, and whereof we shall
have almost continual use; lest we be troubled with repeating them often after.


Spoud. It is well advised, that we may do all things the most shortly, and
in the best and easiest order that we can: I pray you therefore show unto me
what those general observations be.


CHAP. V.
Of certain general Observations to be known of School masters, and
practiced carefully in all Grammar learning chiefly. And first of causing all
things to be done with understanding.
Phil. FOr the general Observations the first may be this. Scholars are to be
taught to do all thing, with understanding, and to know the matter before in
general.
1. That Scholars be taught to do all things with understanding; and to be
able to give a reason of every matter which they learn. And so in every
lecture which they learn in any tongue, first to understand the matter of it,
and the lesson will be learned presently.

But before I speak any more of this, I pray you let me hear of you what
course you have taken in this point.


Spoud. This first observation seems strange unto me, The common course to
do all things without understanding the reason of them or how to make use of
any thing.
at the very naming of it. I my self have used only this course, and I think
it to be all that is done in most of our country schools; To give Lectures
to the several forms, or cause some scholar to do it. And therein first to
read them over their Lecture, then to construe them, and in the lower forms
to parse them. So when they come to say; to hear them whether they can read,
say without book, construe and parse. More as I take it, is not much used, for
the understanding and making use of them.


Phil. I know it to be as you say; and do hold it to be a very great defect
in schools generally: The defect hereof exceeding great.
yea a far greater hinderance to learning, then that of letting them to lose
so many years, before they begin to learn. For this is a matter which of all
other concerns the credit of schools, and furthereth learning wonderfully;
to teach scholars to understand whatsoever they learn, and to be able to give
a reason of every thing why it is so; and to do this from the lowest to the
highest. My reasons are these:

1 Because if it were rightly known, To do all things by reason, brings
almost double learning.
and constantly practiced in schools, it would bring forth very near double
so much good and sound learning, as is now gotten commonly.

2 It would bring withal, so much ease, pleasure and delight, both to all
teachers and learners and also so much certainty, and cause them to go forward
with such cheerfulness, boldness and contention, as will hardly be believed
until it be tried by experience. In a word; It would cause at things to be
gotten much more speedily, laid up more safely, and kept more surely in
memory. Therefore, that old rule is true; Legere and non intelligere negligere
est.

To read and not to understand what we read, To read without understanding and
knowledge how to make use, is a neglect of all learning.
or not to know how to make use of it, is nothing else but a neglect of all
good learning; and a mere abuse of the means and helps to attain the same. It
is no other thing but a very loss of our precious time, and of all our labor
and cost bestowed therein, in regard of that which is read with understanding.

We may see trial hereof sundry ways.

1 Let children be examined together; Trial of the difference between learning
with understanding and without 1. In scholars examined together, whereof one
understands, and can give reasons of things, the other not.
I mean such as of whom one of them alone has been taught to do all things
by reason and with understanding; so that he is able to give you a plain
reason, and make the right use of every thing, which he has learned: the
other have learned only to say without book, to construe and parse; then mark
the difference. Although all these learn one and the same Author; yet when they
come to the trial, you would think that one to have all learning, when you
hear him to give a reason of every thing, and that he can make use of al
things; all the rest to have almost nothing at all, or at least nothing in
regard of that one so taught.

2 Prove it thus in getting learning: 2. In getting a lesson, how to do it
soonest, and in the best manner.


Teach your scholar one lesson which you cause him to understand perfectly
before; another of the same matter, whereof he understands little or
nothing: and then try whether he will not do that, whereof he understands
the meaning and reasons, almost in half the time, which the other will require.
And this also so, as you may evidently discern it, that he will do it with
much more ease, certainty and boldness, then he can do the other.

3 We our selves may make trial of it by our own experience, 3. In our own
experience construing or studying out any difficult place in any Author or
tongue.
in construing any difficult piece of Latin, Greek, or Hebrewe, or committing
any thing to memory; whether if so be that we do but understand the matter of
it before perfectly, we shall not do it in half the time and with one half
of the labor, that otherwise it would require.

Or if we would write or speak of any thing, let us prove it but thus: If we
first understand the matter well and have it perfectly in our head, whether
words to express our minds will not follow as of themselves.

To this very purpose, for confirming the truth hereof, and to keep a
continual remembrance of this point; these three verses of Horace were worthy
to be written in letters of gold, and to be imprinted in the memory of every
one who is desirous to get the best learning: for so they would indeed prove
golden verses, and make undoubtedly golden times; Scribendirecte sapere est and
principium and fons:
Rem tibi Socraticae poterunt ostendere char^ae;
Verbaque prouisam rem non inuita sequentur.


The meaning of the verses, I take it to be this: To attain to this faculty,
to be able to write or speak of any matter, and so to come to all excellent
learning, the very first and chief fountain, and that which is all in all,
is to understand the matter well in the first place. As for store of matter, the
writings of learned men (such as Socrates was) will furnish you abundantly
therewith.

And when you have the matter thoroughly in your head, words will follow, as
waters out of a fountain, even almost naturally, to express your mind in any
tongue, which you study in any right order.

This will be found to be true in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and by a like reason
in every other tongue, and in every faculty: whether we would write, speak,
learn, resolve, or remember and lay up for ever.

This was a principal cause that made Tully, One chief cause why Virgil and
others writ so eloque^tly, because they were so ripe in understanding, and had
such store of matter.
Ovid, Virgil, and some others so to flow in eloquence; and especially Virgil,
whom men worthily account the chief of all latin Poets, because they did
understand so fully whatsoever they writ of. I might instance this also in
Preachers, by our daily experience; of whom some are better able to preach
powerfully in two days warning, and having words at will, then other in two
months; and all because the one sort are so full of understanding and matter,
the other are so barren thereof.

Thus in all these examples, every man may see a plain demo^stration of the
truth of these verses of Horace, which he no doubt did write upon his own
experience, as every man shall find, who will set himself to make trial.
Prove and confirm what tongue soever your scholar learns, Try.
even from the first reading of English, if he can repeat you the matter, or
the sum of it, or have it in his head, try whether he will not have the words
presently. The plentiful experience which I have seen, They who find
experience will be desirous to make others partakers.
of the sweet delight and fruit of this course, of causing children to do
all things with understanding and reason, compared with the fruitless toiles
and griefs of former times, do make me not only confident for the thing, but
also desirous to make all other partakers of the benefit.


Spoud. I do fully see the evidence of all that which you have said, and
therefore I must needs be persuaded of it. I do heartily thank God for it, and
will endeavor my self to put it in practice continually. It seems great
difficulty for masters to teach their scholars to do all things with
understanding.
Only here is the difficulty, how a schoolmaster may do this, to teach his
scholar so to proceed with understanding, and how to give a reason of every
matter which they learn, to make use of all their learning.

Above all, how he may begin to fraught young Scholars with all store of
matter, as they go on: this very much passes my skill. I should think my
self most happy, to obtain this knowledge, if it possibly can be done.


Phil. Attend to those things which I shall relate, and I have no doubt, but I
shall very much accomplish your desire in this: for our whole conference, does
tend chiefly to this end. As all learning is grounded on reason: so in every
Chapter, I shall endeaur my self to manifest the reasons of every thing, and
how you may teach others; so far forth, as hitherto the Lord has made them
known unto me. And more hereafter, as I shall learn more. The principal
means for their understanding, is, by asking short questions of the matter:
for so they will understand and any thing, which they are to learn. But of
that more hereafter in the particular examples; and chiefly, Chapt. 24.


Spoud. If you have done then with this, let us go forward to your next
general observation; and so through them all, as briefly as you can.


Phil. My next observation is this: The second general observation.
that as I would have them to do all things with understanding; so to learn
only such books and matters, as whereof they may have the best use, To learn
only such things, as whereof they may have good and perpetual use.
and that perpetually in all their learning, or in their whole life. For this
is well known to every one; that things well learned in youth, will be kept
most surely all the life long; because in that age they are most easily
imprinted, and stick the longest in fresh memory. And for that cause, children
should spend no time unfruitfully, in such books, as whereof they cannot have
both very good and continual use. This cannot be but a great folly, to
mis-spend our precious time in such studies, whereof neither our selves nor
others can have benefit after; or else in such, as the knowledge whereof will
vanish for want of practice: and much more in those, which will corrupt and
hurt in stead of doing good. Filthy places in Poets omitted.
And therefore all filthy places in the Poets would be wisely passed over, or
warily expounded. It were well if there were an Index Expurgatorius, to purge
out all the filth out of these, by leaving it out, or changing it.

Third rule, 3. To note all hard words, or matters worthy observation.
and that general for all Students, is this: that whatsoever difficult words,
or matters of special observation, they do read in any Author, be marked
out; I mean all such words or things, as either are hard to them in the
learning of them, or which are of some special excellency, or use, worthy the
noting: or which, after that they have been a certain time in construction,
they have not either learned, or at least they know not where they have
learned them. Manner of marking.
For the marking of them, to do it with little lines under them, or above
them, or against such parts of the word wherein the difficulty lies, or by
some pricks, or whatsoever letter or mark may best help to call the knowledge
of the thing to remembrance; yet so much as may be, without marring of their
books. To do this, to the end that they may oft-times read over these, or
examine and meditate of them more seriously, until that they be as perfect in
them, as in any of the rest of their books: for having these then have they
all.

This would be universal, This general in getting all learning.
in getting all kind of learning; after that children do grow to any discretion
to mark such things rightly: you will marvel (if you have not made trial of
it) how much they will go through, and what sound knowledge they will come unto
in any kind of study; and how soon by this help, more then they can do
without it. And when they have once gotten it they may as easily keep it, and
as surely, by oft-times running over those things, which are so noted, above
all the rest. This is the reason that you shall have the choysest books of
most great learned men, The books of the best students thus noted.
and the notablest students all marked through thus, in all matters either
obscure, or of principal and most necessary use. And this is one chief
means, whereby Scholars may have the difficultest things in their Authors so
perfectly, as that whenever they shall be examined of a sudden, they shall be
very ready, to their great praise, and to the just commendation of the School.
To note books of dailyvse with ink.
For the manner of noting, it is best to note all school books with ink; and
also all others, which you would have gotten advnguem, as we use to say, or
whereof we would have daily or long practice; because ink will endure: neither
will such books be the worse for their noting, but the better, Others with
black lead thrust into a quill.
they be noted with judgment. But for all other books, which you would have
fair again at your pleasure; note them with a pensil of black lead: for that
you may rub out again when you will, How to rub it for^h again.
with the crumbs of new wheat bread.

The very little ones, which read but English, may make some secret marks
thus at every hard word; though but with some little dint with their nail: so
that they do not mar their books.

Of this I shall speak more particularly in the manner of parsing, Chapt. 9.

A fourth observation, 4. To learn all so perfectly, as the former may be in
stead of a Schoolmaster to the later.
is this: That whatsoever books or matter Scholars do learn, after they
begin to learn without book; that they learn them so perfectly, and hold
them so surely, by daily repetition and examination, that they may have in
their minds such an absolute knowledge of all the words, and matters which they
have learned; as wheresoever they shall meet with the same again, or shall
have occasion to use them, they may not need to be driven to learn them
anew; but that they may tell of a sudden where they have learned them, or can
repeat the place: and so make their use and benefit of them.

To teach the same things twice, Not to need to teach the same things twice or
thrice over.
or thrice, is a double labor and grief: but to have all things which they
have learned, ever in readiness is a singular benefit, and a rare
commendation. For besides the preventing of all loss of labor and time, it
shall be to the great delight of all who hear them tried, and the exceeding
furtherance of their continual growth in all good learning.

And to effect this yet more fully; To tell where they have learned every hard
word.
acquaint them in all their Lectures and exercises, some one of them or other,
who can tell first, to repeat where they have learned every hard word: and that
chiefly in their Grammar, if they have learned it there, to have that exceeding
perfect; and to mark surely every new word, according to the direction which I
have before given.

A fifth general observation, 5. That the whole School be divided into so few
fourmes as may be.
and which is not inferior to any of the former, for the good both of Masters
and Scholars, and the very great benefit of Schools, is this: that the whole
School be divided into so few fourmes as may be, of so many as can any way be
fitted to go together: though they be sixteen, or twenty, yea, forty in a
form, it is not the worse.

The reasons of it are most clear.

1. In most things it is almost the same labor, Reasons:
to teach twenty, 1. It is for most part the same labor, to teach twenty in a
form, as to teach two.
as to teach two: as in reading all Lectures and rules unto them, in examining
all parts and Lectures. Like as it is in Sermons, and Catechisings, where it
is the same labor to teach one, that it is to teach a thousand, if all can
hear alike. This is very general, except in exercises of writing; wherein also
great advantage may be gotten by this means, if right order be observed, as we
shall show after.

2. Secondly, 2. The fewer fourmes, the more labor may be bestowed in
examining every title.
the fewer fourmes there are, the more time may be spent in each form; and
more labor may be bestowed in examining every title necessary. Which work of
continual examination, is a notable quickner and nourisher of all good
learning; helping maruellously understanding, audacity, memory, and provoking
emulation of the Scholars: Examination, a quickner of learning.
and therefore a principal part of the Masters labor, and of the time in the
School, would be employed in this.

3. By this means, Every one of a form shall some way provoke the others by
this means.
every one of a form shall some way provoke, or encourage the rest of their
fellows. If they be but dull, the rest will think to go before them; but if
they be more pregnant and witty, or more painful and diligent, they shall put
spirits into all the rest, and be as a spur unto them. For there is in our
nature an inbred desire to aim at the best, and to wish to equalize them in
each commendable quality; if there be right means of direction and
encouragement thereunto.

Also every one of a form may some way help the rest: And every one may
help others.
for none are so dull, but they may happily remember some thing, which none of
the rest did.

This I have seen by experience, Those who but read, to be put together so
many as can be.
to be the very best way; even for those who but read the Accedence, to put so
many of them into a fourm together, as may be: they will both further one
another very much, in reading it quickly (each helping and teaching others) and
also they may sooner be heard, when every one need but to read his piece of
the same lesson, the rest helping. Thus they will go through very fast, and be
all ready to enter without book together. Try, and finding the benefit, you
will not alter.

6 A sixth general observation, 6, To have a great care that none be
discouraged.
and of no less worth then any of the former, may be this: That there be most
heedfull care, chiefly amongst all the youngest, that not one of them be any
way discouraged, either by bitterness of speech, or by taunting disgrace; or
else by severity of correction, to cause them to hate the School before they
know it, or to distaste good learning before they have felt the sweetness of
it: But all to be provoked by emulation and desire of praise.
but in stead hereof, that all things in Schools be done by emulation, and
honest contention, through a wise commending in them every thing, which any way
deserves praise, and by giving preeminence in place, or such like rewards. For
that adage is not so ancient as true; Laus excitat ingenium.

There is no such a Whet-stone, Commendation the Whet-stone of the wit.
to set an edge upon a good wit, or to encourage an ingenuous nature to
learning as praise is, as our learned Master Askam does most rightly affirm.

To this purpose that sentence of Tully were worthy to be written in every
School, A sentence of Tully worthy to be ever before the Masters eye.
and to be set up in such places, where it might ever stand in the Masters eye,
if it were possible; that so every teacher might at length be brought to the
continual practice, of the good policy contained in it: to wit, to bend all
his endeauours to provoke all his Scholars, to strive incessantly, which of
them shall carry away the worthiest praise and commendation. The sentence is
this;

Pueriefferuntur laetitiacum vicerint, Cic. 5. de finib.
and pudet victos: vt tamse accusari nolunt, quam cupiunt laudari: quos illi
labores non perferunt vt aequaliumprincipes sint?

Besides this also, This strift for Masteries is the most commendable play, and
a chief means to make the School Ludus literarius.
this same strift for these Masteries, and for rewards of learning, is the most
commendable play, and the very high way to make the Schoole-house to be Ludus
literarius, indeed a School of play and pleasure (as was said) and not of
fear and bondage: although there must be always a meet and loving fear,
furthered by wise severity, to maintain authority, and to make it also Ludus
a non lude^do, a place void of al fruitless play and loytering, the better to
be able to effect all this good which we desire.

7. To the end that every thing in the School may be thus done, 7. All to have
their adversaries, and so to be matched and placed, that all may be done by
strift.
by emulation and contention for praise; there would be a careful sorting, and
matching every one with him, who is next unto him in learning: for this is also
a most true proverb; Marcet sine aduersario virtus: Virtue loses the vigor
and decays, where it has no adversary. So they would be placed as
adversaries, that they may contend in all things, whether of them shall do the
better, and bear the bell away. Thus the whole fourmes through the School,
should be divided also into two equal parts; to strive always, whether side
of the form should get the victory: like as it is in games, at shooting, or
the like. Experience shows how this will provoke them, to be preparing and
fitting for the victory. Even as Archers will prepare themselves by exercising,
getting the best bows and arrows; and then making first their choice so
equal as they can, afterward directing their fellows; thus striving by all
means, whether side shall beat: so will it be here. But of this I shall have
more fit occasion, to tell what I think, when we shall speak of the manner of
dividing of the fourmes.

8. That we use ever to appose the worst and most negligent of each form
above all the rest; 8. To use ever to appose the most negligent.
though every one something, yet them principally. This will make them more
careful, and cause all to come on together in some good sort.

9. That from the first entrance they be taught to pronounce every thing
audibly, 9. Continual care of pronunciation.
leasurely, distinctly, and naturally; sounding out specially the last
syllable, that each word may be fully understood. But of this we have spoken
somewhat; and shall speak more in the due place, what a grace sweet
pronunciation gives unto all learning, and how the want of it does altogether
mar, or much deforme the most excellent speech.

10. That they have daily some special exercise of the memory* by repearing
somewhat without book; 10. To have some exercise of the memory daily.
as a part in their rules the four first days in the week, the Lectures of
the week, or some part of them on the Friday, all the rules of the week on the
Saturday: besides matters of reports as Apologues or fables, theames,
disputations, and the like.

The reason is, because the daily practice hereof, is the only means to make
excellent memoryes; Reason of it for making excellent memories.
so that the memory be not ouerloaden. But for this matter of saying without
book, how far it is to be used, and what help may be had to prevent the
ouertoyling, and terrifying of Scholars with it, and to supply some things
better otherwise; I hope I shall take a fitter place to speak of it hereafter.

11. That for whatsoever exercises they are to learn, 11. To have the best
patterns, of all sorts.
they have the best patterns to follow, which can be procured: as in writing
so for all kind of learning, how to do every thing; because all learning is
principally gotten by a kind of imitation, and art does imitate the most
excellent nature. The patterns being singular, so shall their work prove in
time, either to express their pattern very lively, or happily to go beyond
it. Of this also we shall have occasion after to speak.

12. The Masters to be always vigilant, 12 The Masters continually to
encourage themselves, and their Scholars.
as good leaders; to labor to a lively cheerfulnes, to put life and spirit
into the children; and to encourage themselves in well doing, by amending
whatsoever is amiss, and supplying each thing, wherein they are defective
(observing the daily growth of their Scholars, remembering still that worthy
counsel, Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentiorito; and also ever calling to
mind whom they serve, and how their reward is with the Lord.

13. Constancy in good orders, 13. Constancy in good orders, with a continual
demonstration of love to the Scholars, to do all for their good.
and exercises ought ever to be kept inviolable; with continual demonstration
of love in the Masters toward the Scholars, and a desire to do them the
uttermost good. This shall overcome the most froward in time; and used with the
rest, shall undoubtedly bring forth the fruit of their desires.

Though many more directions might be added, yet we will content ourselves with
these for the present; as being most general and belonging to all which
follow. Others we shall add, as we shall find the fittest occasions.


Spoud. Certainly Sir, these rules do very much affect and delight me, at this
hearing of them; neither can I easily discern which of them is most to be
preferred. If you had given me so many crowns, you could not have gratified
me more: I purpose to put them in practice presently, that I may find that
sweet and pleasant fruit of them, which I fully conceive may be attained by
them.


Phil. If you take so much delight in the hearing of them, I trust you shall
do much more in the proof: and therefore having finished these, we will now
at length come unto the Accedence.


CHAP. VI.
How to make children perfect in the ACCEDENCE.
Spoud. FOR the Accidence then, I pray you acquaint me what you have learned,
how children may get it most speedily; and how they may be made so very perfect
in it, as to answer so readily to any question thereof, as you did affirm
that they may; and to make the right use of it.


Phil. You must ever first let me hear of you, what course you have taken, and
what you think to be ordinary in Schools, and then I will supply whatsoever
I have learned; for that all shall be the better conceived.


Spoud. For reading over their Accedence, The usual manner of learning to
read the Accedence.
this is all that I have used; To let them read it over every one by himself
by lessons, as in reading other English: and so to hear them one by one, as
they can say. In the harder lessons to read it over before them. Thus I make
them to read over their Accedence once or twice within the book, before they
do get it without book.

Secondly, The ordinary manner of getting the Accedence without book.
for getting it without book, I cause them to do likewise, and to say as often
as they can. To keep that which they have learned, by weekly repetitions, and
by saying parts. And for the meaning, to teach it after by practice. Now I pray
you show me your judgment, and vouchsafe me your help.


Phil. My judgment is, according to my experience, that though this be the
ordinary course, The wants in this course.
yet it may be done with far greater ease, in less time and with much more
profit, to effect your desire: yea, to teach ten or twelve as soon and readily
as you shall teach one. Also to make them more full of understanding, that they
shall be able to make right use of their rules, to enter into construction, and
go forward readily together in construing, parsing and making Latin. Whereas
otherwise they must be taught the understanding and use of it after: which
shall be another labor, and be as if they had not learned it at all before.
Now the means how all this may be effected are these:

1 For reading the Accedence.

So soon as they enter into the Accedence, The best means for learning to read
the Accedence.
put so many of them into a fourm as you can well, to enter together; as was
showed before. And therein first, read them over their lesson, telling them
the meaning shortly, to make them a little to understand it: and so they will
learn it much sooner. Then let them one help another, as they will do
learning together, Ever one to be reading, all the rest marking and helping.
and every one will draw on another; one of them ever reading over the lesson,
that all the rest may hear, and the rest telling where he misseth; and so
never idle till all can read it. When they come to say, cause every one of the
fourm to read his piece in order, in like manner the rest to help where he
sticks.

By this means there will not be much more labor with twelve, then with one
alone. Experience also will show, that they will all go forward more fast and
surely then any other way. And although that they go faster forward, and not
so very perfectly as they thus read it first, yet they will soon read most
readily, when they come to get without book.

When they have once gone through it within book,
let them begin to learn it without book. Learning the Accedence without
book, to take but a little at once.
Or else if they can read well before, you may let them learn to read thus,
as they get without book, and so do both under one. But then some hour or
two would be spent daily in the afternoon in reading, This rule must be
general of all learning that seems hard and of things to be gotten
perfectly; but here specially.
or some day of the week separate thereto: else they will somewhat forget to read,
because they read but so little on a day; which must be carefully prevented.
Therefore it will not be amiss to read it over speedily once or twice before.
When they learn without book; let them use this Caveat especially; That they
take but little at a time, so as they may be able to get it quickly and well,
and so go on to a new lesson: for this will harten them exceedingly to take
pains, in reioicing how many lessons they have learned and how soon they have
learned each lesson; Whereas giving them overmuch, it will put them out of
heart, so that they will either do nothing at all, or with no life.

2 Before they go in hand with a lesson, do what you can to make them to
understand the sum of the lesson first, and the meaning of it: thus. 1. Read
them over their lesson.
2. Then show them the plain meaning of every thing so easily, To make them
first to understand their lectures and how.
shortly and familiarly, as possibly you can, and as you think that they can
conceive. After propound all unto them in short questions, and ask the
questions directly in order as they lie in the book answering them first your
self. Then if you will you may ask them the same questions,
and let them answer them as you did before, To let them answer the questions
upon their books.
still looking upon their books, when they answer.

To require them to answer so, will much encourage them; because they shall
find themselves able to do it. The more the questions are, the shorter and
plainer arising naturally out of the words of the book, the sooner a great
deal will your children understand them.

And therefore any long question is to be divided into as many short ones as
you may, according to the parts of the question. Hereby the dullest capacities
will come to conceive the hardest questions in time, and proceed with more
facility; so that the masters do enter them thus from the beginning, still
causing them to understand as they learn.

Here the masters must not be ashamed, Admonition to masters desirous to do
good, to be as the Nurses with little children.
nor weary, to do as the nurse with the child, as it were stammering and
playing with them, to seek by all means to breed in the little ones a love
of their masters, with delight in their books, and a joy that they can
understand; and also to the end to nourish in them that emulation mentioned, to
strive who shall do best. Neither is the wise master to stand with the
children about amending the Accedence, if he think any thing faulty or
defective; but only to make them to understand the rules, as they are set down
in the book: for this they will keep. Example how to make the child to
understand by showing the meaning.
To make this plain by example. To begin at In Speech be, etc. First, read them
over the words: Then tell them for the meaning after this manner, or the like
as you please. The meaning is this; That in Speech which men utter, there is
nothing but words to call or know things by, and setting or joining of words
together. Like as it is in our English tongue, so in the latin, and so in
other tongues. And of these words which make this speech, are not many parts
or kinds, but only eight parts of speech. For whatsoever can be spoken
belongs to one of these eight parts. They are either Nownes, or Pronowns, or
Verbs, or one of the rest. More shortly thus; There is not any word in any
language whatsoever, but it is either a Nown or a Pronown, Verb, etc.

Also of these eight parts, the four first only are such as may be declined.
That is, such as each of them may be turned or framed diverse ways, and have
diverse endings: as Magister, magistri, magistro. Amo, amas, amat. The other
four last are undeclined; that is, such as cannot be so turned, and have but
only one ending: as, Hodie, cras, etc.

Then ask them questions according to the same, How by asking Questions.
following the words of the book, in this manner of the like, as you think
good.

Q. How many parts of speech have you? Or how many parts are there in Speech?

A. Eight.

Q. Of these how many are declined, how many undeclined? So, which are
declined, which undeclined?

Afterward to ask the same questions back again, the last first. As, which
parts of speech are undeclined? Or how many are undeclined? So in the next.

Q. What is a Nowne?

A. A Nowne is the name of a thing.

Q. Of what thing?

A. Of such a thing as may be seen, selt, heard, or understood.

Q. Give me some examples of some such things?

A. A hand, a house, goodness.

Q. What is the name of a hand in Latin? Or what is latin for a hand? what is
latin for a house? and so forth.

Then ask the questions as it were backward thus:

Q. What part of speech is that which is the name of a thing, which may be
seen, felt, heard, or understood?

A. A Nowne, etc.

Thus to go forward in every rule. 1. Reading it over to the children. 2.
Showing the plain meaning in as few words as you can. 3. Propounding every
piece of it in a short question, following the words of the book, and
answering it your self out of the words of the book. 4. Asking the same
questions of them, and trying how themselves can answer them, still looking
upon their books. Then let them go in hand with getting it amongst
themselves, until they can say and answer the questions without book readily;
the highest of the fourmes poasing the rest until they can say. By this means
it will seem so easy to them, that they will go to it most cheerfully, and get
it much sooner then you would imagine, both the understanding and the words:
for the understanding of the matter will presently bring the words, as we said.

As they go forward,
strive to make them most perfect in these things specially: In what points of
the Accedence the chief labor would be bestowed with the children, to make
them perfect in them.


1 In knowing a Nowne, and how to discern the Substantive from the Adjective.
After in the signs of the Cases.

Then in declining the Articles, Hic, haec, hoc; every Article by it self: as
Nom, hic, Genesis huius. Dat, huic. Accus. hunc. Ablat. hoc. etc. So in the
Feminines. Nom. haec. Accus. hanc. Abl. hac. etc.

By being perfect in these Articles thus, Articles.
they shall both be able to decline any Nowne much sooner, and to know the
right Gender for making Latin.

Also let them learn to decline both Latin and English together; Declining
English before Latin, Latin before Eng^lsh.
I mean Latin before English, and English before Latin, both in the
Articles, and other examples of Nownes, Pronownes and Verbes. As in the
Articles thus: Hic this Masculine, haec this Feminine, hoc this Neuter. Genesis
huius of this Masculine, Feminine, Neuter. Dat. hui^, to this Masculine,
Feminine, Neuter. Accus. hunc this Masculine, hanc this Feminine, hoc this
Neuter, Voc. caret. Ablat. ab hoc from this Masculine, ab hac from this
Feminine, ab hoc from this Neuter. Or hic this Male, haec this Female, hoc this
Neuter, etc. or hoc this thing.

So the English before, if you will: Though in these Articles it may suffice to
decline the Latin first* so as before, and in (is) and (qui) or the like.
This kind of declining in all examples following, Benefit of this declining.
will be found such a help, as it will hardly be thought, until it be tried,
both to speedy construing, parsing, and making Latin, howsoever it may seem
at first childish, or but a toy, and of no moment. The Latin before the
English for construing. The English before the Latin, Genders.
for making Latin true. Then make them as p^rfect in their Genders forwards
and backwards. As what Gender is hic, and hic what Gender? or what is the
Article of the Masculine Gender? so in the rest.

After these,
make them as ready in their Declensions, not only to know what Declension
every word is of; Several terminations of the Declensions.
but also the several terminations of ^uery case in every Declension, both as
they learn the^ one by one, according to the book, and after to give them
together, when they have learned them all, and that in this manner as follows.

The Genitive case singular of the first in ae dipthong^as, musae, the second
in i, as Magistri, the third in is, as lapidis etc. so thorough: and backward;
the Genesis of the fifth in ei, as meridiei, of the fourth in us, as manus; the
third in is, as lapidis, etc.

Then to decline perfectly every example in each Declension, Declining the
examples in each Declension.
in manner as the Articles: as for example;

Musa a song, musae of a song, musae to a song, musam the song, o musa o song,
ab hac musa from a song, or from this song. So in the Plural number, musae
songs, musarum of songs, etc.

After, English first. A song musa, of a song musae, to a song musae. etc. To
give them these signs, because they signify thus most commonly, though not
always. Then appose them until they can give readily any case either English
to Latin,
or Latin to English: which they will soon do. So in each Declension.
Declining all the examples of all the Declensions together.
After you may acquaint them to decline all the examples of the Declensions
together, putting in Regnum also, because it differs from Magister; as
Nominatiuo Musa, Magister, Regnum, Lapis, Manus, Meridies: Genesis musae,
magistri, regni, lapidis, manus, meridi^^, etc. This will help them presently
to join any Substantives as they fall in the same case, or the Substantives
and Adjectives together.

So if you please, you may cause them to decline them so with the English
adioined, either before the latin or after. The more ways they are thus
declined, to make them each way perfect, Giving the bare terminations, the
shortest way.
the better they will be learned, if time will permit.

Of all other this is the shortest, and whereby they may be most easily kept by
them, who have any understanding, to give the bare terminations alone
together, as thus. Terminations of the Genitive singular. ae. i. is. us. ei.
Dative. ae. o. i. ui. ei. etc.

And those usual signs of the cases, as a, of, to, the, o, from. Thus to plie
continual poasing, each day a little, until they can give you any termination,
or ^ase in these examples. English to Latin, or Latin to English.

After to do the like in bonus; The like i^ bonus.
thus: Bonus a good Masculine, bona a good Feminine, bonum a good Neuter, etc.
We may English it after this manner, for the better understanding of the
children: Or as we can find any more easy way.

After all these when they wex perfect in them; Declining of Substantives and
Adjectives together.
the declining of Substantives and Adjectives, of all sorts together, is of
very great profit, either Latin alone together, or Latin and English both
together if you will.

And first the examples of the book. As musa bona a good muse, musae bonae of
a good muse, musae bonae to a good muse, etc.

So Magister bonus, Magistri boni, etc. So Regnum bonum. And lapis bonus, a
good stone, lapidis boni, of a good stone* or lapis durus, lapidis duri, etc.
So manus foelix, manus foelicis, manui foelici^, manum foelicem.

Or meridies tristis, meridiei tristis, meridiei tristi, meridiem tristem. etc.

And in which you observe them to miss most ply those until all be perfect.

When they are very cunning in these, then they are to be acquainted with
declining other words like their examples, still keeping them to those
patterns, where they miss. And first the words set down in the margents of
their books against each example.

Then other Substantives and Adjectives together. As sylua s^nans, syluae
sonantis, syluae sonanti, etc.

L^o magnus, a great lion, Leonis magni of a great Lion, Leoni magno, to a
great lion, etc.

Or English before. A great lion, Leo magnus, of a great Lion, Leonis magni,
etc.

Unto these adioine the daily forming of comparisons: as Gratus, gratior,
gratissimus. Bonus, melior, optimus. So, Foelix, foelicior, foelicissimus:
first regular, then irregular or out of rule.

Then do the like in the Pronownes, Chief examples in the Pronownes of most
common use.
to make them to be able to decline and give them readily, English to Latin,
and Latin to English; like as the Nownes. As Ego, I. mei of me, etc. So back
again. I, Ego. of me, mei. to me, mihi. Tu thou, tui of thee, and thou tu, of
thee tui, etc. Sui of himself or of themselves, sibi to himself, or to
themselves, se himself or themselves. Is he, ea she, id that thing, eius of
that man, of that woman, of that thing, or that matter.

Qui which man, quae which woman, quod which thing, cuius of which man, of
which woman, of which thing; like as you may say, hic this man, haec this
woman, hoc this thing etc. or hic this Masculine, etc.

In these two and (hic) it may suffice only to decline Latin before, as was
said.

So to be very ready in the persons of the Pronouns, Persons of the Pronownes.
both to show what person every one is of: and to give every one both
English to Latin, and Latin to English. As when I say, give your first person
singular, Latin and English; The child answers Ego, I. or I, Ego. etc. so
what person every one is.

But in the Verbes above all, is your diligence to be showed in making them not
only perfect in declining every example to be able to decline any Verb by the^;
but more specially in coniugating, and being ready to give you the Latin to
the English, and English to the Latin in any person, of any Mood, or Tense.

To effect this most speedily, How to come most speedily to be perfect in the
verbes, which are a mean foundation* and wherein the greatest difficulty lies.
teach them to say first the first persons of one co^iugation alone, through the
Active voice, both Latin before English, and English before Latin, thus: Amo I
love amabam I loved or did love, amaui I have loved; so through the Indicative
mood. Then English first, thus: I love, Amo: I loved or did love, amabam etc.

And after withal to be able to run the terminations in every tense: as in
amo, o, as, at, amus, atis, ant. In Amabam, bam, bas, bat, bamus, batis, bant.
And likewise the persons in English, I, thou, he, we, ye, they, according to
the terminations; and then by apposing, they will presently answer any of them.

As thus; ask the child, I love: he answers amo: then ask, they love; he
cannot tell. Bid him to run the terminations of Amo; he answers o, as, at,
amus, atis, ant: then I say, give now they love: he answers amant: so ye
love, or we love, etc.

So ask, I loved or did love; he answers Amabam: then we loved or did love:
if he cannot tell, bid him to run his terminations, and he will answer, bam,
bas, bat, bamus, batis, bant. Then ask, How say you, we loved or did love: he
answers Amabamus. Afterward in Doceo: so in the rest.

When they come at the Passive, let them do the like: and when they have
learned it through, then let them practice to repeat Active and Passive
together thus: I love, Amo: I am loved, Amo^: I loved or did love, Amabam: I
was loved, Amabar: I have loved, Amaui: I have been loved, amat us sum vel
fui, etc.

Then by posing the first persons, and running the terminations, they will very
soon give any of the verbes in any person.

They will by this means go through all the coniugations, and with this
perfect readiness, as soon as they will learn to say them without book,
without any understanding at al if not sooner; so that they be well applied. Yet
if this prevail not as you desire, you may exercise them to repeat all the
persons through every mood, These may be added if we will to make them more
ready.
and person, by themselves, but chiefly the first persons: as, Amo, amabam,
amaui, amaueram, amabo: Am^m, amarem, amauerim, amauissem, amauero: amare,
amauisse, amaturum esse: amandi, amando, amandum, etc.

So in the second persons, Amas, amabas, etc.

Or thus to coniugate those tenses together, which do come one of another: as
Amo, amabam, amabo, amem, amarem, amare.

So, Amaui, amaueram, amauerim, amauero, amauissem, amauisse.

This is accounted the speediest way; in examining here, to appose the same
tenses, The manner of apposing here.
of the several moodes together: as the present tenses, I love, Amo: Grant I
love, Vtt^am amem: I may or can love, amem: when I love, cum am^m.

So in the Preterimperfect tenses.

To make them most perfect in this, practice them that they can give readily,
Knowledge of the terminations.
the terminations of the first persons, first in the Indicative mood, in each
tense; then how the same tenses differ in the rest of the moodes, Comparing
them together for memory sake, though they come not one of another.
except the Imperative, together with the signs of the tenses in English. As
for example: the termination o, in the Indicative mood present tense, is in the
three other moodes turned into em or am; as amo is made amem, doceo doceam lego
legam, audio audiam. In the Preterimperfect tense, bam is turned into rem:
Preterperfect tense, i into rim: Preterpluperfect tense, ram into sem: Future
tense bo, or am, into to.

So in the Indicative mood, the terminations are these: o, bam, i, ram, bo or
am. In the other three are these answerable; em or am, rem, rim, sem, to.

Though these be not one formed of another; yet comparing them thus together,
will make the children to learn them sooner by much.

General signs of the five tenses active, are; Do, Did, Have, Shall or will.

Of the Passive present tense, Am, Is, Are or Art. Imperfect tense, Was, Were,
Were. Preterperfect tense, Have been. Preterpluperfect tense, Had been.
Future tense, Shall or Will be.

Signs of the moodes are set down in the book; the Indicative having no
sign: the other three having their several signs in English.

This little Table well thought on, makes all most easy.
Active voice. Passive voice. Signs of the te^ses in English. Terminations in
latin without a sign. Terminations with a sign. Signs of the tenses in
English. Terminatio^s in lat. wthout a sign. Terminations in latin with a sign.
Present tense. Do. o. em or am. Am, is, are, art. or. er, ( or) ar.
Preterimperfect tense. Did. bam. rem. Was, were, were. bar. rer. Preterperfect
tense. Have. i. rim. Have been. su^ vel fui. sim vel fu^rim, Preterpluperfect
tense. Had. ram. sem. Had been. ra^ vel fuera^. essem vel fuissem. Future
tense. Shall or will. bo am. to. Shall or will be. ber. ar. crov^i fuero.

For to make the child to understand this Table, For understanding this Table.
first show him these things upon his book, by comparing the Active voice with
the Passive, and the Indicative mood in both, with the other moodes. After
pose thus:

Q. Do, without a sign of the mood, how must it end in Latin?

A. In o.

Q. Do, with a sign, how?

A. In em or am.

For example:

Q. I do love, or I love?

A. Amo.

Q. Grant I love.

A. Vtinam amem.

Q. I may or can love?

A. Amem.

Q. When I love?

A. Cum amem.

So in the Preterimperfect tense.

Q. How say you Did, without a sign?

A. bam.

Q. With a sign.

A. rem, as Amabam, amarem: Docebam, docerem. Have, without a singe. i. With a
sign, rim; as Amaui, amauerim: Docui, docuerim, etc.

The shortest way of all,
and most easy for all of understanding, The shortest way of all to repeat and
keep these.
is, often to repeat the bare signs and terminations; specially at such times,
as when the younger sort are to make Latin: and this daily then, until they
be perfect, or as shall be requisite, thus: Active signs, Do, Did, Have, Had,
Shall or will. Passive, Am, Is, Art, Was, Were, Were, Have bin, Had bin, Shall
or will be.

Terminations in Latin Indicat. or terminat. without a sign, o, bam, i, ram,
bo and am. Termin. with a sign, em. am. rem, rim, sem, to.



So Active and Passive together. o, or. bam, bar. i, sum vel fui. ram, eram vel
fueram. bo, bor. am, ar.

Em, er. Am, ar. rem, rer. rim. sim vel fuerim. sem, essem vel futissem. to,
crouel fuero.


These gotten, all will be plain; if you use withal to cause them to run
the tenses, as was said, with the signs of the persons, thus: I, thou, he, we,
ye, they: o, as, at, amus, at is, ant. bam, bas, bat, bamus, batis, bant: so in
any. And withal to remember in what letters, or syllables every person ends,
both in the Active and Passive: as the first persons Active, signifying (I) do
end commonly in o, am, em; im, or i. as amo, amabam, amem, amaui, amauerim. The
second persons (or thou) in as, es, is, or sti: as amas, doces, legis,
amauisti. (he) in at, et, it. (we) in mus. (ye) in it is. (they) in nt.

So in the Passive, (I) in or, ar, er, (thou) in ris, or like the Active. (he)
in tur. (we) in mur. (ye) in mini. (they) in ntur.

By these the learners may have a great light: and though some of them be both
in the Active and Passive, and the Imperative mood do differ so as no
certain rules can be given: yet they may be soon discerned and known. And
the perfect knowledge of the Terminations being the speediest way to the
getting the full understanding, both of Nounes and Verbs in every tongue; these
would be learned first, and ever kept most surely.

The benefit also of this exquisite perfection in Nounes and Verbes, No pains
can be too great for perfect getting Nounes and Verbes.
is so singular, for the speedy attayning of the Latin tongue, as no pains in
them can be too great.

First, the very difficulty of the Latin tongue, is in these.

Secondly, these examples set down in the book, are such lively patterns of
all Nounes and Verbes; that Scholars being perfect in these, will soon be
perfect in any other. And for the other parts of speech, the very words are
most of them set down in the Accedence; as Pronounes, Aduerbes, Conjunctions,
Prepositions: Participles, like the Adjectives.

So that these being gotten perfectly, the Latin tongue may soon be attained
in good manner; even by the means following: whereas without this perfection it
is very difficult. So that the learners shall still go incertainly and
fearfully.

Also by these means and helps named, this readiness in them may be very
speedily obtained; whereas only to be able to say them without book, without
this understanding, is to little purpose: and to learn them by practice in
construction, and in writing exercises alone, is most long, hard and wearisome,
both to Master and Scholar.

My former toil and grief in these, above all other things in Grammar (though
I tried all ways which I could hear or devise) with the ease and benefit in
this way, makes me confident. For I have found more profit by this course in
a month, then by all other in half a year. By this practice also, it is most
soon recovered when it is lost, and most easily kept.

Yet my meaning is not to have Scholars to stay ouerlong to be so exquisite in
them, Yet children not to stay ouerlong in these.
before they go any further; but to go on so fast as they can well, and to make
them so ready by daily practice; spending each day a quarter of an hour, or
more, in them, until they come to perfection.

This were not amiss, to be practiced sometimes also amongst the elder
scholars, which are not ready in them; as also those coming from other
Schools, till they grow perfect: here should be the beginning.

If yet a shorter way can be found out, we shall have more cause to rejoice
thereof.

In the Participles, the chief care would be to make them perfect* Participles.
to know the several tenses by their signs, and endings English and Latin,
as they are in the book: for declining, they are the same with the Nounes.

In the Aduerbs, Conjunctions, Prepositions and Interiections, Aduerbs,
Conjunctions, Prepositions, Interiections.
they would be made so ready, as to give English to Latin, and Latin to
English, and to tell of what kinds they are; and also to what cases each
preposition serves: and these specially.

Here it were to be wished (as I take it) that all the rest of the Aduerbs, A
want in the Aduerbs to be supplied.
Conjunctions, and Interiections were also set down in the Accedences; except
only such Aduerbes as are derived of other words: by which words they may be
known, or by their accents or terminations.

Also that some rules were set down for framing of these derived Aduerbes;
Rules of deriuing Aduerbs necessary; and of the Latin in the Accedence
Englished.
and that all the rest of the Aduerbes and Conjunctions, with all other words
and sentences through the Accedence, were Englished, like as the Prepositions
are.

Hereby all these Latin words would soon be learned perfectly, and prove a
very great help, when children come to construction: for then they should have
but only Nounes and Verbes to trouble them withal, as was said; and those
most easy to be known, by the means above mentioned, and after.

For the English rules great care would be had likewise, English rules.
to make Scholars very ready in them: for these rules of themselves with a few
other, Benefit of them well gotten.
might serve for construction, or making Latin. The perfect knowledge of them
also, will make the Latin rules easy, when your Scholars come at them.

In teaching these rules, these two things would be observed generally:
General observations in the English rules.
first, That the Scholars learn to construe each ensample; and that without
book. Experience teaches, that those which art apt, will construe almost as
soon without the book, 1. To construe the examples.
as upon the book, or as they will learn them construed: here by they shall
get so much Latin; beside that it will be a great help to the perfect
understanding, and applying of them. 2. To tell in what words the force of the
examples does lie.
The second is, to mark out with some special marks, those words in which
the force of the examples does lie; as the words agreeing, or the word
governing, and the word governed, and to cause the children to be able to tell
them: See this more plainly, in examining the Syntax in Latin.
and so ever in saying their rules without book, to repeat over those words
again, in all the longer examples. The rules or examples otherwise shall do
them little good, because they know not how to make use of them.

But hereby they shall have perpetual and sure patterns and warrants for
parsing, making and trying Latin. I shall show this more plainly, when we come
to the Syntax in Latin.

These two things being observed, To make them most perfect in the rules of the
principal Verb. Concordes.
have a chief regard in the rules, first, to make them perfect in the rule of
finding out the principal Verb; secondly, in the Concords, as being of
continual use; thirdly, in the rules of government.

And amongst those, to look specially to the two first rules, Relative Qui.
of the case of the Relative Qui: and namely, the latter of them, viz. But when
there comes a Nom. case; for in it Scholars most fail.

Also in all rules of government, to make them able to tell you presently where
any rule is, Governments. Manner of examining in them
and what cases such words govern: as, Where begins the construction of
Substantives? What cases they govern? How many rules there are of them? Or
asking thus; What case must your latter of two Substantives be? What case will
such a word govern? As Opus or Vsus, What cases do they govern? Where is the
rule? So in the rules of the Adjectives, and all the rest throughout.

In posing, remember that which was first directed: to mark carefully the
drift of the whole rule, and so to propound your question; or else to propound
the whole rule in a question. As thus: when two Substantives come together,
betokening diverse things; what case must the latter be? and why? or by what
rule?

Furthermore, to the end to make your Scholars so very ready in the Accedence,
Other helps to make Scholars ready in the Accedence.
and to keep it perfectly; besides the learning all things so well as may be,
there must be also, first, daily repetitions and examinations; because of the
weakness of childrens memories: ^. Daily repetitions and examinations.
that so by long custom all may be imprinted in them.

Herein cause your first enterers to repeat over every day, all that they
have learned; as they proceed to learn more,
to divide it into parts, to go over all so often as time will permit. For them
who have learned all their Accedence, I hold it best (according to the manner
of most Schools) to divide it into four equal parts, except the examples of
the Verbes; and to cause them to say a part every of the four first days of
the week, to say over the whole each week once: for the Verbes, how they
specially would be parsed daily, I spoke before.

In hearing parts, Manner of hearing parts.
ask them first the chief question or questions of each rule in order; then
make them every one say his rule or rules; and in all rules of construction, to
answer you in what words the force of the example lies, both governor and
governed; saying the governor first. Where help is wanting, to do it only in
the hardest and most necessary rules and questions, or where we know them most
defective: Or else only to repeat the rules and examples in such sort as was
showed, without further examination.

Though, where there is help and time enough, it is far the surest, to cause
them to repeat the whole part, and to examine each piece of it daily, though
they say the less at a time. 2. The spending of a month or two to make the
Accedence perfect, after it is learned over.
Secondly, the spending of one month or two, after they have first learned
over their Accedence, to make them perfect thus every way, will be time as well
bestowed as they can bestow any; to prevent both the grief and anger of the
Master after, and also the fear and punishment of the Scholar. 3. Some time
separate daily to examine Nownes and Verbs.
Thirdly, every day some time would be separate, to the examining Nownes and
Verbes; chiefly the Verbes, until they could not be set in declining,
coniugating, giving any termination, case or person.

This continual practice of parsing, Constancy in poasing till use bring
surenesse.
would be constantly kept as need shall require, until by long use children
grow to perfection and surenesse: Because the Accedence thus gotten perfectly;
and after in like manner the rules of Nownes and Verbes in Propria qua maribus,
Heteroclits and in As in praesenti; the difficulty of learning is past: so that
very children, with a little practice, will go forvvard with much
cheerfulness, in construing, parsing, making and proouing Latin, by the
helps following.

Thus have I set you down so plainly as I can, how the Accedence may be
gotten most speedily and profitably, to make all learning a play. Try, and you
will acknowledge Gods blessing herein.


Spoud. I acknowledge your kindness: I can make no doubt of the courses;
because, besides your experience, I see so evident reason in every part.


Phil. Put them in ure, and so you shall have more full assurance, and daily be
helping to find out better, or to confirm the pricipall of these.


CHAP. VII.
How to make Scholars perfect in the Grammar.
Spoud. I Intend to put them in practice forthwith: but in the mean time as
you have thus lovingly gone with me, to direct me, how to make the Accedence
so plain and easy to my little ones; so I entreat you to point me out the
way, how they may proceed in the Grammar with like happy success. What is done
ordinarily in Schools in teaching Grammar.
As for mine own self, I have only used to cause my scholars to learn it
without book, and a little to construe it; and after, to make it as perfect as
I can, by often saying Parts: Finally, in parsing their lectures to give the
rules. This has been all that I have done.


Phil. I know that which you mention, to be the most that is done ordinarily:
but to say without book and construe a little, What things are requisite to be
done in learning Grammar.
are smally available, unless your scholar be able to show the meaning and
use of his rules. Yea, it is very requisite, that here also they should be
able to give the several examples, and in what words the force of each example
lies; and so to apply the examples to the rules, to the end that they may do
the like by them, in parsing, or making Latin. And moreover, in Nownes and
Verbes, to be able not only to decline them, and to give English to the
Latin words; but the Latin words also to the English. Grammar being made
perfect in this manner, will make all other their learning more easy and
delightsome, and be as a Dictionary in their heads, for many chief words:
neither will there any loss of time in it; especially this being done as they
learn it, and still gotten more perfectly by such continual repetitions and
examinations. I have had experience in both.

To the end that they may thus get the Grammar with most fruit and ease; To
get the Grammar with most ease and fruit.


1 Let them learn every rule (I mean) those which are commonly read in
Schools, To learn every ordinary rule perfectly.
and that perfectly as they go forward, together with the titles set before
the rules, and the sums of the rules which are set in the margents. With
titles and sums.


The manner of it I find to be most direct thus, for all the younger sort of
enterers: Manner for enterers.


Where you have time enough, 1. Reading their rules to them.
in giving them rules, do as in the Accedence.

1. Read them over their rule leasurely, and distinctly.

2. Construe it, 2. Construing and showing them the meaning.
and then show them the plain meaning of it, by applying the examples, as
teaching them to decline the words or the like. As I shall show after.

Or else for most ease and speediness in construing,
and for lack of leisure, How they may soonest learn to construe them.
cause every one of your Scholars to have a book of the construing of Lillies
rules, and each to read over his rule, so often upon that book until he can
construe without it; Each Scholar to have his co^struing book, and learn to
construe by that.
or else after a time, to try how he can beat it out of himself, and be
helped by that book where he sticks.

By the help of these books, I find that they will learn to construe their
rules much sooner, then they can without, Benefit of the use of Lillyes rules
construed
I take it by almost one half of the time; and thereby gain so much time, to
be employed in other studies, because they shall have it ever before their eye
without any asking or searching: 1. To gain one half of time in co^struing
them.
whereas otherwise either their Master or some other must tell them every word,
which they cannot tell, or else they must turn to it in their Dictionaries,
And free their Masters from much trouble, and the Scholar from much fear and
toil. Also some recover their selves having forgot.
until they can construe: and that so often as they forget; which, what a toil
and hinderance it is to the Master, and fear to the Scholar, every one
knows. From all which they may be freed hereby; and when they have forgot
they may soonerecouer themselves again. Finally, they shall hereby increase
daily in reading English, and be furthered to write true Orthography in
English, as they grow in Latin. And so the Masters shall also be freed from
fear of that mischief, Increase in reading English. Masters freed from clamors
of these little ones forgetting to read English, when they first learn
latin; and from the clamours and accusations of their Parents in this behalf,
spoken of before.

But here it were to be wished, Wherein the construing books, under
correction, may be much helped and made more profitable.
that those books of construing Lillies rules were translated ever
Grammatically; the manner of which translation I shall show after, with the
benefits of them: And also that not only the Substantive and Adjective,
Preposition and his case were ever construed and set together, wheresoever they
are to be taken together; This I think is in hand or finished.
but withal that every word were Englished in the first, proper, natural, and
distinct signification. In which things they often fail, Necessary words to be
Englished in their proper significations.
as in the Verbes chiefly: though of all other things, that be more necessary,
for Scholars, to know the first and natural signification; for the other then
will soon be learned, by reason and use: or else some of the other most usual
significations might be put in, in other letters, or with notes to know them.

Thus the child might go surely forward, and have a certain direction for
the right and proper use of every word, to be more sure to him then any
Dictionarie, all his life long, either for construing or making Latin: Whereas
being set down in general significations not distinct, they shall ever go
doubtfully and abuse the words: as when traho, promo, haurio, are set down
every one of them to draw, without further distinction.

The benefit would be much more, if it were thus translated: for then they
might learn thereby not only to construe truly, to understand and go truly;
but also to make and speak the same Latin: I mean, to answer easily to all
the rules, with the other benefits of Grammatical translations.

When they can construe in some good sort, Learning the rules without book.
and understand (as was said) then let them get without book perfectly.

In getting without book,
when they can read it perfectly, Helps for getting without book all things
which they learn in verse.
they may be much helped thus, in all things which they learn in verse; to
read them over in a kind of singing voice, and after the manner of the
running of the verse; often tuning over one verse until they can say that, then
another; and so forward: which they will do presently, if the Master do but
read them so before them.

Also, So repeating the Rules in verse.
to say these rules at parts sometimes, after the same manner of scanning, or
running as a verse, shall make them both more easily kept, and be a good help
for right pronuntiation of quantities, and to prepare them the more easily to
make a verse, for authorities and the like.

When they can say perfectly without book, Construing without book.
then (if you please) you may cause all those who are any thing apt and
pregnant, to learn to construe also without book: which they will do very
quickly, with a little reading over and over, upon the construing book; and
almost as soon as they will construe upon the book.

By this means they will be able presently to give not only the English to
the Latin, Benefit of construing without book.
but also the Latin to the English, of any word in the rule, to be perfect
thereby, and to keep all more firmly.

Or where leisure is wanting, Where leisure is wanting how to do.
among the elder sort, And in the elder
which
are well entered in the rules; they may first learn without book, then to
construe, both upon the book and without: Or to construe first. It is not very
material: but, as themselves do find that they can get it most easily, at
the Masters discretion.

Although for all the first enterers and younger sort, The surest way for young
beginners.
I find it the surest way, where the Masters leisure will serve, to cause
them first to understand the rule and the meaning of it, by a short opening or
expressing the sum of it, and then by questions in English, as I directed
before: All of the learners looking upon their books as he reads unto them;
that they may see the questions and answers in their books, either wholly, or
the most part thereof.

And when they can answer in English, looking upon their books, or do
understand the rule; then to learn to construe it of themselves, and to get it
without book.

After,
ar the saying of their rules, when they have said without book and
construed; At saying of rules how to examine, to cause them to answer any
question.
to labor especially to cause them to be able to answer, without book, each
part of the rule, and that both in English and Latin together, after they are
a little entered; that with the meaning and English, you may beat the Latin
into their heads also, to help to prepare them to speak and perse in latin.

Let the manner of the appoasing be here, Manner of appoasing.
as in the Accedence, viz. by short questions, propounded unto them, arising
directly out of the words of the book, either out of the sum and title of
the rule set before it, or set in the margent ever against it, or out of the
very words of the rule; and withal, the examples of the rule, and how to apply
them to the several rules.

I will set you down an example or two more at large, Example of making the
rules (...).
that you or any may do the like the more easily. To begin at Propria quae
maribus: Propria quae maribus.
first, you have the Title before Regulae generales propriorum. Out of which,
you may show them thus; Title of it.
That according to the order of their Accedence, as the first part of speech is
a Nowne, so here are rules first of Nownes: And as their Accedence has first
the Substantive then the Adjective, so here begin rules first of the
Substantives, after of the Adjectives. Again, as the Substantive is either
Proper or Common; so here the rules of Proper Nowns are first set down, whereby
to know the Genders of them; and after of the Common Nowns called Appellatiues.
You may also point them in their book, where each of these begin: they will
presently conceive of them, being first perfect in their Accedence.

Then that the rules of Proper names, are of Masculines, or Feminines: Or all
Proper Nownes are either of the Masculine or of the Feminine Gender, unless
they be excepted.

Also all Proper Nownes which go under the names of Males or He Is (as we call
them) are the Masculine Gender. Then teach them according to the margent, that
of those there are five kinds, which go under the names of Males or He Is. As
names of Gods, men, floods or rivers, months, winds.

So all proper Nowns or names of Females or She Is, are the Feminine Gender. And
of those are likewise five kinds: That is; names of Goddesses, Women, Cities,
Regions or countries, Islands, etc.

Then appoase after the same manner, Appo^sing after the same manner, to help
the weakest teacher: for whom I have set down the more examples.
keeping strictly the words of the book, as was said; only putting in here or
there, a word or two, to make the question; which by often repeating, they will
easily understand. As thus, out of the words set before the rule: Or in the
like manner;

Q. Where begin your general rules of Proper Nownes? Vbi incipiunt regulae
generales propriorum?

A. Propria quae maribus.


Q. This poasing in Latin if it be ouer-hard to the enterers at first, may be
used after a time in examining their parts.
How many general rules are there of proper Nowns? Quot sunt regulae generales
propriorum?

A. Two: Duae.

Q. What is your first rule? Quae est primaregula?

A. Propria quae maribus. etc.

Then out of the margent thus:

Q. How many kinds of Proper names are there of the Masculine gender? Quot sunt
gener a propriorum nominum masculinigeneris?

A. Quinque five: Diuorum, virorum, fluuiorum, mensium, ventorum. Examining out
of the margent.
Or as they are set in the margent. Mascula sunt nomina Diuorum, virorum,
fluuiorum, mensium, ventorum. Names of Gods, men, floods or rivers, months,
winds.

After, Examining out of the words of the rule.
out of the words of the rule, Propria quae maribus tribuuntur, etc. you may
propound your questions thus;

Q. Cuius generis dicas, Propria quae maribus tribuuntur? What Gender are all
Nownes, or names of He Is, or of the Male kind. R. Mascula, or masculini generis.

Q. Cuius generis sunt nomina Diuorum? R. Masculini.

Q. Manner of appoasing the examples of the rules.
Quomodo dicis latin, The God of Battle?

R. Mars, hic Mars, Martis.

Q. The god of wine, quomodo dicis?

R. Bacchus, hic Bacchus Bacchi, etc.

Q. Per quam regulam? R. Propria quae maribus.

In the fewer words you can do it,
for brevity, is the better, Fewest words best.
and that you may go over the more. Or if you think it to be too hard for
children, to answer in Latin at first, and that it is best to do it only in
English;
you may do it following the same order. To oppose only in English if children
be too weak to answer in Latin.
As in the next rule, Propria Foemineum, only asking thus;

Q. What gender are proper names of Females, or She Is? How many kinds are
there of them? Where is the rule for them? Manner of the questions in English,
at Propria Foemineum.
What exceptions are there from that general rule? Or, how many Masculine
Cities have you? How many Neuter Cities? How many Masculine and Neuter Cities?

So in the next rule, Appell, Arboru^.
Appellatiua Arborum, to ask thus or the like;

Where begin your rules of Appellatiues, or Common Nownes?

How many kinds of Appellatiues have you? Or how many sorts of rules have you
for Appellatiues? A. Three: of Trees, Epicenes, The rest.



What gender are names of trees? What exceptions? Or how many Masculine trees
have you? How many Newters, trees? So of Epicens.

Where is your rule of words of the Epicene Gender? How many kinds have you of
words, or Names, of the Epicene gender? A. Three: of Birds, Beasts, Fishes.



How know you the Gender in the Epicens?

What Gender is every Noune that ends in um?

How know you the Gender in all Appellatiues?

Then the special rules, Examining of the special rules.
thus, or the like: How many special rules of Nounes Appellatiues have you?
Ans. Three: The first, of Nounes not increasing; the second, of Nounes
increasing acute, commonly called long; the third, of Nounes increasing, grave
or short, as we call it.

What Genders each of these are of? Where are the rules for them? What examples
have you of them? So to give the meaning, and apply the examples. How many
exceptions there are from every one of these rules? As, how many rules of
Masculines except; so of Feminines or Neuters except. Or thus: Of what Genders
are all Nounes, not increasing in the Genitive case, as Capra, caprae: Or all
Nounes like Musa, musae? So what Genders are all Nounes of the second special
rule? or all Nounes increasing acute, as Pietas, pietatis. What Gender are all
Nounes increasing, grave, or flat, or short? as Sanguis, sangumis. And how many
rules have you of Masculines except from the first special rule? or of
Masculines not increasing in the Genitive case? How many rules have you of long
Masculines, or Masculines increasing acute, excepted from the second special
rule? Or of Feminines increasing short, except from the third special rule? Or
yet more plainly thus: Where is your general rule of all like Capra, caprae: or
musa, musae? Or of all like Magister, magistri: or Dominus, domin.: venture
ventris. Or of words ending in er, os, us, not increasing. Or where is your
rule of all like Virtus, virtutis? Or like Sanguis, sanguinis? And of what
Genders they are of.

For the exceptions, Examining the Exceptions.
you may appose thus: Where is your rule of Neuters not increasing? Of Neuters
increasing, acute or long? Of Neuters increasing, flat or short? Thus of
Doubtfuls, Commons.

Or posing the examples, Posing by asking first the examples.
to ask what is Latin for any word, which is in any of the rules; and then to
cause them to decline the word, the Nom. and Genit. case, and to tell the rule,
as was showed before: as,

What is Latin for a cloud?

A. Nubes, haec nubes, nubis, etc.

Q. By what rule?
What is the meaning of that rule? The shortest course.
Thus you shall receive diverse benefits together

Or thus only; when they have said any rule, to ask them what is the meaning
of that rule, and to give the examples.

So in the Adjectives, to ask thus or the like: Examining the Adjectives.


Where begin the rules of the Adjectives?

Where is the rule of all like Foelix? Adiectiua vnam. So of all like Tristis?
Sub gemina, etc. Of all like Bonus? At si tres etc. Of Adjectives of two
Articles like Substantives? At sunt quae flexu. etc. Of Adjectives of a strange
declining? Haec proprium quendaem etc.

For all declining to make them very perfect in the Genitive case, How to make
Scholars perfect in the Genitive cases.
you may practice them thus; sometimes to repeat the Nominative and the
Genitive case together; as in Propria qua maribus to run, thus: Mars, Martis,
Bacchus, Bacchi, Apollo, Apollinis, Cato, Catonis: So in every rule when time
will permit.

And chiefly appose them often in the most difficult, To appose the hardest
ofttimes.
being noted with some mark: as, Opus, Opuntis, Persis, Persidis. Barbiton,
Barbiti. Senex, senis. Var, viri, Bes, bessis. Cres. Cretis. Pres, predis.
Semis, semissis, and the like. The rest they will do readily of themselves.

In the Heteroclites to do the like, Examining in the Heteroclites.
first to show them what they are, viz. Nounes of another kind of declining:
and then the three several kinds of them according to the titles,
Variantiagenus. Defectiua. Redundantia:


Either such as change their declension, or want some thing, or have too much.
And so the several rules of every one.

Then the several rules to be examined particularly; like as in Propria quae
maribus: to understand every piece: and in them speedily to look to the
Margents: to be able readily to give the rules to them.

And to make them able to repeat the Sums and Margents in order.

So to give any rule thereby: as when I ask, Where is your rule^ of Ap^ots,
Monoptots, Diptots, Triptots? Of those which want the Vocative case, or Defecta
vocatiuo, or propria defecta plurali? or the like.

In the Verbes likewise show them the order, Making the Verbes plain.
that the rules are of Preterperfect tenses and Supines: and those first of
simple Verbes in o. Then compounds after of Verbs in or. Last, of those that
differ in their Preterperfect tenses, or Supines.

In the simple Verbes, first are rules of the first Conjugation, then the
second, so in order.

After cause them to tell by the sums and Margents, Examining in them.
where every rule stands: as where are verbes of the first Conjugation, so in
the rest.

Practice them also to answer thus:
The Present tense, Preterperfect tense, Infinitive mood and first Supine
together. As if I ask, How say you To swim? he answers, No. No, naui, nare,
natum. So To wash, Lauo, laut, lauare, lautum. Because these being known all the
rest are presently known; and to do it also for breuity sake: especially
examine those Verbes often, which have two Preterperfect tenses, or two
Supines, or more; and would therefore have special marks: as vello, velli, and
v^^lsi vellere, vulsum.

For the Syntax in Latin,
though the English rules, with a few more ad^ed to them, Good use of the Syntax
in Latin.
might serve for resolving any construction, or for making Latin; and so many
do think them needless altogether; others do use to teach only the rules
thereof, and one example only in each rule; yet there may be very good use of
them all, rightly understood, and specially of the several examples rightly
applied: that Scholars by them may go surely, having several examples to
warrant almost every thing in construction; which by the bare rule, and one
example they could not but go very doubtfully. Besides that, thereby they also
get so much good Latin of the best Authors, and be helped much for parsing by
the words of the rule.

In examining the Syntax, Examining the Syntax for help of the weakest likewise.
it is the best to do it in Latin: for by that time they will be well able to
do it so, if they be rightly trained up. All who wish well to poor
countrey-Schooles, will pardon my endeavor to be so plain, though in so many
examples.
And it will much help them, as was said, to speak and to parse in Latin:
yet still asking the question also in English, and answering both in English
and Latin, so far as neeede is; as thus, out of the words:

Q. Quot sunt Concordantiae?

R. Tres.

Q. Quae est concordantia prima?

R. Nominatiui and verbi.

Q. Verbum personale cum quo cohaeret?

R. Cum Nominatiuo.

Q. In quibus cohaeret Verbum personale cum Nominatiuo?

R. Numero and persona.

Q. Daexemplum.

R. Nunquam sera est adbonos mores via.

Q. Applica hoc exemplum: vel, Ostende voces, in quibus est vis regulae.

R. Via est.

Q. Da aliud exemplum.

R. Fortuna nunquam perpetuo est bona.

Q. Applica.

R. Fortuna est.

Q. Repete regulam.

R. Verbum personale cohaeret cum Nominatiuo, etc.

Q. Dic Anglice. R. A Verb personal agrees, etc. In the next rule,
Nominatiuus primae vel secundae personae etc.

Q. Vtrum exprimitur Nominatiuus primae vel secundae personae?

R. Rarissime.

Q. Quibus de causis exprimitur?

R. Causa discretionis, aut Emphasis gratia,

Q. Da xemplum vbi exprimitur causa discretionis.

R Vos damnastis.

Q. Quid intelligis per vos?

R. Vos damnastis, and nemo praeterea, etc.

So likewise in the rules of government: Examining in the rules of government.
as at Adiectiua quae desiderium, etc.

Q. Adiectiua quae significant desiderium, notitiam, memoriam, etc. quem casum
adsciscunt?

R. Genitiuum.

Q. Da regulam.

R. Adiectina quae desiderium, etc.

Q. Da exemplum.

R. Est natura hominuus nouitatis avida.

Q. Applica.

R. Auida nouitatis.

To help the examining the Syntax the better, Helps to speedy examining and
applying the force of the examples.
those words also (in every example throughout the Grammar) would be marked,
in which the force of the example lies; as was advised in the English rules;
The word governing, or more principal, with two marks, or with a double mark:
the word governed with one; or at least the chief word or governor with some
letter or mark distinct from the governed. And then ever in saying the
ensample, In saying their rules, after each example repeated, to repeat those
words, in which the force of the example heth.
to repeat again those words only, in which the force of the example lies;
the governor or principal first: as in the English rules, so here. As thus;
in saying, Est natura hominum nouitatis auida; to repeat again, auida
nouitatis. Men's futuri praescia; praescia futuri. Crescit amor nummi quantum
ipsa pecunia crescit; amor nummi, etc.

By this kind of repeating, Benefit of this kind of repeating.
or continual apposing where they miss, by asking thus, Da exemplum, vbi est
vis regulae; They will become exceeding cunning to understand and apply rightly
any example of the Grammar, so fast as they can repeat it; or to apply any
other thereunto; or else to make the like: that so they may ever have sure
patterns for all parsing, making and trying Latin.

Though this may be though an easy matter, Difficulty hereof, unless they be
thus taught.
and that every Scholar can do it; yet try it, and it will be found clean
contrary almost throughout, and to trouble many weak Masters to apply many of
them aright. It is a matter most necessary: because the very life of the
examples is in these; and the profit will doubly counteruaile the pains.

With a little practice, they will almost as soon say their rules this way,
applying each example, as without.


Spoud. I discern evidently the great benefit and furtherance to Scholars,
to be able to repeat the examples of every rule, in such sort as you have
showed, for continual use both in parsing, and in making and writing Latin
surely; as also to have the sums of the rules which are in the Margents, and
before the rules, perfectly: but children cannot possibly get these, unless
their books be marked so, as you directed.

And for the Masters to mark all their Grammars so, it is an infinite toil,
The trouble and inconvenience in marking the books, chiefly by Scholars.
and hinderance to him: to mark some one, and to cause the Scholars to mark
theirs thereby; they will do them so falsely, as will often more hinder then
further, besides the trouble in it: also the sums of the Margents are very
defective.


Phil. For the supplying of all this, The Grammars are procured ^o be thus
printed, as to be most easy and profitable for schools, without inconvenience.
and the avoiding of all these inconveniences, and other like, and for making
our Grammar far more easy and profitable to the Scholars, without any
alteration; the Grammars are procured to be so printed, as to be most plain
herein: all the words wherein the force of the examples does lie, being printed
in differing letters; that the least child may be able to discern them, and
so to apply and repeat them: and also the Margents made more perfect. What is
missed or defective herein, shall (as I hope) be supplied hereafter.


Spoud. Sir, al Schools must needs hereby receive an exceeding benefit; as I
see plainly by that which you have showed for the use of them. But I pray you
proceed, and let me hear what other helps you have, for examining your
Scholars, so as they may fully understand their rules.


Phil. Other helps for the examination and understanding
the rules, Other helps to examine and understand the rules.
are these;

1. Where they cannot understand any question, or answer; remember that, to
teach them to understand, by repeating English and Latin together, How to make
them to understand and answer any question in Latin.
until they fully understand it. For, as was said before, if they have the
meaning in their heads, words, with often repeating, will easily be gotten to
utter their minds, especially having them in their books.

2 Also this may further to understanding, To give English rules to the Latin.
to cause them to be able to give the English rules, answering to every Latin
rule, of those which have English rules; to set marks upon those Latin rules,
which have no English: and to answer to them that they have no rule, but to be
able to give the meaning.

3 These means may also much profit to the easy getting,
full understanding, Other helps to get the rules easily, and to keep them
perfectly; repeating the Titles and Margents in a continued speech.
and perfect keeping of the rules; often to read over, and keep perfectly the
sums of the rules, which are either set before them, or in the margents; as
was noted so to repeat them in order. Thus to be able to report all the sum;
like as of the Accedence, so of the Grammar, as in a narration or continued
speech, as thus:

Regulae generales propriorum, Mascula sunt nomina Diuorum. Virorum, Fluuiorum,
Mensium, ventorum. Foeminina. Dearum, Mulieru^, Vrbium, Regionum, Insularum.
Exceptio. Regulae generales appellatiuoru^. Arboru^. Epicoena. Volncrum,
ferarum, piscium. Exceptio generalis. Vsus trium regularum specialium. Prima
regula specialis, etc.

So to know to give readily the beginning of every rule in order;
as, To repeat the beginnings of the rules in a continued speech.
Propria quae maribus. Propria foemineum. Excipienda tamen quaedam sunt, etc.
Appellatiua arborum crunt, etc.

By these means they will be able both to answer the questions in Latin,
with a very few other words: and also to give any rule presently when but the
sum is demanded or any word belonging unto it, Benefits of these.
to tell where the rule is, and to begin it.

To hauean Idaea or general notion of all in their heads, Idaea.
as if it were before their faces; which Idaea does make any learning most
easy, either to be gotten or kept.

Hereby also that shorter examination and repetition of parts,
may sometimes serve where time or help is wanting; Shorter examination and
repetition.
and in parsing their Lectures, to rid twice so fast, when they can in a word
signify a rule, either by the word in the Margent, or before the rule, or by
the beginning of the rule.

As to say in parsing, It is so, by the rule of the first concord: or per
concordantiam Nominatiui and Verbi etc. Per regulam Accusatiui ante verbum
infinitum, etc. Or to repeat only a word or two of the beginning of the rule;
as Verba infiniti modi, etc. or the like.

To this end it were to be wished that the sums of the rules were set more
perfectly in the margents, Sums to be perfected.
in a word or two in all the Syntax, This is reported to have his Master
Bruns-words order.
as they are in the Nounes, to have some special name to be called by: as,
Adiectiua desiderij, verbalia in ax. Nomina ^artitiua; and the like.

In hearing parts in straights of time,
thus we may examine only in those places where we most suspect their
negligence: Help in hearing parts in straights of time.
asking first the sum of the rule, with an example in it; and then to cause
him whom you examine, to say that rule. Or to ask only an example of the rule,
and cause them to apply it, and to give the rule.

I have set down all these, To use the most profitable
that we may take and use which we find most profitable. The shorter the
better, as was advised; so that we make sure that they do fully understand the
rule, and can make use of it.

One rule, so learned with understanding, is more profitable, The profit of
rules thus learned.
then if they could say every word in a hundredth; and could but only repeat
them over as parats, without any knowledge to make the right use thereof.


Spoud. Sir* I do like very well of these things which you have said; yet for
the helping of my memory and practice, tell me again shortly, which you
account to be the principal: wherein chief care would be had, to the end to
make all easy; also to keep all, and to make right use thereof.


Phil. This I account and find the chief;
to have them perfect in the order both of the whole, The sum of all: wherein
chief care would be had.
and also of all the parts in Grammar, as I showed; and also to be able to
repeat the Titles, with those margents which are necessary; the beginnings of
the rules; and to have the understanding of them, and examples; and also to be
able to apply the examples for the several words wherein the force is: and so
to give any rule of a sudden, either the beginning or the sum of it; and the
words wherein the force of the rule is.


Spoud. Oh, but this is a matter, that is most accounted of with us; to have
them very perfect in saying all their Grammar without book, even every rule;
and wherein I have found much grief and vexation: because I have not been able
to cause my scholars to get their rules so perfectly; and much less to keep
them: and hereby, ever the saying parts has been the greatest fretting to me
and fear to my scholars, for the negligence of most, in them; so that do I
what I could, yet I have never been able to bring most to any commendable
readiness in them.


Phil. To this I answer you; Difficulty of keeping the Grammar rules perfectly
without book.
that this indeed is one principal thing, that makes our calling the more
uncomfortable: and I doubt not, but that the grief, which the best do find
therein, is a means to humble them, and to keep them that they be not too much
lift-vp in the rest. And indeed it were to be wished that the rules were much
shorter: but since we see not how that may possibly be helped, without much
greater inconvenience; we must in this, as in the rest of our inconveniences,
use all the wisdom that we can, to make a benefit of necessity, and the
burden so light, as we may. And that, How helped.
thus. 1. Making our scholars to learn them so perfectly as we can. 2. To keep
chiefly the things last learned, by often repetition. 3. Continual care for
parts; and so much as may be, to let them have some little time over night, to
read them over, against morning. 4. to cause them at least where time will not
serve, to repeat the sums of the rules: and by daily examining to make them
able to give you the sum or beginning of any rule, with the meaning of it, and
to apply the examples.


And therein to content our selves,
if we can but obtain so much of many, Such a perfect saying every rule, not
so absolutely necessary.
as to be able to understand and make use of the rules, or to turn to them,
though they cannot say them readily: for we see most Scholars, when they come
to the Universities, to forget that perfectness in their Grammars, and most
learned men cannot say the rules; yet so long as they have a full understanding
and remembrance to make use, in resolving, writing, or speaking, this suffices.

Lastly,
this shall much help, to cause them in preparing their lectures in
construction, Other help to have the Grammar perfect, to turn to each rule as
they parse.
to turn to every hard rule as they parse, and then to get these rules
readily; and so ever to come to say, with their Grammars under their arms.

And also in examining lectures, to cause them to tell you where they have
learned the several harder words, at least in their Grammars. Note in
examining lectures.
For this I find, that the most ordinary words are in some part of their
Grammar, or the words whereof they come, or some very near unto them, whereby
they may remember them.

Thus may they become very exquisite in the Grammar, Grammar to be made as a
Dictionary.
in time; and have it (as I said) as a Dictionary in their minds, not to need
to seek here or there for every word.

In the higher fourmes, Seldomer repeating rules in the higher forms may serve.
where daily repeating rules hinders much other learning, if they repeat them
but sometimes, and can answer in a word or two, giving the sum of each rule,
it may suffice; although it is a great commendation to have the Grammar ad
vnguem, and to give an example of each thing belonging unto Grammar.

Thus have I showed you what I have yet learned concerning making Scholars
perfect in the Accedence, Readiness of scholars in Accedence and Grammar,
will help to make the Schoolemasters life most pleasant.
and Grammar: wherein as you see, I have been much longer; because I find this
by experience, and therefore dare constantly affirm it, that if this be once
archieued in a school, to have the scholars thus made perfect in Accedence and
Grammar as they proceed, the life of a Schoolmaster may be made as full of
joy and contenment, without wearisomnesse, only in observing the fruit of his
labors, as I touched, as the life of any in any other calling whatsoever:
whereas of the otherside, much of our fretting toil, arises only for want of
this.

Spoud. I would therefore think it a most profitable labor, to set down this
manner of examining the Accedence and Grammar, by Question and Answer
particularly; that not only the weakest Schoolmaster amongst us, but even our
scholars themselves might be able so to oppose and whet one another. I my
self have seen diverse books of questions of our Accedence and Grammar, being
gathered by learned men; yet in none of them have I observed (so far as I
remember) sundry of the principal of these points.

Besides, that no man can so well examine the Accedence and Grammar by them;
because, first the words of their Question and Answer, do not arise so out
of the words of the rules as you direct: neither do they ever keep the order
of the rules; and they have moreover sundry other hard questions intermixed,
and sometimes many together, that my scholars have not been able to make use
of them, nor my self very little, in regard of that which I might if they had
been so framed.


Phil. I my self have had experience of the same in them: insomuch as though I
have greatly desired and tried to use some of them in my school, in regard of
the profit which I have conceived might come by them; yet I have not bin able
without further inconvenience. And ever as new scholars have come to any
school, so they have been always to seek in those new questions, as that I
have been enforced to leave them off utterly. A most plain m^nner of examining
Accedence and Grammar, collected, to help to make al scholars perfect therein;
called, The posing of the parts.
In consideration whereof, and of the general want herein; as also of the
public benefit, which I am certainly assured, may come by such a labor as
you speak of; I have indeauored by the help of all such books of Questions
and Answers, of Accedence and Grammar, as are extant, which I could procure;
as likewise of some written, togather one in this sort, having all the
Questions and Answers arising most directly out of the words of the rules. In
which, I have chiefly followed the order of the Quest. of that ancient
Schoolmaster* Master Brunsword, of Maxfield, in Cheshire, so much commended
for his order and Scholars; who, of al other, comes therein the nearest unto
the mark. This I have studied to make so plain, as every child may by it
both presently understand the meaning of each rule; and, if he can say the
rules, may as soon be able to answer these questions: and whereby they may
also poase one another (as you wish) to make all rules and parts most familiar.
I have in it tied my self strictly to the order and words of the rules, as it
may serve for continual poasing, and speedy examining Parts: and that from what
school soever they come, if they can say the Accedence, they may presently
answer these questions. Other questions which I have thought needful, I have
set in the margents, directly against the questions, to be learned after, if
you will, without troubling the learner, and that nothing may be wanting. But,
for this book, I refer you you to the Epistle Dedicatorie before it, and the
questions themselves.


Spoud. Sir, I see well you have spared no labor, to seek to draw-on the
little ones with ease and delight, and to make scholars most perfect
Grammarians; which all the learned do so highly commend. I trust I shall be
partaker hereof.


Phil. It is and has been my desire, to hide no part of my talent; but to
employ all to the best, and communicate it to every one to whom it may do
good: and especially the little ones, in whom is the chiefest hope of most of
our country schools, and of the age to come.


CHAP. VIII.
Of Construction; how to make all the way thereof most easy and plain.
Spoud. WEll then (good sir) now that you have thus far forth directed me,
how to lay so sure a foundation, for my scholars to build upon; I doubt not
but you can indeed guide me forward, how they may build upon it as speedily and
happily, both for their construing, parsing, and making Latin.

To begin therefore with construction, which is the first thing that our
children enter into, after their Accedence, and Rules: I desire greatly to
hear of you those things which you affirm may be done by scholars; Things
seeming difficult in co^struction.
and whereby all the way of construction may be made so easy. As namely, that
children should be able to take their lectures of themselves, truly and
perfectly; and likewise with understanding upon sure grounds: or at least to do
it with a very little help of their Masters, in such places where they doubt.
So the rest which were mentioned in the note: as that they should be able to
construe, both in propriety of words, and also according to the right sense and
meaning. To do this at any time, in all that which they have learned, to
construe out of a translation in English, as out of the Latin it self. The
ordinary toil of m^sters about giving lectures, and to cause their scholars
to const^ue.


These things, do justly seem strange unto me; because I am feign to give
every lecture my self: or if I appoint the fourmes above to give them; yet I
am compelled to hear the giving of them. And so I have as great a trouble,
when they construe false to direct them right; That it were as much ease to me
to give them, myself; and so I should be freede from the grief that I have,
when they cannot do it, and from other inconveniences.

Besides, to read the lectures in propriety of words, Difficulty in taking
lectures in propriety of words and sense.
phrase, and sense also; this seems to me a matter of some difficulty for
many poor country Schoolemasters; and not only for the younger and weaker
sort, but also for some of the more ancient and experienced; and requires
reading and judgment; that I do not see how scholars can possibly do it.

Moreover, Hardness for scholars to remember how they were construed, and the
trouble therein.
when I have given my scholars their lectures or have heard them given,
unless they mark very well; yet they w^ll commonly mis^e in some part of that
which I have read. And if the chief of the form mistake or go false, all
the rest of the form likewise construe false, because they depend on them:
and so often as they doubt I am sai^e to t^ll them* what business soever I have;
which does exceedingly trouble me. They also are afraid to ask me so many
things, and it may be the same things again and again: whereby it comes to
pass that when they come to say, few of them can construe, or hardly any of
them perfectly: which increases often my passion, and their fear.

Finally, this I account the worst of all, that when I have taken a great deal
of pains, Grief of the Masters for their scholars forge^^ing of that which
they have learned.
and have made my scholars very ready in construing and parsing; yet come and
examine them in those things a quarter of a year after, they will be many of
them as though they had never learned them, and the best far to seek:
whereby, when gentlemen or others come in and examine them, or their friends
try them at home, in the things which they learned a quarter, or half a year
before; they are ordinarily found so raw, and to have so f^rgotten, that I do
receive great reproach, as though I had taken no pains with them, or as they
had profited nothing.

And for that of being able to read, construe, and parse lectures, or
whatsoever they have learned, out of an English translation, I have not made
trial; though I know they cannot do it, being harder, then the construing and
parsing of the Authors themselves: albeit it cannot be, but a matter of
exceeding profit, and must needs help to make scholars very soon.

Therefore, if you can direct me, how to do all these things, which you have
mentioned in this behalf, so to construe and parse of themselves, and that out
of the bare English translation, and also that they shall be able to go
certainly, and upon sure grounds; I must needs acknowledge my self to have
received an incomparable and a perpetual benefit: and you shall indeed even
heer^in help to make my burden far more light, and my whole life much more
comfortable; besides, that my scholars shall be beholden unto you ^or ever, for
delivering them from so much fear, and setting them to go so fast forward
with such alacrity, as should appear.


Phil. Surely, sir, all this may be done, by the perfect knowledge of their
Accedence and Grammar rules first,
and then the practice of that golden rule of construing, All th^s may be done
by the practice of the rule of construing and of Grammatical translations.
together with Grammatical translations of the first ordinary school
Authors, framed according to the same rule, if they be translated rightly in
propriety of words, phrase and sense.

By these I dare be hold to affirm upon sure experience, and the trials of
many very learned, that all these things may be effected amongst th^se who are
apt, without any inconvenience at all, if they be rightly used* as I shall
direct you the manner after. But without them, I cannot find how possibly the
inconveniences, which you have recited, can be prevented, or these benefits can
be attained in any like measure; chiefly in the greater schools, where many
scholars are.


Spoud. For that golden rule of construing and the Grammatical transl^tions
which you mention, The rule of (...) unheard of to the most.
I know not what you mean: N^yther have I ever heard of any such. Have you
any other rule of construing, then our Grammar teaches? or any such
translations made according to it, in this propriety which you speak of?


Phil. Yes indeed sir, there is a special rule, and such translations also:
by the constant practice whereof, not only the former evils may be avoided,
and the benefits mentioned may be obtained; but also the way to all
construing, parsing, examining, making, writing, speaking, and also trying
Latin, may be made most easy and plain; So, as children may proceed upon
sure grounds, and do all things herein with understanding, and right reason,
and far more speedily, and with more delight, then usually.

And howsoever this rule be unknown of most, who never heard of any such
particular rule of construing, but only of such directions, as may be gathered
here and there, out of our Accedence and Grammar, where they are dispearsed
thorough all, This rule is set down by sundry learned Grammarians.
very hardly to be discerned; yet it is set down by sundry learned
Grammarians. As by Susenbrotus, Crusius, Cosarzus, and our ancient School
master Master Leech, in his little questions of the Accedence and others, as
also lately by learned Goclenius; though in all of them imperfectly, and
differing somewhat each from other, through the diverse exceptions in the
Grammar rules and variety of Grammars. Crusius has also examples of the
practice of the rule handled at large. It would be ouertedious to set them
down all, or what each of them has written thereof.

Yet because the rule has some difficulty, and that we may consider the
better of it, I will rehearse it briefly out of one or two of them. And seeing
we are to deal for the first enterers into construction, The rule, as M. Leech
has it,
I will set it down first, as Master Leach has it, who is the plainest.

His words are these;

Q. What order will you observe in construing of asentence?

A. If there be a Vocative case I must take that first: then I must seek out
the principal Verb and his Nominative case, and construe first the Nominative
case: and if there be an Adjective or Participle with him, then I must English
them next, and such words as they govern; then the Verb: and if there follow
an Infinitive mood, I must take that next; then the Aduerbe; then the case
which the Verb properly governs: and lastly, all the other cases in their
order; first the Genitive, secondly the Dative, etc.

Q. What if there be not all these words?

A. Then I must take so many of them as be in the sentence, and in this order.

Q. Is this order ever to be observed?

A. No: it may be altered by Interrogatiues. Relatiues, Infinitiues, Genitiues
of partition, and Conjunctions.

Q. What special things must be observed in construing?

A. That the Nominative case be set before the Verb, the Accusative case after
the Verb, the Infinitive mood after another mood: the Substantive and the
Adjective must be construed together; except the Adjective do pass over his
signification unto some other word, which it governs.

The Accusative, before an Infinitive mood, must have the word (that) joined
with it.

The Preposition must be joined with his case.

Afterward he gives a short example hereof.

Crusius, The rule, according to Crusius.
from whom I received the first light hereof long ago, he has it something
otherwise; though for the substance it be the same: whose words also, because
he is but short, I will set down; and the rather, for that there are so many
learned, who have not so much as heard of the rule. The words of Crusius are
these:


De ordine verborum in construendo and interpretando. Crusius in his Latin
Grammar, page 382,

QVotuplex est ordo verborum?

Duplex. Naturalis and Artificiosus.

Quid est naturalis?

Est Grammaticus ordo docens quid primo, secundo, aut postremo loco ponendum
sit.

Quid artificiosus?

Quo Oratores, Historici, Poetae and Philosophivtuntur.

Quid est ordo verborum naturalis?

1. Sumitur Nominatiuus Substantiuinominis, qui dicitur subiectum aut quicquid
vim Nominatiui habet.

Huic additur Adiectiuum, aut quicquid Nominatiunm explicat. Saepe sententiam
inchoat Vocatiuus, aut particulae Qrationem connectentes, aut Ablatiui
absoluti, aut Relatiua.

2. Verbum finitum personale, quod vocatur Praedicatum. Impersonalia
constructionem sine Nominatiuo inchoant.

3. Casus obliqui, inter quos dignior praecedat.

Saepe Infinitinus: quem antecedit Accusatiuus cum adest.

Saepe Aduerbium, aut Nominatiui gestuum ac similes: quae statim verbo
subijciuntur.

Interdum Gerundia, aut Ablatiui absoluti.

Praeterea,

Praepositiones cum suis casibus.

Denique, Coniunctiones quae superioribus alia attexunt, in quibus idem ordo
seruandus est.

Sic in quauis lingua.

Comprehend ista mihi regula quam potes breuissima.

DIctio regens praeponenda est ei quae regitur:

Quae declarant postponenda sunt ijs quae declarantur. Thus far Crusius, of
the rule.

Sp^ud. I pray you expound it somewhat more at large,
that I may conceive of it yet more fully. The rule expounded more (...).



Phil. I will endeavor to do as you say; although for the more curious
handling of it, I will leave it to some other or else refer it to a farther
time, The ^urious. (...).
because of the difficulty of it, through the manifold exceptions, as I noted,
especially in the longer and more intricate sentences: wherein I take it very
hard, to set down any direct rule particularly.

Therefore for the better understanding of the rule, General observations for
the better understanding of the rule.
we are to observe,

1. That the Scholar must read the sentence, before he construe; and in
reading, that he do it distinctly, reading to a Period or full point, and
there to stay. 1. That the Scholar read before he construe.


2. To mark the sentence well, and to observe all the points in it, both
Commaes and Colons; or less distinctions, 2. To mark the sentence well, and
all the points in it.
and middle distinctions: that so he may see and consider both the beginning,
midst, and end of the sentence together; and also each clause in it.

3. That if there be any words in the sentence, ^ To mark words beginning
with great letters, and included in a Parenthesis.
beginning with great letters, except the first words of all; to remember that
those are proper names: and also if there be any words included within a
Parenthesis, or two half Moons, as they are termed, that they are to be
construed by themselves.

4. That he seek to understand what the matter is about: 4. To understand the
matter.
and so in continued speeches, to mark what went before.

5. To observe if there be a Vocative case. 5. To mark if there be any
Voca^iue case.


6. To seek out carefully the principal Verb, by the rule in the Grammar of
finding out the principal Verb, 6. To seek out the principal Verb, and
observe that well, as directing all.
viz. If there be more Verbes then one in a sentence, the first is the
principal except it be an infinitive mood; or have before it a Relative, or a
Conjunction as vt, cum. si, etc. Which principal Verb being found out, does
commonly point out the right Nominative case: which Nominative case is that,
which agrees with it in number and person; and it does also direct all the
sentence very much. So that this may be accounted as the load-star, guiding all.

7. To mark the clauses which have no Verbs in them, 7 To give every clause
his right Verb.
to fit them with their own right Verbes, expressed or understood: for no
clause can be without a Verb.

8. To supply all such words as are wanting, 8. To supply all words wanting.
to make perfect sense and construction.

9. To give every word his due signification and proper 9. To give each word
his due signification and proper sign.
sign, so far as sense will bear.

10. To join the Substantive and Adjective together in construing, 10. To
join Substantive and Adjective, also Preposition and case.
except the Adjective do pass over his signification into some other word,
which is governed of it. Also to join the Preposition with his case.

11. To mark whether the sentence have not an Interrogatiue point: 11. To
mark if the sentence have not an Interrogatiue point.
then to read it as asking a question; and then the Nominative case is to come
after the Verb, according to the rule of the Accedence: or otherwise to be
set directly before it, if our English phrase will bear it.

These things observed, then the order proceeds thus usually:

1. If there be a Vocative case, The order of the rule: to take
to take that first and whatsoever depends of it, 1. The Vocative case, or
whatsoever is in place of it, or hangs of it.
that is whatsoever agrees with it; or is governed of it to express it; or in
stead of a Vocative case, an Interiection of Calling or Exclamation, or an
Aduerb of Calling, Wishing, Showing, Exhorting, or Swearing, Affirming, or the
like; which have the nature of Interiections, if there be any such.

2. The Nominative of the principal Verb, 2. The Nominative case, or
whatsoever is in place of it, or depends of it.
or whatsoever is put in stead of the Nominative case, and such words as depend
on it; as namely, an Adjective or Participle, and such words as they govern:
or a Substantive, being the latter of two Substantives.

3. The principal Verb, 3. The principal Verb, and whatsoever depends on
it.
and whatsoever hangs or depends on it: as if there follow an Infinitive
mood, to take that next, and the Aduerbe, which is joined commonly to the
Verbes, to declare their signification.

4. The case which the Verb does properly govern next unto it self, 4. The
case which the Verb properly go^erneth.
which is most commonly the Accusative case, and whatsoever hangs on it; or
an Accusative case before an Infinitive mood in stead hereof.

5. Then follow all the other cases in order; 5. All the other cases in order.
first the Genitive, then the Dative or Ablative, with a Preposition, or
without.

This is the sum of the rule, as it is most general and natural.

Yet here these things must be remembered: Other cautiues in the rule.


1. If all these words be not in the sentence which is to be construed, 1 To
take so many words as there are in the same order.
to take so many of them as there are, and in this order.

2 That the order is changed by the Relative Qui quae, 2 The order is changed
by Relat. Interrog. Indef. Partit. words of dependence and Connection.
quod: also by Interrogatiues, Indefinites, Partitiues; because these
(according to the Grammar rule) follow the rule of the Relative; going before
the words whereof they are governed. So likewise Aduerbs of likeness (as,
Quemadmodum, vt, veluti, sicut) when they have sic or ita answering to them in
the second part of the sentence, do use to go before. As also Conjunctions
Copulatiues, Rationals, Aduersitiues, having their Redditiues following,
answering unto them: so Expletiues, and certain others:

Finally, all such words as these mentioned (which we may call words of
dependence, because they depend on something going before or coming after in
the same sentence) or else words of Connection, serving to knit new sentences
to the former (as these Conjunctions) are to be placed next the Vocative case:
or in the first place, where there is no Vocative case.

3 That in stead of the Nominative case, 3 To take for the Nominat. case
whatsoever is put in place of it, or includes it.
we take whatsoever is in place thereof, as a whole sentence, a piece of a
sentence, an Infinitive mood, an Aduerbe with a Genitive case, two Nominative
cases singular or more, joined with a Verb plural, or sometimes a letter set
by it self, or more, or any word put for it self; which we call a word of
art: as Amo est verbum. Amo is here taken for the Nominative case: for all
such words or sentences are supposed to be the Neuter Gender undeclined.

So whatsoever includes the Nominative case; as, a Verb Impersonall, an
Ablative case absolute; Gerunds and Supines put absolutely with this Verb est:
as Orandum est vt sit men's sana in corpore sano. I^um est in viscera terrae:
because these stand for Verbes Impersonals, and have the Nominative case
included in them.

4. The Participles with Gerunds and Supines follow the order of those Verbes
whereof they come, 4 Participles, Gerunds and Supines, follow the order of the
Verbes.
in governing the same cases, as in the rules. Also that Gerunds and Supines are
commonly put for the Infinitive mood.

5. Conjunctions or other words of dependence in new clauses of the sentences,
5 New Conjunctions and words of dependence serve to join new sentences.
serve to join together the later parts of the sentences to the former;
wherein the same order must be kept again as before.

6. That the Aduerbs be placed before or after the Verb; 6 Aduerbs to be placed
to the best sense.
as the sense will most conveniently bear.

7. That the Latinismes be observed, 7 To observe Latinismes, and join
phrases.
to join the whole phrases together, so much as may be, and to express them
by as elegant and fit phrases as we can in our tongue.

The reason also of the rule, that every one may conceive each thing, The
reason of the rule.
is this:

1 That the words must be placed in order, 1 The words to be placed in
natural order.
as they should stand; according to the plain and proper nature of the speech,
in which they are used to express any matter: which is the very order which
Grammar teaches, and as one governs another.

2 The word governing or directing, 2 Governors before the governed.
to be placed before those which it governs or directs.

3 Those words which do declare others, 3 Declarers to follow the declared.
are to be set after those which they do declare or make plain.

So the principal word going before, does commonly direct the words
following; 4 The principal words going before, direct the words following;
except the Interr. Relat. Ind. Part.
either in agreement or government: that is, it causes the word following to
agree with it, or to be governed of it; except in oblique cases of
Interrogatiues, Relatiues, Indefinits, Partitiues, which do commonly go
before together with the Substantives or Antecedents, with which they agree;
and are governed or guided by the word following after: as, Quem librum legis?
Quarum rerum vtram minus velim non facile possum existimare.


Spoud. I perceive the rule most plainly, and do see an evident reason of
every thing; yet nevertheless I desire you further to give me a little brief
of it, as my scholars may best remember it.


Phil. The sum is this; The sum of the rule of construing.
to read over the sentence distinctly to a full point; observing carefully all
the points and proper names, with the drift and meaning; but chiefly to mark
the principal Verb, because that points out the right Nominative case, and
directs all the sentence: also to mark if there be any Vocative case. Then
the order goes thus:


1 If there be a Vocative case, to construe that first, with whatsoever agrees
with it, or is governed of it, or whatsoever is put in the place of it; as an
Interiection of Exclamation or calling, or an Aduerbe of calling.

2 To take the Nominative case of the principal Verb, or whatsoever is put in
steed of it, and to adioyne to it whatsoever hangs of it: as the Adjective
or Participle, and such words as they govern.

3 To take the principal Verb, and whatsoever hangs on it, each in the
right order; as if there follow an Infinitive mood, to take that next: then
the Aduerbe; after, the case which the Verb properly governs (which is
commonly the Accusative case) and whatsoever hangs on that. Lastly, all the
other cases in order: first the Genitive, secondly the Dative, and lastly the
Ablative.

4 If there be not all these Verbes, to take so many of them as are in the
sentence, and in this order.

5 That this order is changed by Interr. Relat. Indefinites, Partitiues, and
some Conjunctions with Aduerbs of likeness: as Quemadmodum, vt, sicut etc.
having sic, or ita, to answer them in the second part of the sentence; because
those words use to go before.

Lastly, to take the Substantive and Adjective together, unless the Adjective
pass over his signification unto some other word, which it governs; and so
likewise the Preposition with his case.

Most briefly thus: that the principal Verb be first sought out; then

1. Take the Vocative case, A brief of the rule of construing for every child
to be able to answer.
or whatsoever is in stead of it, or hangs upon it serving to make it plain.

2. The Nom. case of the principal Verb, or whatsoever is in stead of it, or
depends of it to make it plain.

3. Then the principal Verb, and whatsoever hangs of it, serving to expound
it: as an Aduerbe, or an Infinitive mood.

4. Lastly, the case which the Verb properly gouernes, and all the other cases
after it, in order.

Note that the order is changed by Interrog. Relat. Partit, certain Aduerbs and
Conjunctions: al which use to go before.

Observe, specially for the enterers, to put them in mind of this often: the
Nom. before the Verb: the Accus. after the Verb: the Substant. and Adiect. to
go together; unless the Adiect. pass his signification into some other word:
the Preposition and his case together.

This is the briefest, plainest, and most general form, that (after long
practice and considering of it) I can conceive, though it have some exceptions,
as I said.

Spoud. I pray you give me an example hereof. An example of construing, and of
Grammatical translations according to the rule.



Phil. I will take the very example which Crusius has set down out of Tully
de Senectute.

1. Aptissima omnino sunt, 1 The artificial placing, according to T^lly. (...)
Senectu^e
Scipio and Laeli, arma senectutis, arts exercitationesque virtutu^: quae in
omni aetate cultae, cum multum diuque vixeris, mirificos afferunt fructus: non
folum quia nunquam deserunt, ne in extremo quide^ tempore aetatis, quanquam id
maximum est: verum etiam quia conscientia been ac^^ vitae, multorumque
benefactorum recordatio, iueundissima est. This is Tullies order in placing
this sentence.

2. The natural or Grammatical order of it is this: 2. The Grammatical
placing.


Scipio et Laeli, arts exercitationesque virtutum sunt omnin^ arma aptissima
senectutis: quae cultae afferunt fructus mirificos in aetate omni cum vixeris
multum diuque: non solum quia deserunt nunquam, ne quidem in tempore extremo
aetatis, quanquam ad est maximum: verum etiam quia conscientia vitae actae
been, recordatioque been factorum multorum est iucundissima.

3. The Translation is after this Grammatical order thus: 3. Translation
according to the (...) Grammatical order.


O S^ipio and Lelius, arts and exercises of virtues, Are the very fittest
weapons, Verb aptest.
are altogether the (verb) fittest weapons of old age: which being (verb)
exercised in (verb) every age do bring Wonderful fruits, or benefits.
marvelous fruits, when you have lived Very long
much and long: not only because they Never leave us.
forsake never, Not indeed.
no truly In our last age.
in the extreme time of age, Verb loved or adorned.
although that is The chief.
the greatest; but also because The inward testimony.
the conscience of a life well done [or well passed ouer] and the Verb in all
age.
remembrance of many good deeds is most pleasant.

4. The construing is directly according to this translation. 4. Construing
according to the Grammatical translation. Or, que cultae afferunt, etc.
So that the translation leads the scholar as by the hand, or instead of his
Master; so, as he cannot err, if he be of any understanding: as thus;

Scipio o Scipio, et and, Laeli o Lelius, arts arts, exercitationesque and
exercises, virtutum of virtues, sunt are, omnino altogether, arma aptissima the
fittest weapons, senectutis of old age: quae which, cultae being exercised [or
vsed] in aetate omni in every age, [or in all our life] afferunt do bring,
fructus mirificos marvelous fruits, cum when, vixeris you have lived, multum
much, diuque and long, etc.

5. This translation directs to parse, 5. Parsing according to this
translation.
chiefly for all the Syntax; Every principal word in the Latin, going before
others, commonly governing, or directing and guiding some way that which
follows after. It helps very much for the Etymology; that children well
entered, shall go very near to tell by the English alone, what part of speech
every word is: of which I shall speak after.

The manner of parsing by it, is thus shortly for the Syntaxe:

Scipio] is the first word to be parsed, Scipio.
because it is the first in construing; for that we begin commonly of a
Vocative case if there be one. It is the Vocat ue case, known by speaking to,
and by the Interiection O understood; governed of the Interiection O, by the
rule O Exclaman^is Nominatiuo, Accusatiuo, and Vocatiuo ^ungitur. In English,
Certain a Vocative etc.

Et] the next word a Conjunction Copulative, Et.
serving to couple words or sentences; here coupling Scipio and Laeli together.

Laeli] the next word, Laeli.
the Vocative case known also by speaking to, and put in the same case with
Scipio by reason of the Conjunction et; by the rule, Conjunctions Copulatiues
and Disiunctiues couple like cases, etc.

Artes] is next, Arts.
in construing according to my rule of construing. The Nominative case, coming
before the principal Verb sunt, by the rule of the first Concord.

Quae] next, Quae.
a Conjunction Copulative, coupling arts and exercitationes together.

Exercitationes] is the next, Exercitationes.
the Nominative case coupled with arts, by the Conjunction Enclyticall, que,
which is set after exercitationes in the book; by the rule of the Conjunctions
Subiunctiues, or which are put after.

Virtutem] follows next, Virtutem.
the Genitive case, governed of the Substantive exercitationes: and is the
later of two Substantives; by the rule, When two Substantives come together.

Sunt] is next, Sunt.
agreeing with the Nominative case arts exercitationesque; by Verbum personale
cohaeret cum Nominatiuo etc. It is expressed to the one Nominative case, and
understood to the other, by the figure Zeugma.

Omnino] the next word, Omnino.
an Aduerbe joined to the Verb to declare the signification.

Arma] the Nominative following the verb sunt. Arma.
Sum, forem, fio etc.

Aptissimathe Nominative case of the Nowne Adjective, Aptissima.
agreeing in all things with arma, by the rule of the second Concord. The
Adjective whether it be Nowne, etc. It agrees with arma, because it
expresses the quality of arma, etc.

Senectutis] next, Senectutis.
the Genitive case governed of arma, because it expresses arma, the weapon of
old age, the later of two Substantives.

And so forward, in all things giving the reason according to the rules of
Grammar, and this rule of construing compared; the later word, still declaring
the former. So much shortly for parsing by this rule.

6 This translation directs the scholar also for making Latin, 6. Making
latin according to this rule.
to proceed easily; and likewise the master to teach and guide the scholar
both to make true Latin and pure Tully, or what Author he will follow: so that
he cannot miss so long as he follows this and looks on the Author: also, it
guides to give a reason of every thing, or to prove the Latin thus, in the
very same order as they parsed.

As. the Master to ask thus according to the order of the translation:

How say you Scipio, or o Scipio?

The Scholar answers; Example.
Scipio, as it is in the book.

Ask why not Scipionis nor Scipioni but Scipio; he answers: because it must
be the Vocative case, known by speaking to, and governed of o understood, as o
Magister, o Master.

And] et.

Laelius] Laeli. If it be asked, why not Laelius, nor Laelij, nor Laelium; he
answers, because it must be the Vocative case; and therefore Laeli: because,
when the Nominative ends in ius, the Vocative shall end in i. Also, that it
must be the Vocative case, because et coupleth like cases.

So in all things, just as the child parsed; but only asking the English
first, and making the child to give it in Latin, and to give a reason of every
thing more particularly.

The causing the child to construe and to parse,
looking upon the English only; especially the parsing so, is contitinuall
making Latin, and proving it.

So that we may see by this sentence, Use and benefit of Grammatical
translations, set down in general.
how this translation serves to direct the younger scholar: first, to resolve
or cast each sentence in Latin into the natural or Grammatical order:
secondly, to construe directly according to the same: thirdly, to parse as it
is construed, by marking the last chief word: fourthly, to make the same
Latin as it was parsed, and to prove it by reason and rule. Fifthly, by
comparing the order of the translation and the order of the Author, to compose
the Latin again into the order of the Author. And so by daily practicing
these translations, young scholars must needs come on very much, for that it
makes all the way to learning so plain.

One principal reason is,
for that this is nothing else but a continual practice of Analysis and
Genesis; Chief reason of the benefit of translations according to the rule, for
the continual use of Analysis and Genesis.
that is, of resolving and vnmaking the Latin of the Author, and then making
it again just after the same manner, as it was unmade. Or if we may so term
it, the vnwinding, and winding it up again; which is generally acknowledged to
be the speediest way to all good learning. Now of either of these there may be
three parts.

1. Of the Analysis or resolving a sentence; first the resolving it out of the
Rhetorical order of the Author, Three special parts both of Analysis and
Genesis.
into the first proper, natural and Grammatical order.

2. Construing, turning or translating it into English, according to the same
order; giving the true sense and force of each word and phrase.

3. Parsing as we construe.

So of the Genesis or making up again are three parts.

1. The making the same Latin again, according to the order of the translation
and the words of the Author; that they may go surely.

2. To prove it to be true Latin, after the manner of parsing, by the same
order.

3. To compose all again for the Rhetorical placing of the words, according
to the order of the Author, by the help of a few rules, and by comparing with
the Author; that a child may have a confident boldness, to stand against the
most learned, to justify that which he has done.


Spoud. This stands with all reason, that if the way of vnmaking or resolving
be so plain, thorough this rule; the way of making up again must needs be
as plain and ready: for there is the same way from Cambridge to London,
which was from London to Cambridge.


Phil. You say as it is: Hence you shall find by experience, that as children
will soon learn to construe and parse their Authors thereby; so they will as
soon learn to make them into latin again: yea they will come by daily
practice, to read the Latin almost as fast out of the English translation, as
out of the Author it self, and prove that it must be so: and in short time to
do the same in things which they have not learned; especially, where they
shall have occasion to use the same phrase, to do it readily whether they
shall write or speak.


Particular benefits of the use of Grammatical translations, and of the Rule.
Spoud. IT is apparent by that which you have said, Benefits of the
translations and the rule set down particularly.
that you take the benefit to be very great, which may come by such
translations rightly used.


Phil. I do indeed; and that for all these things following, which seem most
strange and hard to be done by children.

1 Teaching to resolve Latin Grammatically: 1. Resoluiug Grammatically
which is the foundation of the rest.

2 In construing, 2. Construing.
to direct to do it artificially by rule, and also in propriety of words, and
in true sense.

3 For parsing to do it of themselves: 3. Parsing.
as reading a lecture without any question asked, unless some which they omit:
which manner of parsing gains half the time which is spent therein commonly,
when otherwise each question is asked and stood upon.

4 For making latin, 4. Making latin.
to be able to make the very same latin of their Authors upon sure grounds;
and thereby to be encouraged to go on boldly and certainly, with cheerfulnes and
confidence: when little children shall see, that they are able to make the same
latin which their Authors do, as was said, and have also the Author to justify
that which they have don.

5 For proving latin, 5. Proving*
specially for the Syntaxe, when each principal word going before, directs
th^se which follow, except in some few.

6 For composing artificially, 6. Composing.
by continual comparing this Grammatical order, to the order of the Author,
and marking why the Author placed otherwise; and by being helped by a few
rules, which I will show after.

7 To help the younger scholars to understand their lectures, 7.
Understanding.
so far as need is; of the benefit of which understanding we have spoken
before.

8 Also to take their lectures for most part of themselves, 8. T^king lectures
of themselves.
as was said; to get and bring their lectures more surely and sooner then by
the masters teaching alone, as a little experience will show.

9 To construe and parse their lectures, 9. Construing and parsing out of the
English.
out of the English as out of the Latin (which is a continual making latin,
as we heard) and so to read their lectures first in the natural order, then as
they are in their Authors.

10 To be able to correct their Authors of themselves, 10. Correcting their
Authors.
if they be false printed.

11 To keep all which they have learned in their Authors so perfectly, 11.
Keeping all learned in their Authors perfectly.
as to be able in good sort to construe or parse at any time, in any place out
of the bare translation, only by reading them often over out of the translation.

12 To save all the labor of learning most Authors without book, 12. Save
getting Authors without book.
as all Authors in prose; which labor in many schools is one of the greatest
tortures to the poor scholars, and cause of impatience and too much severity
to the Masters, though with very little good for most part: to be able as it
were by playing, only reading their Authors out of the English over and over,
Ten notes more (...).
at meet times, to have them much better for all true use and each good
purpose, then by all saying without book; to trouble the memory only with
getting rules of Grammars and the like, and such other of most necessary use,
as the Poets: which also are exceedingly furthered hereby.

13 To help to proceed as well in our English tongue as in the latin, 13. To
proceed in English as in Latin.
for reading, and writing true orthographie; to attain variety and copy of
English words, to express their minds easily, and utter any matter belonging
to their Authors. And so in time, to come to propriety, choice, and purity,
as well in our English as in the Latin.

14 To learn the propriety of the Latin tongue, 14. To learn the propriety
of the latin tongue, to justify words and phrases, and also to attain the
purity of the latin tongue.
as they go forward; to be able to justify each phrase, and in time to
remember words and phrases, for almost whatsoever they have learned, and where.
Also by reading Tully, and other purer Authors constantly out of such
translations, first Grammatically, then Rhetorically, to attain to make a more
easy entrance, to that purity of the Latin tongue, whereof sundry great
learned men have given precepts, then by precepts alone; and much more by
ioining precepts and this practice together.

15 By the translations of the Poets, 15. To enter and train up scholars iu
Poetry with ease and delight without bodging.
as of Ovid, and Virgil, to have a most plain way into the first entrance into
versifying, to turn the prose of the Poets into the Poets own verse, with
delight, certainty and speed, without any bodging; and so by continual
practice to grow in this facility, for getting the phrase and vein of the
Poet.

16 To be (as was noted) not only instead of Masters, 16. To be instead of
M^ster or Usher amongst the scholars for giving and preparing lectures.
or Vshers, to give each lower lecture perfectly, for all the substance; but
also to be after instead of their own presence, or of Dictionaries in every
one of those fourmes continually, to direct them, until every one of the fourm
can construe, parse, make the same latin, and prove it. Hereby both to free
the children from that fear which they will have ordinarily, To free children
from fear of so often asking, and the Masters from that trouble and hindrance.
to go to their Masters for every word; and also to free the Masters from that
trouble and hindrance to tell them every word, so often as they forget, and the
vexation and fretting to see the childrens dullness and forgetfulness. For the
help of the Master, or Usher, in the mean time what it ought to be, we
shall see after in the use of these.

17 Hereby scholars having been well entered, 17. To be able to proceed in
other Authors of themselves by some help of Master and Commentaries.
and exercised in their lower Authors, shall be able to proceed to their
higher Authors, ex tempore; and go on with ease, by the assistance of the
Master, where they need, and by the help of Commentaries; that they may be
thus enabled to construe any Author, and be fitted for the studies of the
University, at their first entrance thither.

18 These will be also a help to many weaker Schoolemasters, 18. A help to
weaker masters.
for right and certain construction, without so often seeking Dictionaries for
English, and propriety of words; and so for parsing, and all sorts of the
former directions.

19 Also, 19. To help weaker scholars, to proceed in latin in their private
studies in the Universities.
weaker scholars in the Universities, who have not been so well grounded in
the Grammar schools, may proceed in their private studies, by the use of some
of these translations, either one alone, or two or three together; and increase
both for construing, understanding, and writing latin. Also they may have
continual use of translating both into English, and Latin; whether reading
out of the Author into the translation, or out of the translation into the
Author, or doing it by pen; and ever a direction to try all by, and as a
private help: which continual translating both ways is a most speedy way to
learning, as M. Askam proves at large.

20 Likewise, 20. So to help any who have lost their latin or have but a
taste.
any who have lost the knowledge of the Latin tongue, may recover it hereby
within a short time; and they who have had but a smattering, or some little
beginning, may soon come to understand any ordinary Author, and proceed with
pleasure and certainty.

21 Finally, 21. To have daily much practice of Analysis and Genesis; which is
all in all, in getting all learning.
hereby scholars may have daily much sure practice both of Analysis and
Genesis; that is, resolving and making Latin: which as was noted, all the
learned do acknowledge to be almost all in all, in getting all learning: for
all this practice by them is nothing else but Analysis and Genesis, as we
showed before.


Things more specially observed in the Translating of the School Authors.
Spoud. THese benefits are indeed very great, and worthy the labor of every
child, or other who would attain them, if it be as you say: yet by your
favor, many of them cannot be obtained by bare Grammatical Translations
alone; as to get the propriety of both the tongues, both of Latin and English
together, with variety of phrase, the sense, and the like. Therefore what
course have you observed in your Translations, to make them to serve to all
these purposes?


Phil. I have observed these things following, Things observed in the
Translations of the School Authors.
so near as I have been able for the present: I shall amend them after God
willing.

1 This natural or Grammatical order throughout. 1 Natural order.


2 That the English Translation is set down alone, 2 English alone.
without the Latin adjoining, to avoid the inconveniences of having the
Latin and English together; as of making Truant, or the like: whereof I shall
speak after.

3 The propriety of the English words, 3 The English answering the Latin in
propriety.
answering to the Latin, in the first and natural signification, and
expressing the force of the Latin words, so near as I could, is set down in
the first place. Where any phrase is somewhat hard, how it is expressed.
And where the Latin phrase is somewhat hard or obscure to be expressed in
our English tongue, word for word; there I have also expressed that by a more
plain phrase, sometimes included within two marks, almost like a Parenthesis,
with [or] thus. Or else I have set it ever in the Margent: where also I have
often placed the meaning, with variety of other phrases over against the word,
and noted them with a character or letter, answering to the word in the Text.

Moreover, Where any phrase seems over harsh in our English tongue.
where any phrase is ouer-harsh in our English tongue, to express the Latin
verbatim, viz. word for word, or in good propriety; that harsh phrase is also
placed in the Margent, over against the Latin phrase, with this mark, (Verb)
or ( ver. (or v.) signifying verbatim, word by word, or word for word, and the
more easy phrase set in the Text.

Likewise where there may be two senses or constrctions, Where there may be two
senses.
I have commonly expressed both: the more likely and natural in the Text, the
other in the Margent. This I have done, to the end that the Scholar may see
both construction and meaning together; with the propriety of the tongue,
whereunto I have chiefly labored.

So that there is no varying from the propriety, No varying but on necessity.
save where necessity enforced, for the impropernesse of the phrase in our
speech* or in some few places, where the construction is easy and familiar;
and there is set in the Margent (Verb) as was said before.

Lastly, The order of some words changed.
where in the Grammatical order in Latin, the Substantive goes before the
Adjective, the governor or guider first; in our English Dialect, the Adjective
is most commonly set before: as vir bonus, a good man; not a man good: unless
the Adjective be divided from the Substantive; as where it passes the
signification into some at^er word governed of it: as vir praestans ingenio, a
man excelling in wit.

So in the Aduerbe Non: as Non est, It is not; we do not say, Not it is. Also
in the Enclyticall Conjunctio^ ^quen, and the like; as idque, and that.

In the first and lowest Authors is commonly translated Thou, Observation in
the lowest Authors.
Thee, Not you; because of the difficulty for children, to distinguish between
Thou, and You.

Thus I place ordinarily the Accusative case before the Infinitive mood, in
plain words, for the ready and easy making the Latin out of it: as Multum
eum praeuidisse dicimus, we say him to have foreseen much: and in the margent
usually thus; We say, that he foresaw much: according to our English phrase.


How to use these Translations so, as to attain the former benefits.
Spoud. THese things diligently observed, The manner of use of the Translations.
must needs be very available to the purposes, which you have mentioned: the
very propriety alone, I mean the knowledge of words, in their first and proper
signification, is a singular help to learning. For reason will commonly teach,
both the change of the signification by the circumstances of the place, and
also the cause of the change. But I pray you, how might my Scholars use these
Translations so, as that I might find the benefits of them.


Phil. You may cause them to use them after these directions following:

1 First, 1 To see that every one can give the sum of the rule of construing.
you are to see that every one who is to use them, can repeat the rule of
construing, and answer the questions thereof, according to the briefest form
of it at least. And if your leisure will serve, to hear your self how they
can take their Lectures of themselves, according to the same.

2 Where your leisure will not well permit you to see all Lectures given, 2 In
the lower fourmes one to read over the translation, to give some light, and
look on the Translation.
you may appoint at the taking of the Lectures, that some one or two of the
best of each form, do look upon the Translation; and in the lower fourmes
do first read over the Translation once, only to give them some light, for
the meaning and understanding of their Lectures; the rest looking on their
Authors, or only harkening to the meaning: although in the higher fourms
which use them, they will not need so much as once reading over before,
unless in some difficult places: only he who looks on the Translation, may
read the Translation after, for their more full understanding of the Lecture,
and more easy remembrance of it.

3 After that to appoint another, 3 To construe according to the rule, of
themselves.
first, to read over their Lecture in the Latin distinctly, as it is in the
Author, and to try how he can construe; beating it out according to the rule.
He who has the Translation only, to direct where they go false.
In the mean time cause him who has the Translation, to be in stead of your
self amongst the rest, to see that they go right; and where the construer
sticks, or goes amiss, to call him back to the rule, and wish the rest to
help to find it out by the same rule.

And when all the form are at a stand, To do as the cunning Hunts-man.
and none of them can beat it out, then only he who has the book, to do it;
as the cunning Hunts-man, to help a little at the default, to point and to
direct them where to take it: and thus so many to construe over, or so often,
until all of them can construe.

In the mean time your self or Usher,
in the midst, both to have an eye to them, The assistance of the Master or
Usher herein
that they take this course; and also to help yet further, where need is: And
after the taking of the Lecture, to note out unto them all the difficult or new
words in their Lecture, to examine and direct them, for the parsing of them:
and also to cause each of the form to mark out those words, to take
special pains in them; to make them perfect above all the rest: because they
have learned the rest before, and have but so many new words to get in that
Lecture.

4 According to the order as they construe,
cause them to parse, To construe and parse out of the Translation, is the
surest and most profitable way.
as we showed; either looking upon the Author, or upon the Translation alone.
But I find it far the surer and better, in all who are able, both to construe
and parse out of the Translation: because thereby they are learning
continually, both to make and prove their Latin; and so do imprint both the
matter and Latin, more firmly in their memory. So also all of ability, to
construe and parse only out of the Translation, when they come to say; and out
of it to give the reason of every thing. This they will do most readily, with
a little practice.

5 To the end that they may may keep all their Authors perfectly, How to keep
all their Authors perfectly.
which they have learned (which is thought of many almost impossible, and does
indeed so much encourage young Scholars, and grace the Schools when they can
do it) let them but use this practice:
Every day after that they have said their Lectures, To construe or read often
all which they have learned, out of the Translations; to make and keep all
perfect, by often repetions.
cause each form which use these translations, to go immediately to
construing over all which they have learned, each day a piece, every one a side
of a leaf, or the like in order, until they have gone through all; construing
it only out of the translation: to spend an hour or more therein, as time will
permit: one or two who sit next unto the construer, to look on the Translation
with him, Manner hereof.
to help where he sticks; the rest to look on their Authors. Appoint
withal some of the Seniors of the form, to examine shortly the hard words
of each page as they go; I mean those words, which they marked when they
learned them.

And when they become perfect in construing out of the English,
cause them for more speedy dispatch, but only to read their Authors into
Latin, forth of the Translation; first in the Grammatical order: after as
they are in the Author. They will thus soon run over all which they have
learned, without the least loss of time: for this will be found the best
bestowed time, to keep perfectly that which they have gotten. And what they
can so construe or read out of the English into Latin, they can also do it
out of the Latin into English ordinarily.

Then, To read over other Authors after the same manner.
as they wax perfect in that which they have learned, and grow a little to
understanding; they may practice of themselves by the same means, to read
over the rest of their Author, which they learned not, or some easy Author,
which they have not read; as first Corderius, or the like, by the help of the
same translations: first to construe ex tempore amongst themselves, after to
read out of the Translations; according to the same manner as they did in that
which they have learned:
wherein they will do more then you will easily believe, until you see
experience. So in higher Authors translated.


After this, as they come to higher fourmes, and more judgment, Practice will
make them very prompt, both in English and Latin.
they may be appointed likewise to read ex tempore some other Author, whereof
they have the Translation to direct them; and that both out of the Author into
English: first, after the Grammatical manner, and then in a good English
style: afterward out of the English into Latin, both ways, both in
Grammatical order, and after in Composition, according to the Author. And
within a time that they have been thus exercised, they will be able to do
this, almost as easily and readily, as that which they have learned. I find
Tullies sentences, and Tully de natura Deorum, with Terentius Christianus, to
be singular books to this purpose for the best uses.

By this means it must come to pass by daily practice, The fruit hereof.
that they shall attain to the phrase, style and Composition of any Author
which they use to read often over, and to make it their own; even of any piece
of Tully himself (as was said) and much sooner then can be imagined, until
trial be made: though this must needs require meet time. For what thing of
any worth can be obtained, but by time, industry, and continual practice? much
less such copy, choice, propriety, and elegancy, as Tully does afford.


Objections against the use of Translations in Schools answered.
Spoud. AS you have showed me the benefits which may come by Grammatical
Translations; and also how to use them, that Scholars may attain the same: so
give me leave to propound what doubts I may suspect concerning the same for the
present; and more hereafter, as I shall make trial of them.


Phil. Very willingly; for I do desire to find out all the inconveniences
that can be imagined, which may comeby by them: but for mine own part, I can
find none, if they be used according to the former direction; and yet I have
done what I could, to find out whatsoever evils might be to follow of them.
Object whatsoever you can, I think I am able plainly to answer it, and to
satisfy you fully in every point.


Spoud. I will therefore deal plainly with you, in what I can conceive for the
present.


Object. 1. Translations in Schools have not bin found to bring any such
benefit, but rather much hurt; and therefore the best and wisest
Schoolmasters have not been wont to suffer any of them amongst their
Scholars.


Phil. I will first answer you for the benefits: These uses and benefits
cannot be made of any other Translation of the School Authors, but the
Grammatical, and why.
That it is true indeed, that these uses and benefits cannot be made of any
other Translation of any one of our School Authors. The reasons are evident:
first, because none of the Translators have followed, nor so much as propounded
to themselves to follow this Grammatical rule in Translating: which you see is
the mean foundation of all true construing, parsing, making and trying Latin:
and of all these benefits, to keep Scholars to go surely. Secondly, none of
them which I know, have labored to express the propriety and force of the
Latin, in the first and native signification; which this intends
continually: and how much lies upon the knowledge of the propriety of the
words for the certain getting of any tongue, every Scholar knows. Thirdly,
none of them have indeauoured by a double Translation to make all things
plain, as these do every where; laboring to express with the words, and
Grammar, the sense and meaning also in all obscure places, with variety of
English words or phrase: to the end to teach children thereby, Grammar,
propriety, sense with variety of phrase to express their minds in English, as
well as in Latin: and all under one, that nothing be wanting.


The Translators have seemed to aim either only or principally, What the
translator, have aimed at.
at the meaning and drift of the Author, The Translations of our School
Authors extant do perform^ none of the benefits which these Grammatical
Translations do aim at chiefly.
which benefit alone they do in some sort perform: but for the rest of the
benefits and uses, or for the most of them (as for true construing* parsing,
making and trying Latin, which are the chief things here mentioned) they
either set the learner at a non plus, or carry him ordinarily clean amiss.
And therefore there is no marvel, if in that respect they be utterly disliked.
Trial in any of them, compared to the rule and the other limits, and
especially how in construing, parsing, and the like, they carry the learner
utterly out of the way, will presently show the truth hereof, and commonly in
the very first sentence of them. I will set down the words in one or two.

Esops Fables construed thus:

Dum whilst, Examples of the Translations extant, to manifest the truth hereof.
Gallinaceus the dunghill, Gallus Cock, Ver^it scratched, Stercorarium in the
dunghill.

Tullies Offices translated thus:

Marci Tullij Ciceronis de officijs ad Marcum filium liber primus.

Marcus Tullius Ciceroes first book of duties to Marcus his son.

Try in any one of these, whether a child can construe one sentence right and
surely, Try all to construe by these.
according to Grammar, or in any certainety of the propriety of the words, or
be able to parse or make Latin, or the rest: though some of these Translatours
were learned* and gave the sense; yet you may perceive that they aimed not at
these ends here mentioned, or few of them.

Thus you see what I have answered concerning the benefits: now let us hear
what you say concerning the hurt coming by them.

Object. 2. Spoud. Besides that they lead Scholars amiss very ordinarily in
construing, almost in every sentence; they are found also to make Scholars
Truants, or to go by rote (as we commonly call it) which is worse.


A. Phil. For the first part, that they lead Scholars amiss, I have
answered; that, that is only in such Translations, which respect the sense
alone, but do not respect the Grammar.

Secondly, Grammatical translations separate from the Latin, cannot endanger
any to make them truants, if they be rightly used.
for making truants, I answer; that these Grammatical translations being
thus merely English, and separate from the Latin altogether, can never
endanger any way to make truants, if they be used according to the directions
prescribed. For first, for construing latin, there can be no likelihood
hereof, if the translation be only used; first to give some light and
understanding of the lecture amongst the younger; after, to be only in place
of the Master, where he cannot be himself.

Also, where all of the form cannot beat out the construing by the
Grammatical rule, there to direct and point it out how to take it. Likewise,
to give propriety of English, and to guide the scholars in place of the Master
(who cannot be always with every one) to the end, that in all things they may
go surely. Secondly, for construing and making the Latin out of the
translation, it chiefly consists upon understanding and conceit; and shall more
stir up the wit and memory to get propriety and copy of words and phrases,
then all getting without book can possibly do. In getting without book alone,
words and sentences may be learned, as by Parats, without any understanding:
hereby children must needs understand them: For, having nothing but the bare
translation, they must be driven of necessity to beat out the latin, by
learning and by reason, with diligence; and so stir up their memories
continually. Also, hereby whenever they shall have again the same English
words or phrases to make in Latin, to write or to speak; the very same
Latin words and phrases, which they learned in their Authors, do come
straight ways to their memories to express their minds. And in what things
they can give Latin to the English, in that, as was said, they can ordinarily
give English to the Latin.

Indeed, There is great difficulty to use an interlineall translation, or
latin joined to the English*
where the translation is joined with the Author, and so they are set together
answerably word for word, either as the Interlineal set over the head, or the
English word or phrase set after the Latin; there the eye of the child is no
sooner upon the one, but it will be upon the other: and so the memory is not
exercised, neither can this mischief be avoided. Yea, where the Author is of
the one page, the translation is on the other over against it (like as it is in
Theognis, and some other Greek Poets) there must be much discretion for the
right using of them; otherwise many inconveniences must needs follow amongst
children. But in these bare translations so by themselves, these surmised
dangers are prevented; if they be used as has been showed. Although for them
who are of full discretion to use them (as those who would study privately for
the reoouering their Latin, or increasing therein) it may be the most
profitable of all, to have the translation ouer-against the latin, directly on
the other page, after the manner as Theognis is printed; that folding the
book, they may look upon the one, when they would find out the other; and
yet have the other ever at hand, as a master, to help in an instant, where
they need.


3. Ob. Sp. But the scholars may be idle, when they seem to be construing,
when as one only construeth, and the rest look on their books.


A. Phil. So they may be idle in whatsoever exercise they do amongst
themselves, How to prevent idleness or negligence in the use of the
translations, so that one cannot be idle while they are in hand with these.
unless the Master be vigilant: but let the master use any diligent
circumspection, and they cannot possibly be idle in this, of all other; no not
one in any form. For, let but the Master or Usher have an eye to all in
general, though they be in hand in hearing any form; and where they do
mark or but suspect any one of all the fourmes to be careless, or not to
attend; there let them step to such a one of a sudden, and bid him set his
finger to the last word which was spoken: and so if any be idle, he may be
catched presently. Provided always, that no one keep his finger at the book,
lest by them the truants see where it is; but every one to use only his eye and
his ear. Some of the most negligent and stubborn so overtaken now and then,
and sharply corrected for ensample, will continually keep all the rest in
order and diligence, at this time specially. This practice may serve for
whatsoever they construe,
parse, or examine together, to keep them from loytering or carelessness.


4. Ob. Spoud. Well: you seem to have answered the evils which I feared for the
scholars; I shall think further of them. But there may be greater
inconveniences in them concerning the Masters: as 1. These may be a means to
make the Master idle, by freeing them from giving lectures, and much other
employment about the same, which they are wont to be exercised in.


Phil. The best things may be abused some way: but otherwise there cannot be
any such danger of idleness to the Master, These, no means to make Masters
idle, but contrarily to encourage them to take all pains.
who makes conscience of this duty, or has any desire to see his scholars to
profit; but an encouragement hereby to take all possible pains, by seeing the
ease and fruit of his labors. Also, besides the continual eye that he is to
have, that every one be painfully exercised by them in every form, and his
marking out all the difficult words, that they may labor those above all, and
helping in each form where need is, the Master may bestow the more time
with the higher fourms; and in poasing and examining, which is the life of all
learning, as has bin and shall be showed further in due place. As before
lectures, he may spend more time continually in examining parts, and in more
exquisite reading lectures in the higher forms, or hearing them to read their
own lectures, which is far the best of all; or taking pains with the first
enterers for every tittle: so in examining and trying exercises and lectures
after.


Spoud. You seem to be marvelous confident in all things, for the use and
benefit of these translations; and to make a principal reckoning of them.


Phil. I do indeed make a principal account of them very justly; The account
to be made justly of these translations.
and do acknowledge my self bound unto God chiefly for them, above al other
things which he has made known unto me in all my search and travel.

For these are for me instead of mine own self, hearing and directing in
every other fourm which I cannot be withal, or as so many helpers. And by the
help and benefit of these, all my younger Scholars do seem to attain almost
double learning to that, that by mine own pains being far greater, and my
grief much more, I was ever able to bring them unto before. For, before the
time that I came to the knowledge and use of these, as I taught at one end, my
children would forget at an other; and be as raw in that which was learned a
quarter or half a year before, as if they either had not learned it, or never
learned it well; which was no small grief unto me whenever they were
examined: but now take them where you will of a sudden, in all the Authors
which they have learned; and they shall be able in good sort, not only to
construe or parse, but also to read out of the English into the Latin and
prove it: at least so many of them as are apt, and the rest in better manner
then I could have expected of them, unless the fault be in my self; and that
without any loss of time: and to go faster forward in their Authors then
ever they were wont to do; and without any such fretting or vexing to my self,
though I have but some one written copy in a fourm. Now try this amongst your
scholars, whether they be able to do the like at any time of a sudden, by
all your labor. For mine own part, I could never by all means attain unto
it in any measure, especially having many fourmes: neither can I see how I
could have done it, unless I had had so many bodies, or so many to have bin
continually in my place, in each form one.

A small trial will soon make this evident; Trial to make all this evident.
proouing some scholars with them, others learning the same things without
them, in some quarter or half years space, whether have learned more and the
surelier. And therefore I dare be bold to commend this unto you upon most
undoubted experience.


Spoud. I do not doubt then, but upon this so happy an experience you have thus
translated many of our school Authors.


Phil. I have indeed taken pains in translating so many of them, School
Authors translated Gramatically.
as I have had occasion for my scholars to use, since God made known unto me
the benefit of them; and have either finished them wholly, or some part of each
of them; and hope in time to go thorough them wholly, if the Lord vouchsafe me
life. As namely, to begin at the lowest: School Authors translated or in hand.
Pueriles confabulatiunculae. Sententiae pueriles. Cato. Corderius dialogues.
Esops fables. Tullies Epistles gathered by Sturmius. Tullies Offices with the
books adioind to them; de Amicitia, Senectute, Paradoxes. Ovid de Tristibus.
Ouids Metamorphosis. Virgil.


Also these books following, Other books also translated Grammatically for
continual helps in schools.
whereof I find great benefit:

1 Tullies Sentences for entering scholars, to make latin truly and purely in
steed of giving vulgars, and for use of daily translating into latin, to
furnish with variety of pure latin and matter.

2 Aphthonius for easy entrance into Theames, for understanding, matter and
order.

3 Drax his phrases, to help to furnish with copy of phrase both english and
latin, and to attain to propriety in both.

4 Flores poetarum, to prepare for versifying; to learn to versifie, ex
tempore, of any ordinary Theme.

5 Tully de Natura Deorum; for purity, easiness, variety, to help to fit with
a sweet style for their disputations in the Universities.

6 Terentius Christianus.

Of the further uses of all of which I shall speak in their proper places:
Translations as other things defective.
though this I must needs confess unto you, that I know them all to be very
imperfect, and to have many defects: which I every day observe, and am
continually amending, hoping to bring them to much more perfection, as either
my self, or you, or any other good friend, to whose hands they shall come,
shall observe the slips, and God vouchsafe life and his gracious assistance. In
the mean time I entreat you to suspend your judgment, until you have seen
some trial, if you have any further doubt concerning the benefit of them; and
then to let me hear plainly as you find.


Of construing ex tempore.
Spoud. I Rest in these your answers, which you give upon your experience, for
the doubts which may be made concerning the Grammatical translations, and so
for the use and benefits of them; and also for the construing of those lower
School Authors, which are so translated. But when your scholars have gone
through these Authors, what helps may they use for the higher School Authors?
What helps to be used for higher Authors.
as Horace, Persius, and the like; and so for all other things to be construed
ex tempore.


Phil. By this time they will do very much in construing any ordinary Author of
themselves, ex tempore; thorough their perfect knowledge and continual
practice of the rule of construing, Remembering ever to cast each sentence into
the natural order.
and by that help of their reading in the lower Authors: I mean the help of
the matter, words and phrase which they are well acquainted with, and of being
able to cast the words into the natural order.

Yet besides these, and the assistance of the Master where need is, they may
use also these helps following:

1 The best and easiest Commentaries of the hardest and most crabbed School
Authors; 1. Commentaries of the hardest Authors.
as M. Bond upon Horace: who has by his pains made that difficult Poet so
easy, that a very child which has been well entered, and has read the former
School Authors in any good manner may go thorough it with facility, Bond
upon Horace.
except in very few places. Of him, it were to be wished, for his singular
dexterity in making that difficult Poet plain in so few words, that he would
take the like pains in the rest of that kind: as in Persius and Iuvenall, for
the great benefit of Schools. Or that some other would do it, following his
example.

Next unto him, of those which I have seen are these: Murmelius and Buschius
upon Persius, Murmelius printed at Paris 1531.
a double Commentary; the one shortly expressing the matter, and beating out
the sense and meaning, the other the words. Lubin also upon Persius, and
Iuvenal, Lubin on Persius and Iuvenal. Helps for Virg. Virg. with Melancht.
annotations printed at Witeberg. 1598.
is much commended. For short comments and annotations of Virgil, there may be
used Ramus upon the Eclogues and Georgicks. Also the Virgils printed with H.
Stephens annotations; and with Melancthons.

2 Where they have no help but the bare Author, and that they must construe
wholly of themselves call upon them often, to labor to understand and keep in
fresh memory the Argument, matter and drift of the place,
which they are to construe: which matter, 2. Understanding the Argument,
matter and drift in general.
they may either find prefixed generally before the beginning of the treatises,
or chapters, in the Arguments, or else they are to demand the understanding in
general, of the Master or examiner, what the matter of the place is, or what it
about. Otherwise many places may trouble the greatest scholars at the first
sight.


3. To consider well of all the circumstances of each place, 3 To consider the
common cirrcumstances of places.
which are comprehended most of them in this plain verse:

Quis, cui, causa, locus, quo tempore, prima sequela.

That is, who speaks in that place, what he speaks, to whom he speaks, This
verse comprehending the chief circumstances of places to be ever in mind.
upon what occasion he speaks, or to what end, where he spoke, at what time
time it was, what went before in the sentences next, what follows next after.
This verse I would have every such scholar to have readily; and always to
think of it in his construing. It is a principal rule for the understanding of
Authors or matter.
It is a very principal rule for the understanding of any Author or matt^r
whatsoever.

4 In all hard words or phrases let them first call to remembrance where they
have learned them, or the primitive word whereof they come, 4. To search out
every hard word and phrase.
or some words near unto them: or otherwise to search them out by inquiring of
the Master, Usher, or some follow; or of the Dictionaries, which they ought to
have ever at hand.

And in construing their own Authors, let them remember that general precept,
to mark the new words with a line under them, as was advised before; that
they may often go over them: or if they fear they cannot so remember them, to
write them in their books over the word, or in the margents over against the
words, in a fine small hand, it will not hurt their books: or for saving their
books, let every one have a little paper book, Or to have each a little paper
book to note all n^w and hard words in.
and therein write only all the new and hard words as was observed generally,
to be very perfect in those each way, by often reading over; and so they shall
come on very fast: having those (as I said) they have all. So that these things
observed shall accomplish your desire.

1. Consider and way well the general matter and argument. The sum of all, for
construing without Commentary or or help.


2. Mark all the hard words in their proper significations.

3. Keep in mind that verse of the circumstances of places; Quis, cui, etc.

4. Cast and dispose the words in the proper Grammatical order.

5. See that nothing be against sense,
nothing against Grammar: but if either the sense be absurd, or construction
against Grammar, cast it, and try it another way until you find it out.

Finally, Several kinds of construing or expounding.
give me leave to add this, before we end this matter of construing; That all
these kinds of construing, or rather of expounding and expressing their minds,
may be used by scholars of ripeness, and with much profit.

1 According to the bare words in their first signification, and in the
natural order plainly.

2 According to the sense to express the mind of the Author with understanding.

3 More elegantly, in finenesse of words and phrase.

4 Paraphrastically, by exposition of words and matter more at large, to make
as it were a Paraphrase of it. And to do this last in good Latin, where they
are of ability.


Spoud. Sir, you have satisfied me at large for all this matter of co^struing:
now I pray you let us come to parsing, and the manner of it, which follows
next; that I may have your help therein. For this has been no less
weariness and vexation unto me, then the construing has been.


Phil. Before we come to parsing,
let me also tell you this one thing: A most profitable exercise, to cause the
Scholars, daily to construe some things ex tempore, besides their ordinary
Lectures.
That besides my Scholars ordinary Lectures, and repeating daily some part of
that which they have learned in the lower fourmes; I find very great good in
causing them every day in each form to construe a piece of their Authors
where they have not learned; and that ex tempore, aside, or a leaf at a time,
as leisure will permit: hearing them either my self, or by some other very
sufficient, how they can do it; and posing only some hard things as they go
forward: noting also the harder words and more difficult places, as was
showed. Also in those books, where of they have Translations, I cause them by
course sometimes to construe or read the same, out of the Translations: as at
other times to read out of the Author into English; according to the manner of
the Translation.


Spoud. This must needs be exceeding profitable: I likewise will put it in
practice forthwith, if God will; and do heartily thank you for imparting it
unto me. But now if you have done, to the matter of parsing.


Phil. Let me hear of you, what course you have used therein, and I will
supply whatsoever I can.


CHAP. IX.
Of Parsing, and the kinds thereof; and how children may parse of themselves
readily and surely.
Spoud. FOr parsing, I have followed the common course; which is this, The
usual manner of Parsing.
so far as I have seen or heard: viz. To parse over, all my youngest, every
word; and even in the same order as the words do stand in their Authors:
teaching them what part of speech every word is, how to decline them; and so
all the questions belonging thereunto: and what each word is governed of; the
rules for euerything, and the like.

Herein, How to teach children to parse of themselves most surely and readily.
after long and much labor, I have found very little fruit, through the
hardness of it, and the weakness of the childrens memories to carry away
that which I told them: much less have I been able to make my little ones, no
not in the second or third fourmes, so to parse of themselves, as to give a
true reason of every word why it must be so; according to that which I saw in
the note, what might be done in parsing. Now if you have seen the practice
thereof, let me hear it of you, I entreat you; and that in so few words as
you can.


Phil. Yes indeed, I have seen the practice hereof and do know it, that
children will do very much, to ease and delight both the Master and themselves
exceedingly. Besides some of the best of those which you mention (as the
showing the youngest how to parse every word) I have learned to observe these
things following, The certain direction for parsing.
and find marvelous light, easiness, surenesse and help of memory by them:

1 To cause the children ever to parse as they construe, To parse as they
construe, ever marknig the last word.
according to the Grammatical rule of construing and the Translations; always
marking the last principal word which went before in construing: wherein (as I
shortly showed you before) the very child may see every principal word going
before, governing or ordering that which follows; and so he has therein a
guide leading him by the hand for all the Syntax at least: except in the
exceptions mentioned in the Grammatical rule; as of Interrogatiues, Relatiues,
etc. which they will soon know: and where one word gouernes diverse things; as
in that example. Dedit mihi vestem pignori, tepresente, propria manu. where the
word Dedit gouernes most of the rest in a diverse consideration. 2 To remember
if they have not learned the words before.


2 To ask among them every word of any hardness, whether they have not
learned it before: and if they have, to repeat where. As it was before, so it
is there for the most part.

3 For the Etymology; 3 To mark in Nounes, Verbs, Participles, what examples
they are like, The rest are in the book.
all the difficulty is in these three parts of speech, Nounes, Verbs, and
Participles; the rest being set down in the Accedence, or easily known, as was
showed before. And in all words of these three parts, do but tell them what
examples they are like in the Accedence: which examples being known, will
presently bring to their understanding all the questions depending on them and
their answers. As, of what part of speech the words are; of what declension or
Conjugation: so the declining, Case, Gender, Number, Person, Mood, Tense, etc.
Also with a little practice they will soon guess at them, themselves; and that
very right, to show what examples they are like, either by the English, or
Latin, or both. The same would be also for the Syntax, both in agreements and
gouernements, Paralleling by examples in the Syntax likewise An example of
parsing set down at large, to direct the rudest.
ever to show what examples they are like. The example makes the rule most
plain, and imprints all in the childs memory.

To make this plain to the capacity of the simplest, I will add one only
example, particularly examined out of the two first verses of Qui mihi
discipulus puer es, etc.

First, First construe truly.
be sure that the child know the meaning of them, and can construe them
perfectly, as thus:

Puer Oh child, qui who, es art, discipulus a Scholar, mihi to me, atque and,
cupis do covet (or desire) doceri to be taught; ades come, huc hither:
concipe conceive (or consider well) dicta haec these sayings, animo tuo in thy
mind.

In this sentence, Parse as they construe.
parse the child after the same manner; and examine him accordingly. As ask,
where he must begin to parse; Examining in parsing.
he answer that Puer, Oh boy, because he began to construe there. And if you
ask why he began to construe there; he answers by the rule of construing, which
bids, If there be a Vocative case to begin commonly at it. Then ask what
Puer is like; he answers, like Magister: which being known of him and he
perfect in his examples can tell you by Magister, Puer.
what declension it is, how to decline it, and the number; and also by the
increasing of it short in the Genitive case, he can tell you, it is the
Masculine Gender by the third special rule.

For the case; that it is the Vocative, known by calling, or speaking to the
child. And if you ask, why it may not be pueri not puero, but puer; he
answers, because it is the Vocative case, which is like the Nominative.

Afterward, Qui.
demanding what must be parsed next; he answers qui; because qui is next in
construing: and also that qui is a Pronoune Relative, set down in the
Accedence, and there declined. Also that it is the Nominative case, coming
before the Verb es, following it next, by the rule of the Relative; When there
comes no Nominative case: as, Miser est qui nummos admiratur, qui admiratur
So qui es. For the Gender likewise; that it is the Masculine Gender, because so
is his Antecedent puer going next before in construing: with which the Relative
agrees, by the rule of the Relative: The Relative agrees, etc. as vir sapit
qui pauca loquitur: vir qui. So puer qui. Also he can show it, to be the
Masculine Gender, because in words of three terminations, the first is the
Masculine, the second the Feminine, the third is the Neuter. Likewise he can
tell why it must be qui, not cuius, nor cui, nor any other; because it must be
the Nominative case to the Verb, by the rule of the Relative; because no other
Nominative case comes between them. So all other questions. For Person; it
is made the second person here, by a figure called Euocation, because it
agrees with puer, which is made of the second person; and by the same figure
Euocation, as every Vocative case is, by reason of Tu understood.

Then follows es, Es.
art: of which word the child can give you all the Questions; because he has
learned it in his Accedence, and is perfect in it. If you ask why it must be
es, and not est, nor any other word; he answers, because it is Thou art, not
He is, nor I am: and also because in that place qui his Nominative case is of
the second person, as was said. Discipulus.
If you then ask what is parsed next; he answers discipulus, because he
construed so: and discipulus is like Magister. Which being known, the child
can tell the questions of declining, Gender, Case, Number, and the rest
appertayning thereto. If you demand further, why it must be Discipulus and not
Discipulum; why it must be a Nominative case after the Verb, and not an
Accusative according to the rules, The Accusative follows the Verb; and also
that rule, Verbes Transitiues are all such, etc. He answers, because this
Verb Sum es, is a Verb Substantive intransitiue, not a transitiue; and
therefore will have such case after it as it has before it: as Fama est malum,
est malum. And that other rule for the Accusative after the Verb, is of
Transitiues, whose action passes into another thing. So to proceed throughout
for shortness, thus:

Mihi] is parsed next, because it it next in construing. Mihi*
It is a Pronoune set down in the book. All the questions are plain in it,
except why it must be the Dative case: which is, because it is governed of es,
the principal governor going before, by the rule of the Dative case after
sum, Also sum with his compounds, except possum, etc. and, for that, one word
may govern diverse cases; or it may be governed of Discipulus the Substantive,
by the rule of the later of two Substantives, turned into a Dative: wherein the
English rules are defective. The rule in Latin, is Est etiam vbi in Datiuum,
vertitur, etc.

Atque] is next in construing; Atque.
and therefore in parsing. It is a Conjunction Copulative, set down in the
book. It is also a Compound Conjunction; compounded of at and que. It is put
here to couple these members of the sentence together, viz. Cupis doceri, with
that going before.

Cupis] is next: Cupis.
It is like Legis, Thou read. Which being known, the child can tell you
what Conjugation, Mood, Tense, Number, Person, the word Cupis is; and why it
must be so, and not cupiunt, nor any other word; because atque couples like
Moodes and Tenses: and it is, Thou couetest. Other questions which fall out in
declining, the child can tell; as, why it is Cupiui, by the exception of the
rule Fit pio, pi. And why Cupitum, by the rule of the ending of the
Preterperfect tense in vi. Vi^it tum.

Doceri] is parsed next, Doceri.
because it is construed next: it is in my book, says the child, and it
signifies to be taught. Thus he can answer all the questions, why it must
be doceri, not docere: also why it must come next; because an Infinitive mood
does commonly follow another mood.

Ades] is next in order, Ades.
and is in all things like es in sum, compounded of ad and sum: and it must be
so, because it is Come thou, not adest not adsunt.

Huc] is next in construing, Huc.
because Aduerbes are usually joined to the Verbs, to declare their
signification. It is an Aduerbe of place signifying hither, or to this place.

Concipe] is like Lege, Concipe.
Read thou. This being known, the part of Speech, Mood, Tense, Number,
Person, and most questions of it are known; except two or three of the
compounding it with a Preposition, and of changing of the letters a, into i.
Which are to be learned after by the rule in their book.

Dicta] is next, Dicta.
because the Substantive, which is more principal, and to which the Adjective
agrees, must go before the Adjective in parsing; though in our English,
Adjectives go before. It is like Regna. The Accusative case, Neuter Gender,
Plural Number, following the Verb Concipe, by Verbes Transitiues. And the
Neuter Gender by my rule of all words like Regnum. Omne quod exit in um. And
Neutrum nomen in e. It must also end in a, in the Accusative case Plural
number, because all Neuters do end so in three like cases. It is derived of the
Supine dictu, by putting to m.

Haec] is a Pronoune demonstratiue, Haec.
agreeing with dicta, by the rule of the Relative: and it must be so by that
rule.

Animo] follows next, Animo.
the Substantive to be set before the Adjective; it is like Magistro in all.
The Ablative case, because it signifies in the mind, and not into the mind:
because, in, without this sign, to, serves to the Ablative case, and is a
sign thereof. It is also by the rule, Sometime this Preposition In, is not
expressed but understood.

Tuo] A Pronoune possessiue, Tuo.
like bono or meo, but that it wants the Vocative case. It is set down in my
book, and does agree in all things with animo; by the rule of, The Adjective,
whether it be Noune, Pronoune or Participle, agrees with his Subst. etc. And
so on for the rest.

In this first kind of parsing, Manner of hearing their Lectures.
you may at the first entrance, ask them the English of each word, and cause
them to give you the Latin, and so to parse, looking on their Latin books,
to encourage them; just in the manner as is set down.

After a little time cause them to do it, looking only upon the English
Translation.

Then (which is the principal,
and wherein you will take much delight) cause them amongst themselves to
construe and parse out of the translation until they can say, or out of their
Authors, whether they can sooner: but when they come to say, cause them to say
each sentence, first in English, then to construe and parse them; and all with
their books under their arms: what they cannot repeat so, they will do it if
you ask them questions of it. You shall find by experience, that with a
little practice, all who are apt will do this as soon, readily, and perfectly,
as looking upon their books (if so that they but understand the matter well
before) and so they will make all their own most surely. Thus I would have
them to do in Sententiae, Confabulatiunculae and Cato if you will. After in the
middle fourmes, as in E^ops Fables, Ovid de Tristibus, or Ouids Metamorphosis,
etc (because either the matter is not so familiar and easy to remember, or the
Lecture longer) I would have them to parse thus, looking upon their
translation; but then to parse wholly in Latin: and I can assure you by some
good experience, that through Gods blessing* you will admire their profiting.


Spoud. Surely Sir* this way of parsing is most direct and plain; and the
benefits must needs be exceeding great: but give me leave yet to ask one
thing of you, concerning this parsing amongst the younger. I have heard of
some, who would teach their enterers to know by the very words, How to know by
the words what part of speech each word is.
what part of Speech each word is. How may that be done?


Phil. This may very well be done, even according to this ensample above, when
every thing is examined at large. As for example, Cause your Scholar to do
this:

1 To mark out all those words, which they have learned, being set down in
their Accedences; as Pronounes, Aduerbes, Conjunctions, Interiections: that
they know all those. Then have they nothing to trouble them with; but they may
know that all the rest are either Nounes, Verbes or Participles, or else
Gerunds or Supines belonging to the Verbes, or some other Aduerbs.

2 For those parts of Speech, when your Scholar can construe perfectly, they
may be known by their Latin and English together, whether they be Nounes,
Verbs, Participles, or such Aduerbes; chiefly, when they are very cunning in
their parts of Speech in their Accedence, and questions thereof.

1 The Noune Substantives, that they are names of things, to which you may put
to a, Substantives, and how to know them.
or the, as was said; as A boy, A Scholar: but cannot put to the word Thing,
in any good sense. And morefully, when the Latin is put to the English; as
puer A boy, like Magister: discipulus a scholar, like Magister.

The Noune Adjectives contrarily, How Adjectives.
though they signify a thing; yet they cannot stand by themselves in sense,
unless you put to (Thing) or some other word expressly or understood; nor you
cannot in proper speech put to a, or the. As we cannot say properly, A good, An
evil: but we may say A good man, A good house, An evil thing. And when they
are put Substantiuely, yet Thing is properly understood: as bonum a good thing,
summum bonum the chiefest good thing; though we call it the chiefest good.

These Adjectives also may be more fully understood, By the Latin adjoined. In
us or er like bonus,
by the Latin words: as if they end in us or er, they are like bonus; except
those expressed like Nounes, and some few strange Adjectives, which are partly
Substantives partly Adjectives set down in the Rule, At sunt quae flexu etc.
as Pauper, puber, etc. And in the Rule, Haec proprium, etc. as Campester, etc.

Adjectives ending in ans or ens (though they be Participles) and also in x, In
ans, ens, x, rs, like foelix.
and rs, as concors, are declined like foelix; and some in or, as memor.

Adjectives in is, In is, ior, ius, like tristis.
ior, [or jor] and ius signifying the Comparatiue degree, that is to say, more,
are like Tristis: as Dulcis, dulcior, mayor, dulcius.

Finally, if the child but know his word to be like any of the examples of a
Nown Substantive, as Musa, Magister, Regnu^, Lapis, Manus, Meridies, he knows
it to be a Nown Substantive. If like bonus, vnus, foelix, tristis, a Nown
Adjective.

Verbes also may be known most plainly by the English and Latin together. How
Verbes may be known.
As, the words signifying, doing, suffering or being, and like Amo, doceo,
lego, audio, or amor, doceor, legor, audior, or any person coming of them in
any Mood or Tense, and signifying like to them, are Verbs. So by the signs of
the tenses; do, did or did, have, have, has, had or had, shall or will.
By the signs of the moods; Or signs of the Passive: as am, are, art, was,
were, were, be or been: where any of these signs are, are commonly Verbes.

And finally, this is general for the Verbes, as for the Nownes; that if
either the child can tell of himself, or you but show him what person in a
Verb it is like, he can tell presently that it is a Verb, and most questions
belonging to it* As, knowing that cupis thou couetest, is like legis thou
read, he knows presently, that it is a Verb of the third Conjugation, and
the Mood, Tense, etc.

The like may be said for Gerunds of Verbes, Gerunds.
and Supines, Supines.
in all things, as for the Verb before.

Participles Participles.
also may be plainly known by the very same manner; and chiefly by their
endings in English and Latin both together. As, the words that end in [ing]
in English, and in Latin in ans or ens, are Participles of the Present tense.
Present tense Preter tense.
Words in d, t, or n, and their Latin in tus, sus, xus, are Participles of the
Preter tense. So those words ending in rus in Latin, and signifying to do or
about to do, Future in rus.
of the Future in rus. And in dus, signifying to be done like the Infinitive
mood Passive, Future in dus.
are Participles of the Future in dus.

Aduerbes (besides those in the book, How to know other Aduerbes besides those
in the books.
or which should be set down in the English Aduerbe as they are in the
Latin) are but either Aduerbes of Comparison or of Quality.

Those of Comparison end in us, Of Comparison.
and signify more; or in e, and signify most.

Those of Quality end in e, Quality.
or in er commonly; and all of these have their English usually ending in ly:
as docte learnedly, doctius more learnedly, doctissime most learnedly.

To conclude, they are also marked commonly in all books which are well
printed, with grave accents over them, to distinguish them from other parts of
Speech, and that they may be known to be Aduerbes: as docte learnedly, to be
known from docte the Vocative case of the Adjective: so doctius. And thus are
all Aduerbes of like nature; as quam then, to be distinguished from quam which,
the Pronowne.

And also sundry Prepositions are so marked: as pone, prope.


Spoud. I approve and see the reason of all this, that the parts of Speech may
be known or nearly ghessed at: and I do still go on with you, rejoicing in
this our conference.

Notwithstanding, there is one thing I have heard, that a child may not only be
taught to know what part of Speech each word is, but also of what Conjugation
any Verb is, if he hear but only the first person of the Indicative Mood;
that is, if he hear but only the Verb named. Now this seems to me
impossible; there being so many hundredth Verbes all ending in o, and they so
like one another; and especially those of the first and third Conjugation, so
hard to be distinguished, A child may know of what Conjugation any Verb is.
that this may often trouble a learned man, and much more a young scholar.


Phil. This which seems to you so impossible, may be likewise easily done by
a child, by the help of this direction which I shall here set down before
your face, and by one observation or two arising there from.


A direction how to know the Conjugation of any Simple Verb (and so of the
Compounds which may be known by the Simples) although the learner never heard
the Verbes before.
ALl Verbes in eo, A direction to know the Coniugations of Verbs.
as doceo, are of the second Conjugation: except a few of the first
Conjugation; and eo, queo, veneo, which are of the fourth.

So Deponents also in eor are of the second: as fateor, tueor, Verbs of the
second Conjugation easily known.
mereor, vereor, misereor, liceor, with their Compounds.

And only these six, so far as I remember. So also Verbes in eo alone.

All Verbes ending in io as audio, Verbs of the 4. Conjugation.
and in ior, as audior, and they only, are of the fourth Conjugation, except a
few which are of the third, and some of the first noted after.

All the Verbes of the third Conjugation are set down in the rules of the
Verbs, Verbs of the 3. Conjugation.
at Tertia praeteritum formabit, etc. Except these which follow in this Table,
which are also of the third.

uo acuo, arguo, exuo, imbuo, induo, minuo, sternuo, suo, tribuo, delibuo, inde
delibutus.

bo glubo.

co ico.

do cudo, pando, pindo, idem quod pinso, prehendo, contracte prendo, accendo,
succendo, incendo, a cando obsoleto, defendo, offendo, infendo, a fendo
obsoleto.

go cingo, clango, fligo, frigo, mergo, mungo, plango, sugo, tego, tingo, vngo.

guo distinguo, extinguo, restinguo, instinguo, a stinguo obsoleto, inde
instinctus, instinctor

lo consulo, molo, to grind: but immolo, as: promello, an old word, signifying
to stir up strife, or to make delay.

mo fremo, gemo, tre^^o

(...) dispe^^^, to stretch abroad* (...)

po clepo, repo, serpo, sculpo.

pso clepso, pro clepo to steal or take away. depso, to kneade.

to beto, quasi been ito, to go. Varro.

sco All in sco, except conisco, as, to push with the head, as Rams do. lucret.

These old words
clingo. cludo. lido. geno. pago. tago. spicio. for cingo. claudo. laedo.
gigno. pango. tango. specio.


These following are of the first and third conjugation in the same
signification.

la^o, sono, tono, piso to stamp out the husks of corn.

These also of the first and third, in a diverse signification.

appello, as, to call. appello, is, appuli, to bring to, to approach, to
arrive, to apply. caluo, as, to make balde. caluo, is, to deceive. colo, as, to
strain. colo, is, to worship. como, as, to trim or lay out. como, is, to
kembe. consterno, as, to trouble in mind, consterno, is, to strewe or scatter.
dico, as, to vow, offer, dedicate. dico, is, to say. duco, as, as educo, as, to
bring up. duco, is, to lead. euallo, as, to cast out of the doors. euallo, is,
to vanne or to make clean corn. fundo, as, to found, establish* fundo, is, to
pour out. iugo, iugas, to yoke. iugo, is, to cry like a Kite. ^ego, as, to
send Ambassador, or to bequeath. ^ego, is, to read, to gather, steal, or to
strike sail. mando, as, to command, mando, is, to eat. nicto, as, to wink
often. nicto, is, to open as a hound, or quest as aspaniel. pedo, as, to prop.
pedo, is, to break wind. sero, as, to lock. sero, is, to lay in order or to
sow.
These are of the second and third; pendeo, pendo. tergeo, tergo.


These old words,
feruo. cauo. fulgo. olo. cluo. frenlo. for ferueo. caueo. fulgeo. oleo. clueo.
frendeo. excello and excelleo.


Of the first Conjugation, There are some in ^o, as, beo, meo, screo.

And al other verbs in eo derived from Nowns in eus, and e^, as calceo: of
which also is calcio, of calceus; nauseo, of nausea.

Some also in io, as frio, h^o, pio to please God by sacrifice.

Trauio. gargaridio old.

And al other verbs in io and ior, derived from Nownes in i^s, iae, ium, and
ies: as nuncio, of nuncius.

saucio, a scio. somnio, calumnior, auxilior, glacio a glacies. satio a saties.
meridior.
And so all other like; except these which are of the fourth Conjugation; as,
ineptio, insanio, vesanio, lasciuio. balbutio, fastidio. munio a maeniae.


Finally all other Verbes besides these, are of the first Conjugation; and are
infinitely more then of all the other three Coniugations jointly.



Spoud. I see that to be true, which is said of a Parable; that before it be
expounded, nothing seems more hard and obscure; but when it is once made
plain, nothing is more clear: so is it in this, and in the way of construing
and parsing, by the help of the rule, and in diverse other things, which you
have showed unto me.


Phil. It is most certain which you say. I my self have so thought, this
matter of knowing what Conjugation any Verb is of, to be impossible: but you
see what things, pain and diligence may find out. This direction for finding
out the Conjugation received from M. Coot^*
As for this direction, I acknowledge it wholly to that painful M. Coot; who
writ the English Schoolmaster. And by this one, it may evidently appear, what
further benefit the Latin tongue might have hoped for by his labors, if God
had vouchsafed him life to have brought them to perfection; or if others had
bin careful to have afforded him that help that they might have done.


Spoud. It is great pity that he, or any other, should want any help or means,
in so profitable a work; and a token of Gods displeasure, that we should be
deprived of such profitable labors. But, to return again to this matter of
parsing; you have very well satisfied me concerning the younger sort and their
parsing: yet there is one thing concerning this Grammatical parsing amongst
the younger, which I must crave of you. Much time and toil in parsing thorough
examining each word by the Master, how helped.
That there is so much time spent in examining every thing; the Master asking
each question particularly, and the scholar answering: which besides the loss
of time, is a very great weariness to the Master. I pray you show me the
very shortest and speediest way which you know.


Phil. Some very learned would have this parsing to be by pen, The surest
shortest and speediest way of parsing.
and by characters for shortness: But howsoever this may be done among 2. or
3. scholars taught by themselves; Some account to be by pen and characters.
put this will be found most short and easy.
yet this seems to require far more time (both for writing to set every
thing down, and also for examining by the Master) then can be performed in the
common Schools.

But the shortest, surest, most pleasant and easy way both to Master and
Scholar, I touched before, if you marked it: and it is this. After that they
have been entered, and trained up some twelue-month in the lowest form by
questions, as the example was showed out of Qui mihi; then, when they go into
the next form, To parse every one his piece, as reading a lecture.
as into Cato, to begin to parse every one of themselves, as reading a
lecture, each his piece. I mean chiefly, when they come to say their lectures.

For example: Example.
To take those two first verses of Qui mihi, because they are parsed before.
First let them construe perfectly in the Grammatical order, as was said: then
let each parse his word or two, as they construed, ever marking the last word,
and in all things just in the same manner, as is set down before; but only to
do it of themselves without any question asked, for the saving of time: Only
the Master, or he who hears them, is to ask where they do omit any necessary
question in any word, or where they miss.

As thus: Example.
The child having construed, begins of himself,

Puer oh child: It is to be parsed first because it is first in construing.
Puer, is like Magister. A Nowne Substantive common of the second Declension;
and so he declines it, so far as the Master thinks meet, at least giving
the Genitive case; for if they be well entered in the Accedence, they will easily
decline any regular word, when they know the example. After he shows the rule
when he has declined any Nown or Verb. As Puer pueri, is a grave increaser;
and therefore of the Masculine Gender. Nomen cresentis penultimasi Genitiui sit
grauis etc. Also the Vocative case known by calling or speaking to, as o
Magister, o Master. Qui is next, a Pronowne Relative, etc. So every thing in
the same order as before.

To help your scholars to do this:
Remember first when you have used for a time to parse them over every word so,
To help to prepare the children for parsing, at taking lectures*
before them, that by your example they may do the like; then for speediness,
when they have taken their lectures of themselves, that they can construe to
cause only some one of them to read over their lecture, to see that they
pronounce it right, and to construe if you will, if time so permit, or to read
it over to them: And what words you observe to be hard, which you think they
know not, you may ask them what those words are like, and how they are
declined, or where they have learned them, To mark out hard words.
as was said. Where they cannot tell any, or have any new word which they have
not learned, to make that plain unto them, and to cause every one of the
fourm, as was directed in the third general observation, See more of this
marking before in the 3. general obseration.
to make a line under that word, or under that part of the word, that letter or
syllable wherein the difficulty lies; for a little help will bring the whole
to remembrance. Or to note them with some mark or letter over the head of the
word.

As in the enterers, to note the Declension with a d, over the head, and a
figure signifying which Declension.

The Conjugation with a c, and a figure.

Heteroclites with an h; lame Verbes with an l.

For example, to take that which was parsed before

Example of marking hard words amongst the first enterers.
Qui mihi discipulus 2. d. puer 2. d. es cupis 3. c. atque doceri,
Huc ades haec animo concipe dicta tuo.
Here discipulus and puer are noted for the second Declension, cupis the third
Conjugation, ades for the Composition of ad and sum, concipe for changing a
into i.

Or you may mark Declensions and Coniugations, by setting down but only the
first letters of the examples, which they are like, as discipulus mag., puer
mag., cupis leg., etc.

The former is the shorter, after they are acquainted with it, and can make
their figures.

And ever what rules they are not well acquainted with,
turn them, To cause them to turn to the rules.
or cause them to turn to the places in their Grammar, and to show them to you.

As they proceed to higher fourmes, Noting in the higher fourm.
and are more perfect, mark only those which have most difficulty; as
Notations, Deriuations, figurative Constructions, Tropes, Figures* and the
like: and what they fear they cannot remember by a mark, cause them to write
those in the Margent in a fine hand, or in some little book.

In the lower fourmes, you marking one book your self, all the rest may mark
theirs after it, until they can do it of themselves.

The ends of this marking, The ends of marking their books.
are, as I said, that they may take most pains in these; for the rest they can
do easily, and almost of themselves. And also that when they construe and
repeat over their Authors, they may often pose over those hard words. And thus
they shall keep their Authors, which they have learned, to the credit of the
School, with the profiting and encouragement of the scholars, that they shall
go far safer forward, then by any other means.


Spou. But this marking may endanger them, to make them Truants, and to trust
their books more then their memories.


Phil. I answer no, Marking the hardest words for remembrance, is no means
to make them Truants, but helps and preuenteth many inconveniences.
not at all; but to perform a necessary supply unto the children. For
childrens memories are weak: and they are soon discouraged by the difficulty
of learning and by the hastiness of their Masters. And therefore they had
need of all helps at the beginning. It is also the often repeating over of any
thing, which imprints it in their memory for ever.

Of the contrary, try amongst children of the sharpest wits and best memories,
if they have not some such helps, whether they will not be long in learning to
parse a Lecture: Evils of the want hereof.
and when they can parse it very perfectly, prove them within a month after,
whether they will not have forgotten, at least most of the hardest and chief
matters. Then think what a vexation it is to the honest minded Mast that would
be always ready to give an account of the profiting of his scholar; and
withal when he must teach him every thing anew, which he has forgotten: neither
his leisure will any way serve; he having many fourmes* and being to go
forward daily with his Scholars in some new construction; besides many other
like discommodities.


Spoud. But there is another kind of apposing, which I remember in the note,
and which you mentioned; how to teach children to make right use of their
Authors, even of every sentence: which I conceive not of.


Phil. Yes truly: How to appose so as the children may get both the matter,
words, and phrase of each Lecture.
and that which I account the very principal, and as it were the very picking
out of the kernel, and the life of every Lecture; to get both the matter and
also the Latin words and phrases, that they make them their own, to use as
need or occasion requires.


Spoud. That must needs be of excellent use: for though it be commendable to
construe, and to parse perfectly; yet it is nothing in regard of this, if they
shall not know how to make their use and benefit either of matter or phrase.


Phil. This is only by apposing them, as I showed you the manner in the
Propria quae maribus, to make them to understand; and that first in English,
then in Latin: and to cause them to answer both ways, both words and
sentences, as time will permit.

For example; Example.
Take a sentence or two in the beginning of that little book, called
Sententiae pueriles: which is well worthy to be read first unto children,
because it has been gathered with much care and advice to enter younger
scholars, for Latin and matter every way meet for them: but of it and
others, what I find best to be read, I shall show you my experience in another
place. Out of it you may examine thus, for making use, as in the these first
sentences of it: Amicis opitulare. Alienis abstine. Arcanum cela. Affabilis
esto, etc.


1 If you will,
you may ask them by a question of the contrary, Manner of propounding the
questions.
Must you not help your friends? The child answers, Yes. Then bid him give
you a sentence to prove it; he answers, Amicis opitulare.

Or ask by a distribution thus; Whether must you help or forsake your
friends? The child answers, I must help them. Then bid him to give you a
sentence; he answers, Amicis opitulare.

Or thus by Comparison; Whether ought you to help your friends, or others
first? or friends or enemies, etc. When the child has answered, ever bid him
to give his sentence. So on in the rest.

The more plainly you can propound your question, that the child may
understand it, and may answer in the very words of his Lecture, the better it
is: so to examine the words severally: How say you Help? he answers
Opitulare. Friends, Amicis. But of this more after.

After the child has been a while thus practiced, Example of examining
English and Latin together.
then use to examine both in English and Latin together: I mean propounding the
questions first in English, then in Latin; and so let him answer, that the
matter and English may bring the Latin with them: which they will certainly
do. The manner I showed in examining in the Latin rules: I will set down one
other example, in the sentences of three words; Amor vincit omnia.

Out of this sentence I examine thus:

Q. What is that, that will overcome all things?

A. Love.

Then bid him give the sentence.

A. Amor vincit omnia.

Or thus: Is there any thing that can overcome all things?

A. Yes; Love.

Or thus more particularly, to put delight and understanding into them;

Q. What is that which will overcome learning, and make it our own?

A. Love of learning, or loving our books.

Q. Give me a sentence to prove it.

A. Amor vincit omnia, etc.

Then examine in Latin the very same things; but uttering them in Latin and
English together, as thus:

Quid vincit omnia? what will overcome all things?

R. Amor.

Or thus: Est ne aliquid quod potest omnia vincere? Is there any thing that can
overcome all things? R. Imo.

Q. Quidest? What is it?

R. Amor.

Q. Da sententiam.

R. Amor vincit omnia.

Q. Or thus: Quid vincit amor? What will love overcome?

R. Omnia, All things.

So in Cato, Examining for the use in Cato.
to ask, as in the first Verses,

Q. What thing ought to be chief unto us?

A. The worship of God.

Q. Dasententiam.

R. Cultus Deipraecipuus.

Q Dacarmen.

R. Si Deus est animus nobis, etc.

Then to examine the Verses by parts if you will: as Si Deus est animus, etc.
Ask,

Qualis est Deus, What is God, or what a one?

A. Animus, A spirit, or spiritual nature or being.

Q. Qui ita nobis dicunt? vel, Quae nobis ita dicunt? Who or what things tell
us so?

R. Carmina, Verses, or Poets who write Verses.

Q. Quomodo tum co^endus est?

R. Pura mente.

Q. Dacarmen.

R. Si Deus est animus, etc.

Thus throughout, only where they understand not, to propound the question, as
well in English, as in Latin, and so to answer.

Also you may examine thus: What Verses in Cato have you, to prove that the
worship of God must be chiefly regarded? A. Si Deus est animus.

What against sleepiness and idleness?

A. Plus vigila semper, etc.

So in Esops Fables, Examining the Fables in Esop for the use.
besides the examining every piece of a sentence in the Lectures, as thus:

Gallus Gallinaceus dum vertit stercorarium offendit gemmam, etc.

Q. Quid offendebat Gallus dum vertit stercorarium?

R. Offendit gemmam, etc.

Cause the children to tell you, what every Fable is about or against, or what
it teaches, in a word or two. For example, thus:

Q. What Fable have you against the foolish contempt of learning and virtue,
and preferring play or pleasure before it?

A. The Fable of the Cock, scratching in the dunghill.

Or after this manner:

Q. What Fable have you against the foolish neglect of learning?

A. The Fable of the Cock, scratching in the dunghill.

2 Cause them to make a good and pithy report of the Fable; Making a report of
their Fables.
first in English, then in Latin: and that either in the words of the
Author, or of themselves as they can; and as they did in English. For, this
practice in English to make a good report of a Fable, is of singular use, to
cause them to utter their minds well in English; and would never be omitted
for that and like purposes.

In other books the use is according to the quality of them: The use according
to the quality of the books.
as in Confabulatiunculae pueriles, the use is for the children to talk to one
another in the same words.

In Sturmius Epistles, and others of Tully, the phrase principally is to be
regarded: as also in the Poets, the Poetical phrase.

For the further use of them for imitation both in Epistles and Verses, I shall
speak after in their place.

But for the Latin and matter to make it our own,
I find the chief benefit to be in often reading them out of the Grammatical
translations, The surest way to make both Latin and matter our own.
over and over, until the Latin be as familiar to the scholar, as the
English: as I noted in the benefits of the Translations. And also in saying and
repeating of Lectures (I mean the weeks work) to construe without book: and
then repeare them in Verse, or as they are without book.

For the use in Tullies Offices and Ouids Metamorphosis, Use in Tullies
Offices, and Ouids Metamorphosis.
I have set in the Margents of the Translations, the sum of all the matter;
which is very notable and full of delight.

For parsing in the highest fourmes:
to observe only for breuity sake the difficulties of Grammar or Rhetoric,
Parsing in the higher fourms.
special phrases, or the like; the Master only to examine what things they
omit, or wherein he suspects them negligent. In parsing they may use these or
the like speeches:

Hae sunt difficultates Grammaticae. Hae elegantiae Rhetorices. Reliqualcuiora,
trita, puerilia, etc.

In Poetry also, Phrases hae: Epitheta ista.

Let all this examination be only in pure Latin,
from the very lowest fourmes, All in Latin in the higher fourmes.
except the first or second at the most. For they will do it with ease if they
be rightly entered from the beginning; and that the Master ever do it before
them where they are not able: and to observe wherein they are most defective,
therein to take the most pains.


Spoud. Although these things cannot but be very profitable; yet being so many,
they can hardly be put in practice in the greater Schools. I pray you rehearse
me the sum of those which you take most necessary for daily use.


Phil. These are they; The sum of all, principally necessary for parsing.
Cause your scholars to read first their Lecture distinctly and construe
truly: to parse as they construe, ever marking the last principal word: to
show where they have learned every hard word: what example every hard word is
like; so to give rules and examples of them, both for Etymology and Syntax, as
after for the Rhetoric, as need is. To parse of themselves, as reading a
Lecture, and that only in Latin when they come to say, except in the very
lowest fourmes: to make some mark at every hard word, which you note unto
them, to take the most pains in those: amongst the younger specially, to
examine each Lecture for the use; whereby they may get matter, words, and
phrases, all under one. In the highest, for speedines to examine only the
difficulties, as you see requisite; to let them name the rule in a word or two;
to observe phrases and Epithets. In all repetitions amongst themselves, and
construing over their Authors, to examine over also the noted words, as time
permits.


CHAP. X.
Of making Latin; how to enter children therein, with delight and certainty,
without danger of false Latin, barbarous phrase, or any other like
inconvenience.
Spoud. NOw that you have thus lovingly led me by the hand, through the way
of laying a sure foundation amongst my children, for all the grounds both of
Accedence and Grammar; and also of construing and parsing: let me still
entreat you to go on before me; and next to show how I may enter my children
for making of Latin: and then through the several exercises thereof. To enter
children to make Latin, a matter ordinarily extremely difficult, and full of
toil both to Master and scholar.
This I have found extremely difficult. For although it has been a matter of
continual vexation and pain unto my self, and of fear unto my poor
scholars; yet have I found as little profiting therein, as in any other: but
that my children will still write false Latin, barbarous phrase, and without
any certainty, after a very long time of exercise.

If therefore you can guide me the way, how I may do that which you spoke of
before, that I may enter my children with ease and delight, both to my self
and to them; and also surely without danger of making false Latin or barbarous
phrase; I shall further acknowledge my self, to have received yet a greater
benefit then in all the former. And above all, if you can direct me how by
that time that they have been not two years only, but three or four years
in construction, they may be able to make true Latin, and pure Tully in
ordinary moral matters. For I my self have hardly been able to cause my
children to do this at fourteen or fifteen years of age; nor then to
warrant that which they have done: neither do I think that it is much
otherwise in our ordinary Schools.


Phil. I shall willingly satisfy your request hereein likewise, and show you
what I have found: only let me see, as before, what course your self have
taken, to enter your children.


Spoud. I have taken that course which I think is commonly practiced in
Schools: The ordinary manner in country Schools, to enter Scholars to make
Latin.
I have given them vulgars, or Englishes, such as I have devised, to be made in
Latin: and at the first entrance I have taught and heard them, how to make
every word in Latin, word by word, according to their rules. After a while I
have only given them such vulgars, and appointed them a time, against which
they should bring them made in Latin: and at the perusing a^^ examining of
them, I have been wont to correct them sharply, for their faults in writing,
and for their negligence; and so have given them new Englishes: and it may be
I have told them the Latin to the hardest words. This is the course that I
have followed.


Phil. Our learned Schoolmasters M. Askam, The butcherly fear of making
Latins.
does not without cause term this the butcherly fear of making Latins. For
to omit the trouble to the Master, and that it will require a ready wit, to
give variety of such vulgars to the children; and also that it will ask good
learning and judgment to direct them, to make not only true Latin, but pure
phrase withal; what a terror must this needs be unto the young Scholar, who
fears to be corrected for every fault, The shortest way to enter Scholars to
make Latin easily and surely.
and hardly knows in any thing, what to make upon sure and certain grounds?
But for the way, this I find the shortest, surest, and easiest both to Master
and scholar; and which will certainly effect whatsoever has bin said: and
that Master and Scholar may proceed cheerfully and boldly, to justify what
they do.


1. See that your scholar be very cunning in his Accedence, 1. To be exceeding
perfect in their rules; chiefly in Nownes and Verbes.
and Grammar as he goes forward: and chiefly in Nownes and Verbes, to be able
to give each case of a Nown, and every tense and person of a Verb; both Latin
to English, and English to Latin, as I wished you, and showed the manner
before; at least by the perfect knowledge of the terminations of them.

2. Besides the construing and parsing their lectures without book, 2. Each
day to make the Latin of their lectures, and give a reason why each word must
be so.
in the lowest fourmes, or out of the English translation, accustom your self,
in examining the lectures of your first enterers, to do all after the manner of
making Latin; as it were causing them every day to make the Latin of their
lectures, and give a reason why each word must be so, and not otherwise, their
books being shut. I set you down the manner before, in the use of the
Grammatical rule for making Latin, in that example; Aptissima omnino sunt,
etc. Yet to repeat you a word or two for your little ones; take that first
sentence, Amicis opitulare: when you have made them to understand the meaning,
and examined it, Example repeated.
so as was showed; Ask but thus:

How can you make this in Latin; Help friends? How say you, Help thou?

A. Opitulare.

Q. Opitulare like what?

A. Like Amare amator, be thou loved.

So all the questions for parsing: Then ask, why is it help thou, and not, be
thou helped, as Amare amator, be thou loved. He answers because it is a Verb
Deponent, and signifies Actiuely, to help; and not, to be helped.

After ask the next word:

Q. Whom must you help?

A. Our friends.

Q. How say you friends?

A. Amicis.

Q. What is Amicis like?

A. Magistris.

So the questions of declining and the like. Then ask, why not amici nor
amicos, the Accusative case after the verb.

A. Because the Verb Opitulor, to help, will have a Dative case, by that rule of
the Dative, To profit or disprofit, etc.

These may be insteede of all vulgars or Latins, both for ease, These insteede
of all vulgars.
delight and certainty to your self and the child: and so you may ever have
the Author to warrant both Latin, and phrase.

3 Next unto this, 3. Continual reading lectures, and repeating what they have
learned out of the Grammatical translations, is continual making Latin, to
cause children to come on very fast.
that continual beating out and reading their Authors, both lectures and
repetitions, out of the translations, is continual making Latin thus, (as I
said, in the use of the translations) that children will come on very fast for
propriety, choice, and variety of the best words, phrase, matter, and sentences
of their Authors, to begin to have a store^ house in themselves of all copy,
as I have observed.

4 After the former practiced for a time, you may choose some sentences which
they have not learned, 4. Showing fit sentences to turn into Latin out of the
book which they learn, or others.
and cause them to make those, either some out of this book of Sentences, or
any other of like easy moral matter; and then let them begin to write down
that which they make in Latin.

This manner I find to be most easy and speedy for children at their first
entrance: The manner of their entrance to write Latin, to profit in English,
Latin, writing fair, and true, and all under one.
whereby they may profit in English, Latin* Writing true and fair, and all
under one labor.

Let them have their paper books in octauo, of the one side to write the
English which you give them; on the other to set the Latin directly over
against it, and word for word.

To this end cause them to rule their books both sides at once, Their books
how ruled.
or at least the lines of one side directly against the other: their lines a
good distance asunder, that they may interline any thing, if they miss any
word; or for copy and variety, to be set over the head if you will. On the
first side toward the right hand, in which the English is to be set, to leave a
less margent: on the other side for the Latin a greater margent; because the
Latin may be written in a less space then the English; and also to write all
the hard words in the margent of the Latin, the Nominative case of the Nowne
and the first person of the Verb, if so you please. Then cause so many as are
to write Latin together (having books, pen, ink and copy before them, and
every thing so fitted) to write as you speak, so fair as possibly they can.

Herein you are to dictate* or deliver unto them word by word, Manner of
dictating the English which they are to turn into Latin.
the English of the sentence, which you would have them to turn into Latin;
and to do it according to the manner of the Grammatical translation, every
word in that order and in propriety of English, answering the Latin as near as
you can. Also, you are to utter each word leasurely and treatably; pronouncing
every part of it, so as every one may write both as fast as you speak, and
also fair and true together.

And to the end to help for writing true Orthographie, A principal practice
for writing true Orthography both in English and Latin.
besides the former knowledge of spelling; as they are writing, cause every
one in order to spell his 2. or 3. words together, speaking up, that all his
fellows may hear, and may go on in writing, as fast as he spells and you
speak. Those who can write faster to take pains to write fairer; your self
also to walk amongst them in the mean time, to see that every one of them
write true and fair, and to show them their faults by pointing them to their
copies, and using like directions mentioned in the helps of writing, of which I
spoke before.

After; when they have thus set down the English, cause every one in the like
order to make his word or two in latin, after the manner which was showed before
for making latin the very words of the Author in the natural or Gra^matical
order: and cause them al to write the same words, as he speaks, unless any of
them be able to make it before of themselves; who may correct, as they hear
their fellows to make it. Cause also every one to spel the words which he has
made in Latin, like as they did in English, so as all may hear, and go surely
in writing true Orthography in Latin likewise.

And when they have done a sentence, Repeating or construing without book that
which they have written.
or so much as you think good for a time, then cause them to the end to commit
it the better to memory, to try which of them can repeat the soonest without
book, that which they have made. First saying the English sentence; then
giving it in Latin, or construing it without book: which all of them who are
apt, will do presently, or with a very little meditation.
Or, which is shortest of all, appoint them folding their books, to look only
on the English, and read or construe it into Latin: Or on the Latin, to read
or construe it into English. Thus as time will permit.

By this means you shall have a certain direction in all things, Benefit
hereof for certain direction to Master and scholar, and to get Writing,
English Latin, all at once.
both for your self and your scholar, to go truly and surely, both for
propriety, Latin, phrase, and whatsoeue^ you can desire. By this exercise also
your scholar shall get both Writing, English and Latin, all under one. And
therefore an hour may be well employed daily in this exercise.

And to imprint this, To imprint it by repetition the next morning together
with their evening exercise.
yet better; you may cause them the next morning at showing their exercise made
that night, to repeat together with it, that again which they thus made the
day before (if time permit): Either some one to repeat all, or more, every one
a piece, or as time will permit; but all to be able to do it as they are called
forth. Through this also they shall from the first entrance, get audacity and
utterance, with good matter which will bring the Latin with it.

Spoud. But how shall they do for composing, or right placing of their words?
which you know is a principal matter in writing pure Latin.


Phil. I would have them first for a time exercised in this plain natural
order; How to enter young scholars for composing, or right placing their
Latin.
for this is that which Grammar teaches: and then to compose or place finely;
which belongs to Rhetoric, after. As first to write well in prose, before
they begin in verse: so in prose, to go upright and strongly before they
learn to go finely; and as M. Askam speaks, first to go, before they learn
to dance. But for entering them into composition, thus you may do.

1 When they have made it in the natural order, only read unto them how
Tully, or the Author, whom their sentence is taken of it, does place it, and
some reason of his varying, and cause them to repeat both ways, first as they
have written, after in composition.

2 After that they have been practiced a while in the former plain manner,
you may make them to do thus: Cause their books to be ruled in three
columns; in the first to write the English, in the second the Latin verbatim,
in the third to write in composition, to try who can come the nearest unto the
Author.


Spoud. Although I take it that I do conceive your meaning in all, and do see
an evident reason of euerything: yet because examples do most lively
demonstrate any matter; I pray you set me down one example hereof, and show me
what Author you think most fit to gather the sentences forth of.


Phil. In stead of your Author, Tullies sentences the fittest to dictate
sentences out of.
I think and find Tullies sentences the fittest; and of those sentences, to
make choice of such in every Chapter, as are most easy and familiar to the
capacity of the children. This book I do acount of all other to be the
principal; the Latin of Tully being the purest and best, by the general
applause of all the Learned: and because that book is as a most pleasant
posie, composed of all the sweet smelling flowers, picked of purpose out of
all his works; that one book, together with the books which the children
have or do learn, shall also help to furnish them with some sentences,
containing some of the choysest matter and words, belonging to all moral
matters whatsoever; whether to understand, write, or speak thereof; that they
shall be able to go forward with much ease and delight; first in it, and then
in the other sentences adjoined to it, or what exercise you shall think fit.

For an example; take these little sentences, which here follow, as they are
set down in the first Chapter of Tullies sentences, De Deo eiusque natura,
dictating the words to them plainly, as the children may most readily make them
in Latin. In their little paper books they may write the English on the first
side, with the hard Latin words in the Margent, the Latin on the other over
against it, in two columns; the first plain after the Grammar order, the later
placed after the order of the Author: your self may make the words or
phrases plain to them, as they are set in the margent.

An Example of Dictating in English, and setting down both English and Latin;
and the Latin both plainly and elegantly.
Dictating according to the natural order. Ordo Grammaticus. Ordo
Ciceronianus. No man Has ever bin.
has been At any time (verb) inspiration some divine
ever great without (verb) some divine afflatus, breathing into.
inspiration. Nemo fuit vnquam magnus sine afflatu aliqu^ Diuino. Nemo magnus
sine aliquo afflatu diuino vnquam fuit. 2. de Natura Deor. There is nothing
which God cannot Bring to pass.
effect, and truly without any labor. Est nihil quod Deus non possit
efficere, and quidem sine labor vllo. Nihil est quod Deus efficere non possit,
and quidem sine labor vllo. 3. de Not. Deor. GOD cannot Ignoro.
be ignorant In what mind or with what mind.
of what mind every one is. Deus non potest ignorare, qua me^te quisque sit.
Ignorare Deus non potest, qua quisque mente sit. 2. de Diuinatione.

In these examples all is very plain; except that in the first sentence we
say, and so translate in our English tongue, some divine inspiration; according
as it is more elegantly in Latin, the Adjectives usually before the
Substantives; and not inspiration some divine, which would be very harsh; and
so likewise after [without any labour] although in the Grammatical order in
the Latin, the Substantive is to be set before the Adjective; as the child is
to begin to make the Substantive in Latin before the Adjective, and to make
the Adjectives to agree unto, or to be framed according to the Substantives;
as we have showed in the rules observed in the Grammatical translations.

If you think this course over tedious to write both ways in Latin;
then let them turn it only into the natural order, How to learn to compose
the Latin otherwise.
thus verbatim by pen: and afterward in the repeating that which they have
made, ask of them how Tully would place each word, and to give you reasons
thereof: and then to read the sentence in the book unto them; so by the book
and some rules to direct them how to proceed.

For further practice in translating amongst all the higher, Translating into
pure Latin, and composing it of themselves; trying who can come nearest unto
Tully.
after they grow in some good sort to write true Latin verbatim, according to
the former kind of translating; let them still write down the English as you
dictate it, or out of a translation; and try who can come nearest unto Tully
of themselves, composing at the first; and then after examine their exercises,
bringing them to the Author.

For preventing of stealing, For preventing stealing.
or any help by the Latin book if you doubt thereof, you may both cause them
to write in your presence, and also make choice of such places which they know
not where to find.

If you catch any one writing after another, And writing after one another.
and so deceyuing both himself and you, correct him surely, who suffers him
to steal.

For going on faster,
and dispatching more in translating; beside their writing so, How to go o^
faster, and dispatch more in making Latin.
you may only ask them the words or phrases in English, how they can utter
them in Latin; and then let them give them in Latin, every one his piece:
first naturally, after placing each sentence. Thus to go through daily a side,
or a leaf at a time, or as leisure will serve.

Besides these,
this may be a most profitable course as they proceed to cause them to
translate of themselves Esops Fables, Translating into English after M. Askams
manner.
or Tullies sentences, or the like, into plain natural English, so as was
showed; and to cause them the next day, for their exercise, Use hereof.
to bring the same thus in English, and to be able without book, first to make
a report of it (striving in the Fables, Here you must be sure that they have no
translation to help them secretly.
who shall tell his tale in best words and manner) and then to read it into
the Latin of the Author out of the English, and be able to prove it, and where
they have read the hard words. And after all these to try (if your leisure
will serve) how they can report the same in Latin, either in the words of the
Author, or otherwise, as they can of themselves; which all who are pregnant,
and will take pains, will be able to do very readily: by this you shall find
a great increase.

Lastly, this is yet the most speedy and profitable way of all,
as my experience does assure me, to cause them to read ex tempore some easy
Author daily, The most speedy and profitable way of translating and composing.
out of the translation into the Latin of the Author, or out of the Author
into English; first plainly, then artificially. And to this purpose I have
translated, as I showed, Corderius Dialogues, whose latin you know to be most
easy, familar, and pure; and also Terentius Christianus; with Tullies
sentences to help hereunto.

For further translating, or turning any Author, or piece of Author, For
translating an Author into Latin.
or other matter into Latin; if it be difficult, direct your Scholars to
resolve the speech into the natural order of the words, so near as they can.
Secondly, if there be any phrase, which they cannot express; to resolve and
express it by some other easier words and phrase of speech, with which they
are better acquainted; and to do it by Periphrasis, that is more words, if need
be. Besides, for such English words which they know not to give Latin unto; One
good use of Holyokes Dictionarie.
let them use the help of some Dictionary: as Holyoke or Barret: Holyoke is
best, wherein the proper words and more pure, are first placed.

In all such translating either English or Latin, Things to be considered in
translating.
this is carefully to be observed; ever to consider well the scope and drift
of the Author and the circumstances of the place; and to labor to express
lively, not only the matter, but also the force of each phrase, so near as the
propriety of the tongue will permit.

But for all this matter of translating, Best direction for translating.
that practice of reading the English out of the Authors, and the Authors back
again out of the translations, shall fully teach it, so far as it concerns
the scholar for propriety and getting of the tongues. Translation for the
sense and meaning.
For translating any Latin Author into English, only to express the sense and
meaning of it; the sense and drift of the Latin Author is principally to be
observed, and not the phrase nor propriety of the tongue, to be so much sought
to be expressed or stucken unto. The like may be said for the Latin. But this
kind of translating into Latin, This kind of translating into Latin is for
scholars well grounded.
is only for such scholars as are well grounded thorough long exercise and
practice in the former kind of Gra^matical translation, and in Tullies or their
Authors phrase.


Spoud. I hope I understand you, right, and do like very well of all, so far as
I conceive. Only let me entreat you, as in the former, to rehearse the
principal heads briefly concerning this matter.


Phil. This is the sum of all, Sum of all.
for this entrance in making and writing Latin. 1. Readiness in their rules,
chiefly in examples of Nownes and Verbes. 2. Making their own lectures into
Latin daily. 3. Continual reading or repeating lectures and all their Authors
which they have learned, out of the Grammatical translations, into the Latin
of the Authors. 4. Translating into Tullies Latin, out of a perfect
Gra^maticall translation, or as the English is so dictated unto them, and
reading or repeating the same out of the English into Latin. And lastly, out
of the natural order, into the order of Tully. 5. Translating into English
Grammatically of themselves, and reading forth of the English into the Latin
of the Author, or writing it down.

By these means constantly practiced, they will soon be able to make, write, or
utter any ordinary moral matter in pure and good phrase; especially if the
matter be delivered unto them in the natural order of the words. Make trial:
and I doubt not but you will not only confirm it, but still find out more for
the common good.


CHAP. XI.
Of the Artificial order of composing or placing the words in prose, according
to Tully and the purest Latinists.
Spoud. But yet here is one thing wanting: namely, the rules which you spoke of
for composing or placing the words after the manner of the purest Latinists; I
mean for turning them forth of this natural order, into the Rhetorical
order, or order of Tully; without which, the truest and best Latin is little
worth. This I have found very hard for my scholars to perform; Composition a
matter of difficulty.
neither have I had any certain grounds that they might stand upon. Moreover,
this I have known for certain, that many young scholars the more confusedly
that they can transpose, The error of young scholars in displacing sentences.
or disorder the words of a sentence, the more excellent they think it to be,
when as it is indeed most absurd to the learned ear.


Phil. Although this may seem to belong to Declamations and Orations, because
therein there is the greatest labor for curious composition and setting of
words, as wherein scholars stand to show most art, indeauouring to persuade:
Composition generally belonging to all Latin.
yet it is in truth general to all Latin, whether Translations, Epistles,
Theames or whatsoever, and does bring great grace and commendation to every
part thereof; and contrarily being neglected, does detract very much from the
most excellent speech, be the matter and words never so choice. And because
there is special use of it, in the practice of all the translations: and in
all this matter of making Latin for turning or composing out of the
Grammatical order, into the order of the Author, I will afforde you the best
help I can. But for so much as neither Tully nor any of the purest Latinists do
alwais observe the same order, and therefore I take it that no certain rules
can be given as perpetual; I will take those which Macropedius has set
down, as being the most easy of all that I know. He has sundry general
precepts.


Precepts of Composition or placing the words in Latin, as they are set down
by Macropedius, in the end of his method of making Epistles.
The I. Precept.
Of placing the Nominative case, the Verb, and the oblique case.
A Perfect sentence consisting most commonly of a Nominative case, a Verb and
an oblique case; this order is kept in placing ordinarily

1 The oblique cases (that, Oblique case^ first.
is all besides the Nominative and the Vocative) are commonly placed in the
beginning, the Nominative case in the midst, Nominnatiue in the midst.
the Verb in the end: For example; Verb in the end
in the sentence following, the Grammatical order is thus;

Caesar occupauit ciuitatem munitissimam hostium.

The Artificial order is usually thus:

Munitissimam hostium ciuitatem Caesar occupanit.

Yet if the oblique case be of a Nowne negative, Except in obliques of denying.
or a Nowne of denying, it may be put elegantly in the end: as

Caesare fortunatiorem legimus n^minem.

Yea, any Adjective or Participle may be put so, when the chief point of the
matter or meaning rests in it: as

Caesarem in mortefere omnes putant miserum.

The II. Precept.
THe Adjective is ordinarily to be placed before the Substantive. Adjectives
before.
And between the Adjective and the Substantive may be fitly placed the
Gentitiue case of the later of two Substantives; Words placed between the
Adjective and Substantive. 1. Genitive case
as in this sentence the Grammatical order is:

Sever itas magna Caesaris incussit terrorem hostibus.

The artificial order thus;

Terrorem hostibus magna Caesaris seueritas incussit.

Also between the Adjective and the Substantive of the Genitive case, 2. Word
governing the Genitive.
the word governing the Genitive case, may be elegantly placed, as in this
sentence:

Clementia Caesariae maiestatis dedit pacem, and tranquillitatem prouincijs.

The artificial order may be thus;

Caesareae clementia maiestatis pacem and tranquillitatem prouincijs dedit.

The III. Precept.
BEtween the Adjective and the Substantive, Verb.
Tully sometime places the Verb in like manner; A^^erbe.
sometime the Aduerbe, Conjunction.
sometime the Conjunction, sometime the Preposition alone, Preposition.
or with his case: as,

Magnum profecto laborem Caesar assumpsit, quem ferme ab ipsis ad nos venisse
Gadibus ai^nt, vt hosts suae quidem maiestati rebels, nostris autem supra
modum rebus infestos armis subigeret. Quam ob causam, perpetuum illi amorem*
and gratiam debemus immortalem.

The III. Precept.
Of Aduerbes and Prepositions.
ADuerbs and Prepositions with their cases may be placed any where, Aduerbes
and Prepositions.
wheresoever they shall seem to stand most fitly to please the ear: yet most
elegantly before the Verb or Participle which they declare. As,

Debitam pro contemptu suis hostibus diuque dilatam seueritatem, Caesar tandem
exhibuit, sedclement issime mitigauit.

These are the principal of his rules which are necessary.

To these may be added,

1. That this is to be observed very usually: 1. Observation.
That the word governed is commonly placed before the words governing, Word
governed first.
contrary to the Grammatical order. As here.

Fortitudo Caesaris potitur victoria.

The artificial placing may be fitly.

Caesaris fortitudo victoria potitur.

Also if in a sentence there be mention of two persons, 2. Observation.
the one as it were an agent the other a patient, they stand together most
usually and elegantly; Person doing first.
the agent commonly first: as,

Caesar did great wrong to Pompey in this point.

Hac vna in re magnam Caesar Pompeio iniuriam fecit.

These Precepts are set down, The end of these precepts
to the end to direct young scholars; yet so as we must not think, as I said,
that these are ever to be followed strictly; because neither Tully, nor Caesar
himself, nor any who have been most curious, did ever observe the same: for
that should be a falt rather, as we shall see after.

Notwithstanding, by practice in composing, and observation in Tully, How to
attain to right composition.
Caesar and the best Authors, and trying how near we can come unto them in
translating into Latin, by co^paring ours with theirs; and finally weighing
how every sentence may so fall as may best please the ear; scholars may
attain much certainty and commendation herein.

More exquisite observation in placing and measuring sentences.
FOr most exquisite observation of placing and measuring sentences, Observation
in placing and measuring sentences in prose. Butlers Rhetor. Chap. 15.
Rhetorically, in prose by scholars of riper judgment, in their Theames,
Declamations, Orations or the like, read Talaeus Rhetoric de Numero
Oratorio. Cap. 17. 18.

Out of which Chapter, and out of the Commentaries of Minos upon them, these
precepts may be further observed, which follow.

1 That the placing and measuring of the sentences in prose, Prose must be
unlike verse.
should be both unlike to the placing in poetry, and also each sentence unlike
other. No verses to be made in prose.
And therefore that the scholar make no verses in his prose, but that he shun
them warily.

Though in any exercise in prose, Verses cited in prose.
chiefly in Theames, he may cite verses out of other Authors either for
authority or delight.

2 That the beginning or ending of a sentence in prose, Beginning and ending of
sentences most observed: endings chiefly, not to to be like a verse.
be not the beginning or ending of a verse; although this be not so faulty in
the beginning of a sentence, as in the end; where the fault is more observed.

3 That the ending of sentences be specially weighed, which are chiefly marked
of all; Endings of sentences to be carefully waied.
and therefore are to be carefully varyed, that they may not be displeasing.

4 That this curious observation of the endings need not be regarded above
six syllables from the end; This need not be above six syllables.
and those to stand on feet of two syllables, Trochees principally.

5 That we do not continue the same feet in the ends; The same feet not to
be continued in the ends.
but dispose them diversely: not all long syllables, nor all short, unless more
seldom; but commonly tempering long and short syllables together, Tempering
commonly long and short syllables.
as Trochees and Iambicks, sometimes Spondees and Perrichees, yet so as we be
not curious.

6 That sentence is accounted most sweet and excellent which ends in two
Troches; The sweetest sentence ending in 2. Trochees.
viz. the first syllable long, the last short, as in this sentence.

Deinde patris dictum sapiens temeritas fil^^ co^mproba^^it.

This ends in an Iambicke and two Trochees.

Tully used this most often. Tullies ending.
So as in that one Oration pro Pompeio, it is observed to be an hundredth and
fowrteene times.

7. Yet the variety ought to be such, that this art of placing or setting the
number of syllables, The art of placing to be hid.
may not be observed of every one, and so be made envious, nor the
curiosity ridiculous; but to be labored so as it may most delight and draw
on others.

8. That the sounds of the very words and letters are the principal things to
be respected herein. Sounds to be respected principally, in words or letters.
For the elegant composition, is that which is made by a sweet sound of letters
and words.

9. Therefore words of the best sound are to be observed; Words of the best
sound.
and amongst them most elegant Aduerbes and bonds of Conjunctions to be noted
diligently.

Words sounding well are these: 1. Verbals: as, Dominatrix, gubernatrix. 2.
Compounds: as, pernoscere, excruciari. 3. Superlatiues: as, Conspectus
iucundissimus. Ad dicendum paratissinus. 4. Words of mo syllables: as,
Moderatio animi. Tempestas anni.


10 Words which are insolent, Insolent words to be ^uo^ded.
hard and out of use, are to be as warily avoided, as rocks of Mariners.

11 That in all sentences, That all words may (...) and distinct sound.
the words have an easy and distinct sound: that is, neither harsh nor gaping;
but that they fall and conclude aptly and sweetly, fitting best the utterance
of the pronouncer, and as may most like the ear of the hearer.

These are the sum of those rules as I remember. Although the excellency
hereof is rather to be attained, by use and practice, then by any certain
precepts.

Spoud. Sir these put in practice may be very sufficient for whatsoever can be
required in this behalf, as it seems unto me.


Phil. These things concern only the placing and setting or measuring of
sentences, which is one little part of Rhetoric? and there the rest is to be
fully sought, and how to adorn all sentences with tropes and figures. The
practice of these is to be used in their several exercises.

Thus have I gone thorough all these at large, for making the Accedence and
Grammar perfect, for construing, parsing, and making Latin; applying my self
to the capacity of the ^udest learner in so many words; because these things
well performed, all other learning will be most pleasant, as ^as said before.


Spoud. But one other thing by the way, I cannot omit to demand that I did
observe by your speech, that you would have your very enterers to make some
exercise every night of themselves.


Phil. I would indeed have no Evening passed without some little exercise in
Latin by all,
from the very lowest who begin to write Latin; No (...) to be pas^ed without
some little exercise against mo^^ing.
I mean something to be showed the next day about 9 of the clock.


Spoud But what exercise would you appoint to such little ones, that could
be easy enough and meet for their capacity.


Phil. I would appoint them to begin even at, In Speech be these eight
parts etc. and so give them 2. or 3. lines of it for every one to turn into
Latin. And for the examining what they have done where they are many, and time
will not permit to examine what every one has done; to cause some one or two
whom you suspect to be most negligent, first to pronounce the English without
book, then to construe it into Latin without book, or to repeat the Latin as
they have made it: but to construe it without book is far the surest, or to
read and construe it out of the English. And according to these as they
pronounce, and are showed their faults, for all the rest to correct theirs. If
any be found not to correct so, or to have omitted his exercise, to have his
due correction.

Though I have tried many ways and exercises for these little ones, to do
privately by themselves, yet I find none comparable to this: for this they
will do with much facility and contention, after a little that they are
entered; being helped somewhat by their Latin rules, which they have learned.

Thus they may always have a fit exercise, and know aforehand what they are to
do. This also will further much toward their parsing in Latin, and better
imprinting their rules.


CHAP. XII.
How to make Epistles, imitating Tully, short, pithie, sweet Latin and
familiar; and to indite Letters to our friends in English accordingly.
Spoud. I Am very glad I asked you this question: I rest fully satisfied in it,
as also in all this matter of making and composing Latin, for the evidence of
the means; and do thank you heartily for directing me so particularly.

Now let us come, I pray you, to the other several exercises of Scholars,
which are to be practiced in Schools continually, for the morefull attayning
of the knowledge of the Latin tongue.

And first for the making of Epistles, Of making Epistles.
in such sort as was mentioned before; that is imitating Tully, short, pithy,
full of variety of good matter, sweet Latin and familiar; and for inditing of
like Letters in English:

I have found this exercise of making Epistles, no less difficult then the
former toil of making Latin. Difficulty of making Epistles, purely and
pithily.
For although I have taken great pains: yet after long practice, I have hardly
been able to bring them to a show of that which you speak of, I mean so to
imitate and resemble Tully; but that they will frame them of long sentences,
matters unfit for an Epistle, flash and to little purpose; but very childish,
and more like unto a Theme or an Oration, then to an Epistle. Thus I see it to
be also amongst the chief of the Scholars, of sundry of those who are much
accounted of, and wherein the scholars seem to do the best.

As for inditing Letters in English, Inditing English Letters little exercised
in Schools.
I have not exercised my scholars in them at all; neither have I known them
to be used in Schools: although they cannot but be exceeding necessary for
scholars; being of perpetual use in all our whole life, and of very great
commendation, when they are so performed. Therefore I still crave your helping
hand to direct me, how to bring my scholars to the attayning that faculty.


Phil. Let me first hear what way you have taken in these, like as you showed
me in the former kinds; and then I shall relate unto you how this may be done,
so shortly as I can.


Spoud. I have done this: The ordinary means of directing Scholars to make
Epistles
I have read them some of Tullies Epistles, and also some part of Macropedius
or Hegendorphinus de conscribendis Epistolis. I have directed them that they
are to follow the rules set down in the several kinds of Epistles there
mentioned, and made the examples plain unto them.

Moreover, I have used often to put them in mind of this, that an Epistle is
nothing but a Letter sent to a friend, to certify him of some matter, or to
signify our mind plainly and fully unto him. And therefore look how we would
write in English, so to do in Latin. These and the like are the helps which I
have used: and I take them to be the most that are done in ordinary Schools.


Phil. I like well of your reading of Tullies Epistles, which indeed is the
very foundation of all: but for Macropedius and Hegendorphinus, although their
pains were great; yet I cannot see, but that they will rather require an
ancient learned Master to understand, and make use of them, then a younger
scholar, who is to be taught how to speak. Hard for children who have no
reading, to invent variety of matter of themselves.
Also for telling a child that he must invent variety of matter of his own
head, to write to his friend; this is a task over hard to ordinary wits. For
what can a child have in his understanding, to be able to conceive or write
of, which he has not read or someway known before? according to that Maxim:
Nihil est in intellectu quod non prius fuerat in sensu.

Therefore omitting these, wherein I my self have also found a great deal of
toil, with small fruit; I will set you down plainly the very direct way, so
near as yet I have been able to learn; and whereby I am out of doubt, that
that same faculty may be easily gotten, of writing such Epistles; fully
expressing Tully, as was said, and of inditing Letters like unto them, which
are our usual Epistles, as the Latin were of the Romans.

The way may be this:

1 When your young scholars have gone through Sententiae pueriles, Helps for
making Epistles.
Confab. Cato, or the like; and can begin to make Latin in some such good sort
as was showed; let them then read Tullies Epistles, gathered by Sturmius; 1
Reading Tullies Epistles*
as being of the choysest of his Epistles, and most fit for children. This
one book rightly used, may sufficiently furnish for making Epistles, so far
as shall be needful for the Grammar Schools. It would be read by them twice
in the week at least, until they had gone through a good part thereof;
unless they be able to read it of themselves ex tempore, or by the help of
the translation.

2 As they read every Epistle,
or before they are to imitate any one, 2 Making the^ very perfect in every
Epistle.
make them as perfect in it as you can, and as time will permit: not only in
construing, parsing, reading out of the Grammatical translation into the
Latin; but also to be able to give every phrase, both Latin to English, and
English to Latin.

Also cause them to make you a report what the sum of the Epistle is; and
this if you will, both in English and Latin also, as was said of the Fables.

3 Cause them for their exercise to make another Epistle in imitation of
Tullies Epistle,
using all the phrases and matter of that Epistle; 3 To cause them to make
another Epistle in imitation thereof.
only applying and turning it to some friend, as if they had the very same
occasion then presently: and also changing numbers, tenses persons, places,
times: yet so* as thereby to make all the matter and phrases, each way most
familiar to them* and fully their own.

And first let them do this in a good English style, as was said; I mean in
making an English Letter first: setting it after the manner, To do this first
in English, then in Latin.
as they did their English Translation; of that page of their book toward the
left hand, or on the first column, the Latin on the other over against it,
sentence for sentence.

Herein they are only to differ from the Translations, To set the Epistles
after the manner of the Translations.
that they (...) do not in these Letters stick so much to words, to answer
word for word both English and Latin; as to write purely and sweetly, as well
in English as in Latin, and to express their minds most fully in both, and
in most familiar manner.

4 The next day to make another Epistle,
as being sent from their friend to whom they writ, 4 Making answers to
Epistles.
in answer to that which they writ the former day: and in that to answer
every sentence from point to point, in as short manner as the former Epistle
was, still reteyning the same phrases as much as they can. Examples of imitating
Epistles.
I will take for example the first Epistle of Sturmius. The more easy it is
for the children, the better it is.


M. C. Terentiae salutem plurimam dicit.
SIvales, been est: ego valeo. Nos quotidie tab^llarios vestros expectamus:
Tullies Epistles to be imitated.
qui si venerint, fortasse erimus certiores quid nobis fac^endum sit:
faciemusque te statim certiorem, valetudinem tuam cura diligenter. Vale.
Calendis Septembris.


The sum of the Letter is; That Tully writes to his wife Terentia: The manner
of the report of the sum of the Letter.
signifying unto her, that he was in health: that he waited for the
Letter-carriers daily: how by them he should know what to do; and that he
would then certify her of al things. And so concludes, wishing her to look
well to her health. The Letter bare date the Calends of September.

An English Letter in imitation of Tully.
IF you be in health, it is well: I am in health. I have long looked for your
Letter carriers.
Messengers. When they shall come, I shall be more certain what I am to do; and
then I will forthwith certify you of all things. See that you look very
carefully to your health.

The Answer.
I Rejoice greatly of your health. I am sorry that you have looked for the
Carriers so long. They will be with you very shortly, and then indeed you
shall be more certain what to do. We shall forthwith look to hear of all your
matters. I will in the mean time look to my health, as you advise. Farewell.

An Epistle in imitation of Tully.
EPISTOLA.
SIvales been est: ego qu^de^ valeo: diu tabellarios vestros expectaui.
Cu^venerint certior ero quid mihi facie^du^ sit. Tum aute^ te omnibus de rebus
certiore^ faciam. Tuam diligentissime valetudinem fac vt cures.

Responsio.
TE valere maxim lator. Doleo quod tabellarios tam diu expectasti. Statim
vobiscum erunt, and tum re vera certior eris quid tibi agendum sit. Nos deinde
vestra omnia audire sperabimus. Meam interim vt suade; curabo valetudinem. Vale.

Antonius Schorus in the end of his book, de ratione discendae linguae
latinae, has sundry examples. I will set down one Epistle, imitated two
ways: the first keeping almost the words and form of Tullies Epistle; the
other imitating only the form, but changing the words. Tullies Epistle is
this:

Aulo Trebonio, qui in tua prouincia magna negotiaet ampla, and expedita habet,
multos annos vtor valde f^miliariter. Tullies Epistle.
Is cum antea semper and suo splendore and nostra caeterorumque, amicorum
commendatione gratissimus in prouincia fuit, tum hoc tempore propter tuum in me
amorem, nostramque necessitudinem, vehementer confidit, his meis literis, se
apud te gratiosum fore. Quae ne spes eum fallat, vehementer te rogo:
commendoque tibi eius omnia negotia, liberos, procuratores, familiam:
inprimisque vt quae T. Ampius de eius re decreuerit, ea comprobes, omnibusque
rebus eum ita tractes, vt intelligat nostram commendationem non vulgarem fuisse.

The first imitation, more following the words, is this.

Petro Fabro, The first example of imitation of the former Epistle.
qui in vestra vrbe and magnanegotia, and multos amicos habet, multos annos
vtor familiariter. Is cum antea semper and suo splendore, and nostra
caeterorumque amicorum commendatione gratissimus in hac nostra Repub. fuit, tum
hoc tempore propter tuum in me amorem nostramque necessitudinem vehementer
confidit, his meis literis se apud te gratiosum fore. Quae nespes eum fallat,
vehementer te rogo: commendoque tibi eius omnia negotia, amicos, cognatos,
inprimi^que vt quae procuratori de eius rebus videbuntur, ea comprobes:
omnibusque rebus eum ita tractes, vt intelligat nostram commendationem non
vulgarem fuisse.

The second imitation, expressing the form.

Petrus Faber, The second imitation.
qui tibi notus est, and magnas res apud nos gessit, multos annos mihi valde
familiaris fuit. Is cum semper and sua dignitate, and benefi^ijs multis erga
me, meis omnibus gratissimus fuit: tum nunc ob tuum ergame animum, nostramque
coniunctionem, non dubitat quin hac mea commendatione sit in maxima gratia apud
te futurus. Quod vt fiat, summopere te oro: committoque tuae fide^ and curae
omnes res eius, amicos, cognatos, parents: praecipue vero vt quae procurator
de rebus eius agat ea consil^o tuo iuues: and ita honorifice eum accipias, vt
sentiat has nostras literas apud te pondus habuisse.

Thus practicing and trayning up your scholar by little and little; first for
imitation, more nearly following the words; afterward only the form, and
such phrases as shall seem fittest: and ever first writing their English
Letters, and then their Latin answering thereunto; you shall see that they
will come to a lively imitation of Tully; especially if you exercise them well
in Tully, in such sort as is prescribed.

Spoud. Sir, this must needs be a most sure and ready way. But in imitation
what things am I to direct them to observe?


Phil. That they take only so much as is needful, The rule in imitation.
and fit for their purpose, leaving out all the rest; that they add what is
wanting, alter and apply fitly to the occasions, according to the circumstances
of times, persons, places, and the like; that nothing may appear stolen, but
all wittily imitated. Be sure that they know perfectly the matter and the
phrase, of that which they should imitate: and then nothing will be hard, in
imitation of Epistles, Verses, or whatsoever.


Spoud. What is then the sum of all, which you would have principally
exercised, for the speedy attayning this faculty?


Phil. That your scholars have daily a piece of an Epistle, or a whole Epistle
appointed them, matter and phrase made every familiar unto them; then one day
to make an Epistle in imitation, and that both English and Latin; the next day
to make an answer in like manner: thus to proceed until they come to some
good perfection. And so much may serve for Epistles.


CHAP. XIII.
Of making Theames full of good matter, in a pure style, and with judgment.
Spoud. NExt after Epistles Theames* do follow; wherein if you can direct me
also, how these likewise may be composed by children, so as to be couched full
of good matter, written in a pure style, and with judgment, and with as much
certainty and readiness as you have showed me for making their Epistles; I
shall remain more beholden, and return home with greater hope to do good.

For the Epistles it cannot be otherwise, but that the course set down must
needs produce that effect, which you have affirmed; by reason of these singular
patterns of Tully, which children have to imitate. But what patterns or helps
can you have for Theames any way comparable to those?


Phil. What patterns Scholars may have, you shall hear after: but first
relate unto me, as in the former, what way you have used, for the entering of
your children in making their Theames.


Spoud. I have according to the custom in Schools, The ordinary manner of
directing Scholars how to begin to make Theames. According to Apthonius rules.
read them some of Apthonius rules, and so it may be, have begun with Apologues
or Fables, or rather with a Chreia: and in their Chreia, I have first made the
several parts of it, or of their Theme so handled, very plain unto them,
with the manner of the proofs of it; and of gathering reasons to amplify it,
according to the same.

I have then given them a Theme to make, following the example in their book,
to prosecute the same parts of the Theme; as Exordium, narratio, confirmatio,
confutatio, conclusio, and also to follow the several places, to amplify each
thing by. I have withal showed them how to do it: as to try what they could
gather of themselves; and withal to seek Tullies sentences what they could
find out of it, or out of other books to their purpose. The inconveniences of
this course.
But yet (alas!) that which my children have done hereby for a long time, they
have done it with exceeding pains and fear, and yet too-too weakly, in
ha^sh^phrase, without any invention, or judgment; and ordinarily so rudely, as
I have been ashamed that any one should see their exercises. So as it has
driven me into exceeding passions, causing me to deal over rigorously with
the poor boys. Whereby some of them, whose Parents have been more tender,
seeing their children heavy and unwilling to the School, have suffered them to
leave off the School, and so to lose all which they had gotten before; others
also have been made so fearful, that they would rather desire to go to any
base trade or drudgery, then to be Scholars, and hereby have very much
reproached my school: Because, as they have ouer-rightly complained, they must
be beaten for not doing that, which they knew not how to do; so that this
fear is worse to them, then the first for making Latins.

And yet notwithstanding, in their entering to make Theames, and so likewise
into versifying, I have not known how to avoid it, but I have bin enforced to
use so much sharpness, as to make them to call all their wits together, and to
stir them up to all diligence and pains; or otherwise I should have done no
good at all.

Whereupon very great inconveniences have insued: and yet as I said, I have
seen very little fruit to answer unto my pains.


Phil. I do not see how by this course, This way hard enough for many
Schoolemasters.
these evils could be avoided. As I said of Macropedius for Epistles, so I may
here; that this way of entering your scholars is hard enough to many a
Schoolmaster, thus to follow every part of the Theme and those places of
Apthonius, to invent matter and reasons to prove and illustrate every thing,
and to do it in a good style. That which is said of Epistles, that children
must be acquainted by reading, Difficulty in making Theams, because scholars
are not acquainted with the matter of them.
with matter and phrase fit for Epistles, before they can ever be fit to make
such Epistles, is much more true concerning both theames and verses; inasmuch
as the matter of them is harder, being of such things as they have never read
of, nor been any way acquainted with, or at least very little. Besides, to
follow the Logic places in Apthonius in a Philosophical discourse, does
require both some insight in Logic, and reading in such Authors as have
written of such moral matters. And therefore herein many a Master deserves
rather to be beaten then the scholar, The Master often deserves to be beaten
rather the^ the scholar.
for driving the child by cruelty, to do that which he himself can see no
reason how the poor child should be able to do it. It must of necessity either
drive the scholar to use all devises to leave the school, or else cause him
to live in a continual horror and hatred of learning; and to account the
school, not Ludus literarius, but carnificina, or pistrinum literarium.


Spoud. I acknowledge it too true which you have said: I pray you therefore show
me your best advise and experience how to free my self and my children from
these evils; that I may both so enter them in these and also draw them on
after, as not to discourage them in this manner, nor be driven to use the like
sharpness any more.


Phil. Herein I my self am desirous to be a learner, as in all the rest.
Although too much experience has compelled me to seek out all means to
redress this; notwithstanding also that I have ever been afraid of using
cruelty in my school. And the rather have I bin careful to seek out the
easiest and plainest way, that I might allure and draw on my scholars in this
exercise, as in all other, to proceed as in a scholasticall play, with
understanding, love and delight. So much as I have attained, I shall willingly
impart unto you.

1. We are to consider, 1. To consider the principal end of making Theams.
what is the end and purpose of their making Theams; and then to bethink our
selves, which way they may the soonest attain unto the same. The principal end
of making Theams, I take to be this, to furnish scholars with all store of the
choicest matter, The principal end of making Theams.
that they may thereby learn to understand, speak or write of any ordinary
Theme, Moral or Political, such as usually fall into discourse amongst men
and in practice of life; and especially concerning virtues and vices. So as to
work in themselves a greater love of the virtue and hatred of the vice, and to
be able with soundness of reason to draw others to their opinion.

The best means to effect this most soon and surely, The means to furnish them.
are these so far as yet I know.

1. To see that by perfect learning, 1. Making them very perfect in all their
first school Authors. Reasons.
and often repeating they be very ready in their first Authors, which they
learned, of such moral matters; as their Sententiae, Cato, Esopsfables: For
some one or mo of these have the grounds of almost every Theme, which is meet
to be propounded to scholars to write on. So that by these they shall be
furnished with the judgments of may Wisemen, what is truth, what is false in
most matters, with some words to express their minds, and also some reasons; as
with the sentences or testimonies of the wisest, Similitudes, or Apologues in
Aesop, and some grave reasons out of Cato, which they may call to mind. All
these may be done by the courses set down before, and as soon as the bare
learning of the co^struing and parsing alone.

2. Add to these the often reading over of Tullies sentences out of the Gram.
translations, 2. Reading over and over Tullies sentences.
and the sentences of the other Authors adioined with the same. As also the
reading them forth of Latin into a good English style. Thus yoush I find by
experience, that after that children are perfect in their first school
Authors, they will also read this book of themselves, by the help of the
translation alone, to go over and over it, every day thus reading a piece of it
amongst themselves, with little or no hindering any of their school exercises.

3. To the end that they may have presidents and patterns for Theams, 3.
Presidents or examples.
like as they had for their Epistles and for making Latin, some book is to be
chosen which is written to this purpose, and such a one as is most easy, both
for the sweetest Latin and choicest matter.

These presidents are of two sorts: some are to furnish them still, Presidents
for matter.
with more variety of the best matter; others, for the whole form and frame of
the Theme.

Of the first sort,
for singular matter notably compact together, Reusneri Symbola.
Reusners Symbola does seem to me most familiar and plain: wherein the
Poesies or sentences of the several Emperors, both Italian, Greek, and Germane
are handled: As these;

Artem quaeuis terra alit. Apex Magistratus authoritas. Bonus dux, bonus comes.
Bonis nocet, qui parcet malis. Cedendum multitudini. Festma lent and the like

This book I take to be a very worthy book to train up young Gentlemen,
Reusner worthy to train up young Gentlemen, and all of any good sort and
condition.
and all others whom we would have to become wise men, and good Commonwealths
men. It is full of most singular precepts and instructions concerning duties
and virtues; and for framing and ordering the whole course of our life, and
managing all our affairs with wisdom, safety and commendations. So as any
one may receive many wise directions, for all occasions of life, and withal
much sweet delight, in it. And for this matter of Theames, it is fraughted
full of the grave testimonies and sentences of many of the auncientest, wisest,
and most experienced; all fitly applied, without any matter to corrupt or
offend, and in a most familiar, easy, and pleasing style.

The manner of the use of it for the first enterers into Theames,
where they have books, and the Teacher would specially apply them to Theames,
How Scholars may use Reusners Symbola for Theames.
and that they have time enough, may be this:

To take the The words or Mottoes.
Poesies or Theams of it in order: or if any of them seem over hard for
childrens capacities, in regard of the matter of them, to make choice of the
most easy and familiar, first: to read unto them every night a piece of a
Theme of it, as a side of a leaf, or more or less; according to the
abilities of their Scholars. In reading, first to make the Theme or general
matter of it very plain unto them. They are commonly expounded for the sum of
them under the Poesy, in verse, or with some short gloss, or both. Afterward,
to show your Scholars the chief reasons and sentences, as you do read, and
in what words the force of each Argument or reason lies. Also to observe all the phrases which are either more difficult or pure, or most fit to that
purpose in hand.

And thus to make every thing plain unto them; first opening them, after
examining the same, and so causing them to understand, and to be able to
answer every point thereof in Latin, or to give the hard phrases to the
English.

This poasing by short questions, with the other things mentioned, will make
the obscurest pieces of it very evident, and cause both weaker Masters and
scholars to profit greatly in understanding. After all this, if you will,
cause them to construe it amongst themselves and to give the sense, and so make
it as perfect as they can every way: Or if they be able, hear them to
construe it themselves first, or to read it out of the Latin into English, and
then make it plain to them. Then let each severally see how he can gather a
short Theme out of that; choosing out all the principal sentences and reasons,
and composing them in good order: following, if you think good, the parts of a
Theme: viz. Exordium, Narratio, Confirmatio, Confutatio, Conclusio, though
their Theme be not above 12. or ^6. lines, according to their time and
ability. To these they may adioine other reasons or sentences, as they can,
either what they have learned, or what they can gather fitly to the same
purpose.

To bring this Theme of theirs thus made, the next day at the time appointed
for showing their Theames each one to pronounce his Theme without book;
Pronouncing their Theam^.
you in the mean time looking on that which is pronounced, and examining each
fault, as they are uttering it or after, by asking them short questions of the
faults, and causing them to answer them, and to show how they should be
amended; and so making a dash with a pen under every falt, or the letters where
the falt is, to leave them to them to correct them after. Yet your self
sometimes to peruse the exercises after again, to see that they have corrected
them; as I shall show in another place. By this means the first enterers may
have choice of matter gathered to their hands, which otherwise they were to
seek in other Authors they knew not where no^ how.

2. All the Theams of this Author being thus written of, Benefit of Reusner so
used, and of daily Theams out of it.
and pronounced by them memoriter, which may be done in a short time, keeping
each night a Theme, must needs help to furnish them with variety of the best
matter, and fit phrase. Besides that, this will be a great furtherance to
audac^tie, memory, gesture, pronuntiation: and by the continual and diligent
reading of that Author, with their other Authors, they shall have much help to
construe and understand any other moral Author ex tempore.

Or if this course be ouer-tedious,
by reason of the multitude of scholars, These Theams to be limited according
to leisure and opportunity.
or their other exercises; then to read them the more at a time, and let them
bring them once or twice in the week, made longer and more carefully.


Spoud. This way may be very good for entering young scholars, and to store
them with the best matter and phrase: but might there not be some special
rules and directions given, for writing their Theames according to the order of
the chief schools, prosecuting the several parts of the Theme?


Phil. Yes: but these I think fittest to succeed in the second place, The best
and most easy direction for Theams to be written at large, with judgment
according to the parts thereof.
after that they have thus furnished themselves, with words and store of
matter, by this help, or Tullies sentences, or the like; or in want of other
books to use Apthonius. Then to learn to flourish and adorn their Theames
after.

For the surest and easiest direction for such Theams, to be done in more
exquisite manner, where the scholars may have leisure to them; To take the
Theams out of Apthonius, and how to make them to understand them fully, and
prepare matter.
I shall show you my judgment, and what I can yet find or conceive to be the
best.

1. Because I would not have my scholars discouraged any way thorough the
difficulty of this exercise, I would do as in their first Theams for matter: so
in these. That is, I would take their Theames (at least for a time) out of
Apthonius, either in order as they stand, or choosing of the most familiar, and
in all things read and make it plain unto them, with the several parts and
arguments, as I showed you before in Reusner.

Then I would demand of them, first to give me Apthonius arguments: as, what
reasons he has from the Cause, Effect, Contrary, Similitude, Example,
Testimony.

Next, what reasons every one can give of his own, to prove the same.

In the third place to show, what any of them can object against it; or if it
be true, what absurdities and inconveniences will follow of it; and also some
of them to answer the objections and inconveniences: and lastly my self to
supply their wants and faylings.

After this done, direct every one of them who are to write of it, to remember
where they have read any thing of that Theme, or by the Indexes of their books
of Co^monplaces: as Tullies sentences, Reusner, or the like, to seek what they
can find of that matter.

2. That they observe these parts, named Exordium. Narratio. Parts of the
Theme.
Confirmatio. Confutatio. Conclusio.


3. To make their Exordium very short, Exordium what one.
two or three lines, to gain the approbation of the hearers, and their
attention.

If the Theme be of any person in accusation or defense of them after the
manner of declamations, If the Theme be of persons.
then that their Exordium may be fittest taken, from the party himself who
is accused or defended; from some description of him to his praise or
dispraise; or else from the person of the adversary, or of the auditors, or
of the party himself who writes.

For the persons whom they will defend, they must labor to persuade their
hearers of their virtues, or to remove from them all preiudicate opinion. And
for the persons whom they will accuse, to dispraise them, by showing their bad
qualities; so to bring them into disgrace.

But if the Theme be of some matter to be proved or disproued, Theme of some
matter.
commended or discommended, which are most ordinary; their Exordium may be
taken from the matter; by commending it for the excellency thereof, or for the
benefit which may redound to the hearers, by the knowledge of it; or
discommending it by the contrary, or by some circumstance of time* persons,
places, or the like.

In their Narration, to the end that the Auditors may fully understand the
matter, Narration.
and themselves may proceed more easily; let them set down first the Theme or
matter in as few and plain words as they can.

Secondly, expound the doubtful words or phrases, if therebe any. If it
concern persons or facts of persons, then to set down all the circumstances
to express the nature and manner of it. Or if it concern some special matter,
to make some short division of it; if it be a general into his specials, or
if a whole into his members or parts: so to go through every part in order,
ioining each part together with fit transitions, to show their passage from one
part to another.

In the Confirmation to the end, Confirmation.
to be able to prove the matter the better;

1. To note in their Authors all the principal reasons which they can, to that
end, and to gather them forth.

2. To try what reasons they can invent of themselves according to the chief
heads of Invention, following either Apthonius order, or the ten chief heads of
Invention: as, Causes, Effects, Subjects, Adjuncts, etc. which are the same in
effect, but far more easy to prosecute, according to the Art of meditation,
whereof we shall speak after. By considering well either the thing it self,
Causes and Effects of it: or if it be a Proposition, as in this (Children are
to obey their Parents) by marking carefully both parts of the Proposition or
sentence, both Antecedent and consequent, as they are called; and the one part
will surely afford some reasons.

As if we think first of the parents what they have been, and are toward the
children; and so what the children have and do receive from them (thus
following the parts according to those places of meditation) any one of
understanding shall be able to find out reasons why the children are to obey
their parents.

Then having found out reasons, before they set them down in their Theme, as
they will have them, to rank them in their mind or in writing; so as they do
purpose to set them in their Theme: setting some stronger in the first place,
weaker in the midst, reserving some of the stronger to the last, crossing and
leaving out all the weak ones, whereof any one may discredit all the rest.

In the Confutation to seek out and set down two or three good reasons,
Confutation.
to overthrow or reprove the contrary opinion to the Theme: and also to
consider what may be objected against it, and how to answer them, by way of
Occupation and Subjection, or of preventing and objection.

Then to direct them, Conclusion.
that the Conclusion is nothing but a collection gathered from all the former
reasons; in which may be a short recapitulation, or rehearsal of the sum of
the reasons, and an urging (if they will) of one or two of the principal and
most forcible reasons somewhat more, to leave a deeper impression in the minds
of the hearers; and so out of them to conclude most firmly. And thus much may
serve for the direction in general for making the Theme.


Spoud. But this seems still to me rather too obscure for young Grammar
scholars: I pray you let me hear, if you could not lead me yet unto more
ready helps.


Phil. The most excellent patterns, I take to be the most speedy and ready
helps for scholars to be acquainted with, and to learn to imitate them: for
they in every thing do most avail, to teach the soonest and sureliest.

As for variety of Exordiums and Conclusions,
Apthonius his Prog^masmata may help to direct; Imitation of Exordiums and
Conclusions.
and also Master Stockwood his disputations of Grammar.

For furnishing with matter and substance, Authors for matter.
besides Reusners Symbola mentioned, Erasmus Adages of the largest and last
Edition, is a rich storehouse. Also Lycosthenes his Apothegmata, printed at
London by G. Bishop, M.D.XCVI. is of good use.

Lycosthenes of the last Edition (as I hear) is dangerously corrupted with
Popery, Lycosthenes of the last Edition to be taken heed of, as it is augmented
and corrupted by the Jesuits, printed Coloniae, sumptibus Lazari Zetzueri An.
M.D.C.III.
and railing against K. Henry the eight, K. Edward, and our late blessed
Queen; and therefore not to be permitted unto children. Many other I might
name unto you, which have written of such moral matters; diverse of them in
English, and some of them very notable: as the French Academie, the moral part
of it: Charactery, Moral Philosophy, Golden grove, Wits Common wealth, Civil
conversation; and others.

So in Latin* Z^gedine his Philosophia Poetica; The sentences selected out of
the best Authors, adjoined to Tallies sentences; Flores Poetarum for Verses to
flourish withal.

But the former, viz. Reusner Erasmus Adages, Apthonius, and Lycosthenes, may
serve in steed of many, for Scholars who are of understanding and judgment to
use them aright; choosing out the sum of the most excellent matter, and making
it their own; composing every thing fitly, without apparent stealing out of
any.


Spoud. But what help do you account the very best for invention of matter,
Helps for invention of matter.
to find it out as of their own heads, which you know is principally esteemed
of?


Phil. That which I named in the direction for the Theme, is the usual manner
in schools, as I take it; I mean the following the places of Apthonius: as, a
Laudatiuo, Paraphrastico, Causa, Contrario, Parabola, Exemplo, Testimonio
veterum, Breui Epilogo.

So a Manifesto, Credibili, Possibili, Consequente, Decoro, Vtili. And ab
Obscuro, Incredibili, Impossibili, Inconsequenti, Indecoro, Inutili, and the
like.

Yet these do seem to me also far too hard for childrens conceits, who
have read no Logic, and ouer-tedious. But the following of those ten first
and chief heads of reasoning; The knowledge of the ten grounds of Invention,
the readiest.
to wit, from Causes, Effects, Subjects, Adjuncts, Disagreeable things,
Comparisons, Notations, Distributions, Definitions, Testimonies (to one of
which each of Apthonius or Tullies places do belong) is far the easiest,
surest, and plainest way.

If that little book called the Art of Meditation,
were made somewhat more plain for the definitions or descriptions, The art
of meditation most profitable for invention.
that children might see every thing evidently; and illustrated by a few more
examples; and so scholars made perfect in it by examining; they would be able
to invent plenty of good matter presently, after that they had been exercised
in Reusner, and the other Authors; in reading, and also in writing some
variety of Theames, after the manner set down before.

Let them practice when they would invent matter, but to run through those
places curiously in their minds; and if one place do not offer fit matter,
another will surely, and furnish them with store: so that by the help of that
small Treatise, if it were so perfected, all this might be accomplished; and
that with a small meditation any scholar of understanding might discourse very
commendably of any such matter.


Spoud. It is great pity it should not be made exact, if the use and benefit
be such as you conceive of it to this purpose, besides the worthy end for
which it is written.

But as you have given patterns for other exercises, so let me hear your
judgment, where they may have the best patterns for Theames, for the whole
frame thereof, being handled according to all the parts severally.


Phil. Apthonius (out of whom these Theames may be
taken first and the scholars also to have liberty to gather out the
principal matter; Presidents for the manner of Theames, and out of which to
take their Theames first; or out of Reusthner, or others as we will
yet making it their own, by seeking to better every sentence) has sundry
very good presidents for such Theames; and in sweet Latin, written by
Rodulphus Agricola, Cataneus Lorichius, or others: as the example of a
Commonplace, of the Thesis, and the like. Though Apthonius his own (I mean)
those translated out of him, are of a more harsh style in Latin; yet the order
is good, as being written and set forth of purpose to this end.

These very Theames may be written on,
first for encouragement; after, others of like matterto be imitated, according
to the same places.


Secondly, Tullies Paradoxes for more excellent patterns.
next unto those in Apthonius, which are more easy, Tullies Paradoxes are most
singular patterns for true Rhetoric, though the order of them seem to be
more obscure: they will be notable directions, if that the scholars be of
capacity and ripeness, and have the several parts rightly opened unto them,
that they fully understand them.


Spoud. But for Declamations what examples or helps would you use?
Declamations and pattrnes for them.



Phil. The Declamation being nothing else but a Theme of some matter, which may
be controuerted, and so handled by parts, when one takes the Affirmative part,
another the Negative, and it may be a third moderateth or determines between
both; we have very good Presidents in the Thesis in Apthonius: as in that
question handled both affirmatively and negatiuely, viz. Vxor est ducenda, Vxor
non est ducenda.

If it be in a more vehement inuectiue against some vice, Examples of
Inuectiues.
we have sundry examples in Apthonius, in Loco communi. As, In villarum
incensores, In sacrilegum, Incontumacem, In auarum. Examples of praise and
dispraise.


Likewise the several examples there set down of praise and dispraise, of
persons, cities, or the like. So the Presidents in Apthonius of particular
actions, in accusing or defense of them, may be great helps to give much good
direction.

For further patterns, see Tully his Orations; and specially the Inuectiues
against Catiline.

In these kind of Theames, we shall have far more use of those figures of
Sentences, which are the very life and strength of an Oration; as of
Exclamations, Reuocations, Apostrophees, Prosopopies; and the rest of the
figures in Dialogismo.

I have heard of some good ensamples in English, viz. thirteen Declamations;
but I have not been able to find them out.

But these kind of exercises of Declaming are rather for the Universities;
Declamations fit for the Universities, or for principal scholars in the
Grammar schools. Manner of writing down the Theames by Scholars of judgment.
or at least for such Scholars in the Grammar schools, as have been long
exercised in the former kinds.

For the manner of writing down the Theames by Scholars of judgment, it may
not be amiss where leisure will serve, to cause the scholars to write them
thus: In the first Margent toward the left hand, together with the several
parts of the Theme (as Exord. Narratio, Confirmatio, Confutatio, Conclusio,
being set in great letters over against each part) to set also the heads of the
several arguments; chiefly against the Confirmation: as Causa, Effectum: like
as Apthonius does set his places, a Causa, a Contrario. And in the later side
of the page, toward the right hand, to set the several tropes or figures, but
in two or three letters. As for Metonymia Efficientis, no more but Met. Effic.
or the like: making some line under the word, in which they are; The shorter
the better, if it can be understood.

One Theme in the week well performed in this manner,
besides all other exercises, One Theme thus in the week may suffice, and to
spend their odd times in making Verses, as more sharpening the wit. Making
Theames ex tempore, a matter of great commendations if it be don schollar-like.
may be sufficient; like as the order is in many of the chief schools.


Spoud. Certainly Sir, these courses seem to me as easy as the former, both
for Masters and Scholars; that hereby they must needs labor, and go on with
delight; being thus plainly guided and directed from point to point.

Yet to proceed a little further herein, if you will give me leave: I have
heard of some scholars marueilously praised for this, that they have been
able to speak of a Theme ex tempore for a quarter of an hour, or more
together, in good Latin, and to very good purpose.

Now how do you think that this may be done? for this is a matter of very
high commendations to young scholars even in the Universities; and much more
in the Grammar schools, if it can be done.


Phil. This exercise must needs require much reading, The way to make Theames
ex tempore.
and practice to do it, in such commendable manner; as indeed it may. The best
way how to attain it most soon and surely* is this, so far as yet I can
conceive:

1 They must practice constantly for a good space, the former or better course
of making Theames; that they may become very ready in writing their Theames of
any moral matter with a little study.

2 I have seen this practice to be easy and profitable to this end: A
practice most easy and profitable to help to make Theames ex tempore.
the very use of the Grammatical translation of Apthonius, according to the
manner of the use of the translations, for keeping the school Authors
perfectly.

As first, causing them to read a Theme out of the Latin into English; or
where it is hard, first to read it over in English to give some light; To
follow a pattern of a Theme, made familiar unto them by the Grammatical
translations. To see how each is able to better his Author, in uttering every
part of themselves, both English and Latin.
then out of the Latin into English, to understand it perfectly: afterward to
read it out of the English translation into Latin, to have the phrase and
Latin readily to express their minds.

Then every one in his course, to try how he is able to express or utter that
Theme of himself; first in English, then in Latin, every part of the Theme
in order.

For example: To begin first with the Exordium, to try how they can utter it
in English, and whether they can better the Author. After the first, a second
fellow to assay how he is able to better the first; so another after him to
better them both: and so forward as you will.

After this, to make trial how they can utter the same in Latin; every one
still bettering others: then to do the like in the Narration; and so through
every part, both in English and Latin; still contending to go beyond their
patterns in purity of phrase and matter, contracting, adding, or changing as
they will.

When they have for some good time used this practice,
then trying how they are able to discourse of themselves in a Theme given
unto them, To practice to discourse of themselves.
according to the order of meditation, or places of Invention, by continual
exercise they shall attain hereunto.

The practice in Apthonius will afford them matter and wordesenow for
imitation of Exordiums, Where to be stored with matter: and words for all
parts.
manner of Confutations and Conclusions.

Their readiness in their first Authors of moral matters, as also in Tullies
sentences, and Flores Poetarum; and that their continued exercise in Reusner,
with the help of the places of Invention, will commonly yield matter
sufficient.

What phrase or word they cannot utter in Latin,

1 Let them bethink themselves how they would first utter and vary it in
English, Help for supplying words or phrases.
and some of the English words will bring Latin words, 1 To think how to
utter it in other words in English.
or phrases to their remembrance; or else how they can express it by
Periphrasis, or circumlocution in more words, by some description, or by the
general, or the contrary, or by some property, or the like.

2 Next to this,
they may use the help of Holyokes Dictionary; 2 Helps of Dictionaries and
books of phrases.
and for phrase Manutius or Master Draxes Calliepeia: the phrases may be found
more easily in the Calliepeia.

3 And to the end that they may be sure to have variety both of words and
phrase, To meditate the chief phrases before.
which does much delight; it shall not be amiss to peruse before in the phrase
book, the principal words or phrases which concern that Theme, and how many
ways they may be uttered: at least the Master when he tries his Scholars in
this extemporall faculty, if he be not a ready and perfect Latinist may have
the phrase book by him, Help by the Master.
to look every hard phrase which they cannot utter well; and how they may vary
it diverse ways.


Spoud. But to the end that scholars may be sure ever to have store of matter,
or to find of a sudden where to turn to fit matter for every Theme; what do
you think of Commonplace books of such moral matters, that every scholar
should have his Commonplace book written.


Phil. I do account them a great help where the scholars have leisure and
judgment to gather them; Commonplace books a singular help.
I mean, to gleane out all the choice sentences and matter in the best
Authors. Or, because that that is ouer-great a toil, and requires more
judgment then can be looked for in so young years; if they had but only
books of References, it would be exceeding profitable: to wit, such
Commonplace books as did but only contain the general heads of matter, and
then the Quotations of three or four of the chief Authors; as Reusner,
Erasmus Adages, Tullies sentences, or some other; setting down the book and
the page, where to turn of a sudden to any such matter in them. This would ease
them of much searching, and make scholars to do such exercises much sooner,
and with far greater commendations: like as it is in Divinity, Law, Physic,
and whatsoever other Arts. Thus they may use the matter of the best Authors,
going far beyond the matter which the wit of any child can conceive; since
that those books have in them the choysest sayings of the very wisest of all
ages: although they are still to add whatsoever they can invent of their own
brain, so it be wittily and pithily.

Such a book of References well gathered, and made public, would much further
young scholars herein.


Spoud. I see well how they may be furnished for store of matter; yet for
choice of good words and phrase, to have copy and variety ever ready at hand,
I make some doubt how they may be furnished: for it is a toil to go ever to
turn to phrase books; neither can they have time when they are to speak ex
tempore.


Phil. Take no care for that; How to get store of phrases
store of matter being thus gotten, as I have showed, will bring words: yet to
have copy of Synonymaes and good phrase, besides their Authors made perfect,
and other helps mentioned; Calliepeia translated in propriety, and read one
while out of Latin into English, another while out of English into Latin, and
after trying how to vary both in English and Latin; will help very much to
furnish with copy both English and Latin. Hereof I have known some experience.
A little trial will soon co^firm this.

There may be also other helps forvarying: Other helps.
as the rules in Erasmus de Cap^a, in Macropedius and others; and more
specially some select phrases to several purposes noted in Erasmus de Copia.


Spoud. But what say you concerning Orations, Orations.
what course do you think fittest to be able to perform them with
commendations?


Phil. I take them to belong rather to the Universities, Orations belong
specially to the Universities.
that there is more seldom use of them in schools, and then also to be
performed by scholars grown to some maturity.

For examples or patterns of Orations, Examples of Orations.
we can have no better then Tullies Orations; wherein are presidents of all
sorts. In these is the scholar to be exercised to know the nature of them,
and the manner of the loftiness of style used in them. Also Turners Orations,
Muretus, or others. Though for entrance into them we may follow the examples of
praises in Apthonius. Chap. 8. Or some other select Orations.

Yet, because in Schools of special note, and where there are ancient
scholars, Orations ex tempore.
sometimes it may be expected amongst them, that some one of them should make
an Oration to entertain a Benefactor, or other person of note; and it may be,
to do it ex tempore, as their coming is of a sudden; therefore certain
special heads of an Oration to that purpose might be ever in readiness.
As the commendations of a person for his descent, learning, love and
countenance of good learning and virtue, beneficence courtesy, favor toward
that place, and the like. Also for excusing themselves by their tender years,
want of experience and of practice in that kind, bashfulnesse, timorousness;
and yet their desire to answer the parties love and expectation, with
presuming upon their patience, and such others. To be acquainted also with
variety of choice phrases to the same purposes, to have them ever in fresh
memory.


Sp. These courses are very plain in my judgment: yet notwithstanding, since
they are of more seldom use, but Theams of daily practice, we are specially to
look unto them. Therefore my weak memory, let me hear in two words, the sum of
all concerning the Theames.


Phil. This is the sum;

1. That they be acquainted with some matter for Theams and easy phrase, Sum of
all for Theames.
and so accustomed to write Theames in a plain manner first, following Reusner
principally.

2. That they learn to handle the Theme more curiously according to
Apthonius, prosequuting and adorning the several parts thereof, making choice
of the most excellent patterns.

3. That they have the helps and grounds of inuenting reasons of themselves,
and do know whereto find more store of matter and phrase to express their
minds, and be furnished with helps of the best books.

4. Lastly, that as in all other exercises, they use continual practice; which
makes the hardest things easy and pleasant.


CHAP. XIIII.
How to enter to make verses with delight and certainty, without bodging; and
to train up scholars to imitate and express Ovid or Virgil, both their
phrase and style.
Spo^d. NOw that we have gone thorough all the whole course of writing Latin
in prose, and the several exercises thereof which are requisite in Grammar
schools, so far forth as I remember; it remains that we come to verse:
wherein I presume of your love as in all the former, not to conceal anything
from me, but to impart whatsoever may help to the attaining of that faculty.


Phil. Though Poetry be rather for ornament then for any necessary use;
and the main matter to be regarded in it, Poetry rather for ornament then for
any necessity. Yet there may be commendable use of it.
is the purity of phrase and of style: yet because there is very commendable
use of it, sometimes in occasions of triumph and reioicing, more ordinarily at
the funerals of some worthy personages, and sometimes for some other purposes;
it is not amiss to train up scholars even in this kind also. And the rather
because it serves very much for the sharpning of the wit, and is a matter of
high commendation, when a scholar is able to write a smooth and pure verse,
and to comp^ehend a great deal of choice matter in a very little room.


Spoud. Surely sir though it is, as you say, but an ornament, yet it is such a
one, as does highly grace those who have attained it, in any such measure as
you speak of; and two such verses are worth two thousand, of such flash and
bodge stuff as are ordinarily in some schools. But this I have found also to
be full of difficutie, The ordinary difficulty of this faculty.
both in the entering, the progress, and also in the end; that my scholars
have had more fear in this, then in all the former, and my self also driven
to more severity: which I have been enforced unto, or else I should have done
no good at al with the greatest part.

And yet when I have done my uttermost, I have not had any to come to such
pe^fection as you mention, The folly of some in this kind.
to write so pithily or purely: yea, let me tell you this, that I have
knowensom Masters, who have thought themselves very profound Poets, who would
upon an occasion of a Funeral have written you a sheet or two of verses, as
it were of a sydden; yet amongst all those, you should hardly have found one
such a Verse as you speak of, unless it were stolen; and most of them such,
as judicious Poet would be ready to laugh at, or loath to read. Therefore I
entreat you to guide me, how I may redress this evil, and prevent these
inconveniences.


Phil. Though I be no Poet, yet I find this course to be found most easy and
plain to direct my scholars:

1. To look that they be able in manner to write true Latin, The most plain
way how to enter to make a verse without bodging.
and a good phrase in prose, 1. To write true Latin.
before they begin to meddle with making a verse.

2. That they have read some poetry first; 2. To have read some Poetry.
as at least these books or the like, or some part of them: viz. Ovid de
Tristibus, or de Ponto, some peace of his Metamorphosis or of Virgil, and be
well acquainted with their Poetical phrases.

3. I find this a most easy and pleasant way to enter them;
that for all the first books of Poetry which they learn in the beginning, 3.
Practice of turning them out of the Gra^maticall translations into verse.
they use to read them daily out of the Grammatical translations: first
resolving every verse into the Grammatical order, like as it is in the
translation; after into the Poetical, turning it into verse, as the words are
in the Poet: according as I showed the manner before, in the benefit and use of
the translations.
For the making of a verse, Giving Poetical phrase.
is nothing but the turning of words forth of the Grammatical order, into the
Rhetorical, in some kind of meter; which we call verses. And withal, that
in reading thus out of the translations, they use to give the Poetical
phrases, to our English phrases, set in the margents, and also the Epithetes.

For this practice of reading their Poetry, out of the translations into verse,
a little trial will soon show you, that very children will do it as fast almost
as into prose: and by the use of it, continually turning prose into verse, they
will be in a good way toward the making a verse, before they have learned any
rules thereof.

4. Then when you would have them to go in hand with making a verse; 4. To be
very cunning in the rules of versifying.
that they be made very cunning in the rules of versifying, so as to be able to
give you readily each rule, and the meaning thereof.

5. That they be expert in scanning a verse, 5. To be perfect in scanning.
and in proving every quantity, according to their rules, and so use to
practice in their lectures daily.

6. To keep them that they shall never bodge in their entrance, 6. To keep
from bodging in their entrance.
neither for phrase nor otherwise, but to enter with ease, certainty and
delight; this you shall find to be a most speedy way:

Take Flores Poetarum,
and in every Common place make choice of Ouids verses, To use the like
practice in Flores Po^tarum for verse, as in Tullies sentences for prose.
or if you find any other which be pleasant and easy: and making sure, that
your scholars know not the verses a forehand, use to dictate unto them as you
did in prose. Cause also so many as you would have to learn together, to set
down the English as you dictate.

Secondly to give you, and to write down all the words in Latin verbatim, or
Grammatically.

Thirdly, having just the same words, let them try which of them can soonest
turn them into the order of a verse: which they will presently do* being
trained up in the use of the translations; which is the same in effect.

And then lastly, read the^ over the verse of Ovid, that they may see that
themselves have made the very same; or wherein they missed: this shall much
encourage and assure them.

After that they have practiced this for a little time; To do this without pen.
if for speediness, and for saving paper (because they may soon run over much)
you do use but only to read the English Grammatically, and appoint some one of
them to deliver it in Latin; then all to try which of them can soonest turn
those words into a verse, or how many ways they can turn them into a verse:
you shall see them come on a pace, and an earnest ^^rift to be wrought amongst
them.


This also may be done most easily, The most easy way of turning verses out
of Flores Poetarum
by the use of Grammatical translations of all the choice verses in Flores
Poetarum; practicing as in Tully and other, to read them* ex te^pore out of the
English first into prose* after into verse. They will be as familiar and easy,
as to read prose, and to do it with as much delight and contention, or more;
every da^e practicing a little by course. To note hard words qua^tities
Epithets.
For this is nothing (as I said) but the Poetical composition. In the practice
of this likewise, use to note every new and hard word, and quantity, as also
Epithetes; according to the general rule before, and the manner in each
lecture,
and often to examine those.

7. Cause them to turn the verses of their lecture into other verses, 7. To
turn the verses of their lectures.
either to the same purpose, which is easiest for young beginners, or turned to
some other purpose, to express some other matter; yet ever to keep the very
phrase of the Poet, there or in other places, only transposing the words or
phrase, or changing some words or phrase, or the numbers, or persons, or
applying them to matters which are familiar, as they did in imitating Epistles.
This may be practiced, each to bring first a verse or two thus changed, either
being given at eleven to be brought at one, or at evening to be brought in the
morning, or both.

8. As they proceed,
to cause them to contract their lectures, 8. Contracting their lectures.
drawing seven or eight verses into four or five, or fewer: yet still
laboring to express the whole matter of their Author in their own verse, and
every circumstance, with all significant Metaphors, and other tropes and
phrases, so much as they can.

Thus* they may proceed if you will, from the lowest kind of verse in the
Eclogues, to something a loftier in the Georgicks; and so to the stateliest
kinds in the Aeneids: wherein they may be tasked to go thorough some book of
the Aeneids, The certain benefit of this exercise.
every day contracting a certain number, as some 5 or 6. a day, for some of
their exercises, striving who can express their Author most lively. By which
daily contention you shall find, that those who take a delight in Poetry, and
have sharpness and dexterity accordingly, To express their Poet most lively.
will in a short time attain to that ripeness, as that they who know not the
places which they imitate, shall hardly discern in many verses, whether the
verse be Virgils verse, or the scholars.

But herein there must be this care, Caveat in contracting.
that before they go in hand with this kind of contracting, they be both
well exercised in the former kinds, or the like; and also that they beat out
the meaning of the place fully, marking what goes before, and also what
follows after; and observing curiously every phrase, elegancy, and matter of
any weight.


Morouer, To make verses of any ordinary Theme.
that your scholars may be able to write verses ex tempore, of any ordinary
Theme, after they have bin well practiced in turning the easy verses of Flores
Po^tarum, forth of prose into verse, that they can do it readily; appoint them
of the most familiar Theames of it, and the sweetest verses thereof in order,
to see how they can turn the same ex tempore into other verses, to the very
same purpose; either by imitation, or contraction, like as I showed the
practice in their lectures: or having but the light of those verses, how they
can make other verses of their own like unto them.

By this practice kept duly,
to make some such verses twice in the day (as to give them Theams before their
breaking up at noone, To versifie ex tempore.
to bring them at one of the clock, and at night to bring them in the morning,
or nine, as before; only having this help and direction) or of a sudden ever
before they are to pla^e, to versifie of some Theme not thought of: and
secondly by causing them to bring the sum of their Theams written under their
Theams, comprised in a disticke, or two or more, you shall find that they will
grow in so good sort, as shall be requisite to make you verses, ex tempore of
any usual Theme, without hindering of their other studies. And here by they
will soon be acquainted with matter of all sorts according to those Common
places, Benefits of this practice.
and also with variety of poetical phrase of the best, with Epihetes and style.
This exercise is very commendable to satisfy such, The use of versifying ex
tempore.
as use to give Theams to versifie upon ex tempore; and also for that it is a
very great sharpner of the wit, as was said, and a stirrer up of invention and
of good wits to strift and emulation.

In this matter of versifying,
as in all the former exercises, I take this Imitation of the most excellent
patterns, Imitation surest
to be the surest rule, both for phrase and whatsoever: And therefore I would
have the chiefest labor to make these purest Authors our own, as Tully for
prose, so Ovid and Virgil for verse so to speak and write in Latin for the
phrase, as they did.

For them who desire to attain to more exquisite perfection in this faculty of
Poetry, Further helps for versifying.
these things may much further besides the former:

1. For more store and variety of matter, For store of m^tt^r to have Common
place books or books of references to to the most excellent places in Poets.
to have Common place books (as I said for the Theams) therein at least to have
ref^rences* whereby to turn of a sudden to matters of all sorts, in the most
exquisite and pure Poets: to have some direction both for matter and imitation;
whether for Gratulatory verses, Triumphs, Funerals, or whatsoever. Or to refer
all such principal places for imitation, to the heads in Flores Poetarum;
which may serve insteede thereof


2. For variety and copy of Poetical phrases, 2. (...)
the The saurus Phrasium poeticarum gathered by Buchlerus of the last Edition.
An. M. D Cvij. is a notable help.

Also both for words and phrases, (...)
Sylua Synonimorum, may stand in good steed, chiefly for scholars of
iudgementable to make right choice of the fittest.

3. For store of Epithetes, 3. For Epithets, Textors Epithets of the last and
largest.
which if they be choice, are a singular ornament, and means of speediness
in this faculty, and so for all other matters belonging to Poetry, Textor his
Epitheta of the largest and of the last Edition printed at Lions, M. D. Cij.
may be a great help.

The abbridgement of Textors Epithetes may serve insteede hereof to young
scholars: Abb^idgement of Textor.
and namely to such who are not able to buy the large; though the large is more
profitable.

4. For having of the best authorities for the quantities of all syllables,
Smotius his Prosodia will furnish plentifully; 4. For Qua^iti^s and
Authorities Smet^^ Prosodia (...)
all needful words being set in it in the Alphabeticall order. For rules of
quantities, though our own Grammar may be sufficient; yet you may see also
Smotius his Methodus dignosc^n^arum Syllabarum ex Georg. Fabricio, set before
his Prosodia. And rules of the quantities of Syllables in M. Butlers Rhetoric,
short and very plain. Chap. 14 de Metro.


Also the Virgils printed with Erythraus Index, (...)
for Authorities and uses of all words in Virgil.

5. For imitation of the best Poets, (...)
and further direction to attain to more perfection in Poetry, see Sabines
precepts Decarminibi^s ad vete^um imitationem artificiose componendis* joined
with Textors Epithets. Also Buch^^rus his Institutio Poetica in the end of his
Thesaurus phrasium poeticarum.

6 For the Figures belonging to Poetry, 6 Figures of Rhetoric.
see Butlars Rhetoric in his fourteenth Chapt. De Metro.

7 For turning of Verses diverse ways, 7 For turning Verses Poetically:
Stockewood his Progymnasma s^^olafticum.
M* Stockwood his Progymnasma scholasticum is instar omnium* to direct and to
encourage young scholars. In which book toward the end of it, you shall have
one Disticke or couple of Verses, varied 450. ways. One Disticke varyed 450.
ways.
The Verses are these: 1 Linque Cupido iecur; cordi quoque parcito: sivis
Figere fige alio tela cruent a loco.
2 Parce meo iecori; intactum mihi linquito pectus:
Omnia de reliquo corpore membrapete.
3 Ca^epuer, etc.


And in the shutting up of all, One Verse turned 104. ways, the same words
being kept.
this one Verse is turned by transposing the words 104. ways; all the same
words, and only those words being kept: which might seem impossible, but
that there we may see it before our eyes, that nine words should serve to make
a hundredth and four Verses, all of the same matter. The Verse is this: Est mea
spes Christus sol^s, qui de cruce pendet.
Est Christus solus mea spes, qui de cruce pendet.
Est solus Christus mea spes, qui de cruce pendet.
Solus de cruce, etc.


A scholar of any inclination and fitness for Poetry, cannot but receive
notable encouragement, having these, or but the principal of these books:
this exercise of Versifying will be found a most pleasant recreation unto him
after a time.

8 Lastly, 8 Practice still all in all.
in this exercise, as in all the rest, I hold daily practice and diligence
(following the best patterns) to be the surest and speediest guide; and which
will bring in time much perfection, where there is aptness of nature
concurring.


Spoud. But repeat me in a word, which exercises you would have daily put in
practice. Daily and easy exercises.



Phil. Turning the Verses of the Lectures, as was showed; chiefly by
contraction in Virgil, keeping strictly his phrase.

2 Before each breaking up at noones and nights, to have a Theme out of the
easiest of Fl^res Poetarum in order, to bring Verses of it at their entrance
again, or as is appointed to them.

3 Writing Verses of their weekly Theames.


CHAP. XV.
The manner of examining and correcting Exercises.
Spoud. Having thus gone through the principal exercises of writing; Examining
exercises never to be omitted.
I pray you let me hear your judgment, for the examining of such exercises,
and the best manner of performing it: Though tedious yet profitable.
for I find it a matter very tedious and troublesome.


Phil. Howsoever it be tedious, Neglect of exmining brings carelessness in
scholars.
yet it is such a matter as would never be omitted, no more then the giving of
exercises; nor to be slightly passed over, so much as time and opportunity will
permit. For when the scholar knows that his exercise must be strictly
examined, it will make him more careful in performing thereof, and contrarily;
and it will be a great help to bring him sooner to perfection.

For the manner of doing it;

1 The Master ought heedfully to observe those special faults, 1 Masters to
obs^rue general faults.
wherein his scholars do most usually slip; and to acquaint every one, not
only with the general, but also with his particular, to warn them of them.

For example; Wherein scholars do most commonly slip.
I have found my scholars to miss most in these: through want of Dipthongs.
Incongruity in their Concords. In the use of the two chief rules of the
Relative Qui, quae quod. Ablative case absolute. Apposition* Conjunctions to
couple together like cases, moodes and Tenses. Nominature case after the Verb,
etc. The Accusative case before an Infinitive Mood.

Also that they will often have a Synchesis, Synchesis.
or a disordered confusion of their words; Hyperbaton to be avoided.
and sometimes they will use hyperbaton: which is a further fetching or
carrying of some words, whereby a sentence is obscured; and the scholar
forgets himself before he come to the end of his sentence, and so writes false
Latin. Long Periods are therefore to be avoided as much as may be.

2 The Scholars are to be called upon,
to read over their exercises in the natural or Grammatical order, 2 To
read over their exercises first in natural order.
so as they construe: and then they may see presently how the words do hang
together, both for agreement, government, and sense, and where the faults of
Grammar are.

3 That besides their rules, they be able presently to parallele or prove each
phrase and construction,
by the like example in Grammar, 3. To parallele each thing by examples.
or by a like phrase out of Tully, or other Authors: and what they know not,
to seek out; to the end that they may be able to justify every word, even
where they have read it, so much as may be.

4 The higher scholars to look to elegancie,
and finenesse of phrase and Composition; 4 To look to elegancy and finenesse
of Composition.
and so to be reading their exercises over and over, still correcting and
amending them, never thinking an exercise well enough, until no fault can be
found, Never to think any exercise labored enough*
in Latin, propriety, composition, matter; no nor in the least tittle. The
scholar is herein to imitate the curious painter, who is still amending and
bettering his picture, to draw all into admiration; that his Theames, Verses,
Orations may be as the harp of Orpheus, to draw all the hearers or readers
after them.

5 To appoint adversaries to take one another exercises,
and to see whether of them can find the more faults: 5 Adversaries to note
faults in one another exercises.
and if you will, to set underneath, how many faults either of them finds; and
so to give them to the Master, or to themselves first to correct, then to the
Master.

6 Afterall,
the Master is carefully to read over every ones exercise, 6 The manner of
examining by the Master.
so much as leisure will permit; and by questions to make themselves to find
where the error is: as but asking; Do we say thus or thus? and to cause them
to amend it of themselves by giving a like example* And in the mean time, to
make some little line under the phrase or word, or piece of the word or
syllable wherein the error is, that they may amend it after in their books.
And for all correcting of translations in Latin, to do it by comparing their
exercise with the Author; and so exercises of imitation, to see who comes
next to the example.

7 In examining exercises in the highest fourmes (as in Theames,
Declamations, 7 Special faults in the youngest fourmes.
Verses, Orations, and the like) besides the faults against Grammar, the
diligent Master should observe, first, all barbarous phrases, or Poetical
phrase in Prose, or contrary: secondly, Tautologies, or often repetitions of the
same thing or words: thirdly, want of transitions; that is, of fit bonds or
phrases, whereby to pass elegantly from one point to another; so as they might
be more easily understood: fourthly* harsh composition: fifthly, lack of
matter: sixthly, want of elegancy in Tropes and Figures; and so like elegancies
noted in Grammar.

7 To have a diligent eye that the scholars do forthwith correct their
exercises,
so noted out unto them: 7 Care that they do correct their exercises forthwith.
and to this end he is often to look in their books, whether they have
corrected their former exercises; and to use sharp reprehension or correction
for that carelesnes, to make them to look to that above all. For there is
nothing wherein their negligence is more intolerable, nor for which the Master
shall be more censured, when their parents, or others who be learned* shall
look into their books, 8 This to be ^o^e by others (...) of
and read over their exercises, and there to find them uncorrected.

8 If at any time the Masters occasions permit not so much time, yet to see
that it be performed by the Usher or some of the highest scholars, and the
number of faults noted.


Spou. But what if there should be 30. or 40.
in a form (as it may be in the greater schools; How to do for correcting
where there are very many in a form; and where time will not permit to
correct all.
especially amongst the lower fourmes) how would you do to examine all their
exercises in a morning, but you shall hinder your self and them from many other
things, with you must of necessity perform?


Ph. In such cases we must yield to necessity, and use the best policy we can;
as in that exercise of translating into Latin, to cause some 3. or 4. whom you
most fear, In exercises of translations.
to pronounce their exercises, or to read or construe the^ out of the
translation; you to look upon the exercises, as they are pronouncing, and
cause them to show how they must be amended: so all the rest to correct theirs,
according as they hear those corrected: if any be found careless to correct
so, that he be surely corrected: and this is the best help which I know in
this behalf.

So likewise where you give them a Theme to make Verses ex tempore: Verses ex
tempore.
or upon some small meditation, as those which are to be brought each morning, or
at one of the clock, when time will not permit to peruse the writing of every
one; yet to cause every one to pronounce the Verses which he has made: and as
they pronounce, to show them their faults, and then cause them to correct them
after. Thus have I showed you my judgment also for examining of exercises.


CHAP. XVI.
How to answer any needful question of Grammar or Rhetoric.
Spoud. WEll good Sir, you see how bold I am, to require your judgment in
every matter, wherein I find difficulty: now to return to the brief again of
those things which you affirmed might be done for learning;

This I remember was another point, which cannot but greatly commend a
scholar: to be able to answer any difficult question of Grammar, even beside
those which are in the rules, which are commonly learned; and also how to
oppose or dispute schollar-like in Latin, of any good Grammar question; as
both what may be objected against Lillies rules, and how to defend them: I pray
you let me hear of you how this may be done, and what is the most speedy way
which you know hereunto.


Phil. The plainest, How to answer any difficult question of Grammar.
shortest, and surest way, I find to be this:

1 See that they be very ready in all the usual and ordinary questions of
Grammar, 1 To be perfect in all ordinary questions of Accedence.
by daily examining at Parts.

2 For most of the rest fit for young scholars, 2 In those set together in the
end of the Accedence questions.
I have gathered them for the use of mine own scholars, and set them together
after the end of the Accedence Questions; yet so* as I have sorted and referred
every Question to the right place whither it appertains: as to the Noune,
Pronoune, Participle, and so the several heads thereof.

When as young scholars wax perfect in all the former, which are in the
Accedence; then a little pains in teaching them these, making them plain unto
them, and examining them some half side at time (in stead of the time spent
before in examining the former) will very soon make them as ready in these
also.

3 After these, 3 In the Latin questions dispersed through the Grammar, not
learned usually.
you may (if you please) go through the questions of Grammatica, and make them
plain; examining them in Latin: and so through all the necessary questions
which are scattered here and there, through the whole Grammar: directing them
to mark out the questions, or the special words wherein the questions are,
and how to be propounded; that they themselves may oppose one another, or one
to oppose all as need is.

But this as you shall think necessary; Caveat.
and so as it do not hinder better studies.

4 You may run through the questions in M. Stockwoods disputations of
Grammar,
as they are commonly noted in the Margents, 4 Stockwoods questions.
but only propounding the question in few words, both English and Latin, as
need requires, and teaching them to answer in a word or two.

By going through these, they may be able to answer all,
or most of those which are set together in the end of his disputations; Most
of the difficulties of the ancient Classical Authors collected into one by M.
Stockwoods last Edition, printed Anno. 1607.
wherein he has with marvelous pains, and diligent observation, collected a
very great part of the difficulties of all Classical Authors, and in the last
Edition noted the words in the Margents, in which the difficulty in each
sentence is. What other are wanting in these, may be answered by them, being of
like nature.

5 To give a further light, and that nothing may be wanting for my children, 5
Certain general Figures to answer many difficulties by.
I have adjoined unto the later end of all the Accedence questions which I
spoke of, certain general figures: unto some of which, many of the
difficulties of all ancient Authors (both those in Stockewood and others) may
be referred, or else unto those figures set down in the Grammar and Rhetoric.

For answering the questions of Rhetoric, In Talaeus Rhetoric to give
definitions, divisions and one short example.
you may if you please, make them perfect in Talaeus Rhetoric, which I take to
be most used in the best Schools; only to give each definition and
distribution, and some one example or two at most in each Chapter; and those of
the shortest sentences out of the Poets: so that they can give the word or
words, wherein the force of the rule is. And so to proportion all other
questions accordingly.

To this end, the words wherein the force of the examples consist, Talaeus
examples would be noted as Grammar.
would be marked as in the Grammar; and that not only in some one or two
examples in every Chapter, which they are to have perfect without book, but
also in every example through the book, to be able to apply any.

Claudius Minos Commentary may be a good help to make Talaeus Rhetoric most
plain, Minos Commentary to help for understanding Talaeus.
both for precepts and examples.

If your Scholar after he has read these,
do but use to be careful to keep a short Catalogue in his mind, of the
names of the Tropes, and also Figures (and those both of Grammar and
Rhetoric) he shall with practice of examination and observation be able to
tell any of them, but repeating the heads in his mind.

Or in stead of Talaeus, Butlars Rhetoric, a notable abbridgement of Talaeus,
and far more easy and profitable.
you may use Master Butlars Rhetoric, of Magdalens in Oxford, printed in
Oxford; which I mentioned before: being a notable abbridgement of Talaeus,
making it most plain, and far more easy to be learned of Scholars, and
also supplying very many things wanting in Talaeus. Both it and the Commentary
together, are almost as small as Talaeus alone, and not a much greater price,
though the worth be double. It is a book, which (as I take it) is yet very
little known in Schools, thought it have been forth sundry years, set forth
for the use of Schools; and the use and benefit will be found to be far
above all that ever has been written of the same.

Finally, Brasbridges questions on Tullies offices.
for answering the questions of Tullies Offices, M. Brasbridge his questions
thereof, are as short and perspicuous as any of the former.


Spoud. Sir, I have not (in truth) so much as ever heard of either of those
books: as neither of any almost of those singular helps which you mentioned
for Poetry; by which apt Scholars cannot choose but become excellent Poets.


Phil. Thereby may appear what a general want here is amongst us; General
want in the ignorance of the best helps.
when God has given so many worthy helps, whereby we and our Scholars may
attain so readily the excellency of all learning meet for us, and make all our
courses so full of al pleasant and alluring contentment, and yet we shall
neglect to enquire after them.


CHAP. XVII.
Of Grammatical oppositions, how to dispute schollarlike of any Grammar
question in good Latin.
Spoud. IT seems to be very evident, that by these means they may be able to
answer any necessary question, meet for them; but for those schollar-like
oppositions in Grammar questions, I hear you to say nothing, although it
cannot but be a marvelous profitable exercise.


Phil. It is indeed a profitable exercise: and I find that it may be very
easily attained thus;

1. About that time when they begin to read Virgill or before, Two to dispute
each day instead of their Theme or Verses.
as they are able, when they begin to make Theams, two of them may be
appointed, instead of their Theme, or Verses to be made for that mornings
exercise, to dispute every day by course. The manner of it thus:

Let them take M. Stockwoods disputations, 1. To follow M. Stockwood and to use
his very words.
to direct them. And first for their greater ease and encouragement, to enter
them; appoint them to dispute in the very words which M. Stockwood has, and
that of all the questions in order, about a side of a leaf at a time, or as
they can well: so that following the words of the Author, there needs no more
labor, but committing it to memory and uttering; unless they can meditate to
do it more shortly of themselves.

2. After this when they have thus gone over the book or the greatest part of
it, 2. After to take only the substance of his disputations, and go thorough a
whole question at a time.
which they may do in a short time, keeping a constant course: then cause them
to practice to take a whole disputation at a time, or at least a whole
question, and to bring only the substance of it as shortly as they can; yet
st^l observing as much as may be* M. Stockwoods phrase, his order and witty
conceits, which he uses both in obiecting and answering.

For their better understanding of their disputations, Help for the
understanding of the disputations amongst the enterers.
do as in their Theams: use at their entrance, to read them over unto them:
show them the plain meaning of every thing; and by examining the sum of it
all, first in English after in Latin, cause them to understand so much as time
will permit.

What they are not able to utter in Latin, remember to cause them first to
utter in English, and then they will easily do it in Latin, as we said.

When they have been well exercised in these that they are able thus to
dispute with facility, and are acquainted well with Stockwoods phrase and
order; they may have other questions given to handle wholly of themselves, if
you will.

By these means of continual disputing they shall reap these benefits:
Benefits of such scholastical oppositions.


1. They shall be much helped for the perfect understanding, and answering of
any difficult Grammar question, as was said before.

2. They shall be very much furthered for delivering their minds easily in
Latin.

3. They shall be notably fitted for disputations in the University, or any like
opposition, mooting, or pleading in the Innes of Court.

4. It shall bring audacity, help, gesture, pronuntiation, memory, and much
provoke them to an ingenuous e^ulation and contention.


Spoud. But I have seen in a school, where the scholars have been able to
dispute ex tempore of any ordinary moral question, which you should propound
unto them: which me thought did exceedingly grace them, and was a very rare
commendation unto the school.


Phil. Though I do grant with you that this deserved very great praise;
Disputations of Moral Philosophy belong rather to the University.
yet this seems to me rather to belong to the Universities, then to the
Grammar schools. For I take it not only meet, but also most equal and
necessary, that every place have their own Privileges reserved unto them;
and that one in no case should incroach upon another.

Above all, The privileges and prerogatives of the Universities by all means to
be preserved.
that there be a chief regard of the Universities, as unto which the Grammar
schools are ordained principally, for training up young scholars to furnish
them; and that they have all their honors and prerogatives, reserved most
carefully unto them. Of which sort these disputations in Logic and other
Philosophy are.


Notwithstanding I shall show you my judgment, How these may be done and how
far.
how this may be performed also; and as I take it in the most easy manner, and
most surely, so far as it may be.

1. I would have my scholar well practiced in these Grammatical disputations,
1. By practice in the Gra^maticall disputations.
to have phrase and order of disputation in readiness, and to keep themselves
within the compass of that kind of reasoning; leaving logical and strict
concluding by Syllogisms, unto the University.

2. To have read over Tullies Offices, 2. To be acquainted with Tullies
Offices and the questions of it.
with understanding; which by the help of Master Brasbridges questions, and
the Grammatical translations they may the more speedily by far.

3. To choose out of the easiest of those questions, 3. To oppose of some of
those questions instead of the Grammatical.
and to appoint the scholars insteede of their disputations in Grammar: when
they have gone thorough those, then to reply and answer an argument or two
upon some of these questions daily. It were worthy the labor of some ingenuous
and good Latinist, Some of Tullies Offices questions handled after the manner of
M. Stockw* Grammatical disputations worthy the labor*
as M. Stockwood, to handle some of the questions of Tullies Offices after the
manner of his Grammatical disputations, to fit scholars the more for such
witty and pleasant disputations, against that they should come to the
University. But I speak this as the rest under better judgment, and so far
as these may be meet for the Grammar schools.

4. For inuenting reasons to reply, 4. How to invent reasons by the help of
the places of Inue^tion.
it may soon be performed, by the dullest capacity, according to the manner
of inuenting reasons for Theames or verses, following the chief heads of
reasoning. If the replier do but only meditate what can be said against the
question or position, from some one of those chief places of reasoning,
discoursed in his mind in order; having the places ever in fresh memory (as I
showed before) by the practice of the Art of Meditation, or the like: For then
if one place will not presently afforde meet matter, another will. And
commonly, the places from Causes, Effects, Contraries, Examples, Testimonies,
are most pregnant to bring reasons to our mind.

Moreover,
to help to answer the subtilties or ^allacies; besides the perfect
understanding of the question, Helps for the answerer.
and the matter of it, by reading or meditating of it diligently, the wise
observing by the aunswerer from what place of reasoning the argument seems to
be taken, will usually answer the reason. For, the most ordinary fallacies or
deceits in reasoning, are from a bare show of Causes, Effects, Contraries,
Testimonies, and the rest, mistaken or misalledged; yet urged as if they were
true Causes Effects etc. when they are but fained or bare shows: Or else in
wra^gling about words, not disputing to the purpose, and to the point; but in
some other sense mistaking the question.

For those common places or heads of Invention,
all scholars who come to any ripeness, All the chief scholars are
necessarily to be acquainted with the heads of Invention.
are necessarily to be acquainted with them, as was touched before. These will
ever stand them instead for making of all Epistles Theams, Verses,
Declamations, Oppositions.

Also to help them to resolve whatsoever they read or hear in any continued
speech; For Inuenting, Resolving, Remembering.
and to remember it, by gathering all the matter unto the several heads of
Invention. Thus to be able to remember, and confute a Position, or an Oration,
ex tempore, with much admiration.

Without these helps they shall never be able to do these things; or at least
not with that facility, and in so commendable a manner, though they have
otherwise very singular gifts, of nature and learning.

But above all, Continual exercise all in all.
as in all other exercises so in this chiefly, continual practice of
disputing is all in all; when once you have directed them how to attain good
order, or method, phrase, and matter.

If you desire any more, Goclenius Problemes.
concerning the difficult questions of Grammar, read Goclenius his Problems in
the end of his Observations of the Latin tongue.


Spoud. I much approve of all that you have said in this matter; and
principally that the Universities should be honored by all means* and their
dignities reserved inviolable; yet give me leave to tell you of one thing,
which here may seem to be blameworthy, Ob. That this may seem to make them
truants to dispute out of the words of the book.
which is this: That you would have your enterers into this kind of opposing,
to bring the whole disputations of M. Stockw* to dispute in his very words;
this may help to make them truants, to trust only to their books and memory,
and not to stir up their own wits and inventions.


Phil. Nothing less: for you see how after that they have bin exercised this
way for a time, then I would have them to try their own wits and inventions
also; first abbridging their Author, Necessity of being well acquainted with
the best examples.
then bringing their own: But* for following this course, both experience and
reason do show it to be the surest; as in all other learning, so in this (like
as we observed in general before) to let them have first the most excellent
patterns, and never to rest until they have the very patterns in their heads,
and as it were ever before their eyes; for then they will be able to go forwards
of themselves with delight and co^mendations. The evils of in forcing scholars
to exercises, whereof they are not acquainted with the examples first.
Whereas, otherwise to enforce them by fear, to undertake such exercises,
wherewith they are not acquainted, nor see the reason of them, it is a matter of
over great rigor* that I say no more of it, and which must needs work a
marvelous distaste in the scholar, as I have noted. Besides, to cause such
young ones to dispute without hearing or seeing such presidents, is al one, as
to teach them to write only by precepts or some direction without copy. For
even as therein they shall both write very il fauouredly if any thing at all, and
learn so bad a hand, as they shall be much troubled to forget, which they must
do before they can come to a good hand* so is it here. 1. They shall dispute
very weakly and childishly, both forwords and matter* if any thing at all, and
2. they shall get barbarous phrase, to make them to be skorned, and which they
shall hardly forget again.

But of the otherside, Benefits of the contrary; viz of having the best
patterns.
they being trained up thus, shall make not only the matter of their learned
Author their own, but also his phrase; and be so furnished, that any man will
take delight to hear them. And that which I say of this, the same I affirm of
all excellent patterns, whether for making Theames, Verses or whatsoever; that
the more absolute their Presidents are, and the more cunning they are in them,
the more singular they shall undoubtedly prove.

This is the very maine reason, why all would have the children to learn each
Author so perfectly, as to say every word without book, as much as is
possible, that the very phrase and matter of their Author may be their own
to use perpetually.

To conclude this point, Trial by experience.
trial and experience may teach us. Let two children be taken, one of a more
pregnant and sharp wit, the other of a slower and duller capacity: cause him
of the sharp wit, to do all only by precept and his own Invention in making
Epistles, Theames, Verses, disputing; but let the other of the duller capacity
be trained up, not only by precept and his own invention; but principally by
being kept strictly to imitate the most excellent patterns in all things: then
make the trial, whether he of the duller wit shall not express the
sharpness, learning, gravity, of the most learned and wise men, with certain
assurance to justify what he has done: whereas in the other; shall be found
by a learned and a judicious examiner, nothing but froth, childishness and
uncertainty, in the greatest ouerweening of wit and learning; and whether the
duller and harder wit shall not do it with far less labor.


Sp. I must needs yield unto that which you say, Following constantly (...)
excellent patterns does (...) every calling.
for that evidence of truth which cannot be gainsaid. For this indeed all men
do see by common experience, that in all trades and sciences, they who get
themselves most excellent patterns to follow, and are the curiousest in
expressing them most liu^ly, are ever found the most excellent workmen. And
therefore I do content my self, as fully answered, entreating that we may
still proceed.


CHAP. XVIII.
Of pronouncing naturally and sweetly without vain affectation.
Phil. WHat will you that we come unto next? Take it that we have gone
thorough the most things, which concern our function for teaching the Latin
tongue.


Spoud. There remain yet two other matters, and those of no less difficulty
nor weight then most of the former; and without which, yet schools do lack
their principal ornaments, as I suppose: the one of them is pronouncing
sweetly, the other speaking Latin purely and readily.


Phil. These 2. are* indeed worthy of our best thoughts. The first of them, The
excellency of Pronuntiation.
that is, Pronuntiation, being that which either makes or mars the most
excellent speech. For all speeches are usually esteemed even as they are uttered
or pronounced; the finest scholar without this is accounted no body: and a
mean scholar having attained this faculty, is ordinarily reputed and
commended above the best. Whereupon you know how that famous Greek Orator, when
he was asked, what was the chief grace or excellency in Rhetoric, what was the
second and third; he still answered, To pronounce well. The necessity and
estimation of being able to speak Latin readily and purely.
And for the second, that is, speaking of Latin, as in examinations and
disputations, so in all other things, there would be a perpetual use of it
amongst all Grammar scholars of any years. To the end, to fit them to answer
any learned man in Latin, or to dispute ex tempore: also to train them up to
be able to speak purely when they come in the Universities; as in some
Colleges they are only to speak Latin: or to fit them, if they shall go
beyond these as, as Gentlemen who go to travel, Factors for Merchants, and
the like. The readiness in which faculty if it be in a good phrase, how much
it graceth a child in University, City, or Country, we all of us know.


Spoud. Sir, you have spoken very truly of these: therefore let us come unto
them in order, I entreat you; and first unto pronuntiation. Pronuntiation
ordinarily hard to be attained in Schools.
This I have found passing hard to acquaint my scholars withal, to bring them
to any ripeness or commendable faculty, but still they will speak as a boy
who is saying his lesson; though I have both directed them how to pronounce,
uttering the sentences often before them, and have very much called upon them for
the same.


Phil. To bring your scholars unto this sweetness of pronuntiation, How
scholars may be brought to pronounce sweetly.
this is the plainest and surest way, so far forth as yet I can find: and
this I am assured will effect it in a commendable sort;

1. You must remember that which was generally premised in the beginning.
To acquaint your young scholar from the very first entrance, 1. Children to
be trained up to pronounce right from the first entrance.
to pronounce every lesson and each word audibly, leasurely, and distinctly,
ever sounding out the last letter.

2. To pronounce every matter according to the nature of it,
so much as you can; To utter every matter, according to the nature of it.
chiefly where persons or other things are ^ained to speak.

As for example: In the Confabulatiunculae pueriles, Cause them to utter every
dialogue lively, as if they themselves were the persons which did speak in
that dialogue, and so in every other speech, to imagine themselves to have
occasion to utter the very same things.

3. What they cannot utter well in Latin,
cause them first to do it naturally and lively in English, What they can not
utter in Latin, to learn to do it in English, then after the same manner in
Latin.
and show them your self the absurdnesse of their pronuntiation, by
pronouncing foolishly or childishly, as they do: and then pronounce it rightly,
and naturally before them likewise, that they may perceive the difference to be
ashamed of the one, and take a delight in the other.

So cause them to do it after you, until that they can do it in good sort,
tuning their voices sweetly. When they can do it in English, then cause them
to do it just in the same manner in Latin; and thus they will undoubtedly
come unto it very easily.

4 Also cause sundry of them to pronounce thus the very same sentence; 4 To
cause sundry to pronounce the very same sentence in emulation.
disgracing the speech of those who pronounce absurdly, by imitation of it, and
gracing as much the speech of those who do it most naturally and pleasantly:
propounding such as patterns and marks to all their fellows, for all to
emulate and imitate them; as I have advised generally.

5 Cause them to do the like in Corderius, 5 In all Authors wherein persons
are fained to speak to be careful for this.
Esops Fables, or Terence as they did in Confabulatiunculae. For Esops Fables,
we have showed before the manner, for making a report of each Fable, first in
English, after in Latin, and the benefit thereof.

So after when they shall come to Virgils Eclogues,
cause them yet still more lively, in saying without book, to express the
affections and persons of sheepeheards; or whose speech soever else, which they
are to imitate. Of which sort are the Prosopopeyes of Jupiter, Apollo, and
others in Ouids Metamorphosis, Juno, Neptune, Aeolus, Aeneas, Venus, Dido, etc.
Virgils Aeneids.

So in all Poetry, Poetry to be pronounced as prose, except in scanning.
for the pronuntiation, it is to be uttered as prose; observing distinctions
and the nature of the matter; not to be tuned foolishly or childishly after
the manner of scanning a Verse as the use of some is. Only to tune it so in
scanning, or getting it without book, unless you would have them to pronounce
some special book, for getting authorities for quantities; or others, only
to that same purpose.

6 To help hereunto yet more, 6 Further helps as they proceed. Practice of
often pronouncing (...) e^ically, some special examples in T^l^us.
and that they may do every thing according to the very nature; acquaint them
to pronounce some special examples, set down in Talaeus Rhetoric as
pathetically as they can: as examples of Ironies, Exclamations, Reuocations,
Prosopopeyes, and those which are in his rules of pronouncing.

Let them also be taught carefully, in what word the Emphasis lies; To mark
in each sentence in what word the Emphasis is.
and therefore which is to be elevated in the pronuntiation. As namely those
words in which the chief Trope or Figure is.

Thus let them take special pains to pronounce Theams or Declamations,
striving who shall do best: Butlars Rhet. li. 2. cap. 2. de voce in singulis
verbis. Care in pronouncing all exercises.
and in all their oppositions to dispute, as if ex animo in good earnest, with
all contention and vehemency.

Finally, the practice of pronouncing emphatically, of some of Tullies
Orations, which are most flowing in these Figures of sentences (especially in
Exclamations, The curious pronouncing some of Tullies Orations or the like.
Prosopopeis, Apostrophees, and the like: as some against Catiline) must needs
much acquaint them with great variety of pronuntiation, to be fitted for all
sorts.

For more exquisite knowledge and practice hereof, More exquisite knowledge
hereof left to the Universities Butleri Rhet. lib. 2. de proment.
I leave it to the Universities, which are to perfect all those faculties which
are but begun in the Grammar Schools; and do refer you for precepts, to the
second book of Talaeus Rhetoric de pronunciatione: or rather of Master
Butlars Rhetoric, as I said before.


CHAP. XIX.
Of speaking Latin purely and readily.
Spoud. I Pray you Sir, go on to the last point: in this which you have said
for the manner of pronuntiation, I have heard nothing which I can justly except
against, it does all sound so pleasing and likely in mine ear. When I have
more trial, I shall be able to say more.

In the mean time let me crave the like, for the manner of learning to speak
Latin. If you can show me so plain a way of it, as this seems to be, surely
you shall make me much more to rejoice.

For of this I may complain yet more, Complaint of the trouble and difficulty
to train up scholars to speak Latin.
then of most of the rest; that though I have labored and striuen by Ferula,
and all means of severity, yet I have not been able to make my Scholars to
utter their minds in any tolerable manner, of ordinary things, but in very
barbarous phrase, nor so much as to put it in practice amongst themselves; much
less to utter their minds in Latin easily, purely, and freely as it were to
be wished, and as you have showed the necessity and commendation thereof.


Phil. I my self have had long experience of the truth and grief of this
complaint likewise, though I also have done what I could continually: and yet
of late time I grow to this certain assurance, that Scholars may be brought
to talk of any ordinary matter which can be required of them, both in good
Latin, and also most readily and easily.

Herein has been a great part of my error and hinderance, The general
error for the time when scholars are to begin to speak Latin.
that I ever thought as most do, that children were not to be exercised to
speak Latin, for fear of Barbarism, until they came into the highest
fourmes; as at least until they were in the third, fourth, or fifth fourmes:
and hereuppon I could never attain to that which I desired.

But now I find evidently, To learn to speak Latin, must be begun from the
first entrance into construction.
that this must be begun from the very first entrance into construction; their
first books being principally appointed, and read to them to this end, to enter
and train them up in speaking of Latin of ordinary matters:

As Confabulatiunculae Pueriles, Corderius, and other like Colloquiums. And
therefore they should then begin to practice to use those phrases which there
they learn.

Also for the Grammar, I see no reason but it might have been all as well set
down in the English, like as the Accedence is, and learned in one half of the
time, and with much more delight; but only or chiefly to train up scholars
to deliver all their Grammar rules, and matters concerning Grammar, in Latin.


Spoud. It stands with very great reason, that it should be as you say, that
in the learning of those books, the right foundation of speaking Latin
familiarly should be laid; and the practice begun; and that indeed there is
a general mistaking about this: but I desire you to set down the whole course
and proceeding in it, how to bring it to perfection; and then I shall be much
better able to judge.


Phil. For the manner of effecting it,
I find it to be most easy thus: The surest course for entering young scholars
to speak Latin. 1 Examining and answering every piece of a rule or sentence
in Latin, to make them their own. So in their Authors.


1 You must remember that which I said, concerning the manner of the examining
both of their Grammar rules and Lectures; to pose every piece of a rule, and
every part of a sentence both in English and Latin, as leisure will permit;
and to cause them to answer both in English and Latin, until they be able to
understand and answer in Latin alone. And so both examining in the words of
their Authors, and causing them to answer likewise in the very same words of
the Authors, they will enter into it with great delight. For the particular
manner. I refer you to the Chapter of examining in Latin, which I showed you
before at large, and set down examples of it.

2 What they are not able to utter in Latin, 2 To utter before them what they
cannot. How the Master himself may do it easily before them.
utter you it ever before them; that as the child learneth of the mother or of
the nurse, to begin to speak, so they may of you and of their Author.

If you were not able so to utter every thing before them, as very many are to
seek this way, amongst others (I mean in this, to speak in Latin easily and
purely, even in ordinary matters); 3 The daily practice of Grammatical
translations; chiefly reading books of Dialogues out of English into Latin,
which is nothing but such talking.
yet this continual practice of daily examining and teaching your scholars to
answer out of the words of the Author (as the manner was set down before)
and watchfulness to use to speak Latin, only amongst all whom you would
have to learn it, shall bring you unto it; and much more by the means
following.

3 I do find the daily practice also of those Grammatical translations,
which I have so often mentioned in reading the Latin of the Author out of the
translation, to be a marvelous help heereunto; especially the reading of
books of Dialogues: as of Confabulatiunculae pueriles, Corderius, etc. For if
there they can presently express their minds in Latin, of any such matter as
is there handled; why shall they not be able to do it likewise, of any such
thing falling into their common talk.

4 As they learn these Dialogues,
when they have construed and parsed, 4 To talk together in the words of the
Dialogues, each sentence first in English, then Latin.
cause them to talk together; uttering every sentence pathetically one to
another (as was showed in our former speech of pronouncing) and first to utter
every sentence in English, as need is, then in Latin.

So you shall be sure that they shall not go by rote (as we term it) and as
they may do soon, if they only repeat the Latin so talking together. And
moreover, ever thus with the English, the Latin will easily come to their
remembrance, so often as they have occasion to use the same.

5 The practice mentioned of turning every morning a piece of their Accedence
into Latin, 5 Translating and uttering every morning a piece of their Accedence
in Latin.
for their exercise, shall much prepare them to parse and speak in Latin.

6 Accustom them to parse wholly in Latin, by that time that they have bin a
year or two at the most, in construction, 6 Custom to parse wholly in Latin,
and how to do it.
and are well acquainted with the manner of parsidg in English, as we advised
before. This they will do very readily, if you train them up well in their
Accedence, and in the former kinds of examining and exercises, which I spoke
of even now; and more specially by the right and continual apposing of their
Grammar rules in Latin.

Moreover, the Dialogues in the end of the first book of Corderius Dialogues,
Corderius lib. ^. Colloq. 69 70. 71. 72. 73. 74. 75.
will much further them in this parsing, because they are principally written
to this purpose; as all his four books are very sweet and pleasant for all
ordinary scholars talk.

7 Next unto these I find the daily practice of disputing or opposing in
Latin (following the order, 7 Daily practice of disputing.
and using the help of M. Stockwood) to be marueilously profitable, for witty
and sweet speech.

8 Unto these you may add the practice of varying of a phrase, 8 Practice of
varying a phrase into diue^s ^oimes.
according to the manner of Erasmus, Riuius, or Macropedius, de copia verborum:
as the ways of varying the first Supine, of the Imperative mood, the future
tense, the Superlatiue degree, and the like. But these only as leisure will
suffer not hindering the most necessary exercises.

9 So also for copy of the purest phrases and Synonimaes, 9 Copy of
Synonimaes, and the ^urest phrases, and how to get them. This noted before.
besides the daily helps of all their Authors,Manutius or Master Draxe his
phrases, to see how many ways they can utter any thing in good phrase; and so
to turn to any phrase when they have occasion. And more specially for that
practice of the reading them ou^ of the Grammatical Translations in propriety
(as was showed before of the Dialogues) any shall find to be most easy, to
furnish with store of the purest phrase for any purpose.

10 Besides,
for the Master to use often, at taking or saying Lectures or exercises, 10
Exercising the scholars often to give variety for every difficult matter.
or at their pronouncing or showing exercises, to cause them to give variety
for anything; who is able to give a better word or phrase, or to give the
greatest copy to express their minds, and where they have read the words or
phrase.

11 Where none can give a fit word, 11 Holyokes Dictionary, describing things
by Periphrasis or circumlocution.
there to turn their Dictionaries, as to Holyokes Dictionary, and then to
furnish them; or to describe the thing by some Periphrasis or circumlocution of
words or the phrases mentioned.

12 But to the end to have copy of proper words, besides all other helps
spoken of, 12 To give dai^y certain proper words, and where they have read
them.
it were not unprofitable to have daily some few words to be repeated first in
the morning; as out of Adrianus ^unius his Nomenclator; or out of the Latin
Primitiues, or the Greek Radices; the use whereof I shall show hereafter: and
ever for those words which they have learned (any one who can soonest) to name
where they have learned them.

Thus by all means they should be furnished with propriety and copy of the
best words; which is a wonderful help to all kind of learning, especially to
the knowledge of the tongues.

13 To all these may be added for them who have leisure enough the reading over
and over of Erasmus Colloquium, 13 Reading over Erasmus Colloquium.
Castalions Dialogues, or the like.

14 Lastly when you have laid a sound foundation that they may be sure to have
warrantable and pure phrase, 14 Continual practice, when they have learned a
pure phrase.
by these means or the best of them, and all other their school exercises;
then continual practice of speaking shall undoubtedly accomplish your desire
to cause them to speak truly, purely, properly, and readily; Practice in a
good way being here, as in all the rest, that which does all.


Spoud. These things, or but the best of them, being constantly practiced
cannot but effect marvelous much, and very surely; chiefly if we could bring
them to speak Latin continually, from that time that they begin to parse in
Latin: Difficulty to cause schollar^ to practice speaking Latin amongst
themselves.
but this I have had too much experience of, that without great severity they
will not be brought unto: but they will speak English, and one will wink at
another, if they be out of the Masters hearing.


Phil. It is indeed exceeding hard, to cause this to be practiced constantly
amongst scholars. That is a usual custom in Schools to appoint Custodes,
or Asini (as they are termed in some places) to observe and catch them who
speak English in each form, Inconveniences of Custode^.
or whom they see idle, to give them the Ferula, and to make them Custodes if
they cannot answer a question which they ask.

But I have observed so much inconvenience in it, as I cannot tell what to say
in this case: for oft-times, he who is the Custos will hardly attend his own
work, for harkening to hear others to speak English.

Also there falls our amongst them oft-times so much w^angling about the
questions, or defending themselves, that they did not speak English, or were
not idle, that all the whole form is troubled. So likewise when the Custodes
are called for, before breaking up at dinner and at night, there will be so
much contention amongst them, as is a disquieting and trouble to the Master.
Moreover, this I have observed, that ever if there be any one simple in a
form or harder of learning then the rest, they will make him a right Asinus,
causing such to be the Custodes continually, or for the most part, if they
cannot answer: and to this end will be always watching them; whereby many such
are not only notably abused, but very much discouraged for being scholars,
when they see themselves so baited at by all: some others are made over
malipart thereby.

Besides all these,
I do not see any great fitness, that one scholar should smite another with
the Ferula; Of one scholar smiting another with the Ferula.
because much malicing one another, with grudges and quarrels do arise
thereupon. So that the discommodities that follow the Custodes, seem to me to
be many more then the benefits can be; chiefly in loss of time, and hindering
more in other learning, then can be gotten in that.


Spoud. I my self have had experience of most of these inconveniences: but
what way will you take then, to cause your scholars to speak Latin
continually?


Phil. This is the best way that yet I can find, The best means
and to avoid the former inconveniences;
First, to appoint the two Seniors in each fourm (of whom we shall speak
after) as to look to all other matters in the form, 1 Seniours of each form
to look to the whole.
so to this more specially, that none speak English nor barbarous Latin: and
if they be found partial or negligent, then to prefer others into their
places; besides the other censures to be inflicted upon them which I shall
mention to you, when we shall come to speak of punishments; and so to have
their due rewards, being found careful.
Secondly, the Masters own eye and ear in the School, 2 The Masters eye and
ear.
to be continual Custodes so much as may be,
both for Monitors and others. Thirdly, if they do use to parse in Latin (and
therefore must needs exercise themselves in that against that time that their
Master does come to hearethem) and secondly, 3 Parsing in Latin.
if they be kept in their places, and strictly looked unto for performing all
exercises; I do not see but they may be made to speak Latin in the school at
schooletimes; neither that they shall have any great occasions of the contrary.
Fourthly, 4 Weekly Monitours abroad.
for speaking Latin in all other places, it must only be by Monitours appointed
weekly, as we shall have occasion to speak more after, and some severely
corrected who are found most careless herein.


Spoud But if any one alone,
who has some understanding of Latin, How any one may by himself alone
attain to speak Latin of ordinary matters.
would learn to speak of familiar matters, to be able to talk with others,
what course do you think the speediest?


Phil. Even the same which I would use to help a whole School: which if I
should take a course for a wager, amongst others, I would use specially, to
cause them daily to spend some quarter, or half an hour, each in his order,
reading Corderius first out of Latin into English, after out of English into
Latin, every one a little piece; where one fails another to help; and the
book or Master where all fail: and also the Master to cause them to vary each
hard phrase (and chiefly all which are of most common use) so many ways as
they can, trying who can do best; himself to add more where they fail. After
Corderius gone over, to do the like in other easy Authors, as Terence, or
Terentius Christianus, and the like. So I would have the private learner to
practice daily the same, reading Corderius first out of Latin into English, by
help of the translation; after trying how he can read it out of English into
Latin, and ever where he fails, to use the help of the Latin book lying by
him. The continual exercise in this, if they labor to be perfect in the
examples of Nowns and Verbs, and somewhat in knowing the Rules of the Accedence,
as was showed, shall most speedily effect this desire. For thus may any one soon
learn to utter all that book: And in it is the substance of most things
falling out in ordinary speech. After this, he may do the like in other easy
books by the same help of translations. And lastly, practicing to translate
other books of dialogues (as, Erasmus Colloquium, or the like) and afterward
reading them forth of English into Latin again, any one may come on very fast.


Spoud. This stands upon the former grounds. These several points which you
have gone thorough, seem to me very sufficient (and to need no addition) for
training up scholars to attain to so good perfection in the Latin tongue.


Phil. These are but an entrance, meet for the Grammar schools; but to attain
to the perfection of the Latin tongue, for propriety, choice, elegancy,
purity, will require much and long reading, and exercise in the Universities.


For further direction thereunto, I refer you to Gocleninius his observations
of the Latin tongue: Goclenius his observations for them who seek to come to
purity and ripeness in the Latin tongue.
whom I take to be worthy the diligent reading of all scholars who are of
judgment, and who do desire to come to the purity and ripeness of the
Latin.


CHAP. XX.
How to attain most speedily unto the knowledge of the Greek tongue.
Spoud. NOw that we have gone thorough all the principal points of learning,
which belong to the knowledge of the Latin tongue* so much as can be required
in schools, as far forth as I can conceive or remember for the present; let me
(I entreat you) require your like help for the Greek: for I desire now, to be
directed in every matter, which may concern our calling and faculty. I do
perceive by our former speeches, that you likewise have traveled and found
much experience and assurance herein.


Phil. Although I am only a learner in the Greek, The Greek may be gotten
with far less labor the^ the Latin.
as in the Latin, and my hope is chiefly for the time to come: yet this I have
found by experience, that the Latin once obtained, the Greek may be gotten
with far less labor, and euerything as certainly, And this also in a little
time, so much as it shall be requisite for the Grammar schools.


Spoud. Surely sir, One benefit worth al our labor in the Greek.
if but that one thing that I saw in the note, may be attained, concerning the
tongues, the Greek and Hebrew, I do not see what can be more required for the
Grammarschooles: That is; That scholars may be able as they proceed, to read
the Greek of the New Testament and the Hebrew of the old, first into Latin,
or English exactly, out of the bare text; and after, out of a translation to
read them into the text, that is, into their own words again: and also to
give the reason of every word, why it must be so, and to be able to proceed
thus of themselves in the University.

The continual practice hereof, must needs make them worthy Linguists, as was
there said, and notable text men. I pra^ you therefore let me hear of you, how
this may be effected, and I shall think my self sufficiently satisfied for
all my travel, though it were but in this one thing alone besides all the
former.


Phil. Nay rather, To go through the whole course of the Greek.
let us go thorough the whole course still, so far as we can, how the exact
knowledge of this famous tongue may be gotten most speedily. For when I do
remember the worthy testimony, which our learnedest Schoolmaster does give, M.
Askams testimony concerning the Greek tongue* Schoolmaster p. 17. 2.
concerning this Greek tongue, I cannot think any pains overmuch, for the
finding out the ready way to the perfect knowledge of it. He in one place
having mentioned sundry of the renowned Greek Authors, as Plato, Aristotle,
Zenophon, Demosthenes, Isocrates and others, whom he names there (the
matchless masters in all manner of learning) adds these words in praise of
the Greek tongue, and the learning in it.

Now let Italian, says he, and Latin it self, Spanish, French, Dutch, and
English bring forth their learning, and recite their Authors, Cicero only
excepted, and one or two more in Latin; they be all patched clouts and rags
in comparison of fair wouen broad clothes. And truly, says he, if there be
any good in them, it is either learned, borrowed, or stolen from some one of
those worthy wits of Athens. Thus far M. Askam.


Spoud. This is a high commendation indeed, to be given by a man of such
reading and estimation for learning, as M. Askam was; and which must needs
incite all students to the reading of the principal Greek Authors, to desire
to hear these peerlesse Masters to speak in their own tongue.

Wherefore, I pray you let us hear from you, how you think that the way may
be made so ready unto it.


Phil. The way may be most short and easy to him, The way to the Greek the
same with the Latin.
who is acquainted with the manner of getting the Latin tongue, so as has been
mentioned; because it is the very same with it in effect.

1. If your scholars who are to enter into it, Getting first the chief rules.
be such as have time enough before them; let them get the Grammar very
perfectly,
especially all the chief rules, by continual saying and poasing, as in the
Latin. Most exceptions or Anomalies may be learned after, or turned unto
presently, as they learn their Authors. Because Rectum is Index sui, and
obliqui. And knowing the rule perfectly, they will soon know the reason of the
change.

More specially, To be very perfect in Nownes and Verbs.
make them very perfect in declining Nouns and Verbs, and giving all the
Terminations of them: I mean the several Terminations of each declension,
and every case in them; Terminating Nownes.
and so likewise the Terminanations of every Conjugation, and each Tense
therein.

In the Coniugations, Coniugating and terminating Verbs.
to give the first person of every Mood and Tense, in each voice together
(whereby they are the soonest learned, To give the first person in every Mood
and Tense in each voice together.
one directing another) and also to be able to run the Terminations as in
the Latin.

For example, in the first Declension. The terminations of the Declension are
(...) and (...). Terminations of the cases are (...), etc.

So declining the example.

(...).

So in the rest: The Terminations gotten first perfectly, the words are
declined presently, as I said.

In the Verbs also, besides the Terminations, to use to give the first Persons
together in every voice. Only let them be perfect in the Active voice, giving
all the first persons in order; then the Passive and middle voice by comparing
them to the Active: As Indicat^vus presens, (...) verbero, (...). Imperfectum,
(...) verberabam, (...). Futurum pr^us, (...) verber^bo (...).

So the Terminations of them, if you will: As (...), etc.

To this end, make them very perfect in the tables of the cognata tempora. And
also, cause them to run the Terminations in each voice thus; (...).

You shall find they will be learned not only very soon and surely this way,
but also most profitably for use.

After these to be perfect in Pronowns, To be very perfect in Pronowns,
Aduerbes, Conjunctions, Prepositions.
Aduerbs, Conjunctions, and Prepositions; giving (if you will) Latin to
Greek, and Greek to Latin, as I showed before in the Latin. Because then
all the labor is with the Nowns and Verbes only.

If your scholars who begin Greek, How scholars of understanding and
judgment, may take yet a shorter course.
be of good years and judgment; it may suffice to have them perfect in the
examples of the Nownes and Verbes, and some few principal rules, in such sort
as I have showed: and to be well acquainted with the order of the Grammar, by
showing how and where every part of it stands; that so they may learn the
Rules or the meaning of them, by turning to them; as they shall have occasion
in every lect^re.


Spoud. But what Grammar would you have them to use?


Phil. Master Camdens Grammar,
notwithstanding the faults in the print (as indeed there are very many; which
thing would be carefully amended in all our school Authors) and what other
exceptions can be taken: because, as it is one of the shortest as yet, so it is
most answerable to our Latin Grammar, for the order of it. Whereby scholars
well acquainted with our common Grammar, will be much helped both for speedy
understanding and learning it. Also the words of art set down in it in Greek,
as well as Latin, will be a great help for reading Commentaries in Greek:
as upon Hesiode, and Homer.

To the end to make that Grammar most plain, To make it plai^e: Grammatica
Graecapro Schola Argentinensi per Theophilum Golium.
and to supply and help whatsoever is defective; I take it, that the
Strasburge Greek Grammar, set sorth lately by Golius (which seems to me to
have been made in an imitation of Camden) may be as a good Commentary, though
the order be not ever directly kept: The first part of it serving for a brief
sum of the Etymology, the second for an exposition at large.


Spoud. But with what Author would you begin, to enter them into Construction?


Phil. I hold the Greek Testament to be most fit;
and that for these reasons: To begin Construction with the Greek Testament.
Reasons.


1. Because, 1. For the familiarnesse of it.
that thorough the familiarnesse of the matter, (in that children are so well
acquainted with it, by daily hearing or reading of it) the Greek thereof which
is easy of itself, will be made yet far more easy to the learner; for that
the matter will bring the words, as I have often said.

2. Because all scholars who can have means to come to any knowledge of the
Greek, 2. Because that book with the Hebrew of the old Testament are the
Books of books. Being only written by the Lord. Having life in the^.
should endeavor above all other Authors, to be well acquainted with this.
First, for that this book together with the Hebrew of the Old Testament were
written by the Lord himself; not only the matter, but also even the very
words of them.

Secondly, for that eternal life is only in these books, being truly
understood and believed. So that we may rightly term these the Bible, or
Book of books; because all other books are but as servants unto these, and all
other are nothing without these, for any true good, but only to condemnation by
leaving men more without excuse. Yea, All who may, are to labor to see with
their own eyes, and why.
every one who can have opportunity, should labor to see with his own eyes,
for the fullness of his assurance, rather then to rest on others. And much more
because there are so many and such malicious sl^unders against all our
translations; as that those shameless calumniations have been a principal
means to turn many thousand souls, after Satan and Antichrist, by causing
them to reject the sacred Scriptures utterly, to their endless perdition, and
have been enough to shake the faith of Gods Elect. Under this very pretense of
false translations,
and obscurity of the Scriptures, has Antichrist principally holden up his
kingdom; keeping all in palpable ignorance to be drawn to dumb Idols, to
murder Princes, to lying and all abominations which himself lists.

And therefore in these respects it were to be wished, that all scholars who
have any leisure, and may come to these studies of Greek and Hebrew
(especially they who purpose in time to become teachers of others) would do
their endeavors to be as perfect in these two books, To strive to have these
books as familiarly as the Jews had the Hebrew.
and to have them as familiarly as ever the ancient Jews had the Hebrew. This
cunning in the Text should make them to speak as the words of God indeed, with
facility, authority, and power.

Those also,
who have but a little time to bestow in the Greek, If any purpose to have but
a smattering in the Greek, to have it here, and why.
would bestow it here, for the former reasons; and because they may have good
occasion and help to increase in this continually, by the daily use which they
have of the scriptures: whereas they, having but a smattring insom other Greek
Authors, and contenting themselves therewith, do come in a short time utterly
to forget all; and so all that labor which was taken therein, is altogether
lost.

If any do prefer some other Greek Author,
for the sweetness and purity of the Greek, The Testament compared to other
Greek w^^ters.
and so will spend their little time ^o that; Luke is inferior to none therein,
by the judgment of the learned. If they look to the excellency of all wisdom,
what light is there to the light of the Sun? Also, for them who have a desire
to travel further, This is a not^ble entrance to read all other Greek Authors
amongst all the famous Greek writers, for the surpassing humane wisdom to
be found therein; this book once perfectly known, will make the passage
thorough all of them both very direct and plain, and also full of all delight
and contentment, and to read al other Authors without any danger.

In the Greek Testament,
to begin at the Gospel of John as being most easy; In the Testament to begin
at the Gospel of John.
and next unto that to go through the Gospel of Luke, if you please. In which
two Evangelists most of the history of the Gospel is contained: that by them
the Evangelists may be soon run thorough; And also the Acts: Then all the
Epistles may be read with speed.


Spoud. I cannot but allow and like of all these things; and principally of
reading the Greek Testament in the first place, making it the entrance, and
another foundation to all the Greek studies. But if that could be brought to
pass, How scholars may be made most perfect in the Greek Testament.
that scholars, as they proceeded herein, might grow as perfect in the Greek
Testament, as it is said of the learned Jews, that they were in the books of
the Old Testament; what a blessing might it be to the Church of God, and what
a happiness to all posterity?


Phil. Surely, I am fully persuaded of it, that very much may be done in it;
and after also, in the Hebrew of the Old, to come near unto them: except that,
that was their native language. This persuasion I ground, partly from that
little experience which I have had in mine own trial; yet sufficient to
confirm me by proportion. More specially, by that which is well known in a
worthy school in London, (to which I acknowledge my self much beholden for
that which I have seen in this behalf, and some other) where some of the
scholars have bin able in very good sort to c^strue and resolve the Greek
Testam. out of the Latin into Greek, wheresoever you would set them, and to go
very near to tell you, where they had read any special word or phrase in it,
to turn to them. And lastly, for the evident reasons thereof, and the agreement
of it with some former courses in the Latin, whereof I have a full assurance.


Spoud. I pray you show me the means how.


Phil. The means are these,
most easy and plain, for every one to teach who has any Greek, Means
parti^ularly.
and for others to learn:

1. That they have so much knowledge in the Grammar, as I showed chiefly in
Nowns and Verbes.

2 Besides the Greek Testament, I would have every one to have his English
Testament, or Latin, or both; and ever in their entrance before they learn a
lesson, to have read it over in the translation, and to be able either to say
it without book, or make a report of it in English or Latin: but better to
say it without book, even in the English; which with a little reading over,
especially before bed time, those who are of good memories will get quickly.
This same done with understanding, will exceedingly bring the Greek with it:
besides, that thus they shall have much opportunity and furtherance, to get the
English text almost by heart, as we term it.

3. In reading a Lecture to them, ever tell them what example each Noune and
Verb is like unto, and for Pronounes, Aduerbes, and the like: if they be not
perfect in Grammar, tell them in a word, or point them where they are in the
Grammar; just after the manner as in the Latin.

4 Show them carefully all the hard words, and those which they have not
learned; and for those which you think they cannot remember otherwise, or
wherein there is need of special labor, cause every one to write them in a
little paper book, made for that purpose, with sundry columns in each page, to
write at least the Greek word and Latin or English in, in each Chap. and the
Verse against them: to the end to take most pains in those, and to run often
over them: and so ever to see after where they have had those words before.
And thereby also to account how many new words they have in every Lecture: for
all the rest learned before in any place or which are very easy, are not to be
accounted for any new words.

Thus shall you provoke and encourage them to more pains* when they have not
over five or six new words in a douzen or twenty Verses, and in time happily
not two in a Chapter. So that they will have the most of the hard words in a
short time, and be able easily to proceed of themselves, without any reading,
through these and other helps following. 5 When they learn to construe, let
them do it by the help of the translation; observing wherein the translation
seems to differ from the words of the Greek, and marking the reason thereof;
and after to try of themselves how they can construe, looking only upon the
translation, beating the Greek out of it, as formerly they did the Latin.
Those who are of any aptness, will do it presently.

And thus by practice, every day going a piece, and often reading over and over,
they will grow very much, to your great joy.


Spoud. But give me leave to ask of you two or three doubts.

1 Why you would have them to write down their hard words in a book: 1 Why to
have the hard words written down.
will not making some marks at the words serve as in their Latin Authors,
according to the general observation?


Phil. This was observed before, as I remember to mark their hard words either
in their books, or setting them down in a paper. But here I think it to be
better, thus to write down the principal; First, because scholars now will
be careful to keep their Greek Testaments fair from blotting or scrauling,
although a book were well bestowed to make them perfect in it, though it were
never so marked. Secondly, be^^use when they are fit to read Greek, they have
commonly good discretion to keep their notes, and to make use of them; going
often over them.


Spoud. But might there not be some other means for the getting of the hard
words aforehand? for this must needs be some labor, and ask care and
diligence thus to write them down.


Phil. Yes verily, if it be looked to in time; all these may be so prepared
aforehand, that most of this labor now may be spared, and only special
difficulties to be observed.

The manner of it is thus: That whereas there is nothing in getting any tongue,
but to get words,
and Grammar for framing and setting those words together, and afterward
practice; I hold it to be far the speediest course, The speediest way, to get
the Greek Ra^ices first.
to have the scholars to have learned the Greek Radices or Primitive words,
before that they go to construction; or at least to be well acquainted with
them.

This course some famous Grecians have taken: How it may be done easily,
without loss of time.
we may do it most easily, and without any loss of time, or very little, if
any; as I have made trial: First, having gathered the Greek Radices out of
Scapula, after the manner of that abbridgement, called voces primogeniae, I
have heretofore caused such as I have thought fit, to write it out, and to
bring me a side (or so much as I thought good) every morning at my entrance
into the School, or presently after; and so have used to examine those words
amongst them all, once or twice over, and where they have learned the
principal Latin words. (Of late I have seen the Greek Nomenclaton used,
not without fruit; though it be imperfectly gathered.)

The manner of getting the words may be most easy, thus: Manner of learning
them.


Having these in this manner with the English adjoined: if you would make
trial herein; when you have examined a side, read them over as much more
against the next day; reading first the English word, then the Latin, and
Greek last: showing them some help how to remember, by comparing the Greek
with the Latin, or English; and so the English will bring the Latin to
remembrance, and both of them the Greek.

And in examining them, Manner of examining them for speed and memory.
to ask them the English word; and to cause them to give both Latin and
Greek together, both backward and forward again.

As, posing thus: How say you, I love? He answers, Amo, (...), amo, I love:
so they will be perfect each way. Thus within the space of a twelve month they
may go through the whole; spending not much above a quarter of an hour in a
day or half an hour at most of school time. Those who are diligent may get
them in good sort, only (as I have often admonished) making some little pricks
or marks at the hardest to run often over them: and when they have once gone
over them, you may cause them to bring you a leaf at a time, or more; as those
who are apt will do readily.

By this means, besides that they shall learn very many Latin words,
Benefit hereof.
chiefly most of the Primitiues to further them greatly in the Latin, and to
counteruaile all the time and labor bestowed in them: they may also, when they
come to construction, either have every Radix in their head, or turn to it
with a wette finger, and make it perfect in an instant; and thereby have such a
light to all other words coming of these, as presently by them, to conceive
of and remember any word.

And thus by them and their readiness in the Grammar, to go on in reading by
the helps mentioned, faster then you would imagine.

For having these Radices perfect, Having Scapula in the school to run to, they
shall presently have any thing.
they will conceive presently by a little observing, of what root every word
comes, and guess near at the significations of them.


Spoud. But how shall I teach my fourmes which have not learned the Greek
Grammar, to read these Radices?


Phil. Nothing more easily:
for I find by experience that they will learn that presently, How children
may soon learn to read the Greek before they learn the Greek Grammar.
by knowing but the value and power of the Greek letters; I mean what every
letter signifies, or sounds in the Latin: and so calling them by their
names, as A. b. g. d. or giving them their sounds. Although if you will, the
names of the Greek characters are soon learned: but that former course, with
continual reading over to them before hand, so much as you would have them to
learn at once, will sufficiently effect it, until they learn the Grammar.

In learning these Radices, In learning the Radices to observe right
pronuntiation for accents and spirits.
call upon them often to mark carefully the accents of each word, with the
spirits: for that will further them exceedingly to accent right, when they come
to write in Greek, by knowing but the accent of the Primitive word, and a few
other rules. Right pronouncing of them, will make both their accents and
spirits remembered.

By some experience of the fruit of this book, This book labored in for the
common good.
for the speedy getting of the Greek* I have endeavored to make it more
perfect, by placing so near as I can,

First, the most proper significations in the first place; and only one word
in each signification, lest the volume should prove ouer-great: though (if the
volume would bear it) variety under every one, being rightly placed, were the
better, to use as need required; and thereby also to help to furnish with copy
of Synonimaes.

Secondly, by setting down also the English in one proper word, or just as the
Latin; only to express it, and without variety: except in some special
things which have diverse names in our own tongue, not commonly known.

Thirdly, setting down also the Articles in the Nounes, at least in all which
are hard to distinguish. The Future and Preterperfect tenses of the Verbes may
be known by their figurative letters: Anomalyes are set down in the Grammar for
most part.

I also intend (God willing) to set in the Margent of it all the Hebrew
Radices, against every Radix in Greek; at least so many as can be found: which
I presume upon good ground will be found a speedy introduction to the Hebrew.

Thus young scholars, and all others who are desirous to get the tongues, may
make a most easy entrance into them, and go forward with much pleasure in all
together: for having these, they shall lack nothing in effect, but some
precepts of Grammar, with practice in reading.


Spoud. But I would think, these Radices should be very hard to remember.


Phil. Not so: for there is such an agreement and harmony, between all the
four tongues, Help for committing words to memory.
or some of them in many words, as will make the learners to take a delight in
them, and much quicken and confirm the memory of the weakest; if it be but by
the very sounding of one word like another.

Those words which they cannot remember thus, direct them to remember them by
some other name or thing which we know well; being of a like sound: which so
soon as they but conceive, the Greek or Hebrew words may come to their
mind, or the significations of them.

Here must be remembered that Maxim in the Art of Memory, ^aueat in remembering.
that the more we do animate or give life unto the object, or thing whereby we
would remember, the more presently will the word which we would remember come
to our mind. But yet withal, we must always look to that divine Caveat,
that we never help the mind by any filthy object, or whatsoever may any way
corrupt it, or offend the Lord: because we must never do the least evil, that
we may obtain the greatest good. If we get any thing so, the more the worse;
for it cannot prosper, but to bring a curse with it.

But for this point of the agreement of the tongues, it may be I shall have
more occasion yet after, and how to remember the words.

And thus much shortly for remembering the Radices.

Yet besides these, The Greek Radices contrived into continued speeches.
there might yet be a shorter way for committing all the Radices to memory, or
exceedingly helping thereunto;

If all the principal of them were contrived into continued speeches, and
divided into certain Classes or chief heads; and they translated verbatim
into Latin or English, or both: and the translation to be made in a book
separate, or in several pages; as in the one page the Greek, in the other
over against it the Latin or English, line for line, and so many words in a
line: like as is the translation of Theogius, and the other small Poets
adjoined, with Sylburgius annotations; that so looking only on the Greek,
they might learn first to construe into Latin, and after looking only on the
translation they might beat out the Greek (as I showed before in the use of
the translations) and only use the help of the Greek text where they could
not find it out otherwise.

By this means, when they were able to read these both ways, both the Greek
into the translation, and the translation into the Greek readily (as they
might soon do, by often reading over, and by understanding the matter of them
well) it must needs make all other Greek very easy, being but the same
words in effect.

This work also is done in part: it perfected and adjoined as a praxis in the
end of the Radices, being so framed (as was showed) the one might soon be
learned by the help of the other.

And finally for this matter of thus getting all the Radices, Strange Latin
words.
or principal words in the tongues, if all the hard Latin words, and
specially whereof they may have use in good Authors, and which they have not
learned in their former Authors (as namely in Virgil, or the rest under him,
or which were not to be found in his Nomenclator) were set down after all
these Radices, in a few leaves in the end, the scholars should be with all
furnished for ordinary Latin words.

As for such words as are peculiar to some special arts, as to Physic or
the like, they are to be studied and lear^ed only of them who apply
themselves to those arts.


Spoud. Well Sir, to return unto the point again for making your scholars so
perfect in the Testament, by help of reading it out of the translation;
Learning the Greek out of our translations
I would think that it must needs be hard to learn to construe or read it
out of our translation, to do it with judgment on sure grounds; because ours
so often do express the sense and force of the words, for the better
understanding of the matter, according to the phrase in our own tongue; and
not the words particularly.


Phil. Indeed it is oft-times the more hard and uncertain: and therefore the
Scholar must take the more pains to remember it.

But to this purpose, for the exact getting of the Greek Testament,
if there were a perfect verbal Translation, The readiest and surest way by a
perfect verbal translation, or the verball^et in the Margent* where it
differs from that we use.
according to the manner of the interlineall (that so out of that the scholar
might daily practice to read the Greek) this must needs make him exceeding
ready, without danger of any missing, either of the phrase, or misplacing the
words: or in steed of such a perfect verbal Translation, if you take the
ordinary interlineall Translation; and where it does not sufficiently express
the force of the Greek words, there setting down the different words in the
Margent, as they are in the best Translations, you shall find it very
profitable. Or if you will, you may take Bezaes Translation, and set the
verbal in the Margent, where Beza differs from it. The difficult Radices
would be also be set in the Margent.


Spoud. It is very like that this would make them very perfect in the words of
the text: but yet this verbal translation would not serve for the manner of
construction, or the parsing of it; like as the Grammatical translations did
in the Latin.


Phil. By this time, How to east the Greek into the Grammatical order.
when they know the words, and the meaning, they will be able to cast them
into the Grammatical order of themselves; and so all that labor is supplied
for construing and parsing: for even as they cast and dispose the Latin into
the natural order; so they may the Greek.


Spoud. Then that must needs follow* which you affirm;
that by daily practice of reading the Greek out of such a translation, How
any who have but a smatering may proceed of themselves in the Greek Testament.
they may be exceeding perfect in the Testament; and that after that they are a
little entered they may go on of themselves in it: and so likewise all others
by the same reason, who have any smattering in the Greek, as all such
Ministers who are desirous hereof, may grow to great readiness and perfection
in it by themselves, thorough such a Translation.


Phil. It is most certain: for there is the very same reason in it that is in
the Latin; and this I find that a child of 9. or 10. year old, being well
entered, shall be able only by the help of the translation, to read of himself
an easy Author, as Corderius, or Tullies sentences, as fast out of Latin into
the English, or the English into the Latin, as the Latin is ordinarily read
alone, after he has read it over once or twice: to be able to read you thus,
in the space of an hour, a side of a leaf or more, of that which he never saw
before: And by often reading it over, to have it almost without book, if he
understand the matter of it.


Spoud. But if they should use the very Interlineall of Arias Montanus, This
cannot be so well done, by the Interlineall or having the Greek and Latin
together as by having them separate. Experience.
as it is: I mean the Greek and Latin together; might they not as well
learn by that; as having them so severally, the Greek in one book the Latin
in another?


Phil. No in no wise. This will appear most evidently to any who shall make
trial, how much sooner and more surely they will learn, and keep that which
they learn, by this means of having the books separate.

The reason also is evident; because when the books are so severed, the mind
it beats out the words, and makes them its own: yea, and also imprints them;
and does use the Translation but only as a Schoolmaster, or a Dictionary, The
Interlineal is continually a prompt^ to the schol^ar, and a deceiuer of the
mind instead of a Master, unless it be used with great wisdom.
where it is not able to find out the words of it self; and also to try
after, that it have gone surely. But when both are joined together, as in the
Interlineall, the eye is as soon upon the one as the other: I mean, as soon
upon the Latin as upon the Greek; and so likewise upon the Greek as upon the
Latin, because they are so close joined one unto the other. So that the book
instead of being a Master to help only where it should, where the mind cannot
study it out* it becomes a continual prompter and makes the mind a truant,
that it will not take the pains, which it should.

How this evil can be prevented amongst scholars, This evil cannot be
prevented amongst scholars.
having both together, I do not possibly see. For, whether they be to get it
themselves, or to be examined; yet still will their eye be upon the help,
where it should not be.

Indeed this I grant,
that the Interlineall translation may be a worthy help for a man of
judgment or understanding; How men of understanding may use the Interlineall.
who can so moderate his eye as to keep it fixed upon either Greek or Latin
alone, when he would beat the other out of it; as upon the Greek only when
he would construe, or read it into Latin, or on the Latin only when he
would read it into Greek, and so can use them as was said, without hindering
the mind to study and beat out, or to remember. Though the wisest shall find
it very hard to use it in this sort, but the eye will be where it should not;
unless he use this course, to lay a knife, or a ruler, or the like, on the
line which he would not see, and so remove it as need is. Thus he may use it
both for the Greek and Hebrew.


Spoud. It stands with great reason. Well then, the way being so ready and
plain, they are utterly unworthy so great a benefit, who will not take pains
in so easy a course.

But if I would have my scholars to proceed in other Greek Authors, How the
scholars may proceed in other Authors.
what courses should I then take: Though I cannot doubt, but being only thus
entered in the Testament, that they will be well accepted in the University,
and go forward speedily.


Phil. If you train them up thus f^^st in the Testament, they will go
forwards in others with the smaller helps. But if you would have them to begin
in other Greek Authors; I take the very same help of translations, either
verbal or Grammatical, to be the most speedy furtherances, so that there be
a diligent care of propriety in translating, and of variety set in the
margents; to use them in all things as in the Greek Testament, and in the
Latin Authors mentioned.


Spoud. But how shall we do for such translations of those Greek Authors?


Phil. Instead of reading lectures to them, you may thus translate them their
lectures daily, either in Latin or English; and cause them then either to
seek them out of themselves by their translations, Grammars and Lexicons: Or
reading them first unto them, cause them to make them perfect hereby.

By this labor of translating, you shall find your self to profit very much
in this knowledge of the Greek, and be greatly eased in your pains.


Spoud. But be it so, that I am not able to translate thus; as he had need to
be a good Grecian who should translate in such manner: what then should I do?


Phil. If you be able to read the Author truly unto them, The benefit of
such translations of some of the purest Authors performed by skillful Grecians.
and profitably; then may you also translate it thus: you may have help by
such translations as are extant, to give you much light. But it were much to
be wished, that to this purpose, some skillful Grecians would translate some of
the purest Authors in this manner. As namely, Isocrates, Xenophon, Plato, or
Demosthenes, or some parts of them, which might seem most fit for scholars;
only to be for this purpose of getting the Greek. To begin with the easiest
of them first. All painfu^l students would be found to profit exceedingly, and
to become rare Grecians in a little time.

Thus they might go on until they were able to read any Greek Author of
themselves, with such helps as are extant.

In the mean time, As the fables translated in the Strasburge Grammar.
you may use such Authors as are so translated, or which come the nearest unto
them; of which sort are those fables of Aesop translated in the Argentine
Grammar, and others which I shall show you in the manner of parsing.


Spoud. For the parsing then, what way may I use?


Phil. I have showed you this in part: Parsing in Greek*
as the noting and causing your scholars to write every hard word, showing
what examples they are like, the special rule, and so the other helps as they
are in the Latin, by casting words into the Grammatical order.

More special helps for them, who are not acquainted with Camdens Grammar.

1. They may use the Praxis Praeceptorum Grammatices of Antesignanus,
set down in the end of Cleonards Greek Grammar; Helps ^or construing and
pa^fing.
wherein is both an Interlineall verbal translation, Praxis praeceptorum
Grammatices Antesignani.
such as I spoke of; and also a parsing of every word familiarly and plainly,
much according to the manner of parsing of Latin, which I showed you; which
may be a good direction for parsing.

2. Berkets Commentary upon Stephens Catechism, Berket on Stephens Catech,
printed by Wechelus an. 1604
parsing every word according to Cleonard in folio, is found to be a speedy
help.

3. M Stockwood his Progymna^ma scholasticum:
wherein is also a Grammatical practice of sundry Greek Epigrams gathered by H.
Stephens, M* Stockw. Progimnasma scholasticum ex Anthologia He^^ici Stephani.
having a double translation in Latin (the one ad verbum, the other in verse)
and also a varying of each Epigr^^ Latineverse by diverse Authors. And lastly,
an explanation or parsing of every hard word set in the margent, or under each
Epigram in manner of a Commentary. In it also the Greek text is set down
both in Greek Characters, and also in Latin letters interlineally, directly
over the head of the Greek words; of purpose for the easy entering and better
directing of the ignorant.

The Commentary in it for parsing, may be also a good direction, for parsing in
the shortest manner by pen or reading.

Besides these,
for Poetry, we may take these Authors, which are easy and plain by their
helps mentioned: The best and fittest Authors ^or Poetry, and most easy:


1. Theognis his sentences with the other Poets joined with him: as namely,
Phocilides with the Latin translation and notes, Theognis. Phocili^es. Hesiode
with C^po^ine and M^lanchthon.
set forth by Sylburgius; which is very notable to enter young Scholars into
Poetry, for making a verse.

2. Hesiode his Opera and Dies with Ceporine and Melancthons Commentaries set
forth by Johannes Frisius Tigurinus, and the new translation of it, adverbum,
by Erasmus Schemidt, Greek professor at Wittenberge, printed 1601.

3. Homer with Eustathius Greek Commentary may easily be read after these
(especially after the Commentary on Hesiode; Homer with Eustathius.
which may be as an introduction to it) by the help of the verbal Latin
translation of Homer: and the words of Art, belonging to Grammar set down in
Greek in M. Camdens Grammar.

Moreover, these directions following will be most speedy helps for all the
Poets:

To have in readiness some brief rules of the chief figures, To have in
readiness a short brief of all the dialects and figures, a speedy help for
the knowledge of the Poets.
and dialects: as those who are in Master Camdens Grammar; so to be able to
refer all Anomalies in Greek unto them. Those with the verba anomala, and
the particular dialects, according to each part of speech, set down in the end
of Camden, may resolve most doubts: for Anomalies and special difficulties
which you cannot find otherwise, A principal help for all Anomalies and
difficulties in Greek.
you may find many of them set Alphabetically together in the end of Scapula
his Lexicon, where they are expressed fully, and particularly: which you shall
prove to be a marvelous readiness to you.


Spoud. Here are indeed very many and singular helps: most of which, I may
truly say as before, that I have not so much as heard of. But if I would have
my scholar to write in Greek, what means should I use then?


Phil. If you mean for the tongue, How to write purely in Greek
to be able to write true and pure Greek, the sure means are even the same,
as for writing Latin.

1. The continual practice of construing,
parsing, and reading forth of the translation into the Authors, is making the
Greek continually.

2. To come to the style and composition, and so for Orthography, to do as for
the Latin. As I directed you to give them sentences in English, translated
Grammatically out of Tullies sentences, to turn into Tullies Latin, whereby
both your self and they may have a certain guide for them to go surely; so
here to give them sentences or pieces out of the Testament, or out of
Isocrates, as ad Demomcum, or out of Xenophon to translate into Greek, and so
to see how near they can come unto the Author. Or else, to ask them only the
Latin or English of the Greek, and to try how they can turn it into Greek
first Grammatically, after in composition: or sometimes one way, sometimes the
other. And to this purpose also, the translations of some excellent parts of the
purest Greek Authors were most necessary.

By these means they might come in time, to be as accurate in writing Greek
for the style and composition, as in the Latin. For all other exercises in
Greek, I refer you to that which has been said concerning the Latin, the
reason and means being the like.

Or if you meant for writing the Greek hand fair, How to write fair.
most exquisite copies constantly followed, as in the Latin and English, and
practice, shall bring them unto it. But for this, I likewise refer you to that
which was said concerning the way of writing fair.


Spoud. But what say you for versifying in Greek? Versifying in Greek.
for that you know to commend the chief Schools greatly.


Phil. As I answered you before, so I take the means to be in all things the
same, as for versifying in Latin; except that this is more easy, because of
the long and short vowels so certainly known.
To be very perfect in the rules of versifying; Theognis may be easily learned
without book by the help of the translation*
inscanning averse. To learn Theognis, that pleasant and easy Poet without
book, to have store of Poetical phrase and authorities: which is the
speediest and surest way. And so to enter by turning or imitating his verses,
as in Latin. But herein as in all the rest, I do still desire the help of the
learned, who can better show by experience the shortest, surest, and most
plain ways.

Notwithstanding,
let me here admonish you of this (which for our curiosity we had need to
be often put in mind of) that, A Caveat for the time bestowed in such
exercises of writing in Greek^.
seeing we have so little practice of any exercises to be written in Greek,
we do not bestow too much time in that, whereof we happily shall have no
use; and which therefore we shall also forget again: but that we still
employ our precious time to the best advantage in the most profitable studies,
which may after do most good to Gods Church or our country.


Spoud. Your counsel is good: yet repeat me again a brief of the
principal of these helps for my memory sake.


Phil. This was it;

1. To make your Scholars very perfect in the Grammar, Sum of all.
chiefly Nownes and Verbes; that they may be able to prove and parallel every
thing by a like example, or at least to turn to them readily.

2. To have the Greek Radices by the means mentioned.

3. Continual use of most accurate verbal or Grammatical translations; and
in the mean time to make them perfect in the Testament daily use of our
ordinary translations so as was showed, by reading the Greek out of them over
and over.

4. Help of the best Commentaries and Grammatical practices in the books
mentioned.

5. To be ready in the dialects and the common figures for the Poetry.

6. Noting all the difficulties, and running often over them as in the Latin;
and so all other helps of understanding the matter first, and the rest
mentioned generally.


CHAP. XXI.
How to get most speedily the knowledge and understanding of the Hebrew.
Spoud. But what say you, for that most sacred tongue, the Hebrew? How, I pray
you, do you think, that that may be attained, which you mentioned, that
students may come so soon to the understanding of it?


Phil. This may be obtained the sooner, The knowledge of the Hebrew may be the
soonest gotten and why
because we have it all comprised, so far as is necessary for us to know, in
that one sacred volume of the old Testament. Also because the principal roots
of it are so few, the matter so familiar, as which every one of us ought to be
acquainted with. The Nowns have so little varying or turning in them.

And finally, for that we have such singular helps for the understanding of
it (as the Interlineall verbal translation, and the translations and labors
of others which beat out the propriety, force and sense of every word and
phrase) like as in the Greek Testament, that nothing can be difficult in it to
the good heart, who will use the means which the Lord has vouchsafed, and will
seek this blessing, from his Majesty.


Spoud. Surely, he is utterly unworthy of this heavenly treasure, who will
not seek and beg it from the Lord, and dig deep for it: I mean, who will not
use any holy means, for the obtaining of it; and much more the course being so
short, plain and direct, as you say. But I entreat you to trace me out the
shortest way.


Phil. The way, so far as yet I have been able to learn, is wholly set down
already in the manner of getting the Latin and the Greek. But to make a brie^e
rehearsal*

1 For them who would be more accurate Hebricians for the beating out of every
tittle, 1 The Grammar to be gotten most exquisitely of them who desire to come
to perfection in the Hebrew.
they are to have the Grammar very accurately; and that by the like means even
as the Greek and the Latin.

But for those who only desire the understanding of it, and to be skillful in
the text, the chief care must be, that they be made perfect in some few
principal rules of Grammar of most use. Some chief parts for others who only
desire the understanding.
Also in declining and coniugating the examples set down in the book, and in
the several terminations of declensions, numbers, moodes, tenses, persons, to
be able in them in some good manner to give Hebrew to Latin, and Latin to
Hebrew, and to run the terminations in each; at least to give the Latin to the
Hebrew perfectly. And so in the several Pronounes, Aduerbes, Conjunctions to
do the like; I mean, to give Latin to the Hebrew, to have them very readily,
seeing they are but few, and sundry of them of continual use.


Spoud. But what Grammar would you use?


Phil. Martinius of the last Edition, Grammars to be used.
with the Technologia adjoined to it, Martinius with his Technologia.
I take to be most used of all the learned, as most methodicall and perfect;
although Blebelius is far more easy to the young beginner, Blebelius
accounted most plain and easy
as much more answering to our Latin Grammar; and made so plain of purpose by
questions and answers, that any one of judgment may better understand it, and
go forward with delight: so as it may be a notable introduction or Commentary
to Martinius, who had need of a good Reader, to learn to understand him
perfectly.

Both read together, The several points in Martinius you may find in
Blebelius by the table in the end of Blebelius.
must needs be most profitable; Martinius for method and shortness, Blebelius
for resolving and expounding every obscurity: yet every one who has learned a
Grammar, may best use the same, because that is most familiar to him.

But for them who are to begin, or to teach others, they may take the easiest
first, that the learner may no way be discouraged; and after others as as they
shall think meet, or which shall be found most profitable, by the judgment
of the greatest Hebricians. This I think to be the surest advice; and by
comparing of Grammars together, ever to beat out the sense and meaning.


Spoud. What is your next means?


Phil. The getting of the Hebrew roots, The second principal means, the
perfect getting of the Radices.
together with the Grammar, every day a certain number. Hereunto the
Nomenclator Anglolatmus-Graecus-Haebraicus, mentioned before, if it were so
finished, might be a notable introductio^.

For the manner of committing the Radices to memory, Manner of committing the
Radices to memory.
I showed it before: yet hereto speak of it a little more fully, first to
help our remembrance by some of the chief helps of memory; as by comparing in
our meditation the several words in the Hebrew, with what words they are like
unto, either in the English, Latin, or Greek, which words either do come of
them, or sound like unto them, or with some other root in the Hebr^w, wherewith
they have affinity. That so soon as we see the Hebrew root, the other word
which we would remember it by, coming to our mind; the understanding or
meaning of the Hebrew root may also come to mind with it.

As for example, Examples of helping memory in the Hebrew.
to begin in the first Radices, and to give some light in 2. or 3; (...) and
(...) ^uber or pubert as, may be remembered by (...), pubertas; and by ephebe or
ephebus, in Latin coming of it, signifying the same: as Postquam excessit ex
ephebis. Terent. Also (...) may be remembered by the month Abib in the
Scriptures, which was amongst the Jews mensis pubertatis, in quo seges terrae
Canaan protrudebat spicas. (...) Perijt, may be remembered by Abaddon in the
Apocalips, called in Greek Apollion, the destroyer, or destruction; the Angel
of the bottomless pit. (...) voluit, acquieuit, or been affectus est in
aliquid, vt pater in filios: It may fully be remembered by Abba, father, coming
of (...) pater: and so the word (...) in Greek, or Abbas an Abbot, quia Abbas
erat pater totius societatis. And Auus seems to come of the same By any of
these we may remember the root.

Thus we may remember very many of them by the help of Auenars Dictionary (as I
showed) or by our own meditation, even from the words coming of them indeed,
or in show, observed according to certain rules which Auenarius gives in the
beginning of his Lexicon.

The reason hereof also is most evident;
for that this is the mother tongue of all tongues, The Hebrew the mother
tongue most ancient and worthy.
and was the only tongue, until the confounding of the tongs at Babel: in which
confusion, some words were changed altogether, in others the significations were
altered, and many have bin depraved and corrupted by continuance and succession
of time. Others derived from it.
Therefore as this tongue is to be honored, so this diligence in comparing and
deriuing other tongues, The benefit of diligence in comparing the tongues.
must needs be of exceeding great profit many ways: and amongst other, for
this very purpose of conceiving or committing to memory, and retayning the
Hebrew more surely, by other words better known to us.

Other words which cannot be remembered thus, How other words may be remembered,
which cannot be so derived.
yet may be remembered by the learned, by some thing which they sound like unto,
in one of the three tongs; So that we forget not to animate that which we
remember by: that is, to conceive of it in our mind, as being lively and
stirring; like as we noted before in the Greek.

The rest of the roots besides these, The hardest roots which seem to have no
affini^y.
will be but few: and being noted with a line with a black lead pen (as was
said) or any mark, and often run over, they may soon be gotten.

Besides these, To mark out also the harder deriuatiues in the Hebrew.
some mark would be given under every deriuatiue, in each root, which does
differ much in signification from the Radix, and cannot be remembered well by
the Radix, nor how it may be derived from it.


Spoud. Such a Nomenclator as you speak of, must needs be a rare and speedy
help to all the tongues, if it were well gathered by some very learned and
judicious Hebrician. But in the mean time, what abbridgement would you use for
getting these Radices of the Hebrew?


Phil. The Epitome of Pagnine I take to be most common: The best Epitome for
getting the Radices.
but Buxtorphius his abbridgement (going under the name of Polanus) must needs
be the best in all likelihood; as having had the help of that and all other,
and gathered by great judgment.

I have seen a draught of another, This is not fully finished.
much shorter then them both, collected by comparing Pagnine, Auenar, and
others; showing also for most part how the Hebrew deriuatiues, which are more
obscure, are derived from the Radices, giving at least a probable reason for
them: and also in sundry, showing the agreement and manner of the deriuation of
the tongues, one from another, and the affinity of many of them; to help the
memory with the speedy and sure getting of all.


Spoud. It were great pity, but that that should be perfected; for the
benefit of it must needs be very great. But might there not be such a devise,
of contriuing all the Hebrew roots into continued speeches; and so learning
them by studying them out of verbal translations, as you showed for the Greek?


Phil. Yes undoubtedly, The way might be more compendious by the roots reduced
to Classes.
it might easily be accomplished by some exquisite and painful Hebrician, to
make this labor yet much more compendious: Although I do not doubt but any
indifferent memory, might in the space of a twelve month or less, get all the
Hebrew Radices very perfectly, By the Dictionary alone they might be gotten in
a short time.
by the former means of Buxtorphius or Pagnines abbridgement alone; spending
but every day one hour therein. And when they were once gotten, they were
easily kept by often repetition, running over the hardest, being marked out; and
by daily practice in reading some Chapters; though much more easily, by having
the heads reduced to such classes, and the often running over them.

I have heard moreover of all the Radices, with their Primitive significations
alone, drawn into a very little space; which being well performed, must needs
be a notable furtherance.


Spoud. What is your third help?


Phil. The perfect verbal translations written out of Arias Montanus, The
third help, perfect verbal translations, and continual practice of them.
by conferring with Iunius and our own Bible, specially our new translation,
and setting the diverse readings in the margents with a letter, to signify
whose the translations are, and also every hard Radix noted in the margent, as
now sundry of them are; with references to them by letters or figures, as I
showed for the Greek: these being used as the English translations, for
getting the Latin, and as the Latin or English for the Greek, will be found
above all that we would imagine.

And that after this manner:

First, as I said for the others, by reading over the translations, The manner
of using these repeated.
to understand the matter.

Secondly, learning to construe the Hebrew into the Latin exactly, and back
again out of the translation into Hebrew; looking only on the translation, to
meditate and beat out the Hebrew. This helps understanding, apprehension,
memory, and all (as I said) to have the text most absolutely.

Lastly, beginning with the easiest first (as in the other tongues) as either
some part of the History (as namely Genesis, the books of Samuel) or else the
Psalms; and therein specially the hundred and nineteen Psalm, as most plain
of all other: or rather to begin with the Praxis upon the Psalms, the first,
the five and twentieth, and the threescore and eight, set down in the end of
Martinius Grammar, printed by Raphalengius, Anno 1607. which will both acquaint
the learner with the understanding of Martinius, and set him in a most direct
and ready way, by the other helps.

For the certainty of this, Experience of this for assurance.
besides that the reason is the very same with the Latin, and like as I said
for the Greek also, I have moreover known this experience in a child, under
fifteen years of age; who besides all kind of studies and exercises, both in
Latin and Greek, as those mentioned before, and his daily progress in them,
had within the space of less then a year, gotten sundry of the principal and
most necessary rules of Grammar. Also a great part of the Radices in
Buxtorphius, though he spent not therein above two hours in a day. And
besides all this, he had learned about fourteen or fifteen Psalms: wherein
he was so ready, as that he was able not only to construe or read the
Hebrew into the Latin; but also out of the bare translation, to read the
Hebrew back again, to show every Radix, and to give a reason in good sort for
each word, why it was so. Of this has been trial by learned and sufficient
witnesses.

The which experience with the daily trials of reading the Latin so exactly
and readily out of the English, and getting it (as it were without book) by
that practice, doefully assure me that by this daily exercise the very
originals of the Hebrew may be made as easy and familiar as the Latin is;
yea, in time with continual practice, to be able to say very much of it
without book: A Student cannot be better employed then in thus imprinting the
originals in his heart, if he have leisure.
as I showed before for the Greek. And what Student, especially of Divinity,
can ever bestow some part of his time in a more pleasant, easy and happy
study? when there will be no more but reading over and over with meditation,
and still to be reading the words and wisdom of the Highest; in whose
presence he hopes to dwell, and to hear the same sweet voice in the Temple in
heaven eternally.


Spoud. By these means, it seems to me that any tongue may be gotten speedily.


Phil. Yea verily,
I do so persuade my self. For seeing (as I said) that there is no more in any
tongue, It seems that any tongue may be gotten thus.
but words and joining of those words together; therefore the words being first
gotten, chiefly by being contrived into continued speeches, and those so learnd
out of such verbal translations: secondly, some few rules of them being known:
thirdly, continual use of such translations; would make any tongue to be
understood and learned very soon, so far as I can conceive.


Spoud. How soever this be, which seems indeed most probable; These tongues,
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew may be gotten in each Nation, by these means of
translations in their own ^ongues.
yet I take it, there can be no doubt of this, but that in every country of the
world, the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew may be attained by the same means: which
three are enough (yea the two last alone sufficient) to know God and Jesus
Christ to eternal life: and that so by the knowledge of the Originals, men may
have a certain knowledge of the eternal word of the Lord.


Phil. I can see no reason at all to the contrary, but that these our Latin
Classical Authors being translated Grammatically into other tongues, by some
who are learned amongst them, the Latin may as well be learned thereby by
them out of their translations, in their own tongues, by such helps of rules as
have bin mentioned, or the like, as out of translations in our English tongue.
Secondly, the Latin tongue being once gotten, the getting of the Greek and
Hebrew are the very same unto them which they are to us.

Or otherwise, the Greek and Hebrew but translated so alone, Greek or Hebrew
most easily learned by perfect translations in each tongue.
into the several tongues of each Nation (I mean verbally) they might as
easily, if not more easily, be learned in each country out of them, as out of
the English or Latin; and the sense or meaning also, if in every difficult
place, or where the words seemed to be out of order, it were set in the
margents over against them.

The same I say for our English; into which the Hebrew, in most places
translated verbatim, does keep a perfect sense, and might be learned out of
it. Also the most absolute fullness of understanding of the matter in our
heads, does bring words, most readily to express it; which I have often told
you of.


But remember this that I have said; Of the use of perfect verbal translations
for getting the originals.
that the verbal Translations, for these originals, shall make the learners
most cunning in the text, and in the very order of the words of the Holy
Ghost, without danger of any way deprauing, corrupting or inuerting one iotte
or tittle: though for the Latin, the Grammatical translations be far most
profitable, as we have showed.


Spoud. Are these all the directions that you would give me herein?


Phil. These are all which yet I know.


Spoud. By these then it seems that you are fully persuaded that this holy
tongue may be obtained.


Phil. Yea undoubtedly, so much as shall be requisite for us, by observing
withal those general rules, set down for the getting of the Latin; and
chiefly that, of making marks under every hard word in each page, without
marring our books; and to run often over those.

But herein it is necessary that I put you in mind again, Observation re^
eated how much and what to learn in eu^ry book*
of that which I admonished you of in the Greek; that your scholar learn so
much only, as either the present time requires: I mean, whereof he may have
good use presently, or else when he shall proceed to higher studies in the
Universities, or to other employments. And for other speculatiue or more
curious knowledge in Quiddities, either to cut them off altogether from
hindering better and more needful studies, or to reserve them to their due
time and place; or to leave them only to them who shall give themselves wholly
to these studies, to be readers in the Universities, or for like purposes; as,
the learning of the music and Rhetorical accents: the Prosodia metrica, and
the like.


Spoud. What is then the sum of all?


Phil. For them who desire to be exact Hebricians, to be very perfect in the
Grammar; for them who desire but only the understanding, to have,

1 Some necessary rules, and principally examples of Nounes and Verbes very
readily.

2 The Radices.

3 Continual use of verbal translations, or others; as in the Greek.

4 Often running over the hardest words.

But these, as all other things, I write under correction, and with submission
and desire of better judgment.


CHAP. XXII.
Of knowledge of the grounds of religion and training up the scholars therein.
Spoud. NOw that we have thus gone thorough all the way of learning, for
whatsoever can be required in the Grammar schools; and how to lay a sure
foundation, both for the Greek and the Hebrew, that they may be able to go
on of themselves in all these by their own studies: it remains that we come
yet to one further point, and which is as it were the end of all these.
Scholars to be trained up in Religion.
That is, how scholars may be seasoned and trained up in Gods true Religion
and in grace; without which all other learning is merely vain, or to increase
a greater condemnation. This one alone does make them truly blessed, and
sanctify all other their studies.

Moreover, they being taught herein in their youth shall not depart from it
when they are old. I entreat you therefore to show me so shortly as you can,
how scholars may be taught all those things which were contained in the
note: As,

1. To be acquainted with all the grounds of religion and chief histories of
the Bible.

2. So to take the Sermons* at least for all the substance both for doctrines,
proofs, uses; and after to make a rehearsal of them.

3. Every one to begin to conceive and answer the several points of the
Sermons, even from the lowest forms.

These are matters that I think are least thought of in most schools, This
most neglected in schools.
though of all other they must needs be most necessary, and which our laws
and injunctions do take principal care for; and that the schoolmasters, to
these ends, be of sincere religion.


Phil. I fear indeed that it is as you say, that this is ouer-generally
neglected. The popish Schoolemasters shall rise up against us.
And herein shall the popish schoolemasters rise up in judgment against us:
who make this the very chief mark at which they aim, in all their teaching;
to pour in superstition at the beginning, first to corrupt and deceive the
tender minds.

But to return unto the matter, how they may be thus trained up in the fear
of the Lord; I shall set you down the best manner, so near as I my self have
yet learned, follovving the order of these particulars mentioned.

1. For being acquainted with the grounds of religion and the principles of
the Catechism;
Every Saturdaie before their breaking up the school (for (...) finishing
their weeks labors, How to teach them the Catechism and when.
and a preparatiue to the Sabbath) let them spend half an hour or more in
learning and answering the Catechism.

To this end, cause every one to have his Catechism, to get half a side of a
leaf or more at a time; each to be able to repeat the whole. The more they
say at a time and the ofter they run over the whole, the sooner they will
come to understanding. This must be as their parts in their Accedence.

In examining,
first your Usher or Seniors of each fourm may hear that every one can say.
Manner of examining Catechism.
Afterward, you having all set before you, may poase whom you suspect most
careless.

1. Whether they can answer the questions.

2. In demanding every question again, to stand a little on it, to make it so
plain and easy, as the least child amongst them may understand every word
which has any hardness in it, and the force of it.

Let the manner of the poasing be as I showed for the Accedence. The more
plainly the question is drawn out of the very words of the book, and into the
more short questions it is divided, and also examined backward and forward, the
sooner a great deal they will understand it, and better remember it.

Herein also to use all diligence to apply every peecevnto them, to whet it
upon them, to work holy affections in them; that each may learn to fear the
Lord and walk in all his commandments. For, being in their hearts and
practice, it will be more firmly kept. This also must be remembered for all that
follows.

2. For the Sabbaoths and other days when there is any sermon, Taking notes
or writing sermons.
cause every one to learn something at the sermons.

1. The very lowest to bring some notes, at least 3. or 4. If they can, to
learn them by their own marking; if not to get other of their fellows to
teach them some short lessons after. As thus: Without God we can do nothing.
All good gifts are from God: or the like short sentences; not to ouer-load them
at the first.

To this end, that the Monitours see, 1. That all be most attentive to the
Preacher.

2. That all those who can write any thing, 2. All who can write to take notes.
or do but begin to write ^oining hand, do every one write some such notes, or
at least to get them written, some 5. or 6. or more as they can, as I said to
be able to repeat them without book, as their other little fellows.


But herein there must be great care by the Monitours, Caveat of any noise or
disorder in gathering notes.
that they trouble not their fellows, nor the congregation, in asking notes,
or stirring out of their places to seek of one another, or any other disorder;
but to ask them after they are come forth of the Church, and get them written
then.

3. For those who have been longer practiced herein, 3. The higher to set down
parts of the sermon more o^derly.
to set down, 1. The Text or a part of it. 2. To mark as near as they can,
and set down every doctrine, and what proofs they can, the reasons and the
uses of them.

4. In the highest fourmes, 4. In all the highest fourm^ to set down the
substance exactly.
cause them to set down all the Sermons. As Text, division, exposition, or
meaning, doctrines, and how the several doctrines were gathered, all the
proofs, reasons, uses, applications. I mean all the substance and effect of
the Sermons: for learning is not so much seen, in setting down the words, as
the substance.

And also for further directing them,
and better helping their understanding and memories, Manner of noting for
helping understanding and memory.
for the repetition thereof; cause them to leave spaces between every part,
and where need is to divide them with lines. So also to distinguish the
several parts by letters or figures,
and setting the sum of every thing in the margent over against each matter in
a word or two. Helps for memory in the margent, and for understanding.
As, Text, Division, Sum.

First Observation or 1. Doctrine, Proofs, Reasons 1. 2. 3. Uses 1. 2. 3. So,
the 2. Observation or doctrine, proofs, reasons, etc. so thoroughout. Or what
method soever, the Preacher does use, to follow the parts after the same manner,
so well as they can.

Direct them to leave good margents for these purposes:
and so soon as ever the Preacher quotes any scripture, To leave good margents.
as he names it, To set down quotations as they are spoken.
to set it in the Margent against the place, lest it slip out of memory.

And presently after the sermon is done, to run over all again, To set down
the heads of all in the margents after.
correcting it, and setting down the sum of every chief head, fair and
distinctly in the margent over against the place, if his leisure will suffer.

By this help they will be able to understand, and make a repetition of the
sermon, Benefit of this.
with a very little meditation; yea to do it with admiration for children.

After all these, To turn it after into Latin for the next days exercise.
you may (if you think good) cause them the next morning, to translate it into
a good Latin style, instead of their exercise the next day (I mean, so many
of them as write Latin) or some little piece of it according to their ability.

Or rather,
(because of the lack of time, to examine what every one has written) to see
how they are able out of the English, Or to read it into Latin ex tempore.
to read that which they have written, into Latin, ex tempore, each of them
reading his piece in order, and helping others to give better phrase and more
variety, for every difficult word; and so to run thorough the whole.

This I find that they will begin to do, Experience how soon they will do
this.
after that they have been exercised in making Latin a twelve month or two,
if they have been rightly entered, and well exercised in Sententiae pueriles;
especially in the divine sentences in the end thereof, and in Corderius with
other books and exercises noted before, chiefly by the practice of reading out
of the translations.


Spoud. But when would you examine these? Examining the sermons.



Phil. For the reading into Latin, I would have it done the next day at 9. of
the clock for their exercise, or at their entrance after dinner; that so they
might have some meet time to meditate of it before: and for examining of it in
English, to do it at night before their breaking up, amongst them all shortly,
or before dinner.

Herein also some one of the higher fourmes might be appointed in order to
make a repetitio^ of the wholeserm on without book, One to make a short
rehearsal of the whole first.
according as I showed the manner of setting it down; rehearsing the several
parts so distinctly and briefly, as the rest attending may the better conceive
of the whole, and not exceed the space of a quarter of an hour.

After the repetition of it, To ask questions of all things difficult.
if leisure serve, the Master may ask amongst the highest some few questions,
of whatsoever points might seem difficult in the sermon: for by questions as I
have said, they will com to understand any thing.

Next to appose amongst the lowest, To cause the least and all sorts to repeat
their notes.
where he thinks good, what notes they took of the Sermons, and cause them to
pronounce them; and in appoasing to cause them to understand, by applying all
things to them in a word or two. Thus to go thorough as time shall permit.


Spoud. This strict examining will be a good means to make them attentive?


Phil. It will indeed; Benefit of this strict examining.
so as you shall see them to increase in knowledge and understanding above your
expectation: And besides it will keep them from playing talking, sleeping and
all other disorders in the Church. To this end therefore poase diligently, all
those who^ you observe or suspect most negligent* as I have advised: then you
shall have them to attend heedfully.


Spoud. But how will you cause them to be able so to repeat the Sermon? Me
thinks that should be very difficult.


Phil. The scholars will do it very readily, How they may be able to repeat
the whole sermons without book.
where the Preachers keep any good order; when they have so noted euerything as
I directed before, and set down the sum in the margent. For then, first
meditating the text to have it perfect: secondly, meditating the margents to
get the sum of all into their heads, and the manner how it stands: thirdly,
observing how many doctrines were gathered and how, what proofs, how many
reasons and uses of every doctrine; they will soon both conceive it, and be
able to deliver it with much facility after a little practice.

But herein the principal helps are understanding, Principal helps for it.
by getting the sums, and margents; observing the order, and constant
practice. Understanding will bring words: practice perfection.

If those who are weaker or more timorous,
have their notes lying open before them, Help of notes for assurance.
to cast their eye upon them here or there where they stick, it shall much
embolden them, and fit them after to make use of short notes of any thing: I
mean of the brief sum of that which they shall deliver.


Spoud. These are surely very good exercises for the Saturday for catechizing,
and the days after the sermons for repeating of the sermons: but would you
have no exercises of religion at all in the other days of the week?


Phil. Yes. As there is no no day but it is the Lords, and therefore it and all
our labors to be consecrated to him by a morning and an evening sacrifice, I
mean prayer and thanksgiving morning and evening; so there would no day be
su^fered to pass over, wherein there should not be some short exercise or
lesson of religion: which is both the chief end of all other our studies, and
also that, whereby all the rest are sanctified. And to this end, one quarter of
an hour or more might be taken every evening before prayer, though they were
kept so much the longer, that it might not hinder any other of their daily
studies: Although in this, no loss will ever be found, to any other study,
but the Lord will bless so much the more; That also to be in such a course as
none could any way dislike, and which of all other might be both most sure and
profitable.


Spoud. What such a course can you find which is so profitable, and which all
must needs so approve of, which might be so short?


Phil. To go thorough the history of the Bible, every day a history, or some
piece of a history: I mean, some few questions of it in order, as the time
will permit.

To this purpose, Every night to go thorough a piece of the history of the
Bible.
there is a little book called the history of the Bible, gathered by M. Paget:
wherein if you cause them to provide against every night a side of a leaf, or
as you shall think meet, of the most easy and plain questions; and to
examine them after the manner of examining the Catechism; Manner of examining
the history.
you shall see them to profit much, both for the easiness of the history, and
the delight which children will take therein.

Wherein also if first you shall show them or ask them what virtues are
commended in that history; what vices are condemned; or what generals they
could gather out of that particular; or what examples they have against such
vices, or for such virtues; and thus examine them after the same manner, so
going over and over as the time permits, you shall see them to come on
according to your desire.


Spoud. But me thinks that you would not have them to take every question in
that book before them. Not to trouble them with every question.



Phil. No: I would have only those histories which are most familiar for
children to understand, and most to edification; and so those questions only to
be chosen. There are sundry concerning the Leuiticall laws, which are beyond
their conceit, and so in diverse other parts. For that should ever be kept in
memory, that things well understood are ever most soon learned and most firmly
kept: and we should ever be afraid to discourage our children by the difficulty
of anything.


Spoud. It is true indeed. And moreover, howsoever it is most certain that all
holy Scripture is profitable, and all to be known: yet some parts are more
easy and as milk, meet for the weakest and youngest children to be taught, and
which they may understand and conceive of easily; others are as stronger meat,
and more obscure, wherewith they are to be acquainted after. But as in all
other learning, so it is here, every thing is to be learned in the right place.
The more plain and easy questions and places will still be expounders and
masters to the more hard and obscure.

But yet, Objection, concerning them who would not have their children taught
any religion.
howsoever I like very well of all this, you know that there are some who would
not have their children to be taught any religion, nor to meddle with it at all.


Phil. There cannot be any such who either love or know the Gospel of
Christ, or regard their own salvation, or the saving of their children.

The rest are to be pitied and prayed for, rather then to be answered.

The Popish sort know the necessity hereof: and therefore they labor
principally to corrupt the youth, and offer their pains freely to that end.
They shall be the Judges of all such.


Spoud. But it will take up overmuch time from their other learning.


Phil. I directed you how to cut off all such exceptions: How to deal that
this may not hinder any other learning
I would take the time to that purpose over and beside their ordinary. It is
but mine own labor, for a quarter or half an hour in the day at the most,
keeping them a little longer. Although if it should be part of the school
time, there would never be found any loss therein.


Spoud. But how will you teach your children ciuility and good manners? which
is principally required in Scholars.


Phil. Religion will teach them manners: How to teach the scholars civility.
As they grow in it, so they will also in all civil and good behavior. The
word of the Lord is the rule and ground of all, to frame their manners by; that
is therefore the first and principal means.

Secondly, out of their Authors which they read, you may still take occasion
to teach them manners; some of their Treatises being written of purpose to that
end: as Qui mihi, Sententiae pueriles, Cato, Tullies Offices, etc.

For the carriage of youth, according to the ciuility used in our time, and for
the whole course of framing their manners in the most commendable sort, there
is a little book translated out of French, The School of good manners, or The
new School of virtue for civility.
called The School of good manners, or The new School of virtue; teaching
youth how they ought to behave themselves in all companies, times, and places.
It is a book most easy and plain, meet both for Masters and Scholars to be
acquainted with, to frame all according unto it; unless in any particular the
custom of the place require otherwise.


Spoud. How would you have the children acquainted with this?


Phil. The Master sometimes in stead of the History, or if he will (at some
other times) might read it over unto them al, a leaf or two at a time, and
after to examine it amongst them. It is so plain that they will easily
understand it.


Spoud. But if I could thus teach them Religion, and Latin all under one; it
were a most happy thing, and I should cut off all quarrel and exception.


Phil. I will show you how you may do it.
Cause your Scholars to read you a Chapter of the New Testament, How to teach
Religion and Latin all under one, by reading each night a piece of a Chapter.
Practice this constantly and carefully, and try the experience of Gods
blessing in it.
or a piece of a Chapter, as time will permit, about twenty verses at a time,
in steed of the History mentioned. One night to read it out of the Latin into
English; reading first a verse or a sentence in Latin to a Comma, or a full
point, as they can: then Englishing that, not as construing it, but as reading
it into good English; so throughout: the next night to read the same over
again forth of an English Testament, into the same Latin back again.

Thus every one of those who are able, to read in order, each his night; all
the rest to look on their own Testaments, English, Latin, or Greek, or to
harken. Let them begin at the Gospel of John, as was advised for the Greek,
as being most easy; or at Matthew if you please; and you shall soon find
that through the familiarnes of the matter, they will so come on both ways
(both in reading the Latin into English, and English into Latin) as your
self will marvel at, and their parents will rejoice in; and acknowledge
themselves bound unto you for to see their little ones to be able to read the
Testament into Latin.

Besides that, it will be also a notable preparatiue to learn the Greek
Testament, when they are so well acquainted with the English and Latin before.


Spoud. But what Latin translation would you use?


Phil. Such as my Scholars have: Erasmus or Beza; but chiefly Beza, as the
more pure phrase, and more fully expressing the sense and drift of the Holy
Ghost. Therein your self, or your scholars marking the peculiar Latin
phrases, when they read first forth of the Latin into the English, they will
be able of themselves (when they read them the second time forth of the
English into Latin) to give the same phrases again, and to imprint them for
ever.


Spoud. But what time should I have then for the History of the Bible, that
little book which you mentioned; whereof must needs be very singular use:
would you have me to omit it?


Phil. No, in no case: one quarter of an hour spent in examining it before
prayers in the forenoone, When the History to be repeated.
a side or a leaf at a time (as I said) may serve for that; and another
quarter or not much more, before prayers at the breaking up at evening for
this; and so neither to lose time, nor to omit any thing necessary for their
happy growth herein. In this reading of the Chapters so, you shall find that
they will get as much Latin, and go on as fast as in any other exercise
whatsoever; and also will do it with ease, when they have been first well
trained up in the Grammatical translations, and that each knows his night to
look to it aforehand.


Spoud. But at this kind of reading the Chapter, the lesser sort which
understand no Latin, will get no good.


Phil. Yes very much. How all the least may profit by reading of the Chapters*
If after that the Chapter is read, you use but to examine some two or three,
as time will permit; asking them what they remember of that which was read, or
how much they can repeat without book of it: you shall see that in a short
time they will so mark, or so look to it before hand, as they will (almost any
of them) repeat you a verse or two a piece. If you use to appose ordinarily
for example, some one whom you know can repeat a great deal, it will much
provoke the rest, to mark and take pains; and especially if (as in other
things) you use to appose adversaries, whether can repeat the more. And thus
much for that, how they may get Religion and Latin together.


CHAP. XXIII.
How to understand and remember any moral matter.
Spoud. YEt one other point remains, which is of great use, and very fit to
be asked here; how children may be made to understand, and conceive of any
ordinary matter meet for them? as the points of the Sermons, the History of
the Bible: for even most of these things may seem to be above childrens
capacities; and I see understanding to be the life and substance of all.


Phil. This point has been taught throughout in part: A principal help of
understanding, how to make children to understand any thing and remember.
but this I say unto you again, and you shall find it most true; that for any
one who would conceive of any long sentence and remember it, let him divide it
into as many short questions as he can, and answer them (though closely) in
his mind; it shall give a great light. So do with your scholars in any thing
which you would have them to understand: divide the long question or sentence
into many short ones; by the short they will understand and conceive of the
long. I showed the manner in examining young scholars, at In speech, and in
Sententiae pueriles.

For other helps; as for marking the sum and drift of every thing, and also
for observing what goes before, what follows after, the propriety of words,
those circumstances of examining and understanding, casting the words into the
natural order, and the like: I refer you to the Chapter of construing ex
tempore; where these things are handled at large.


Spoud. Yet for my further direction, give me one ensample in a sentence, in
the story of the Bible, because we were speaking of that last, and how to
teach children to understand that. I take it there is the like reason in the
Latin, and in all things.


Phil. There is indeed the same reason. I will give you an instance in a
sentence or two in the first Chapter in Genesis: and the rather because this is
used by many, to cause children to read a Chapter of the Bible, and then to
ask some questions out of that. For example:

1 In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. Examples of asking
questions, to help understanding.


2 And the earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face
of the deep, and the spirit of God moved upon the waters.

3 Then God said; Let there be light, and there was light, etc.

I would propound my questions thus, sundry ways, out of the words, and that
they may answer directly in the very words:

Q. What did God in the beginning?

A. He created heaven and earth.

Q. When did God create heaven and earth?

A. In the beginning.

Q. Were not heaven and earth always?

A. No; God created them.

Q. What a one was the earth?

A. The earth was without form or fashion.

Q. Had it any thing in it?

A. No; it was void or waste.

Q. Was there nothing upon it?

A. Yes; darkness was upon the deep.

Q. Was there nothing else moving?

A. Yes; the spirit of God moved on the waters.

Q. What said God then?

A. Let there be light?

Q. Was there light as he commanded?

A. Yes; there was light.

Q. Was there no light before?

A. No; God commanding created it: there was nothing but darkness before:
darkeness was upon the deep.

These questions and answers arise directly out of the words; and are the same
in effect with those in the little book, called The History.


Spoud. These verily give a great light, and are marvelous easy, and do cause
that a child may conceive and carry away most of them; whereas reading them
over he marked little in them. But yet here are some things dark, and
ouer-hard for children to understand: as, what is meant by created, by the
deep, and the moving of the spirit upon the waters, etc.


Phil. It is true; These short questions give a great light to harder points,
how they are to be understood.
but yet by this means a child shall have a great light and help for
understanding, conceit and memory in most. And for those things which remain
obscure, the learner is to mark them out, and inquire them of others, or of
the notes and short Commentaries upon them; and so by the other helps
mentioned: and especially considering the drift of the Holy Ghost, and
comparing with more plain places where like phrases are used. But here it shall
be the safest, in posing to ask those things which arise clearly and naturally
out of the words, and may be fully understood; to omit the rest until God shall
make them as evident. The easiest being first learned perfectly, the rest will
come in their time, and the fruit according to your desire.

And let me tell you this for your own benefit: In your private reading
Scriptures, Help in private reading.
or other books, where you would fully understand and lay up, use thus to
resolve by questions and answers in your mind; and then tell me what you do
find. The benefit which I do conceive of it, makes me bold thus to advise
you: but this by the way.


Spoud. Thus you will bind me unto you for ever, in directing me in every
thing, so plainly and so easily; and not only for my children, and how to do
them all this good, but even for mine own private. Though I cannot requite
you, yet the high God, who has given you this heart, and who never forgets the
least part of the labor or love which any of his servants shall show to his
name, he will certainly reward it.

Thus have we gone through all the maine and principal matters concerning this
our function, for all parts and exercises of learning, which I do remember; so
far as do belong to our calling: so that now I should leave off from
hindering or troubling you any further. Yet nevertheless, whereas I remember
that you said, that God might direct this our conference, not only to our own
private benefit, but also to the benefit of many thousand other; and verily I
see that he may turn it to a perpetual blesing: give me leave to propound
some other doubts, to the very same purpose, to remove whatsoever may hinder or
bring scruple to any, and to supply what yet may seem wanting or hard to be
effected.


Phil. Go on I pray you: I shall resolve you in all, according to my poor
ability, as I have in the rest. Now indeed we have a fit time: and God knows
whether ever we shall have the like opportunity again. Therefore propound
whatsoever may tend hereunto.


CHAP. XXIIII.
Some things necessary to be known, for the better attaining of all the parts
of Learning mentioned.
1 How the Schoolmaster should be qualified.

Spoud. My first question shall be this: How the Schoolmaster should be
qualified.
How you would have your Schoolmaster qualified, to be able to do all these
in this manner: he had not need to be every ordinary man.


Phil. I will answer you, how I think it necessary, that the Schoolmaster
should be qualified.

1 To be such a one as is sufficient to direct his Scholars in the things
mentioned, 1 Sufficient to direct his Scholars. Or tractable.
or in better; according as the learning of his Scholars shall require: or at
least such a one as is tractable, and not conceited, though his ability be the
meaner; and who will willingly use any help or direction, to fit him hereunto.
Neither is there any thing here, but that any one mere to be admitted to that
place, may by his labor and diligence (following but even this direction)
attain unto in short time, through the blessing of God.

2 He must resolve to be painful and constant in the best courses; 2
Painful and constant, of conscience to God.
of conscience, to do a special service to God in his place: to be always
upon his work, during school times; never absent from his place or office
more then upon urgent necessity.

To cast aside all other studies for the time of his school, To cast off all
other studies for school times.
I mean in the greater Grammar schools: his eye to be on every one and their
behauiours, and that nothing be wanting to them: his mind upon their taskes
and profiting; Not to post over the trust to others.
not posting over the trust to others, for hearing parts or Lectures, or
examining exercises, so far as his own leisure will serve. For he shall
sensibly discern a neglect, even in the best where they have any hope to
escape the Masters own view. One day omitted shall make them worse two days
after. The Masters eye must feed the horse: therefore where he is compelled to
use the help of some scholars, he is to see that they deal faithfully, and
to take some short trial of them after.

3 He should be of a loving and gentle disposition with gravity; 3 Of a
loving disposition to encourage all by praise and rewards.
or such a one as will frame himself unto it; and to encourage his scholars
by due praise, rewards, and an honest emulation; who also dislikes vttery all
severity, more then for necessity: yet so as that he be quick and cheerful*
to put life into all, and who cannot endure to see sluggishnesse or idleness
in any, much less any ungraciousness; and therefore can use also not only
sharpness, but even severity with discretion where need is.

4 He ought to be a godly man, of a good carriage in all his conversation, 4
A godly man and of good carriage.
to gain love and reverence thereby. And therefore to avoid carefully all
lightness, To seek to gain and maintain his authothority, and how.
and overmuch familiarity with boys, or whatsoever may diminish his
estimation and authority. And also to the end that God may grace him with
authority, to aim in all his labor, not at his own private gain or credit,
but how he may most honor God in his place, do the best service to his
Church, and most profit the children committed to him. To expect the blessing
of his labors only from the Lord, and to ascribe all the praise unto him
alone. Thus to serve forth his time, so long as he remains therein, that he
may be ever acceptable unto the Lord, looking (as was said) for his chief
reward from him.


Spoud. Indeed Sir, such a man cannot doubt of a blessing, and a reward from
the Lord: yet nevertheless he had need have good help, and also to be well
rewarded and encouraged from men, at least by them with whose children he
takes these pains. You think it then necessary that he should have an Usher:
I pray you let me hear, your judgment of this, and what a one you would have
his Usher to be.


CHAP. XXV.
Of the Usher and his Office.
Phil. TO answer your questions, An Usher necessary in all greater schools.
and first for an Usher. I think it most necessary, that in all greater
schools, where an Usher can be had, there be provision for one Usher or more,
To divide the burden.
according to the number of the scholars; that the burden may be divided
equally amongst them. As Iethro exhorted Moses concerning the Magistracy;
wherein he was ouertoiled, and the judgment of the people much hindered for
lack of help; that therefore there should be provision of helpers made: so is
it as requisite here.

That so the Master may employ his pains principally amongst the chiefer; as
the Usher does amongst the lower. For otherwise, Evil of lack of an Usher.
when the master is compelled to divide his pains both amongst little and
great, he may much ouer-wearie himself, and yet not be able to do that good
with any, which he might have done having help.

Hence also it shall come to pass, that another Schoolmaster who has but two
or three of the chief fourmes only under him, shall have his scholars far
to excel his, who is troubled with all; though the other neither take half
the pains, nor observe so good orders. Besides, that he who has the care of
all, can have no leisure nor opportunity to furnish himself more and more for
the better profiting and growth of the highest, nor for any other study to
answer the expectation of his place. The Master burdened with all, is as the
husbandman ouercharged with more then he can compass.
It is in this case as we see in husbandry; where the meanest and most
unskillful husband having but a little husbandry to follow, which he is able
to compass thoroughly, goes ordinarily beyond the most skillful being
ouercharged, though he toil never so hard, and weary himself never so much.

And howsoever wise order and policy may much help, Supply by scholars not
sufficient.
to the supply of the want of an Usher, by means of some of the scholars: yet
it shall not be comparable to that good which may be done by a sufficient
Usher, because of his stayednesse and authority; neither without some
hinderance to those scholars, who are so employed.

Besides this, in the absence of the Master (which sometimes will necessarily
fall out) how hard a thing it is to keep children in any awe without an Usher
(when boys are to be governed by boys) every man knows; what
inconveniences also come of it, and specially what discredit to the school.
And thus much for the necessity of an Usher.

Now for the sufficiency of the Usher, Sufficiency of the Usher.
it would be such, as that he should be able in some good sort to supply the
Masters absence; or that he be such a one, as who will willingly take any
pains, and follow any good direction to fit himself for his place.

For his submission, To be at the Masters command.
he should be always at the Masters command, in all things in the school,
ever to supply the Masters absence, as need shall require; and to see that
there be no intermission, or loitering in any form, if the Master be away:
but that every one do go on in his place. Yet awarie care must be had, To be
used with respect.
that he be used with respect by the Master, and all the scholars, to
maintain and increase his authority, to avoid all disgrace and contempt.

Also,
for the avoiding of all repining and malice against him, Not to meddle with
correcting the highest.
there would be this caveat; that he do not take upon him the correction of
those which are under the Master; without aspeciall charge, or some
extraordinary occasion.

And to speak further what I think in this case; It were the best if the
Usher meddled with no correction at all, unless in the Masters absence.
That although I would have the Usher to have authority to correct any under
him, or others also, need so requiring in the Masters absence, and all the
scholars to know so much: Yet he should not use that authority, no not in
correcting those under himself, unless very sparingly; but rather of himself
and in his own discretion, to refer or to put them up to the Master; so to
keep the scholars from that stomaking and complaints which will be made
against him to the Parents and otherwise, do he what he can to prevent it:
unless it be where the Usher teaches in a place separate from the Master;
there he is of necessity to use correction, though with great discretion, and
so seldom as may be. Experience also shows, that the scholars will much
more willingly and submisly take correction of the Master without the least
repining. Neither need this correction to be so great, as to trouble the Master
very much, if right government be used.

All this must be ordered by the discretion of the wise Master, so as they may
stand in awe of the Usher: otherwise little good will be done.

The principal office and imploiment of the Usher, The Vshers principal
employment with the younger, to train them up for the Master.
where there is but one, should be, for all under construction and the enterers
into it, to prepare and fit them for the Master, to lay a most sure foundation
amongst them; to train them up to the Masters hand; and so to make them
exceeding perfect in all the first grounds, that they may go on with ^ase and
cheerfulness, when they come under the Master.

Also to the end that the Usher be not a means of the negligence of the
Master, To prevent all inconveniences by the Usher.
but to prevent that, and a number of inconveniences, and also to tie both
Usher and Scholars, to perpetual diligence and care; and withal that the
Master may have an assured comfort in the profiting of all his Scholars, and
boldness against the accusations of any malicious party, this shall be very
requisite: that the Master go over all once in the day (if he can possibly) to
see what they have done, and to examine some questions in each form of them
under the Usher, to make trial in some part of that which they have learned
that day, how well they have done it; or at least amongst some of them where
there are many. This account will enforce all, both Usher and scholars, to a
very heedefull care. It may be shorter or longer, as time and occasions permit.


CHAP. XXVI.
Helps in the school.
Spoud. But be it so, Helps besides the Usher.
that you be destitute of an Usher; or having an Usher, yet your number is so
many, as you are not able to go thorough them all, in that sort that were
meet: what help would you use then?


Phil. My helps are of two sorts; general or particular. My general helps
which are common to all schools, even where there are Vshers, are these:

1. That which was noted amongst the general observations; 1. Help in
Schools, fewness of the fourmes.
to have all my school sorted into fourmes or Classes, and those so few as may
be: though twenty in a form or more, the better, as was said; and my fourmes
divided into equal parts. This shall gain one half of time, for the reasons
there mentioned.

2. In every form this may be a notable help, 2. Seniors in each form.
that the two or four seniors in each form, be as Vshers in that form, for
ouerseeing, directing, examining, and fitting the rest every way before they
come to say; and so for ouerseeing the exercises.

Also in straights of time, to stand forth before the rest, and to hear them.
The Master to have an eye and see carefully that they deal faithfully, and
make some short examination after. And in all lectures those two Seniors to be
blamed principally for the negligence of their sides, and contrarily to be
commended for their diligence. This may be a second and a very great help:
like as it is in an army, where they have their under-officers for hundreths or
for tennes; as Decuriones, Centuriones, etc. for the special government of all
under them. These who thus take most pains with the rest, shall still ever keep
to be the best of the fourmes.

A third might be added: 3. Authority.
which is Authority and good Government, which indeed is above all. But of that
it will be fitter to speak by it self.

The particular help where either an Usher is wanting, Particular help.
or else is not sufficient, Subdoctor in place of the Usher, or where the Usher
is not sufficient.
is by a Subdoctor, one or mo, according to the number of the scholars. The
Subdoctor is to be appointed out of all your highest fourmes* every one to be
his day instead of an Usher, to do those things which the Usher should,
according to their abilities; and so to observe the behauior of all under them.


Spoud. These cannot but be very worthy helps. But here I pray you resolve me
a doubt or two, arising hereon.

1. How will you divide your school thus, and especially your fourmes, for the
appointing of your Seniors, that every one in a fourm may be placed according
to his learning? which I take to be very necessary; so as they shall not
think, that any are preferred by the favor of the Master: also that all may
sit as Adversaries and fit matches, and so to have sides equally divided, to
do all by that emulation, and honest strift and contention, which you spoke of.


Phil. For my fourmes I would put so many in a fourm, Sorting the fourmes so
many together as may be.
as possibly can go together, as was noted: the better will be continual
helpers to the other, and much draw on the worse.

Secondly, for the division of my fourms, and election of Seniors, I find this
the only way to cut off all quarrelling, and to provoke all to a continual
contention;

1. By voices; all of a form to name who is the best of their form, Choice
and matching each form.
and so who is the best next him. Those who have the most voices, to be the
two Seniours of the form. These they will choose very certainly. Then to the
end to make equal sides; let the second or Junior of those two so chosen,
call unto himself the best which he can, to make his side.

After that, let the first choose the best next; then after, the second and his
fellow, to choose the best next to them again: And thus to go thorough choosing
until they have chosen all the form. The two Seniours, I say, to be chosen by
election of the whole fourm: then they two to choose, or call the rest of the
fourm by equal election; the Junior choosing first and so to go by course: If
the Senior should choose first, then his side would ever be the better; which
by the Junior choosing first is prevented.

By this means you shall find that they will choose very equally,
and without partiality, Benefits of this election.
to the end that each may have the best fellows; even as gamesters will do at
matches in shooting, bowling or the like: and every match shall be very equal,
or small difference amongst them.

Also hereby all mutterings shall be cut off, whereby some kind boys will be
whispering to their Parents, that their Master does not regard no^ love them,
but preferres others before them. Thus also the painful shall be encouraged,
when they find themselves preferred by the judgment of all their fellows; and
each made to strive daily to be as good as his match or adversary, and for the
credit of their side: and finally, they will labor that they may be preferred
at the next election; or at least, not be put down with disgrace. This
election would be made oftener amongst the younger, as once in a month at
least; because their diligence and quickness will much alter: Amongst the
Senior fourmes once in a quarter may suffice; yet at the Masters discretion.


Spoud. This election surely is most equal, and the benefits of it must needs
be very great according to that which you have said; and chiefly to help as
much as any one thing to make the school to be indeed a pleasant place of
honest, This a chief means to make the school Ludu^ literari^^
schollarlike, sweet and earnest contention. But you spoke of a third general
help, which might be added, which you said was above all; to wit good
government: of this I do desire to hear.


CHAP. XXVII.
Of government and authority in schools.
Phil. COncerning the government of the school, Government the help of helps.
of which you so desire my sentence; I do indeed account it the help of helps:
as it is in all kind of societies; so principally in the school: out of
which, all other good and civil societies should first proceed. To the end,
that out of the schools, and from the first years, children may learn the
benefit and blessing of good government, and how every one ought to do his
duty in his place: and so from thence this good order and government may be
derived into all places in some manner. Authority the top of government.


This government ought to be, 1. By maintaining authority, which is the very
top of all government; and is indeed aspeciall gift of God.

This authority must be maintained, Authority how to be maintained.
as in the Magistrate, by his so carrying himself, as being a certain living
law, or rather as in the place of God amongst them; 1. By being a living law.
I mean, as one appointed of God, to see the most profitable courses to be put
in practice painfully, and constantly, for the speediest furnishing his
scholars with the best learning and manners, to the greatest good of the
scholars, Gods Church, and their country.

2. It must be maintained by a most strict execution of justice, 2. By most
strict execution of justice in praemio. poena.
in rewards and punishments. As Solon said that the Commonwealth, was vpholden
by two things; praemio and poena. That the painful and obedient be by all
means countenanced, encouraged and preferred: the negligent, and any way
disobedient, be disgraced, and discouraged in all their evil manners, until
they frame themselves to the diligence and obedience of the best.

Thus by the encouragement and commendation of virtue, Encouraging virtue.
and discountenancing of vice; you shall in time overcome the most froward
nature, Discouraging vice.
and bring all into a cheerful submission: The evils of the contrary, or of
partiality.
Whereas of the contrary, dealing partially, or making no difference between
the good and the bad, and much more discountenancing the painful and toward,
and countenancing or favoring the idle and ungracious, you shall see all
ouerturned: Observe this and be warned.
for who will not frame himself to the lewdest, when it is all one unto them,
whatsoever they be? our corrupt natures being so prone unto the worst things.

3. That in all their government there be a true demonstration of conscience
and love, 3. By a demonstration of conscience and love in all.
to do all as of conscience to God, and of love to the children, for the
perpetual good of every one; and in an endeavor and study to draw them on by
love, in an honest emulation, with due praise and rewards; abhorring cruelty,
and avoiding severity (as was said) more then of necessity.

4. By being Presidents of all virtue to their children; 4. By being
presidents to the children, of all virtue.
and being as careful in their own places first, before the childrens eyes to
do their duties, as they would have their children to be in theirs. And so
finally, by their holy and faithful carriage, to seek that God may rule, and
that the children may obey God: For then he will both bless all their
labors, and maintain their authority.


Spoud. Surely si^ these are worthy means to maintain authority: which
unless it be preserved inviolable, all government goes down* But I perceive,
you utterly dislike that extreme severity whereby all things are done in
very many schools, and the whole government maintained only by continual and
terrible whipping; because you have so often mentioned it as with grief.


Phil. You shall find that M. Askam does as often and more vehemently inueigh
against it. Extreme severity and whipping to be avoided in schools, and all
means used to prevent it.
For mine own part I do indeed altogether dislike it, more then necessity
inforceth: and I take it that I have better grounds for my dislike, then any
one can have to the contrary; even from those things which cannot be
contradicted.

1 We are to imitate the Lord himself; 1 By the example of God.
who though he be justice it self, yet is evermore inclined unto mercy, and
does not execute the severity and rigor of his justice, when any other means
can serve: who if he should smite us, even the most vigilant of us all, so often
as we offend, as many do the children; which of us could live?

2 What father is there; 2 By the general desire of all wise parents, having
natural affections.
nay which of us is there who is a father, who would not have our own children
rather trained up by all loving means of gentle encouragement, praise and
fair dealing, then with buffeting and blows, or continual and cruel
whipping, scorning, and reuiling? Or which of us could but endure to see that
indignity done to our own children, before our faces?

Now our government and correction ought to be such, as which the very parent
being present (I mean the wise parent) might approve; and for which we may
ever have comfort and boldness, even before the holy God. To this we are to
strive and contend always, until at length we attain unto it.

3 Which of us is there that would willingly live under such a government of
any sort, 3 By that which every one of us would have done unto our selves.
that our state should be as the people, under their task Masters in Egypt,
that we should be smitten continually for every little fault? and labor we
never so much to do our duties, yet still we should be beaten.

4 Let every man's experience teach whether extremity or excess of fear 4 For
the mischiefs which follow excess of ^eare, taking away all vnderst^nding and
sense from the wisest.
(which must needs follow upon such cruel and continual beating and dulling)
does not deprive and rob the mind of all the helps which reason offers. So
as that the mind running about that which it fears so much, forgets that
which it should wholly intend; whereby in timorous natures, you shall see some
to stand as very sottes, and senseless through an apprehension of some
extreme evil, or by extremity of fear; whereas they are otherwise as wise and
learned as the best. Insomuch as all devices are to be used to rid children of
that kind of ouerwhelming fear; and sometimes correction for it, when this
fear is without cause, and cannot be helped otherwise.

5 For the scholars themselves; 5 For the scholars to work in them a love of
learning.
because all things should be done in the School, so as to work in the
children a love of learning, and also of their teachers: for that this love is
well known to be the most effectual means, to increase and nourish learning
in them the fastest; and also that government which consists in love, is ever
the firmest.

Now this extreme whipping, all men know what a dislike it breeds in the
children, both of the school, and of all learning as that they will think
themselves very happy, if the parents will set them to any seruille or toyling
business, so that they may keep from school. And also it works in them a
secret hatred of their Masters; according to the sayings, Quem metuunt oderint:
and, Quem quisque odit perijsse expetit; whom men do fear with a slavish
fear, them they hate, and wish in their hearts to see their death.

6 In regard of the Masters themselves; 6 In regard of the Masters, to gain
hearts of children and parents.
because by this mild and loving government, they shall both have the hearts
and commendations of the children presently, when they see in the Masters the
affections of fathers toward them; and also they will ever keep a sweet and
thankful remembrance of them, all their life long: that ever when they have
occasion to speak of their Schoolemasters, they will do it with reverence,
and praise God that ever they fell into the hands of such Masters: whereas of
the contrary, they shall be sure of the secret hate and complaints of the poor
children presently, where they dare speak: and ever after when they come at
their own liberty, they will then report as they have found, and it may be
far worse. So that they can never speak of their Master, but as of a thing
which they abhor: his name is as a curse in their mouths; many wishing they
had never known him. For that then they had been scholars, if they had not
fallen into the hands of so cruel Masters.

7 And finally, 7 That Masters may ever have boldness and comfort.
because in this loving, equal, mild and tender government, the Masters
shall ever have boldenes and comfort before the children, their parents, in
their own consciences, and before God himself: whereas in the cruel and
unmerciful tyranny, they shall have nothing but fear; fear of the children,
fear of their parents, fear in their own consciences, fear for the Lord who
has said, that there shall be judgment merciless for them who show no mercy;
and so the conscience being awaked, to have nothing but fear round about,
except the Lord do grant unfeigned repentance to escape thereby.


Spoud. I know not how to answer that which you say. It is hard for the Master
striving to do good, to moderate his passion.
The Lord be merciful unto us all who are in this calling, even for this
sin: for it is no small matter to moderate our passion, and our correction.
When the parents and others look for great things at our hands, and we find
little good, and oft-times those the worst, whom we would fainest have to do
the best: which of us can herein justify our selves? But I pray you Sir, how
would you have our authority maintained, and justice executed, which you so
commend? You would have correction used, and sometimes sharpness too; as I
observed in your speech for your Schoolmaster. How would you have the justice,
inpraemio and poena, in rewards and punishments? Set me down shortly the
means: and first for rewards and incourageme^ts; after for punishments.


CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Preferments and encouragements.
Phil. FOr the rewards of learning by preferments and encouragements;
Encouragements to be by these means;
thus I find best to do it:

1 By often elections of every form, 1 Often elections and preferments
therein.
in such manner as was showed; and so ever preferring the best thereby, to
higher places as they grow in learning.

2 By gracing all the Seniors, 2 Countenancing and gracing the Seniours, and
all the best and most painful.
all best in each form, both to encourage them, and to provoke their fellows
to emulate them, to strive in all things to be like unto them: and also to
cause all their fellows in all things to reverence, and prefer them, both by
giving place to them and otherwise.

3 By preferring or putting up those into higher fourms, 3 Putting up into
higher fourmes. Giving places.
who profit extraordinarily.

Also daily (if you see good) to give higher places to them who do better,
until the other recover their places again, by the election of the whole
form, or by their diligence.

4 To use to commend every thing in their exercises, 4 Commending every thing
well done.
which is well or painefully done; passing over the lesser faults only with a
word, showing our dislike: and that which is absurd, with some pretty speech;
sharply reproving or disgracing their absurdity, without further correction,
if there do not appear in them extreme negligence.

Yet in praising them, you are to beware of making any of them wantonly proud,
Caveat in praising.
or letting them to be any way ouerbolde or malepart, or of using them
ouer-familiarly: for familiarity will certainly breed contempt, and sundry
inconveniences; whereas a reverend awe and loving fear, with these
encouragements, shall continually nourish all virtue and diligence.

5 This might be used also with much fruit, 5 Disputation for the victorship.
to encourage and provoke: but this as shall be found meet; To have a
disputation for the victorship once every quarter of the year: as the last
Wednesday or Friday of each Quarter in the afternoon; the manner thus:

Cause the two Seniours of the two highest fourmes to sit together in the upper
end of the School; Manner of the Disputation.
and all the Scholars from the lowest which take construction, unto the
highest* to ask of either of them, each two questions in order* of the best
questions, which they have learned in their Grammar or Authors: first the two
Seniour adversaries of the highest form to answer, then two of the next. And
then let those two of them four, who answered best (that is, one of either
fourm who answered most questions) be the victours for that Quarter. Two other
of their next fellows, or more, to take note, and set down to how many
questions each answered; and so the victorship to be decided.

After this, some use to cause the scholars every of them, to give something
for a Praemium, Praemia given to the two victours.
to the Victours: as each one a point or a counter, or more; or else better
gifts if they be well able, of such things as they may without their hurt, or
the offense of their parents, and as every one will himself. These to be
divided equally between the two Victours, as a reward of their diligence and
learning; to encourage them, and all the rest of them by their ensample to
strive at length to come unto the Victorshippe; because then besides the honor
of it, each may come to receive again more then ever they gave before.

The practice of this disputation must needs be very profitable;
though some good Schoolemasters do doubt of the expediency for Scholars to
give any thing, but to honor them otherwise.

The two victours in regard of this dignity, and the applause from their
fellows, Office of the victours for their Praemia.
should use to make some exercises of Verses, or the like, to get leave to play
on every Thursday, when there was no play day in the week before. And so they
two continually to have that day for their fellows, as a further reward and
honor of their learning; I mean only in such weeks when they had no play
before, or at the Masters discretion. But this (as was advised) as Masters
shall find it most expedient.

6 Above all these,
this may be used as a notable encouragement and provocation, Solemn
examination to be made once every year.
both to Masters and scholars, and very necessary; That every year, at least
once in the year, there be a solemn examination by the Governors of the
school, or some specially appointed thereunto.

Against which time, Exercises to be provided against that time.
all of any ability should provide some exercises fair written; as either
Translations, Epistles, Theames, or Verses, according to the daily exercises of
every form: and withal some declamations where there are ancient scholars,
an Oration by the highest, to give the visitours intertainement. That in these
their exercises, all may see their profiting, at least in writing, and receive
some other contentment.

Also all to keep their chief exercises fair written in books, To keep
their daily exercises fair written in books for trial then by comparing.
to be showed then; that by comparing them together with the former years,
both the Masters diligence and their profiting may appear, and have due
commendation.

Besides these also, A course of examination to be appointed, and to be
performed first by the Masters and Vshers.
for the full examination of the scholars in all their learning, the
Schoolemasters and Vshers are to be appointed an order and course in their
examination; and themselves first to make a demonstration before the Visitours,
what the children can do in every form, both in their Grammar and Authors,
and each kind* as shall be fit. It would be done first by themselves, because
the scholars are best acquainted with their manner of examining, After by
others not satisfied.
and will be most bold to answer them. After them the Visitours and others,
who are not satisfied, to examine where, and as they please.

Then when all is done, All who do well to be praised.
as the Visitours are to encourage all who do well, with praise; so those who
do best, would be graced with some Praemium from them: The best specially
graced.
as some little book, or money; to every one something: or at least with some
special commendation.

It were to be wished that in great schools, Some Praemia given.
there were something given to this end, to be so bestowed; five shillings or
ten shillings. It would exceedingly encourage and incite all to take pains.

This set solemn public examination,
will more enforce all, Benefit of set and solemn examination.
both Masters, Vshers and Scholars, to take pains, and tie them to make
conscience of their duties, and to seek to profit and increase daily in
knowledge, that they may then answer the expectation of all men, and give up a
good account; then any augmentation of maintenance, or statutes, or whatsoever
devise can possibly do:

Although all necessary provision is to be made, both for the best statutes
and orders; and chiefly for sufficient maintenance, and rewards to give all
kind of hartning and encouragement both to Masters, Vshers, and Scholars.

Also if at such examinations, Something given to some painful poor scholar
to help the Usher.
something were given by the Visitors or other benefactors, to be allowed upon
some poor scholar of the school, who is of special painfulness and
towardliness; to the end he might be assistant to the Usher: it would much
help both Usher and the younger scholars, and animate all such to take pains;
striving who should have that preferment.

Before such public examinations, All parents to have notice before such
examination.
all the parents of the children should have notice given them: that all of
them may know certainly, the hopes of their children, and contrarily; and all
who will may take trial.

That so neither the parents may be abused, neither schools, nor scholars
discredited, nor any lose their time, nor be wearied out, in that to which they
are not fitted by nature; but every one to be employed to that in due time, to
which he is most apt.


Spoud. These means constantly observed, together with that strift and
contention by adversaries, must needs provoke to a vehement study and
emulation; unless in such who are of a very servile nature, and bad
disposition: but how will you deal with them? you must needs use extreme
severity toward them, who regard neither preferment, nor credit, nor fear
ought but stripes.


Phil. For these and all the rest (besides the former preferments) to the end
to avoid this cruelty, which is so odious to all, we are to strive to this one
thing following:

7 Above all, 7 To labor ever to work conscience in all to do all of
conscience to God.
to labor to work in them some conscience of their duties, by planting grace
in them, and the fear of the Lord; with childelike affections toward the
Lord, as toward their heavenly Father.

And that also, besides al other means of Religion, spoken of before, By
calling on them to remember these things:
by calling often upon all, to remember these things:

1 That in their calling they serve not men, 1 That in their calling they are
Gods servants.
but God; that they are Gods children and servants. As the very drudge is Gods
servant: so they are much more, being employed in so holy a calling, as to get
knowledge and good nurture, for the good of the Church of God, and their own
salvation; and principally that they may be most serviceable to God in all
their lives after, in what calling soever.

And therefore ever to bethink themselves, that Gods eye is upon them, His eye
is upon them.
and he marks all their labor, and of what conscience to him they do it; and
so will accept and reward them according to their faithfulness: so to be
painful and obedient, not for fear of their Master, nor of the rod; but
for the fear and love of God, because he has appointed them so. And so
herein to make a full demonstration, who they are amongst them that are truly
wise, who fear and love God indeed; and who otherwise.

2. To call on them often, to aim at this, to use all their wit, 2. To study to
get le^rning to honor God with, and do service to his Church.
their labor, time, and all their gifts, which are Gods, to get the best
learning that they can; to do the Lord the greatest honor which they are
able, whilst they shall remain in the earth, and the best service to his
Church* and thereby to walk toward eternal life. Because, thus they shall be
sure that God will honor them seeking to honor him; and will cast learning
upon them so far as shall be good.

3. To put them often in mind of the reward of their learning, 3. To put them in
mind of the rewards which follow learning
which they may look for even in this life. As those rewards which accompany
great learned men; namely, riches, honors, dignities, favor, pleasures, and
whatsoever their hearts can desire; and much more that reward which shall be
eternal; that if men should be unthankful, yet God will reward al our labor
and study abundantly, even every thought and meditation that ever we had for
his name.

To this end, Excellent sentences to be often incu^cated, to work in the
scholars a love of learning. Pro. 3. 13.
to inculcate often unto them some of Salomons Proverbs, concerning the excellency
of learning and wisdom.

As, Pro. 3. 13. Blessed is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that
gets understanding.

14. For the merchandise thereof is better than the merchandise of silver, and
the gain thereof is better then gold.

15. It is more precious then pearls; and all things that thou can desire,
are not to be compared unto her.

And so forth, the 16. 17, and 18. verses. Also Prou. 4. 7. 8. and 8. 14. 15.
16. 17. 18. 19. 20. etc. and 33. 34. etc. These and the like, being indeed
chiefly meant, of the divine wisdom, comprehend also this learning, which is
the way and means unto that divine and heavenly wisdom.

By these means, and remembering well the general observations to put them in
practice (as, To keep grounds perfect.
to make all grounds exceeding perfect as they go, chiefly their Accedence and
Grammar, and to keep them by continual^ repetitions and examinations, that
they may go on with ease,
and feeling a sweetness of learning, To (...) the nature of each (...), and
fra^^^ our selves thereto accordingly.
and keeping a constant course in your government; observing wisely the nature
and disposition of every one, and framing your self thereto accordingly) you
shall undoubtedly see the Lord so bringing them in obedience by your prayers,
as a very small punishment shall serve.


Spoud. It cannot he, but if we can plant the fear of the Lord in them, to
work in them a conscience of their duties, it must needs be most available;
and much more all these: but yet seeing that punishments also must needs be
inflicted on some often times and on all sometimes (because otherwise as you
said, justice cannot be executed, nor any government or authority maintained) I
pray you let me hear, how you would proceed in the same.


CHAP. XXIX.
Of execution of justice in schools by punishments.
Phil. FOr inflicting punishments, To punish unwillingly.
we ought to come thereunto unwillingly, and even enforced; and therefore to
proceed by degrees: that who cannot be moved by any of the former means of
preferments, nor encouragements, nor any gentle exhortation nor admonition, may
be brought into order and obedience by punishment.

And therefore, To proceed by degrees in punishing.
first to begin with the lesser kinds of punishments; and so by degrees to
the highest and seuerest, after this manner observing carefully the natures of
every one, as was said.

1. To use reproves; 1. Reproves.
and those sometimes more sharp according to the nature of the offender, and
his falt.

2. To punish by loss of place to him who does better according to our
discretion. 2. Loss of place.


3. To punish by a note, 3. Black Bill of principal use and most available
which may be called, the black Bill. This I would have the principal
punishment, I mean most of use: for you shall find by experience, that it
being rig^^ly used, it is more available then all other, to keep (...)
obedience; and specially for any notoriously idle or stubborn, or which are of
evil behavior any way.

The manner of it may be thus:

To keep a note in writing: Manner of the black Bill to deprive them of the
play-daies.
or which may more easily be done; to keep a remembrance of all whom you
observe very negligent, stubborn, lewd, or any way disobedient, to restrain
them from all liberty of play.

And therefore, To make them all to know what to look for.
to give them all to know so much before hand, that whosoever asks leave to
play, or upon what occasion soever, yet we intend always to except all such;
and that the liberty is granted only for the painful and obedient, which are
worthy to have the privileges of scholars, and of the school, because they
are such, and are an ornament to the school: not for them who are a disgrace
unto it.

So always at such playing times, To view the fourmes before play, and to
separate all the disobedient and unworthy to be left to their taskes.
before the Exeatis, the Master and Vshers to view every fourm thorough; and
then to cause all them to sit still, whom they remember to have been negligent,
or faulty in any special sort worthy that punishment, and to do some
exercises in writing besides; either those which they have omitted before, or
such as wherein they cannot be idle.

But herein there must be a special care, Care for their taskes to be
performed faithfully in their restraint.
when they are thus restrained from play, that either Master or Usher, if it
can be conveniently, have an eye to them, that they cannot loyter; or some one
specially appointed, to see that they do their taskes.

Also that they be called to an account the next morning, whether they have
done the taskes inioined, under pain of six ierkes to be surely paid.

Moreover, Notorious offenders to sit until they show geod tokens of amendment.
for all those who are notoriously stubborn, or negligent, or have done any
gross fault, to cause them to sit thus, not only one day, but every play day
continually, until they show themselves truly sorry for their faults, and do
amend; becoming as duetifull, and submisse as any other; and until they do
declare by good signs, their desire and purpose to please and obey their
Master. Unless they be released at very great suite, or upon sufficient
sureties of their fellows, to incur otherwise their penalty if they amend
not.

This course straightly observed, Benefit of this punishment strictly observed,
and why.
partly thorough the shame of being noted in the rank of disordered fellows,
and also lest their Parents should know it; and partly thorough depriving them
of play, and more also thorough this strict account to be given of their
taskes, and severity of correction otherwise, will more tame the stubbornest
and prowdest, thorough Gods blessing, then any correction by rod: and this
without danger to the scholar, or offense to their friends.

And therefore, To look to this strictly.
when rod and all other means fail, let us look carefully to this, not to
leave one stubborn boy, until he be brought as submisse and dutiful as any
of the rest. For, those being brought into obedience, the rest may easily be
kept in order, with very little correction: whereas one stubborn boy suffered,
will spoil, or at leastwise endanger all the rest.

4. Sometimes in greater faults, 4. Correction with rod more seldom, and
chiefly for terror.
to give three or four ierkes with a birch, or with a small read willow where
birch cannot be had. Or for terror in some notorious fault, half a dozen
stripes or more, soundly laid on, according to the discretion of the Master.

Some do only keep a bill, Custom of some in the use of the black Bill.
and note carefully their several principal disorders; and now and then, show
them their names and faults mildly, how often they have been admonished; and when
they take them in hand pay them soundly, and by this policy keep them in
great obedience.

In this correction with the rod, C^ueats in correction.
special provision must be had for sundry things.

1. That when you are to correct any stubborn or unbroken boy, 1. Manner of
correction of the stubborn and unbroken.
you make sure with him to hold him fast; as they are enforced to do, who are
to shoe or to tame an unbroken colt.

To this end to appoint 3. or 4 of your scholars, To hold them fast.
whom you know to be honest, and strong enough, or more if need be, to lay
hands upon him together, to hold him fast, over some form, so that he cannot
stir hand nor foot; or else if no other remedy will serve, to hold him to some
post (which is far the safest and free from inconvenience) so as he cannot
any way hurt himself or others, be he never so peevish. Neither that he can
have hope by any devise or turning, or by his apparel, or any other means to
escape.
Nor yet that any one be left in his stubbornness to go away murmuring, Not to
let any to go away in their stubbornness.
pou^ing, or blowing and puffing, until he show as much submission as any, and
that he will lie still of himself without any holding; yet so as ever a wise
moderation be kept. Although this must of necessity be locked unto; because
besides the evil ensample to others, there is no hope to do any good to count
of, with any until their stomachs be first broken: and then they once
thoroughly brought under, you may have great hope to work all good according to
their capacity; so that it may be, you shall have little occasion to correct
them after.

Moreover, a very child suffered in his stubbornness, to escape for his
struggling, will in a short time come to trouble two or three men to take him
up, and to correct him without danger of hurting himself, or others.

2. To be very wary for smiting them over the backs, To be wary to avoid all
smiting or hurting the children.
in any case, or in such sort as in any way to hurt or endanger them. To the
end to prevent all mischiefs, for our own comfort; and to cut off all
occasions from quarrelling parents or evil reports of the school. And
withal, to avoid for these causes, all smiting them upon the head, with hand,
rod, or ferula. Caveat of threatening.
Also to the end that we may avoid all danger and fear for desperate boys
hurting themselves, not to use to threaten them before, and when they hane done
any notorious fault, nor to let them know when they shall be beaten; but when
they commit a new fault, or that we see the school most full or opportunity
most fit to take them of a sudden.

3. That the Master do not in any case abase himself, That the Master do not
abase himself to struggle with any scholar.
to strive or struggle with any boy to take him up: but to appoint other (...)
the strongest to do it, where such need is, in such sort as was showed before;
and the rather for fear of hurting them in his anger, and for the evils which
may come thereof, and which some Schoolemasters have lamented after.

4. That the Masters and Vshers also, do by all means, avoid all furious
anger, To avoid all furious anger.
threatening, cha^ing, fretting, reuiling: for these things will diminish
authority, and may do much hurt, and much endanger many ways.

And therefore of the contrary, How correction ought ever to be given.
that all their correction be done with authority, and with a wise and sober
moderation, in a demonstration of duty to God, and love to the children, for
their amendment, and the reformation of their evil manners.

Finally, Sparing the rod where necessity requires is to undo the children.
as God has sanctified the rod and correction, to cure the evils of their
conditions, to drive out that folly which is bound up in their hearts, to save
their souls from hell, and to give them wisdom; so it is to be used as Gods
instrument to these purposes. To spare them in these cases is to hate them.
Assurance of s^fety in correction when it is done ^right, Such correction is no
cruelty.
To love them is to correct them betime. Do it under God, and for him to these
ends and with these cautions, and you shall never hurt them: you have the Lord
for your warrant. Correction in such manner, for stubbornness, negligence and
carelessness, is not to be accounted ouer-great severity, much less cruelty.


Spoud. But how hard a matter is it to keep this moderation in correcting, and
thus to temper our anger! Surely, it must be a greater work then of flesh and
blood: how may we attain unto it? It is a matter which has often times
troubled me, but I have not been able to overcome it.


Phil. I do not condemn all anger in us:
nay, anger in the Schoolmasters is as necessary as in any other, Anger
necessary in Schoolemasters, so it be tempered aright.
to be angry at the negligence and other vices of the children; for God has
ordained this to be a means, to whet us on to do our duties, and for the
reformation and good of our scholars, to keep them ever in a holy awe by the
fear of it. Yea, sometimes in more grievous offenses, God is wonderfully
pleased with it, though it be more vehement; as we may see in the anger of
Moses and Phineas, so that we te^per it in such sort, as that we sin not in it.
That it do not cause us to break out to reuiling, fretting, chafing, blows on
the head, or otherwise to any cruel or unmerciful dealing with the children,
to use them worse, then we would use a dog, as we say:

But that we ever remember, that they are children, Gods children, heirs of
his kingdom; we are to nu^ture them only under him, to train them up for
him, and for his Church; nor to correct nature but vice; to do all to the end
to make them men.

Now the helps of repressing this our anger, Means to repress furious and
raging anger.
are the wise consideration of those things which I have mentioned, or the
like. As to keep a continual memory, whose the children are; what they are;
for whom we bring them up; under whom and in whose place; whether we would have
God angry at us, and to smite us, as we do the children, for every fault which
we do: how we would have our own children dealt withal: and also Gods
justice to measure to us or ours, with what measure we mete to others. Besides,
to remember, that anger will blind our minds, that we cannot see to correct
or use any right moderation.

Moreover, to have ever in mind, the mischiefs that come of anger; how it will
diminish our authority, and disgrace us extremely in the eyes of the children,
when it is immoderate, and without just cause. Also that in our anger, we may
do that evil in a moment, which we shall repent all our lives long. And the
rather, because Satan watches to get advantage against us, to bring us to
some notable evils in our anger. Into whose hand, it is just with God to leave
us, because we would not watch over this passion to keep it in temper; when we
know that of all other our affections we mostly open to his malice in this, by
reason of our continual occasions of anger.

Therefore to conclude this point, as we are to use all wisdom to prevent
these evils; so principally, a constant course in observing all orders, shall
prevail maruellously, by cutting off most occasions of anger.

And finally, when all other means fail of conquering this unruly passion:
let us call to mind the means, which the Lord has sanctified to bring every
thought into obedience; Places of scripture to be ever in our minds for
repressing and moderating our anger.
to wit, his heavenly word and prayer. To this end it shall be necessary, to
have ever in mind, some special places of holy scripture against anger; as
these and the like:

Be angry but sin not, Ephesians. 4. 26. 27
let not the sun go down upon your wrath: neither give place to the devil.

Be slow to wrath: Iam. 1. 20
For, the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God.

Cease from anger, Psalm. 37. 8.
leave off wrath: fret not thy self also to do evil.

A fool in a day is known by his anger.

Be not of a hasty spirit, to be angry: for anger rests in the bosom of
fools.

The angry man is said to exalt folly, to set up his folly to be seen of all.

A man of much anger shall suffer punishment: Pro. 19 19
and though thou deliver him, yet will his anger come again.

In a word, that severe denuntiation of our Savior for this indiscreet anger,
breaking out into evil speeches, may humble us continually and make us afraid
of this sin:

That whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, Mat. 5. 22
shall be culpable of judgment [or subject to punishment.] Danger of rash
anger when it exceedes.
And whosoever shall say unto his brother Racha, shall be worthy to be
punished by the Council; and whosoever shall say fool shall be worthy to be
punished with hell fire.

By all which words it is most evident, that our indiscreet and hasty anger
which ouertakes us too often in our places, making us to break out (unless we
be more watchful) not only into reuiling speeches, but also to blows, and
to great severity, is highly displeasing to the Lord; and it does exceedingly
indaunger us for his wrath and vengeance, unless we be daily humbled by
unfeigned repentance for it: and yet so, as that we cannot look to escape some
like measure from him, that we or ours shall surely feel his hand, unless we
prevent and amend it.


Spoud. These are worthy places of holy Scriptures; and able to stay us, if we
could keep them in memory. But yet even in the most moderate, the very desire
to do good, and to answer our places, moved by the untowardness and carelessness
of many of our children, does cause us sometimes to forget our selves, and to
break out overmuch.


Phil. God has left this to our calling, Occasions of anger left to our
calling to humble and exercise us.
as a means to try us, and to humble us continually; and also to have matter
wherein to exercise us to strive against, and to make us more watchful in our
places. But if we could learn but these three lessons, Three lessons for
preventing of anger.
we should wonderfully prevent Satan in these occasions of our anger, wherein
we are so overtaken;

1 So much as ever we are able, 1 Constancy in observing order, and our eye
ever on all.
to have our eye continually round about the School upon every one; and namely
the most unruly, to keep them in awe: and that we keep order strictly in
euerything at all times; as specially in all examinations and taskes, and our
times for every thing most precisely, that they may look for it: for omitting
them sometimes, makes the best too careless, and some bold to offend, in hope
that they shall not be seen, or not called to an account: whereas by the
contrary they grow into a habit of painfulness and obedience.

2 Studying to put on a fatherly affection and to deal so with them as a good
father amongst his children. 2 Fatherly affections.
This shall also bring them or many of them to the affections and dutifulness
of loving children, to do all of cons^ience.

3 Laboring to be Enocks, 3 To walk i^ our places with God as Enock.
to walk in our places with God, as ever in his presence, his eye always on
us; that he observes all our ways and will reward and bless us, according to
our conscience herein: thus to walk before him, until he translate us hence,
being as little absent from our place and charge, as possible may be; cutting
off wisely all unnecessary occasions. Often absence of the Master is a principal
cause of the scholars negligence and not profiting, with the grief and vexing
of the Master, arising thereon; unless he have very good supply.


Spoud. Happy men were we if we could attain to this. But I pray you sir, what
think you of this, to have ever the rod or ferula in our hand, at lesser
faults to give them a blow or a ierke on the hand; and so when we see any of
them idle?


Phil. If we will strive earnestly, according to the former means, we shall by
little and little attain to that ability, to cut off those occasions, and come
to this good government, so far as the Lord shall be well pleased with us;
and that he will pass by our weaknesses. But for having the rod or ferula
always in our hands, if we be of hasty natures, The danger of having the rod
of ferula ever in our hand.
I take it to be, as for a furious man to carry ever a naked sword in his hand.
It will make us to strike many a time, when we will be sorry for it after, if
it fall not out worse. For these lighter faults, proceeding from lack of time,
years, capacity, discretion, or the like, would rather be corrected by words,
and reformed lovingly, then by this continual whipping and striking: neither
will any good and wise father smite his child for every fault.

I would therefore have neither of these to be continually holden up; Rather a
little twigge if any thing at all.
but rather some little twigge, if you will needs: I mean a small twigge
something more then a foot long; that if you a little rap them on the heads,
you can no way hurt them, neither their head, eyes nor face.

But I account this far the best, for a Schoolmaster by his grave and wise
carriage, For the surest, to have nothing ordinarily, but gravity and authority.
and his faithfulness in his place; and also by carefully observing, and
surely and soundly correcting the negligent and disobedient, when other means
fail; to strive to come to this, that his own presence, or at least his eye
and speech, may sufficiently prevail to keep all in a submisse obedience; and
that he may use the rod very sparingly, but only in greater faults, and on
the principal offenders for example and terror. This shall be a fatherly and
worthy government indeed, when the children thus obey of conscience; striving
who shall be the best, and each way most dutiful. And thus in a short time,
when your Scholars are so inured to your government that they know what to
look for, you shall find that very seldom correction will serve.


Spoud. I like your advice wonderful well herein: The time of inflicting
common punishments.
but when would you have the time, of common punishment to be inflicted; as
namely that for their misdemeanors in the Church, or other gross faults noted
by the Monitours?


Phil. I would have this done commonly at the giving up of the Monitours Bills,
some day before prayer; sometimes one day, sometimes another: and when the
Master finds the greatest company present, then to call for the Monitours of
that week; lest keeping a settime, any absent themselves by fained excuses or
otherwise, or cry unto their parents, that they dare not go to the school,
because they must be beaten. But for extreme negligence, or other faults in
the School, the very fittest time is immediately before the breaking up, upon
the play-dayes; then if need^ so require, first to whip all the stubborn and
notoriously negligent, as also those who have done any gross fault: and after
to cause them to sit, and do some exercises, whereof they are to give a strict
account, as I said. This will surely by Gods blessing tame the proudest of them
in time, and bring them to be as submisse as the least child; as experience
will manifest.


Spoud. But what if you have any, Such as of whom is no hope of reformation to
be sent from School in time.
whom you cannot yet reform of their ungraciousness or loyt^ring, and whom
you can do no good with all, no not by (...) these means? As some there are
ever in all schools extremely untoward.


Phil. These I would have some way removed from the school; at least by giving
the parents notice, and entreating them to employ them some other way; that
neither other be hurt by their example, nor they be a reproach to the School,
nor yet we be enforced to use that severity with them which they will deserve.
But keep these courses strictly, and you shall see that they will either
amend, or get away of themselves, by one means or other; I mean, by some
device to their parents, to leave the School, and to go to some other
employment.


CHAP. XXX.
Of School times, intermissions and recreations.
Spoud. NOw that you have thus courteously gone through this point concerning
the Schoole-gouernment, by rewards and punishments (which being rightly put in
practice, must needs bring a great blessing with them) let me crave your
judgment also for the times of School and intermissions; with recreations to
be used therein.


Phil. To give you my judgment in all these briefly, School time to begin at
six.
according to that which by trial I find best;

1 The Schoole-time should begin at six: all who write Latin to make their
exercises which were given ouernight, in that hour before seven, unless they
did them the night before, to get parts or the like.


Spoud. Would you then have the Master and Usher present so early?


Phil. The Usher should necessarily be there, to be present amongst them; The
Usher to be present at six, only to ouersee all.
though he follow his own private study that hour, yet to see that all the
Scholars do their duties appointed, and that there be no disorder: which
will be, unless he or some other of authority be amongst them. For otherwise
the best children, left to their own liberty, will show themselves children.
If the Master be present at seven, it may suffice, where there is any in his
place, whose presence they stand in awe of.


Spoud. But it is hard for the little children to rise so early, and in some
families all lie long: how would you have them come so soon then? You would
not have them beaten every time that they come ouer-late, as the custom is in
some schools.


Phil. That I take far too great severity, and whereby many a poor child is
driven into wonderful fear, and either to play the truant, or make some
device to leave the school; at least to come with a marvelous ill will, and
often to be dragged to the School, to the reproach of the Master and the School.

The best means that ever I could find to make them to rise early, How to
make all children to strive who shall be first at school without any
correction.
to prevent all this fear of whipping, is this; by letting the little ones to
have their places in their fourmes daily, according to their coming after six
of the clock: so many as are there at six, to have their places as they had
them by election or the day before: all who come after six, every one to sit as
he comes, and so to continue that day, and until he recover his place again
by the election of the form or otherwise. Thus deal with them at all times,
after every intermission, when they are to be in their places again, and you
shall have them ever attending who to be first in his place; so greatly even
children are provoked by the credit of their places.

If any cannot be brought by this, then to be noted in the black Bill by a
special mark, and feel the punishment thereof: and sometimes present
correction to be used for terror; though this (as I said) to be more seldom,
for making them to fear coming to the School. Intermission at nine and three
for a quarter of an hour, or more.


The higher Scholars must of necessity rest to do their exercises, if their
exercises be strictly called for.

Thus they are to continue until nine, signified by Monitours, Subdoctour, or
otherwise. Then at nine I find that order which is in Westminster to be far
the best; to let them to have a quarter of an hour at least, or more for
intermission, either for breakefast, for all who are near unto the School,
that can be there within the time limited, or else for the nece^sity of every
one, or their honest recreation, or to prepare their exercises against the
Masters coming in.

After, each of them to be in his place in an instant upon the knocking of the
door, or some other sign given by the Subdoctor or Monitors, in pain of loss
of his place, or further punishment, as was noted before; so to continue until
eleven of the clock, or somewhat after, to counteruaile the time of the
intermission at nine.

To be again all ready, and in their places at one, in an instant^ to continue
until three, or half an hour after: then to have another quarter of an hour
or more, as at nine for drinking and necessities; so to continue till half an
hour after five: thereby in that half hour to counteruaile the time at
three; then to end so as was showed, with reading a piece of a Chapter, and
with singing two staves of a Psalm: lastly, with prayer to be used by the
Master.

For the Psalms, every scholar should begin to give the Psalm and the tune
in order, To sing part of a Psalm before breaking up at night; and each to
begin in order and give the tune.
and to read every verse before them; or every one to have his book (if it
can be) and read it as they do sing it: where any one can not begin the
tune, his next fellow beneath is to help him, and take his place.

By this they will all learn to give the tunes sweetly, which is a thing very
commendable; and also it will help both reading, voice and audacity in the
younge^.


Spoud. But these intermissions at nine and three, may be offensive: they who
know not the manner of them, may reproach the school, thinking that they do
nothing but play.


Phil. We are so much as may be in all things to avoid offense: Intermissions
at nine and three a clock not offensive.
but when by long custom the order is once made known, it will be no more
offensive then it is at Westminster, or then it is at noone and night; so that
it be done in a decent order.

The benefits of such intermissions Benefits of intermissions.
will be found very great, and to prevent many inconveniences.

1 By this means neither Masters nor Scholars shall be ouer-toyled, 1 None
ouer-toyled, but wits ever fresh.
but have fit times of refreshing. For there is none (no not almost of the
least) but being used to it a while, they will sit very well in their places,
for two hours together, The least will soon learn to sit two hours together.
or two hours and a half; without any weariness or necessity, observing
duly those times.

2 By this means also the Scholars may be kept ever in their places, and
hard to their labors, without that running out to the Campo (as the term it)
at school times, 2 Kept ever in their places at school time.
and the manifold disorders thereof; as watching and striving for the clubbe,
and loytering then in the fields, some hindered that they cannot go forth at all.

But hereby all may have their free liberty in due time; and none can abuse
their liberty in that sort, nor have their minds drawn away, nor stir abroad
all the day at school times: except upon some urgent necessity, to be
signified to the Master or Usher; and so leave to be gotten privately, to
return presently again. And also in those cases to lose their places for that
day, unless the case be approved very necessary and sure; to the end to cut
off occasions Leave to be granted upon urgent occasions besides.
from such as will pretend necessities. If any one be catched abusing his
Master or his liberty, without necessity only, upon desire of idleness or
play, he is to be corrected sharply, for ensample. By this means you shall
bring them to that order and obedience in a short time as they will not think
of stirring all the day, but at their times appointed, or upon very urgent and
almost extraordinary necessity.

3 Besides these benefits, 3 The time may be gained daily, and sundry
inconveniences prevented.
this will also gain so much time every day, as is lost in those
intermissions; because there is no day but they will all look for so much time
or more, to the Campo: especially the shrewdest boys, who use to wait for the
club, and watch their times; these will be sure to have much more then that.
Besides all the time which they lose in waiting for that idle fit; and that
they will, if they can, be away at Lectures, and showing exercises: and
likewise they will exceedingly trouble the Master in asking three or four
sometimes together, what business soever he be about.


Spoud. I have been well acquainted with these disorders of the Campo, and
vexed with them many a time: I shall be most glad* if I may thus reform them,
and find these benefits in stead thereof. But what say you for their
recrea^ions? Let me also hea^e your judgment in them: for I see that you would
have in like manner a special regard to be kept thereof.


Phil. I would indeed have their recreations as well looked unto, as their
learning; as you may perceive plainly, by their intermissions, at nine and at
three.

Besides those, and all other their intermissions, it is very requisite also,
that they should have weekly one part of an afternoon for recreation,
Weekly recreations.
as a reward of their diligence, obedience and profiting: and that to be
appointed at the Masters discretion, either the Thursday, after the usual
custom; or according to the best opportunity of the place. That also to be
procured by some Verses, made by the Victors, as was showed: and then only,
when there has bin already no play-day in the week before, nor holy day in all
the week.

Before their breaking up also, it shall not be amiss to give them a Theamto
make some verses of, ex tempore, Before breaking up to play, to make verses ex
tempore.
in the highest fourmes, after they have been for a time exercised therein: or
if time permit, sometime to cap verses.

In capping verses the way to provoke them the most, and to have most variety
of good verses, Or cap verses. The best manner of capping verses.
is, to appoint some one or two of the best, to challenge their fellows to
come one after another; and ever as any one but sticks or misseth in a
syllable, the other to tell him, and another to come in his place: or else to
try adversaries or fourmes together.

This exercise will much help capacity and audacitie, Benefit of capping
verses.
memory, right pronuntiation, to furnish with store of authorities for
Poetry, and the like; so as that they may be very cunning in their Poets by
it.

Therefore it may also be used in regard of the benefits at some other fit
times besides, instead of some other examination.

He that brings the most sweet verses, The greatest commendation in these.
out of Ovid and Virgil or Cato amongst the youngest, and so out of other most
approved Poets, is to have ever the greatest commendations.

Absurd verses, such as most are of those called Carmina Prouerbialia, are to
be hissed forth: Namely, those which are termed versus Leonini. As that first
verse, Si canis ex hilla religatur mordet in illa.

And so all other of the same mould. Though even amongst those of that book
there are some tolerable verses, if good choice be made.

This exercise may well go before play: for it is nothing but a pleasant
school recreation, and will exceedingly whet on the scholars to an ingenuous
contention.

All recreations and sports of scholars, Manner of their recreations.
would be meet for Gentleman. Clownish sports, or perilous, or yet playing for
money, are no way to be admitted.

The recreations of the studious are as well to be looked unto, The recreatio^s
of the studious to be regarded.
as the study of the rest: That none take hurt by his study, either for mind
or body, or any way else.

Yet here of the other side, Over much play to be carefully avoided.
very great care is to be had, in the moderating of their recreation. For
schools, generally, do not take more hinderance by any one thing, then by
ouer-often leave to play. Experience teaches, that this draws their minds
utterly away from their books, that that they cannot take pains, for longing
after play, and talking of it; as also devising means to procure others to
get leave to play: so that ordinarily when they are but in hope thereof, they
will do things very negligently; and after the most play they are evermore
far the worst.

And contrarily, when they are most holden to it, without looking for any play,
in such a course, as wherein they may take delight, and go on with ease; then
will they do far the best, without any danger of taking hurt thereby; for
that the^ their learning is for most part as a play to them who are ingenuous.

Therefore Masters are to use great wisdom in avoiding this* and answering with
mildness, all those who are ever importunate in asking leave.

And whereas such suitors are wont to be instant thus, That the Scholars will
learn the better after; we may say truly, that they will learn fa^ the worse
after. Also, whereas they think that they do them good; they do both them,
their friends and the school very great hurt, for the reasons mentioned. It is
continual applying which brings learning, and the credit of a school. And for
this cause it were not amiss, nor inconvenient (neither for the school, nor
the Master himself who has a regard of the profiting of his scholars) if in
such places where both Master and scholars are hindered hereby that there were
some statute for the help of the Master, that he could not give leave of
himself above once in the week, without consent of the Minister, or some man
of authority in the town; unless very seldom, and unto some chief parties
to be yielded unto of necessity, in regard of some special dignity or desert.


Spoud. Many Masters would count this a bondage.


Phil. They should yet find it a profitable bondage, and which would bring no
small freedom and comfort to themselves, or benefit and credit to their
schools in the end.


CHAP. XXXI.
Inconvenience growing by diversity of teaching, and of Grammars.
Spoud. But what think you of diversities of Grammars, Inconvenience by
diversity of Grammars and courses of teaching.
and of diverse courses in teaching? do you not take them to be very
inconvenient?


Phil. Yes indeed: for by this means they younger scholars coming at new
schools, or under new masters, are new to begin; or are hindered, and do lose
much time, when they must after asort begin again. Many of great towardness
and hope are thought to have nothing in them, because they are not acquainted
with the new courses.

Also their former Masters are discredited, which happily had taken the best
and most profitable pains with them: the children are utterly or very much
discouraged. Besides that many schoolmasters are extremely ignorant, and
insufficient, not knowing any good course of teaching at all.


Spoud. But how might these be helped?


Phil. Only thus: The best courses being once found out by search, conference,
and trial, with directions and helps How helped.
for the practice thereof* and the same universally received or at least known;
these inconveniences should be for most part prevented, and both Masters and
scholars go on with cheerfulnes in every place. In the mean time this is the
safest course; To make them perfect in our ordinary Gra^mar, by the use whereof
alone so many excellent scholars have been: then they shall be sure to go
forward in any school or course, and to be well liked by every one.


CHAP. XXXII.
Evils by ordinary absence of Scholars.
Spoud. ALthough I have been troubled by that diversity, yet much more by the
absence of many of my scholars, Evils by absence of scholars.
when some of them are away, two or three days in a week, and sometimes
happily a month together, or almost a quarter of a year, as in the harvest
time, and it may be they have no books neither; and yet the Parents will
expect, that they should profit as much as if they were there daily, and as if
they had al necessary books.

Also they will be ready to rail upon me that their children do no good:
whereby both my self and my school are much traduced; when the fault is
wholly in themselves or principally, neither can I tell how to help it.


Phil. I know this to be a common grieuance. The best way to redress it, is
this, so far as I know:

1. Parents are to be admonished, either to keep their children to school
daily, or to keep them away continually. For by such absence, though it be but
now and then, the minds of the best and most studious will be much drawn
away, or they discouraged, and made unable to go with their fellows.

Other their fellows also, are often much hindered for them; Schools and
Masters discredited by them: Besides that in their absence they commonly learn
much evil; and chiefly stubbornness to corrupt themselves and others

Therefore this would be looked unto specially, How redressed.
to be avoided so much as may be: And order to be taken by the governors and
overseers of schools, that all such should be sent home again, who are kept
away above a certain number of days; as thirteen in a Quarter (as the
statute is in some schools) or a like number: unless in case of sickness, or
such necessary occasion to be approved by the Master or overseers.

Those most seldom absences, to be punished by loss of their places, and
correction too, if the fault be found to be any way in themselves; or at least
to sit still on the play days to learn when their fellows play, to recover
that time again, and to make them more careful to come; or by all these
means together. This will make the Parents to amend it.


CHAP. XXXIII.
Discouragements of Schoolemasters by unthankfulness of Parents.
Spoud. THis is good counsel, if I could get our overseers to put it in
execution; I my self will try what I can do to redress it by these helps:
Yet there is one other discouragement, whereby I have bin very much troubled in
my self, many times; that is, the great unthankfulness that I find,
Discouragement of Schoolemasters by unthankfulness of Parents.
and have ever found in many whose children I have had; That some, if they
think they have any little privilege by the place, they will not so much as
give me thanks for all my labors, nor it may be afford me a good word, though
their children do never so well under me.

Others who have no privilege in the place, will give little or nothing, in
regard of my pains, or to my meet maintenance, according to my place, to
encourage me to take pains: and besides, they will run behind with me two or
three Quarters, and then they will seek some occasion to take away their
children, to set them to other schools, finding some quarrel that their
children did not profit, or the like; and thus not only defraude me of my due,
but also raise such slanders against me, for the recompense of all my pains.


Phil. We must look for thanks, Thanks to be expected at Gods hands. Remedies
against discouragements by unthankfulness of Parents.
and the rewards of our labors from God, where the world is unthankful. But
for the help of this, my advise is, that first we labor to be faithful in our
places, in the best courses and kinds; chiefly to make our scholars good
Gra^marians: and then we may be bold to cause them who are of ability to pay
accordingly in some sort, for the instruction of their children. They will
better esteem the worth of learning, and of the service we perform to them (in
those in whom they are to live after their time) and also to the Church and
Commonwealth. And if God do bless us, that our scholars profit indeed, we
shall in time have scholars enough; such as will be willing to pay well, how
basely soever learning be esteemed of.

Moreover, to prevent all such shifting and detraction, it is wisdom ever to
call for our due at the Quarters end; and to see that our carriage and government
be such in our place,
as that we may stand in the face of any such unthankful detractour. Also, that
Gods blessing on our labors, may ever answer for us; which following but
these directions we may certainly expect.

Finally, that in our places we labor to serve the Lord faithfully: and then
we may be sure to receive the full reward of all our labor, from him; let
men, as I said, be never so unthankful.


CHAP. XXXIIII.
What Children are to be kept to learning.
Spoud. SIr, if I should not take heart and courage to set to my calling
afresh, I were much to be blamed, having all my doubts thus answered, and being
thus heartened in every part. But yet, that I may both return unto it
cheerfully; and also go forward, and continue happily to the end: I pray you
let me have your judgment in these two points:

1. What children you would have set to learning, and encouraged to go on in
the same.

2. Which you would have sent to the University, and how qualified.


Phil. To both these I shall answer you what I hold. 1. what scholars to be
set to learning.


To the first: I would have those who after good time of trial shall be found
the fittest amongst a man's children, to be applied unto learning; Most apt and
of greatest hope.
as being the meetest to be offered to God in a more special manner, to the
public service of his church or their Countries.

And so those only of them, to be encouraged to go on in the same, whom you
find most ingenuous, and especially whom you perceive to love learning the
best; which also do witness the same by their painfulnesse and delight in
their books. The rest to be fitted so far as may be conveniently, for trades,
or some other calling, or to be removed speedily.

2. To the second I answer: That such only should be sent to the
Universities, 2. What scholars to be sent to the Universities.
who prove most ingenuous and towardly, and who in a love of learning, will
begin to take pains of themselves, having attained in some sort the former
parts of learning; Ingenuous and lovers of learning.
being good Grammarians Good Grammari^ns.
at least, able to understand, write and speak Latin in good sort.

2. Such as have good discretion how to govern themselves there, Of discretion.
and to moderate their expenses; which is seldom times before 15. years of
age: which is also the youngest age admitted by the statutes of the University,
as I take it.

Some of chief note for learning and government, and of long experience in the
University (as namely, some worthy heads of Colleges) would have none sent
nor admitted into the University, None to be sent to the Universities, before
15. years of age at least.
before they be full fifteen years old at least; for these reasons specially
amongst others:

1. Because, before that time, they will commonly require more bodily help,
then can be there afforded.

2. The University statute forbids to admit any under this age.

3. Because that daily experience does teach how inconvenient it is in diverse
respects.

Finally, all generally of whom I can hear in the University, do assent
hereunto. Many would have them 17. or 18. year old before; because then
commonly they have discretion to stick to their studies and to govern
themselves.


Spoud. I do much approve their judgment. I would have them good scholars,
before they go to the University; and namely sound Grammarians, that the
Tutors need not to be troubled with teaching them to make or to construe
Latin; but that they may go forward in Logic or other studies meet for the
University. For such a scholar as is able to understand well what he reads,
or what is read unto him there (I mean in regard of the Latin) shall do more
good in a year, then a weak scholar shall do in two or three; chiefly, if he
have discretion to govern himself, and abide close to his book.

For when as the scholar is feign to turn his Dictionary for every word, or
hearing a Lecture read does come away as he went; unless he be placed under a
most painful Tutor, how is it possible that he should profit any thing, in
respect of him who goes a good scholar thither? How many evils do come upon
the sending of scholars so rawly thither, both University and Country do
fully know and ^ue.

Now you have so lovingly and fully answered me in every doubt, and so largely
laid open your mind unto me, as indeed I cannot desire any more of you:
Only let me tell you this, To practice the most profitable
that the points are so many, as I fear that I shall never be able to put them
in practice.


Phil. You may make trial of all, or the most likely of them; and constantly
practice those which you find most profitable: the shorter that you can be in
every thing, the better shall you do; so that all be done with understanding,
as I said before.


Spoud. I trust you will give me a copy of them: for otherwise I shall never
be able to remember them; besides that they will require to be often read over
and over, until I shall grow perfect in them. I do not doubt, but you have
set them down.


Phil. I have; though as yet very imperfectly, for lack of meet leisure. Such
as I have I shall impart (seeing your earnest desire to do good) and more as
God shall add more help and experience by your self, and by others*


CHAP. XXXV.
A brief rehearsal of the chief points and helps mentioned in this book.
Spoud. HOw much shall you make me more indebted by that favor, above all your
other kindness hitherto! Yet in the mean time before we depart, to the end to
help my weak memory, and to cause me to go on more cherefully, let me
request only these two things of you further:

1 To repeat the principal heads of those things which should be as it were in
the Masters remembrance always, A brief rehearsal of the chief points
mentioned in this book.
to be continually put in practice.

2 To set me down a short Catalogue of the books and helps which you have
mentioned belonging hereunto, A rehearsal of the books and helps mentioned.
for the better accomplishing of all these several parts of learning.


Phil. For those principal heads, though most of them were named in the
observations; yet since such little briefes do much help memory, I will
rehearse them so near as I can.

These were of the chief:

1 To cause all to be done with understanding. The principal heads of those
things which would be kept ever in memory, to be put in practice by the Master
continually.


2 To cut off all needless matters, so much as may be, and pass by that which
is unprofitable.

3 To note all hard and new words: to observe matter and phrase carefully.

4 To learn and keep all things most perfectly, as they go.

5 To have few fourmes.

6 To discourage none, but to draw on all by a desire of commendation.

7 To stir up to emulation of adversaries, and to use all good policy for one
to provoke another.

8 Continual examining (which is the life of all) and chiefly posing of the
most negligent.

9 Right pronuntiation.

10 Some exercise of memory daily.

11 To have the best patterns for every thing; and to do all by imitation.

12 The Master to stir up both himself and his Scholars to continual
cheerfulness.

13 Constancy in order.

These were generally premised. To these we may add;

14 To get an Idea or short sum and general notion of every Treatise or
Chapter.

15 To parallel all by examples, or to give like examples for each thing, and
where they have learned them.

16 To see that they have continually all necessaries.

17 To countenance and prefer the best, to be marks for the rest to aim at,
and that all may be encouraged by their example.

18 Maintayning authority, by careful execution of justice in rewards and
punishments, with demonstration of love, faithfulness and painfulness in our
place, with gravity; working by all means a love of learning in the scholars,
and a strift who shall excel most therein, of a conscience to do most honor
and service unto the Lord, both presently, and chiefly in time to come.

19 In a word; Serving the Lord with constant cheerfulness, in the best
courses which he shall make known unto us* we shall undoubtedly see his
blessing, according to our hearts.

M. Askam has these steps to learning: Master Askam his steps to learning.
First, Aptness of nature: Secondly, Love of learning: Thirdly, Diligence in
right order: Fourthly, Constancy with pleasant moderation: Fifthly, Always to
learn of the most learned; pointing and aiming at the best, to match or go
beyond them.

Philip Melanchton also, in his Preface before Hesiod, advises after this
manner; Philip Melanchtons direction.
To strive to make scholars exceeding cunning in every Author which they
read. do this by often reading and construing over their Authors; causing them
to note every thing worthy observation, with some mark, to run ofter over
those: not regarding how many the Authors are, but how exactly they learn
them; chiefly all their sentences and special phrases, that the speech of the
children may ever savor of them: for thus he says; Vt quisque author optimus,
it a saepissime relegendus ad imit ationem: And that thereby they may always
have of a sudden a pattern or president in their mind, whereunto to run, as
the painter has. And so much for the chief points: for the several books and
helps, I refer you rather to the several Chapters; where you may soon see
them together, as you shall have occasion to use them for their several
purposes.


Spoud. But it is a great charge to poor men, to provide so many books as may
seem necessary.


Phil. It is true indeed; yet one year gained in their childrens learning,
will recompense abundantly all charge in books which they shall need: and
much more, if by them they shall gain sundry years, and be furnished with all
kind of excellent learning meet for their years; which without the best
books, it is no more likely to do, then for any to prove exquisite in other
trades and sciences, without the most fine instruments serving thereunto.

And this one certain assurance of the obtaining this treasure of learning, by
following the right means and courses, may counterpoize all labor and charges
whatsoever can be furmised, for attayning of the same.


Spoud. Sir, I rest fully satisfied; praising the Lord, and acknowledging my
perpetual debt for this our conference.


Phil. Let us give God all the glory; to whom of due it appertains: and let us
ever entreat him, that as he has thus begun, so he will perfect his own
work, for the everlasting praise of his own name, and the perpetual good of
all his people, until Christ Jesus shall come. (...).


(...).
THE SEVERAL CHAPTERS, WITH THE PARticular Contents of them.
CHAP. I.
1 A Discourse between two Schoolemasters, concerning their function: in the
end determining a conference about the best way of teaching, and the manner of
proceeding in the same.

Herein these particulars:

The Schoolemasters place, ordinarily, wearisome, and thankelesse. They, who
have felt the evils of laboring without fruit, will neither spare travel nor
cost to help the same. Many honest hearted and painful Schoolemasters utterly
discouraged, and living in continual coffeehouse, through lack of
knowledge of a right course of teaching. Some few God much blesses in this
calling, though rare. More true contentment to be found in this calling,
rightly followed, then in any recreation. The fruits of this, most sweet in the
remembrance. Knowledge and practice of the best courses will much augment the
blessing of our labor, and fill our lives with contentment. How the way of all
good learning may be made more easy, then ever in former ages. Many worthy
helps lie hid from the greatest part, only through neglect. A brief
rehearsal of the chief contents, for the better entering into the conference,
and for giving more light and life to all that follows. The manner of
proceeding in this conference.
CHAP. II.
2 WHen the scholar should first be set to the school. Branches;

The time of the first entrance in country schools, at seven or eight year
old. The child of any ordinary towardlines, to begin to learn about five year
old. Reasons and benefit of it. Two or three years may be gained hereby, to
fit them sooner for the University. Parents ought to labor to see their
childrens good education before their eyes, so soon as may be. Objections
against setting children so young to the school, answered.
CHAP. III.
3 HOw the scholar may be taught to read English well and speedily, to fit him
the sooner and better for the Grammar school.

Herein these things handled;

The inconveniences of having the Grammar schools troubled with teaching A. B.
C. How this might be remedied by some other schools in each town for that
purpose. The redress hereof to besought. To be borne with patience, where it
cannot be avoided; and the burden of it to be made so light as may be. The
first entering of children to be looked to heedily. To teach to read well, a
matter of good commendation. Grief and discredit to the Schoolmaster for want
of this. To teach to call and pronounce each letter right. How to know their
letters the soonest. To spell, and take a delight therein. Some of the hardest
syllables and words set down, for the practicing children in spelling of them;
to help by them to spell any other speedily, and for writing true Orthography.
Of joining syllables together. Books to be first learned of children. In what
time children well applied, may learn to read English. Dividing and
distinguishing syllables. The pleasantest way to teach the little ones, to
pronounce their letters, and to spell before they know a letter; and how to do
it. Any one who can read, may thus enter children, if they will follow the
directions; and so a poor body may make an honest living of it, and free the
Grammar schools. Complaints for children for getting to read English, when
they first enter into Latin; and how to avoid them. The just complaint of
want of care in our schools, for proceeding in our own tongue, as in the
Latin or Greek; whereas our chief care should be for our own language: and
reasons for it. How scholars may increase continually, as fast in our own
tongue as in the Latin. The chief fault of children going back in English,
when they begin to learn Latin, is in the Parents. An ordinary fault, that
scholars are to seek in matters of common numbers; and how to redress it.
CHAP. IIII.
OF writing. How the Master may direct his scholars to write fair, though
himself be no good penman.

Herein these particulars:

Fair writing a great benefit and ornament to schools. The opinion is fond,
that a good scholar cannot be a good writer. The trouble of Schoolemasters,
for want of this skill to teach their scholars how to write. When the
scholars should begin to write. To have all necessaries thereunto, and books
kept fair. Each to learn to make his own pen, and how. Holding the pen, and
carrying it lightly. In stead of setting copies, to have little copie-bookes
fastened to the tops of their books; and those of the best which can be
procured. Manner of their copie-bookes and copies. Inconvenience of following
diverse hands. Evils of the want of such copie-bookes. Fair writing to be
practiced by all the scholars once every day. General rule in writing, to make
all like the copy. How to keep even compass in writing, not ouer-high not
too low. Benefit of ruling-pens for each, and what ones. The books of the
young beginners to be ruled with cross lines. The compass in greatness and
neerenes of the letters. Joining the letters in writing. Writing straight
without lines. Special furtherances for the first enterers, when they cannot
frame any letter. Leisurely drawing the letters as the Painter, a chief help.
To observe ornaments of writing. To make all the letters most plain.
Mischiefs of getting a bad hand first. What the Master is to do, to the end
that he may learn to teach his scholars to write fair. To walk amongst the
scholars, to see that they observe their directions, and to mark all faults
in writing. This skill is to be gotten, to avoid the evils by wandering
Scriueners. The use of Scriueners in Grammar Schools, what. The sum of the
principal directions for writing, to be ever in memory.
CHAP. V.
Certain general observations to be known of Schoolmasters, and practiced
carefully; chiefly in all Grammar learning.

1. That scholars be taught to do all things with understanding, and to have
a general knowledge of the matter before. To do all things by reason with
understanding, brings almost double learning, besides ease and delight. Reading
without understanding, is a neglect of learning. Trial of difference between
learning with understanding and without. Verses of Horace to this end, worthy
to be written in letters of gold, to be imprinted in the memories of all. How
some writers have so far gone beyond others in eloquence, thorough their
ripeness and understanding. How to teach all to be done by understanding. 2.
To learn only such things as whereof they may have good and perpetual use.
3. To note all hard words or matters worthy observation, and the manner of
marking them. 4. To learn all things so perfectly, as the former may be
instead of a Schoolmaster to the later. 5. That the whole school be divided
into so few forms, as may be; with reasons for the same. 6 To have a great care
that none be discouraged, but all to be provoked by emulation and desire of
praise. A sentence of Tully to this purpose worthy to be ever before the
Masters eye. Strift for victories the most commendable play and a chief
means to make the school Ludus Literar^us. 7. Each to have his adversary: and
they to be so matched and placed as all may be done by equal strift. 8. To use
ever to examine the most negligent. 9. Continual care of pronouncing. 10. To
have some exercise of memory daily, for making excellent memories. 11. To have
the best patterns of all sorts that can be gotten. 12. The Masters to
encourage themselves and their scholars continually. 12. Constancy in good
orders, with continual demonstration of love, to do all for the greatest good
of the scholars.
CHAP. VI.
HOw to make children perfect in the Accedence.

Herein these particulars:

The usual manner of learning to read the Accedence. The ordinary manner of
getting the Accedence without book. The best means, for learning to read the
Accedence. General rule in learning without book, or getting whatsoever
seems hard, To take but a little at a time. To cause them first to understand
their lectures and how. Admonition to Masters, desirous to do good; To be as
the Nurses with little children. Example how to make children to understand, by
showing the meaning, and by asking questions. In what points of the Accedence,
the chief labor would be bestowed to make young scholars very perfect* viz.
in all kind of declining. How to be most speedily perfect in the Verbs; which
are a mean foundation, and wherein the greatest difficulty lies. No pains can
be too great in Nownes and Verbs until they be exceeding perfect. Two general
observations in the English rules: what parts of the English rules, to be made
most perfect in. Help for examination of the Accedence: viz. The questions of
the Accedence, called the Poasing of the English parts. Other needful
questions adioined to the end of the same.
CHAP. VII.
HOw to make scholars perfect in the Grammar.

What is done ordinarily in schools in teaching Grammar. What things are
requisite in learning Grammar. How to get the Grammar with most ease and
fruit. Benefit of Lillies rules construed. Learning the rules without book.
Construing the rules without book. How to do where leisure is wanting. How to
examine so as to make your scholar to answer any question of his Grammar; with
an example thereof. To appose only in English, where children are too weak to
answer in Latin. Examining in the Latin Nownes and Verbes. Examining the
Syntaxis, and helps thereunto. Repeating titles and margents, or the beginning
of the rules, in a continued speech, to keep the rules perfectly. Help for
hearing part in straights of time. Helps for further understanding the rules.
The sum of all, wherein chief care would be had. A perfect saying every rule,
not so absolutely necessary. To turn to each hard rule in parsing, a help to
make Scholars perfect in the Grammar. Grammar to be made as a Dictionary to
the Scholars.
CHAP. VIII.
OF Construction, or of construing Authors, how to make all the way thereof
most easy and plain.

Herein these particulars:

Things seeming difficult in construction. The ordinary toil of Masters about
giving lectures, and making their scholars able to construe. Difficulty in
taking lectures, in propriety of words and sense. Grief of the Masters for
their scholars forgetting that which they have learned. The way of construing
most plain, by practice of the Rule of construing, and of Grammatical
translations. The rule of construing unheard of to the most. The rule set down
by sundry learned Grammarians. The rule according as Master Leech has set it
down. The rule according to Crusius. The rule expounded more at large, though
the curious handling of it be left to some others. The sum of the rule briefly.
An example of construing and of Grammatical translations according to the
rule: wherein may be seen the general benefits thereof, for resolving Latin
into the Grammatical order, construing, parsing, making Latin, and trying it.
The chief reason of the benefits. Benefits of translatio^s according to the
rule, set down more particularly. Things specially observed in the translations
of the School Authors. How to use the translations, so as to attain the
former benefits. Objections against the use of translations in Schools,
answered. The uses and benefits mentioned, cannot be made of any other
translations of the School Authors, except of the Grammatical: and the reason
of it. Some exampls of other translations, to manifest the truth hereof.
Grammatical translations separate from the Latin, cannot endanger any to make
them truants. How to prevent idleness or negligence in the use of the
translations. These no means to make Masters idle, but contrarily to encourage
them to take all pains. The account to be justly made of such translations.
School Authors translated Grammatically. Other books also translated
Grammatically for continual helps in Schools. What helps to be used for
construing higher Authors, and so for construing ex tempore. The higher fourmes
to practice to go over so much as they can, construing ex tempore.
CHAP. IX.
OF Parsing and the several kinds thereof. How children may parse of themselves,
readily and surely.

The particular branches are these;

The usual manner of teaching to parse. The certain direction for parsing. To
parse as they construe, marking the last word. To observe carefully, where they
have learned each word, what example every word is like; so to parallel by
examples, each thing which they have not learned in their rules. An example of
parsing, set down at large for the rudest. Manner of hearing lectures amongst
the lower. How to know by the words what part of Speech each word is. How a
child may know, of what Conjugation any Verb is. Much time and toil in
parsing, thorough examining each word by the Master, how helped. The surest,
shortest and speediest way of parsing, to parse as reading a lecture. How to
help to prepare the children for parsing at taking lectures, by showing them
only the hard words, that they may take most pains in them. Example of
marking the hard words amongst the first enterers. Marking the hard words
helps much, and preuenteth many inconveniences. How to oppose so as children
may get both matter, words and phrase of each lecture, with examples of it in
the first Authors: and how to make use of each Author. Parsing in the higher
fourmes, and to do all in Latin. The sum of all for parsing.
CHAP. X.
OF making Latin. How to enter children to make Latin, with delight and
certainty; without danger of false Latin, barbarous phrase, or any other like
inconvenience.

Particular points;

To enter children to make Latin, a matter ordinarily extremely difficult and
full of toil, both to Master and Scholar. The usual manner in country
Schools, to enter children to make Latin. The shortest, surest, and easiest
way, both to Master and Scholar, for entering to make Latin. Making first the
Latin of their lectures, and giving a reason of each word. Example of it.
Continual construing, parsing, and reading their Authors out of Grammatical
translations, is continual making pure Latin, to cause children to come on in
it very fast. Choosing fit sentences out of Authors, for the children to make
of themselves. The manner of the entrance of children to write Latin, so as to
profit in English, Latin, Writing fair and true, all under one labor. How to
have their books ruled to this purpose. Manner of dictating the English to
scholars, when they are to learn to write Latin. Making and setting down
the Latin, by the Scholars. Benefit of it for, certain direction both to
Master and Scholar. Further use to be made of the Latin so set down, to make
it fully their own. Composing the Latin into the order of the Author. Tullies
Sentences, the fittest book to dictate sentences out of. An example of the
manner of dictating, and writing down both English and Latin. Translating
into pure Latin, and in good composition of themselves, trying who can come
nearest unto Tullie. How to prevent stealing, and writing after one another.
How to go on faster, and dispatch more in making Latin. Translating into
English of themselves, after M. Askams manner; and after, reading the same into
Latin again, or writing it. The most speedy and profitable way of translating
for young scholars. How to translate an Author into Latin, or any piece
thereof. Such translating only for Scholars well grounded. Sum of all for
making Latin.
CHAP. XI.
OF the Artificial order of composing, or placing of the words in prose,
according to Tully, and the purest latinists. Herein these particulars:

Pure composition a matter of difficulty. The error of young Scholars,
displacing sentences, in an imagination of fine composition. Composition
generally belonging to all Latin. Rules of composition, as they are set down
by Macropedius, in the end of his Method of making Epistles. More exquisite
observation in placing and measuring sentences.
CHAP. XII.
HOw to make Epistles imitating Tully, short pithy, sweet Latin and familiar,
and to indite Letters to our friends in English accordingly. Herein these
things;

Difficulty of making Epistles purely, and pithily. The ordinary means of
directing Scholars to make Epistles. Difficulty for children, who have no
reading, to invent variety of matter of themselves. Helps for making Epistles,
by reading Tullies Epistles, and imitating them. Making answers to Epistles.
Examples of imitating Epistles, and answering them.
CHAP. XIII.
OF making Theames full of good matter, in a pure style and with judgment.

Herein these branches;

The ordinary manner of directing scholars how to enter to make Theames,
according to Apthonius precepts. The inconueniencies of that course for young
scholars; and that it is hard enough for many teachers. Difficulty in making
Theames, because scholars are not acquainted with the matter of them. The
scholar is often beaten for his Theme, when the Master rather deserves it. To
consider the end of making Theames. The means to furnish the scholars for
Theames. Presidents or examples for Theames. Presidents for matter, to furnish
scholars with store of the best matter. Reusneri Symbola, a book meet to
this purpose; and chiefly for trayning up young Gentlemen, and all of chief
sort and condition. How to use Reusner for Theames. An easy direction for
Theames, to be handled according to the several parts thereof. Imitation of
Exordiums and Conclusions. Other Authors for matter. Helps for invention of
matter. The knowledge of the ten grounds of Invention, the readiest way. The
Art of meditation most profitable and easy for help of invention. Presidents
for the form and manner of making Theames. Declamations and patterns for
them. Declamations fit for the Universities, or for the principal scholars in
Grammar schools. Manner of writing down Theams by scholars of judgment.
Making of Theames ex tempore, a matter of great commendations, if it be done
schollar-like. The way to make Theames ex tempore. A most easy and profitable
practice, to help to make Theames ex tempore. Whereto be stored with matter
and words for each part of the Theme. Help for supplying words and phrases.
Commonplace books, a singular help. Orations. Orations belong specially to
the Universities. Examples of Orations. Orations ex tempore. Sum for Theames.
CHAP. XIIII.
OF versifying. How to enter to make verses with delight and certainty, without
bodging; and to train up scholars to imitate and express Ovid or Virgill,
both their phrase and style.

Herein these particulars:

Poetry rather for ornament then for any necessity. There may be commendable
use of Poetry. The ordinary difficulty of Poetry. The folly of some in this
kind. The most plain way how to enter to make verses, without bodging.
Turning the verses of their Lectures into other verses. Of contracting or
drawing seven or eight verses into four or five; and the certain benefit of
this exercise. To make verses of any ordinary Theme. To versifie ex tempore.
Helps for versifying.
CHAP. XV.
THe manner of examining and correcting exercises.

Herein these particulars:

Examining exercises never to be omitted. General faults wherein scholars do
commonly slip. To read over their exercises first in natural order. To
parallel each thing by examples. To look to elegancy and finenesse of
composition. Never to think any thing labored enough. Adversaries to note
faults in one another exercises. The manner of examining exercises by the
Master. Special faults in the highest fourmes. Care that they do correct
their exercises presently.
CHAP. XVI.
HOw to answer any needful question of Grammar or Rhetoric.

Herein these things;

To answer any Grammar question, a thing commendable. How to answer any
difficult Grammar question. Most of the difficulties of the ancient Classical
Authors, collected briefly by M. Stockwood. How to answer the questions of
Rhetoric. How to answer the questions of Tullies Offices.
CHAP. XVII.
OF Grammatical oppositions. How to dispute schollar-like of any Grammar
question in good Latin.

Herein these branches:

To use the help of Master Stockwoods disputations of Grammar. Benefits of
such scholasticall oppositions. Disputations of moral Philosophy belong rather
to the Universities. How these may be done, and how far. Objection answered,
for disputing out of Master Stockwood. Evils of enforcing scholars to
exercises, with the examples whereof they are not acquainted first. Benefit of
having the best paternes.
CHAP. XVIII.
OF pronouncing naturally and sweetly, without vain affectation.

Herein these particulars:

The excellency of pronuntiation. Pronuntiation ordinarily hard to be attained
in schools. How scholars may be brought to pronounce sweetly. Children to
be trai^ed up to pronounce right from the first entrance. To utter every matter
according to the nature of it. What they cannot utter in Latin, to learn to
do it first in English, then in Latin. To cause sundry to pronounce the very
same sentence in emulation. To be careful, chiefly for pronuntiation, in all
Authors wherein persons are fained to speak. Poetry to be pronounced as prose,
except in scanning. Further helps in pronouncing. To mark in each sentence,
in what word the Emphasie lies. Care in pronouncing exercises. The more
exquisite knowledge and practice of pronouncing, left unto the Universities.
CHAP. XIX.
OF speaking Latin purely and readily.

Complaint of the difficulty to train up scholars to speak Latin. The
general error, for the time when scholars are to begin to speak Latin. To
learn to speak Latin should be begun from the first entrance into
construction. The surest course for entering young scholars to speak Latin.
How the Master himself may do it easily before them. The daily practice of
Grammatical Translations, and chiefly of reading books of Dialogues out of
English into Latin, is a continual practice of speaking Latin. Difficulty to
cause scholars to practice speaking Latin amongst themselves. Inconueniencies
of Custodes for speaking Latin. Inconvenience of one scholar smiting another
with the Ferula. The best means to hold scholars to speaking Latin. How any
one may by himself alone, attain to speak Latin in ordinary matters. For
them who desire to come to ripeness and purity in the Latin tongue, Goclenius
his observations of the Latin tongue, is of singular use.
CHAP. XX.
HOw to attain most speedily unto the knowledge of the Greek tongue.

Herein these branches;

The Greek may be gotten with far less labor then the Latin. One benefit
of the perfect knowledge of the Greek Testament alone, worthy all our labor
to be taken in the Greek. M. Askams testimony concerning the Greek tongue,
and the excellent learning contained in it. The way to the Greek, the same
with the Latin. How scholars of understanding and judgment may take a
shorter course. To use M. Camdens Grammar. Grammatica Graecapro Schola
Argentinensi per Theophilum Golium, may serve in steed of a further exposition
of Camden. To begin construction with the Greek Testament, and why. To strive
to have the Scriptures as familiarly in the Originals, as the Jews had the
Hebrew. Those who purpose to have any smattering in the Greek, to have it in
the Testament, and why. The Testament compared to other Greek Authors. The
Testament a notable entrance to all other Greek Authors. How scholars may be
made most perfect in the Greek Testament. The speediest way to the Greek, To
get the Radices first. The easiest way, how to learn the Greek Radices. How
any may soon learn to read the Greek, before they learn the Greek
Grammar. How the Nomenclator of the Greek Primitiues might be made of singular
use. Help for committing words to memory. Caveat in remembering. The Greek
Radices contrived into continued speeches, may be gotten soonest of all. The
readiest and surest way of getting the Testament* By a perfect verbal
translation, separate from the Greek. How by the help of such a translation,
any who have but a smattering in the Greek may proceed of themselves in the
Testament. This cannot be so done by the interlineall, or having the Greek and
Latin together, and why. How scholars of judgment may use the interlineall.
How to proceed in other Authors. The benefit of such translations of some of
the purest Greek Authors. Parsing in Greek. Helps for parsing in Greek.
Helps for knowledge of the Poets. How to write in Greek purely. How to write
fair in Greek. Versifying in Greek. Sum of all for the Greek.
CHAP. XXI.
HOw to get most speedily, the knowledge and understanding of the Hebrew.

Herein these branches;

The knowledge of the Hebrew may be the soonest gotten, and why. Manner of
learning the Grammar, and what Grammar to be used. The getting the Hebrew
Radices, a chief help. Manner of committing the Radices to memory. Examples
of helping the memory in learning the Hebrew Radices. The benefit of comparing
the tongues. The best Epitome for learning the Radices. The way might be more
compendious by the roots reduced to Classes. Continual practice of perfect
verbal Translations, a singular help. A Student having opportunity cannot be
better employed, then in getting perfectly, and imprinting the originals in
memory. The Latin, Greek and Hebrew, may be the soonest gotten by such
perfect Translations in each tongue. How much and what to learn in all things.
CHAP. XXII.
OF knowledge of the grounds of Religion, and trayning up scholars therein.

Herein these heads;

Scholars are to be trained up in Religion. Religion most neglected in
Schools. The Popish Schoolemasters shall rise up in judgment against all who
neglect it. Teaching the Catechism, and when. Examining the Catechism. Taking
notes of Sermons. Setting down all the substance of the Sermons, in the higher
fourmes. Manner of noting, for helping understanding and memory. To translate
the Sermon into Latin, or to read it into Latin ex tempore. Examining
Sermons. Repetition or rehearsal of the Sermons. Benefit of strict examination
of Sermons. How the repetition may be done readily. How to go through the
History of the Bible, and the manner of examining it. Objections answered. How
to teach the scholars ciuility.
CHAP. XXIII.
HOw to understand and remember any Moral matter.

Herein these things;

A principal help of understanding, to cause children to understand and
remember by questions. An example hereof. Help in private reading, by
questions.
CHAP. XXIIII.
SOme things necessary to be known, for the better attaining of all the parts
of learning mentioned before: as,

1. How the Schoolmaster should be qualified. Herein these branches; The
Schoolmaster ought to be sufficient to direct his Scholars, or tractable and
willing to be directed. The Schoolmaster must be painful and constant, of
conscience of God. He must cast off all other studdies at school times. He
must not post over the trust to others. The Schoolmaster must be of a loving
disposition, to encourage all by praise and rewards. He ought to be a godly
man, and of good carriage. To seek to gain, and maintain authority, and how.
CHAP. XXV.
OF the Usher and his office.

Herein these particulars;

An Usher necessary in all greater Schools. Evils of lack of an Usher. The
Master burdened with all, is, as the Husbandman ouercharged with more then he
can compass. Supply by Scholars, not sufficient. Sufficiency of the Usher.
The Usher to be at the Masters command. To be used with respect. The Usher not
to meddle with correcting the highest Scholars. The Usher to use as little
correction as may be, unless in the Masters absence. The Vshers principal
employment with the younger, to train them up for the Master. To prevent all
inconveniences by the Usher.
CHAP. XXVI.
Helps in the School besides the Usher.

Seniors in each form. Particular help, a Subdoctor in place of the Usher,
or where one Usher is not sufficient. Sorting the fourmes, so many into a
form as may be. Choice and matching each form equally, that all may sit as
matches. Benefits of this election. This equal matching all, a chief means
to make the School Ludus L^terarius.
CHAP. XXVII.
OF government and of authority in Schools.

Herein these branches;

Government, the help of helps. Authority, the top of government. Authority
how to be maintained. The Masters and Vshers to be as living laws, to maintain
their authority. Authority maintained by most strict execution of justice, by
rewards and punishments. Encouraging virtue, discouraging vice, to maintain
authority. The evils of neglect hereof, and of partiality. Authority to be
maintained by a continual demonstration of conscience, and love to the
scholars. By being Presidents of all virtue. Extreme severity, and whipping,
to be avoided in schools; and all means used to prevent it. Reasons.
Difficulty for the Master to moderate his passions oftentimes, if he strive to
do good.
CHAP. XXVIII.
OF Preferments and encouragements.

Herein these particulars:

Encouragements to be by these means; Often Elections. Countenancing and
gracing the Seniors, and all the best and most painful. Putting up into higher
fourmes. Giving places. Commending every thing well done. Caveat in commending.
Disputation for the victorship. Praemia to be given to the two Victors. Office
of the Victors for their praemia. Solemn examination to be made once every
year. Exercises to be provided against that time. To keep their daily
exercises fair written in books, to try their profiting* by comparing with
the former. A course of examination to be appointed: and the same first to be
performed by the Masters and Vshers; after by others not satisfied. All doing
well to be praised, the best specially graced. Benefits of this set solemn
examination. All Parents to have notice before such examinations. To labor by
all means to work a conscience in all the Scholars, to do all of duty and
love to God, and how. Some excellent sentences to be often inculcated, to work
in the Scholars a love of learning.
CHAP. XXIX.
OF execution of justice in Schools, by punishments. Herein these particulars:

To punish unwillingly. To proceed by degrees in punishing. A note which may
be termed the black Bill, of principal use, and most available in punishing
and reforming. Manner of the black Bill, to deprive all chief offenders of
the benefit of play days. To cause all such to know aforehand, what to look
for. To view the forms before play, and to separate all the disobedient and
unworthy, to be left to their taskes. Care that their taskes be strictly
exacted. Notorious offenders, or stubborn boys, to sit so many days, until
that they show good tokens of amendment. Benefit of this punishment, strictly
observed, and why. Correction with rod to be used more seldom, and chiefly
for terror. Caueats in correcting. Manner of correcting the stubborn, and
unbroken. Not to suffer any to go away in their stubbornness. To be wary to
avoid all smi^ing or hurting the children. Caveat of threatening. That the
Master do not abase himself, to struggle with any stubborn boy. To avoid
all furious anger and cha^ing. How correction should ever be taken. Sparing the
rod where necessity requires, is to undo the children. Assurance of safety
in correction, when it is done aright. Anger necessary in Schoolemaisters, so
it be tempered aright. Means to repress furious and raging anger. Places of
Scripture to be ever in our minds, for the repressing and moderating our
anger. Danger of rash anger when it exceeds. Occasions of anger, left to the
calling of the Schoolemaisters, to humble and exercise them. Three lessons for
preventing anger. The danger of having the rod, or ferule ever in the hand of
the Master or Usher. The surest way to have nothing ordinarily, but gravity
and authority. The time of inflicting common punishments. Such as in whom is
no hope of reformation, to be sent from School in time.
CHAP. XXX.
OF School-times, intermissions, and recreations.

School-time to begin at six. The Usher to be ever present at six of the
clock, though only to ouersee all. How to make children to strive who shall
be first at School without correction. Daily intermissions at nine, and three
of the clock, for a quarter of an hour or more. To sing part of a Psalm
before breaking up at night, and each to begin in order, and to give the tune.
Intermissions at nine of the clock and three, not offensive, when they are
once known. Benefits of intermissions. None to stir forth of t^eir places at
Schoole-times, but upon urgent occasions. The time of the intermissions may be
gained daily, and sundry inconveniences prevented. Weekly recreations. Before
breaking up to play, to make Verses ex tempore, or to cap Verses. The best
manner of capping Verses. The greatest commendation in these. Manner of their
recreations. The recreations of the studious to be regarded. Overmuch play to
be carefully avoided.
CHAP. XXXI.
Inconveniences growing by diversity of teaching and of Grammars. How this
helped.
CHAP. XXXII.
Evils by ordinary absence of Scholars.

CHAP. XXXIII.
DIscouragements of Schoolemaisters, by unthankfulness of parents. Remedies
against such discouragements.
CHAP. XXXIIII.
WHat Children to be set and kept to learning. What Scholars to be sent to the
Universities. None to be sent to the Universities before fifteen years of
age at least. The best courses to be practiced.
CHAP. XXXV.
A Brief rehearsal of the chief points and special helps, mentioned through
the whole book. The principal heads of those things, which would be ever
kept in memory by the Master, to be continually put in practice. Mt. Askames
steps to good learning: with a brief direction of Melanchtons.
FINIS.
STudious Reader, I thought meet to give thee notice, that my Translation of
Sententiae Pueriles, and of Cato, are now under the Press; and the former of
them, within a day or two, ready to come forth. Expect the other, shortly after.

Postscript.
PAge 53. line 3. read by that. p. 78. l. 35. for declension read Gender or
declining. p. 87. l. 16. for ever read a^way. p. 115. l. 9. put in so far as I
know p. 116. after the 11. line, put in so mothers for most part. p. 191, l.
^7. put out ^ound. p. 202. l. 25 for of Grammatica, read at Grammatica. p. 2^0.
l. 32* put out secondly. p. 251. l. 20. for most, read many. p. 274. l. 22. put
out kind. 297. l. 35. for rest, read: rise.

Faults escaped by the Printer.
IN PAge 20. line 3 the Alphabet should have been distinguished by threes,
thus; A b c. d e f. g h i. and so for the rest.

Page Line False True. 20 25 thus this 30 24 long longest 30 36 a book books
31 22 m. i t. m c.t. 31 30 without or without 46 1 Third A third 56 9 of or 59
29 manuifoelicis manuifoelici 63 3 parsed poased 63 27 parsing poasing 72 23
more most 73 1 go truly go surely 79 3 speedily specially 102 12 Que Que 18
Virtutem. virtutum 36 weapon weapons 114 9 must will 137 2 ascio ascio 144 3.
and 11 vincit vincet 179 31 fittest fit^^est 182 17 curiously cursorily 192 1
in manner in good manner 221 37 so great great 231 16 Nomenc^aton Nomenclator
234 35 Th^ogius Theognis 235 22 his this 236 19 be also also 241 13 who which
278 24 oderint oderunt.

Page 200. in the margent against line 18 for youngest* read highest:


