A compendious Register in Meter, containing the names, and pacient suffryngs
of the members of Jesus Christ. and the tormented; and cruelly burned within
England, since the death, of our famous king, of immortal memory EDWARD the
sixte: to the entrance and beginning of the reign, of our sovereign and derest
Lady ELIZABETH of England, France, and Ir^^^^ queen, defender of the faith,
to (...) highness truly and properly, apperteineth next and immediately under
God, the supreme power, and authority of the Churches of England and
Irelande. Sobeit.

Anno. 1559.

Apoca. 7.
ANd one of the angels (says S. Iho^) spa^, saying (...): what are theie
which are ar^ in long white Ga^entes, and when^ came they (before the people
before sealed by the angel) And I sai^d ^o him: Lord thou ^otest, and he said
unto me, these are they which (...) great tribulation, and washed their
garments, and made them white by the blo^ the lamb, therefore are they in
the ^esence of the Throne of GOD, and serve him day and (...) in his Temple, a^
^at sytteth in (...) Throne will (...) among them. (...)

To the right honorable Lord Par, Marquis of Northampion: Thmas Brice, your
lordshippes daily Orator, wisiheth continual increase of grace, concord, and
consolation in him that is, was, and is to come, even the first and the last.
AMEN.
IT may please your goodness (honorable Lord) to receive in good part, the
^ttie labor of my pen, which, albe it the rudenes and quantite thereof,
procures not to be dedicate to so honorable a personage, yet the matter it
self is of soche worthiness, as duly deserves to be graeuen in gold, but who
goes about so finely to depict with Appelles instrume^te this said Regester,
thinkyng to excede the rest, not I poor wretch because I am assured, that soch
a worthy work, as thereof may be written, can not, neither shall pass
untouched, among so many godly learned, but were it, that no man hereafter
should in more ample and learned manner set forth the same, yet should my
presumption (if I so mente) be turned to reproach, for this I believe, that
they be in soche sort regestred in the book of the living, as passes either
pen, ynke, or memory to declare. This my simplicity, and to bold attempt
might move your honor to conjecture in me much rudeness, or at the least
might persuade me so to think, but that experience has showed me, the
humility, and gentleness, of your long tried patience, the certain knowledge
whereof, has pricked me forward, in this my pretense: and being thereto
requested of a faithful brother and friend, I have with more industry then
learning (God knows) finished the same, which being (as I thought) brought to
good end, I desired according to the accustomed manner, to dedicate the same,
unto soche one, as would not conte^pne, so simple a gift. And calling you to
mind (right honorable lord) I knew none more mete, first because your
knowledge in Christ, teaches you the same godly, and virtuous life, which
not only your lordship, but al other honorable. etc. ought to ensue.
Secondly, because these late years you have had good experience, of the
troubles, and miseries of the faithful, which have patiently embrased in their
arms, the comfortable (although painful) cross of Christ, which in so great
a nu^bre is commonly not so plenteous, as commendable, but what stand I
praisyng this pa cience in them (which yet deserves the same) seeing y^ migh
tie god and his christ, has prepared from everlasting, for soche a glorious,
rich, and incomprehensible croune of felicity, and continual co^fortes. This
my short and simple work, I comme^de and dedicate, unto your Lordeship,
crauynge pardon at your hands, for this my to homely and rude enterprise,
considering that albeit golden fruit ware offered in Peuter, and by the hands
of a simple man, yet is the fruit notwithstanding still precious, and neither
abased by the Peuter or giver, even so (honorable Lord) though the verses be
simple, and the giver unworthy, yet the fruit or mat ter, is precious,
comfortable, and good: The order to attain to the perfect understanding of my
mind, in setting forth the same, with figures and letters, shall largely appear
in this book, which I have not only dooen, to make plain unto your honor,
the year, month and day, but also to all other, that hereafter shall read it,
for that I do pretend (if God and favor will permit it) to use the same as
common to the profit of al for which cause I have al so, placed a preface to ye
reader: But that it may please your honor (in respect of the premises) to
extend your favorable assistaunce, to the manifest setting forth of this
short and simple work, to the glory of the great and myghtie God, to the
comfort of christians, I as unworthy and to bold a suter most humbly craves
your Lordshyps aid and supportation in the same, especially to bear the
rudeness of my unlearned style (which alas I lament). But now ceassyng to
trouble your Lordshyppe any longer, this shall be my continual prayer for
you. The wisdom of GOD, direct your honor, the mercy of God, give you
spiritual power, the holy ghost guide and comfort you with all fulness of
consolation in Christ Jesus.

Ame^.
Your Lordships daily orator Thomas Brice.

To the gentle Reader mercy and peace.
MAy it please the (gentle reader) to take in good worth, this short and
simple regester, containing the names of diverse (although not all) both men,
women, and virgins. etc. Which for the profession of Christ their Captain,
have been most miserably afflicted, tormented, and prisoned, and in fine
either died (by some occasion) in prison, or else erected in the charret of
Elias since the. iiii. day of February M. D. L. v. to the. xvii. day of
November. M. D. L. viii. wherein according to the determinacion of our loving
and most merciful father our long wisshed for, and most noble Queen
Elizabeth, was placed Gouernesse and Queen by general Proclamacion, to the
great comfort of all true English hearts.

This I commit to thy frendlye acceptatio^ and favorable scannynge (gentle
reader) and all be it, I doubt not, but some of godly zeal both wise and lear
ned, will not neglect hereafter, to set forth so worthy a work, namelye of the
martyrdom, and paciente sufferynges of Christ's elect members, and also of
the tyrannical Tragedies, of the unmerciful ministers of Satan, yet at the
request of a dear friend, to whom love and nature has linked me, I could not
(without ingratitude) deny his lawful desire, attempting the same also the
rather, because it might be manifest to the eyes of the world, and also put
the learned (of godly zeal) in memory moore amply to enlarge, and at their
good discretion to set forth the same, pardon my rudenes: therefore I beseech
thee, considering that will in the unable is to be esteemed, look not upon
the baseness of the meter (the true nombre whereof can not easily be observed in
soche a gatherynge of names) but with lyfted eyes of the mind, meditate upon
the omni potent power of God, which has given and wrought such constancy in
his children, in these our days, that even in fiery flambes, and terrible
torments they have not ceased to invoke and to extol the name of their
creator, redemer and comforter, according to the saying of the. C. xlviii.
Psalm, young men and maidens, old men, and children, have set forth his
worthy and excellent praise, to that the same just and righteous God, which
(for our sins) corrected us and gave us over into the hands of the most
bloody and viperous generation, to be eaten like bread, has now (of his mercy
alone) exalted the horn of his people. Therefore al his saints shall praise
him.

Fare well. T. B.

The manner how to understand the letters and fygures.
INprimus, the fygures, which are always four in nu^bre, and ax placed in
the myddle of the two strykes, which go between the verses, within two short
strikes, signify the year, wherein those persons were slain under them
contained. And where you see a little cross on the out side of the outmost line,
on the side of the book, it signifies the chaungyng of the year, as from. M.
D. L. iiii. to M. D. L. v. and in such manner, the letters which stand iii the
little square place, on the rightside of the book, signifies the month
wherein they died, and for the playner understanding thereof, I have used
twelve Letters, for the twelve Months, that is A. for January, B. for
February, C. for March, D. for April, E. for May, F. for June, G. for July, H
for August, I. for September. K. for October, L. for Noue^ber, M for December.
But where one letter stands in ye little square place, and an other is placed
under it, between the two lines before ye verse be ended, it signifies the
chau^gyng of the month, so that the person or perfones, where against the
letter so changed does stand, was put to death in that month which that
letter does signify. And where as in the third verse (and no where else) there
stands fygures on the right side between the two lines, that gives to
understand, that Hunter, Higbye, Picket, and Knight, which are placed in one
line, were brent in three sundry days. The fygures, which stands in the
little square place, on the left side of the book, is but the sum of the
verses. But those which stand between the two lines, on the left side of the
book, signifies the day of the month, wherein that person or persons died,
where against those fygures stand, the fygures, which stand without both
the lines on the top of the right side, signifies the Folio, or number of
the sides, but the figures which stand underneath the neither strike, between
the two lines is the number of the persons murdered on that side, this is
done (gentle Reader) that thou should understand, the year month, and day,
wherein every person dyed (according to the knowledge that I have learned.)
Also in some places, where you shall see, a name or names stand without
fygures, that signifies the certain day to be unknown. Some therefore,
perchance will judge much rasshnes in me to write with ignorance: to whom
with reverence I answer, that as I received the names regestred, and gathered,
by a good gentleman, even so (at a friends desire) I have put them in meter
in this little book, thinking that by pleasauntnes of reading, and easines of
prices they might be the moore largely blown and known, for my desire is
that all men should participate this my travail. And were the Author and
endightynge half so worthy as the matter, then would I most earnestly wyshe
and desire that it might be conveyed and delivered to the Queen's majesty's
own hands, wherein her grace might see what unmerciful ministers had charge
over the poor sheep, who woluishely at their wylles devoured the same. And
also what ruin and decay of her graces subjects (that might have been) they
have brought to pass, therein might her grace see as in a glass, how that
blood thyrstie generation, neither spared hoar headed and ancient age, which
al men ought to honor, neither youth, nor middle age, neither wife, nor widow,
yongeman, nor tender virgins: but like the unnatural eggs of Astiages that
tyraunte, destroy and spyll the blood of all, besides stockynge rackyng, and
whippyng of the younger sort, whom shame would not suffer to kill (as some
are well enough known) and I am not all together ignorant. Should such
tyrannycall tragidies be kept one hour from the hands of so noble and
virtuous a gouer nesse, whose princelye and natural heart (I doubt not) should
have occasion thereby to be in both hindes both heavy and joyful, heavy for
the innocent blood spilt, but ioiful for yt the praises of her God, and our God
shall be honored thereby, while the world does endure, I dout whether her grace
(inwardlye rapte up with Paul and Ihon) in divine science will brast out and
say: Oh happy Latymer, Cranmer, Hoper, Rogers, Far rer, Tailer, Sanders,
Philpot, Cardmaker, Bradford. etc. you members of Christ, you faithful fathers
and preaching pastors, you that have not defiled your selves (with
abhominacion) but have washed your garments white in the blood of the lamb,
you that in fyrye torments with Steven have called upon the name of your
redemer, and so finished your lives, you that now are clothed in white
garments of inno cency, with crowns of consolation, and palms of victory, in
your hands, following the Lamb whether so ever he goes. Or else in anguishe
of soul syghyngly say, oh thou tyrannous and unmercifully world, thou monstrous
and unnatural generation, what devil inflamed thy mind with such malicious
mischief to tor meant and shed the blood, of such innocent lyuers, perfect
preachers, and worthy councelours, learned ministers, diligent divines,
perfect personages, and faithful shepherdes, they were constant confessors
before, but thou (with the Romain Emperor) thoughtest to prevent the
determinacion of god, in making them martyrs, to be the sooner with their
Christ, whom they so much talked of, oh cruel Neroes that could kill
(through malice) such worthy men, as have often preached to our dear father,
and brother, the everlasting gospel of GOD. Could neither honorable age,
innocent syngle life, chaste matrimonye, inuiolate virginity, nor yet pity
morte you to cease sheadyng of blood (alas to much unnaturalness) whether the
sight of this simple book, I say, should bring to her graces natural heart
the passions of heaviness or joy (I doubt) but I think rather both. Therefore
would to God it wear worthy to enter into the hands of so noble and natural a
Princes and Queen, whom the Lord of his eternal and foreseyng determination,
has now placed in this royal dignity, to the redress of such unnatural and
bloody factes, as in this book are contained. But for as much as some
imperfection is (and may easly be) in this gathering, I commend it to thy
goodness (gentle reader) besechyng thee not to be to precise in perusynge the
day, for it may be that either through my negligence or some other writing
before me, we may miss so narrow a ma^e, such as it is, I commend unto thee,
only Judge well. (...)

The ooke to the Reader.
PEruse with patience, I thee pray
My simple style, and meter base,
The works of GOD, with wisdom way
The force of love, the strength of grace.
Love caused GOD, his grace to give
To such as should, for him be slain
Grace wrought in them, while they did live
For love to love, their Christ again.
Now grace is of, such strength and might
That nothing may, the same withstand
Grace puts death, and hell to flight
And guydes us, to the living land.
The force of love, also is such
That fear and pain, it does expel
Love thinks nothing, over much
Love does all earthly things excel.
Thus love and grace, of GOD began
To work in them, to do his will
These virtues force, wrought love in man
That fear was past, their blood to spyll.
FINIS.
The Regester.


Continued in, the flaming fire

Did taste the tyrants, raging ire

we wished for our, Elizabeth.


with force of fire, to death were brent



we wished for our, Elizabeth.

when Bradford, beautified with bliss

when they like brethren, both did kiss
And in the fire were, truly tried
when tears were shed, for Bradfords death
we wyshte for our, Elizabeth.




with moody minds, and puffed pride

we wished for our, Elizabeth.

when Richard Hook, limlesse and lame


Ensued the same, with worldly loss

we wysht for our, Elizabeth.

when william Ailewarde, at Redding
In prison died, of sickness soore

Did woefully weep, and deplore
when he at Bery, was done to death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.
9.


with constant care, to Christ's cause

Her flesh and blood, for holy laws
when she at Stratforde, died the death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.


At Cantorbury, were causeles slain

Converted flesh, to earth again

we wishte for our, Elizabeth.



when harmefull hearts, as hard as stones


we wishte for our, Elizabeth.


At Ware and Walden, made their end

with breath and blood, did still contend

we wishte for our Elizabeth.




At Thetforde cruelly, was brent
when these with joy, did take their death
we wished for our, Elizabeth.

When William Allen, at Walsingham
For truth was tried, in fiery ^ame
when Roger Cooe, that good old man
Did lose his life, for Christ's name
when these with other, were put death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.
7.



Unto their duty, had good regard
wherefore in one fire, they were fried
when these at Cantorbury, took their death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.

When Ihon Less, prisoner in Newgate

when wicked men, with ire and hate
brent Thomas Heywarde and Goreway





^n faier fields, they had their bower
where earth and clay, does still abide
when they in this wise, did die the death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.
22 1555. September.

were fiercely brent, at Couentrie

At Ely felt, like cruelty

we wishte for our Elizabeth.

when learned Ridley, and Latymer

when furious foes, could not confer
But with revenge, and mortal pain
when these two fathers, were put to death
we wished for our, Elizabeth.

when worthy Web, and George Koper
In Elyeschayre, to heaven were sent
Also when Gregory Paynter
The same straight path, and voyage went
when they at Cantorbury, took their death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.
9.

when godly Gore, in prison died


Ended his life, with peace and power
when he kissed the chain, at his death,
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.




In Smithfield beat, their enemies down
Even flesh and Devil, world and death
when we wished for, Elizabeth.
27 1556. January. (...)


In fire with flesh and blood did fight
when tongues of tyrants, laid on lode
when these at ones, were put to death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.

when two women, at Ippeswiche town

when they sange out, with chereful sou^de
Their fired foes, for to deface
when Norwich no body, put them to death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.

when constant Cranmer, lost his life

when ^reames of tears, for him were rife
And yet did miss, their just desire
when popysh power, put him to death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.


were put to death, at Salisbury
Ashes to earth, did right restore
They being then, joyful and merry
when these wc violence, were burnt to death
we wyshte for our, Elizabeth.
5.


At Cambridge did, this life despise

To make his flesh, a sacrifice

we wishte for our, Elizabeth.



Confessing that, for Christ's sake
They were content, thus to be tried

We wyshte for our, Elizabeth.



At Colchester in, the posterne place
Joyfully to their death, did go

we wishte for our, Elizabeth.

When Margaret Eliot, being a maid



when these. ii. impotentes were put to death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.



when they embraste, both read and wood
Trusting in Christ, his death alone
when men unnatural, drew these to death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.


At Bekelles were, consumed to dust

In prison died, with hope and trust
when these our brethren, were put to death
we wyshte for our, Elizabeth.
20.



wc blasing brandes, their blood did bleed
As their brethren, before had done
when tyranny, drove these to death
We wishte for our, Elizabeth.


At Jews lost, this mortal gain
Compast with spears, and bloudye bylles
Unto the stake, for to be slain

we wishte for our, Elizabeth.





when Dorifall with the^, was put to death
We wishte for our, Elizabeth.



when the young man, at Lecester
And Clemente died, with filthy stenche

we wishte for our, Elizabeth.


were brent with force, at Newbery
Lamenting only, for their sin
And in the lord, were full merry
when tyrants merciles, put these to death
We wysht for our, Elizabeth.


At Grenstede cruelly, were slain

with them did pass, from woe and pain
when these with other, were put to death
We wishte for our, Elizabeth.
11

when two at Asheforde, with cruelty
For Christ's cause, to death were brent


when wyly wolves, put these to death
we wished for our, Elizabeth.


Sturtle, Kamsey, and Ihon Lothesby
were content torments, to abide
And took the same, right patiently
when these in Smithfield were don to death
we wished for our, Elizabeth.


Refused with falshode, to be beguil^e
And for the same, were burned quick
with fury in, S. Georges field
when these with other, were put to death
we wyshte for our, Elizabeth.
11




But al these seven, did lose their lives
when these at Maistone, were put to death
We wishte for our, Elizabeth.




And for their faith, al lost their life
when these at Cantorbury, died the death
We wysht for our, Elizabeth.





when one fy^e at ^es, brought to the death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.
7.
55 1557. July. (...)
when Ambrose died, in Maiston gaile
And so set free, from tyrauntes bands


when these at Norwich, were don to death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.


were fried with fire, of tyrants stout
Not once permitted, truth to say
But were compast, with bills about
when these with other, were put to death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.


was hanged drawn, and quartered
His quarters carried, up and down
And on a pole, the set his head
when wrested law, put him to does
we wyshte for our, Elizabeth.
14






we wyshte for our, Elizabeth.


Continuyng constant, in the fire
when fired faith was truly tried
Having her just, and long desire
w^n she with other^ were put to death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.



were bre^ with force, at Islyngton
Ending (...) ^ort, and ^mefull life
(...) they with cherefulnes, did take their death
we wyshte for our, Elizabeth.
11


In Smithfielde did, the ^ake embr^ce
when fire converted, flesh to clay
They being joyful, of such grace
when Lawles liberty, put them to death
we wished for our, Elizabeth.



Because Christ only, they did seek
with fire of force, they must be fried
when these in Smithfield, were put death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.



As fired (...), to Romish (...)
And Cuthberte Sy^son, (...) ^yne
(...) these d^d worthily* (...) (...) death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.
7

when Dale disseast, in B^ry gaile
According to, gods ordinance
when widow Thurstone, they did assail
And brought An Bo^ger, to death his dau^ce
when these at Colchester, were done to death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.


was tried with, their fiery fan


when these at Norwiche, did die the death
We wyshte for our, Elizabeth.
66 1558. May. (...).


Holding their enemies, at a baye
Till life was lost, and breath all spent
when these at Colchester, were put to death
we wysht for our, Elizabeth.
9.



with cherefull look, and constant cry

when these in Smithfield, were put to death
we wishte for our Elizabeth.

When Thomas Tyler, past this place
And Matthew Withers, also died
Though suit were much, yet little grace
Among the Rulers, could be spied
In prison patiently, they took their death
we wisshinge for, Elizabeth.


At Norwiche did, his life forsake

A lively sacrifice, did make
when these with other, were put to death
We wishte for our, Elizabeth.
11


The pop^he power, did soore invade
To burning schole, they were sent straight

when these at Brainford, were put to death
we wishte for our Elizabeth.




To do as their brethren had done
when these at Ipswich, were put to death
we wished for our, Elizabeth.



when they ^d co^orte, one another
Against all ^eare, and worldly loss
when these at Bery, were put to death
we wishte for our, Elizabeth.
9.
76 1558. November.
When last of all, to take their leave
At Cantorbury, they did some consume
who constantly, to Christ did cleave
Therefore were fried, with fiery fume
But six days after, these were put to death
God sent us our, Elizabeth.
77
Our wished wealth, has brought us peace
Our joy is full, our hope obtained
The blasing brandes of fire do cease
The s^eayng sword, also restrained
The simple sheep, preserved from death,
By our good queen, Elizabeth.
As hope has here, obtained (...) (...)
By gods good will, and providence
So trust does truly, look for (...)
Through his heavenly, influence.
That great Golia, shall be put to death
By our good Queen Elizabeth.
76
That gods true word shall placed be
The hungry souls, for to sustain
That perfect love, and unity
Shall Be set in, their seat again
That no more good me^, shall be put to death
Seeing God has sent, Elizabeth.
77
Pray we therefore, both night and day
For her highness, as we be bound
O lord preserve, this branch of bay
And all her foes, with force confound
Here long to live, and after death
Receive our queen, Elizabeth.
Amen.
Apoc 6 How long tariest thou (O Lord) holy and true, to judge and aduenge
our blood, on them that dwell on the earth. The wishes, of the wise, which
long, to be at rest: To GOD, with lifted iyes, They call, to be redreste.
When shall this time, of trauail cease
which we with woe sustain,
when shall the days, of rest and peace
Return to us again.
when shall the mind, be moved right
To leave his lustyng life
when shall our mocions, and delight
Be free from wrath and strife.
when shall the time, of woeful tears
be moved unto mirth,
when shall the aged, with gray hears
Rejoice at childrens birth.
when shall Jerusalem rejoice,
In him that is their King:
And Sion hill, with cherefull voice
Sing Psalms, with triumphyng.
When shall the walls, erected be
That foes, with fury fraye
when shall that perfect, olive tree
Give odor, like the baye.
When shall the vineyard, be restorde
That beastlye Bores, devour
when shall the people, late abhorde
Receive a quiet hour.
When shall the spirit, more fervent be
In us that want good will,
when shall thy mercies, set us free
From wickedness and ill.
when shall the Serpentss, that surmise
To poison thine ^lecte,
Be bound to better exercise,
Or utterly reiecte.
when shall the blood, revenged be
which (...) (...) earth is shed
when shall sin, and iniquity
Be cast into the bed.
when shall that man, of sin appear
To be even as he i^,
when shall thy babes, and children de^
Receive eternal bliss.
when shall that painted, hoar of Rome
Be cast unto the ground,
when shall her children, have their do^
which virtue would come.
when shall thy spouse, and turtle dove
Be free from bitter blaste,
when shall thy grace, our sins remove
with pardon at the la^e.
when shall this life translated be
From fortunes fickell fall,
when shall true faith, and equity
Remain in general.
when shall contention, and debate
For ever slake and cease,
when shall the days, of ^uill (...)
Be turned unto peace.
when shall true dealing, rule the roste
with those tha^, bye and sell,
And single mind, in every ^aste
Among us bid^ and dwell.
when shall our minds, wholly conuer^
From wealth, and worldly gain
when shall the mouynges, of o^ heart
From wickedness refrain.
when shall this flesh, return to du^
From whence the ^ame did spryng
when shall the ^all of our trust,
Appear with triumphyng.
When shall the trumpe, blow out his blast
And thy de^e babes revive,
when shall the ^oare, be headlong (...)
That sought us to depryne.
when shall thy Christ, our ^yng apeare
with power and renown:
when shall thy saints, that suffer here
Receive their prome^ crown.
when shall the faithful, firmly stand
Before thy face to dwell:
when shall thy foes, at thy lift hand
Be cast into the hell.
Apoca. 22. Come Lord Jesus.
T. B.

Imprynted at London by Ihon Kyngston, for Richard Adams.


